 = = = Ratings = = = 
 In its original American broadcast on May 13 , 2011 , " Dwight K. Schrute , ( Acting ) Manager " was viewed by an estimated 6 @.@ 45 million viewers and received a 3 @.@ 3 rating / 9 % share among adults between the ages of 18 and 49 . This means that it was seen by 3 @.@ 3 % of all 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ olds , and 9 % of all 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ olds watching television at the time of the broadcast . This marked a nine percent drop in the ratings from the previous episode making it the second @-@ lowest @-@ rated episode of the season in the 18 – 49 demographic , after " Todd Packer " . " Dwight K Schrute , ( Acting ) Manager " was the sixth most @-@ watched scripted show for the week of broadcast among adults aged 18 – 49 . 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 " Dwight K. Schrute , ( Acting ) Manager " received positive reviews from critics . IGN reviewer Cindy White commented : " This episode proved that the show can be funny without him ( Steve Carell ) " . She also praised Rainn Wilson and John Krasinski 's performance in the episode calling it " one of my favorite dynamics on the show " . However , she criticized the Andy @-@ Gabe @-@ Erin love triangle storyline , commenting : " It 's only been made worse by the way they 've turned Gabe from meek , bumbling <unk> [ sic ] into unhinged stalker guy . " She ultimately gave the episode an 8 @.@ 0 / 10 . Alan Sepinwall of HitFix called the episode " fun " and a " drastic improvement from ' The Inner Circle ' " . He mainly praised the return of " The Dwight / Jim dynamic " , writing that he " briefly rethought the idea of Dwight as long @-@ term boss " , and went on to praise the writers for featuring Dwight as manager for only one episode . He ultimately concluded that " the first real impression of the show after Michael was a strong one . " TV Squad writer Joel Keller was very positive towards the episode commenting that " The story also gave me faith that Lieberstein and company might actually do a credible job of exploring the other folks in the office now that the show 's dominant force , Michael , is gone " . 
 The A.V. Club 's Myles McNutt stated that " ' Dwight K. Schrute , ( Acting ) Manager ' demonstrated that the show is perfectly capable of being funny without Carell " , but criticized the episode for not featuring more " subtle " humor . He ultimately gave the episode a B. Sam Morgan of Hollywood.com called the episode " fairly decent episode " commenting that the concept of the episode was similar to the 10th episode of the seventh season , " China " . He also positively commented on Ellie Kemper 's performance , writing that " She came into this series as a sketch actor but for the first time I think she finally started being an ' actor . ' " Several commentators praised the scene featuring Dwight massaging Kevin 's back . " Dwight K. Schrute , ( Acting ) Manager " was voted the fourth highest @-@ rated episode out of 24 from the seventh season , according to an episode poll at the fansite OfficeTally ; the episode was rated 8 @.@ 81 out of 10 . In another poll , the episode was voted the second @-@ highest @-@ rated out of 24 from the seventh season , according to an " Survivor " episode poll at the fansite OfficeTally . 
 = The Last Dog on Earth = 
 The Last Dog on Earth is a 2003 young adult novel written by Daniel Ehrenhaft . It follows Logan , a lonely 14 @-@ year @-@ old boy who adopts a dog from an animal shelter and names her Jack . The pair 's relationship is soon threatened by an incurable prion disease spreading across the nation . Infected dogs become unnaturally violent and bloodthirsty , culminating in the deaths of several people . As public fear heightens and the government intervenes to control the outbreak , Logan struggles to reform his life and remain with Jack . 
 The Last Dog on Earth largely focuses on the impact of disease and both public and governmental panic . Society is ravaged by fear over the epidemic , endangering Logan and Jack despite the two being uninfected . Additionally , the novel presents a coming of age story in which Logan , a troubled youth , matures through his relationship with Jack , his only friend . 
 Despite 17th Street Productions holding the rights to The Last Dog on Earth , Dell Publishing gained permission to publish it . The company released the novel in hardcover in 2003 and in paperback in 2004 . Throughout 2009 , the book was published on various e @-@ book readers , including the Nook , Kindle , and several Apple Inc. products . The Last Dog on Earth was a winner of the Texas Lone Star Reading List and recognized by YALSA on a 2006 book list for young adults . The novel garnered mixed feedback from critics , who generally felt that the plot held appeal , but that Ehrenhaft tended to rely on coincidence . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Logan Moore is a troubled 14 @-@ year @-@ old boy living with his mother Marianne and stepfather Robert in Newburg , Oregon . Logan does not get along well with Robert or his mother , and holds a grudge against his biological father for leaving when he was young . After an incident at a barbecue , Robert decides to purchase a Labrador Retriever in order to teach Logan responsibility . Eager to rebel against his stepfather , Logan convinces his mother to adopt a dog from an animal shelter . He plans to choose an ugly dog and teach it destructive behavior . At the shelter , Logan encounters a young female mutt who immediately takes a liking to him . Logan adopts the dog and names her Jack after Robert 's former dog . 
 Meanwhile , a new prion disease named Psychotic Outburst Syndrome ( or POS ) is affecting dogs , causing friendly pets to become violent . Officials struggle to control the disease and immediately terminate any dogs that catch it . Humans soon begin to contract the disease . 
 Logan quickly bonds with Jack and values her as his only friend . After getting into trouble while attempting to protect her , Logan is sent to boot camp while Jack remains at home . Both he and Jack manage to escape , find each other , and begin traveling together . During their journey , they encounter another dog called White Paws : Jack 's brother who has become infected with POS . White Paws attacks Jack and severely wounds her before dying . Logan worries that Jack may have contracted the disease through contact with White Paws . The pair continue their journey until they reach the town of Dayville . Logan faintly remembers that his biological father lives in the town and decides to find his father and confront him . 
 While Logan is stealing food from a local shop , Jack is found by three men who , fearing that she may be infected , beat her . Logan is arrested and manages to find his father 's address at the police station before escaping . He returns to find Jack nearly dead and carries her , attempting to find his father 's house , until he faints from exhaustion . He awakens in the house of his biological father , Dr. Craig Westerly , who had found Logan unconscious by his car . Logan learns from Craig that he had not abandoned him and his mother , but that Marianne had divorced him . Logan fears for Jack 's life , afraid that she is infected or will be euthanized . Craig runs tests on the dog and learns that Jack , despite having been in contact with POS , isn 't infected : she is immune . 
 Craig decides to take Jack to a doctor so that a vaccine can be created . During the meeting , Rudy Stagg , a man infected with POS who had been killing dogs in order to contain the outbreak , stumbles into their room . Rudy ignores pleas to spare Jack and shoots at her , but Logan dives in front of the dog and is shot instead . Logan suffers a collapsed lung and falls into a coma . He awakens weeks later and learns that Jack is on life support . He says a final goodbye to Jack before her life support is turned off . Jack 's immunity to POS leads to the creation of a vaccine and cure , and Logan is finally able to reconcile with Robert , Craig , and Devon Wallace — a childhood enemy whose dog died due to POS . The novel 's epilogue , written as a newspaper article , reveals Logan and his family hold a private ceremony to honor Jack . 
 = = Themes and style = = 
 Ehrenhaft deals with several themes over the course of The Last Dog on Earth . Kirkus Reviews commented on the " backdrop of rising governmental and public panic " that interfere with Jack and Logan ; despite escaping the disease , they are unable to escape the panic . Rachel Seftel , author of a Journal of Adolescent & Adult Literacy review , also commented on the " mass hysteria " that arose due to POS and noted the novel 's core theme of a troubled youth being taught " valuable lessons until an external force threatens to tear them apart . " 
 In order to track particular events and plot points related to POS , Ehrenhaft inserts various messages , faxes , and articles throughout the novel . 
 = = Publication history = = 
 17th Street Productions , a branch of Alloy Entertainment , holds the rights to The Last Dog on Earth . Dell Publishing ( a division of the larger publisher Random House ) made arrangements with 17th Street to have it released under their name . On February 11 , 2003 , the novel was released in hardcover , and was later reprinted in paperback under Dell 's Yearling book imprint on June 8 , 2004 . In January 2009 , the novel received a Barnes & Noble Nook release in the United States , enabling it to be read on the Nook e @-@ book readers . The listed file size of The Last Dog on Earth is 2224 KB for the brand . On January 21 , 2009 , the book was released for the Kindle , Amazon.com 's online e @-@ book reader . Its listed file size is 448 KB . On February 3 , 2010 , The Last Dog on Earth was released on Apple Inc . ' s iTunes . It is listed as being compatible with the iPhone , iPod Touch , and iPad . Later , on February 25 , 2009 , the novel was released digitally with <unk> and mobile @-@ specific file types for the Borders Group e @-@ book app . 
 = = Reception and influence = = 
 The Last Dog on Earth has been nominated for several awards . The novel was recognized and listed on the Texas Library Association 's 2004 – 2005 Texas Lone Star Reading List . The book was also a nominee for the 2005 Mark Twain Award and 2007 Minnesota Young Reader Award . The Last Dog on Earth was named on " Popular Paperbacks for Young Adults 2006 " , a list created by YALSA ( Young Adult Library Services Association ) , a division of the American Library Association . The list is conceived by a committee and compiles various novels that hold appeal to teen readers . The Last Dog on Earth was included in the " What <unk> You ? " category , comprising literature " about how diseases , disorders , and other general health related symptoms affect our lives " . In a 2005 interview , Daniel Ehrenhaft mentioned that a school in Chicago created an extracurricular activity wherein " kids designed games and gadgets " , having been inspired by Logan 's hobby of inventing devices . 
 The Last Dog on Earth has received mixed reception from critics , who have praised the plot , but criticized the heavy use of coincidences to advance the plot . Kirkus Reviews commented that " happenstance plays a large role in the plot " and thought Ehrenhaft had " a tendency to trot in typecast characters , then summarily drop them " , but wrote that it would appeal to " disaster @-@ tale fans with a taste for the lurid " . Within the Journal of Adolescent & Adult Literacy , Volume 47 , Rachel Seftel reviewed the novel . She felt that The Last Dog on Earth 's main strength was the " well @-@ developed and sympathetic protagonist " Logan , but noted that the " memos and several subplots " interspersed between chapters and Ehrenhaft 's " [ somewhat ] heavy @-@ handed " attempts to foreshadow were drawbacks . Seftel concluded that , despite Ehrenhaft 's " reach at times [ exceeding ] his grasp , " The Last Dog on Earth was " an interesting and absorbing variation " of the slightly conventional " boy @-@ and @-@ his @-@ dog story . " 
 = Dave Martinez = 
 David Martinez ( born September 26 , 1964 ) is an American professional baseball coach and former outfielder . He is the bench coach for the Chicago Cubs of Major League Baseball ( MLB ) . He played in MLB for the Cubs , Montreal Expos , Cincinnati Reds , San Francisco Giants , Chicago White Sox , Tampa Bay Devil Rays , Texas Rangers , Toronto Blue Jays , and Atlanta Braves from 1986 to 2001 . Martinez had a .276 career batting average , 1 @,@ 599 hits , 91 home runs , 795 runs scored , and 580 runs batted in . 
 Martinez became the bench coach for the Tampa Bay Rays in 2008 , during which time he became a candidate for several managerial positions in MLB . After Rays ' manager Joe Maddon became manager of the Cubs after the 2014 season , Martinez joined the Cubs as their bench coach . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Martinez was born in Brooklyn , New York , to Puerto Rican parents . He lived at East 93rd Street and Lexington Avenue in Manhattan . At age 13 , his family moved to Orlando , Florida , on the recommendation of an uncle . 
 Martinez attended Lake Howell High School in Winter Park , Florida . He played on the school 's baseball team , which won the Five Star Conference championship in 1981 . He then enrolled at Valencia Community College , where he played college baseball . 
 = = Professional career = = 
 The Chicago Cubs selected Martinez in the January phase of the 1983 Major League Baseball draft . After he signed , he played for the Geneva Cubs of the Class A @-@ Short Season New York – Penn League and the Quad Cities Cubs of the Class A Midwest League . He began the 1984 season with Quad Cities , and in 1985 , he received a promotion to the Winston @-@ Salem Spirits of the Class A @-@ Advanced Carolina League . Martinez led the Carolina League with a .342 batting average ; the second @-@ place finishers , Keith Miller and John Wilson , batted .302 . Martinez began the 1986 season with the Iowa Cubs of the Class AAA American Association . 
 The Cubs promoted Martinez to the major leagues for the first time on June 15 , 1986 , and he served as an injury replacement for Bob Dernier . He had a <unk> batting average ( 8 @-@ for @-@ 67 ) before he was optioned back to the minor leagues in August . Martinez made the Cubs major league roster in 1987 , splitting time in center field with Dernier . He batted .292 in 142 games . Martinez struggled in the 1988 season , batting .230 in mid @-@ June . On July 14 , 1988 , Martinez was traded to the Montreal Expos in exchange for Mitch Webster . He finished 1988 with a .255 batting average and 23 stolen bases . 
 Martinez was pegged as a platoon player in Montreal , as he batted against right @-@ handed pitchers and sat against left @-@ handed pitchers . The Expos also had outfielders Otis Nixon , Marquis Grissom and Larry Walker on their roster . He played 126 games in 1989 , hitting .274 . In 1990 , Martinez lost the competition for the center field job to Grissom . However , Grissom was injured , and Martinez platooned with Nixon in center field . Martinez batted .279 with 11 home runs in 118 games in 1990 . He batted .295 in 1991 . After the 1991 season , the Expos traded Martinez with Willie Greene and Scott Ruskin to the Cincinnati Reds for Bill Risley and John Wetteland . He was sought out as a replacement for Eric Davis for the Reds . He competed with Reggie Sanders for the starting job during spring training . 
 Martinez played for Cincinnati in 1992 , but as Sanders established himself as the Reds ' starting center fielder , Martinez declared for free agency after the season . He signed with the San Francisco Giants on a two @-@ year contract for the 1993 and 1994 seasons . He suffered a torn hamstring in 1993 and was limited to 91 games . He hit .241 , his lowest average in several seasons . The Giants waived Martinez in October 1994 after he was held to a .247 average , 4 home runs and 27 runs batted in ( RBI ) . 
 Martinez signed a one @-@ year , $ 500 @,@ 000 contract with the Chicago White Sox for the 1995 season . He received limited playing time under manager Gene Lamont . When Lamont was replaced by Terry Bevington , Martinez saw an increase in playing time . He signed a two @-@ year $ 1 @.@ 425 million contract for the 1996 and 1997 seasons . He spent the 1996 season as a backup behind Darren Lewis , Tony Phillips , and Danny Tartabull , along with fellow backup Lyle Mouton . 
 In 1997 , Martinez batted , .286 and set career highs with 12 home runs and 55 RBI . He then signed a two @-@ year contract with the expansion Tampa Bay Devil Rays worth $ 3 @.@ 5 million with an option for a third season at $ 1 @.@ 75 million . In addition his desire to play in Florida , he was enticed by the Rays ' additions of Fred McGriff , Wilson Álvarez , and Roberto Hernández . In 1998 , he recorded the first hit in Tampa history . His contract option for the 2000 season vested when he recorded his 500th at bat of the 1999 season . 
 After batting .260 in his first 29 games of the 2000 season , the Devil Rays , who needed to improve their pitching staff , traded Martinez to the Cubs for Mark Guthrie and cash . On June 9 , 2000 , the Cubs traded Martinez to the Texas Rangers in a three team trade that sent Chuck Smith from the Florida Marlins to the Rangers and Brant Brown from the Marlins to the Cubs . On August 4 , 2000 , the Rangers traded Martinez to the Toronto Blue Jays for a player to be named later . The Blue Jays sent Peter Munro to the Rangers to complete the trade . By playing for four MLB teams in one season , Martinez tied the record . Since 1901 , the previous players to play for four MLB teams in a season were Frank <unk> ( 1904 ) , Willis <unk> ( 1940 ) , Paul Lehner ( 1951 ) , Wes Covington ( 1961 ) , Mike Kilkenny ( 1972 ) , and Dave Kingman ( 1977 ) . Dan Miceli ( 2003 ) and José Bautista ( 2004 ) later achieved the feat . With Toronto , he filled in for the injured Raúl Mondesí as the Blue Jays contended for the American League wild card . Between the four teams , he had a .274 batting average , five home runs , and 47 runs batted in ( RBIs ) in 132 games . 
 Martinez signed with the Atlanta Braves on a two @-@ year contract covering the 2001 and 2002 seasons , valued at approximately $ 3 million . He batted .328 in the first half of the 2001 season , but only .233 in the second half . Late in the year , he was diagnosed with chronic tendinitis in the patella . He appeared in the MLB postseason for the only time in his career , as he played in the 2001 National League Division Series , as the Braves defeated the Houston Astros , and the 2001 National League Championship Series , where the Braves lost to the Arizona Diamondbacks . Martinez returned to the Braves in 2002 , but missed the entire season after he injured his right knee during spring training . He announced his retirement . In 1 @,@ 919 games played , Martinez had a .276 career batting average , 1 @,@ 599 hits , 91 home runs , 795 runs scored , and 580 RBI . 
 = = Coaching career = = 
 Martinez worked for the Tampa Bay Rays as a spring training instructor in 2006 and 2007 . On October 11 , 2007 , he was hired by the Tampa Bay Rays to be their bench coach . As the Rays ' bench coach , Martinez was in charge of defensive positioning , and worked with the Rays ' players on bunting and baserunning . 
 Martinez interviewed for managerial positions with Toronto in the 2010 offseason and the Cleveland Indians . During the 2011 offseason , Martinez interviewed for White Sox ' managerial position . The White Sox hired Robin Ventura . After the 2012 season , Martinez was considered for the Astros ' managerial position , which went to Bo Porter . During the 2013 offseason , Martinez interviewed for Cubs ' managerial position , which went to Rick <unk> , and the Washington Nationals ' managerial position , which went to Matt Williams . 
 Rays ' manager Joe Maddon opted out of his contract with Tampa Bay after the 2014 season . The Rays sought feedback from their players on who should manage the team . Evan Longoria , Alex Cobb , and Ben Zobrist endorsed Martinez . Martinez interviewed for the position , but was not among the Rays ' three finalists . Martinez announced his intention to leave the Rays . On December 4 , he was hired to serve as the bench coach for the Cubs under Maddon . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Martinez resides in Safety Harbor , Florida , a suburb of Tampa Bay , with his wife , Lisa , and their four children : David , Jagger , Dalton , and Angelica . Lisa is originally from Chicago ; they met while Martinez was in his first stint with the Cubs . Jagger attended the University of Tampa , where he played for the school 's soccer team . 
 = Penticton Regional Airport = 
 Penticton Regional Airport ( IATA : <unk> , ICAO : <unk> ) , also known as Penticton Airport , is a regional airport located 1 @.@ 8 nautical miles ( 3 @.@ 3 km ; 2 @.@ 1 mi ) southwest of Penticton , British Columbia , a city in the Okanagan region of Canada . It is owned and operated by Transport Canada , serving the South Okanagan , Similkameen and West Kootenay areas . Initial examination for the airport 's construction began in 1937 . The proposed locations were owned by the Penticton Indian Band at that time , but expropriated in 1949 . 
 Temporary public use of the Penticton Regional Airport was approved in 1945 , and in 1956 , it was given a permanent airport license . It has a 6 @,@ 000 by 148 ft ( 1 @,@ 829 by 45 m ) runway aligned 16 – 34 , and served approximately 80 @,@ 000 passengers in 2011 . The airfield maintains a restaurant , Sky High Diner , as well as a medical facility , accommodation areas and administrative buildings ; food and snacks are also offered . It has seen two accidents and incidents throughout its history . 
 The airport has three scheduled flights to the Vancouver International Airport every day , with one fewer on Sunday , provided by Air Canada Express . There is also a daily flight to the Calgary International Airport provided by WestJet <unk> airport now also has a few flights a week leaving Calgary at 8 : 45 PM and arriving in Penticton later on in the night , the plane then stays at the Penticton Airport and leaves for Calgary at 7 : 00 AM and arrives in Calgary around 9 : 00 . Kelowna International Airport has affected traffic at the Penticton Regional Airport , with the former providing more direct flight and connection options for travellers . Penticton Regional Airport also recently under went an expansion to add more seating area in the main terminal building as an addition to the extra WestJet Encore flights on certain days coming in and out of Penticton . 
 = = History = = 
 Initial examination for the construction of what would become Penticton Regional Airport began in 1937 , at two locations . The proposed areas — west of Penticton 's city centre and north of the <unk> Lake — were owned by the Penticton Indian Band . The land for the airport was expropriated from the band in 1949 under the War Measures Act , with the preliminary development of the airfield completed in 1941 . Because of wartime military air transportation concerns , the airport acted as an emergency landing strip until its tarmac was completed . Rights for a temporary public use airport were secured in 1945 for an operation of 24 hours a day . In 1946 , more land was acquired from the Penticton Indian Band for the airport 's use . 
 Trans @-@ Canada Air Lines , now known as Air Canada , and Canadian Pacific Air Lines served Penticton after World War II . In 1956 , the airport was granted a permanent license , replacing the temporary permit . The airport 's runway was extended in 1959 , and a new terminal was built in 1963 . In 1968 , Canadian Pacific Air Lines extended its services for the airport , scheduling two daily flights , only to be taken over by Pacific Western Airlines the following year . However , in 1988 , Canadian Airlines ended this service . That was replaced by Time Air and Air BC airlines ; both airlines are no longer active . 
 An aviation centre was constructed at the airport in 1976 , which included a 12 @-@ unit motel , flight training school , and aircraft overhaul shop ; the latter is no longer maintained . Later , a helicopter flight and training club was established . In September 2007 , Pacific Coastal Airlines began offering daily flights from this airfield to the Vancouver International Airport and Calgary International Airport for a period of twelve months . During this time , the airline served an 22 @,@ 000 passengers at the airport . It has been able to support emergency Boeing 747 landings since the 1970s , but this capability has never been tested ; the runway has been used by Airbus 320s , Boeing 727 @-@ 200s , Boeing 737 @-@ 400s , Boeing 737 @-@ 700s , and Cessna 150s . 
 According to statistics , the South Okanagan region is underserved in terms of airports , owing to its population . The Kelowna International Airport provides international flights to 62 commercial destinations daily . South Okanagan is home to 79 @,@ 475 people , totaling 25 percent of the Okanagan area as a whole . The air travel market of the local area consists of 210 @,@ 000 passengers yearly . However , in 1990 , the Penticton Regional Airport was considered to be the area 's primary airport , hence why people questioned the need to expand the Kelowna International Airport at that time , when its runway was in the process of expansion . 
 = = Facilities = = 
 The airport is located at 49 ° 27 ′ 45 ″ N 119 ° 36 ′ 08 ″ W on 3000 Airport Road in Penticton , 1 @.@ 8 nautical miles ( 3 @.@ 3 km ; 2 @.@ 1 mi ) southwest of city centre , situated off of Highway 97 . It is located 73 kilometers ( 45 mi ) north of the Canada – United States border , and opposite the Airport Beach attraction , which is a beach situated in the city . Paid parking , taxis and car rentals are available , but there is no bus service . Car rentals are provided by Budget Rent a Car and National Car Rental . 
 Food and snacks are available at this airport 's terminal , as well as a medical facility , accommodation areas and administrative buildings . There is a restaurant provided at the airport 's terminal , Sky High Diner , as well as Canada Revenue Agency and Nav Canada offices . The airport 's aircraft obtain their fuel from Spencer Aviation , which is located on site ; Shell Canada serves as an aviation dealer for the Penticton Regional Airport . The airfield has a 6 @,@ 000 by 148 ft ( 1 @,@ 829 by 45 m ) asphalt runway aligned 16 – 34 . This facility maintains a management plan to keep geese off of their runways and properties . 
 The Penticton Flying Club operates at the airport , which is a club where children receive a flight in an airplane with the pilot , and learn about the airplanes themselves . In addition , the flight school Southern Skies Aviation is based on site ; the school closed in 2011 and was reopened shortly after , after it was bought by Kittyhawk A / C Services . The former is also at the airport , serving as an aircraft maintenance centre . There is a radio navigation aid provided at the Penticton Regional Airport which is used by pilots on aircraft coming from other nearby airports to determine their location . The navigation system is owned by Nav Canada . The local and upcoming weather of Penticton is observed at this airport 's weather station . Nav Canada has noted that most of the aircraft winds at the Penticton Regional Airport blow north and south . 
 The facility has been recognized as a certified airport by the British Columbia Ministry of Transportation . Transport Canada categorizes a certified airport through a process which ensures that it meets the safety criteria and provides flights to other destinations . Penticton Regional Airport is considered to be a port of entry that serves American fishermen coming to Canada . It has been classified as an airport of entry by Nav Canada , and is staffed by the Canada Border Services Agency . The Penticton Regional Airport employs 247 persons , including its manager David Allen and maintenance workers . 
 Controversy has occurred over airport ownership before . When a transfer of ownership to the city of Penticton was planned , effective March 31 , 1999 , the Penticton Indian Band protested at the airfield on that same day ; this forced three scheduled flights to be canceled . Members of the band stated that the land belonged to them , noted they would " never relinquish claim to the airport lands " , and expected the airport 's ownership to be transferred to them after World War I and World War II . They attempted to conceptualize a different agreement , but Transport Canada suggested the band 's claims should be ignored , as it is not a proper government . In response , the Penticton Indian Band blocked road entrance to the airport , and terminal . Transport Canada later announced a six @-@ week break from the ownership situation , and a runway @-@ paving project was placed on hiatus . Based on a suggestion from the Penticton City Council , it was later decided that , if the Penticton Regional Airport be closed , the land may be returned to them , although Transport Canada was against this . As of 2011 , the airport is owned and operated by Transport Canada . 
 = = Airlines and destinations = = 
 Penticton Regional Airport has historically provided flights to several destinations , including Boeing Field — an international airport located in King County , Washington , that serves the Seattle and Tacoma areas — and the Kelowna International <unk> as of 2012 , it offers flights to the Vancouver International Airport , which are provided by Air Canada Express and operated by Jazz Air . These flights are provided three times daily , with the exception of Sunday , when two flights are available . On May 1 , 2013 , due to feedback from the public , an additional flight to the Vancouver International Airport offered by Air Canada Express was launched . In 2010 , the airport garnered 34 @,@ 946 aircraft movements , while in 2011 , it served approximately 80 @,@ 000 passengers . 
 Over the years , there have been several attempts to increase destinations serviced from Penticton . And in 2012 , local residents attracted the attention of WestJet . Efforts to woo West Jet included the airport being renamed " <unk> " for a day in June 2012 and local residents created a flashmob video . So on October 26 , 2014 , WestJet operated by WestJet Encore flew its inaugural flight from the Calgary Airport to the Penticton Regional Airport and continues to fly once daily to and from Penticton . Discussion to expand the flight services provided by WestJet Encore from Penticton continue . 
 = = Accidents and incidents = = 
 On December 22 , 1950 , a Douglas C @-@ 47 aircraft operated by Canadian Pacific Air Lines from Vancouver crashed into Okanagan Mountain , some 26 kilometres ( 16 mi ) north of Penticton . Later investigation reported that the aircraft was below the minimum altitude permissible through an instrument approach procedure , causing the beyond <unk> crash . Two crew members of the 18 total occupants were fatally injured , the remainder survived . On January 4 , 1973 , a Convair aircraft scheduled to land in Penticton was hijacked by a Vietnamese man , who demanded money while being taken to North Vietnam . The Royal Canadian Mounted Police ( RCMP ) stormed the flight in a successful attempt to arrest the man . There were no fatalities in the incident . 
 = Tax protester constitutional arguments = 
 Tax protesters in the United States advance a number of constitutional arguments asserting that the imposition , assessment and collection of the federal income tax violates the United States Constitution . These kinds of arguments , though related to , are distinguished from statutory and administrative arguments , which presuppose the constitutionality of the income tax , as well as from general conspiracy arguments , which are based upon the proposition that the three branches of the federal government are involved together in a deliberate , on @-@ going campaign of deception for the purpose of defrauding individuals or entities of their wealth or profits . Although constitutional challenges to U.S. tax laws are frequently directed towards the validity and effect of the Sixteenth Amendment , assertions that the income tax violates various other provisions of the Constitution have been made as well . 
 = = First Amendment = = 
 Some protesters argue that imposition of income taxes violates the First Amendment freedom of speech because it requires the subject of the tax to write information on a tax return ; or violates freedom of religion if the subject of the tax claims some religious objection to the payment of taxes , particularly if the subject styles himself or herself as a Reverend , Minister , or other religious office @-@ holder . While the Internal Revenue Code makes an exemption for churches and other religious institutions , it makes only special tax codes and deductions , not exceptions , for religious professionals . The United States Supreme Court held in 1878 Reynolds v. United States , that a religious belief , however strongly held , does not exempt the believer from adhering to general laws . 
 = = Fifth Amendment = = 
 = = = Self incrimination = = = 
 Other protesters argue that the Fifth Amendment right against self @-@ incrimination allows an individual to refuse to file an income tax return calling for information that could lead to a conviction for criminal acts from which the income was derived , or for the crime of not paying the tax itself . In response , the courts generally refer to the case of United States v. Sullivan , where Justice Oliver Wendell Holmes wrote : 
 If the form of return provided called for answers that the defendant was privileged from making he could have raised the objection in the return , but could not on that account refuse to make any return at all .... It would be an extreme if not an extravagant application of the Fifth Amendment to say that it authorized a man to refuse to state the amount of his income because it had been made in crime . But if the defendant desired to test that or any other point he should have tested it in the return so that it could be passed upon . He could not draw a conjurer 's circle around the whole matter by his own declaration that to write any word upon the government blank would bring him into danger of the law . 
 = = = Takings Clause = = = 
 Some protesters have argued that the income tax is a prohibited " takings " under the Fifth Amendment 's Takings Clause , and can not be imposed unless the taxpayer receives just compensation . The United States Supreme Court rejected this argument in <unk> v. Union Pacific Railroad . The takings argument and variations of this argument have been officially identified as legally frivolous federal tax return positions for purposes of the $ 5 @,@ 000 frivolous tax return penalty imposed under Internal Revenue Code section 6702 ( a ) . 
 = = = Due Process Clause = = = 
 Protesters argue that the income tax violates the Fifth Amendment right that no person shall be " deprived of life , liberty , or property , without due process of law " . However , people can be deprived of life , liberty , or property with due process of law — this is what the courts do . Legal commentator Daniel B. Evans describes : 
 Every time a court finds a defendant guilty , the court has deprived the defendant of life or liberty , and every time a court rules in favor of a plaintiff or defendant , the court has deprived either the plaintiff or the defendant of some property . So saying that a court has deprived someone of life , liberty , or property is not particularly interesting unless you can explain exactly what the court did ( or did not do ) that deprived that particular someone of due process . 
 Similarly , the general proposition that every man has the right to his own labor does not necessarily lead to the conclusion that the government cannot tax the " common right " of labor . If the government could never impose a tax that took away someone ’ s rights to their property , then the government could never tax anyone for anything . So the claim that a tax deprives someone of " property " or a " right " is pretty much meaningless . 
 Fifth Amendment due process arguments by tax protesters were rejected by the United States Court of Appeals for the Third Circuit in Kahn v. United States , by the United States Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit in Anderson v. United States , by the United States Court of Appeals for the Seventh Circuit in Cameron v. Internal Revenue Serv . , by the United States Court of Appeals for the Eighth Circuit in Baskin v. United States , by the United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit in Jolly v. United States , and by the United States Court of Appeals for the Tenth Circuit in Martinez v. Internal Revenue Serv . 
 = = Thirteenth Amendment = = 
 Tax protesters have argued that income taxes impose involuntary servitude in violation of the Thirteenth Amendment . That argument was ruled to be without merit in Porth v. Brodrick , United States Collector of Internal Revenue for the State of Kansas . The involuntary servitude argument , and variations of this argument , have been officially identified as legally frivolous federal tax return positions for purposes of the $ 5 @,@ 000 frivolous tax return penalty imposed under Internal Revenue Code section 6702 ( a ) . 
 = = Fourteenth Amendment = = 
 Some tax protesters argue that all Americans are citizens of individual states as opposed to citizens of the United States , and that the United States therefore has no power to tax citizens or impose other federal laws outside of Washington D.C. and other federal enclaves . They cite the first sentence of Section 1 of the Fourteenth Amendment which states , " All persons born or naturalized in the United States , and subject to the jurisdiction thereof , are citizens of the United States and of the State wherein they reside . " 
 Courts have uniformly held that this argument that the Fourteenth Amendment divested state citizens of U.S. citizenship is plainly incorrect . In Kantor v. Wellesley Galleries , Ltd . , the court explained that " [ w ] hile the Fourteenth Amendment does not create a national citizenship , it has the effect of making that citizenship ' paramount and dominant ' instead of ' derivative and dependent ' upon state citizenship " . See also United States v. Ward , Fox v. Commissioner , and United States v. Baker . 
 Another argument raised is that because the federal income tax is progressive , the discriminations and inequalities created by the tax should render the tax unconstitutional under the 14th Amendment , which guarantees equal protection under the law . Such arguments have been ruled without merit under contemporary jurisprudence . Notably , some tax protesters contend that the Fourteenth Amendment itself was never properly ratified , under the theory that the governments of southern states that supported the post @-@ Civil War constitutional amendments were not representative of the people . 
 = = Sixteenth Amendment = = 
 It has been argued that the imposition of the U.S. federal income tax is illegal because the Sixteenth Amendment , which grants Congress the " power to lay and collect taxes on incomes , from whatever source derived , without apportionment among the several States , and without regard to any census or enumeration , " was not properly ratified , or that the amendment provides no power to tax income . Proper ratification of the Sixteenth Amendment is disputed by tax protesters who argue that the quoted text of the Amendment differed from the text proposed by Congress , or that Ohio was not a State during ratification . Sixteenth Amendment ratification arguments have been rejected in every court case where they have been raised and have been identified as legally frivolous . 
 Some protesters have argued that because the Sixteenth Amendment does not contain the words " repeal " or " repealed " , the Amendment is ineffective to change the law . Others argue that due to language in Stanton v. Baltic Mining Co . , the income tax is an unconstitutional direct tax that should be apportioned ( divided equally amongst the population of the various states ) . Several tax protesters assert that the Congress has no constitutional power to tax labor or income from labor , citing a variety of court cases . These arguments include claims that the word " income " as used in the Sixteenth Amendment cannot be interpreted as applying to wages ; that wages are not income because labor is exchanged for them ; that taxing wages violates individuals ' right to property , and several others . 
 = = Seventeenth Amendment = = 
 An argument raised in the case of <unk> v. Commissioner is that the Seventeenth Amendment to the United States Constitution was not properly ratified , and that all laws passed by Congress since the year 1919 ( which was not the year of ratification ) are invalid . The <unk> case involved a criminal contempt charge against the taxpayer in connection with a failure to obey a subpoena to produce books and records needed for the trial of the case . The United States Tax Court stated : 
 The [ taxpayer 's ] petition in this case , while rambling and lengthy , appears to rely primarily on arguments that neither the Internal Revenue Service nor this Court has authority to determine petitioner 's tax liability because the Seventeenth Amendment to the Constitution , which changed the method of electing senators to the U.S. Congress , was improperly proposed and / or adopted , and therefore all laws enacted by Congress ( and the Senate ) subsequent to at least 1919 are invalid . This included the Internal Revenue Code and the legislation which established this Court . 
 The court rejected the taxpayer 's arguments , and ordered that " he be imprisoned for 30 days as punishment " for criminal contempt in failing to obey court orders or subpoenas . 
 = = Titles of Nobility Amendment = = 
 Another tax protester argument centers upon the pending and inoperative Titles of Nobility Amendment . Proposed as an amendment to the Constitution by the 11th Congress in 1810 , it would , if ratified by the required number of states , strip United States citizenship from any citizen who accepted a title of nobility from a foreign government . The contention here is that this amendment was in fact ratified by the required number of states ( in the 1810s ) to have become an operative part of the Constitution , and that , because this is so , actions taken by lawyers and judges , who use the title Esquire – asserted to be a title of nobility and monarchical – are unconstitutional . In fact , the use of " Esquire " by lawyers and judges is merely an informal custom in the United States , not a title with any legal standing . This contention , rarely raised before courts , was most recently addressed in Campion v. Towns , <unk> @-@ 04 @-@ <unk> @-@ ROS , * 2 <unk> ( D. <unk> . 2005 ) as a defense to a charge of tax evasion . The court replied : 
 Additionally , the Court will correct any misunderstanding Plaintiff has concerning the text of the Thirteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution . In his Complaint , Plaintiff includes a certified copy of the Thirteenth Amendment from the Colorado State Archives which was published in 1861 . As included in that compilation , the Thirteenth Amendment would strip an individual of United States citizenship if they accept any title of nobility or honor . However , this is not the Thirteenth Amendment . The correct Thirteenth Amendment prohibits slavery . Although some people claim that state publication of the erroneous Thirteenth Amendment makes it valid , Article V of the Constitution does not so provide . 
 = = Federal government authority = = 
 The authority of the federal government has been challenged by protesters , arguing that they should be immune from federal income taxation because they are sovereign individuals or natural individuals , have not requested a privilege or benefit from the government , or are outside the " federal zone " ( D.C. and various federal enclaves such as military bases ) . Neither the U.S. Supreme Court nor any other federal court has ruled that an income tax imposed under the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is unconstitutional . Under the Supreme Court ruling in Cheek v. United States , a defendant in a tax evasion prosecution who has made arguments that the federal income tax laws are unconstitutional may have the arguments turned against him ( or her ) . Such arguments , even if based on honestly held beliefs , may constitute evidence that helps the prosecutor prove <unk> , one of the elements of tax evasion 
 = = = Sovereign individual & government privilege = = = 
 Some tax protesters argue that they should be immune from federal income taxation because they are sovereign individuals or " natural individuals , " or on the ground that they have not requested a privilege or benefit from the government . These kinds of arguments have been ruled without merit . For example , in the case of Lovell v. United States the United States Court of Appeals for the Seventh Circuit stated : 
 Plaintiffs argue first that they are exempt from federal taxation because they are " natural individuals " who have not " requested , obtained or exercised any , privilege from an agency of government . " This is not a basis for an exemption from federal income tax . [ citation omitted ] All individuals , natural or unnatural , must pay federal income tax on their wages , regardless of whether they received any " privileges " from the government . Plaintiffs also contend that the Constitution prohibits imposition of a direct tax without apportionment . They are wrong ; it does not . U. S. Const. amend . XVI … 
 The Court of Appeals in Lovell affirmed a U.S. District Court order upholding a frivolous return penalty under 26 U.S.C. § 6702 ( a ) . Similarly , in United States v. Sloan , the taxpayer 's contention — that he is " not a citizen of the United States , but rather , that he is a freeborn , natural individual , a citizen of the State of Indiana , and a ' master ' — not ' servant ' — of his government " — was ruled to be not a legal ground for the argument that the taxpayer was not subject to the federal tax laws ; the tax evasion conviction was upheld by the United States Court of Appeals for the Seventh Circuit . Similarly , the United States Court of Appeals for the Third Circuit stated , in Powers v. Commissioner : " Powers [ the taxpayer ] contends that either he is immune from the tax laws , or he is a ' slave ' to the federal government . This false choice is a creature of Powers ' tax protester ideology , not the laws of this Republic . " Similarly , in 2008 the United States Court of Appeals for the Tenth Circuit rejected a taxpayer 's argument that gains of an individual 's labor could be taxed only if the gains were received from a " federal venue " . In that case , the taxpayer 's argument — that the IRS had no ability to impose a tax on the taxpayer because he was a citizen " of the several states , " but not a " federal U.S. citizen " — was ruled to be frivolous . 
 Variations of the argument that an individual is a “ sovereign ” have been rejected in tax cases such as United States v. Hart , <unk> v. Commissioner , Maxwell v. Snow , Rowe v. Internal Revenue Serv . , <unk> v. Commissioner , and Glavin v. United States . 
 The argument that an individual who received Form W @-@ 2 wages or other compensation is not subject to federal income tax because the individual has " neither requested , obtained , nor exercised any privilege from an agency of government " was ruled frivolous by the United States Court of Appeals for the First Circuit in Sullivan v. United States and again in Kelly v. United States . See also United States v. Buras ( argument that the taxpayer can be subject to an excise tax only if he benefits from a " privilege extended by a government agency " was rejected ) . ; Nichols v. United States ; and Olson v. United States . 
 The argument that an individual who received Form W @-@ 2 wages is not subject to federal income tax unless the tax is imposed in connection with " government granted privileges " was ruled frivolous by the United States Court of Appeals for the Seventh Circuit in Coleman v. Commissioner . The argument that an individual who received Form W @-@ 2 wages is not subject to federal income tax unless the taxpayer enjoys a " grant of privilege or franchise " was ruled frivolous by the United States Court of Appeals for the Eighth Circuit in May v. Commissioner . The argument that an individual who received Form W @-@ 2 wages is not subject to federal income tax unless the taxpayer has obtained a " privilege from a governmental agency " was ruled frivolous by the United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit in Olson v. United States , and by the United States Court of Appeals for the Tenth Circuit in Prout v. United States . 
 In the case of Steward Machine Company v. Davis , the Supreme Court rejected the argument that " the relation of employment is one so essential to the pursuit of happiness that it may not be burdened with a tax , " and upheld the validity of the Social Security tax . The Court stated : " . . . natural rights , so called , are as much subject to taxation as rights of less importance . An excise is not limited to vocations or activities that may be prohibited altogether . It is not limited to those that are the outcome of a franchise . It extends to vocations or activities pursued as of common right . " . 
 Regarding the taxability of income in connection with events or activities not involving a government privilege or franchise , the United States Supreme Court stated in United States v. Sullivan that gains from illegal traffic in liquor are subject to the Federal income tax . The U.S. Supreme Court ruled in <unk> v. United States that the receipt of money obtained by extortion is taxable as income to the wrongdoer . The U.S. Supreme Court ruled in James v. United States that the receipt of money obtained through embezzlement is taxable as income to the wrongdoer , even though the wrongdoer is required to return the money to its owner . 
 The argument that a person 's income is not taxed when the person rejects or renounces United States citizenship because the person claims to be a citizen exclusively of a state , and variations of this argument , have been officially identified as legally frivolous federal tax return positions for purposes of the $ 5 @,@ 000 frivolous tax return penalty imposed under Internal Revenue Code section 6702 ( a ) . 
 = = = Federal zone = = = 
 Some tax protesters argue that under Article I , section 8 , clause 17 of the Constitution , federal income taxes can be imposed only inside so called " federal zones " , areas — such as the District of Columbia , military bases or other places – over which Congress has direct authority . 
 This argument is based in part on the U.S. Supreme Court decision in the case of United States v. Bevans . In Bevans , the parties argued over whether a federal court in Massachusetts had jurisdiction over the case of a U.S. Marine charged with a murder that occurred on a ship in Boston Harbor . No issues regarding federal income taxation or the Internal Revenue Code were presented to or decided by the Court in the Bevans case . The Internal Revenue Code and the Internal Revenue Service did not yet exist in 1818 , when the Bevans murder case was decided . 
 The Clause 17 argument was specifically rejected in the case of United States v. Sato : 
 Defendants argue that Clause 17 limits the legislative power of Congress such that the only geographical areas over which Congress may legislate , or may exercise its power of taxation , are those areas described in Clause 17 . This position is contrary to both the natural reading of the Constitution and the case law . Clause 17 limits not the power of Congress , but the power of the states . " [ T ] he word ' exclusive ' was employed to eliminate any possibility that the legislative power of Congress over the District [ of Columbia ] was to be concurrent with that of the ceding states . " . . . Similarly , it is clear that the power of the Congress to collect taxes , created by Article I , Section 8 , Clause 1 of the Constitution , is an independent power which is not limited by the other specific powers enumerated in Section 8 . United States v. Butler , 297 U.S. 1 , 65 @-@ 66 , 56 S. Ct . 312 , 319 ( 1936 ) . It is thus readily apparent that Congress ' power to tax extends beyond the exclusive legislative districts contemplated by Clause 17 . Defendants ' motion to dismiss based on Clause 17 is denied . 
 The Clause 17 argument was also unsuccessful in <unk> v. United States , Internal Revenue Service . Some tax protesters contend that the U.S. Supreme Court decision in Caha v. United States restricts the jurisdiction of the federal government to impose income taxes inside the " states " , based on the following language from the Court ’ s opinion : 
 This statute is one of universal application within the territorial limits of the United States , and is not limited to those portions which are within the exclusive jurisdiction of the national government , such as the District of Columbia . Generally speaking , within any state of this Union the preservation of the peace and the protection of person and property are the functions of the state government , and are no part of the primary duty , at least , of the nation . The laws of congress in respect to those matters do not extend into the territorial limits of the states , but have force only in the District of Columbia , and other places that are within the exclusive jurisdiction of the national <unk> [ n ] ment . 
 Some tax protesters contend that the Court 's reference to " those matters " restricted the federal government 's jurisdiction over matters of taxation . Caha is not a tax case . The reference to " this statute " was a reference to a perjury statute . The Caha case involved a perjury conviction where the defendant unsuccessfully argued that the federal court had no jurisdiction over a prosecution for the crime of perjury committed in a proceeding in a land office at Kingfisher , Oklahoma regarding ownership of real estate . 
 The reference in Caha to the " laws of congress in respect to those matters " was a reference to the matters of preservation of the peace and the protection of person and property . The Court in Caha rejected the argument that the federal courts had no jurisdiction to hear a case under the perjury statute , and the defendant 's conviction was affirmed . No issues involving the power to impose and enforce federal taxes in the fifty states were presented to or decided by the court in Caha . 
 The courts have uniformly rejected the " federal zone " argument that congressional authority to impose an income tax is limited to the District of Columbia , forts , magazines , arsenals , or dockyards , etc . See , for example , United States v. Mundt ; Nelsen v. Commissioner ; Abbs v. Imhoff . 
 = = Definition of income = = 
 = = = Stratton 's Independence , Limited v. Howbert = = = 
 Some tax protesters have cited the U.S. Supreme Court case of Stratton 's Independence , Limited v. Howbert for the argument that an income tax on an individual 's income is unconstitutional . This was an argument raised unsuccessfully by John B. Hill , Jr . , in Hill v. United States. and without success by John B. Cameron , Jr . , in Cameron v. Internal Revenue Serv .. In Stratton , a mining corporation argued that the 1909 corporation tax act did not apply to that corporation . The U.S. Supreme Court ruled that the 1909 corporation tax act did apply to mining corporations , and that the proceeds of ores mined by the corporation from its own premises were income within the meaning of the 1909 tax act . The Court also ruled that the corporation was not entitled to deduct " the value of such ore in place and before it is mined " as depreciation within the meaning of the 1909 Act . The Stratton case involved income taxation of a corporation , not of individuals . The Court in the Stratton case did not rule any corporate or individual income tax as unconstitutional . 
 = = = Doyle v. Mitchell Bros. Co . = = = 
 Some tax protesters have cited Doyle v. Mitchell Bros. Co. for the proposition that income of individuals cannot be taxed . This was the argument raised unsuccessfully by Joseph T. <unk> in the case of <unk> v. United States and by Joram Perl in Perl v. United States ( also unsuccessfully ) . The following language is sometimes cited by protesters : 
 Yet it is plain , we think , that by the true intent and meaning of the act the entire proceeds of a mere conversion of capital assets were not to be treated as income . Whatever difficulty there may be about a precise and scientific definition of ' income , ' it imports , as used here , something entirely distinct from principal or capital either as a subject of taxation or as a measure of the tax ; conveying rather the idea of gain or increase arising from corporate activities . 
 The above verbiage is immediately followed in the text of the case by this sentence : 
 As was said in Stratton 's Independence v. Howbert , 231 U.S. 399 , 415 , 34 S. Sup . Ct . 136 : ' Income may be defined as the gain derived from capital , from labor , or from both <unk> 
 In Doyle , the taxpayer was a corporation engaged in the manufacture of lumber . In 1903 , the taxpayer purchased certain timber land at a cost of about $ 20 per acre ( $ 49 / ha ) . As of December 31 , 1908 , the value of the land had increased to about $ 40 per acre ( $ 99 / ha ) . The Corporation Excise Tax Act of 1909 was enacted on August 5 , 1909 , and was effective retroactively to January 1 , 1909 . For the years 1909 through 1912 , the taxpayer filed tax returns under the 1909 Act , showing gross receipts from the sale of manufactured lumber and , in arriving at the amount of net income subject to tax under the 1909 Act , deducted an amount based on the $ 40 @-@ per @-@ acre value , rather than the actual cost of about $ 20 per acre . The Commissioner of Internal Revenue argued that the taxpayer should be able to deduct only an amount based on the taxpayer ’ s historical cost basis of $ 20 , rather than the $ 40 fair market value at the time the 1909 Act became effective . ( Essentially , if the taxpayer were allowed to use the $ 40 per acre value as its basis rather than the actual $ 20 historical cost basis , a portion of the taxpayer ’ s gain — the increase in value from 1903 to December 31 , 1908 — would go untaxed . ) 
 The U.S. Supreme Court ruled that under the 1909 Act — which had become effective January 1 , 1909 — the taxpayer should be taxed only on the increase in value after 1908 . Increases in value prior to the effective date of the statute were not to be taxed under the terms of that statute . Thus , the taxpayer was entitled to deduct , from its gross receipts from the sale of finished lumber , a basis amount computed with reference to the $ 40 per acre value as of December 31 , 1908 . Doyle is a case involving statutory ( not constitutional ) interpretation . In this case , the Court was interpreting the 1909 statute . Although some tax protesters cite this case for an argument about the constitutional definition of income as excluding income of individuals , no issues involving the constitutional definition of income , or of income under any other tax statutes , were presented to or decided by the Court . 
 The case is also notable for the fact that it involved a retroactively imposed tax . The taxpayer did not argue — and the Court did not rule — that as a general proposition taxes could not be imposed retroactively . Indeed , the tax in this case was imposed retroactively ; the statute was enacted in August 1909 but was made effective retroactively to January 1 , 1909 . 
 = = = Corporate profits = = = 
 One argument repeatedly made by tax protesters is that the income of individuals is not taxable because income should mean only " corporate profits " or " corporate gain " . This is the Merchants ' Loan argument , named after the case of Merchants ’ Loan & Trust Company , as Trustee of the Estate of Arthur Ryerson , Deceased , Plaintiff in Error v. Julius F. <unk> , formerly United States Collector of Internal Revenue for the First District of the State of Illinois . The argument is essentially that " income " for federal income tax purposes means only the income of a corporation — not the income of a non @-@ corporate taxpayer — because the United States Supreme Court in that case , in discussing the meaning of income , mentioned a statute enacted in 1909 that taxed the income of corporations . 
 The Court in Merchants ' Loan was specifically interpreting a 1916 statute imposing income taxes on individuals and estates ( among other kinds of entities ) , and not the 1909 corporate tax statute . The taxpayer in Merchants ' Loan was not a corporation but was the " Estate of Arthur Ryerson , Deceased " . The Court was not presented with ( and did not decide ) any issue involving the taxability of " corporate profits " or " corporate gains " or any other kind of income except the gain on the sale of the stock by the " Estate of Arthur Ryerson , Deceased " . The terms " corporate profit " and " corporate gain " are not found in the text of the Court ’ s decision in Merchants ’ Loan . In Merchants ' Loan , the Supreme Court ruled that under the Sixteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution and the 1916 tax statute applicable at the time , a gain on a sale of stock by the estate of a deceased person is included in the income of that estate , and is therefore taxable to that estate for federal income tax purposes . 
 The Merchants ' Loan argument has been litigated by tax protesters several times , and the courts have uniformly rejected the argument that income consists only of corporate profits . See , for example : Cameron v. Internal Revenue Serv . , <unk> v. Commissioner , Reinhart v. United States , Fink v. Commissioner ; <unk> v. Commissioner ; Schroeder v. Commissioner ; Sherwood v. Commissioner ; Ho v. Commissioner ; and Zook v. Commissioner . Tax protesters — who have lost every case using Merchants ' Loan for the theory that only " corporate profits " could be taxable — are citing a case where the U.S. Supreme Court ruled that the income of a non @-@ corporate taxpayer is taxable . Neither the United States Supreme Court nor any other federal court has ever ruled that under the Internal Revenue Code the term " income " means only the income of a corporation for federal income tax purposes . 
 Some tax protesters have cited the Supreme Court case of Flint v. Stone Tracy Co. for the argument that only corporate profits or income can be taxed , using the following quotation : 
 <unk> are taxes laid upon the manufacture , sale or consumption of commodities within the country , upon licenses to pursue certain occupations and upon corporate privileges ... the requirement to pay such taxes involves the exercise of privileges , and the element of absolute and unavoidable demand is lacking ... Conceding the power of Congress to tax the business activities of private corporations .. the tax must be measured by some standard ... It is therefore well settled by the decisions of this court that when the sovereign authority has exercised the right to tax a legitimate subject of taxation as an exercise of a franchise or privilege , it is no objection that the measure of taxation is found in the income produced in part from property which of itself considered is <unk> . 
 In Flint v. Stone Tracy Co . , the U.S. Supreme Court ruled that the corporation tax act of 1909 did not violate the constitutional requirement that revenue measures originate in the U.S. House of Representatives . The Court did not rule that excise taxes consisted only of taxes on corporations and corporate privileges , to the exclusion of taxes on individuals ( natural persons ) . The issue of the validity of an income tax imposed on individuals was neither presented to the Court nor decided by the Court . 
 The courts have rejected the argument that Flint v. Stone Tracy Co. can be used to avoid taxation of wages . For example , in Parker v. Commissioner , a case where a taxpayer unsuccessfully argued that wages were not taxable , the United States Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit stated ( in part ) : 
 Appellant cites Flint v. Stone Tracy Co . , 220 U. S. 107 , 31 S. Ct . 342 , 55 L. Ed . 389 ( 1911 ) , in support of his contention that the income tax is an excise tax applicable only against special privileges , such as the privilege of conducting a business , and is not <unk> against income in general . Appellant twice errs . Flint did not address personal income tax ; it was concerned with corporate taxation . Furthermore , Flint is pre @-@ sixteenth amendment and must be read in that light . At this late date , it seems incredible that we would again be required to hold that the Constitution , as amended , empowers the Congress to levy an income tax against any source of income , without the need to apportion the tax equally among the states , or to classify it as an excise tax applicable to specific categories of activities . 
 The argument that only corporations are subject to federal income tax , and variations of this argument , have been officially identified as legally frivolous federal tax return positions for purposes of the $ 5 @,@ 000 frivolous tax return penalty imposed under Internal Revenue Code section 6702 ( a ) . 
 = = = Cases indicating definition of income is irrelevant = = = 
 At least two federal courts have indicated that Congress may constitutionally tax an item as " income , " regardless of whether that item is " income " within the meaning of the Sixteenth Amendment . In Penn Mutual Indemnity Co. v. Commissioner , the United States Court of Appeals for the Third Circuit stated : 
 It did not take a constitutional amendment to entitle the United States to impose an income tax . Pollock v. Farmers ' Loan & Trust Co . , 157 U. S. 429 , 158 U. S. 601 ( 1895 ) , only held that a tax on the income derived from real or personal property was so close to a tax on that property that it could not be imposed without apportionment . The Sixteenth Amendment removed that barrier . Indeed , the requirement for apportionment is pretty strictly limited to taxes on real and personal property and capitation taxes . 
 It is not necessary to uphold the validity of the tax imposed by the United States that the tax itself bear an accurate label … 
 It could well be argued that the tax involved here [ an income tax ] is an " excise tax " based upon the receipt of money by the taxpayer . It certainly is not a tax on property and it certainly is not a capitation tax ; therefore , it need not be apportioned . … Congress has the power to impose taxes generally , and if the particular imposition does not run afoul of any constitutional restrictions then the tax is lawful , call it what you will . 
 In Murphy v. Internal Revenue Serv . , the United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit ruled that a personal injury award received by a taxpayer was " within the reach of the congressional power to tax under Article I , Section 8 of the Constitution " — even if the award was " not income within the meaning of the Sixteenth Amendment " . 
 = = Progressive taxation = = 
 One argument that has been raised is that because the federal income tax is progressive ( i.e. , because the marginal tax rates increase , or progress , as the level of taxable income increases ) , the discriminations and inequalities created by the tax should render the tax unconstitutional . This argument was rejected by the United States Supreme Court in two companion cases — with respect to the income tax on individuals in Thorne v. Anderson , and with respect to the income tax on corporations in Tyee Realty Co. v. Anderson . 
 = = Taxing labor or income from labor = = 
 Several tax protesters assert that the Congress has no constitutional power to tax labor or income from labor , citing a variety of court cases . These arguments include claims that the word " income " as used in the Sixteenth Amendment cannot be interpreted as applying to wages ; that wages are not income because labor is exchanged for them ; that taxing wages violates individuals ' right to property ; that an income tax on wages is illegal as a direct tax on the source of income , and several others . 
 Another protester argument is that the U.S. Constitution authorizes the income tax only on income derived from activities that are government @-@ licensed or otherwise specially protected . The courts have rejected this theory , ruling that " Congress has taxed compensation for services , without any regard for whether that compensation is derived from government @-@ licensed or specially protected activities , … and this has been construed to cover earnings from labor . " 
 Robert L. Schulz and his We the People Foundation take the positions that the government " is clearly prohibited from doing what it is doing – taxing the salaries , wages and compensation of the working men and women of this country and forcing the business entities that utilize the labor of ordinary American citizens to withhold and turn over to the IRS a part of the earnings of those workers " and " that the federal government <unk> NOT possess <unk> legal authority – statutory or Constitutional – to tax the wages or salaries of American workers . " 
 Similarly , tax protester Tom Cryer , who was acquitted of willful failure to file U.S. Federal income tax returns in a timely fashion , argued that " the law does not tax [ a person 's ] wages " , and that the federal government cannot tax " [ m ] <unk> that you earned [ and ] paid for with your labor and industry " because " the Constitution does not allow the federal government to tax those earnings " ( referring to " wages , salaries and fees that [ a person ] earn [ s ] for [ himself ] " ) . 
 Arguments about the taxability of compensation for personal services , whether called wages , salary , or some other term , may be either constitutional arguments as in United States v. Connor ( see below ) or statutory arguments as in Cheek v. United States , depending on the details of the argument . For purposes of presentation , these arguments are summarized here rather than in the article Tax protester statutory arguments . The rest of this section explains these arguments in more detail . 
 = = = Evans v. Gore = = = 
 Some protesters include false quotations in their arguments . Radio personality Dave Champion contends that the following verbiage is a quotation from the case of Evans v. Gore in his own arguments on the internet about federal income taxes : 
 The sixteenth [ amendment ] does not justify the taxation of persons or things ( their property ) previously immune … it does not extend taxing power to new or excepted citizens … it is intended only to remove all occasions from any apportionment of income taxes among the states . It does not authorize a tax on a salary . … 
 The quoted material by Dave Champion is false ; it does not appear in the Court 's decision . In Evans v. Gore , the U.S. Supreme Court actually did rule that a federal income tax on certain income of federal judges was unconstitutional . The Evans v. Gore ruling has been interpreted as barring application of the Federal income tax to a Federal judge who had been appointed prior to the enactment of the tax . This was the Court 's year 1920 interpretation of the " Compensation Clause " , the rule that Federal judges " shall , at stated Times , receive for their Services a Compensation , which shall not be diminished during their <unk> in Office " under Article III , section 1 of the U.S. Constitution . The decision in Evans v. Gore was eviscerated in the 1939 U.S. Supreme Court decision of O 'Malley v. <unk> , and was expressly overruled by the U.S. Supreme Court itself in 2001 , in the case of United States v. Hatter . In Hatter , the Supreme Court stated : " We now overrule Evans insofar as it holds that the Compensation Clause forbids Congress to apply a generally applicable , nondiscriminatory tax to the salaries of federal judges , whether or not they were appointed before enactment of the tax . " 
 Neither the Supreme Court nor any other federal court has ever ruled that the Sixteenth Amendment ( or any other part of the Constitution ) does not authorize a Federal income tax on compensation for personal services . 
 = = = Southern Pacific Co. v. Lowe = = = 
 Another United States Supreme Court case frequently cited by tax protesters is Southern Pacific Co. v. Lowe , 247 U.S. 330 ( 1918 ) . Tax protesters attribute the following quotation to the Court in this case : " income ; as used in the statute should be given a meaning so as not to include everything that comes in . " The quotation does not appear in the text of the Supreme Court decision . 
 This case began in the United States District Court for the Southern District of New York . In the decision in that court , the trial court judge stated : " I do not think that ' income ' as used in the statute , should be given a meaning so as to include everything that comes in . " The case did not involve compensation for labor or services . Instead , the case involved the federal income tax treatment of dividends paid by the Central Pacific Railway Company to its parent company , the Southern Pacific Company , which owned 100 % of the stock of Central Pacific Railway Company . The District Court ruled that the dividends were taxable to the Southern Pacific Company . This decision was reversed by the Supreme Court . 
 What the U.S. Supreme Court actually said was : 
 We must reject in this case , as we have rejected in cases arising under the Corporation Excise Tax Act of 1909 ( Doyle , Collector , v. Mitchell Brothers Co . , and Hays , Collector , v. <unk> Mountain Coal Co . , decided May 20 , 1918 ) , the broad contention submitted in behalf of the Government that all <unk> that comes <unk> income within the proper definition of the term " gross income , " and that the entire proceeds of a conversion of capital assets , in whatever form and under whatever circumstances accomplished , should be treated as gross income . Certainly the term " income " has no broader meaning in the 1913 Act than in that of 1909 ( see Stratton 's Independence v. Howbert , 231 U. S. 399 , 416 , 417 ) , and for the present purpose we assume there is no difference in its meaning as used in the two Acts . 
 In Southern Pacific Company v. Lowe , the Supreme Court ruled that where a shareholder receives a dividend representing earnings of a corporation realized by the corporation prior to January 1 , 1913 , the dividend is not <unk> in the gross income of the shareholder for purposes of the Federal Income Tax Act of 1913 , Ch . 16 , 38 Stat . 114 ( Oct. 3 , 1913 ) . No issues involving the definition of income with respect to wages , salary or other compensation for labor were decided by the Court . 
 = = = Colonial Pipeline Co. v. Traigle = = = 
 Another case that has been cited for the argument that wages are not taxable is the United States Supreme Court decision in Colonial Pipeline Co. v. Traigle . An individual named " William Dixon " at a web site called " <unk> " claims that the following is a statement by the U.S. Supreme Court in that case : 
 Income taxes statutes apply only to state created creatures known as corporations no matter whether state , local , or federal . " , Colonial Pipeline Co. v. Traigle , 421 US 100 . " 
 This material alleged to be a quotation does not appear in the text of the case at all . Also , the words " wages " and " salaries " are not found anywhere in the text , and there is no ruling in that case that the federal income tax statutes apply only to " corporations . " The Colonial Pipeline case actually involved the Louisiana corporate franchise tax , not a federal tax . The validity of the Louisiana franchise tax was upheld by the U.S. Supreme Court in this case . No issues involving the validity or applicability of federal income taxes were presented to , mentioned by , or decided by the Supreme Court in the Colonial Pipeline case . 
 = = = Lucas v. Earl = = = 
 For the argument that wages are not taxable , some tax protesters — including convicted tax offender Irwin Schiff — incorrectly attribute to the U.S. Supreme Court the following language in connection with the leading tax case of Lucas v. Earl : 
 The claim that salaries , wages , and compensation for personal services are to be taxed as an entirety and therefore must be returned [ i.e. , reported on an income tax return ] by the individual who has performed the services which produce the gain is without support , either in the language of the Act or in the decisions of the courts construing it . Not only this , but it is directly opposed to provisions of the Act and to regulations of the U.S. Treasury Department , which either prescribed or permits that compensations for personal services not be taxed as an entirety and not be returned by the individual performing the services . It is to be noted that , by the language of the Act , it is not salaries , wages , or compensation for personal services that are to be included in gains , profits , and income derived from salaries , wages , or compensation for personal services . 
 This language is not from the Court ’ s opinion in Lucas v. Earl . Instead , it is an almost direct quotation from page 17 of the taxpayer 's brief filed in the case . Guy C. Earl was the taxpayer , and the brief was written by Earl ’ s attorneys : Warren Olney , Jr . , J.M. <unk> , Jr . , and Henry D. Costigan . In some printed versions of the case , this statement and other quotations and paraphrases from pages 8 , 10 , 14 , 15 , 17 , and 18 of the taxpayer 's brief are re @-@ printed as a headnote or syllabus above the opinion of the Court . In the case reprints that include this headnote ( and many of them do not even show it ) , these excerpts are not clearly identified as being from the taxpayer 's brief . A person not trained in analysis of legal materials would not necessarily know that this verbiage , like any headnote or syllabus , is not part of the Court ’ s opinion , perhaps leading to the confusion about the source of the quotation . As explained below , the Supreme Court rejected the arguments in the quotation , and the taxpayer lost the case . 
 Lucas v. Earl is a leading case in the area of U.S. income taxation , and stands for the <unk> Assignment of Income Doctrine . In the case , Mr. Earl was arguing that because he and his wife , in the year 1901 , had made a legally valid assignment agreement ( for state law purposes ) to have his then @-@ current and after @-@ acquired income ( which was earned solely by him ) be treated as the income of both him and his wife as joint tenants with right of survivorship , the assignment agreement should also determine the federal income tax effect of the income he earned ( i.e. , only half the income should be taxed to him ) . 
 The U.S. Supreme Court rejected that argument , essentially ruling that under federal income tax law all the future income earned by Mr. Earl was taxable to him at the time he earned the income , even though he had already assigned part of the income to his wife , and regardless of the validity of the assignment agreement under state law . The Court in Lucas v. Earl did not rule that wages are not taxable . 
 = = = Coppage v. Kansas = = = 
 One case frequently cited by tax protesters for the " wages are not taxable " argument is Coppage v. Kansas with respect to the following quotation : 
 Included in the right of personal liberty and the right of private property @-@ partaking of the nature of <unk> is the right to make contracts for the acquisition of property . Chief among such contracts is that of personal employment , by which labor and other services are exchanged for money or other forms of property . 
 Coppage was a criminal case involving a defendant convicted , under a Kansas statute , of firing an employee for refusing to resign as a member of a labor union . No issues of taxation were presented to or decided by the Court , and the word " tax " is not found in the text of the Court 's decision . 
 = = = Truax v. Corrigan = = = 
 Tax protesters also cite or quote from the case of Truax v. Corrigan for the argument that an income tax should not be imposed on labor and at least arguably relating " labor " to a right of " property " : 
 That the right to conduct a lawful business , and thereby acquire pecuniary profits , is property , is indisputable . 
 The Truax case involved a Mr. William Truax who owned a restaurant called " English Kitchen , " in Bisbee , Arizona . A Mr. Michael Corrigan and others were former cooks and waiters at the restaurant . Corrigan and others allegedly instituted a boycott of the restaurant , after a dispute arose over the terms and conditions of employment . A strike was allegedly ordered by a local union with respect to certain union members employed at the restaurant . The restaurant ’ s business was allegedly harmed , and Mr. Truax sued various parties on a variety of grounds . The lawsuit was thrown out by the trial court before the case could be heard , on the theory that Mr. Truax was incorrect as a matter of law . Mr. Truax appealed and the case eventually ended up in the U.S. Supreme Court . The U.S. Supreme Court ruled that the trial court should not have thrown out the lawsuit , but should have heard Mr. Truax ’ s case . The case was sent back to the trial court so that a trial could take place . Truax was not a tax case . No issues involving taxation were presented to or decided by the Court . 
 = = = Butchers ' Union Co. v. Crescent City Co . = = = 
 Tax protesters also cite the U.S. Supreme Court case of Butcher 's Union Co. v. Crescent City Co. for the argument that an income tax should not be imposed on labor , sometimes quoting the following language : 
 A monopoly is defined ' to be an institution or allowance from the sovereign power of the state , by grant , commission , or otherwise , to any person or corporation , for the sole buying , selling , making , working , or using of anything whereby any person or persons , bodies politic or corporate , are sought to be restrained of any freedom or liberty they had before or hindered in their lawful trade , ' All grants of this kind are void at common law , because they destroy the freedom of trade , discourage labor and industry , restrain persons from getting an honest livelihood , and put it in the power of the grantees to enhance the price of commodities . They are void because they interfere with the liberty of the individual to pursue a lawful trade or employment . 
 Butchers ' Union Co. was a case involving interpretation of the Louisiana Constitution and certain ordinances of the city of New Orleans . The Court ruled that the Louisiana Constitution and the New Orleans ordinances did not <unk> impair a pre @-@ existing obligation under a contract when those laws effectively ended a slaughter @-@ house business monopoly by the Crescent City Company . No issues regarding the power to tax incomes from businesses , vocations , or labor were presented to or decided by the Court , and the word " tax " does not appear in the text of the decision . 
 = = = Murdock case = = = 
 Tax protesters also cite the case of Murdock v. Pennsylvania ( also known as Jones v. City of Opelika ) : 
 A state may not impose a charge for the enjoyment of a right granted by the federal constitution . 
 Murdock ( or Jones v. City of Opelika ) was a case involving the validity of a city ordinance ( in Jeannette , Pennsylvania ) worded as follows : 
 That all persons canvassing for or soliciting within said Borough , orders for goods , paintings , pictures , wares , or merchandise of any kind , or persons delivering such articles under orders so obtained or solicited , shall be required to procure from the Burgess a license to transact said business and shall pay to the Treasurer of said Borough therefore the following sums according to the time for which said license shall be granted . 
 <unk> one day $ 1 @.@ 50 , for one week seven dollars ( $ 7 @.@ 00 ) , for two weeks twelve dollars ( $ 12 @.@ 00 ) , for three weeks twenty dollars ( $ 20 @.@ 00 ) , provided that the provisions of this ordinance shall not apply to persons selling by sample to manufacturers or licensed merchants or dealers doing business in said Borough of Jeannette . 
 A group of people who were Jehovah 's Witnesses went from door to door distributing literature in the town . They failed to obtain the license under the ordinance . The case ended up in court , and went all the way to the U.S. Supreme Court , which stated : 
 There was evidence that it was their [ the Jehovah ’ s Witnesses ’ ] practice in making these solicitations to request a ' contribution ' of twenty @-@ five cents each for the books and five cents each for the pamphlets but to accept lesser sums or even to donate the volumes in case an interested person was without funds . … The First Amendment , which the Fourteenth makes applicable to the states , declares that ' Congress shall make no law respecting an establishment of religion , or prohibiting the free exercise thereof ; or abridging the freedom of speech , or of the press .... ' … It could hardly be denied that a tax laid specifically on the exercise of those freedoms would be unconstitutional . 
 The protester argument appears to be that the federal government should not be able to tax income from labor because it would be a tax on an exercise of the freedoms mentioned in the quotation . The " tax " in this case was , in effect , a license fee imposed on door to door sales people under a city ordinance . The city was trying to exact the fee from Jehovah ’ s Witness members who were going door to door . Questions about the validity of federal income taxes were neither presented to nor decided by the Court . 
 = = = Redfield v. Fisher = = = 
 Some tax protesters cite or quote from Redfield v. Fisher : 
 The individual , unlike the corporation , cannot be taxed for the mere privilege of existing . The corporation is an artificial entity which owes its existence and charter powers to the state ; but the individual 's rights to live and own property are natural rights for the enjoyment of which an excise cannot be imposed . 
 The argument seems to be that because " the individual 's rights to live and own property " are arguably rights against which " an excise cannot be imposed , " the federal income tax on income from labor should therefore be unconstitutional . However , Redfield v. Fisher is an Oregon Supreme Court case , not a federal case . No issues involving the validity of federal income tax laws were decided by the court . 
 = = = Conner v. United States = = = 
 Some tax protesters cite a case called Conner v. United States , with a quotation that " Congress has taxed income , not compensation " for the argument that wages are not taxable . This was the case cited unsuccessfully by <unk> Sumter before the U.S. Court of Federal Claims in the case of Sumter v. United States . The Conner case involved the taxability of compensation paid by an insurance company to a policy holder whose house had burned down . The insurance company was reimbursing the homeowner for the costs of renting a place to stay after the home burned down — under the terms of the insurance policy . The insurance company was not paying " wages " . The court was not presented with , and did not decide , any issue involving the taxability of wages . 
 = = = Eisner v. Macomber = = = 
 Some tax protesters have cited the U.S. Supreme Court decision in the case of Eisner v. Macomber for the theory that wages are not taxable , or for the theory that dividends are not taxable . The case dealt with a stock dividend on stock that was essentially equivalent to a stock split , as opposed to a cash dividend on stock . In the case of this kind of " dividend " the stockholder does not receive anything or realize any additional value . For example , if a stockholder owns 100 shares of stock having a value of $ 4 per share , the total value is $ 400 . If the corporation declares , say , a " two for one " stock dividend that is essentially similar to a stock split ( and the corporation distributes no money or other property ) , the stockholder now has 200 shares with a value of $ 2 each , which is still $ 400 in value - i.e. , no increase in value and no income . The pie is still the same size — but it 's sliced into more pieces , each piece being proportionately smaller . 
 More directly to the point , there has been no " sale or other disposition " of the stock . The taxpayer still owns the same asset ( i.e. , the same interest in the corporation ) he owned prior to the stock dividend . So , even if his basis amount ( generally , the amount he originally paid for the stock ) is less than the $ 400 value ( i.e. , even if he has an unrealized or potential gain ) , he still has not yet " realized " the gain . The Court ruled that this kind of stock dividend is not treated as " income " to a shareholder . 
 The Court in this case did not rule on any issue involving the taxability of labor or income from labor , or wages , salary or ordinary " cash " dividends — where the stockholder actually receives a check from the company , etc . Indeed , the terms " wage " and " salary " do not appear in the text of the decision in Eisner v. Macomber . 
 = = = Cases where wages or labor ruled taxable = = = 
 The provisions of the U.S. Constitution authorizing Congress to impose taxes , duties , imposts and excises contain no express exceptions for taxes on wages or labor , or for taxes on income from labor . The courts have consistently rejected arguments that " wages " or " labor " ( whether denominated as " labor property " or not ) cannot be taxed under the Internal Revenue Code . The United States Court of Appeals for the Eighth Circuit has stated : " Taxpayers ' argument that compensation for labor is not constitutionally subject to the federal income tax is without merit . There is no constitutional impediment to levying an income tax on compensation for a taxpayer 's labors . " See also : 
 United States v. Connor ( tax evasion conviction under 26 U.S.C. § <unk> affirmed by the United States Court of Appeals for the Third Circuit ; taxpayer ’ s argument — that because of the Sixteenth Amendment , wages were not taxable — was rejected by the Court ; taxpayer ’ s argument that an income tax on wages is required to be apportioned by population also rejected ) ; 
 Parker v. Commissioner ( taxpayer 's argument — that wages are not taxable — was rejected by the United States Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit ; taxpayer charged double costs for filing a frivolous appeal ) ; 
 Perkins v. Commissioner ( 26 U.S.C. § 61 ruled by the United States Court of Appeals for the Sixth Circuit to be “ in full accordance with Congressional authority under the Sixteenth Amendment to the Constitution to impose taxes on income without apportionment among the states ” ; taxpayer ’ s argument that wages paid for labor are non @-@ taxable was rejected by the Court , and ruled frivolous ) ; 
 <unk> v. United States ( United States Court of Appeals for the Sixth Circuit ruled that the federal district court properly dismissed taxpayer ’ s frivolous lawsuit based on taxpayer ’ s tax return position that wages do not represent a taxable gain because wages are a source of income and are received in equal exchange for labor ) ; 
 White v. United States ( taxpayer ’ s argument that wages are not taxable was ruled frivolous by the United States Court of Appeals for the Sixth Circuit ; penalty — imposed under 26 U.S.C. § 6702 for filing tax return with frivolous position — was therefore proper ) ; 
 <unk> v. Commissioner ( taxpayer ’ s argument that wages are not taxable was rejected by the United States Court of Appeals for the Seventh Circuit , and ruled frivolous ) ; 
 United States v. Russell ( taxpayer 's argument — that the federal income is unconstitutional on the theory that the law cannot tax a " common law right to work " — was rejected by the United States Court of Appeals for the Eighth Circuit ) ; 
 Waters v. Commissioner ( taxpayer ’ s argument that income taxation of wages is unconstitutional was rejected by the United States Court of Appeals for the Eleventh Circuit ; taxpayer required to pay damages for filing frivolous suit ) . 
 Related tax protester arguments with respect to wages paid by " employers " to " employees " are ( 1 ) that only federal officers , federal employees , elected officials , or corporate officers are " employees " for purposes of federal income tax , ( 2 ) that the inclusion of the United States government within the definition of the term " employer " operates to exclude all other employers from the definition , and ( 3 ) that with respect to compensation , the tax is imposed only on compensation paid to federal government employees . These arguments have been rejected in court rulings . 
 Another tax protester argument is that income from labor should not be taxable because any amount the worker receives in exchange for his or her labor is received in an exchange of " equal value , " although an exchange in any true " arm 's length " fair market value transaction is , essentially by definition , an exchange of equal value . See , for example , the decision of the United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit in United States v. Buras , in which the taxpayer 's theory — that wages were not taxable because ( 1 ) " only profit or gain , such as that from the sale of a capital asset , constituted income subject to federal tax " and ( 2 ) " [ w ] ages could not constitute gain or profit because wages merely represent an equivalent exchange for one 's labor " — was rejected . See also the decision of the United States Tax Court in Link v. Commissioner , where the taxpayer 's argument — that pension income is " labor property " and that when taxpayer receives his pension income from his former employer for whom he once performed services ( or labor ) , any amount he receives in exchange for his labor is a <unk> exchange of equal value — was rejected . In Boggs v. Commissioner , a penalty of $ 8 @,@ 000 was imposed by the United States Court of Appeals for the Sixth Circuit on the taxpayers for filing a frivolous appeal using the argument that a portion of a wage amount was not taxable as a return on " human capital . " 
 Further , under the U.S. federal tax laws , even if labor were considered " property " the gain or income from " labor property " would be defined as the excess of the amount realized ( for example , the money received ) by the taxpayer over the amount of the taxpayer 's " adjusted basis " in the " property " ( see 26 U.S.C. § 1001 ) . Since the taxpayer can have only a zero " basis " amount in his or her own labor — the personal living expenses incurred to generate labor being both non @-@ <unk> and , under 26 U.S.C. § 262 , non @-@ deductible — the " gain " would thus be equal to the amount of compensation received by the taxpayer . Compare Carter v. Commissioner , where the United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit stated : " The assertion that proceeds received for personal services cannot be given a ' zero @-@ basis for the purpose of the assessment of taxation , ' is frivolous . This is a variation of the ' wages are not income ' theme , which has been rejected repeatedly by this court . " See also Reading v. Commissioner ( taxpayer 's argument — that gain from labor of self @-@ employed individual cannot be determined until the " cost of doing labor " has been subtracted from the amount received — was rejected ; validity of 26 U.S.C. § 262 , disallowing deductions for personal living expenses , was upheld ) . See also Burnett v. Commissioner ( taxpayer 's argument — that wages represent an equal exchange of property and , therefore , are not taxable income — was rejected ) . See also In re <unk> ( ruling that a taxpayer is not entitled to deduct the value of his labor from his income in calculating his taxes ) . 
 = = = Wages and salaries , the Sixteenth Amendment , and the Cheek case = = = 
 In dicta in Cheek v. United States , the United States Supreme Court specifically labeled defendant John Cheek 's arguments about the constitutionality of the tax law — arguments Cheek had raised in various prior court cases — as " frivolous . " Prior to his conviction , John Cheek had specifically contended that the Sixteenth Amendment did not authorize a tax on wages and salaries , but only on gain or profit . 
 = = = Monetary penalties for asserting the argument on tax return = = = 
 The argument that wages , tips and other compensation received for the performance of personal services are not taxable income , the argument that such items are offset by an equivalent deduction , the argument that a person has a " basis " in his or her labor equal to the fair market value of the wages received , and variations of these arguments , have been officially identified as legally frivolous federal tax return positions for purposes of the $ 5 @,@ 000 frivolous tax return penalty imposed under Internal Revenue Code section 6702 ( a ) . 
 = Dump months = 
 The dump months is a term used in the film community for the two periods of the year when there are lowered commercial and critical expectations for most new releases . Audiences during these periods are smaller than the rest of the year , so no tentpole movies are released . January and February are usually most commonly described this way , with August and September sometimes included . Releases during those times primarily include films that would have been released at other times of year had they done better at test screenings , films with less prominent stars , genre films ( particularly horror ) , movies that cannot be easily marketed and films intended for a teenage audience , which has fewer entertainment options outside the home . 
 Several factors combine to create the dump months , most of them circumstances particular to the United States and Canada , the primary market for most major Hollywood releases . Both periods immediately follow the times of year in which the distributors concentrate films they expect to be the biggest critical and / or commercial successes , periods of increased spending on entertainment generally . While this often means that moviegoers have less disposable income afterwards , economics alone does not explain the dump months . The weather and competition from other forms of mass entertainment , especially professional sports , also play a part ; the winter dump months are further affected by the Academy Awards eligibility rules . 
 The dump months evolved over the course of the 20th century . Although during the studio era most major releases followed annual patterns similar to today 's , several classics like The Kid , Shadow of a Doubt and The Treasure of the Sierra Madre were released during January . Since the decline of the studios , however , memorable films from the dump months have become rare exceptions . The most notable is The Silence of the Lambs , a well @-@ reviewed box office smash released in late January 1991 that went on to win that year 's Academy Award for Best Picture . Several years before that , Dirty Dancing and Fatal Attraction became hits following releases in August and September respectively . 
 Films released during the dump months have not always been consigned to cinematic oblivion . Some , like Tremors and Office Space , have become cult classics . Starting with Cloverfield , some 21st @-@ century dump @-@ months releases have managed to exceed $ 100 million on box office receipts . The similar success of low @-@ budget horror films like The Devil Inside and Mama in the early 2010s has prompted studios to release films in that genre at times of the year other than Halloween and the dump months . 
 = = Etymology = = 
 The term " dump months " comes from the belief that studios use the time periods in question as a " dumping ground " for movies they are contractually obligated to release but believe to have limited commercial prospects at best . " The first months of the year are known as the ' dump months ' in Hollywood , " wrote Vegas Seven critic Una LaMarche in early 2013 , a period characterized by " movies that studios dislike , and want to release with little fanfare . " Likewise , Paul <unk> at JoBlo.com dismisses September as " one of the most worthless months at the box office . " 
 The earliest use of the term to turn up in a Google search is a 2007 article in the British newspaper The Guardian . " In the US , January is ' dump month ' at the movies , " critic Jonathan Bernstein wrote . " The films no studios believe in or care about ... suddenly become the sole choice available to regular filmgoers hungry for fresh fare . " Use of the term became more common in the early 2010s . 
 = = Causes = = 
 While both dump @-@ month periods immediately follow periods of greater movie attendance when event movies expected to be critical and / or commercial successes are released , and periods of greater consumer spending generally there are also reasons specific to both periods that further dampen movie attendance to limit the expected box office returns to the extent that movies with strong potential will be scheduled for other times of year . 
 = = = January – February = = = 
 The main impediment to the release of highly anticipated or high @-@ quality films in January and February is the calendar of the two major film awards , which overlap with those months . The winter weather also adds uncertainty to estimates of potential box office . Two holidays during the time provide some slight relief ; however , they are offset by the distraction of Super Bowl weekend , which depresses spending on movies . The combined gross for all January releases 2002 – 2012 has averaged $ 387 million ; for February it is $ 615 million . By comparison December , with its holiday releases , averages $ 1 @.@ 2 billion . 
 Spending is low to begin with since many consumers are cutting back and repaying debts incurred during the preceding holiday season , as well as having less free time , Jeremy Kirk of <unk> , when asked to explain the dearth of good films in January , notes that moviegoers are returning to their work and school routines during the month . C. Robert Cargill of Ain 't It Cool News adds that only those over 35 , " who have savings accounts and weren 't tapped out by Christmas , " can afford to go to the movies regularly then . He attributes the early @-@ year success of Taken and its sequels to that market , as well as that of many of Clint Eastwood 's recent films , to that older market . 
 The website Box Office Mojo , which publishes reports on film grosses , divides the movie year into five seasons . It defines the winter season as lasting from the first day after New Year 's week or weekend ends through the Thursday before the first Friday in March . The site 's data go back to 1982 , and in every year the winter season has had the lowest box office grosses . The weakest winter was 1983 , when The Entity 's $ 13 million take led the way to a total of $ 93 @.@ 4 million in domestic grosses for all movies released during that season . On the other end , 2012 had the strongest winter , at $ 1 @.@ 24 billion , topped by Safe House , which took in $ 124 million . 
 = = = = Awards calendar = = = = 
 At the end of the year comes the holiday movie season , when the studios release both tentpole movies , such as the latest installments in popular franchises that are expected to be highly successful and " Oscar bait " movies that are seen as likely to earn critical praise and , more importantly , nominations for major awards such as the Golden Globes and Oscars , the industry 's most prestigious . Those nominations are then used to promote the film . But while the former nominations are announced in December with the awards themselves given in early January , the Academy Award nominations are announced after the Golden Globes , and the actual awards are not given until late February leaving most of the first two months of the year as Oscar season a period during which any Golden Globes received as well as Oscar nominations can be used to promote the film to audiences , while studios lobby Academy members to vote for their nominees . 
 To be eligible for award consideration , the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences requires that a film be shown in a theater in Los Angeles County , California , for at least seven consecutive days during which is advertised in print media . Studios hoping to position a film for some nominations usually satisfy that minimum requirement , then ease them into wide release from then until the nominations and / or awards ceremony . The flexibility this marketing strategy requires means that screens be available , and studios limit their releases of new films during this time to that end . As critic Ty Burr explained in a 2013 New York Times Magazine article on the mediocrity of new releases in the first month of the year : " [ T ] he studios ... know our attention is elsewhere . " 
 New films shown publicly anywhere for the first time after January 1 themselves are ineligible for Oscars until the following year , by which time they will likely have been forgotten by critics , audiences and voters . The Silence of the Lambs , winner of the 1991 Academy Award for Best Picture , is a rare exception , as the only film in the post @-@ studio era released in the first two months of its year to go on to win that Oscar . Burr calls it " the grand exception to the January Movies Will Never Amount to Anything rule , " and finds that only one other classic of the late 20th century , Dr. Strangelove , was a January release . 
 Theaters will also still be running any holiday @-@ season hits even if they had not been nominated for awards , further reducing the screens available for new movies . Ray Subers , an editor at Box Office Mojo , says there are two types of January moviegoer that keep December releases on screens throughout the months . " <unk> adult audiences " , he told The Atlantic in 2012 , spend the month congregating to those films on critics ' lists for the best of the year they have not yet gotten to see , while " the general moviegoers are seeing the event films of December . " 
 = = = = Winter weather = = = = 
 During January and February winter storms become more likely than they are in December . While they do not affect the entire U.S. , the Northeast and Midwest are particularly prone to them , along with most neighboring areas of Canada . This includes many major metropolitan areas , and movie markets , in both countries . 
 When winter storms hit , bringing with them combinations of precipitation that making driving difficult and sometimes dangerous , moviegoers often prefer to stay home . Non @-@ essential travel is officially discouraged , and in severe enough weather all non @-@ emergency driving can be banned in some areas until the situation improves . In anticipation of the February 2013 nor 'easter , which struck on the month 's first weekend , three large chains closed down many of their theaters in the Northeast . 
 Industry analysts feared that the storm could seriously impact the box office prospects of two films opening that weekend , Identity Thief and Side Effects , both of which were seen as having potential to do better than most winter movies . While it afterwards appeared that the two films were not seriously affected , and did better than expected , with Identity Thief even winning the weekend , despite generally poor reviews and word of mouth , with $ 36 million in receipts , overall box office was down 45 % from the same weekend the previous year . Side Effects finished a distant third with a quarter of Identity Thief 's take . The clearest sign of the storm 's effect , according to Box Office Mojo , was the 35 % drop in earnings for Silver Linings Playbook , then in wide release after several Oscar nominations . 
 = = = = Holiday weekends and Super Bowl = = = = 
 While holiday weekends in the US generally increase film audiences and thus attract major releases throughout the year , the two that occur during these months — Martin Luther King Day in January and Presidents ' Day in February – offer only a modest prospect for improvement . The most lucrative take by any movie on Martin Luther King Day weekend is $ 107 @.@ 2 million by American Sniper in 2015 , its first weekend in wide release ; the previous best opening weekend was Ride Along the previous year , taking in $ 41 @.@ 5 million ( $ 48 @.@ 6 million if the entire three @-@ day holiday weekend is counted ) . 
 Presidents 's Day benefits by its proximity to Valentine 's Day ( which , as it is always February 14 , is often a weekday ) , which offers the studios enough chance of a payoff , usually from romantic comedies and other " chick flicks " marketed towards women as date movies . " [ Some years ] it 's been six straight weeks of dreck until " that holiday , says Cargill . Fifty Shades of Grey , the 2015 adaptation of the bestselling erotic novel , took in $ 93 million on its opening weekend , the largest take for a President 's Day weekend until Deadpool broke that record the year later . Valentine 's Day , the 2010 romantic comedy with a large ensemble cast , is third with $ 63 @.@ 1 million . Third among opening weekends is Ghost Rider , which took in $ 52 million in 2007 ; the best performance by a previously released film on President 's Day weekend is the $ 62 @.@ 4 million take by The Lego Movie , a week after its release in 2014 . 
 Any boost movie grosses get from those two holidays , however , is offset by what typically comes between them . The Super Bowl , the annual championship game of the National Football League , has been in recent years played on either the last Sunday of January or the first one of February . It is accompanied by heavy media attention and frequent gatherings all over the country to watch the game on television , accompanied with food and beverages purchased with money that might otherwise be spent on movie tickets . " Does the Super Bowl affect ticket sales ? " asks Scott Gwin at Cinemablend . " The answer , of course , is yes . In fact , there 's a decent chance Budweiser spends more on advertising that Sunday than America does in theaters . " 
 The most successful film to open during Super Bowl weekend is the 2008 concert film Hannah Montana & Miley Cyrus : Best of Both Worlds Concert , which took in $ 31 @.@ 1 million , almost half the total it would earn during a released limited to just that weekend and the following week . In a close second is Dear John , grossing $ 30 @.@ 5 million in 2010 , for the strongest Super Bowl weekend opening for a conventional release . Both films had strong appeal to female moviegoers , an audience more receptive to moviegoing on a weekend dominated by a sporting event . The 2008 action film Taken , which Cargill noted for its success in appealing to an older audience , took in $ 24 @.@ 7 million on its opening weekend on its way to total receipts of over $ 100 million , making it a distant third . 
 = = = August – September = = = 
 " As we enter the dog days of summer , we get the summer movie season dregs as well , " wrote PopMatters editor Bill Gibron , anticipating August 2013 . The year 's other dump period straddles summer and fall , and does not lend itself to being as clearly delineated as the winter dump months . In the past it was usually considered to include all of August and September , and in some years still may . But in years with many major summer movies , some may open on the first or second weekend of August to avoid competing with other such movies , such as Guardians of the Galaxy , the first @-@ ever August release by Marvel Studios , which took in $ 94 million on the first weekend of that month in 2014 . It was the most successful August opening weekend , and it became one of the year 's top @-@ grossing films . 
 By the end of the summer seasonal jobs end , just as with the winter dump months , and younger moviegoers begin to return to school . Tuition payments , and retailers ' back @-@ to @-@ school sales further cut into movie grosses . " The prevailing wisdom is that people don 't go to the movies in August " due to family vacations , summer camp , among other factors , Vulture complained as it pondered another potentially dreary month in 2008 . While an August release can open as successfully as a film earlier in the summer , " [ i ] t just doesn 't have the ability to run five or six weeks so there 's a scramble for June and July , " Ted <unk> , head of Landmark Theatres , told the Fort Worth Star @-@ Telegram in 2014 . The type of films that interest younger audiences in the early summer , he elaborates , do not do well after Labor Day . 
 It is the month 's last two weekends that are more universally seen as the beginning of the late @-@ summer dump months , when only forgettable films are likely to be released , with occasional exceptions like Dirty Dancing , which went on to make $ 63 million domestically from its release in late August 1987 , and spawn several sequels and a franchise . 
 At the end of August is the annual American celebration of Labor Day , the only holiday weekend during this period . Of all the year 's holiday weekends it is reliably the weakest in terms of movie box office , with the top grosser for the weekend being the 2007 Rob Zombie @-@ directed reimagining of Halloween , at $ 30 @.@ 5 million . The Sixth Sense , then in its fourth week , is a close second after pulling in $ 29 million in 1999 ; in a distant second for opening weekends is yet another horror film , 2012 's The Possession with $ 21 @.@ 1 million . 
 Once September begins , younger moviegoers are preoccupied with starting the school year and thus less likely to go to the movies on weeknights than they were in summertime . As with the winter months , football also has an impact at the box office as not only NFL teams but college and high school teams resume play , all on weekends . " [ W ] e are left with a series of movies competing for box office scraps in a month when Hollywood assumes no one goes to the movies , " says a Yahoo critic . 
 Some September movies have triumphed critically and commercially . In 1987 , Fatal Attraction , which opened in wide release on September 18 not only succeeded at the box office , staying in theaters through June of the next year and garnering six Academy Award nominations , including Best Picture . Twelve years later , in 1999 , the similarly successful American Beauty , which had been in limited release through September before going wide in October , won that award and four others . 
 September 's counterpart to Sundance , the Toronto International Film Festival , is held at the end of the month . The film community 's attention is focused on the Canadian city . Critics gather to see potential Oscar contenders among the many independent films on the program and studio executives look to line up distribution deals with the same prize in mind . Some of the best are released within a week or so , ending the September dump period . 
 In past years , October also was when eagerly anticipated horror films reached screens , to capitalize on the approach of Halloween at the end of the month . However , this began to change in the 2000s due to the way franchises such as the Saw and Paranormal Activity films dominated that period , prompting distributors of other horror films to consider releasing them during the winter dump months instead . In 2012 Paramount enjoyed huge success with the unheralded The Devil Inside , released right after New Year 's Day despite a strongly negative critical and audience reaction ; the next year Mama was received enthusiastically by critics and filmgoers when it came out on Martin Luther King Day weekend after being rescheduled from the previous October to avoid going up against Sinister and Paranormal Activity 4 . Only one major horror film , the third adaptation of Stephen King 's Carrie , was released in October 2013 , and it underperformed . " At your local multiplex , the spirit of Halloween is , sadly , dead , " Matt Barone wrote in Complex . " Horror 's now too big of a business for major studios to care much about October . " 
 = = Statistical analyses = = 
 The dump months ' obstacles are reflected in their box office totals , particularly the success of movies opening during those months . January 's strongest domestic opening weekend ever was the $ 90 million American Sniper took in when it went into wide release on Martin Luther King Day weekend in 2015 . The best opening weekend for a movie seeing screens for the first time in January was the $ 42 million pulled in by Ride Along the year before ; it is the lowest best opening weekend gross for any month . Close behind is September 's best , the $ 48 million that Hotel Transylvania 2 took in following its 2015 release . August and February are fourth and fifth , respectively , with Guardians of the Galaxy at $ 94 million and Deadpool at $ 132 million respectively ( the all @-@ time champion is December , reflecting Star Wars : The Force Awakens ' massive $ 248 million it made during its 2015 opening weekend ) . 
 In January 2010 , Metacritic editor Jason Dietz undertook a statistical analysis of whether films released in that month were , as perceived , inferior . He compared the site 's aggregate scores , based on critical and audience consensus , for films released in January , February , and March from 2000 to 2009 . January averaged the fewest releases of the three , and the lowest average scores . Of the 88 films released in the first month of the year during that decade , only six earned above a 61 average on the site 's scale of 0 to 100 , the lowest of any of the three winter months , even accounting for the increase in releases as the spring becomes closer . 
 It did not seem to Dietz as if there was any relationship between critical praise and audience enthusiasm for January films . The best @-@ rated , Disney 's 2004 animated musical Teacher 's Pet , was a commercial failure , as was 2001 's The Pledge . Cloverfield , the third entry , was a success , and behind it Freedom Writers had ridden its good reviews to do some modest box office in 2007 ; however How She Move had flopped that same year . 
 Conversely , some of the successful January releases did not meet with critical acclaim . Taken had been highly successful at the end of the month in 2009 despite reviews that ranged across the spectrum . And two weeks before that film 's release , the universally panned comedy Paul Blart : Mall Cop had opened strong on its way to a total take over $ 150 million . 
 Contemplating the offerings for January 2013 , Adam Raymond at Vulture undertook a ranking of a quarter @-@ century of Januarys based on scores at Rotten Tomatoes ( RT ) , another review aggregator . He averaged the ratings for all films released in a particular January , with the best and worst scores noted . By this method the best and worst Januarys were both in the earliest years for which the site kept scores . " [ T ] his could be more a result of the fact that far fewer movies used to be released then , so it took less to sway the average , " Raymond noted . 
 The best January was also the first , 1987 , whose 79 % average was led by Woody Allen 's acclaimed Radio Days . At 95 % , it was also the best @-@ rated January film during the survey period . That month 's lowest @-@ rated new release , Outrageous Fortune , still managed a 50 % rating , better than the average for all but one of the other years . 
 At the other end was January 1989 , where the 26 % achieved by Gleaming the Cube and the 0 % awarded to <unk> Six bracketed a 16 % average . Five other January films joined it at the bottom of the scale . It was recognized as a nadir among Januarys even at the time . In a contemporary essay in The New York Times after the month had concluded , an exasperated Janet Maslin presciently noted that " the January that has just ended really looks like one for the record books . " 
 Among the 21st @-@ century Januarys , 2011 did the best at 39 % , led by The Way Back 's 75 % . The worst was 2003 , when Final Destination 2 led the pack to a 23 % average with its score of 47 % . Kangaroo Jack brought up the rear at 8 % . 
 Looking ahead to the movies of February 2014 , Chris Kirk and Kim Thompson at Slate argued that February 's movies were statistically the worst of any month . Their evidence was the average RT ratings for all movies for each month between 2000 and 2013 . February 's averaged 45 % , three points lower than January and September and four below August . February also had the worst month in the entire sample period , with the 2001 releases from that month coming in at 31 % ; 2010 and 2012 tied for the best February at 54 % . 
 No comparable analysis has ever been done on films released during the late @-@ summer dump months . At the end of July 2008 , Vulture again greeted the coming month with two posts on the drop in movie quality historically associated with the month , and its theories for what might explain that . One was a history of the previous 15 Augusts , with movies released in each month subjectively rated as " halfway @-@ decent " or " lousy " . It concluded that over that time there had been 169 lousy movies , and 26 halfway @-@ decent ones . " That 's 11 @.@ 2 movies per August that make you want to claw your eyes out . " 
 Most of the Augusts in the time period in question had one or two " halfway @-@ decent " movies , with the other 9 – 11 movies discarded as " lousy " . The exceptions were the consecutive years 1998 – 99 . The former was regarded as the worst August , with no halfway @-@ decent movies and all its releases ( The Avengers , How Stella Got Her Groove Back and Halloween H20 , among others ) considered lousy . But in August 1999 , there were five halfway @-@ decent films : The Sixth Sense , The Thomas Crown Affair , The Iron Giant , Dick and <unk> . 
 = = History = = 
 According to Burr , from the earliest days of the studio system major releases had largely followed the same calendar modern audiences would recognize , clustered during spring , summer , and the end @-@ of @-@ year holidays . " Yet January was still in the mix , " he observes . " Silent @-@ era Charlie Chaplin hits like The Kid ( 1921 ) and The Circus ( 1928 ) , the Garbo / John Gilbert melodrama Flesh and the Devil ( 1927 ) and Josef von Sternberg 's Last Command ( 1928 ) all came out during the first month of the year . " 
 The best decade for January movies , Burr writes , may well have been the 1940s . It began with what he suggests was best January in cinema history . The Grapes of Wrath , His Girl Friday and The Shop Around the Corner , all considered classics , were released in January 1940 . Later in the decade , other classic films would first reach screens during January , such as Sullivan 's Travels , Shadow of a Doubt and The Treasure of the Sierra Madre . 
 A few months after Treasure 's release , the U.S. Supreme Court handed down its decision in United States v. Paramount Pictures , Inc . , holding that it was a violation of antitrust law for the studios to own theater chains as well . This has historically been seen as the beginning of the end of the studio system . Burr found that after it , with movies having less of a guaranteed box office since an adequate theatrical run could no longer be guaranteed , " release patterns began to clump more formally around big weekends , warmer weather and national holidays . " 
 In the mid @-@ 1970s , the studios discovered the summer blockbuster via the success of Jaws and Star Wars . In the following decade the rise of independent producers dedicated to quality such as Merchant Ivory and Harvey Weinstein made the October – December the year 's other highlight . But those two concentrations left the post @-@ holiday winter and late summer as the lows that followed the highs . By the 2010s , Burr said , " August is death by ennui . And January is suicide . " Similarly , The A.V. Club had noted at the same time , " over the past few decades , the American movie schedule has calcified ... January and February are when studios dump their discards , the movies they have low hopes for and want to disavow . " 
 In the early 1980s producer Daniel Melnick , whose Altered States was moved up a month into the 1980 Christmas season by the studio over his objections , complained about this in an interview . " I would rather go at a time when there are fewer people attending movies and offer them pictures they want to see , rather than to divide a larger audience with ten other desirable films ... [ A ] s an industry we have very often shown the instinct of lemmings ... We 're all convinced that people go to the movies primarily at Christmas time , so we release our big pictures then ... " 
 By the end of the decade critics had taken notice as well . After January 1989 , the month that Vulture would 24 years later find to be the movies ' worst January ever , New York Times critic Janet Maslin had had enough . Her idea of " movie hell " she said , included among other indignities having to watch only January releases . " It 's well known that January films have a character that is , let us say , distinctive ... What is it that leads film distributors to regard January as just the right resting place for so many flukes , black sheep , wild cards and also @-@ <unk> ? " She allowed that recent years had allowed some good films , such as Radio Days and El Norte , to get attention they might note have in other months of the year . However , that January had had as one its major releases The January Man , a thriller she characterized as aptly titled , despite not even being the worst the month had to offer ( that dubious honor went to <unk> Six ) . 
 Despite the critical and commercial success of The Silence of the Lambs in 1991 , Burr qualified it as an exception that proved the rule . First , it had been released at the very end of January ; and second , it had only gone into wide release two weeks later . Such a strategy is typical of January , Burr writes . " [ It ' ] s a studio 's way of gritting its teeth and ripping off the Band @-@ Aid . " 
 In 2013 , Don Fithian , president of the National Association of Theater Owners ( NATO ) , criticized the dump months ( among several other studio practices ) at CinemaCon , the annual gathering of film exhibitors hosted by NATO . The theaters had come off a first quarter where receipts had been down 12 % from the first quarter of 2012 . He faulted the studios for their insufficiently diverse offerings in 2013 as compared to the first quarter of the year before , which he connected to the dump @-@ months phenomenon . " Any month can produce a $ 100 million movie , " he said in his speech . " In 2012 , distributors spread their movies over the calendar , and we had a record year . " 
 Responding later , in an indieWIRE panel discussion hosted by Anne Thompson , Universal Studios chairman Adam Fogelson agreed in principle with Fithian , saying " there are very few reasons other than historical behavior why almost any film can 't work on almost any weekend ... " he said . He pointed to the 2005 success of White Noise on the first weekend of January as having opened that time up to similar low @-@ budget horror films . 
 However , he called the belief among some exhibitors that the theaters ' slump was attributable to a plethora of R @-@ rated films saved for January , a criticism repeated by Fithian , " simplistic . " The problem was the movies in question , not their ratings . Django Unchained , he insisted , would have been a hit regardless of the month it opened with . " It happens to be about the movies , " Fogelson said . " People tend to if not forget minimize how complicated this is . " 
 = = Releasing strategies = = 
 Critics and movie fans have observed that studios and other distributors have leaned on particular types of movies , or particular genres , to get them through the dump months . Some of them overlap : 
 " Mediocre comedies " , as Scott Meslow of The Atlantic puts it , referring to films like Tooth Fairy , Bride Wars and Hotel for Dogs , all of which had tepid critical receptions but did better than they might have at other times of year . In the 2010s , these films have been doing even better , with Paul Blart : Mall Cop and Identity Thief both vaulting past unimpressed critics to gross over $ 100 million in consecutive years ; the former is the all @-@ time top @-@ grossing January release . 
 " Mediocre action movies " . Meslow points to The Book of Eli and Underworld : Evolution as films that , like their comic counterparts , succeeded commercially due to their January release . In 2011 , he adds , rescheduling The Green Hornet to January from its originally intended release the previous summer proved to be a very lucrative decision . A decade earlier , in a piece about his general complaints with August , Slate editor David Plotz included " egregious action movies " dominating movie screens during the month . " 
 Low @-@ cost rereleases : In 2011 , Meslow recounts , Disney rereleased The Lion King in 3 @-@ D to test whether its core audience would be amenable to the format . The experiment wound up becoming the highest @-@ grossing September release ever . It followed it up with Beauty and the Beast in 3 @-@ D , released the following January . George Lucas primed audiences for the Star Wars prequel trilogy by releasing the enhanced " Special Edition " of the original trilogy during the winter dump months , Meslow recalled . 
 Low budgets , generally : Taken and Paul Blart 's stars , Liam Neeson and Kevin James respectively , are not considered A @-@ listers , bankable enough to open a major movie on the strength of their names alone . Therefore , Meslow writes , they work for lower salaries , which helps keep budgets low enough for the film to be profitable with a smaller potential audience amid minimal competition . 
 Teen @-@ oriented movies . Since teenagers , " the demographic with an excess of idle time in January , " are less interested in movies touted as potential Oscar winners than adults , Meslow reasons , studios make the effort to release films targeted to them . So , romantic films like She 's All That , Save the Last Dance and A Walk to Remember have successfully opened in January . The low @-@ budget parody films of Jason Friedberg and Aaron Seltzer , such as Date Movie and Meet the Spartans , have also done well with the teen market in the dump months despite strongly negative reception from critics and audiences . 
 Not all films released in the dump months were originally intended for that period , however . Movies that failed to live up to studios ' hopes for a competitive summer release often come out in the winter . Vegas Seven 's Una LaMarche pointed at the beginning of 2013 to the then @-@ upcoming Hansel & Gretel : Witch Hunters as such a film . " If [ it ] were any good , " she wrote , " it would be coming out in June . " It indeed fared poorly in the U.S. , but better abroad . 
 She also suspected that Broken City , another upcoming release that starred Russell Crowe , Catherine Zeta @-@ Jones and Mark Wahlberg , had been consigned to a January release due to adverse reactions from test audiences , and correctly anticipated the failure of the ensemble comedy Movie 43 for the same reason . For his part , Meslow points to Season of the Witch , a $ 40 million horror film starring Nicolas Cage which failed to recoup even that amount , and <unk> as emblematic of that kind of big @-@ budget bust buried during dump months . " The marketing plan for a film like this is often just a formal wake , the last stop before a film 's reincarnation as generic product for the on @-@ demand / DVD / streaming after @-@ markets , " says Burr in his Times Magazine piece . 
 Others that were not originally intended for the dump months get shifted there anyway not because they are bad but because the studios cannot figure out how to market them or aren 't sure they will succeed . C. Robert Cargill , a former critic for Ain 't It Cool News who scripted the successful 2012 horror film Sinister , points to Chronicle , which had a surprisingly strong opening on Super Bowl weekend earlier that year , an example . 
 Similarly , LaMarche points to two other types of movies difficult to market to large audiences . " Winter can be a boon to little movies with niche audiences , " she writes , pointing to Dustin Hoffman 's directorial debut , Quartet , which received a limited U.S. release in January 2013 , and Struck by Lightning , released at the same time . Movies that also blend genres or defy such categorization , such as the zombie – human Romeo and Juliet retelling , Warm Bodies , or the limited @-@ release Charlie Sheen comedy A Glimpse Inside the Mind of Charles Swan III , are also ideal for their dump @-@ months release time frame . 
 = = = August = = = 
 Guardians of the Galaxy had the most successful August opening weekend ever and became 2014 's top @-@ grossing film domestically . These accomplishments led industry observers to reconsider whether they should be so dismissive of August , a trend that had been building even before that year . Cary Carling noted afterwards in the Fort Worth Star @-@ Telegram that recent Augusts had seen a number of critical and commercial successes , not only franchise movies such as The Bourne Ultimatum and Rise of the Planet of the Apes but films that appealed to adult audiences such as Blue Jasmine , The Help , and the James Brown biopic Get on Up , whose $ 14 million opening weekend against Guardians " met expectations . " 
 " [ Is ] the summer movie season ... expanding out from its traditional boundaries ? " Jordan Smith asked before the month began on Hollywood.com. He noted that some big @-@ budget movies released in the late spring and early summer of recent years , like After Earth , White House Down , <unk> and The Lone Ranger , had struggled at the box office against similar competition . He believed a " point of saturation " had been reached , with too many of those movies being released in the early summer . But " audiences are proving that they 'll line up at any time of the year to watch Captain America save the day . " 
 Dave <unk> of Fandango.com believes moviegoers are already adapting . When a film like Guardians of the Galaxy comes out at the time of summer it does , " [ it ] feels like an event , regardless of the month . " He sees it as similar to what has happened to the TV schedule , where both broadcast and cable networks have begun airing new scripted shows during the summer , which was once relegated to reruns due to small audiences . 
 = = = Horror films = = = 
 One genre regularly mentioned in connection with the dump months is horror . Once a staple of the periods , yet frequently limited to them , recent successes during the dump months have actually led studios to reevaluate this scheduling limitation and release horror movies at other times of the year . " It seems this time of the year has become the ' other October . ' " said Brian Salisbury of Hollywood.com at the end of February 2013 . LaMarche attributes this to winter 's " cold , dark landscape . " 
 Critically praised and commercially successful horror films such as 2008 's Cloverfield , which had the best January opening weekend for six years until Ride Along , and 2013 's January champion Mama , have done well by the dump months . But other horror movies have still succeeded in the face of critical condemnation , starting with White Noise in 2005 . As a result , " the only new release is usually one crappy horror movie , " on the year 's first weekend , says Will Goss of <unk> 
 In reviewing 2016 's The Forest , David Ehrlich of Slate took note of its release at that time of year . " [ A ] <unk> with access to a calendar already knows that The Forest is bad , " he wrote . " [ A ] t this point , that 's less of a presumption than it is a tradition . " In that vein , playing on the movie 's Japanese setting , he likened it to the supposed ancient custom of <unk> in that country , by which elderly people who could no longer care for themselves were purposely abandoned on mountainsides . 
 In 2012 , The Devil Inside , a low @-@ budget found footage horror film following in the steps of Cloverfield , opened the weekend after New Year 's Day . Critics , for whom it had not been screened , reviewed it harshly if and when they did see it , and audiences reacted angrily to the film 's abrupt ending , which directed them to a website for more information . Yet , as Cargill notes , its success was proof that even on that low @-@ potential weekend , a disengaged audience will " throw money at a terrible movie if it looks like it 's good . " The film 's opening weekend take of $ 33 @.@ 7 million ranks in the top ten for January . The Devil Inside went on to make over $ 50 million domestically and almost that much abroad to break $ 100 million in total receipts . 
 The success of both films outside of October , usually the month when studios released their quality horror films to capitalize on Halloween 's approach , has actually led studios to rethink that approach and release horror films at other times of year . During the 2000s October , and the weekend before Halloween , had come to be dominated by the Saw and Paranormal Activity franchises . " You would never come up against them because you would be killed , " recalls Rock Alvarez , producer of A Haunted House 2 . 
 For that reason , Mama was rescheduled from October 2012 to the following January . In October 2013 , Paramount decided to delay the release of Paranormal Activity : The Marked Ones from the weekend before Halloween to March 2014 , and replaced it not with another horror offering but the comedy Johnny Knoxville , leaving the month with only one highly anticipated horror film , the third adaptation of Stephen King 's Carrie . 
 Tiffany Smith of Fandango.com 's House of Screams says studios are finding holidays with horror associations elsewhere in the year , like Friday the 13th , regardless of season . Insidious : Chapter 2 had actually opened well on that weekend in September . " That weekend actually played as a bigger movie weekend than Halloween is this year , " she told USA Today . In July , The Conjuring had also done well amidst the summer movies . " A lot of people are moving [ horror movies ] everywhere , " said Mama producer Guillermo del Toro . 
 = = Audience and critical responses = = 
 Some movie critics have called on the studios to change their release schedules and improve the quality of new films during the dump months . Paul <unk> of JoBlo.com calls on the studios start releasing better films then . " Rather than saving them to win statues , why not put them out to reap some box office and fill an otherwise dead month with something worth seeing ? " 
 Ty Burr suggested that in January 2013 that no new movies should be released in January . Instead , " studios would have to rerelease their most underrated entertainments from the previous year for a second chance . " He gave The Cabin in the Woods or Chronicle , itself a January release in 2012 , as examples of such films . Failing that happening , he wrote that he was using home media to catch up on older films . 
 Other critics have tried to look for worthwhile , overlooked films amid the dump @-@ months releases , which do exist , Vegas Seven 's Una LaMarche assures readers . In January 2013 , The Onion 's A.V. Club compiled a list of such overlooked dump months films . It includes many that have since become cult classics , like the 1991 Kevin Bacon horror film Tremors , 1999 's Office Space and Boiler Room from the following year , all released in late February . They also recommend the January 1993 release Matinee , starring John Goodman as legendary gimmick @-@ using film producer William Castle , and The Pledge , a January 2001 film starring Jack Nicholson . " It is Sean Penn 's best film as director , an uncompromising depiction of faith and devotion curdled into something monstrous . " 
 One critic , Matt Singer of indieWIRE , said in January 2013 that he has " started to look at January with anticipation rather than dread . " He argues that even the month 's bad movies are bad in their own way . Unlike failed summer blockbusters , which have " way too much money riding on [ them ] to be anything but mediocre and boring , " January movies are often spectacular in their failure since the studios do not expect them to do well . " Why throw good money after bad ? " he asks rhetorically . " Just cut your losses and let the thing really suck . " Such benign neglect , he suggests , led to The Devil Inside , " so intensely stupid it 's almost brilliant — and entirely entertaining . " He likened January movies to <unk> , while bad movies in June were more like " controlled demolitions . " Cloverfield , he asserted , had begun reversing the trend of forgettable January movies . In more recent years he had been impressed by The Grey and Mama . 
 " While it 's easy to complain about a stretch of so @-@ so movies , " wrote Matt Patches at Hollywood.com as 2012 began , " the twist is we should really be thanking the studios for catering to niche audiences all month . " For most viewers , it is a chance to catch up on the major awards contenders released in December . But studios and the filmgoers who have already seen those two films can benefit from creative risk @-@ taking by filmmakers . He points to Cloverfield as one such gamble that succeeded . Smaller film distributors also take advantage of the dump months to bring little @-@ seen but highly praised films like Kill List to wider audiences via home @-@ media releases . 
 Scott Mendelson at Forbes said in January 2014 that only critics in large markets have reason to complain during the dump months . " For the rest " he claimed " January is in fact a deluge of high quality movies " owing to the combination of awards contenders reaching the mass market for the first time , the possibility for unusual successes among the new releases , and overlooked films from the previous year reaching home markets . In that last category , he highly recommended the August 2013 release Short Term 12 . 
 = Enough Said ( film ) = 
 Enough Said is a 2013 American romantic comedy @-@ drama film written and directed by Nicole Holofcener . The film stars Julia Louis @-@ Dreyfus , James Gandolfini , Catherine Keener , Toni Collette and Ben Falcone . Louis @-@ Dreyfus plays Eva , a divorced masseuse who begins a relationship with Albert ( Gandolfini ) , only to discover that he is the ex @-@ husband of her client and friend Marianne ( Keener ) . 
 Holofcener wrote the script , which was partly inspired by her own life , after she was approached by two producers from Fox Searchlight Pictures who offered to produce her next project . It was filmed in Los Angeles on a budget of US $ 8 million . Gandolfini died after the film was completed but before it was released ; Holofcener dedicated the film to him . 
 Enough Said premiered at the 2013 Toronto International Film Festival and was released on September 18 , 2013 to critical acclaim , ranking as the fifth best @-@ reviewed wide release of the year . Particular praise was given to Gandolfini and Louis @-@ Dreyfus 's performances , along with Holofcener 's script and direction . The film also received several major award nominations , including for a Golden Globe , a Screen Actors Guild Award , two Independent Spirit Awards and four Critics ' Choice Movie Awards . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Eva , a masseuse and the divorced mother of a teenage girl , attends a party in Pacific Palisades with her friends , married couple Will and Sarah . There she meets a poet , Marianne , and Will introduces Eva to one of his friends , Albert . After the party , Albert asks Will for Eva 's number and , although hesitant since she is not physically attracted to him , Eva agrees to go on a dinner date with Albert , which goes well . Marianne contacts Eva for a massage , and after taking an immediate liking to one another they become friends . 
 Eva finds herself growing fonder of Albert and they have lunch with his teenage daughter , Tess , who , like Eva 's daughter Ellen , is graduating from high school and moving away to attend college . A few days later , Eva goes to her massage appointment with Marianne and realizes that Albert is Marianne 's ex @-@ husband after Marianne tells a story about how he manages to pick out onions when scooping salsa — the same story Albert had told Eva , but about guacamole . Tess then arrives at the house and Eva 's suspicions are confirmed . Marianne tries to introduce Eva to Tess , but Eva hides behind a tree to avoid the meeting . Eva continues seeing Albert , keeping her friendship with Marianne a secret ; likewise , she does not tell Marianne that she is seeing him . 
 Eva encourages Marianne to voice her complaints about Albert so she can identify potential problems in her relationship with him . At the encouragement of Eva , Sarah and Will invite her and Albert to a dinner party , which ends badly after Eva nitpicks over Albert 's faults , which upsets him . At another appointment with Marianne , Eva is exposed when Albert arrives to drop Tess off . He is angry that Eva kept her friendship with Marianne a secret , and breaks up with her . 
 Eva and her ex @-@ husband take Ellen to the airport for her flight to college . A few months later , on Thanksgiving Day , Eva drives by Albert 's home and stops in front of the house on her way to pick up Ellen from the airport . He sees her and she awkwardly waves . He eventually comes outside , to Eva 's surprise , and sits with her on the porch while they begin to renew their relationship . 
 = = Cast = = 
 = = Production = = 
 Enough Said was the fifth film written and directed by Nicole Holofcener . After the release of her fourth film , Please Give ( 2010 ) , she was approached by Matthew Greenfield and Claudia Lewis from Fox Searchlight , who offered to produce Holofcener 's next project on the condition that it was more mainstream than her previous films . She wrote three drafts of the screenplay over six months . The premise was partly inspired by Holofcener 's own life as a divorced mother of two teenagers and her " feelings and fears about what [ her ] life will be like when [ her ] kids go away " . While writing the film , she said , " I was having thoughts about my ex @-@ husband and my new boyfriend and thinking about being married and how I 'm trying to have a relationship that 's happier the second time . " Small details of the plot were also drawn from her life ; Albert 's guacamole @-@ eating habit was inspired by a story that her boyfriend told her about his ex @-@ wife . 
 Neither Julia Louis @-@ Dreyfus nor James Gandolfini was Holofcener 's first choice to play the lead roles . Louis @-@ Dreyfus was cast after she approached Holofcener to express her interest in appearing in one of Holofcener 's films . Holofcener 's first choice as Albert was Louis C.K. , who read part of the script but was not interested in the role . Gandolfini did not feel that he was right for the part , but Holofcener later described him as " perfect " . Catherine Keener , who played Marianne , is a frequent collaborator of Holofcener 's , having appeared in all four previous films that Holofcener had directed . 
 The film was shot on location over 24 days in Los Angeles , with a budget of $ 8 million . It was filmed by cinematographer Xavier Pérez <unk> , with whom Holofcener had previously worked on the HBO television series Enlightened . Although each scene was scripted , the actors would often ad @-@ lib lines of dialogue . The final scene of the film , in which Eva and Albert reunite in front of his house , was improvised by Louis @-@ Dreyfus and Gandolfini . It was edited by Robert <unk> , Holofcener 's boyfriend at the time , who had also worked on all four of her previous films . 
 Gandolfini died of a heart attack in June 2013 , almost a year after production on the film had ended but before it was released . The film 's editing was complete by then but Holofcener added a dedication to the end @-@ credits reading " For Jim " . Gandolfini never saw the completed film . 
 = = Release = = 
 Enough Said premiered on September 7 , 2013 at the Toronto International Film Festival and was released theatrically shortly thereafter on September 18 , 2013 . On its opening weekend , the film earned $ 240 @,@ 000 from four theaters for a $ 60 @,@ 000 per @-@ theater average , ranking among 2013 's best specialty release openers . It received a wide release on September 27 and gradually expanded to a peak of 835 theaters in late October . Over 121 days in theaters , the film grossed $ 17 @.@ 6 million at the U.S. box office . It earned $ 7 @.@ 7 million from other countries , making a total worldwide gross of $ 25 @.@ 3 million . 
 The film was released in DVD and Blu @-@ ray format on January 14 , 2014 . The Blu @-@ ray disc includes six making @-@ of featurettes , titled " Second Takes " , " Cast " , " Story " , " Meet Eva and Albert " , " Nicole Holofcener " and " Julia " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 Enough Said received positive reviews from critics . On Rotten Tomatoes , the film has a rating of 96 % , based on 167 reviews , with an average rating of 7 @.@ 7 / 10 , and the critical consensus reads , " <unk> charming , impeccably acted , and ultimately quite bittersweet , Enough Said is a grown @-@ up movie in the best possible way . " Another review aggregation website , Metacritic , gave the film a score of 78 out of 100 , based on 44 critics , signifying " generally favorable reviews " . In their year @-@ end tabulations , Rotten Tomatoes dubbed Enough Said the fifth best @-@ reviewed wide release of 2013 and the runner @-@ up for the best @-@ reviewed romance film of 2013 ( second to Before Midnight ) . Many critics also listed the film among their 10 best of the year . 
 Specifically , Enough Said was praised for its commitment to realism , both in the way Holofcener 's characters converse and in the themes the film addresses . In a review for The New York Times , A. O. Scott claimed that " Line for line , scene for scene , it is one of the best @-@ written American film comedies in recent memory . " Kenneth Turan of the Los Angeles Times felt that Enough Said demonstrated " Holofcener 's gift for portraying life as it is lived " , while David Denby , writing for The New Yorker , wrote that it " approaches novelistic richness " . In The New York Times Book Review , Francine Prose praised Holofcener for having written characters " with sufficient depth and wisdom that ... the actors never seem to be movie stars impersonating people . Rather , they disappear into the vulnerable and self @-@ doubting characters they play without a hint of the preening vanity that so often causes cinematic performances to seem forced and shallow . " 
 Numerous critics also praised Gandolfini and Louis @-@ Dreyfus 's performances in the film . Ann Hornaday of The Washington Post wrote that Gandolfini brought " superb sensitivity and naked vulnerability " to his portrayal of Albert , while Indiewire 's Eric Kohn felt that Gandolfini " truly blossoms " in the film . Writing for The Wall Street Journal , Joe Morgenstern similarly described Gandolfini 's performance as " marvelous " and " grounded in genial humanity " , and found Louis @-@ Dreyfus to be " equally endearing " . Ty Burr of The Boston Globe wrote that Gandolfini gave " a performance of immense tenderness and charm " , " as endearing as it is heartbreaking " , and said of Louis @-@ Dreyfus , " Holofcener brings out a vulnerability you may have forgotten was in this actress . " Slate magazine 's Dana Stevens , meanwhile , wrote that " There 's no one making films right now who writes that kind of dialogue better than Holofcener ... And it 's hard to imagine anyone speaking it better than Gandolfini and Julia Louis @-@ Dreyfus . " 
 In a negative review for the San Francisco Chronicle , Mick LaSalle wrote that he found Eva and Albert 's romantic pairing implausible and , knowing that Gandolfini died after making the film , found the references to Albert 's obesity " awkward and macabre and not at all enjoyable " . The Financial Times ' Antonia Quirke , meanwhile , described the film as <unk> , " very modest " and " too depressing " . 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 = Mallory Hagan = 
 Mallory <unk> Hagan ( born December 23 , 1988 ) is an American actress , model and beauty queen who won Miss America 2013 and Miss New York 2012 . She was also Miss New York City 2012 , Miss Manhattan 2011 , Miss Brooklyn 2010 , and a two @-@ time Miss New York first runner @-@ up . She is a native of Alabama , where she had been runner @-@ up in the Miss Alabama 's Outstanding Teen Program , and a non @-@ finalist talent winner at Miss Alabama . She won the Miss America competition on a platform of child sexual abuse awareness and prevention . She also gave a timely response on the issue of gun control in which she opposed fighting violence with violence . She moved to New York after her first year of college at Auburn University , which is the local college near where she was raised . 
 = = Early life and education = = 
 Hagan is from Opelika , Alabama and is a 2007 graduate of Opelika High School . She was influenced by her formative years spent with a mother who ran a dance studio in the Auburn @-@ Opelika area , where she was raised . Her grandmother had run a dance studio in Tennessee , where Hagan was born . She is a former student at Auburn University , where she spent a year studying biomedical science . She was also a member of the sorority Pi Beta Phi Alabama Gamma chapter , becoming the fourth Pi Beta Phi to become Miss America ( Marilyn Van <unk> , Jackie Mayer , and Susan Akin ) . 
 She moved to the Bedford – Stuyvesant , Brooklyn neighborhood in New York City in October 2008 . At the time of her arrival , she had $ 1000 and a dream of beauty pageant success . Several sources stated that Hagan was a Park Slope , Brooklyn resident when she won Miss America . The Wall Street Journal ran a correction ( that was corroborated by The New York Times ) that she was a resident of Windsor Terrace , Brooklyn at the time . Hagan had lived in six different Brooklyn neighborhoods between her arrival in 2008 and her Miss America victory in 2013 , including Sunset Park and Williamsburg . 
 At the time of the 2013 Miss America competition , she was a Fashion Institute of Technology ( FIT ) student , where she studied advertising , marketing and communications with aspirations of a profession related to cosmetic and fragrance marketing . At FIT , she was a part of the Presidential Honors Program . Her three placements in the Miss New York competition provided her with sufficient scholarship monies to pay for her entire FIT tuition . She trained several different methods to prepare for the pageant . Her trainers included Richard <unk> of social fitness network <unk> , <unk> Lee , and Mark Fisher of Mark Fisher Fitness . One of her training elements was also CrossFit exercise programs . 
 = = Pageants = = 
 Hagan won Miss Brooklyn on March 28 , 2010 . Her prior pageant experience has been reported to include runner @-@ up placements in the Miss Alabama 's Outstanding Teen and the Miss Alabama competition . However , Hagan stated that in the Miss Alabama 2008 competition , which was her only attempt at that title , " I did get a non @-@ finalist talent award . " She competed in Miss Alabama 's Outstanding Teen from the ages of 13 to 17 . 
 Hagan was the first runner @-@ up in both of the Miss New York 2010 and Miss New York 2011 pageants . She then went on to win the title of Miss New York 2012 ( in which Miss America 2014 Nina Davuluri was the second runner up ) . During Hagan 's reign as Miss New York 2012 , her platform was child sexual abuse awareness and prevention . Her contest bio stated that " Hagan has chosen to honor the women in her family who have been victims of sexual abuse by sharing their personal stories and encouraging others to take a stand . " According to statements made during an Associated Press interview , her mother , Mandy Moore , convinced her to tackle child sexual abuse since it had affected her mother , aunt , grandmother , and cousins . Hagan has stated that she has experienced the ripple effects of child sexual abuse . Hagan 's mother , father , Phil Hagan , and 32 friends and family members from Opelika attended her crowning . Her grandfather , Stan Hagan , says that Mallory 's comments regarding gun control represented most of her family . At the time of her victory , she was also supported by her then boyfriend , <unk> Maynard from New York City . Hagan is the fourth Miss New York , second individual from New York City , and first individual from Brooklyn to serve as Miss America . 
 = = 2013 Miss America pageant = = 
 Hagan was crowned Miss America 2013 on January 12 , 2013 in Las Vegas , Nevada by outgoing Miss America 2012 Laura <unk> , beating out first runner @-@ up Miss South Carolina 2012 Ali Rogers . Due to the decision to move the pageant back to Atlantic City , New Jersey , her reign was cut short by four months and ended on September 15 , 2013 . Although Hagan follows a few other Miss New York contestants to earn the Miss America crown , she is the first <unk> to win . The 2013 competition was Hagan 's final year of Miss America Organization eligibility . Her introductory quip to the Miss America 2013 audience at the beginning of the on @-@ air broadcast was " Sandy may have swept away our shores but never our spirit . " During the Miss America 2013 competition , she performed a tap dance routine to James Brown 's " Get Up Offa That Thing " while wearing a latex rodeo outfit . Other elements of her winning wardrobe included a black string bikini and an asymmetric white evening gown . At the time of her Miss America victory , she was 24 years old and a resident of Brooklyn . Part of her prize package was a $ 50 @,@ 000 scholarship . She won the swimsuit and evening wear portions of the show . 
 = = Miss America role = = 
 Hagan promoted awareness of child sexual abuse , and in her first 24 hours as Miss America , she was in communication with United States Secretary of Education Arne Duncan . Her first initiative as Miss America was to become spokesperson for the IHOP 's 8th Annual National Pancake Day Celebration in which they hope to raise $ 3 Million for the Children 's Miracle Network Hospitals . As Miss America , Hagan claimed to travel 20 @,@ 000 miles ( 32 @,@ 187 km ) per month . She was derided in the press for gaining weight a few months after becoming Miss America . Hagan responded : " I 'm human … and I 'd like to equate getting ready for the Miss America pageant , you know , to getting ready for a boxing match [ ... ] We get into shape and then afterwards life goes back to normal . " 
 = = Career = = 
 Hagan stated that she will use her scholarship money from both the Miss New York and Miss America pageants to complete her education at the Fashion Institute of Technology ( FIT ) where she is a communications major and hopes to pursue a career in television . 
 = Frank Pick = 
 Frank Pick Hon. RIBA ( 23 November 1878 – 7 November 1941 ) was a British transport administrator . After qualifying as a solicitor in 1902 , he worked at the North Eastern Railway , before moving to the Underground Electric Railways Company of London ( UERL ) in 1906 . At the UERL he rose through the corporate ranks , becoming joint assistant managing director in 1921 and managing director in 1928 . He was chief executive officer and vice @-@ chairman of the London Passenger Transport Board from its creation in 1933 until 1940 . 
 Pick had a strong interest in design and its use in public life . He steered the development of the London Underground 's corporate identity by commissioning eye @-@ catching commercial art , graphic design and modern architecture , establishing a highly recognisable brand , including the first versions of the roundel and typeface still used today . Under his direction , the UERL 's Underground network and associated bus services expanded considerably reaching out into new areas and stimulating the growth of London 's suburbs . His impact on the growth of London between the world wars led to him being likened to Baron Haussmann and Robert Moses . 
 Pick 's interest extended beyond his own organisation ; he was a founding member and later served as President of the Design and Industries Association . He was also the first chairman of the Council for Art and Industry and regularly wrote and lectured on design and urban planning subjects . For the government , Pick prepared the transport plan for the mass evacuation of civilians from London at the outbreak of war and produced reports on the wartime use of canals and ports . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Frank Pick was born on 23 November 1878 at Spalding , Lincolnshire . He was the first child of five born to draper Francis Pick and his wife Fanny Pick ( née Clarke ) . Pick 's paternal grandfather , Charles Pick , was a farmer in Spalding who died in his forties , leaving eight children . His maternal grandfather , Thomas Clarke , was a blacksmith and Wesleyan lay preacher . As a child , Pick was bookish , preferring to read and build collections of moths and butterflies and objects found on the beach rather than take part in sports . 
 Before becoming a draper , Pick 's father had had an ambition to become a lawyer and he encouraged his son to follow this career . Pick attended St Peter 's School in York on a scholarship , but failed to get a scholarship to Magdalen College , Oxford . Instead , he was articled to a York solicitor , George Crombie , in March 1897 . He qualified in January 1902 and completed a law degree at the University of London in the same year , but he was not sufficiently interested in a legal career to apply to practice . 
 In 1902 , Pick began working for the North Eastern Railway . He worked first in the company 's traffic statistics department before becoming assistant to the company 's general manager , Sir George Gibb in 1904 . In 1904 , Pick married Mabel Mary Caroline Woodhouse . The couple had no children . 
 = = London 's transport = = 
 In 1906 , Gibb was appointed managing director of the UERL . At Gibb 's invitation , Pick also moved to the UERL to continue working as his assistant . The UERL controlled the District Railway and , during 1906 and 1907 , opened three deep @-@ level tube lines – the Baker Street and Waterloo Railway ( Bakerloo tube ) , the Charing Cross , Euston and Hampstead Railway ( Hampstead tube ) and the Great Northern , Piccadilly and Brompton Railway ( Piccadilly tube ) . 
 The UERL had financial problems . Ticket prices were low and passenger numbers were significantly below the pre @-@ opening estimates . The lower than expected passenger numbers were partly the result of competition between the UERL 's lines and those of the other tube and sub @-@ surface railway companies . The spread of street @-@ level electric trams and motor buses , replacing slower , horse @-@ drawn road transport , also took a large number of passengers away from the trains . 
 = = = Branding – a clear identity = = = 
 By 1908 , Pick had become publicity officer responsible for marketing and it was at this time that , working with the company 's general manager Albert Stanley , he began developing the strong corporate identity and visual style for which the London Underground later became famous , including the introduction of the " UNDERGROUND " brand . Pick 's philosophy on design was that " the test of the goodness of a thing is its fitness for use . If it fails on this first test , no amount of ornamentation or finish will make it any better ; it will only make it more expensive , more foolish . " 
 Pick became traffic development officer in 1909 and commercial manager in 1912 . Albert Stanley replaced Gibb as managing director in 1910 . During 1912 and 1913 , the UERL increased its control over transport services in London by purchasing two tube railways , the City & South London Railway ( C & SLR ) and Central London Railway ( CLR ) , and a number of bus and tram companies . One of Pick 's responsibilities was to increase passenger numbers , and he believed that the best way to do so was by encouraging increased patronage of the company 's services outside peak hours . He commissioned posters which promoted the Underground 's trains and London General Omnibus Company 's ( LGOC 's ) buses as a means of reaching the countryside around London and attractions within the city . Pick realised that variety was important to maintain travellers ' interest and he commissioned designs from artists working in many different styles . At the same time , he rationalised bus routes to ensure that they complemented and acted as feeder services for the company 's railway lines , tripling the number of LGOC operated routes during 1912 and extending the area covered to five times its previous size . Sunday excursion services to leisure destinations were implemented to fully utilise otherwise idle buses and agreements were established with rural bus operators to coordinate services rather than compete with them . 
 Pick introduced a common advertising policy , improving the appearance of stations by standardising poster sizes , limiting the number used and controlling their positioning . Before he took control of advertising , posters had been stuck up on any available surface on station buildings and platform walls in a crowded jumble of shapes and sizes that led to complaints from passengers that it was difficult to find the station name . Pick standardised commercial poster sizes on printers ' double crown sheets , arranging these in organised groups to enable the station name to be easily seen . The Underground 's own promotional posters were smaller , using single or paired double royal sheets , and were arranged separately from the commercial advertising . Pick described the process : " after many fumbling experiments I arrived at some notion of how poster advertising ought to be . Everyone seemed quite pleased and I got a reputation that really sprang out of nothing . " 
 To make the Underground Group 's posters and signage more distinctive he commissioned calligrapher and typographer Edward Johnston to design a clear new typeface . Pick specified to Johnston in 1913 that he wanted a typeface that would ensure that the Underground Group 's posters would not be mistaken for advertisements ; it should have " the bold simplicity of the authentic lettering of the finest periods " and belong " unmistakably to the twentieth century " . Johnston 's sans serif " Underground " typeface , ( now known as Johnston ) was first used in 1916 and was so successful that , with minor modifications in recent years , it is still in use today . 
 In conjunction with his changes to poster display arrangements , Pick experimented with the positioning and sizing of station name signs on platforms , which were often inadequate in number or poorly placed . In 1908 , he settled on an arrangement where the sign was backed by a red disc to make it stand out clearly , creating the " bulls @-@ eye " device – the earliest form of what is today known as the roundel . In 1909 , Pick started to combine the " bulls @-@ eye " and the " UNDERGROUND " brand on posters and station buildings , but was not satisfied with the arrangement . By 1916 , he had decided to adapt the logo used by the LGOC , the Underground Group 's bus company , which was in the form of a ring with a bar bearing the name " GENERAL " across the centre . Pick commissioned Johnston to redesign the " bulls @-@ eye " and the form used today is based on that developed by Johnston and first used in 1919 . 
 = = = Expansion – a growing network = = = 
 In 1919 , with a return to normality after the First World War , Pick began developing plans to extend the Underground network out into suburbs that lacked adequate transport services . The only major extensions made to the Underground network since the three tube lines had opened were the extension of the District Railway to Uxbridge in 1910 , and the extension of the Bakerloo tube to Watford Junction between 1913 and 1917 . Approved schemes put on hold during the war were revived : the CLR was extended to Ealing Broadway in 1920 , the Hampstead tube was extended to Edgware between 1923 and 1924 and the C & SLR was reconstructed and extended to Camden Town between 1922 and 1924 . Finance for the latter two extensions was obtained through the government 's 1921 Trade Facilities Act which underwrote loans for public works as a means of alleviating unemployment . For new lines , Pick first considered extending Underground services to the north @-@ east of London where the mainline suburban services of the Great Northern Railway ( GNR ) and Great Eastern Railway ( GER ) were poor and unreliable . Studies were carried out for an extension of the Piccadilly tube on GNR tracks to New Barnet and Enfield or on a new route to Wood Green and plans were developed for an extension of the CLR along GER tracks to Chingford and Ongar , but both mainline companies strongly opposed the Underground 's encroachment into their territories . 
 Wanting to make maximum use of the government 's financial backing , which was only available for a limited period , Pick did not have time to press the Underground 's case for these extensions . Instead he developed a plan for an extension of the C & SLR south @-@ west from Clapham Common to Sutton in Surrey . Pick still faced strong opposition from the London , Brighton and South Coast Railway and the London and South Western Railway which operated in the area , but the Underground had the advantage of already having an approval for the last few miles of the route as part of an unused pre @-@ war permission for a new line from Wimbledon to Sutton . The railway companies challenged the need for a new service , claiming it would simply drain passengers from their own trains and that any extension should only run as far as Tooting , but Pick was able to counter their arguments and negotiated a compromise settlement to extend the C & SLR as far as Morden . 
 Even before the C & SLR extension had been completed in 1926 , possibilities for the northward extension of the Piccadilly tube began to reappear . From 1922 , a series of press campaigns called for the improvement of services at the GNR 's Finsbury Park station where interchanges between tube lines , mainline trains , buses and trams were notoriously bad . In June 1923 , a petition from 30 @,@ 000 local residents was submitted to parliament , and , in 1925 , the government called a public inquiry to review options . Pick presented plans to relieve the congestion at Finsbury Park by extending the Piccadilly tube north to Southgate . Opposition from the London and North Eastern Railway ( successor to the GNR following the 1923 grouping of railway companies ) was again considerable and based on claims that the new Underground line would take passengers from the mainline services . Using data from the Bakerloo tube , Hampstead tube and C & SLR extensions , Pick demonstrated that the route planned for the new line would stimulate new residential development and increase passenger numbers for all rail operators in the area , increasing those on the Piccadilly tube by 50 million per year . Parliamentary approval was granted in 1930 to extend the Piccadilly tube north beyond Southgate to a terminus at Cockfosters . The approval also included complementary extensions of the Piccadilly tube from its western terminus at Hammersmith to supplement District Railway services to Hounslow and South Harrow . The development was again financed with government backed loans , this time through the 1929 Development ( Loan Guarantees and Grants ) Act . To ensure the most efficient integration between the new tube line and the UERL 's bus and tram operations , the stations were located further apart than in central areas and where road transport services could be arranged to deliver and collect the most passengers . At Manor House , the station was designed with subway exits directly on to pedestrian islands in the road served by the local trams . 
 = = = Design – a new architecture = = = 
 In 1924 , with plans for the C & SLR extension under development , Pick commissioned Charles Holden to design the station buildings in a new style . The designs replaced a set by the Underground 's own architect , Stanley Heaps , which Pick had found unsatisfactory . Pick had first met Holden at the Design and Industries Association ( DIA ) in 1915 , and he saw the modernist architect as one he could work with to define what Pick called " a new architectural idiom " . Pick wanted to streamline and simplify the design of the stations to make them welcoming , brightly lit and efficient with large , uncluttered ticket halls for the rapid sale of tickets and quick access to the trains via escalators . At these new stations , tickets were issued from a number of " <unk> " , glazed booths in the centre of the ticket hall , rather than the traditional ticket office windows set to one side . 
 Pick was pleased with the results and at a DIA dinner in 1926 proclaimed " that a new style of architectural decoration will arise " leading to a " Modern London – modern not garbled classic or Renaissance . " Amongst Pick 's next commissions for Holden were the redesign of Piccadilly Circus station ( 1925 – 28 ) , where a wide subterranean concourse and ticket hall were built beneath the road junction , and the Underground Group 's new headquarters building at 55 Broadway , St James 's ( 1925 – 1929 ) . The new headquarters building was on an awkwardly shaped site , partly over the platforms and tracks of St. James 's Park station . Although Holden 's practice had not designed such a large office building , it did have experience of large hospital design , which Pick saw as complementary to the design of a modern office building . When completed , the twelve @-@ storey , 176 @-@ foot ( 54 m ) high cruciform building was the tallest in London and the tower dominated the skyline . The building was well received by architectural critics and won Holden the RIBA 's London Architecture Medal for 1929 . Two sculptures commissioned for the building were less well received , generating considerable controversy in the media . The nudity and primitive carving of Day and Night by Jacob Epstein led to calls for them to be removed from the building and the board of the Underground Group considered replacing them with new sculptures by another artist . Although he privately admitted later that the sculptures were not to his taste , Pick publicly supported Holden 's selection of Epstein as sculptor and offered to resign over the matter . The crisis was averted when Epstein was persuaded to reduce the length of the penis of one of the figures and the sculptures remained in place . 
 Pick wanted a new type of building for the more open sites of the stations on the Piccadilly line 's extensions . To decide what this new type should look like , he and Holden made a short tour of Germany , Denmark , Sweden and the Netherlands in July and August 1930 to see the latest developments in modern architecture . Pick was disappointed with much of the new architecture that he saw in Germany and Sweden , considering it either too extreme or unsatisfactorily experimental . The architecture in the Netherlands was much more to his liking , particularly buildings by Willem Marinus <unk> in Hilversum . Although the architecture in Denmark was not considered remarkable , Pick was impressed with the way in which designers there were often responsible for all elements of a building including the interior fixtures and fittings . 
 The designs Pick commissioned from Holden ( 1931 – 33 ) established a new standard for the Underground , with the prototype station at Sudbury Town being described by architectural historian Nikolaus Pevsner as a " landmark " and the start of " the ' classic ' phase of Underground architecture " . To ensure that the new stations achieved the complete and coherent design that he wanted , Pick instructed the engineering departments to provide Holden with full details of all equipment needed for the stations . After late equipment changes by the engineers at the first few new stations compromised the integrated design , Pick took personal charge of the coordination of the architectural and engineering elements . In the mid @-@ 1930s when the introduction of trolleybuses to replace trams required the installation of new street poles to support overhead wiring , Pick was keenly interested that the design of the poles was coordinated to accommodate all of the possible equipment and signage that might be needed . He also oversaw the designs of the new bus stops and bus shelters that were installed when specified stopping points were introduced for bus services . 
 As part of the Transported by Design programme of activities , on 15 October 2015 , after two months of public voting , the work of Frank Pick was elected by Londoners as one of the 10 favourite transport design icons . 
 = = = London Passenger Transport Board – bringing it all together = = = 
 At the beginning of the 1920s , with vehicle numbers depleted by wartime service in France and Belgium , the Underground Group 's bus operations began to experience a surge in competition from a large number of new independent bus operators . These small operators were unregulated and preyed on the group 's most profitable routes taking away a large number of its passengers and a large amount of its income . Albert Stanley ( ennobled as Lord Ashfield in 1920 ) and Pick fought back by calling on parliament to regulate bus operations in the capital . The London Traffic Act 1924 granted their request by establishing the London Traffic Area to regulate road passenger traffic within London and the surrounding districts . Throughout the 1920s , Pick led the Underground Group 's efforts to coordinate its services with the municipal tram operators , the Metropolitan Railway and the suburban mainline rail services . The aim was to achieve a pooling of income between all of the operators and remove wasteful competition . At the end of 1930 , a solution was announced in a bill for the formation of the London Passenger Transport Board ( LPTB ) , a public corporation which was to take control of the Underground Group , the Metropolitan Railway and the majority of the bus and tram operators within an area designated as the London Passenger Transport Area covering the County of London and Middlesex and parts of Buckinghamshire , Essex , Hertfordshire , Kent , Surrey and Sussex . 
 Pick had become joint managing director of the Underground Group in 1928 , and when , on 1 July 1933 , the group was taken over by the LPTB , he became chief executive officer and vice @-@ chairman , on an annual salary of £ 10 @,@ 000 ( approximately equivalent to £ 640 @,@ 000 in 2015 ) . Ashfield was chairman . Pick led the board 's negotiations on the compensation to be paid to the owners and shareholders of each of the transport operations being taken over . 
 With the majority of London 's transport operations now under the control of a single organisation , Pick was able to commence the next round of improvements . On the Metropolitan Railway ( renamed the Metropolitan line ) , Pick and Ashfield began to rationalise services . The barely used and loss @-@ making Brill and Verney Junction branches beyond Aylesbury were closed in 1935 and 1936 . Freight services were reduced and electrification of the remaining steam operated sections of the line was planned . In 1935 , the availability of government @-@ backed loans to stimulate the flagging economy allowed Pick to promote system @-@ wide improvements under the New Works Programme for 1935 – 1940 , including the transfer of the Metropolitan line 's Stanmore services to the Bakerloo line in 1939 , the Northern line 's Northern Heights project and extension of the Central line to Ongar in Essex and Denham in Buckinghamshire . 
 During 1938 and 1939 , with war anticipated , an increasing part of Pick 's time was spent in planning for the approaching conflict . The Railway Executive Committee was reconstituted in 1938 to act as a central coordinating body for the country 's railways with Pick as the LPTB 's representative . This role absorbed most of his time after the committee took over control of the railways on 1 September 1939 . Following a disagreement with other members of the LPTB board over the government 's proposals to limit the dividend that it could pay to its shareholders , Pick stated his intention to retire from the board at the end of his seven @-@ year appointment in May 1940 . Pick had previously suggested a reorganisation of the LPTB 's senior management structure and hoped to be able to continue with the organisation in some sort of joint general manager position . Ashfield chose not to find such a continuing role for Pick and , on 18 May 1940 , to the surprise of many within the organisation , Pick retired from the LPTB board , officially due to failing health . Pick 's post of chief executive was abolished and replaced with a group of six heads of department . 
 = = Other activities = = 
 Pick 's interest in design led to his involvement in the founding , in 1915 , of the Design and Industries Association . The organisation aimed to bring manufacturers and designers together to improve the quality of industrial design . Through his improvements in the UERL 's advertising and branding , Pick was considered by many of its members to be taking a practical lead in achieving the organisation 's aims and he was soon lecturing on the subject , giving talks during 1916 and 1917 at the Art Workers Guild in London , at the Royal Scottish Academy in Edinburgh and elsewhere . After the First World War , Pick continued to give talks regularly and published articles on design . He also began to set out his ideas on reconstruction and town planning , an area of design he became interested in through its connection to transport planning . He wrote and lectured extensively on this subject during the 1920s and 1930s including presenting a 14 @,@ 000 word paper to the Institute of Transport in 1927 and addressing the International Housing and Town Planning Congress in 1939 . Concerned about the uncontrolled and unchecked growth of London , partly facilitated by the new lines that London Underground was building , Pick was a strong supporter of the need for a green belt around the capital to maintain open space within reach of urban areas . 
 In 1922 , he wrote and published privately a pamphlet This is the World that Man Made , or The New Creation that was influenced by the rationalist writing of Ray Lankester . In it Pick was pessimistic that mankind was not achieving its creative potential . He returned to the subject in lectures he gave in the 1930s when he outlined his concern that at some not too distant point progress in civilisation would come to a natural end and a stable condition would arise where , he believed , it would be hard to maintain creativity and an <unk> decline would follow . Later , in the last year of his life and with the Second World War under way , he published two booklets on post war reconstruction , Britain Must Rebuild and Paths to Peace . Pick wrote the introduction to the English translation of Walter Gropius 's The New Architecture and the Bauhaus published in 1935 . 
 Beside his positions at the UERL and LPTB , Pick held a number of industrial administrative and advisory positions . In 1917 , during the First World War , Pick was appointed to be head of the Mines Directorate 's Household Fuel and Lighting Department at the Board of Trade where Albert Stanley was the President . Pick was responsible for the control of the rationing and distribution of domestic fuel supplies . He remained in this position until June 1919 . In 1928 , he was appointed as a member of the Royal Commission On Police Powers and Procedure . He also served as a member of the London and Home Counties Traffic Advisory Committee and as a member of the Crown Lands Advisory Committee . 
 Pick was President of the Institute of Transport for 1931 / 32 . He was President of the Design and Industries Association from 1932 to 1934 and the chairman of the Board of Trade 's Council for Art and Industry from 1934 to 1939 . 
 During 1938 , the government appointed Pick to plan the transport operations for the evacuation of civilians from London . Initially scheduled for 30 September 1938 , the plans were cancelled when Neville Chamberlain 's Munich conference with Adolf Hitler averted war that year , but were activated a year later at the beginning of September 1939 on the declaration of war with Germany . After leaving the LPTB , Pick visited British ports for the Ministry of Transport to prepare a report on methods of improving port operations and cargo handling . In August 1940 , he reluctantly accepted the position of director @-@ general of the Ministry of Information . His time at the Ministry of Information was short and unhappy and he left after four months and returned to the Ministry of Transport , where he carried out studies on improvements in the use of Britain 's canals and rivers . 
 = = Personality = = 
 Biographers have characterised Pick as being " very shy " , and " brilliant but lonely " . Christian Barman described him as a person who inspired conflicting opinions about his personality and his actions : " a man about whom so many people held so many different views " . Pick acknowledged that he could be difficult to work with : " I have always kept in mind my own frailties – a short temper . <unk> with fools , quickness rather than thoroughness . I am a bad hand at the gracious word or casual congratulation . " His moralistic character led to friends giving him the nickname " Jonah " . Pick valued criticism and savoured challenging debate , though he complained that he found it difficult to get people to stand up to him . UERL board member Sir Ernest Clark considered Pick to be perhaps too efficient and unable to fully delegate and relinquish responsibility : " his own efficiency has a bad effect on the efficiency of others ... How can the housemaid take pride in a job to which the mistress will insist on putting the finishing touch ? " Pick 's friend Noel Carrington thought that his attention to detail made him the " ideal inspector general . " 
 Pick ran his office on a fortnightly cycle and his workload was prodigious . Barman described Pick 's office as a training school for future managers , with a regular turnover of staff who would go on to management positions when Pick thought them ready . 
 Ashfield considered that Pick possessed " a sterling character and steadfast loyalty " , and " an administrative ability which was outstanding " , with " a keen analytical mind which was able to seize upon essentials and then drive his way through to his goal , always strengthened by a sure knowledge of the problem and confidence in himself . " Charles Holden described Pick 's management of meetings : " Here his decisions were those of a benevolent dictator , and the members left the meeting with a clear sense of a task to be performed , difficult , perhaps , and sometimes impossible , as might subsequently prove to be , but usually well worth exploring if only in producing convincing proof of obstacles . Out of these exploratory methods there often emerged new and most interesting solutions , which Pick was quick to appreciate , and to adopt in substitution for his own proposals . " Disliking honours , Pick declined offers of a knighthood and a peerage . He did accept , in 1932 , the Soviet Union 's Honorary Badge of Merit for his advice on the construction of the Moscow Metro . He was an honorary member of the Royal Institute of British Architects . 
 = = Influences = = 
 Pick was widely read and was influenced by many writers on scientific , sociological and social matters including works by Alfred North Whitehead , Leonard Hobhouse , Edwin Lankester , Arthur Eddington and John Ruskin . On design , he was influenced by D 'Arcy Wentworth Thompson 's description of design in nature in On Growth and Form and by architect William <unk> . His admiration for William Morris led him to adopt Morris 's favourite colour of green as his own , using green ink for the majority of his correspondence . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Pick had not been well for some years . The stresses of his war work took a further toll on his health and he lost two stone during his travels around the country to research his report on the canal industry . Although exhausted at the end of the tour , he wrote to friends that he was struggling with the idleness and was hoping for something new to do . He died at his home , 15 Wildwood Road , Golders Green , on 7 November 1941 from a cerebral haemorrhage . His funeral was held at Golders Green Crematorium on 11 November 1941 and a memorial service was held at St Peter 's Church , Eaton Square on 13 November 1941 . 
 Working with Ashfield , Pick 's impact on London 's transport system was considerable . Transport historian Christian Wolmar considers it " almost impossible to exaggerate the high regard in which [ London Transport ] was held during its all too brief heyday , attracting official visitors from around the world eager to learn the lessons of its success and apply them in their own countries " and that " it represented the apogee of a type of confident public administration ... with a reputation that any state organisation today would envy ... only made possible by the brilliance of its two famous leaders , Ashfield and Pick . " In his obituary of Pick , Charles Holden described him as " the Maecenas of our time . " Writing in 1968 , Nikolaus Pevsner described Pick as " the greatest patron of the arts whom this century has so far produced in England , and indeed the ideal patron of our age . " Considering Pick 's public statements on art and life , art historian Kenneth Clark suggested that " in a different age he might have become a sort of Thomas Aquinas " . Historian Michael <unk> compared Pick 's influence on London Transport to that of Lord Reith on the BBC 's development during the same inter @-@ war period . Urban planner Sir Peter Hall suggested that Pick " had as much influence on London 's development in the twentieth century as Haussmann had on that of Paris in the nineteenth " , and historian Anthony Sutcliffe compared him to Robert Moses , the city planner responsible for many urban infrastructure projects in New York . 
 Pick 's will was probated at £ 36 @,@ 433 12s 9d ( approximately £ 1 @.@ 53 million in present @-@ day terms ) . In his will he bequeathed a Francis Dodd painting , Ely , to the Tate Gallery . He is commemorated with a memorial plaque at St Peter 's School , York , unveiled in 1953 by Lord Latham , and a blue plaque was erected at his Golders Green home in 1981 . A building at London Underground 's Acton Works is named Frank Pick House in his honour . It stands on the north side of the Piccadilly and District line railway tracks to the east of Acton Town station . 
 Transport for London and the London Transport Museum maintain archives of Pick 's business and personal papers . 
 = Sandra Morgan = 
 Sandra Anne Morgan ( born 6 June 1942 ) , also known by her married name Sandra Beavis , is an Australian former freestyle swimmer , who won gold in the 4 × 100 @-@ metre freestyle relay at the 1956 Summer Olympics in Melbourne . At the age of 14 years and 6 months , she became the youngest Australian to win an Olympic gold medal , a record that still stands . Morgan began serious training in early 1956 and won Olympic selection for the relay team as well as the 400 @-@ metre freestyle . Morgan 's selection in the final quartet raised controversy because of her inexperience in top @-@ level racing and her history of false starts . During the final , she lifted her head out of the water and saw her American opponent ahead of her , prompting her to regain the lead with a late burst in the third leg . Australia went on to win the relay in world record time . In her only individual event , Morgan came sixth in the 400 @-@ metre freestyle . 
 In 1957 , she won the 110- , 220- , and 440 @-@ yard treble at the Australian Championships in the absence of her main rivals , but from that point on her career was plagued by illness and weight problems . She was selected in the 1958 British Empire and Commonwealth Games purely as a relay swimmer , winning gold in the event . At her second 1960 Summer Olympics in Rome , she only competed in the relay heats ; her teammates went on to win silver in the final . She retired from competitive swimming following the Rome Olympics . In retirement , she has continued her involvement in swimming and the Olympics by teaching disabled children to swim and participating in Olympic educational programs and torch relays . She is also an ambassador for Australia Day and has appeared on television as part of her work with Christian groups . 
 = = Early years = = 
 Morgan was born in the north @-@ western New South Wales city of Tamworth , before growing up in Punchbowl , a suburb in western Sydney . Morgan was the oldest of four children , with two sisters and a brother . Her father Barrington , a plumber , had success as a swimmer in his childhood , but a lack of facilities in rural Australia curtailed his career . As a result , he vowed that his daughter would become a national champion . Morgan said her father " became my driving and inspirational force . I not only fulfilled his ambition , but surpassed it by becoming an Olympic champion ! " Morgan also cited her meetings with Frederick Lane — Australia 's first Olympic gold medallist in swimming — and the Olympic athletics champion Marjorie Jackson @-@ Nelson as key inspirational moments in her career . 
 Morgan learned to swim at Bankstown at the age of 7 . She was initially slow to learn and her coach used a long pole attached to a rope and belt to maintain her safety . This allowed him to fish her out of the water if she fell into difficulty . Due to her slow learning , Morgan was given twice the number of lessons as the other students . At the age of eight , she won the district championship and in 1953 , aged 11 , she won the New South Wales ( NSW ) Primary School Championships . In February 1956 , aged 13 , she was taken for serious training . Her father transferred her to the tutelage of Frank Guthrie in Enfield . At the time , Guthrie was regarded as one of the best coaches in the state ; his students included Gary Chapman , Kevin O 'Halloran and Lorraine Crapp . All three would win Olympic medals at the 1956 Summer Olympics ; Crapp won an individual gold medal . Her mother had to drive her to Enfield , as her father was busy with the plumbing business . 
 = = National selection = = 
 Under Guthrie 's coaching , Morgan quickly became one of the fastest junior swimmers in the state , winning the under @-@ 14 110 @-@ yard and 55 @-@ yard freestyle , as well as the 110 @-@ yard butterfly at the New South Wales Championships in 1956 . She went on to win the junior 110 @-@ yard freestyle at the Australian Championships , despite causing two false starts . After the national titles , she represented Marrickville Junior Girls ' High School and won the State Combined High School Championship in the 110 @-@ yard freestyle . 
 Although her times were among the fastest in the country , Morgan 's youth prevented selection for the Olympic training squad . However , the Australian Swimming Union allowed her to join the squad for training in Townsville at her own expense . Her family was unable to meet these costs , but a fundraising campaign by the Bankstown community allowed her to make the trip . Training in the Tobruk Memorial Baths alongside swimmers such as Crapp , Alva Colquhoun , Faith Leech and Dawn Fraser , Morgan 's times steadily improved . The team were expected to swim three times a day , totalling more than 16 km ( 9 @.@ 9 mi ) . However , Morgan was not regarded as a likely selection in the final team . 
 Following the training camp , a series of selection trials were held in Brisbane and Melbourne . In three 100 @-@ metre races , Morgan came third , fifth and fourth respectively , with a best time of 1 minute 7 @.@ 3 seconds . She recorded a best performance of third in a time of 5 minutes 10 @.@ 0 seconds in the 400 @-@ metre freestyle behind Crapp and Fraser . Australia was entitled to three representatives in each individual event , thus allowing Morgan to compete in her first Olympics . Morgan missed out in the 100 @-@ metre freestyle as Fraser , Crapp and Leech were selected , but she gained an individual berth in the 400 @-@ metre along with Fraser and Crapp . She was one of six swimmers selected for the 4 × 100 @-@ metre freestyle relay squad , the first from Australia to compete at Olympic level . Morgan was placed under substantial pressure by media commentary that regarded her as the weak link in the relay team . 
 = = 1956 Summer Olympics = = 
 Arriving in Melbourne for the Olympics , Morgan was not assured of a place in the final relay quartet . Fraser and Crapp were rested in the heats on 4 December while the remaining four swimmers qualified the team . Morgan swam the second leg in 1 minute 5 @.@ 4 seconds , the fastest of the Australians , securing her position in the final four along with Leech . Australia qualified quickest for the final , winning the second heat by 3 @.@ 1 seconds . They were 1 @.@ 8 and 2 @.@ 3 seconds faster than the South Africans and Americans , respectively , both of which swam in the first heat . 
 The selection of Leech and Morgan for the 6 December final generated controversy , as they were the two youngest swimmers in the squad and lacked experience at open level competition . Both had competed only once at senior Australian level ; Morgan had twice false started at the 1956 Australian Championships , while Leech had been too ill to compete . Australia was the favourite for the relay , having swept the medals in the individual 100 @-@ metre event ; Fraser , Crapp and Leech finished first , second and third . The favouritism was even more marked because Fraser and Crapp were three seconds faster than everyone else in the world . 
 The Australian team made a poor start in the final after Fraser almost stopped during the first leg , believing that a false start had occurred after mistakenly hearing a second gunshot . She finished her leg in 1 minute 4 @.@ 0 seconds , almost two seconds slower than her personal best , but enough for a 2 @.@ 3 @-@ second lead over the United States ' Sylvia <unk> . Swimming the second leg , Leech maintained the lead in the first 50 metres but faded in the second half and finished with a split of 1 minute 5 @.@ 1 seconds ; the Australian lead was thus cut to 0 @.@ 9 s . Morgan dived in for the third leg and was then overhauled and passed by American Nancy Simons . With 25 metres left , Morgan took her head out of the water — a fundamental error — and seeing the American a body length in front , responded with a surge to regain a 0 @.@ 7 @-@ second lead heading into the final changeover . Crapp then extended the margin to 2 @.@ 2 seconds to secure an Australian victory in a world record time of 4 minutes 17 @.@ 1 seconds . The victory was the first time that Australia had swept the 100 @-@ metre freestyle relay and individual events for both men and women . The only other time that this has been achieved was by the Americans in 1920 in Antwerp . The win would be Australia 's only triumph in a female swimming relay at the Olympics until the 2004 games in Athens . The victory made Morgan Australia 's youngest ever gold medallist ; this record still stands . 
 Morgan 's individual event was the 400 @-@ metre freestyle . She reduced her personal best by 2 @.@ 3 seconds in recording a time of 5 minutes 7 @.@ 8 seconds in the heats , just 0 @.@ 2 of a second behind Marley Shriver of the United States , who set a new Olympic record . The mark was surpassed in later heats by Fraser and Crapp , but Morgan nevertheless qualified fourth fastest for the final , almost seven seconds faster than the cutoff . The final was held the day after the relay final . Morgan was unable to repeat her heat performance , finishing sixth in a time of 5 minutes 14 @.@ 3 seconds , far outside her personal best . Had she repeated her heat swim , she would have placed fourth , just 0 @.@ 7 of a second from the bronze medal . Nevertheless , she noted that " I was so happy that I had made the final in an individual event in the Olympic Games , for this was my first appearance in a senior competition " . 
 Upon her return to Bankstown , Morgan was honoured with a civic reception and presented with a gold watch and life membership of the Bankstown Pool . However , her stay at the Olympic Village had given rise to a new problem . She enjoyed the food so much that she had gained 9 @.@ 5 kilograms ( 21 lb ) in weight , and now stood at 170 centimetres ( 5 ft 7 in ) and weighed 76 @.@ 2 kilograms ( 168 lb ) . This heralded the start of a continual weight problem . 
 = = Later career = = 
 After the Olympics , Crapp and Fraser took a break from competitive swimming , while Leech retired . This allowed Morgan an opening , and she won both the junior and open sprint titles at the 1957 New South Wales Championships . She followed this by winning three individual titles at the Australian championships in Canberra : the 110- , 220- and 440 @-@ yard freestyle , in times of 1 minute 7 @.@ 8 seconds ; 2 minutes 29 @.@ 3 seconds ; and 5 minutes 21 @.@ 6 seconds , respectively . Her times were slower than her bests in 1956 . She was part of the New South Wales team that won the 4 × 100 @-@ yard freestyle and medley relays , anchoring both quartets . 
 In 1958 , Crapp and Fraser returned to the pool , while Ilsa Konrads emerged as a leading swimmer . At the Australian Championships , Morgan came third in both the 110 @-@ yard and 440 @-@ yard freestyle events ; Fraser won both and Crapp and Konrads placed second in the 110 @-@ yard and 440 @-@ yard freestyle respectively . Morgan was selected for the 1958 British Empire and Commonwealth Games in Cardiff , Wales , but only in the 4 × 110 @-@ yard freestyle relay . Along with Fraser , Crapp and Konrads , she broke the world record for the event in March in Sydney with a time of 4 minutes 18 @.@ 9 seconds . At the Empire Games , Fraser , Crapp , Morgan and <unk> lowered the world record to a time of 4 minutes 17 @.@ 4 seconds to win gold . 
 After the Empire Games , the Australian team returned home via France , Austria , Germany , Netherlands , Italy and Singapore for a series of competitions . Morgan 's best performances were at the Dutch and French Championships , where she came third in the 400 @-@ metre events . In 1959 , she placed third in both the 440 @-@ yard and 880 @-@ yard freestyle events at the Australian Championships . Her swimming career was then interrupted by bronchitis , which developed into bronchial pneumonia . The illness forced her to take an extended break . Her chest problems persisted when she returned to competition at the 1960 Australian championships , placing third in the 220 @-@ yard and 440 @-@ yard freestyle and fifth in the 110 @-@ yard freestyle . She gained selection for the 1960 Summer Olympics in Rome as a member of the 4 × 100 @-@ metre freestyle relay squad . She swam the first leg in the heats , posting a time of 1 minute 5 @.@ 5 seconds , giving Australia a 1 @.@ 0 @-@ second lead . Australia led at every change and went on to win its heat by five seconds , qualifying fastest for the final . However , Morgan posted the slowest leg of the Australian quartet and was dropped when Fraser and Konrads were brought into the team for the final , in which Australia won silver . Under the rules of the time , heat swimmers were not awarded medals if the final quartet placed in the top three positions . Suffering from periodic chest pain , Morgan retired from competitive swimming in December 1960 . 
 = = After swimming = = 
 Morgan married George Beavis in 1965 and had three daughters , all of whom enjoyed swimming victories at school and district level . After her marriage , she lived in the outback towns of Griffith and Orange for six years before returning to Sydney . She experimented with coaching , but found the competition unappealing and became a schoolteacher . In 1978 , she began teaching handicapped children to swim in her backyard pool , and was given a government grant to continue her work . She then ran a swimming school at Bonnet Bay for 15 years and worked at the Bates Drive Special School , receiving a grant to teach preschool handicapped children swimming . In later life , Morgan successfully fought a life @-@ threatening battle against lupus , and she now lives in Sutherland Shire in southern Sydney . 
 A committed Christian , Morgan currently works as a public speaker at functions for Seasons Christian Women 's Conference . From January 1996 to mid @-@ 1999 , she lived in Kuala Lumpur , Malaysia , along with her husband , who was posted there by his employer . During that time , Morgan worked as a Bible <unk> in St Andrew 's Presbyterian Church , Kuala Lumpur . She has also appeared on Face to Face , a Christian television talk show that screens on the Ten Network . 
 In 1995 , Morgan was inducted into the Hall of Champions at the State Sports Centre and the Path of Champions at the Sydney Olympic Park Aquatic Centre . She has been involved in educational programs aimed at promoting the Olympic movement in schools and helps to raise funds for the Australian Olympic Committee . In 2000 , Morgan was awarded the Australian Government 's Australian Sports Medal for her contributions to the 2000 Summer Olympics held in Sydney and her achievements as a competitor . She has been awarded the honour of carrying the Olympic torch during its passage through Australia in both 2000 and 2004 . Morgan is an Australia Day ambassador , and travels to regional towns promoting the annual celebrations . 
 = Oliver Cromwell 's head = 
 Following the death of Oliver Cromwell on 2 September 1658 , he was given a public funeral at Westminster Abbey , equal to those of monarchs before him . After the defeat of King Charles I in the English Civil War and Charles ' subsequent beheading , Cromwell had become Lord Protector and ruler of the English Commonwealth . His legacy passed to his son Richard , who was overthrown by the army in 1659 , after which monarchy was re @-@ established and King Charles II , who was living in exile , was recalled . Charles ' new parliament ordered the disinterment of Cromwell 's body from Westminster Abbey and the disinterment of other regicides John Bradshaw and Henry Ireton , for a posthumous execution at Tyburn . After hanging " from morning till four in the afternoon " , the bodies were cut down and the heads placed on a 20 @-@ foot ( 6 @.@ 1 m ) spike above Westminster Hall ( the location of the trial of Charles I ) . In 1685 a storm broke the pole upon which Cromwell 's head stood , throwing it to the ground ( although other sources put the date anywhere between 1672 and 1703 ) , after which it was in the hands of private collectors and museum owners until 25 March 1960 , when it was buried at Sidney Sussex College in Cambridge . 
 The symbolic value of the head changed over time . While it was spiked on a pole above the London skyline , it gave a potent warning to spectators . In the 18th century , the head became a curiosity and a relic . The head has been admired , reviled , and dismissed as a fake throughout the centuries . After Thomas Carlyle dismissed the head as " fraudulent moonshine " , and after the emergence of a rival claimant to the true head of Oliver Cromwell , scientific and archaeological analysis was carried out to prove the identity . <unk> tests culminated in a detailed scientific study by Karl Pearson and Geoffrey Morant , which concluded , based on a study of the head and other evidence , that there was a " moral certainty " that the head belonged to Oliver Cromwell . 
 = = Background = = 
 Oliver Cromwell ( born in April 1599 ) led England into a republic , abolishing the monarchy and the House of Lords , after the execution of King Charles I in January 1649 . However , Cromwell 's rule as Lord Protector ( beginning in December 1653 ) was not dissimilar to the Personal Rule of his royal predecessors . He maintained sole , unrestricted power , and lived in the many royal palaces . In 1657 he was formally offered the title of King , but after an “ agony of mind and conscience ” turned it down . Throughout 1658 , Cromwell suffered illness and family tragedy , and died on the afternoon of 3 September 1658 ( Old Style ) . 
 His death and funeral were treated with the same respect afforded to English monarchs before him . On 20 September , his body was moved to Somerset House to lie in state , which was opened to the public on 18 October . The body had been embalmed , shrouded and sealed in a lead coffin , which in turn was placed in a wooden decorated coffin , placed next to a life @-@ like effigy . The effigy was decorated with the royal symbols , including : " a rich Suit of uncut Velvet ... laced with a rich gold lace , and <unk> 'd with [ sic ] Ermins ; upon the <unk> is the Royal large Robe of the like Purple Velvet laced , and fur 'd with Ermins , with rich strings , and tassels of gold ... upon his head , the Cap of <unk> of Purple Velvet , <unk> 'd with Ermins ... upon the Cushion of the Chair stands the Imperial Crown set with stones . " The elaborate funeral procession , delayed twice by hesitant preparations , made its way through London on 23 November 1658 . The body itself had already been buried at Westminster Abbey two weeks earlier due to its fast decay ( by the time of the funeral procession , he had been dead over two months ) . A catafalque had been erected to receive his coffin which was similar to that of King James I , only " much more stately and expensive " . 
 Cromwell 's body lay undisturbed at Westminster until the restoration of the Stuart monarchy under Charles 's son , King Charles II , in 1660 . After their trial , conviction and sentencing , twelve surviving regicides ( those who had participated in the trial and execution of Charles I ) were hanged , drawn and quartered — that is , dragged through the streets on an <unk> sledge or hurdle , hanged by the neck and cut down live , disembowelled while alive , beheaded and dismembered ( cut into four quarters ) . In addition , the recalled parliament ordered the posthumous execution of the deceased regicides Oliver Cromwell , John Bradshaw and Henry Ireton . The laws of treason placed a traitor 's remains at the King 's disposal . Traitors ' heads were often displayed on bridges , the Tower of London and other conspicuous points in London , while the quarters were sometimes distributed for similar display in leading provincial cities . 
 Cromwell 's body , hidden in the wall of the middle aisle of Henry VII Lady Chapel , took effort to exhume because the wood and cloth were difficult to shift . On 28 January 1661 , the bodies of Cromwell and Ireton were taken to the Red Lion Inn in Holborn , joined the following day by the body of John Bradshaw , before being taken to Tyburn for execution . On the morning of 30 January 1661 , the anniversary of the execution of King Charles I , the shrouded bodies in open coffins were dragged on a sledge through the streets of London to the gallows , where each body was hanged in full public view until around four o 'clock that afternoon . After being taken down , Cromwell 's head was severed with eight blows , placed on a wooden spike on a 20 @-@ foot ( 6 @.@ 1 m ) pole , and raised above Westminster Hall . Various conspiracy theories exist as to what happened to the body , including a rumour that Cromwell 's daughter Mary had it rescued from the pit and interred at her husband 's home at Newburgh Priory . A sealed stone vault was claimed to contain the remains of the headless Cromwell , but generations of the family have refused requests , including one from King Edward VII , to open it . Biographer John Morrill stated that it was more likely that Cromwell 's body was thrown into the pit at Tyburn , where it remained . 
 = = Journey = = 
 = = = Westminster Hall to Du <unk> = = = 
 Cromwell 's head remained on a spike above Westminster Hall until the late 1680s , not counting a temporary removal for roof maintenance in 1681 . The position of the head , in relation to the heads of Bradshaw and Ireton , was called into question . Pearson and Morant argued in the 1930s that the originally understood position — traditionally , Bradshaw 's head was in the middle , with Cromwell to the right and Ireton to the left — could be disputed , as they reveal in their study . Although they upheld the originally understood position through careful analysis of contemporary poems and plans , the circumstances in which it came into private ownership are rumoured to be tied with a great storm towards the end of James II 's reign ( 1685 – 1689 ) , which broke the pole bearing the head , throwing it to the ground . A sentinel guarding the Exchequer 's Office came across it , after which he hid it under his cloak and stored it , hidden , in the chimney of his house . The loss of the head was still significant in London at the time , and many searched for it , hoping to claim the “ considerable reward ” being offered for its safe return . The guard , however , after seeing “ the placards which ordered any one possessing it to take it to a certain office ... was afraid to divulge the secret ” . However , only circumstantial evidence has been established for the whereabouts of the head following its fall from Westminster Hall until 1710 , when it was in the possession of Claudius Du Puy , a Swiss @-@ French collector of curiosities , who displayed it in his private museum in London . According to Fitzgibbons , Du Puy 's museum was internationally famous and ranked among the top attractions in London at the time , attracting visitors such as a traveller named Zacharias Conrad von <unk> , who was not impressed by what he saw . After hearing Du <unk> boast that he could sell the head for as much as 60 guineas ( £ 63 , or the equivalent of about £ 5000 in today 's British money ) , <unk> exclaimed his surprise that " this monstrous head could still be so dear and worthy to the English " . 
 = = = Russell and Cox = = = 
 By Du Puy 's death in 1738 , the head had shifted in importance and status . When it was atop Westminster Hall high above the London skyline , it gave a sinister and potent warning to spectators . By the 18th century , it had become a curiosity and an attraction , and it had lost its original sinister message . The head fell out of prominence until the late 18th century , when it was in the possession of a failed comic actor and drunkard named Samuel Russell . Russell was rumoured to be a relative of Cromwell , which is plausible ; the Cromwells intermarried with the Russells in a number of alliances . It is also possible that the head was sold to the Russell family after Du Puy 's death as an easy target for a sale . However , it was spotted by the prominent goldsmith , clockmaker and <unk> James Cox , who was “ convinced by all the circumstances that it was the identical head of Oliver Cromwell ” . Cox offered £ 100 ( about £ 5 @,@ 600 in today 's money ) , but “ poor as he was , and considerably in debt , Russell refused to part with it , so dear to him was that which he knew to be the sacred relic of his great ancestor . ” Russell did not take the correct care with the head , however ; in drunken gatherings , he passed the head around , leading to “ irreparable erosion of its features ” . Russell possibly had some connections with Sidney Sussex College , as he offered the head to the Master of the College . However , the Master was not interested , and Cox connived to get the head using a different approach . He offered Russell small sums of money , gradually reaching the total of just over £ 100 , and Russell could not pay when the loan was recalled . Thus his only option was to give up the head . However , as Fitzgibbons 2008 , <unk> and Morant argued , Cox 's pursuit of the head appears to be for retail investment . By the time of his acquisition , he was a rich jeweller and no longer owned his museum , so display was not his intention . 
 Cox sold the head in 1799 for £ 230 ( about £ 7 @,@ 400 in today 's money ) to three brothers named Hughes . Interested in starting their own display in Bond Street , the brothers acquired the head as part of other Cromwell @-@ related items . Thousands of posters were produced for the event , but the exhibit was marred by doubtful provenance . The Hughes brothers and their publicist , John Cranch , wrote Cox to ask about the gaps in the journey , but Cox was evasive , leading to concerns that he had sold them a fake . Indeed , Cranch could not come up with a documentary history of how the head came into their hands , so improvised a story that Cromwell 's head was “ the only instance of a head cut off and spiked that had before been embalmed ; which is precisely the case with respect to the head in question ” . Although Henry Ireton had also been embalmed before being beheaded , the story stuck , but it was in vain . The exhibition was a failure . The entrance fee was high ( two shillings and sixpence , about the equivalent of £ 5 ) and rumours that the head was a fake were prevalent . 
 = = = 19th and 20th centuries = = = 
 Despite the failure of the Hughes brothers ' exhibition , a Hughes daughter continued showing the head to anyone who wanted to see it . An offer was made to Sir Joseph Banks , but “ he desired to be excused from seeing the remains of the old <unk> [ sic ] Republican , the mention of whose very name made his blood boil with indignation ” . William Bullock , considering a purchase , wrote to Lord Liverpool , who stated “ the strong objection which would naturally arise to the exhibition of human remains at a Public Museum frequented by Persons of both Sexes and of all ages ” . Failure to sell to public museums forced the daughter to sell it privately , and in 1815 it was sold to Josiah Henry Wilkinson , in whose family it would remain until its burial . Maria Edgeworth , attending breakfast with Wilkinson in 1822 , was shown the head , and she wrote with great surprise that she had seen “ Oliver Cromwell 's head — not his picture — not his bust — nothing of stone or marble or plaister [ sic ] of Paris , but his real head ” . 
 Coinciding with the release of his Letters and Speeches of Oliver Cromwell in 1845 , Thomas Carlyle was asked to view the head . However , he did not , and on the basis of a friend 's visit , wrote a scathing dismissal of the authenticity of the head : “ it has hair , flesh and beard , a written history bearing that it was procured for £ 100 ( I think of bad debt ) about 50 years ago ... the whole affair appears to be fraudulent moonshine , an element not pleasant even to glance into , especially in a case like Oliver 's . ” Fitzgibbons 2008 , <unk> and Morant agree that Carlyle 's dismissal was not based on any historical or scientific fact . Although Carlyle conceded that it was “ the head of some decapitated man of distinction ” , the only other known man of distinction to be embalmed and then decapitated in such a manner over the previous 200 years was Henry Ireton . George Rolleston had conducted an examination on another skull — called the Ashmolean skull — after claims that it was Cromwell 's head . Rolleston was unconvinced by the skull 's supposed history , and visited Wilkinson 's home to see the skull shortly afterwards . After an examination , he dismissed the Ashmolean skull as a fake and declared that the Wilkinson head was the real head of Cromwell . 
 After another full examination in 1911 , with comparisons to the Ashmolean head , archaeologists dismissed the Ashmolean head as a fake . However , the absence of firm evidence of the whereabouts of Cromwell 's head between 1684 and 1787 made them wary about declaring the head genuine . They concluded their study unable to verify or refute the head 's identity . The uncertainty increased public demand for a full scientific examination , and Wilkinson reluctantly allowed the head to be taken for examination by the eugenicist Karl Pearson and the anthropologist Geoffrey Morant . Their 109 @-@ page report concluded that there was a “ moral certainty ” that the Wilkinson head was that of Oliver Cromwell . Horace Wilkinson died in 1957 , bequeathing the head to his son , also called Horace . However , Horace Wilkinson wished to organise a proper burial for the head rather than a public display , so he contacted Sidney Sussex College , which welcomed the burial . There it was interred on 25 March 1960 , in a secret location near the <unk> , preserved in the oak box in which the Wilkinson family had kept the head since 1815 . The box was placed into an airtight container and buried with only a few witnesses , including family and representatives of the college . The secret burial was not announced until October 1962 . 
 = = Authenticity = = 
 = = = Body = = = 
 The authenticity of the head has long been debated , and has resulted in a number of scientific analyses . The most notable and detailed of these was Karl Pearson and Geoffrey Morant 's study conducted in the 1930s , which concluded that the Wilkinson head was that of Cromwell . However , rumours and conspiracy theories have circulated since Cromwell 's head fell from Westminster Hall . 
 According to Fitzgibbons , the rumours surrounding Cromwell 's body immediately after his death are “ merely good yarns born out of over @-@ active imaginations ” . One legend claims that he was conveyed secretly to Naseby , the site of his “ greatest victory and glory ” , for a midnight burial . The field was then ploughed over to hide evidence of the burial . Another legend , written in the 1730s by a John Oldmixon , claims that “ a reliable Gentlewoman who attended Cromwell in his last sickness ” had said the coffin was sunk in the deepest part of the River Thames the night following Cromwell 's death . Fearful of royalists , “ it was consulted how to dispose of his Corpse . They could not pretend to keep it for the Pomp of a publick [ sic ] burial ... and to prevent its falling into barbarous hands , it was resolved to wrap it up in lead , to put it aboard a Barge , and sink it in the deepest part of the Thames , which was done the night following Cromwell 's death . ” In 1664 , Samuel Pepys wrote of a story he had heard in which “ Cromwell did , in his life , transpose many of the bodies of the Kings of England from one grave to another , and by that means it is not known certainly whether the head that is now set upon a post be that of Cromwell , or one of the Kings ” . If this story had any accuracy , Fitzgibbons suggests the irony would be that the posthumous act was possibly carried out on an English monarch rather than Cromwell himself . Another story even suggested that Cromwell 's body was substituted for Charles I , adding what Fitzgibbons describes as “ an even greater mockery of the events of 30 January 1649 ” . However , this story is known to be false ; Charles ' tomb was opened in 1813 , and his remains , including the cut that severed his head , remained as they were in 1649 . 
 Fitzgibbons argues that it was not impossible for Cromwell 's body to have been substituted before his posthumous execution . One proposition is that Sergeant <unk> , who exhumed the bodies from the abbey , found the tombs of Cromwell and Ireton empty , prompting the government to sanction an exhumation of two other graves . This has been put forward because Bradshaw 's body arrived at the Red Lion Inn at Holborn a day after Cromwell and Ireton , prompting rumour that he was the only real body to be hanged at Tyburn . An alternative theory is that Cromwell 's friends bribed the guards attending Cromwell 's body , “ privately interring him in a small paddock near Holborn ” , so that when the sledges dragged the bodies to the gallows , Cromwell 's body was already buried . However , the faces on the three bodies , although heavily shrouded , were clearly visible ; and since no witnesses expressed any doubt that the bodies were those of Cromwell and Ireton , there is no evidence supporting this theory . 
 = = = Head = = = 
 The authenticity of the head itself has been called into question on a number of occasions . The Hughes brothers ' failure to piece together a solid history of the head was possibly partly responsible for its failure to attract visitors . The discovery of the Ashmolean skull reputed to be that of Cromwell was the head 's first rival claim , but the events did not add up . The story of the head was : 
 In 1672 , Oliver 's skull was blown off the north side of Westminster Hall down into the leads of the same and taken thence by Mr. John Moore ... Sometime after this he gave it to Mr. Warner , apothecary , living in King Street , Westminster . Mr. Warner sold it for 20 broad pieces of gold to Humphrey Dove , Esq ... This skull was taken out of Mr. Dove 's chest at his death in 1921 . 
 However , the head was conclusively seen on Westminster Hall as late as 1684 , and it was on the south side of the Hall . Archaeological evidence also disproved its authenticity . The skull was pierced from the top , not from the bottom ; and the skull had no trace of skin or hair , showing it had never been embalmed . 
 = Sale el Sol = 
 Sale el Sol ( English : The Sun Comes Out ) is the ninth studio album by Colombian singer @-@ songwriter Shakira , released on 19 October 2010 , by Epic Records . The album marks a musical return to Shakira 's " roots " after the electropop record She Wolf ( 2009 ) . The singer split the album into three " directions " : a romantic side , a " rock and roll " side , and a " Latino , tropical " side . The latter two " directions " experiment with rock and merengue music , respectively . As co @-@ producer , Shakira enlisted collaborators including Josh Abraham , El Cata , Gustavo Cerati , John Hill , Lester Mendez , and Residente Calle 13 . 
 Five singles were released from Sale el Sol . The lead single " Loca " topped the charts of Italy , Spain , and Switzerland . The title track , " Sale el Sol " , was released as the second single . The third single " Rabiosa " reached top ten positions in Austria , Belgium , Italy and Spain . " Antes de las Seis " was released as the fourth single . " Addicted to You " was released as the fifth single . In the United States , " Loca " topped the Billboard Hot Latin Songs , Latin Pop Airplay , and Tropical Songs charts . Shakira embarked on The Sun Comes Out World Tour in late @-@ 2010 to promote the album . 
 At the 2011 Latin Grammy Awards ceremony , Sale el Sol won the award for " Best Female Pop Vocal Album " . A success throughout Europe and Latin America , Sale el Sol peaked atop the charts of countries Belgium , Croatia , France , Mexico , Portugal and Spain . In the United States , it debuted at number seven on the US Billboard 200 chart and at number one on both the Top Latin Albums and Latin Pop Albums charts , achieving strong digital sales in the region . Sale el Sol attained numerous record certifications in several regions across the globe , including multi @-@ platinum certifications in Spain and Switzerland , and diamond certifications in France and Colombia . 
 = = Background = = 
 In October 2009 , Shakira released her eighth studio album , She Wolf . The composition of the record shifted from her more traditional Latin pop and pop rock styles , and was primarily an electropop album with combined elements of world and dancehall . The album was positively received by most music critics and was praised for its distinguished nature and Shakira 's experimentation with electropop . Commercially , She Wolf was a success and topped charts and attained gold and platinum certifications in several South American and European territories . However , it performed poorly in the United States and became Shakira 's first studio album since Dónde Están los Ladrones ? ( 1998 ) to miss peaking inside the top 10 after it debuted at number 15 on the US Billboard Hot 200 chart . In May 2010 , she wrote and recorded " Waka Waka ( This Time for Africa ) " , the official song of the 2010 FIFA World Cup , which became a worldwide hit . 
 = = Production = = 
 Following the worldwide success of " Waka Waka ( This Time for Africa ) " , Shakira soon began work on her ninth studio album Sale el Sol . She decided to experiment with merengue music on the album , saying " I grew up listening to merengue — that was a big part of my life , and I was missing it . " Merengue is recognized as the national music of the Dominican Republic and the singer travelled to the country to work with Dominican songwriter and record producer El Cata , resulting in songs like " Loca " and " Rabiosa " . Shakira said that the recording of the two songs took place in " this tiny studio in the middle of nowhere " , and that " it wasn 't planned , I was just following my instincts . So this album is very genuine , and very personal as well " . Other collaborators on the album include American rapper and songwriter Armando Pérez , better known by his stage name Pitbull , Shakira 's friend and frequent collaborator Luis Fernando Ochoa , René Pérez Joglar , better known by his stage name " Residente Calle 13 " , John Hill , Lester Mendez , Albert Menéndez , Tim Mitchell and Jorge Drexler . Shakira co @-@ wrote and co @-@ produced every track on the album , with the exception of " Islands " . The recording of the album took place at locations such as The Bahamas , London , Barcelona and the Dominican Republic . 
 Armando Pérez , who co @-@ wrote the tracks " Loca " and " Rabiosa " , talked about Shakira 's previous album She Wolf , saying " on the last album they tried to Americanize Shakira by giving her the big producers . Not that it was necessarily a bad thing , but it ’ s just not her " . Talking about his collaboration with Shakira , El Cata revealed that she told him " You have something that makes me move " . Cata responded by telling Shakira that " it was the percussion " and " Those sounds that you want , I have them in my studio . " , which led to a recording session between the two . He appears as a featured artist on the Spanish version of " Loca " . René Pérez Joglar , who performs as the lead singer of Puerto Rican alternative hip hop band under the name of Residente , appears as a featured artist on the track " Gordita " . He explained the conception of the song , in which he raps about the fact that " he liked Shakira better when — early in her career : she was <unk> , had dark hair and was a rock chick " , by saying that " I told her ( Shakira ) it was a good idea to make fun of yourself . That way the haters can 't say anything , because you already said it " . British rapper Dizzee Rascal appears as a featured artist on the English version of " Loca " . He said that he felt " honoured " that Shakira chose him for the song , by saying that " She 's a bit of a trendsetter -- she does loads of different things on a major scale . You 'd expect her to use an American rapper ( for the song ) , but she chose me . It meant a lot " . 
 = = Music and lyrics = = 
 Sale el Sol is considered to be Shakira 's return to her " roots " and is a " fusion between rock and pop heavily influenced from Latino and Colombian music " . Shakira said there are three " directions " of Sale el Sol : a romantic one , a " very rock and roll " one , and a " Latino , tropical " one . Explaining the romantic " direction " of the album , she said that it was something " which I hadn 't tapped into for the past three years , but it suddenly came to me and I couldn 't hold it back . So it ’ s [ the album has ] got songs that are very intense , very romantic [ sic ] " . Examples include ballads like " Antes de las Seis " ( " Before Six O 'Clock " ) and " Lo Que Mas " ( " The Most " ) ; in the former Shakira delivers " sad , emotional , and heartfelt vocals , " while in the latter she sings over a piano and string @-@ supplemented melody . About the rock and roll " direction " of the album , Shakira said " I started my career as a rock artist and then I kind of crossed over into pop , so it ’ s been fun to re @-@ encounter that side of my artistic personality " . The title track is an acoustic guitar @-@ driven alternative rock and Latin pop @-@ infused song , while " <unk> " ( " Devotion " ) is a techno @-@ influenced alternative rock track in which Shakira " beats all U2 @-@ inspired arena rockers at their own game , " according to AllMusic critic Stephen Thomas Erlewine . The " sultry , energetic , bass @-@ laden " " Tu Boca " ( " Your Mouth " ) finds influences from new wave music . " Islands " is a cover of the original song of the same name by English indie pop band The xx . Shakira adds a few house music elements to the original art pop song . 
 The " Latino " and tropical side of the album is prominently influenced by merengue music . The genre is characterized by the use of the accordion and the percussion instrument <unk> . " Loca " ( " Crazy " ) , is Shakira 's interpretation of El Cata 's song " Loca Con Su Tiguere " , and is composed of horn @-@ heavy merengue beats set over techno dance percussion beats . Similarly , " Rabiosa " ( " Rabid " ) is Shakira 's interpretation of El Cata 's song " La Rabiosa " , and is a fast @-@ paced merengue @-@ influenced dance track . In addition to merengue , songs like " Addicted to You " , which features " bilingual lyrics , a very 70 's chorus and Copacabana sounds " , are influenced by reggaeton music . " Gordita " ( " Chubby " ) , a duet between Residente Calle 13 and Shakira , is a cumbia and Latin rap hybrid . 
 Talking about the album 's lyrical content , Shakira said that there are some songs " that are just to dance to in a club , that don ’ t have a big transcendence " . In " Rabiosa " , Shakira sings about her partner 's sex appeal . " Loca " expresses Shakira 's erratic and obsessive behaviour towards her lover , more so than his other leading lady . However , Shakira also said that there are some songs which " will remain in people ’ s hearts and people ’ s consciousness , sometimes forever " . She described these tracks as " songs that have the power to feed people ’ s relationships and states of mind and states of spirit " . According to Billboard , the title track is composed of " evocative and hopeful " lyrics which are dedicated to Argentine singer @-@ songwriter and Shakira 's friend Gustavo Cerati , who had been in a coma around the time of the release of the album . " Antes de las Seis " deals with issues of longing , regrets and loneliness . Shakira said these songs are written " in such a personal and intimate way that at that moment . I 'm not really thinking much . I 'm just letting it all out " . 
 = = Release and promotion = = 
 Sale el Sol was released worldwide on 19 October 2010 . The album was made available for digital downloading on the iTunes Store on the same day . An English titled version of the album , The Sun Comes Out , was also released and contains exactly the same tracklist ; the only difference being in the running order as the Spanish versions of " Loca " and " Rabiosa " , featuring El Cata , are included as bonus tracks , while the English versions , featuring Dizzee Rascal and Pitbull , respectively , are included on the main tracklist . 
 = = = Singles = = = 
 " Loca " was chosen as the lead single from the album ; the Spanish version , featuring El Cata , was released on 10 September 2010 , while the English version , featuring Dizzee Rascal , was released on 13 September 2010 . It became an international success . It peaked atop the charts of countries like France , Italy , Spain and Switzerland . In the United States , the song peaked at number 32 on the Billboard Hot 100 chart , and also topped the Hot Latin Songs , Latin Pop Airplay , and Tropical Songs charts . " Loca " was certified double @-@ platinum in Mexico and Spain by the Mexican Association of Phonograph Producers and the Producers of Spanish Music . In Shakira 's native country Colombia , it was certified diamond by the Colombian Association of Phonograph Producers . It also attained platinum certifications in Italy and Switzerland . The accompanying music video for " Loca " , directed by Jaume de Laiguana , was filmed in Barcelona , Spain , and features Shakira interacting with a beach crowd , and dancing in front of the sea wearing a golden bikini . 
 " Sale el Sol " , the title track of the album , was released as the second single on 4 January 2011 . The song charted very <unk> but managed to perform well in Mexico and Spain , peaking at numbers one and eight on the Monitor Latino and Spanish Singles Chart , respectively . It was certified gold in both countries . " Sale el Sol " peaked at numbers 10 and two on the US Billboard Hot Latin Songs and Latin Pop Airplay charts , respectively . The accompanying music video was directed by Jaume de Laiguana , and contains scenes of Shakira finding her way out of large maze and finally emerging outside to a sunny garden . 
 " Rabiosa " was chosen to be the third single off the album ; both the Spanish and English versions of the song , featuring El Cata and Pitbull , respectively , were released on 8 April 2011 . A commercial success , it topped the chart of Spain , and reached top ten positions in countries like Austria , Belgium , and Italy . A success on the Latin record charts in the United States , it peaked at number eight on both the Billboard Hot Latin Songs chart and Latin Pop Airplay chart , and also peaked at number 13 on the Tropical Songs chart . The song was certified double @-@ platinum in Mexico , and platinum in Spain and Italy . The accompanying music video for the single , directed by Jaume De Laiguana , features Shakira enjoying an underground party while sporting a brown bob @-@ cut wig ; it also contains scenes of her <unk> while sporting her normal long blonde hair . 
 " Antes de las Seis " was released as the fourth single on 21 October 2011 . It wasn 't successful on singles chart but performed moderately well on airplay charts , topping the airplay chart in Spain and peaking at number four on the US Billboard Latin Pop Airplay chart . It is the only song from the album to miss the top 10 of the US Billboard Hot Latin Songs chart . In 2013 , " Antes de las Seis " was certified gold in Mexico . The live recording of Shakira 's performance of the song during the Palais Omnisports de Paris @-@ Bercy concert show of The Sun Comes Out World Tour , taken from the live album Live from Paris , served as the accompanying music video for the single . 
 " Addicted to You " was released as the fifth and final single off Sale el Sol , on 13 March 2012 . It became a success in Mexico , where it received a platinum certification , and Poland , where it topped the airplay chart . In the United States , it peaked at number nine on the US Billboard Hot Latin Songs chart , and at number three on both the Latin Pop Airplay and Tropical Songs charts . The accompanying music video for " Addicted to You " was directed by Anthony Mandler , and features Shakira dancing in various locations , such as an " old Spanish style " town , a cathedral @-@ like room , and a bathtub , while sporting different " high fashion " outfits . 
 = = = Tour = = = 
 To promote Sale el Sol , as well as She Wolf , Shakira embarked on The Sun Comes Out World Tour in late @-@ 2010 . Shakira 's official website first announced the three initial venues of the North American leg of the tour , on 3 May 2010 , < and subsequently 22 more venues were listed . After a special tour preview show held in Montreal , Canada , on 15 September 2010 , the North American leg of the tour commenced at Uncasville , Connecticut , on 17 September , and closed at Rosemont , Illinois , on 29 October 2010 . The initial dates for the European leg of the tour were announced on 28 June 2010 , and subsequently 22 more shows were listed . The European leg of the tour was planned to commence at Lyon , France , on 16 November , and end in London , England , on 20 December 2010 . The tickets for the initial dates of the European leg were soon sold out , and Shakira extended the tour into 2011 , beginning by announcing a show at Paris , France ; venues at countries such as Croatia , Russia , Spain and Switzerland were soon added . The Latin American leg of the tour was a part of the Pop Festival , which was heralded as an initiative to bring international music stars to Latin America . Initial tour dates for the leg were announced on 3 December 2010 , and soon venues at countries like Argentina , Brazil , Colombia and Mexico were added to the tour dates . 
 The setlist of the tour was primarily composed of songs from Sale el Sol : " Antes de las Seis " , " Gordita " , " Loca " , " Sale el Sol " and " Waka Waka ( This Time for Africa ) " . The stage was shaped like the letter " T " to enable maximum amount of viewers to see Shakira easily . A large screen was set behind the stage , on which various visuals , designed by entertainment branding agency Loyalkaspar , were projected . For the performances , Shakira mainly wore a mesh gold crop top coupled with skin @-@ tight leather pants . Other attires Shakira wore during the concert shows included a hooded pink gown , a flamenco @-@ skirt , and a feathery blue dress . 
 The concert shows were well @-@ received by critics , many of whom praised the charisma Shakira displayed during the performances . Commercially , the tour was a success . It ranked at number 40 on Pollstar 's 2010 year @-@ end " Top 50 North American Tours " list as it grossed a total of $ 16 @.@ 9 million in the continent , with total ticket sales amounting up to 524 @,@ 723 . In North America , the tour sold an average of 9 @,@ 335 tickets , and a total of 205 @,@ 271 tickets . The tour was a bigger success worldwide , ranking at number 20 on Pollstar 's 2011 " Top 25 Worldwide Tours " . Its total gross during its worldwide dates was of $ 53 @.@ 2 million and ticket sales amounted up to 692 @,@ 064 . A live album of the show held at the Palais Omnisports de Paris @-@ Bercy in Paris , France , was released as Shakira : Live from Paris , on 5 December 2011 . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 At Metacritic , which assigns a normalized rating out of 100 to reviews from mainstream critics , Sale el Sol received an average score of 89 based on 5 reviews , indicating " universal acclaim " . Carlos Quintana from About.com praised Shakira 's experimentation with merengue and rock sounds on the album , noting that her " never ending innovative style giving us an indication of her artistic evolution and current musical interests " , and that Sale el Sol " shows again why Shakira is one of the top Latin Pop artists in the world " . Stephen Thomas Erlewine from AllMusic gave it a very positive review , complimenting Shakira 's versatility in her " pan @-@ global approach " , and praising the album 's simple and " breezy " nature , saying it " never once sounds disparate or overworked -- it 's sunny and easy , its natural buoyancy disguising Shakira 's range and skill -- but listen closely and it becomes apparent that nobody makes better pop records in the new millennium than she does " . The Billboard review of the album was also extremely positive , noting that its composition is " infinitely more memorable and unique than the singer 's baffling 2009 set , She Wolf " , and that it " manages to bridge the divide between the old and new Shakira with a spark that keeps you listening to the very end " . 
 Michelle Morgante from Boston.com chose the merengue @-@ influenced songs of Sale el Sol as " some of its strongest moments " , and noted that the album is a " truer representation of the Shakira who has excited Latin America and propelled her onto the world stage " . James Reed from The Boston Globe felt that while Sale el Sol " isn 't as heady as She Wolf " , it proves to be " another step forward for an artist who rarely looks back " . Mikael Good from Entertainment Weekly termed Sale el Sol as a demonstration of " Shakira 's boldly global mindset " and awarded it a perfect " A " grade . Jesus Yanez @-@ Reyes from Northern Arizona News favoured the album 's rock @-@ influenced tracks and concluding that Sale el Sol " is one of Shakira ’ s best releases , with songs sure to become classics within the next year " . Mikel Toombs from Seattle Post @-@ Intelligencer said that the album features Shakira " at her most upbeat " . Jennifer Schaffer from Stanford Daily called Sale el Sol a " fantastically diverse album with some awesome collaborations and a truly impressive range of emotions " , and commended Shakira 's vocal delivery , saying " the sheer power of Shakira 's vocal chords is clearly the focus of the album " . Allison Stewart felt the album was a showcase for Shakira 's " remarkable " voice , and concluded that while Sale el Sol is not " necessarily adventurous " , it " provides a better showcase for Shakira 's countless charms than its predecessors ever did " . Carlos Macias from Terra USA , however , gave the album a mixed review and said it " delivers half the goods " . 
 = = = Accolades and recognition = = = 
 Sale el Sol was included in AllMusic 's " Favorite Albums of 2010 " and " Favorite Latin Albums of 2010 " year @-@ end lists . At the 2011 Latin Grammy Awards ceremony , Sale el Sol was nominated for " Album of the Year " and " Best Female Pop Vocal Album " , winning the award in the latter category . At the 2011 Billboard Music Awards Sale el Sol was nominated for " Top Latin Album " , but lost it to Spanish singer @-@ songwriter Enrique Iglesias 's album Euphoria . At the 2011 Latin Billboard Music Awards , the album won the award for " Latin Digital Album of the Year " , and Shakira won the award for " Top Latin Albums Artist of the Year , Female " . At the 2011 Premios Juventud awards ceremony , the album was nominated for " Lo Toco Todo . CD Favorito " ( " Your Favorite CD " ) . At the 2011 Premios Shock awards ceremony , it was nominated Album of the Year . 
 At the 2012 Premios Lo Nuestro awards ceremony , Sale el Sol won the award for " Pop Album of the Year " . At the 2012 Premios Oye ! awards ceremony , it was nominated for " Spanish Album of the Year " . At the 2012 Premios Nuestra Tierra award ceremony , it was nominated " Best Album of the Year " . 
 = = Commercial performance = = 
 The album was a success in Europe . In Austria , Sale el Sol entered and peaked at number three on the Austrian Albums Chart , spending a total of 44 weeks on the chart . In this region , it was certified platinum by the International Federation of the Phonographic Industry ( IFPI ) for selling 20 @,@ 000 units . The album debuted at number 15 on the Ultratop chart in the Dutch @-@ speaking Flanders region of Belgium and jumped to its peak position of number eight the following week . It entered the chart at the same debut position in the French @-@ speaking Wallonia region of the country but saw more success as it later peaked at number one , displacing French pop rock duo <unk> 's album Birds in the Storm from the top spot . Sale el Sol became Shakira 's first studio album to reach at number one in the region . In Flanders and Wallonia , the album charted for 55 and 54 weeks , respectively . The Belgian Entertainment Association ( BEA ) certified the album platinum for sales of 20 @,@ 000 units . 
 After entering the French Albums Chart at number two , Sale el Sol peaked at number one for two consecutive weeks , propelled by the success of the lead single " Loca " in the country . It spent 17 consecutive weeks inside the top 10 and 113 weeks in the top 20 , making it Shakira 's longest charting album in the country . It finished as the 13th best @-@ selling album of 2010 in France , with sales of 236 @,@ 616 units . The album further sold 198 @,@ 000 units in 2011 , appearing at number 10 on the year @-@ end chart and bringing its total sales to 425 @,@ 000 units . In addition to being her first album to top the French Albums chart , Sale el Sol is also Shakira 's highest @-@ certified album in the country as it was certified diamond by the Syndicat National de l 'Édition Phonographique ( SNEP ) for sales of 500 @,@ 000 units . It is one of the best @-@ selling albums in France of all time . By contrast , Sale el Sol became the singer 's lowest charting studio @-@ album in Germany , peaking at number six on the Media Control Charts . However , it achieved high sales in the country and was certified platinum by The Federal Association of Music Industry ( BVMI ) for having shipped 200 @,@ 000 units in Germany . The album peaked at number four on the Hungarian Albums Chart and was certified platinum by the Association of Hungarian Record Companies for selling 10 @,@ 000 units . 
 In Italy , it debuted at number three on the FIMI Albums chart and ascended to number one the following week . Sale el Sol was Shakira 's second consecutive album to peak atop the Italian albums chart , after She Wolf topped the chart in 2009 . Its stay inside the top 20 lasted for 19 weeks . The Federazione Industria Musicale Italiana ( FIMI ) certified the album platinum for sales of 60 @,@ 000 units . Sale el Sol debuted atop the Portuguese Albums Chart — Shakira 's first album to accomplish the feat in the country — and spent two weeks at number one . It was able to stay within the top 10 for 23 consecutive weeks . It was certified platinum by the Associação Fonográfica Portuguesa ( AFP ) for selling 15 @,@ 000 units in Portugal . Sale el Sol was Shakira 's first studio album since Fijación Oral , Vol . 1 ( 2005 ) to peak at number one on the Spanish Albums chart after it debuted at the top position . It spent a total of 63 weeks on the chart and was certified double @-@ platinum by the Producers of Spanish Music ( PROMUSICAE ) for shipments of 80 @,@ 000 units . Sale el Sol entered and peaked at number two on the Swiss Albums Chart and was kept from attaining the top position by American rock band Kings of Leon 's album Come Around Sundown , which debuted at number one . It charted for 49 weeks in total . In Switzerland , it was certified double @-@ platinum by IFPI for selling 40 @,@ 000 units . 
 The album also enjoyed high @-@ sales in South America . In Shakira 's native country Colombia , it sold in excess of 200 @,@ 000 units and was certified diamond by the Colombian Association of Phonograph Producers ( <unk> ) . In Mexico , Sale el Sol debuted at number one on the Mexican Albums Chart , becoming the singer 's second consecutive studio album to enter the chart at the top position . It also became her longest @-@ charting album in the country , spending a total of 50 weeks . In this region , it was certified platinum and gold by the Mexican Association of Phonograph Producers ( AMPROFON ) for shipments of 90 @,@ 000 units . In Canada , the album peaked at number 11 on the Canadian Albums Chart , spending a total of two weeks on the chart . In the United States , Sale el Sol debuted and peaked at number seven on the US Billboard 200 chart on the chart date of 6 November 2010 . On the Latin Albums chart , Sale el Sol debuted at number one with first @-@ week sales amounting up to 46 @,@ 000 units , as compiled by Nielson SoundScan . It marked the highest debut for a Latin album for the year and was Shakira 's fifth album to peak at number one . According to Billboard , 35 % of its first @-@ week sales were credited to strong digital sales . In total , Sale el Sol spent 118 weeks on the Latin Albums chart . On the Latin Pop Albums chart , it again peaked at number one and spent 118 weeks on the chart in total . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 Sale el Sol – Standard edition 
 Notes 
 ^ a signifies a co @-@ producer 
 ^ b signifies an additional producer 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Credits adapted from AllMusic . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = The Proclamation of Dušan 's Law Codex = 
 The Proclamation of Dušan 's Law Codex ( Serbian : <unk> <unk> <unk> ) is the name given to each of seven versions of a composition painted by Paja Jovanović which depict Dušan the Mighty introducing Serbia 's earliest surviving law codex to his subjects in Skopje in 1349 . The Royal Serbian Government commissioned the first version for 30 @,@ 000 dinars in 1899 , intending for it to be displayed at the following year 's Exposition Universelle ( world 's fair ) in Paris . 
 When originally commissioned , the painting was intended to depict Dušan 's 1346 coronation as Emperor of Serbia . After consulting with the politician and historian Stojan Novaković , Jovanović decided against painting a scene from Dušan 's coronation , and opted to depict the proclamation of his law codex instead . Thus , the painting has often erroneously been described as depicting the coronation . Jovanović paid a great deal of attention to historical detail in preparation for the work , visiting several medieval Serbian Orthodox monasteries in Kosovo and Macedonia , studying medieval costumes and weaponry and consulting experts on the period . 
 The first version was finished in time for the world 's fair , where it received widespread critical acclaim and was awarded a gold medal by the fair 's artistic committee . In the opinion of one art historian , the artistic committee 's decision affirmed that the painting was on par with the works of the world 's greatest visual artists . A number of historians and critics consider The Proclamation of Dušan 's Law Codex to be one of Jovanović 's finest works , and Jovanović himself felt the painting was his " most beautiful composition " . 
 = = Dušan 's Code = = 
 Stefan Dušan was one of Serbia 's most powerful rulers . In the mid @-@ 14th century , he oversaw the establishment of a large Serbian state that stretched from the Danube to the Greek mainland . As a result of his achievements , in Serbian historiography he is referred to as Dušan the Mighty or Dušan the Lawgiver . The first suffix is in recognition of his expansion of Serbia 's territory and the second in recognition of the law codex he introduced during his reign , commonly called Dušan 's Code . In 1343 , as King of Serbs , Albanians and the Coast , Dušan added " King of the Romans " to his title . In late 1345 , he began referring to himself as the Emperor ( tsar ) of Serbia . On Easter Day , 16 April 1346 , Dušan convoked an assembly in Skopje , attended by the Serbian Archbishop Joanikije II , the Archbishop of Ochrid Nikolaj I , the Bulgarian Patriarch Simeon and various religious leaders from Mount Athos . The assembly then ceremonially performed the raising of the autocephalous Serbian Archbishopric to the status of Patriarchate . From then on , the Archbishop was titled the Serbian Patriarch , with his seat in Monastery of Peć . Dušan was subsequently crowned Emperor of Serbia by the new Patriarch , Joanikije . 
 Dušan had ambitions of conquering all the Byzantine lands , including Constantinople , and proclaiming himself Byzantine Emperor . In order to achieve this goal , he knew that he needed to secure the loyalty of his Greek subjects . Thus , Dušan decreed that lands inhabited by Greeks were to have Greek governors and follow traditional Byzantine laws as opposed to Serbian customary law . This had the effect of reducing tensions between Serbs and Greeks and made it easier for the Serbs to occupy Greek lands without any considerable threat of revolt . In 1349 , Dušan issued a national legal code from his capital , Skopje , one that applied only to the northern half of the empire where Serbs predominated . Dušan 's Code is Serbia 's earliest surviving legal code ; it was influenced heavily by Byzantine law . It was also one of the most advanced legal texts of its time , and the first wide @-@ ranging set of laws promulgated by the South Slavs . Because it only covers specific crimes , it was likely part of a three @-@ part legal document that also included an abridgement of Matthew <unk> ' <unk> and the Law of Justinian . The third part , Dušan 's Code itself , was thus probably intended to supplement the first two texts by touching upon issues not covered in them rather than serve as a stand @-@ alone legal system . 
 = = The painting = = 
 = = = Preparation and composition = = = 
 In the late 1890s , Serbia was invited to participate at the 1900 Exposition Universelle ( world 's fair ) in Paris . In 1897 , the Royal Serbian Government created a special committee to select which Serbs would go to France as representatives of their country ; the committee was chaired by the politician Svetozar <unk> . It was decided that Serbia 's contribution to the fair would predominantly consist of art , most of which was to be displayed at the Serbian Pavilion , a building in the Serbo @-@ Byzantine style designed by the architect Milan <unk> . Other Serbian works were to be displayed at the Grand Palais . The rules of the fair 's art exhibit held that each canvas had to measure 390 by 589 centimetres ( 154 by 232 in ) and contain over seventy figures in various , often complex , positions . 
 In Serbia , the period between 1889 and 1914 was marked by a spate of patriotic literature , theatre and visual art . Serbian artists competed with one another over who would produce the best depictions of Serbia 's medieval history , and the best Serbian national romantic art was made during this time . One of the most prominent Serb artists of the day was the realist Paja Jovanović , who was known for his sprawling historical works . In 1899 , the special committee hired him to compose a scene depicting Dušan 's coronation to be displayed in Paris . In return for his services , he received an honorarium of 30 @,@ 000 dinars . The government felt it was essential that Jovanović 's work and those of other Serbian artists be well received . Given decades of political instability in the Balkans , the authorities sought to promote a positive image of their country abroad , especially by familiarizing Western Europeans with Serbian art . Hence , Jovanović was painting for a dual audience , both domestic and foreign . His foremost goal was to emphasize the legitimacy of Serbia 's contemporary territorial claims before the Great Powers , especially with regard to Kosovo , Macedonia and the Sandžak ( then divided between the Ottoman Empire and Austria @-@ Hungary ) , and counter any negative views of the Serbian state . For his domestic audience , Jovanović 's goal was to remind his countrymen of Serbia 's rich history and encourage patriotic sentiments . After consulting with the politician and historian Stojan Novaković , Jovanović decided against painting a scene from Dušan 's coronation , and opted to depict the proclamation of Dušan 's Code instead . As a result , the painting is sometimes mistakenly referred to as The Coronation of Tsar Dušan ( Serbian : <unk> Cara <unk> ) . 
 Jovanović began working on the painting in 1900 . In keeping with his usual approach , he spent a significant amount of time researching Dušan 's life . He read medieval accounts of the proclamation , consulted experts on that historical period , and examined medieval paintings and illuminated manuscripts for insight into the architecture and weaponry of 14th @-@ century Serbia . Jovanović also visited the monasteries of Gračanica and <unk> , the Field of Kosovo , and the cities of Prizren and Skopje . Since the church where the proclamation took place had long since been destroyed , he was forced to find an alternative , ultimately deciding to model it after the Visoki Dečani monastery given the similarities in their design . By his own admission , the hardest task Jovanović faced was achieving authenticity with regard to clothing , weaponry and medieval heraldry . He found the medieval clothing particularly difficult to reproduce because Serbs did not have their own national costume at the time . Instead , medieval Serbs , especially royalty and the nobility , wore clothing that was greatly influenced by neighbouring cultures , particularly the Byzantines . Jovanović styled the clothes seen in the painting on frescoes from the medieval monasteries he visited , sketched them , and then requested that the head costume designer of the Vienna State Opera recreate them based on those sketches . Upon receiving the costumes , Jovanović placed them in his studio and used them as models for the painting . Dušan 's German mercenaries , who are shown lining the church doors church as he exits , wear Venetian body armour . Jovanović based this detail on a medieval correspondence that Novaković had discovered in the Venetian archives where Dušan is recorded having ordered 300 units of plate armour from Venice . Knights ' swords and other weaponry were based on depictions from medieval frescoes . The heraldry depicted on the shields and the insignia of the various figures is based on examples from a medieval book titled <unk> Illyricorum . Jovanović had found the book in a Viennese library . It had been removed from Herzegovina 's <unk> monastery several decades prior and brought to the Austro @-@ Hungarian capital . The Proclamation of Dušan 's Law Codex was painted outdoors , en plein air . 
 = = = Description and history = = = 
 The painting depicts Dušan exiting a church with his wife , Jelena , and son , Uroš , shortly after announcing that the law codex would be put into force . At their side are Patriarch Joanikije and the magnate Jovan Oliver , as well as many other members of the clergy and nobility . The emperor and his entourage are watched by an admiring crowd of nobles , knights and commoners . The knights lower their swords at Dušan 's feet as a sign of respect and submission . A festive atmosphere pervades the scene . The noble Gojko Mrnjavčević reads the proclamation before the crowd . <unk> <unk> , a German mercenary who oversaw Dušan 's personal bodyguard , stands at the far right among a row of other knights , and watches closely as the Emperor steps outside . The art historian Lilien Filipovitch @-@ Robinson writes : 
 Technically , the artist brought together an accumulation of his considerable study and experience as a painter of history , portrait , and genre scenes . As was typical , his orderly composition and perfect one @-@ point linear perspective , both of which are appropriate to the subject , are informed by the frescoes of the Renaissance . Every figure in the foreground and middle ground directs the eye steadily to the compositional vanishing point , Tsar Dušan . He is the epitome of control , dignity , and majesty . The brilliantly clothed entourage behind him frames his form as do the massive stone walls of the church . They not only lend compositional stability but intimate a durability shared by the God @-@ inspired architecture and Dušan ’ s reign . 
 Once complete , the painting was presented to the Royal Serbian Government . As part of his contract , Jovanović granted the government the right to print reproductions of the painting . Jovanović felt the painting was his " most beautiful composition " , but was displeased that he had not been able to complete it the way it was originally envisaged . He had originally intended for the finished work to be painted on woven tapestry . The version that went on display in Paris was an oil on canvas that Jovanović had only meant to use as a model for the tapestry painting . He later recalled that King Alexander had gambled away the money he had promised to provide for the tapestry painting 's completion . Disappointed , Jovanović pledged to repaint it to his own liking , though he did not begin work on a revision until 1925 – 26 , by which time he was in his sixties . He went on to complete a total of seven different versions of the painting in his lifetime . The first version is in the possession of the National Museum of Serbia , in Belgrade . Another , measuring 190 by 126 centimetres ( 75 by 50 in ) , is on permanent display at the Belgrade City Museum . 
 = = Critical reception and legacy = = 
 The Proclamation of Dušan 's Law Codex was well received by the Serbian public , and is said to have exceeded the expectations of all the government ministers . It was also well received in France , where Jovanović was named an Officer of the Académie des Beaux @-@ Arts . The painting was met with critical acclaim at the world 's fair , and the fair 's artistic committee awarded Jovanović a gold medal for his work . By way of this decision , the art historian Jelena Milojković @-@ Djurić asserts , the Paris committee recognized that the painting was on par with those of the world 's best visual artists . 
 Serbian painter and art critic <unk> Petrović described Jovanović 's compositions as the " crown of Serbian pictorial art " , and lauded The Proclamation of Dušan 's Law Codex as his best work . Filipovitch @-@ Robinson ranks it among Jovanović 's three best paintings , alongside The Takovo Uprising ( 1888 ) and Migration of the Serbs ( 1896 ) . " By focusing on the famed reign of Tsar Dušan , " she writes , " Jovanović was making a case for the respect with which Serbia should be regarded . " The painting , she argues , is both a history lesson and a " patriotic declaration " . For Serbian audiences in particular , she continues , it alluded to the greatness of Serbia 's past and implied that the country 's restoration as a free , modern nation was within reach . In her opinion , it is an inherently optimistic work . 
 Tim Judah , a journalist specializing in the Balkans , compares Jovanović 's contribution to Serbian art to Jacques @-@ Louis David 's contribution to French art , and draws parallels between The Proclamation of Dušan 's Law Codex and The Coronation of Napoleon . Professor David A. Norris , a historian specializing in Serbian culture , describes the knights ' armour as " highly stylized " and opines that , as a direct result , some of the figures resemble Hollywood actors more than medieval knights . " The picture shows excellent conception and solidity in its composition , " art historian Radmila Antić contends . " The figures are well related , their attitudes conscientiously studied , the costumes represented with the greatest care for detail . " 
 = = = Endnotes = = = 
 = Catherine de ' Medici = 
 Catherine de ' Medici ( Italian : Caterina de ' Medici pronounced [ <unk> de <unk> ] ; French : Catherine de Médicis pronounced : [ <unk> də <unk> ] , 13 April 1519 – 5 January 1589 ) , daughter of Lorenzo II de ' Medici and of Madeleine de La Tour d 'Auvergne , was an Italian noblewoman who was Queen of France from 1547 until 1559 , as the wife of King Henry II . As the mother of three sons who became kings of France during her lifetime , she had extensive , if at times varying , influence in the political life of France . For a time , she ruled France as its regent . 
 In 1533 , at the age of fourteen , Caterina married Henry , second son of King Francis I and Queen Claude of France . Under the <unk> version of her name , Catherine de Médicis , she was Queen consort of France as the wife of King Henry II of France from 1547 to 1559 . Throughout his reign , Henry excluded Catherine from participating in state affairs and instead showered favours on his chief mistress , Diane de Poitiers , who wielded much influence over him . Henry 's death thrust Catherine into the political arena as mother of the frail fifteen @-@ year @-@ old King Francis II . When he died in 1560 , she became regent on behalf of her ten @-@ year @-@ old son King Charles IX and was granted sweeping powers . After Charles died in 1574 , Catherine played a key role in the reign of her third son , Henry III . He dispensed with her advice only in the last months of her life . 
 Catherine 's three sons reigned in an age of almost constant civil and religious war in France . The problems facing the monarchy were complex and daunting but Catherine was able to keep the monarchy and the state institutions functioning even at a minimum level . At first , Catherine compromised and made concessions to the rebelling Protestants , or Huguenots , as they became known . She failed , however , to grasp the theological issues that drove their movement . Later she resorted , in frustration and anger , to hard @-@ line policies against them . In return , she came to be blamed for the excessive persecutions carried out under her sons ' rule , in particular for the St. Bartholomew 's Day massacre of 1572 , in which thousands of Huguenots were killed in Paris and throughout France . 
 Some historians have excused Catherine from blame for the worst decisions of the crown , though evidence for her ruthlessness can be found in her letters . In practice , her authority was always limited by the effects of the civil wars . Her policies , therefore , may be seen as desperate measures to keep the Valois monarchy on the throne at all costs , and her patronage of the arts as an attempt to glorify a monarchy whose prestige was in steep decline . Without Catherine , it is unlikely that her sons would have remained in power . The years in which they reigned have been called " the age of Catherine de ' Medici " . According to Mark <unk> , one of her biographers , Catherine was the most powerful woman in sixteenth @-@ century Europe . 
 = = Birth and upbringing = = 
 Catherine was born in Florence , Republic of Florence , as Caterina Maria <unk> di Lorenzo de ' Medici . The Medici family were at the time the de facto rulers of Florence . Originally bankers , they came to great wealth and power by bankrolling the monarchies of Europe . Catherine 's father , Lorenzo II de ' Medici , was made Duke of Urbino by his uncle Pope Leo X , and the title reverted to Francesco Maria I della Rovere after Lorenzo 's death . Thus , even though her father was a duke , Catherine was of relatively low birth . However her mother , Madeleine de la Tour d 'Auvergne , the Countess of Boulogne , was from one of the most prominent and ancient French noble families ; this prestigious maternal heritage was of benefit to her future marriage to a fils de France . 
 According to a contemporary chronicler , when Catherine de ' Medici was born , her parents , were " as pleased as if it had been a boy " . Madeleine died on 28 April of puerperal fever or plague , and Lorenzo died on 4 May . The young couple were married the year before at Amboise as part of the alliance between King Francis I of France and Pope Leo against the Holy Roman Emperor Maximilian I. King Francis wanted Catherine to be raised at the French court , but Pope Leo had other plans for her . He intended to marry her to his brother 's illegitimate son , Ippolito de ' Medici , and set them up to rule Florence . 
 Catherine was first cared for by her paternal grandmother , Alfonsina Orsini ( wife of Piero de ' Medici ) . After Alfonsina 's death in 1520 , Catherine joined her cousins and was raised by her aunt , Clarice Strozzi . The death of Pope Leo in 1521 interrupted Medici power briefly , until Cardinal Giulio de ' Medici was elected Pope Clement VII in 1523 . Clement housed Catherine in the Palazzo Medici Riccardi in Florence , where she lived in state . The Florentine people called her <unk> ( " the little duchess " ) , in deference to her unrecognised claim to the Duchy of Urbino . 
 In 1527 , the Medici were overthrown in Florence by a faction opposed to the regime of Clement 's representative , Cardinal Silvio <unk> , and Catherine was taken hostage and placed in a series of convents . The final one , the Santissima <unk> delle <unk> was her home for three years . Mark <unk> described these years as " the happiest of her entire life " . Clement had no choice but to crown Charles Holy Roman Emperor in return for his help in retaking the city . In October 1529 , Charles 's troops laid siege to Florence . As the siege dragged on , voices called for Catherine to be killed and exposed naked and chained to the city walls . Some even suggested that she be handed over to the troops to be used for their sexual gratification . The city finally surrendered on 12 August 1530 . Clement summoned Catherine from her beloved convent to join him in Rome where he greeted her with open arms and tears in his eyes . Then he set about the business of finding her a husband . 
 = = Marriage = = 
 On her visit to Rome , the Venetian envoy described Catherine as " small of stature , and thin , and without delicate features , but having the protruding eyes peculiar to the Medici family " . Suitors , however , lined up for her hand , including James V of Scotland who sent the Duke of Albany to Clement to conclude a marriage in April and November 1530 . When Francis I of France proposed his second son , Henry , Duke of Orléans , in early 1533 , Clement jumped at the offer . Henry was a prize catch for Catherine , who despite her wealth , was from commoner origins . 
 The wedding , a grand affair marked by extravagant display and gift @-@ giving , took place in the Église Saint @-@ <unk> les <unk> in Marseille on 28 October 1533 . Prince Henry danced and <unk> for Catherine . The fourteen @-@ year @-@ old couple left their wedding ball at midnight to perform their nuptial duties . Henry arrived in the bedroom with King Francis , who is said to have stayed until the marriage was consummated . He noted that " each had shown valour in the joust " . Clement visited the newlyweds in bed the next morning and added his blessings to the night 's proceedings . 
 Catherine saw little of her husband in their first year of marriage , but the ladies of the court treated her well , impressed with her intelligence and keenness to please . The death of Pope Clement VII on 25 September 1534 , however , undermined Catherine 's standing in the French court . The next pope , Paul III , broke the alliance with France and refused to pay her huge dowry . King Francis lamented , " The girl has come to me stark naked . " 
 Prince Henry showed no interest in Catherine as a wife ; instead , he openly took mistresses . For the first ten years of the marriage , Catherine failed to produce any children . In 1537 , Philippa <unk> , one of Henry 's mistresses , gave birth to a daughter , whom he publicly acknowledged . This proved that Henry was fertile and added to the pressure on Catherine to produce a child . 
 = = = Dauphine = = = 
 In 1536 , Henry 's older brother , Francis , caught a chill after a game of tennis , contracted a fever and died , leaving Henry the heir . As Dauphine , Catherine was now expected to provide a future heir to the throne . According to the court chronicler Brantôme , " many people advised the king and the Dauphin to repudiate her , since it was necessary to continue the line of France " . Divorce was discussed . In desperation , Catherine tried every known trick for getting pregnant , such as placing cow dung and ground stags ' antlers on her " source of life " , and drinking mule 's urine . On 19 January 1544 , she at last gave birth to a son , named after King Francis . 
 After becoming pregnant once , Catherine had no trouble doing so again . She may have owed her change of luck to the physician Jean <unk> , who had noticed slight abnormalities in the couple 's sexual organs and advised them how to solve the problem . Catherine quickly conceived again and on 2 April 1545 she bore a daughter , Elisabeth . She went on to bear Henry a further eight children , six of whom survived infancy , including the future Charles IX ( born 27 June 1550 ) ; the future Henry III ( born 19 September 1551 ) ; and Francis , Duke of Anjou ( born 18 March 1555 ) . The long @-@ term future of the Valois dynasty , which had ruled France since the 14th century , seemed assured . 
 Catherine 's new @-@ found ability to bear children , however , failed to improve her marriage . In 1538 , at the age of nineteen , Henry had taken as his mistress the thirty @-@ eight @-@ year @-@ old Diane de Poitiers , whom he adored for the rest of his life . Even so , he respected Catherine 's status as his consort . When King Francis I died on 31 March 1547 , Catherine became queen consort of France . She was crowned in the basilica of Saint @-@ Denis on 10 June 1549 . 
 = = = Queen of France = = = 
 Henry allowed Catherine almost no political influence as queen . Although she sometimes acted as regent during his absences from France , her powers were strictly nominal . Henry gave the Château of Chenonceau , which Catherine had wanted for herself , to Diane de Poitiers , who took her place at the centre of power , dispensing patronage and accepting favours . 
 The imperial ambassador reported that in the presence of guests , Henry would sit on Diane 's lap and play the guitar , chat about politics , or fondle her breasts . Diane never regarded Catherine as a threat . She even encouraged the king to sleep with Catherine and sire more children . In 1556 , Catherine nearly died giving birth to twin daughters . Surgeons saved her life by breaking the legs of one of the two babies , who died in her womb . The surviving daughter died seven weeks later . Catherine had no more children . 
 Henry 's reign also saw the rise of the Guise brothers , Charles , who became a cardinal , and Henry 's boyhood friend Francis , who became Duke of Guise . Their sister Mary of Guise had married James V of Scotland in 1538 and was the mother of Mary , Queen of Scots . At the age of five and a half , Mary was brought to the French court , where she was promised to the Dauphin , Francis . Catherine brought her up with her own children at the French court , while Mary of Guise governed Scotland as her daughter 's regent . 
 On 3 – 4 April 1559 , Henry signed the Peace of Cateau @-@ Cambrésis with the Holy Roman Empire and England , ending a long period of Italian wars . The treaty was sealed by the betrothal of Catherine 's thirteen @-@ year @-@ old daughter Elisabeth to Philip II of Spain . Their proxy wedding in Paris on 22 June 1559 was celebrated with festivities , balls , masques , and five days of jousting . 
 King Henry took part in the jousting , sporting Diane 's black @-@ and @-@ white colours . He defeated the dukes of Guise and Nemours , but the young Gabriel , comte de Montgomery , knocked him half out of the saddle . Henry insisted on riding against Montgomery again , and this time , Montgomery 's lance shattered into the king 's face . Henry reeled out of the clash , his face pouring blood , with splinters " of a good bigness " sticking out of his eye and head . Catherine , Diane , and Prince Francis all fainted . Henry was carried to the Château de Tournelles , where five splinters of wood were extracted from his head , one of which had pierced his eye and brain . Catherine stayed by his bedside , but Diane kept away , " for fear " , in the words of a chronicler , " of being expelled by the Queen " . For the next ten days , Henry 's state fluctuated . At times he even felt well enough to dictate letters and listen to music . Slowly , however , he lost his sight , speech , and reason , and on 10 July 1559 he died . From that day , Catherine took a broken lance as her emblem , inscribed with the words " <unk> hinc , hinc <unk> " ( " from this come my tears and my pain " ) , and wore black mourning in memory of Henry . 
 = = Queen mother = = 
 = = = Reign of Francis II = = = 
 Francis II became king at the age of fifteen . In what has been called a coup d 'état , the Cardinal of Lorraine and the Duke of Guise — whose niece , Mary , Queen of Scots , had married Francis the year before — seized power the day after Henry II 's death and quickly moved themselves into the Louvre Palace with the young couple . The English ambassador reported a few days later that " the house of Guise <unk> and doth all about the French king " . For the moment , Catherine worked with the Guises out of necessity . She was not strictly entitled to a role in Francis 's government , because he was deemed old enough to rule for himself . Nevertheless , all his official acts began with the words : " This being the good pleasure of the Queen , my lady @-@ mother , and I also approving of every opinion that she <unk> , am content and command that ... " Catherine did not hesitate to exploit her new authority . One of her first acts was to force Diane de Poitiers to hand over the crown jewels and return the Château de Chenonceau to the crown . She later did her best to efface or outdo Diane 's building work there . 
 The Guise brothers set about persecuting the Protestants with zeal . Catherine adopted a moderate stance and spoke up against the Guise persecutions , though she had no particular sympathy for the Huguenots , whose beliefs she never shared . The Protestants looked for leadership first to Antoine de Bourbon , King of Navarre , the First Prince of the Blood , and then , with more success , to his brother , Louis de Bourbon , Prince of Condé , who backed a plot to overthrow the Guises by force . When the Guises heard of the plot , they moved the court to the fortified Château of Amboise . The Duke of Guise launched an attack into the woods around the château . His troops surprised the rebels and killed many of them on the spot , including the commander , La <unk> . Others they drowned in the river or strung up around the battlements while Catherine and the court watched . 
 In June 1560 , Michel de l 'Hôpital was appointed Chancellor of France . He sought the support of France 's constitutional bodies and worked closely with Catherine to defend the law in the face of the growing anarchy . Neither saw the need to punish Protestants who worshipped in private and did not take up arms . On 20 August 1560 , Catherine and the chancellor advocated this policy to an assembly of notables at Fontainebleau . Historians regard the occasion as an early example of Catherine 's statesmanship . Meanwhile , Condé raised an army and in autumn 1560 began attacking towns in the south . Catherine ordered him to court and had him imprisoned as soon as he arrived . He was tried in November , found guilty of offences against the crown , and sentenced to death . His life was saved by the illness and death of the king , as a result of an infection or an abscess in his ear . 
 When Catherine had realized Francis was going to die , she made a pact with Antoine de Bourbon by which he would renounce his right to the regency of the future king , Charles IX , in return for the release of his brother Condé . As a result , when Francis died on 5 December 1560 , the Privy Council appointed Catherine as governor of France ( <unk> de France ) , with sweeping powers . She wrote to her daughter Elisabeth : " My principal aim is to have the honour of God before my eyes in all things and to preserve my authority , not for myself , but for the conservation of this kingdom and for the good of all your brothers " . 
 = = = Reign of Charles IX = = = 
 At first Catherine kept the nine @-@ year @-@ old king , who cried at his coronation , close to her , and slept in his chamber . She presided over his council , decided policy , and controlled state business and patronage . However , she was never in a position to control the country as a whole , which was on the brink of civil war . In many parts of France the rule of nobles held sway rather than that of the crown . The challenges Catherine faced were complex and in some ways difficult for her to comprehend as a foreigner . 
 She summoned church leaders from both sides to attempt to solve their doctrinal differences . Despite her optimism , the resulting Colloquy of Poissy ended in failure on 13 October 1561 , dissolving itself without her permission . Catherine failed because she saw the religious divide only in political terms . In the words of historian R. J. Knecht , " she underestimated the strength of religious conviction , imagining that all would be well if only she could get the party leaders to agree " . In January 1562 , Catherine issued the tolerant Edict of Saint @-@ Germain in a further attempt to build bridges with the Protestants . On 1 March 1562 , however , in an incident known as the Massacre of Vassy , the Duke of Guise and his men attacked worshipping Huguenots in a barn at Vassy ( <unk> ) , killing 74 and wounding 104 . Guise , who called the massacre " a regrettable accident " , was cheered as a hero in the streets of Paris while the Huguenots called for revenge . The massacre lit the fuse that sparked the French Wars of Religion . For the next thirty years , France found itself in a state of either civil war or armed truce . 
 Within a month Louis de Bourbon , Prince of Condé , and Admiral Gaspard de Coligny had raised an army of 1 @,@ 800 . They formed an alliance with England and seized town after town in France . Catherine met Coligny , but he refused to back down . She therefore told him : " Since you rely on your forces , we will show you ours " . The royal army struck back quickly and laid siege to Huguenot @-@ held Rouen . Catherine visited the deathbed of Antoine de Bourbon , King of Navarre , after he was fatally wounded by an arquebus shot . Catherine insisted on visiting the field herself and when warned of the dangers laughed , " My courage is as great as yours " . The Catholics took Rouen , but their triumph was short lived . On 18 February 1563 , a spy called <unk> de <unk> fired an arquebus into the back of the Duke of Guise , at the siege of Orléans . The murder triggered an aristocratic blood feud that complicated the French civil wars for years to come . Catherine , however , was delighted with the death of her ally . " If Monsieur de Guise had perished sooner " , she told the Venetian ambassador , " peace would have been achieved more quickly " . On 19 March 1563 , the Edict of Amboise , also known as the Edict of Pacification , ended the war . Catherine now rallied both Huguenot and Catholic forces to retake Le Havre from the English . 
 = = = = Huguenots = = = = 
 On 17 August 1563 , Charles IX was declared of age at the Parlement of Rouen , but he was never able to rule on his own and showed little interest in government . Catherine decided to launch a drive to enforce the Edict of Amboise and revive loyalty to the crown . To this end , she set out with Charles and the court on a progress around France that lasted from January 1564 until May 1565 . Catherine held talks with the Protestant Queen Jeanne III of Navarre at Mâcon and Nérac . She also met her daughter Elisabeth at Bayonne near the Spanish border , amidst lavish court festivities . Philip II excused himself from the occasion . He sent the Duke of Alba to tell Catherine to scrap the Edict of Amboise and to find punitive solutions to the problem of heresy . 
 In 1566 , through the ambassador to the Ottoman Empire , Guillaume de <unk> de <unk> , and because of a long @-@ standing Franco @-@ Ottoman alliance , Charles IX of France and Catherine de Medicis proposed to the Ottoman Court a plan to resettle French Huguenots and French and German Lutherans in Ottoman @-@ controlled Moldavia , in order to create a military colony and a buffer against the Habsburg . This plan also had the added advantage of removing the Huguenots from France , but it failed to interest the Ottomans . 
 On 27 September 1567 , in a swoop known as the Surprise of Meaux , Huguenot forces attempted to ambush the king , triggering renewed civil war . Taken unawares , the court fled to Paris in disarray . The war was ended by the Peace of Longjumeau of 22 – 23 March 1568 , but civil unrest and bloodshed continued . The Surprise of Meaux marked a turning point in Catherine 's policy towards the Huguenots . From that moment , she abandoned compromise for a policy of repression . She told the Venetian ambassador in June 1568 that all one could expect from Huguenots was deceit , and she praised the Duke of Alba 's reign of terror in the Netherlands , where Calvinists and rebels were put to death in the thousands . 
 The Huguenots retreated to the fortified stronghold of La Rochelle on the west coast , where Jeanne d 'Albret and her fifteen @-@ year @-@ old son , Henry of Bourbon , joined them . " We have come to the determination to die , all of us " , Jeanne wrote to Catherine , " rather than abandon our God , and our religion " . Catherine called Jeanne , whose decision to rebel posed a dynastic threat to the Valois , " the most shameless woman in the world " . Nevertheless , the Peace of Saint @-@ Germain @-@ en @-@ Laye , signed on 8 August 1570 because the royal army ran out of cash , conceded wider toleration to the Huguenots than ever before . 
 Catherine looked to further Valois interests by grand dynastic marriages . In 1570 , Charles IX married Elisabeth of Austria , daughter of Maximilian II , Holy Roman Emperor . Catherine was also eager for a match between one of her two youngest sons and Elizabeth I of England . After Catherine 's daughter Elisabeth died in childbirth in 1568 , she had touted her youngest daughter Margaret as a bride for Philip II of Spain . Now she sought a marriage between Margaret and Henry III of Navarre , with the aim of uniting Valois and Bourbon interests . Margaret , however , was secretly involved with Henry of Guise , the son of the late Duke of Guise . When Catherine found this out , she had her daughter brought from her bed . Catherine and the king then beat her , ripping her nightclothes and pulling out handfuls of her hair . 
 Catherine pressed Jeanne d 'Albret to attend court . Writing that she wanted to see Jeanne 's children , she promised not to harm them . Jeanne replied : " Pardon me if , reading that , I want to laugh , because you want to relieve me of a fear that I 've never had . I 've never thought that , as they say , you eat little children " . When Jeanne did come to court , Catherine pressured her hard , playing on Jeanne 's hopes for her beloved son . Jeanne finally agreed to the marriage between her son and Margaret , so long as Henry could remain a Huguenot . When Jeanne arrived in Paris to buy clothes for the wedding , she was taken ill and died , aged forty @-@ four . Huguenot writers later accused Catherine of murdering her with poisoned gloves . The wedding took place on 18 August 1572 at Notre @-@ Dame , Paris . 
 = = = = St. Bartholomew 's Day massacre = = = = 
 Three days later , Admiral Coligny was walking back to his rooms from the Louvre when a shot rang out from a house and wounded him in the hand and arm . A smoking arquebus was discovered in a window , but the culprit had made his escape from the rear of the building on a waiting horse . Coligny was carried to his lodgings at the Hôtel de Béthisy , where the surgeon Ambroise Paré removed a bullet from his elbow and amputated a damaged finger with a pair of scissors . Catherine , who was said to have received the news without emotion , made a tearful visit to Coligny and promised to punish his attacker . Many historians have blamed Catherine for the attack on Coligny . Others point to the Guise family or a Spanish @-@ papal plot to end Coligny 's influence on the king . Whatever the truth , the bloodbath that followed was soon beyond the control of Catherine or any other leader . 
 The St. Bartholomew 's Day massacre , which began two days later , has stained Catherine 's reputation ever since . There is no reason to believe she was not party to the decision when on 23 August Charles IX ordered , " Then kill them all ! Kill them all ! " The thinking was clear . Catherine and her advisers expected a Huguenot uprising to avenge the attack on Coligny . They chose therefore to strike first and wipe out the Huguenot leaders while they were still in Paris after the wedding . 
 The slaughter in Paris lasted for almost a week . It spread to many parts of France , where it persisted into the autumn . In the words of historian Jules Michelet , " St Bartholomew was not a day , but a season " . On 29 September , when Navarre knelt before the altar as a Roman Catholic , having converted to avoid being killed , Catherine turned to the ambassadors and laughed . From this time dates the legend of the wicked Italian queen . Huguenot writers branded Catherine a scheming Italian , who had acted on Machiavelli 's principles to kill all enemies in one blow . 
 = = = Reign of Henry III = = = 
 Two years later , Catherine faced a new crisis with the death of Charles IX at the age of twenty @-@ three . His dying words were " oh , my mother ... " . The day before he died , he named Catherine regent , since his brother and heir , Henry the Duke of Anjou , was in the Polish @-@ Lithuanian Commonwealth , where he had been elected king the year before . However , three months after his coronation at Wawel Cathedral , Henry abandoned that throne and returned to France in order to become king of France . Catherine wrote to Henry of Charles IX 's death : " I am grief @-@ stricken to have witnessed such a scene and the love which he showed me at the end ... My only consolation is to see you here soon , as your kingdom requires , and in good health , for if I were to lose you , I would have myself buried alive with you . " 
 Henry was Catherine 's favourite son . Unlike his brothers , he came to the throne as a grown man . He was also healthier , though he suffered from weak lungs and constant fatigue . His interest in the tasks of government , however , proved fitful . He depended on Catherine and her team of secretaries until the last few weeks of her life . He often hid from state affairs , immersing himself in acts of piety , such as pilgrimages and flagellation . He was , however , also famous for his circle of favorites , called Les <unk> ( from mignon , French for " the darlings " or " the dainty ones " ) . It was a term used by polemicists in the toxic atmosphere of the French Wars of Religion and taken up by the people of Paris , to designate the favourites of Henry III of France , from his return from Poland to reign in France in 1574 , to his assassination in 1589 , a disastrous end to which the perception of effeminate weakness contributed . [ 1 ] The <unk> were frivolous and fashionable young men , to whom public <unk> attributed heterodox sexuality , rumors that some historians have found to be a factor in the disintegration of the late Valois monarchy . 
 According to the contemporary chronicler Pierre de l 'Estoile , [ 2 ] they made themselves " exceedingly odious , as much by their foolish and haughty demeanour , as by their effeminate and immodest dress , but above all by the immense gifts the king made to them . " The Joyeuse wedding in 1581 occasioned one of the most extravagant display of the reign . 
 Henry married Louise de Lorraine @-@ <unk> in February 1575 , two days after his coronation . His choice thwarted Catherine 's plans for a political marriage to a foreign princess . Rumours of Henry 's inability to produce children were by that time in wide circulation . The papal nuncio Salviati observed , " it is only with difficulty that we can imagine there will be offspring ... physicians and those who know him well say that he has an extremely weak constitution and will not live long . " As time passed and the likelihood of children from the marriage receded , Catherine 's youngest son , Francis , Duke of Alençon , known as " Monsieur " , played upon his role as heir to the throne , repeatedly exploiting the anarchy of the civil wars , which were by now as much about noble power struggles as religion . Catherine did all in her power to bring Francis back into the fold . On one occasion , in March 1578 , she lectured him for six hours about his dangerously subversive behaviour . 
 In 1576 , in a move that endangered Henry 's throne , Francis allied with the Protestant princes against the crown . On 6 May 1576 , Catherine gave in to almost all Huguenot demands in the Edict of Beaulieu . The treaty became known as the Peace of Monsieur because it was thought that Francis had forced it on the crown . Francis died of consumption in June 1584 , after a disastrous intervention in the Low Countries during which his army had been massacred . Catherine wrote , the next day : " I am so wretched to live long enough to see so many people die before me , although I realize that God 's will must be obeyed , that He owns everything , and that he lends us only for as long as He likes the children whom He gives us . " The death of her youngest son was a calamity for Catherine 's dynastic dreams . Under Salic law , by which only males could ascend the throne , the Huguenot Henry of Navarre now became heir presumptive to the French crown . 
 Catherine had at least taken the precaution of marrying Margaret , her youngest daughter , to Navarre . Margaret , however , became almost as much of a thorn in Catherine 's side as Francis , and in 1582 , she returned to the French court without her husband . Catherine was heard yelling at her for taking lovers . Catherine sent <unk> de <unk> to Navarre to arrange Margaret 's return . In 1585 , Margaret fled Navarre again . She retreated to her property at Agen and begged her mother for money . Catherine sent her only enough " to put food on her table " . Moving on to the fortress of <unk> , Margaret took a lover called d <unk> . Catherine asked Henry to act before Margaret brought shame on them again . In October 1586 , therefore , he had Margaret locked up in the Château d <unk> . D <unk> was executed , though not , despite Catherine 's wish , in front of Margaret . Catherine cut Margaret out of her will and never saw her again . 
 Catherine was unable to control Henry in the way she had Francis and Charles . Her role in his government became that of chief executive and roving diplomat . She travelled widely across the kingdom , enforcing his authority and trying to head off war . In 1578 , she took on the task of pacifying the south . At the age of fifty @-@ nine , she embarked on an eighteen @-@ month journey around the south of France to meet Huguenot leaders face to face . Her efforts won Catherine new respect from the French people . On her return to Paris in 1579 , she was greeted outside the city by the Parlement and crowds . The Venetian ambassador , Gerolamo <unk> , wrote : " She is an indefatigable princess , born to tame and govern a people as unruly as the French : they now recognize her merits , her concern for unity and are sorry not to have appreciated her sooner . " She was under no illusions , however . On 25 November 1579 , she wrote to the king , " You are on the eve of a general revolt . Anyone who tells you differently is a liar . " 
 = = = = Catholic League = = = = 
 Many leading Roman Catholics were appalled by Catherine 's attempts to appease the Huguenots . After the Edict of Beaulieu , they had started forming local leagues to protect their religion . The death of the heir to the throne in 1584 prompted the Duke of Guise to assume the leadership of the Catholic League . He planned to block Henry of Navarre 's succession and place Henry 's Catholic uncle Cardinal Charles de Bourbon on the throne instead . In this cause , he recruited the great Catholic princes , nobles and prelates , signed the treaty of Joinville with Spain , and prepared to make war on the " heretics " . By 1585 , Henry III had no choice but to go to war against the League . As Catherine put it , " peace is carried on a stick " ( <unk> porte paix ) . " Take care " , she wrote to the king , " especially about your person . There is so much treachery about that I die of fear . " 
 Henry was unable to fight the Catholics and the Protestants at once , both of whom had stronger armies than his own . In the Treaty of Nemours , signed on 7 July 1585 , he was forced to give in to all the League 's demands , even that he pay its troops . He went into hiding to fast and pray , surrounded by a bodyguard known as " the Forty @-@ five " , and left Catherine to sort out the mess . The monarchy had lost control of the country , and was in no position to assist England in the face of the coming Spanish attack . The Spanish ambassador told Philip II that the abscess was about to burst . 
 By 1587 , the Catholic backlash against the Protestants had become a campaign across Europe . Elizabeth I of England 's execution of Mary , Queen of Scots , on 8 February 1587 outraged the Catholic world . Philip II of Spain prepared for an invasion of England . The League took control of much of northern France to secure French ports for his armada . 
 = = = = Last months and death = = = = 
 Henry hired Swiss troops to help him defend himself in Paris . The Parisians , however , claimed the right to defend the city themselves . On 12 May 1588 , they set up barricades in the streets and refused to take orders from anyone except the Duke of Guise . When Catherine tried to go to Mass , she found her way barred , though she was allowed through the barricades . The chronicler L 'Estoile reported that she cried all through her lunch that day . She wrote to <unk> , " Never have I seen myself in such trouble or with so little light by which to escape . " As usual , Catherine advised the king , who had fled the city in the nick of time , to compromise and live to fight another day . On 15 June 1588 , Henry duly signed the Act of Union , which gave in to all the League 's latest demands . 
 On 8 September 1588 at Blois , where the court had assembled for a meeting of the Estates , Henry dismissed all his ministers without warning . Catherine , in bed with a lung infection , had been kept in the dark . The king 's actions effectively ended her days of power . 
 At the meeting of the Estates , Henry thanked Catherine for all she had done . He called her not only the mother of the king but the mother of the state . Henry did not tell Catherine of his plan for a solution to his problems . On 23 December 1588 , he asked the Duke of Guise to call on him at the Château de Blois . As Guise entered the king 's chamber , the Forty @-@ five plunged their blades into his body , and he died at the foot of the king 's bed . At the same moment , eight members of the Guise family were rounded up , including the Duke of Guise 's brother , Louis II , Cardinal of Guise , whom Henry 's men hacked to death the next day in the palace dungeons . Immediately after the murder of Guise , Henry entered Catherine 's bedroom on the floor below and announced , " Please forgive me . Monsieur de Guise is dead . He will not be spoken of again . I have had him killed . I have done to him what he was going to do to me . " Catherine 's immediate reaction is not known ; but on Christmas Day , she told a friar , " Oh , wretched man ! What has he done ? ... Pray for him ... I see him rushing towards his ruin . " She visited her old friend Cardinal de Bourbon on 1 January 1589 to tell him she was sure he would soon be freed . He shouted at her , " Your words , Madam , have led us all to this butchery . " She left in tears . 
 On 5 January 1589 , Catherine died at the age of sixty @-@ nine , probably from pleurisy . L 'Estoile wrote : " those close to her believed that her life had been shortened by displeasure over her son 's deed . " He added that she had no sooner died than she was treated with as much consideration as a dead goat . Because Paris was held by enemies of the crown , Catherine had to be buried provisionally at Blois . Eight months later , Jacques Clément stabbed Henry III to death . At the time , Henry was besieging Paris with the King of Navarre , who would succeed him as Henry IV of France . Henry III 's assassination ended nearly three centuries of Valois rule and brought the Bourbon dynasty into power . Years later , Diane , daughter of Henry II and Philippa <unk> , had Catherine 's remains reinterred in the Saint @-@ Denis basilica in Paris . In 1793 , a revolutionary mob tossed her bones into a mass grave with those of the other kings and queens . 
 Henry IV was later reported to have said of Catherine : 
 I ask you , what could a woman do , left by the death of her husband with five little children on her arms , and two families of France who were thinking of grasping the crown — our own [ the Bourbons ] and the Guises ? Was she not compelled to play strange parts to deceive first one and then the other , in order to guard , as she did , her sons , who successively reigned through the wise conduct of that shrewd woman ? I am surprised that she never did worse . 
 = = Patron of the arts = = 
 Catherine believed in the humanist ideal of the learned Renaissance prince whose authority depended on letters as well as arms . She was inspired by the example of her father @-@ in @-@ law , King Francis I of France , who had hosted the leading artists of Europe at his court , and by her Medici ancestors . In an age of civil war and declining respect for the monarchy , she sought to bolster royal prestige through lavish cultural display . Once in control of the royal purse , she launched a programme of artistic patronage that lasted for three decades . During this time , she presided over a distinctive late French Renaissance culture in all branches of the arts . 
 An inventory drawn up at the Hôtel de la Reine after Catherine 's death shows her to have been a keen collector . Listed works of art included tapestries , hand @-@ drawn maps , sculptures , rich fabrics , ebony furniture inlaid with ivory , sets of china , and Limoges pottery . There were also hundreds of portraits , for which a vogue had developed during Catherine 's lifetime . Many portraits in her collection were by Jean Clouet ( 1480 – 1541 ) and his son François Clouet ( c . 1510 – 1572 ) . François Clouet drew and painted portraits of all Catherine 's family and of many members of the court . After Catherine 's death , a decline in the quality of French portraiture set in . By 1610 , the school patronised by the late Valois court and brought to its pinnacle by François Clouet had all but died out . 
 Beyond portraiture , little is known about the painting at Catherine de ' Medici 's court . In the last two decades of her life , only two painters stand out as recognisable personalities : Jean Cousin the Younger ( c . 1522 – c . 1594 ) , few of whose works survive , and Antoine Caron ( c . 1521 – 1599 ) , who became Catherine 's official painter after working at Fontainebleau under Primaticcio . Caron 's vivid Mannerism , with its love of ceremonial and its preoccupation with massacres , reflects the neurotic atmosphere of the French court during the Wars of Religion . 
 Many of Caron 's paintings , such as those of the Triumphs of the Seasons ' , " are of allegorical subjects that echo the festivities for which Catherine 's court was famous . His designs for the Valois Tapestries celebrate the fêtes , picnics , and mock battles of the " magnificent " entertainments hosted by Catherine . They depict events held at Fontainebleau in 1564 ; at Bayonne in 1565 for the summit meeting with the Spanish court ; and at the Tuileries in 1573 for the visit of the Polish ambassadors who presented the Polish crown to Catherine 's son Henry of Anjou . Biographer Leonie Frieda suggests that " Catherine , more than anyone , inaugurated the fantastic entertainments for which later French monarchs also became renowned " . 
 The musical shows in particular allowed Catherine to express her creative gifts . They were usually dedicated to the ideal of peace in the realm and based on mythological themes . To create the necessary dramas , music , and scenic effects for these events , Catherine employed the leading artists and architects of the day . Historian Frances Yates has called her " a great creative artist in festivals . " Catherine gradually introduced changes to the traditional entertainments : for example , she increased the prominence of dance in the shows that climaxed each series of entertainments . A distinctive new art form , the ballet de cour , emerged from these creative advances . Owing to its synthesis of dance , music , verse , and setting , the production of the Ballet Comique de la Reine in 1581 is regarded by scholars as the first authentic ballet . 
 Catherine de ' Medici 's great love among the arts was architecture . " As the daughter of the Medici , " suggests French art historian Jean @-@ Pierre Babelon , " she was driven by a passion to build and a desire to leave great achievements behind her when she died . " After Henry II 's death , Catherine set out to immortalise her husband 's memory and to enhance the grandeur of the Valois monarchy through a series of costly building projects . These included work on <unk> at Montceaux @-@ en @-@ Brie , Saint @-@ Maur @-@ des @-@ Fossés , and Chenonceau . Catherine built two new palaces in Paris : the Tuileries and the Hôtel de la Reine . She was closely involved in the planning and supervising of all her architectural schemes . 
 Catherine had emblems of her love and grief carved into the stonework of her buildings . Poets lauded her as the new Artemisia , after Artemisia II of Caria , who built the Mausoleum at Halicarnassus as a tomb for her dead husband . As the centrepiece of an ambitious new chapel , she commissioned a magnificent tomb for Henry at the basilica of Saint Denis . It was designed by Francesco Primaticcio ( 1504 – 1570 ) , with sculpture by Germain Pilon ( 1528 – 1590 ) . Art historian Henri Zerner has called this monument " the last and most brilliant of the royal tombs of the Renaissance . " Catherine also commissioned Germain Pilon to carve the marble sculpture that contains Henry II 's heart . A poem by Ronsard , engraved on its base , tells the reader not to wonder that so small a vase can hold so large a heart , since Henry 's real heart resides in Catherine 's breast . 
 Although Catherine spent ruinous sums on the arts , most of her patronage left no permanent legacy . The end of the Valois dynasty so soon after her death brought a change in priorities . 
 = = = Culinary Legend = = = 
 The legend that Catherine de ’ Medici introduced a long list of foods , techniques and utensils from Italy to France for the first time is a myth routinely discredited by most food historians . Items whose introduction to France have been attributed to Catherine include the dinner fork , parsley , the artichoke , lettuce , broccoli , the garden pea , pasta , Parmesan , as well as the turkey and tomato of the New World . She has also received credit for introducing sauces and a variety of dishes such as duck à l ’ orange and deviled eggs . 
 Barbara Ketcham Wheaton and Stephen Mennell provided the definitive arguments against these claims . They point out that Catherine ’ s father @-@ in @-@ law , François I of France , and the flower of the French aristocracy had dined at some of Italy ’ s most élite tables during the king ’ s Italian campaigns ( and that an earlier generation had done so during Charles VIII of France ’ s invasion of 1494 ) ; that a vast Italian entourage had visited France for the wedding of Catherine de ’ Medici ’ s father to her French @-@ born mother ; and that she had little influence at court until her husband ’ s death because he was so besotted by his mistress , Diane de Poitiers . In fact , a large population of Italians — bankers , silk @-@ weavers , philosophers , musicians , and artists , including Leonardo da Vinci — had emigrated to France to promote the burgeoning Renaissance . Nevertheless , popular culture frequently attributes Italian culinary influence and forks in France to Catherine . 
 The earliest known reference to Catherine as the popularizer of Italian culinary innovation is the entry for " cuisine " in Diderot and d ’ <unk> ’ s Encyclopédie published in 1754 , which describes haute cuisine as decadent and effeminate and explains that fussy sauces and fancy <unk> arrived in France via " that crowd of corrupt Italians who served at the court of Catherine de ’ Medici . " 
 = = Links to the occult = = 
 Catherine de Medici has been labelled a " sinister Queen … noted for her interest in the occult arts " . To some , Catherine and Henry 's inability to produce an heir for the first ten years of their marriage gave rise to suspicion of witchcraft . <unk> suggested that women 's power was believed to be the ability to create and sustain life , whilst witches were believed to have the opposite power ; that of attacking health , life and fertility . An infertile woman , and in particular an infertile Queen , was therefore regarded as ' unnatural ' and a small step from supernatural . Elizabeth I was treated with similar suspicion - she too entertained questionable characters ( such as her advisor , John Dee ) , and produced no official heir . Essentially , however , there exists no concrete proof that either woman took part in the Occult , and it is now believed that Catherine 's trouble in providing an heir was in fact due to Henry II 's penile deformity . 
 Suspicion was fuelled to some degree by her entertainment of questionable characters at court - for example , the reputed seer Nostradamus , who was rumoured to have created a talisman for Catherine , made from a mixture of metals , goat blood and human blood . Catherine also gave patronage to the Ruggeri brothers , who were renowned astrologers , but were also known for their involvement in necromancy and the black arts . Cosimo Ruggeri , in particular , was believed to be Catherine 's own " trusted necromancer , and specialist in the dark arts " , although there is not a great deal of surviving documentation to tell of his life . Though some suggest that they were simply magicians , for many living in Italy at the time , the distinction between ' magician ' and ' witch ' was unclear . Entertaining individuals that appeared to subvert the natural religious order during the most intense period of witch hunting and a time of great religious conflict was therefore an easy way to arouse suspicion . 
 Catherine herself had been educated in astrology and astronomy . Though these were largely considered respectable subjects , Catherine 's biographer Leonie Frieda believes that it was her fascination with these subjects that has earned her the reputation history and her peers accorded her . Indeed , it has been suggested that Catherine educated her son , Henry III , in the dark arts , and that " the two devoted themselves to sorceries that were scandals of the age " . As a result , some ( more extreme ) authors believe Catherine to be the creator of the Black Mass , a Satanic inversion of the traditional Catholic Mass , although there is little to prove this aside from Jean Bodin 's account in his book De la <unk> des <unk> . Nevertheless , Catherine was never formally accused or prosecuted despite the fact that her reign experienced the greatest number of prosecutions for Witchcraft in Italy . This lends some weight to the suggestion that people were labelled ' witches ' simply because they did not act the way a woman should ( humble and grateful ) , or simply to suit personal agendas . This may be particularly true for Catherine as an Italian woman ruling in France ; several historians argue that she was disliked by her French subjects , who labelled her " the Italian woman " . In any event , the rumours have made a mark on Catherine 's reputation over time , and there are now many <unk> works about her involvement in the Occult . 
 = = Issue = = 
 Catherine de ' Medici married Henry , Duke of Orléans , the future Henry II of France , in Marseille on 28 October 1533 . She gave birth to ten children , seven of whom survived to adulthood . Her three oldest sons became king of France ; two of her daughters married kings ; and one married a duke . Catherine outlived all her children except Henry III , who died seven months after her , and Margaret , who inherited her robust health . 
 Francis II , King of France ( 19 January 1544 – 5 December 1560 ) . Married Mary , Queen of Scots , in 1558 . 
 Elizabeth ( 2 April 1545 – 3 October 1568 ) . Married Philip II , King of Spain , in 1559 . 
 Claude ( 12 November 1547 – 21 February 1575 ) . Married Charles III , Duke of Lorraine , in 1559 . 
 Louis , Duke of Orléans ( 3 February 1549 – 24 October 1550 ) . Died in infancy . 
 Charles IX , King of France ( 27 June 1550 – 30 May 1574 ) . Married Elizabeth of Austria in 1570 . 
 Henry III , King of France ( 19 September 1551 – 2 August 1589 ) . Married Louise of Lorraine in 1575 . 
 Margaret ( 14 May 1553 – 27 March 1615 ) . Married Henry , King of Navarre , the future Henry IV of France , in 1572 . 
 Francis , Duke of Anjou ( 18 March 1555 – 19 June 1584 ) . 
 Victoria ( 24 June 1556 – August 1556 ) . Twin of Joan . Died in infancy . 
 Joan ( 24 June 1556 – 24 June 1556 ) . Twin of Victoria . Died in utero . 
 = = Ancestry = = 
 = = In popular culture = = 
 = = = Film = = = 
 Josephine Crowell – Intolerance ( 1916 ) 
 Marguerite Moreno – Pearls of the Crown ( 1937 ) 
 Françoise Rosay – La Reine Margot ( 1954 ) 
 Marisa Pavan – Diane ( 1956 ) 
 Isa Miranda – Hardi <unk> ! ( 1964 ) 
 Virna Lisi – La Reine Margot ( 1994 ) 
 Evelina <unk> – The Princess of Montpensier ( 2010 ) 
 Amanda Plummer – Nostradamus ( 1994 ) 
 = = = Television = = = 
 Alice <unk> – la Reine Margot ( television film , 1961 ) 
 Joan Young – The Massacre of St Bartholomew 's Eve ( episode of Doctor Who , 1966 ) 
 Maria <unk> – La Dame de <unk> ( mini @-@ series , 1971 ) 
 Margaretta Scott – Elizabeth R ( mini @-@ series , 1971 ) 
 Dominique <unk> – Le Chevalier de <unk> ( series , 1988 ) 
 Alice <unk> – Catherine de Médicis : Le <unk> de la révolution ( television film , 1989 ) 
 Marie @-@ Christine <unk> – Saint @-@ Germain ou la <unk> ( television film , 2003 ) 
 Megan Follows – Reign ( series , 2013 ) 
 = = = Gaming = = = 
 Catherine de ' Medici will lead France in Civilization VI . 
 = Hanging by a Moment = 
 " Hanging by a Moment " is a song by American alternative band Lifehouse . It was the first single released from their debut studio album , No Name Face ( 2000 ) . The track was written by lead singer Jason Wade , who said that he wrote the song in about five minutes without thinking about what would happen to it . It was produced by American record producer Ron Aniello and was mixed by Brendan O 'Brien . Musically , " Hanging by a Moment " is a post @-@ grunge song that contains influences of alternative rock . The song was first released in the United States on April 24 , 2001 by DreamWorks Records . 
 The song received positive reviews from critics , who applauded its instrumentation . It became a commercial success , charting in the top ten in the United States and Australia , and also charting in the Netherlands , United Kingdom , and New Zealand . In 2001 , the song was certified 2x Platinum by the Australian Recording Industry Association ( ARIA ) and also became the most played radio track of that year in the United States . The official music video for the song premiered on <unk> on December 7 , 2000 . In the video , Wade is seen singing the lyrics of the song in many locations around a town . The band went on tours with Matchbox Twenty and 3 Doors Down as an opening act before going on their first headline tour that featured American rock band The Calling and American singer Michelle Branch . 
 = = Background and composition = = 
 The song was written by Lifehouse lead singer Jason Wade . It was produced by American record producer Ron Aniello and was mixed by Brendan O 'Brien . When asked about the song in an interview with Billboard , Wade said , " It was the most uptempo , radio @-@ friendly song . We all decided it was the right choice to release it as the first single . " He went on to describe his expectations when writing songs , saying , " My ultimate goal in writing songs is to connect with people . In the lyrics , you don 't tell the whole picture : You give a road to start on that people can relate to . We 're honest , nice guys and I hope that comes across in everything we do . " After being asked how he wrote the song in an interview with Launch , Wade explained , " I wrote that song without thinking about what was gonna happen to it and then it just kinda took over from there . " He also said in the interview that he wrote " Hanging by a Moment " in about five minutes . 
 " Hanging by a Moment " was described as a post @-@ grunge and alternative rock song that contains a strong melody . According to the sheet music published at Musicnotes.com by Sony / ATV Music Publishing , the song is set in common time with a " moderate rock " tempo of 124 beats per minute . It is composed in the key of D @-@ flat major . In an interview with Billboard , lead singer and guitarist of Lifehouse , Jason Wade , described the song as an " uptempo , radio @-@ friendly song " . Bill Lamb of About.com called the song " one of the biggest rock hits ever by a Contemporary Christian band crossing over into the mainstream . The song was the biggest hit of summer 2001 and was eventually named the most played song of the year on the radio . " The song was described by John DiBiase of Jesus Freak Hideout as " a song [ that is ] clearly a cry out to God " . Sean Rizzo of Sputnikmusic says that the song " presents one of the best with the guitar ’ s plucking during the verses and a chorus infectious enough to infiltrate your brain for a few days . " 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 " Hanging by a Moment " debuted at number 76 on the Billboard Hot 100 for the week of February 10 , 2001 . It gradually ascended on the chart and eventually peaked at number two on June 16 , 2001 , just behind the 2001 cover version of " Lady Marmalade " by Christina Aguilera , Pink , Lil ' Kim , and Mýa . After its peak , it gradually descended and left the chart after 54 consecutive weeks . The song was also a huge hit on rock radio holding number one for three weeks beginning on January 27 , 2001 . On the Billboard Alternative Songs chart , the song debuted at number 36 for the week of October 28 , 2000 and eventually peaked at number one after it stayed on the chart for 36 non @-@ consecutive weeks . The song debuted at number 32 on the Billboard Pop Songs chart during the week of March 3 , 2001 . After moving around the chart for 37 consecutive weeks , the song managed to peak at number two on May 19 , 2001 . On the Billboard Radio Songs chart , " Hanging by a Moment " debuted at number 70 for the week of February 10 , 2001 . After moving around the chart for 55 consecutive weeks , the song eventually peaked at number one on July 14 , 2001 . The song debuted at number 37 on the Billboard Adult Pop Songs chart for the week of February 24 , 2001 . It eventually peaked at number one on June 23 , 2001 after it spent 74 consecutive weeks on the chart . " Hanging by a Moment " became the most played song of 2001 and made Lifehouse the first male rock group to make the annual recap since Chicago did in 1989 with " Look Away . " 
 The song also achieved international success . In Australia , the song debuted at number 36 on the ARIA Charts during the week of June 17 , 2001 . It has since peaked at number one , after being on the chart for 24 consecutive weeks . Because of its success in Australia , " Hanging by a Moment " was certified 2x Platinum by the ARIA in 2001 . It debuted on The Netherlands ' Mega Single Top 100 chart at number 95 for the week of June 9 , 2001 . The song has since peaked at number 31 . On the New Zealand Singles Chart , " Hanging by a Moment " debuted at number 48 for the week of March 11 , 2001 . After being on the chart for 31 consecutive weeks , it eventually peaked at number six . The song debuted at number 25 on the UK Singles Chart for the week of September 8 , 2001 , which became its peak position after it spent one week on the chart . 
 = = Music video = = 
 The music video , directed by Gavin Bowden , was first released December 7 , 2000 on <unk> It served as an official video for the song , after an unofficial version was released by DreamWorks as a " temporary video " that was played on MTV2 . In an interview with MTV Radio , Wade explained the process of making the music video , and said , " We shot the video at this really cool place in Crenshaw , in L.A. , that was a bowling alley upstairs and a roller rink downstairs . It had this really weird , retro vibe to it . When they were setting up the different sets , we 'd have to stop every 10 seconds because a bowling league would walk in . It was the coolest thing . At night , we got all of our friends to come down . " 
 The video begins with Wade singing and playing his guitar in a hotel room . While singing , Wade is seen packing his clothes into a suit case in separate camera shots . He then leaves the hotel room and it shows a time @-@ lapse scene of a car going down a highway . Then , the video cuts to a restaurant , where Wade is seen lying on a restaurant booth and singing the lyrics of the song . After this , Wade is seen with the rest of Lifehouse in a concert setting in a restaurant . It then splits to shots of Wade singing the lyrics of the song to the camera . Toward the end of the video , it switches to Lifehouse playing the song in front of a crowd while showing shots of Wade in a car going down a highway . It ends with the scene of Lifehouse in a restaurant and then switches to a camera shot of all of the band members with the video fading out on Wade . 
 = = Promotion = = 
 On January 10 , 2001 , MTV confirmed that Lifehouse would serve as an opening act on a fourteen @-@ day tour for Matchbox Twenty , who were promoting their album Mad Season ( 2000 ) . The tour started February 27 , 2001 in Minneapolis and ended on March 29 , 2001 in Universal City . While on tour with Matchbox Twenty , Lifehouse went on The Tonight Show with Jay Leno for the first time and performed " Hanging by a Moment " on March 28 , 2001 . Several months later , the band performed the song at the River Rave Festival in Foxboro Stadium on May 26 , 2001 . In July 2001 , Lifehouse went on tour with 3 Doors Down as an opening act on twelve select dates , and performed songs from No Name Face , including " Hanging by a Moment " . 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Songwriting – Jason Wade 
 Production – Ron Aniello 
 Mixing – Brendan O 'Brien 
 Engineering – Bob Kearny , Marc Green , Paul Hayden 
 Credits and personnel adapted from Allmusic . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = = Charts and certifications = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Battles of Saratoga = 
 The Battles of Saratoga ( September 19 and October 7 , 1777 ) marked the climax of the Saratoga campaign giving a decisive victory to the Americans over the British in the American Revolutionary War . British General John Burgoyne led a large invasion army up the Champlain Valley from Canada , hoping to meet a similar force marching northward from New York City ; the southern force never arrived , and Burgoyne was surrounded by American forces in upstate New York . Burgoyne fought two small battles to break out . They took place eighteen days apart on the same ground , 9 miles ( 14 km ) south of Saratoga , New York . They both failed . Trapped by superior American forces , with no relief in sight , Burgoyne surrendered his entire army on October 17 . His surrender , says historian Edmund Morgan , " was a great turning point of the war , because it won for Americans the foreign assistance which was the last element needed for victory . 
 Burgoyne 's strategy to divide New England from the southern colonies had started well , but slowed due to logistical problems . He won a small tactical victory over General Horatio Gates and the Continental Army in the September 19 Battle of Freeman 's Farm at the cost of significant casualties . His gains were erased when he again attacked the Americans in the October 7 Battle of Bemis Heights and the Americans captured a portion of the British defenses . Burgoyne was therefore compelled to retreat , and his army was surrounded by the much larger American force at Saratoga , forcing him to surrender on October 17 . News of Burgoyne 's surrender was instrumental in formally bringing France into the war as an American ally , although it had previously given supplies , ammunition , and guns , notably the de <unk> cannon , which played an important role in Saratoga . This battle also resulted in Spain joining France in the war against Britain . 
 The first battle , on September 19 , began when Burgoyne moved some of his troops in an attempt to flank the entrenched American position on Bemis Heights . Benedict Arnold , anticipating the maneuver , placed significant forces in his way . While Burgoyne did gain control of Freeman 's Farm , it came at the cost of significant casualties . Skirmishing continued in the days following the battle , while Burgoyne waited in the hope that reinforcements would arrive from New York City . Militia forces continued to arrive , swelling the size of the American army . Disputes within the American camp led Gates to strip Arnold of his command . 
 British General Sir Henry Clinton , moving up from New York City , attempted to divert American attention by capturing two forts in the Hudson River highlands on October 6 ; his efforts were too late to help Burgoyne . Burgoyne attacked Bemis Heights again on October 7 after it became apparent he would not receive relieving aid in time . In heavy fighting , marked by Arnold 's spirited rallying of the American troops , Burgoyne 's forces were thrown back to the positions they held before the September 19 battle and the Americans captured a portion of the entrenched British defenses . 
 = = Background = = 
 When the American Revolutionary War approached the two @-@ year point , the British changed their plans . Giving up on the rebellious New England colonies , they decided to split the Thirteen Colonies and isolate New England from what the British believed to be the more loyal middle and southern colonies . The British command devised a grand plan to divide the colonies via a three @-@ way pincer movement in 1777 . The western pincer , under the command of Barry St. Leger , was to progress from what is now Ontario through western New York , following the Mohawk River , and the southern pincer was to progress up the Hudson River valley from New York City . The northern pincer was to proceed southward from Montreal , and the three forces were to meet in the vicinity of Albany , New York , severing New England from the other colonies . 
