 Despite the disadvantages posed by his Alexandrian and Jewish origin , Tiberius Alexander was evidently well enough connected for an equestrian career in Roman public life . The first position he is known to have held , beginning in about 42 , was that of <unk> of the Thebaid , one of the three regions into which the Roman province of Egypt was divided . This was an administrative and judicial post involving no military command . He could have maintained contact with his brother Marcus , who was trading in the same area until his premature death in 43 or 44 . 
 A promotion came in c . 46 , when Alexander was appointed procurator of Judea by Claudius . The province had returned to direct Roman rule only after the death of Agrippa in 44 , and the tenure of Alexander 's predecessor <unk> <unk> had been marked by unrest , so Alexander 's Jewish background may have marked him as a more acceptable governor . Less trouble is attested during his office , although he did condemn James and Simon , sons of an earlier rebel named Judas of Galilee , to crucifixion . It was also at this time that Judea was afflicted by a severe famine . In 48 he was succeeded by Ventidius Cumanus . 
 Alexander 's subsequent activities are unknown until the reign of Nero , when he served as a staff officer under the prominent general Gnaeus Domitius Corbulo during campaigns against Parthia . In 63 he was dispatched along with Corbulo 's son @-@ in @-@ law to escort the Armenian king Tiridates to the Roman camp , on the first stage of his journey to receive the status of client king from Nero . 
 = = Prefecture of Egypt = = 
 In May 66 , Nero appointed Alexander as Prefect of Egypt , one of the two most prestigious posts available to an equestrian along with Prefect of the Praetorian Guard . He may have benefitted from a <unk> tendency in equestrian appointments under Nero , but his experience of Egypt must also have commended him . However , any hope that he would be able to quell the recurring conflicts in his province between Greek and Jewish populations proved to be short @-@ lived . The year he assumed office saw the outbreak of the First Jewish @-@ Roman War in Judea , and aggression inevitably spilled over into the large Jewish community of Alexandria . An outbreak of ethnic violence during a Greek assembly escalated when the Greeks took prisoners , leading the Jewish side to threaten to burn the assembled Greeks to death . Alexander sent mediators to calm the Jews , warning he would have to use the Roman legions if violence continued . The threat was ineffective , and Josephus describes the outcome : 
 A less violent side to Alexander 's government is demonstrated by other evidence . Over a century after his time , his administrative decisions were still being cited as precedents . Some of these are known from a surviving edict issued on July 6 , 68 , less than a month after Nero 's death . This denounces , and introduces measures against , a variety of abuses including inaccurate tax assessments , malicious prosecutions and the imprisonment of debtors by private creditors . The edict 's only allusion to the chaotic political situation comes as a call for trust in the benevolence of the new Emperor , Galba , and his ability to put right the wrongs of the past . Alexander was making representations to Galba on behalf of the provincials , presumably representing the desired reforms as the price of loyalty from this vital grain @-@ producing province . 
 Neither Galba nor his successor Otho survived long in office . In April 69 , Vitellius was recognized as Emperor by the Roman Senate , but his opponents were beginning to rally behind Vespasian , commander of the Roman forces conducting the war in Judea . The loyalties of Alexander , who commanded two legions and had control of the grain shipments from Alexandria to Rome , were of crucial importance . Fortunately for Vespasian , Alexander was willing to correspond with him secretly ; go @-@ betweens suspected by modern historians include Berenice ( soon to be lover of Vespasian 's son Titus ) , and an Egyptian official named <unk> . On July 1 Alexander became the first to make a decisive move against Vitellius : on receipt of a letter from Vespasian , he instructed his forces to take the oath of allegiance to Vespasian as Emperor . His lead was followed by legions throughout the eastern Empire , and the anniversary of Vespasian 's accession was later celebrated on this date . 
 = = Siege of Jerusalem = = 
 Vespasian moved rapidly to Egypt , leaving the Jewish war under the command of Titus . At the same time Alexander , as a proven commander with experience of Jewish affairs , was sent by Vespasian to join Titus as his chief of staff and adviser , second only to Titus himself . By April 70 , Jerusalem was under siege by four legions , and even after the city walls were overcome , the defenders held out in the Temple . Alexander , the offspring of a pious Jewish family , whose own father had donated the gold and silver for the Temple gates , now found himself in a position of command against his former brothers in that very sanctuary . 
 Despairing of any siege operation against the Temple 's massive walls , Titus had the gates burnt down . At the ensuing council of war , when it was debated whether to destroy the entire Temple , Alexander voted with the majority who favored preservation . In the event , this made no difference ; as the fighting raged on the following day , a Roman soldier hurled a burning brand into a chamber of the Temple itself . The Temple was consumed by the flames . 
 = = Later career = = 
 By this time , Vespasian 's position in Rome was secure . The details of Alexander 's career under the new emperor remain unclear . A damaged papyrus refers to Alexander as holding the position of " Praetorian Prefect " , which is open to two interpretations . It could indicate his rank during Titus ' campaign in 70 , which would mean that he held his own independent imperium ( commanding authority ) . According to another view , it means that he became Prefect of the Praetorian Guard at Rome , which in later years became a common position for former Prefects of Egypt . In either case , Alexander attained a position in the Roman Empire that was unparalleled for a man of Jewish birth , not to mention one who suffered from the further stigma of an Egyptian origin . The xenophobic speaker of Juvenal 's first Satire , composed in the late 1st or early in the 2nd century AD , complains of passing the Forum 's triumphal statues , " where some Egyptian <unk> 's had the nerve to set up his titles . At his image it 's right to do more than piss ! " This is very likely a reference to Alexander . 
 = = = Ancient = = = 
 = = = Modern = = = 
 = Japanese battleship Kashima = 
 Kashima ( <unk> ( <unk> ) , Kashima ( senkan ) ) was the second ship of the two Katori @-@ class pre @-@ dreadnought battleships built for the Imperial Japanese Navy ( IJN ) in the first decade of the 20th century , the last to be built by British shipyards . Ordered just before the start of the Russo @-@ Japanese War of 1904 – 05 , the ship was completed a year after its end . She saw no combat during World War I , although the ship was present when Japan joined the Siberian Intervention in 1918 . Kashima was disarmed and scrapped in 1923 – 24 in accordance with the terms of the Washington Naval Treaty of 1922 . 
 = = Design and description = = 
 The Katori @-@ class ships were ordered just before the start of the Russo @-@ Japanese War in 1904 as improved versions of the Royal Navy ’ s King Edward VII @-@ class battleships . Kashima was 473 feet 7 inches ( 144 @.@ 3 m ) long overall and had a beam of 78 feet 2 inches ( 23 @.@ 8 m ) . She had a full @-@ load draught of 26 feet 4 inches ( 8 @.@ 0 m ) and normally displaced 16 @,@ 400 long tons ( 16 @,@ 700 t ) and had a crew of 864 officers and enlisted men . The ship was powered by two vertical triple @-@ expansion steam engines using steam generated by 20 Niclausse boilers . The engines were rated at 15 @,@ 800 indicated horsepower ( 11 @,@ 800 kW ) , using forced draught , and were designed to reach a top speed of 18 @.@ 5 knots ( 34 @.@ 3 km / h ; 21 @.@ 3 mph ) . Kashima , however , reached a top speed of 19 @.@ 24 knots ( 35 @.@ 63 km / h ; 22 @.@ 14 mph ) from 17 @,@ 280 indicated horsepower ( 12 @,@ 890 kW ) on her sea trials on 4 April 1906 . She carried a maximum of 2 @,@ 200 long tons ( 2 @,@ 200 t ) of coal and 750 long tons ( 760 t ) of fuel oil which was sprayed on the coal to increase their power . This allowed her to steam for 12 @,@ 000 nautical miles ( 22 @,@ 000 km ; 14 @,@ 000 mi ) at a speed of 11 knots ( 20 km / h ; 13 mph ) . 
 The ship 's main battery consisted of four 12 @-@ inch guns mounted in two twin @-@ gun turrets , one forward and one aft . The secondary armament consisted of four 10 @-@ inch guns mounted in four single @-@ gun turrets positioned on each side of the superstructure . Katori also carried 12 quick @-@ firing ( QF ) six @-@ inch guns , mounted in casemates on the sides of the hull and in the superstructure . A number of smaller guns were carried for defence against torpedo boats . These included a dozen QF 12 @-@ pounder guns and three 47 @-@ millimetre ( 1 @.@ 9 in ) 3 @-@ pounder Hotchkiss guns . She was also armed with five submerged 18 @-@ inch torpedo tubes , two on each broadside and one in the stern . 
 Kashima 's waterline armour belt consisted of Krupp cemented armour and was 3 @.@ 5 – 9 inches ( 89 – 229 mm ) thick . The armour of her main gun turrets had a maximum thickness of 9 in ( 229 mm ) and her deck ranged from 2 to 3 inches ( 51 to 76 mm ) in thickness . 
 = = Construction and career = = 
 Kashima , named for a Shinto shrine in Kashima , Ibaraki , was ordered in January 1904 from Armstrong Whitworth . The ship was laid down at their Elswick shipyard on 29 February 1904 as yard number 755 . She was launched on 22 March 1905 , and completed on 23 May 1906 . Kashima departed Britain on 31 May on her maiden voyage and shakedown cruise and arrived at Yokosuka on 4 August 1906 . 
 Whilst conducting gunnery training in Hiroshima Bay on 16 September 1907 , brown powder propellant in Kashima 's starboard rear 10 @-@ inch ( 250 mm ) gun mount ignited when it came in contact with burning residue from the previous shot . The fire killed seven officers and 27 enlisted men and wounded two officers and six enlisted men . 
 When World War I began , Kashima was in a refit at Maizuru Naval Arsenal that lasted until March 1915 . The ship was assigned to the 2nd Battleship Squadron when her refit was completed and became the squadron 's flagship in 1916 . Kashima joined her sister ship Katori in the 5th Battleship Squadron as its flagship in 1918 and both ships covered the landing of Japanese troops in Siberia in August of that year as Japan intervened in the Russian Civil War . 
 On 3 March 1921 , Katori , escorted by Kashima , departed Yokohama bound for Great Britain carrying Crown Prince Hirohito , the first Japanese crown prince to travel abroad . The ships arrived at Portsmouth on 9 May and Hirohito disembarked to tour Europe ; they returned home several months later . To comply with the terms of the Washington Naval Treaty the ship was disarmed in April 1922 , stricken from the Navy List on 20 September 1923 and the removal of her armor was completed by February 1924 . Mitsubishi won the public auction conducted 26 – 27 April with a price of 238 @,@ 900 yen and had to pay an additional 35 @,@ 000 yen to have her towed to Nagasaki for scrapping . The company finished the job on 24 November . Kashima 's main gun turrets were re @-@ used in coastal artillery batteries around Tokyo Bay and on Iki Island in the Strait of Tsushima . 
 = Objections to evolution = 
 Scholars , theologians and lay @-@ people have raised objections to evolution since evolutionary ideas came to prominence in the 19th century . When Charles Darwin published his 1859 book On the Origin of Species , his theory of evolution ( the idea that species arose through descent with modification from a single common ancestor in a process driven by natural selection ) initially met opposition from scientists with different theories , but eventually came to receive overwhelming acceptance in the scientific community . The observation of evolutionary processes occurring ( as well as the modern evolutionary synthesis explaining that evidence ) has been uncontroversial among mainstream biologists since the 1940s . 
 Since then , most criticisms and denials of evolution have come from religious sources , rather than from the scientific community . Although many religions , such as those advocating theistic evolution , have accepted the occurrence of evolution , some religious beliefs reject evolutionary explanations in favor of creationism ( the belief that a deity created the universe and life through the application of supernatural processes ) . The resultant <unk> creation – evolution controversy has become a focal point of recent perceived conflict between religion and science . 
 Modern creationism features movements such as creation science , neo @-@ creationism , and intelligent design , which argue that the idea of life being directly designed by a god or intelligence is at least as scientific as evolutionary theory , and should therefore be taught in public education . Such arguments against evolution have become widespread and include objections to evolution 's evidence , methodology , plausibility , morality , and scientific acceptance . The scientific community , however , does not recognize such objections as valid , citing detractors ' misinterpretations of such things as the scientific method , evidence , and basic physical laws . 
 = = History = = 
 Various evolutionary ideas came to prominence around the start of the 19th century , in particular the transmutation of species theory put forward by Jean @-@ Baptiste Lamarck . These were opposed on scientific grounds , most notably by Georges Cuvier , as well as encountering political and religious objections . These ideas that natural laws controlled the development of nature and society gained vast popular audiences with George Combe 's The Constitution of Man of 1828 and the anonymous Vestiges of the Natural History of Creation of 1844 . When Charles Darwin published his 1859 book On the Origin of Species , he convinced most of the scientific community that new species arose through descent through modification in a branching pattern of divergence from common ancestors , but while most scientists accepted that natural selection was a valid and empirically testable hypothesis , Darwin 's view that it was the primary mechanism of evolution was generally rejected . 
 The earliest objections to Darwinian evolution were both scientific and religious . Darwin 's contemporaries eventually came to accept the transmutation of species based upon fossil evidence ; the X Club was formed to defend evolution against the church and wealthy amateurs , although the specific evolutionary mechanism which Darwin provided — natural selection — was actively disputed in favour of alternative theories such as Lamarckism and orthogenesis . Darwin 's <unk> account was also opposed by saltationism and catastrophism . Lord Kelvin led scientific opposition to gradualism on the basis of his thermodynamic calculations that the Earth was between 24 and 400 million years old , an estimate strongly disputed by geologists . These figures were corrected in 1907 when radioactive dating of rocks showed that the Earth was billions of years old . Kelvin 's own views favoured a version of theistic evolution accelerated by divine guidance . The specific hereditary mechanism Darwin provided , pangenesis , lacked any supporting evidence . Although evolution was unchallenged , uncertainties about the mechanism in the eclipse of Darwinism persisted from the 1880s until the 1930s inclusion of Mendelian inheritance and the rise of the modern evolutionary synthesis . The modern synthesis rose to universal acceptance among biologists with the help of new evidence , such as genetics , which confirmed Darwin 's predictions and refuted the competing theories . 
 Protestantism , especially in America , broke out in " acrid polemics " and argument about evolution from 1860 to the 1870s — with the turning point possibly marked by the death of Louis Agassiz in 1873 — and by 1880 a form of " Christian evolution " was becoming the consensus . In Britain , while publication of The Descent of Man by Darwin in 1871 reinvigorated debate from the previous decade , Sir Henry Chadwick notes a steady acceptance of evolution " among more educated Christians " between 1860 and 1885 . As a result , evolutionary theory was " both permissible and respectable " by 1876 . Frederick Temple 's lectures on The Relations between Religion and Science ( 1884 ) on how evolution was not " antagonistic " to religion highlighted this trend . Temple 's appointment as Archbishop of Canterbury in 1896 demonstrated the broad acceptance of evolution within the church hierarchy . 
 For decades the Roman Catholic Church avoided official refutation of evolution . However , it would rein in Catholics who proposed that evolution could be reconciled with the Bible , as this conflicted with the First Vatican Council 's ( 1869 – 70 ) finding that everything was created out of nothing by God , and to deny that finding could lead to excommunication . In 1950 , the encyclical Humani generis of Pope Pius XII first mentioned evolution directly and officially . It allowed one to enquire into the concept of humans coming from pre @-@ existing living matter , but not to question Adam and Eve or the creation of the soul . In 1996 , Pope John Paul II said that evolution was " more than a hypothesis " and acknowledged the large body of work accumulated in its support , but reiterated that any attempt to give a material explanation of the human soul was " incompatible with the truth about man . " 
 Muslim reaction ranged from those believing in literal creation from the Quran to many educated Muslims who subscribed to a version of theistic or guided evolution in which the Quran reinforced rather than contradicted mainstream science . This occurred relatively early , as medieval madrasahs taught the ideas of Al @-@ Jahiz , a Muslim scholar from the 9th century , who proposed concepts similar to natural selection . However , acceptance of evolution remains low in the Muslim world , as prominent figures reject evolution 's underpinning philosophy of materialism as unsound to human origins and a denial of Allah . Further objections by Muslim authors and writers largely reflect those put forward in the Western world . 
 Regardless of acceptance from major religious hierarchies , early religious objections to Darwin 's theory are still used in opposition to evolution . The ideas that species change over time through natural processes and that different species share common ancestors seemed to contradict the Genesis account of Creation . Believers in Biblical infallibility attacked Darwinism as heretical . The natural theology of the early 19th century was typified by William Paley 's watchmaker analogy , an argument from design still used by the creationist movement . Natural theology included a range of ideas and arguments from the outset , and when Darwin 's theory was published , ideas of theistic evolution were presented in which evolution is accepted as a secondary cause open to scientific investigation , while still holding belief in God as a first cause with a non @-@ specified role in guiding evolution and creating humans . This position has been adopted by denominations of Christianity and Judaism in line with modernist theology which views the Bible and Torah as allegorical , thus removing the conflict between evolution and religion . 
 However , in the 1920s Christian fundamentalists in the United States developed their literalist arguments against modernist theology into opposition to the teaching of evolution , with fears that Darwinism had led to German militarism and was a threat to religion and morality . This opposition developed into the creation – evolution controversy involving Christian literalists in the United States objecting to the teaching of evolution in public schools . Although early objectors dismissed evolution as contradicting their interpretation of the Bible , this argument was legally invalidated when the Supreme Court ruled in Epperson v. Arkansas in 1968 that forbidding the teaching of evolution on religious grounds violated the Establishment Clause . 
 Since then creationists have developed more nuanced objections to evolution , alleging variously that it is unscientific , infringes on creationists ' religious freedoms or that the acceptance of evolution is a religious stance . Creationists have appealed to democratic principles of fairness , arguing that evolution is controversial , and that science classrooms should therefore " Teach the Controversy . " These objections to evolution culminated in the intelligent design movement in the 1990s and early 2000s that unsuccessfully attempted to present itself as a scientific alternative to evolution . 
 = = Defining evolution = = 
 One of the main sources of confusion and ambiguity in the creation – evolution debate is the definition of evolution itself . In the context of biology , evolution is genetic changes in populations of organisms over successive generations . However , the word has a number of different meanings in different fields , from evolutionary computation to molecular evolution to sociocultural evolution to stellar and galactic evolution . It can even refer to metaphysical evolution , spiritual evolution , or any of a number of evolutionist philosophies . When biological evolution is conflated with other evolutionary processes , this can cause errors such as the claim that modern evolutionary theory says anything about abiogenesis or the Big Bang . 
 In colloquial contexts , evolution can refer to any sort of progressive development or gradual improvement , and evolution is understood as a process that results in greater quality or complexity . When misapplied to biological evolution this common meaning leads to frequent misunderstandings . For example , the idea of devolution ( " backwards " evolution ) is a result of erroneously assuming that evolution is directional or has a specific goal in mind ( cf. orthogenesis ) . In reality , the evolution of an organism has no " objective " and is only showing increasing ability of successive generations to survive and reproduce in its environment ; and increased suitability is only defined in relation to this environment . Biologists do not consider any one species , such as humans , to be more highly evolved or advanced than another . Certain sources have been criticized for indicating otherwise due to a tendency to evaluate nonhuman organisms according to anthropocentric standards rather than more objective ones . 
 Evolution also does not require that organisms become more complex . Although the history of life shows an apparent trend towards the evolution of biological complexity ; there is a question if this appearance of increased complexity is real , or if this conclusion comes from neglecting the fact that the majority of life on Earth has always consisted of prokaryotes . In this view , complexity is not a necessary consequence of evolution ; rather , it is a consequence of the specific circumstances of evolution on Earth , which frequently made greater complexity advantageous , and thus naturally selected for . Depending on the situation , organisms ' complexity can either increase , decrease , or stay the same , and all three of these trends have been observed in evolution . 
 Creationist sources frequently define evolution according to a colloquial , rather than scientific , meaning . As a result , many attempts to rebut evolution do not address the findings of evolutionary biology ( see straw man argument ) . This also means that advocates of creationism and evolutionary biologists often simply speak past each other . 
 = = Scientific acceptance = = 
 Recent objections to evolutionary theory have focused on its scientific validity , or attempting to come up with alternative ideas such as creationism to debate its findings . 
 = = = Status as a theory = = = 
 Critics of evolution assert that evolution is " just a theory , " which emphasizes that scientific theories are never absolute , or misleadingly presents it as a matter of opinion rather than of fact or evidence . This reflects a difference of the meaning of theory in a scientific context : whereas in colloquial speech a theory is a conjecture or guess , in science a theory is an explanation whose predictions have been verified by experiments or other evidence . Evolutionary theory refers to an explanation for the diversity of species and their ancestry which has met extremely high standards of scientific evidence . An example of evolution as theory is the modern synthesis of Darwinian natural selection and Mendelian inheritance . As with any scientific theory , the modern synthesis is constantly debated , tested , and refined by scientists , but there is an overwhelming consensus in the scientific community that it remains the only robust model that accounts for the known facts concerning evolution . 
 Critics also state that evolution is not a fact . In science , a fact is a verified empirical observation ; in colloquial contexts , however , a fact can simply refer to anything for which there is overwhelming evidence . For example , in common usage theories such as " the Earth revolves around the Sun " and " objects fall due to gravity " may be referred to as " facts , " even though they are purely theoretical . From a scientific standpoint , therefore , evolution may be called a " fact " for the same reason that gravity can : under the scientific definition , evolution is an observable process that occurs whenever a population of organisms genetically changes over time . Under the colloquial definition , the theory of evolution can also be called a fact , referring to this theory 's well @-@ established nature . Thus , evolution is widely considered both a theory and a fact by scientists . 
 Similar confusion is involved in objections that evolution is " unproven , " since no theory in science is known to be absolutely true , only verified by empirical evidence . This distinction is an important one in philosophy of science , as it relates to the lack of absolute certainty in all empirical claims , not just evolution . Strict proof is possible only in formal sciences such as logic and mathematics , not natural sciences ( where terms such as " validated " or " corroborated " are more appropriate ) . Thus , to say that evolution is not proven is trivially true , but no more an indictment of evolution than calling it a " theory . " The confusion arises , however , in that the colloquial meaning of proof is simply " compelling evidence , " in which case scientists would indeed consider evolution " proven . " 
 = = = Degree of acceptance = = = 
 An objection is often made in the teaching of evolution that evolution is controversial or contentious . Unlike past creationist arguments which sought to abolish the teaching of evolution altogether , this argument makes the weaker claim that evolution should be presented alongside alternative views since it is controversial , and students should be allowed to evaluate and choose between the options on their own . 
 This objection forms the basis of the " Teach the Controversy " campaign by the Discovery Institute , a think tank based in Seattle , Washington , to promote the teaching of intelligent design in U.S. public schools . This goal was a part of the Institute 's " wedge strategy , " an attempt to gradually undermine evolution and ultimately to " reverse the stifling dominance of the materialist worldview , and to replace it with a science consonant with Christian and theistic convictions . " Several subsequent attempts were made to insert intelligent design or creationism into the U.S. public school curriculum , including the failed Santorum Amendment in 2001 . 
 Scientists and U.S. courts have rejected this objection on the grounds that science is not based on appeals to popularity , but on evidence . The scientific consensus of biologists , not popular opinion or fairness , determines what is considered acceptable science , and although evolution is controversial in the public arena , it is entirely uncontroversial among experts in the field . 
 In response , creationists have disputed the level of scientific support for evolution . The Discovery Institute has gathered over 761 scientists as of August 2008 to sign A Scientific Dissent From Darwinism in order to show that there are a number of scientists who dispute what they refer to as " Darwinian evolution . " This statement did not profess outright disbelief in evolution , but expressed skepticism as to the ability of " random mutation and natural selection to account for the complexity of life . " Several counter @-@ petitions have been launched in turn , including A Scientific Support for Darwinism , which gathered over 7 @,@ 000 signatures in four days , and Project Steve , a tongue @-@ in @-@ cheek petition that has gathered the signatures of 1 @,@ 393 ( as of May 24 , 2016 ) evolution @-@ supporting scientists named " Steve " ( or any similar variation thereof — Stephen , Stephanie , Esteban , etc . ) . 
 Creationists have argued for over a century that evolution is a " theory in crisis " that will soon be overturned , based on objections that it lacks reliable evidence or violates natural laws . These objections have been rejected by most scientists , as have claims that intelligent design , or any other creationist explanation , meets the basic scientific standards that would be required to make them scientific alternatives to evolution . It is also argued that even if evidence against evolution exists , it is a false dilemma to characterize this as evidence for intelligent design . 
 A similar objection to evolution is that certain scientific authorities — mainly pre @-@ modern ones — have doubted or rejected evolution . Most commonly , it is argued that Darwin " recanted " on his deathbed , a false anecdote originating from Lady Hope 's story . These objections are generally rejected as appeals to authority . 
 = = Scientific status = = 
 A common neo @-@ creationist objection to evolution is that evolution does not adhere to normal scientific standards — that it is not genuinely scientific . It is argued that evolutionary biology does not follow the scientific method and therefore should not be taught in science classes , or at least should be taught alongside other views ( i.e. , creationism ) . These objections often deal with the very nature of evolutionary theory , the scientific method , and philosophy of science . 
 = = = Religious nature = = = 
 Creationists commonly argue against evolution on the grounds that " evolution is a religion ; it is not a science . " The purpose of this criticism is to undermine the higher ground biologists claim in debating creationists , and to reframe the debate from being between science ( evolution ) and religion ( creationism ) to being between two equally religious beliefs — or even to argue that evolution is religious while intelligent design is not . Those that oppose evolution frequently refer to supporters of evolution as " evolutionists " or " Darwinists . " 
 The arguments for evolution being a religion generally amount to arguments by analogy : it is argued that evolution and religion have one or more things in common , and that therefore evolution is a religion . Examples of claims made in such arguments are statements that evolution is based on faith , that supporters of evolution revere Darwin as a prophet , and that supporters of evolution dogmatically reject alternative suggestions out @-@ of @-@ hand . These claims have become more popular in recent years as the neo @-@ creationist movement has sought to distance itself from religion , thus giving it more reason to make use of a seemingly anti @-@ religious analogy . 
 In response , supporters of evolution have argued that no scientist 's claims , including Darwin 's , are treated as sacrosanct , as shown by the aspects of Darwin 's theory that have been rejected or revised by scientists over the years , to form first neo @-@ Darwinism and later the modern evolutionary synthesis . The claim that evolution relies on faith , often based on the creationist belief that evolution has never been observed , is likewise rejected on the grounds that evolution has strong supporting evidence , and therefore does not require faith . 
 In general , the argument that evolution is religious has been rejected on the grounds that religion is not defined by how dogmatic or zealous its adherents are , but by its spiritual or supernatural beliefs . Evolutionary supporters point out evolution is neither dogmatic nor based on faith , and they accuse creationists of equivocating between the strict definition of religion and its colloquial usage to refer to anything that is enthusiastically or dogmatically engaged in . United States courts have also rejected this objection : 
 Assuming for the purposes of argument , however , that evolution is a religion or religious tenet , the remedy is to stop the teaching of evolution , not establish another religion in opposition to it . Yet it is clearly established in the case law , and perhaps also in common sense , that evolution is not a religion and that teaching evolution does not violate the Establishment Clause . 
 A related claim is that evolution is atheistic ( see the Atheism section below ) ; creationists sometimes merge the two claims and describe evolution as an " atheistic religion " ( cf. humanism ) . This argument against evolution is also frequently generalized into a criticism of all science ; it is argued that " science is an atheistic religion , " on the grounds that its methodological naturalism is as unproven , and thus as " faith @-@ based , " as the supernatural and theistic beliefs of creationism . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 A statement is considered falsifiable if there is an observation or a test that could be made that would demonstrate that the statement is false . Statements that are not falsifiable cannot be examined by scientific investigation since they permit no tests that evaluate their accuracy . Creationists such as Henry M. Morris have claimed that any observation can be fitted into the evolutionary framework , so it is impossible to demonstrate that evolution is wrong and therefore evolution is non @-@ scientific . 
 However , evolution is considered falsifiable because it can make predictions that , were they contradicted by the evidence , would falsify evolution . Several kinds of evidence could falsify evolution , such as the fossil record showing no change over time , confirmation that mutations are prevented from accumulating , or observations showing organisms being created supernaturally or spontaneously . Many of Darwin 's ideas and assertions of fact have been falsified as evolutionary science has developed and has continued to confirm his central concepts . Despite this , creationism consists largely of unsubstantiated claims that evolution has been falsified . In contrast , creationist explanations involving the direct intervention of the supernatural in the physical world are not falsifiable , because any result of an experiment or investigation could be the unpredictable action of an omnipotent deity . 
 In 1976 , the philosopher Karl Popper said that " Darwinism is not a testable scientific theory but a metaphysical research programme . " He later changed his mind and argued that Darwin 's " theory of natural selection is difficult to test " with respect to other areas of science . 
 The most direct evidence that evolutionary theory is falsifiable may be the original words of Charles Darwin who , in chapter 6 of On the Origin of Species wrote : " If it could be demonstrated that any complex organ existed , which could not possibly have been formed by numerous , successive , slight modifications , my theory would absolutely break down . " If empirical evidence supported this instance , it would be affirmation of the creationist argument in favor of irreducible complexity . 
 In response to the <unk> criticism of evolutionary theory , numerous examples of potential ways to falsify evolution have been proposed . J. B. S. Haldane , when asked what hypothetical evidence could disprove evolution , replied " fossil rabbits in the Precambrian era . " Numerous other potential ways to falsify evolution have also been proposed . For example , the fact that humans have one fewer pair of chromosomes than the great apes offered a testable hypothesis involving the fusion or splitting of chromosomes from a common ancestor . The fusion hypothesis was confirmed in 2005 by discovery that human chromosome 2 is homologous with a fusion of two chromosomes that remain separate in other primates . Extra , inactive telomeres and centromeres remain on human chromosome 2 as a result of the fusion . The assertion of common descent could also have been disproven with the invention of DNA sequencing methods . If true , human DNA should be far more similar to chimpanzees and other great apes , than to other mammals . If not , then common descent is falsified . DNA analysis has shown that humans and chimpanzees share a large percentage of their DNA ( between 95 % to 99 @.@ 4 % depending on the measure ) . Also , the evolution of chimpanzees and humans from a common ancestor predicts a ( geologically ) recent common ancestor . Numerous transitional fossils have since been found . Hence , human evolution has passed several falsifiable tests . 
 A related claim is that natural selection is tautological . Specifically , it is often argued that the phrase " survival of the fittest " is a tautology , in that fitness is defined as ability to survive and reproduce . However , this phrase , first used by Herbert Spencer in 1864 , is rarely used by biologists . Additionally , fitness is more accurately defined as the state of possessing traits that make survival more likely ; this definition , unlike simple " survivability , " avoids being trivially true . 
 Similarly , it is argued that evolutionary theory is circular reasoning , in that evidence is interpreted as supporting evolution , but evolution is required to interpret the evidence . An example of this is the claim that geological strata are dated through the fossils they hold , but that fossils are in turn dated by the strata they are in . However , in most cases strata are not dated by their fossils , but by their position relative to other strata and by radiometric dating , and most strata were dated before the theory of evolution was formulated . 
 In his 1982 book , Abusing Science : The Case Against Creationism , philosopher of science Philip Kitcher specifically addresses the " falsifiability " question by taking into account notable philosophical critiques of Popper by Carl Gustav Hempel and Willard Van Orman Quine that reject his definition of theory as a set of falsifiable statements . As Kitcher points out , if one took a strictly <unk> view of " theory , " observations of Uranus when first discovered in 1781 would have " falsified " Isaac Newton 's celestial mechanics . Rather , people suggested that another planet influenced Uranus ' orbit — and this prediction was indeed eventually confirmed . Kitcher agrees with Popper that " there is surely something right in the idea that a science can succeed only if it can fail . " But he insists that we view scientific theories as consisting of an " elaborate collection of statements , " some of which are not falsifiable , and others — what he calls " auxiliary hypotheses , " which are . 
 According to Kitcher , good scientific theories must have three features — unity , fecundity , and independent <unk> of auxiliary hypotheses : 
 Unity 
 " A science should be unified .... Good theories consist of just one problem @-@ solving strategy , or a small family of problem @-@ solving strategies , that can be applied to a wide range of problems " ( 1982 : 47 ) . 
 Fecundity 
 " A great scientific theory , like Newton 's , opens up new areas of research ... Because a theory presents a new way of looking at the world , it can lead us to ask new questions , and so to embark on new and fruitful lines of inquiry ... Typically , a flourishing science is incomplete . At any time , it raises more questions than it can currently answer . But incompleteness is no vice . On the contrary , incompleteness is the mother of fecundity ... A good theory should be productive ; it should raise new questions and presume that those questions can be answered without giving up its problem @-@ solving strategies " ( 1982 : 47 – 48 ) . 
 Auxiliary hypotheses that are independently testable 
 " An auxiliary hypothesis ought to be testable independently of the particular problem it is introduced to solve , independently of the theory it is designed to save " ( 1982 : 46 ) ( e.g. the evidence for the existence of Neptune is independent of the anomalies in Uranus 's orbit ) . 
 Like other definitions of theories , including Popper 's , Kitcher makes it clear that a good theory includes statements that have ( in his terms ) " observational consequences . " But , like the observation of irregularities in Uranus 's orbit , falsification is only one possible consequence of an observation . The production of new hypotheses is another possible — and equally important — observational consequence . Kitcher 's account of a good theory is based not only on his understanding of how physical sciences work . He is also taking into account the way the life sciences work . 
 From Kitcher 's point of view , Darwinian theory not only meets the three conditions for a good scientific theory ; it is without question an extraordinarily successful theory : 
 The heart of Darwinian evolutionary theory is a family of problem @-@ solving strategies , related by their common employment of a particular style of historical narrative . A Darwinian history is a piece of reasoning of the following general form . The first step consists in a description of an ancestral population of organisms . The reasoning proceeds by tracing the modification of the population through subsequent generations , showing how characteristics were selected , inherited , and became prevalent . Reasoning like this can be used to answer a host of biological questions . 
 The same kind of story can be told again and again to answer all sorts of questions about all sorts of living things . Evolutionary theory is unified because so many diverse questions ... can be addressed by advancing Darwinian histories . Moreover , these narratives constantly make claims that are subject to independent check . 
 Darwin not only provided a scheme for unifying the diversity of life . He also gave a structure to our ignorance . After Darwin , it was important to resolve general issues about the presuppositions of Darwinian histories . The way in which biology should proceed had been made admirably plain , and it was clear that biologists had to tackle questions for which they had , as yet , no answers . 
 = = Evidence = = 
 Objections to the evidence that evolution occurs tend to be more concrete and specific , often involving direct analysis of evolutionary biology 's methods and claims . 
 = = = Lack of observation = = = 
 A common claim of creationists is that evolution has never been observed . Challenges to such objections often come down to debates over how evolution is defined ( see the Defining evolution section above ) . Under the conventional biological definition of evolution , it is a simple matter to observe evolution occurring . Evolutionary processes , in the form of populations changing their genetic composition from generation to generation , have been observed in different scientific contexts , including the evolution of fruit flies , mice , and bacteria in the laboratory , and of tilapia in the field . Such studies on experimental evolution , particularly those using microorganisms , are now providing important insights into how evolution occurs , especially in the case of antibiotic resistance . 
 In response to such examples , creationists specify that they are objecting only to macroevolution , not microevolution : most creationist organizations do not dispute the occurrence of short @-@ term , relatively minor evolutionary changes , such as that observed even in dog breeding . Rather , they dispute the occurrence of major evolutionary changes over long periods of time , which by definition cannot be directly observed , only inferred from <unk> processes and the traces of <unk> ones . 
 However , as biologists define macroevolution , both microevolution and macroevolution have been observed . <unk> , for example , have been directly observed many times , despite popular misconceptions to the contrary . Additionally , the modern evolutionary synthesis draws no distinction in the processes described by the theory of evolution when considering macroevolution and microevolution as the former is simply at the species level or above and the latter is below the species level . An example of this is ring species . 
 Additionally , past macroevolution can be inferred from historical traces . Transitional fossils , for example , provide plausible links between several different groups of organisms , such as Archaeopteryx linking birds and dinosaurs , or the recently discovered Tiktaalik linking fish and limbed amphibians . Creationists dispute such examples , from asserting that such fossils are hoaxes or that they belong exclusively to one group or the other , to asserting that there should be far more evidence of obvious transitional species . Darwin himself found the paucity of transitional species to be one of the greatest weaknesses of his theory : 
 Why then is not every geological formation and every stratum full of such intermediate links ? Geology assuredly does not reveal any such finely graduated organic chain ; and this , perhaps , is the most obvious and gravest objection which can be urged against my theory . The explanation lies , as I believe , in the extreme imperfection of the geological record . 
 Darwin appealed to the limited collections then available , the extreme lengths of time involved , and different rates of change with some living species differing very little from fossils of the Silurian period . In later editions he added " that the periods during which species have been undergoing modification , though very long as measured by years , have probably been short in comparison with the periods during which these same species remained without undergoing any change . " The number of clear transitional fossils has increased enormously since Darwin 's day , and this problem has been largely resolved with the advent of the theory of punctuated equilibrium , which predicts a primarily stable fossil record broken up by occasional major <unk> . 
 As more and more compelling direct evidence for inter @-@ species and species @-@ to @-@ species evolution has been gathered , creationists have redefined their understanding of what amounts to a " created kinds , " and have continued to insist that more dramatic demonstrations of evolution be experimentally produced . One version of this objection is " Were you there ? , " popularized by young Earth creationist Ken Ham . It argues that because no one except God could directly observe events in the distant past , scientific claims are just speculation or " story @-@ telling . " DNA sequences of the genomes of organisms allow an independent test of their predicted relationships , since species which diverged more recently will be more closely related genetically than species which are more distantly related ; such phylogenetic trees show a hierarchical organization within the tree of life , as predicted by common descent . 
 In fields such as astrophysics or meteorology , where direct observation or laboratory experiments are difficult or impossible , the scientific method instead relies on observation and logical inference . In such fields , the test of falsifiability is satisfied when a theory is used to predict the results of new observations . When such observations contradict a theory 's predictions , it may be revised or discarded if an alternative better explains the observed facts . For example , Newton 's theory of gravitation was replaced by Albert Einstein 's theory of general relativity when the latter was observed to more precisely predict the orbit of Mercury . 
 = = = Unreliable evidence = = = 
 A related objection is that evolution is based on unreliable evidence . This objection goes further than the less substantial " evolution isn 't proven " arguments , claiming that evolution isn 't even well @-@ evidenced . Typically , this is either based on the argument that evolution 's evidence is full of frauds and hoaxes , that current evidence for evolution is likely to be overturned as some past evidence has been , or that certain types of evidence are inconsistent and dubious . 
 Arguments against evolution 's reliability are thus often based on analyzing the history of evolutionary thought or the history of science in general . Creationists point out that in the past , major scientific revolutions have overturned theories that were at the time considered near @-@ certain . They thus claim that current evolutionary theory is likely to undergo such a revolution in the future , on the basis that it is a " theory in crisis " for one reason or another . 
 Critics of evolution commonly appeal to past scientific hoaxes such as the Piltdown Man forgery . It is argued that because scientists have been mistaken and deceived in the past about evidence for various aspects of evolution the current evidence for evolution is likely to also be based on fraud and error . Much of the evidence for evolution has been accused of being fraudulent at various times , including Archaeopteryx , peppered moth melanism , and Darwin 's finches ; these claims have been subsequently refuted . 
 It has also been claimed that certain former pieces of evidence for evolution which are now considered out @-@ of @-@ date and erroneous , such as Ernst Haeckel 's 19th @-@ century comparative drawings of embryos , used to illustrate his recapitulation theory ( " ontogeny recapitulates phylogeny " ) , were not merely errors but frauds . Molecular biologist Jonathan Wells criticizes biology textbooks by alleging that they continue to reproduce such evidence after it has been debunked . In response , the National Center for Science Education notes that none of the textbooks reviewed by Wells makes the claimed error , as Haeckel 's drawings are shown in a historical context with discussion about why they are wrong , and the accurate modern drawings and photos used in the textbooks are misrepresented by Wells . 
 = = = Unreliable chronology = = = 
 Creationists claim that evolution relies on certain types of evidence that do not give reliable information about the past . For example , it is argued that radiometric dating technique of evaluating a material 's age based on the radioactive decay rates of certain isotopes generates inconsistent and thus unreliable results . Radiocarbon dating based on the carbon @-@ 14 isotope has been particularly criticized . It is argued that radiometric decay relies on a number of unwarranted assumptions such as the principle of uniformitarianism , consistent decay rates , or rocks acting as closed systems . Such arguments have been dismissed by scientists on the grounds that independent methods have confirmed the reliability of radiometric dating as a whole ; additionally , different radiometric dating methods and techniques have independently confirmed each other 's results . 
 Another form of this objection is that fossil evidence is not reliable . This is based on a much wider range of claims . These include that there are too many " gaps " in the fossil record , that fossil @-@ dating is circular ( see the <unk> section above ) , or that certain fossils , such as <unk> fossils , are seemingly " out of place . " Examination by geologists have found <unk> fossils to be consistent with in situ formation . It is argued that certain features of evolution support creationism 's catastrophism ( cf . Great Flood ) , rather than evolution 's <unk> punctuated equilibrium , which some assert is an ad hoc theory to explain the fossil gaps . 
 = = <unk> = = 
 Some of the oldest and most common objections to evolution dispute whether evolution can truly account for all the apparent complexity and order in the natural world . It is argued that evolution is too unlikely or otherwise lacking to account for various aspects of life , and therefore that an intelligence , such as God of the Abrahamic religions , must at the very least be appealed to for those specific features . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 A common objection to evolution is that it is simply too unlikely for life , in its complexity and apparent " design , " to have arisen " by chance . " It is argued that the odds of life having arisen without a deliberate intelligence guiding it are so astronomically low that it is unreasonable not to infer an intelligent designer from the natural world , and specifically from the diversity of life . A more extreme version of this argument is that evolution cannot create complex structures ( see the Creation of complex structures section below ) . The idea that it is simply too implausible for life to have evolved is often wrongly encapsulated with a quotation that the " probability of life originating on Earth is no greater than the chance that a hurricane , sweeping through a scrapyard , would have the luck to assemble a Boeing 747 " — a claim attributed to astrophysicist Fred Hoyle and known as Hoyle 's fallacy . Hoyle was a Darwinist , atheist and anti @-@ theist , but advocated the theory of panspermia , in which abiogenesis begins in outer space and primitive life on Earth is held to have arrived via natural dispersion . 
 Views superficially similar , but unrelated to Hoyle 's , are thus invariably justified with arguments from analogy . The basic idea of this argument for a designer is the teleological argument , an argument for the existence of God based on the perceived order or purposefulness of the universe . A common way of using this as an objection to evolution is by appealing to the 18th @-@ century philosopher William Paley 's watchmaker analogy , which argues that certain natural phenomena are analogical to a watch ( in that they are ordered , or complex , or purposeful ) , which means that , like a watch , they must have been designed by a " watchmaker " — an intelligent agent . This argument forms the core of intelligent design , a neo @-@ creationist movement seeking to establish certain variants of the design argument as legitimate science , rather than as philosophy or theology , and have them be taught alongside evolution . 
 This objection is fundamentally an argument by lack of imagination , or argument from incredulity : a certain explanation is seen as being counterintuitive , and therefore an alternate , more intuitive explanation is appealed to instead . Supporters of evolution generally respond by arguing that evolution is not based on " chance , " but on predictable chemical interactions : natural processes , rather than supernatural beings , are the " designer . " Although the process involves some random elements , it is the non @-@ random selection of survival @-@ enhancing genes that drives evolution along an ordered trajectory . The fact that the results are ordered and seem " designed " is no more evidence for a supernatural intelligence than the appearance of complex natural phenomena ( e.g. snowflakes ) . It is also argued that there is insufficient evidence to make statements about the plausibility or implausibility of abiogenesis , that certain structures demonstrate poor design , and that the implausibility of life evolving exactly as it did is no more evidence for an intelligence than the implausibility of a deck of cards being shuffled and dealt in a certain random order . 
 It has also been noted that arguments against some form of life arising " by chance " are really objections to <unk> abiogenesis , not to evolution . Indeed , arguments against " evolution " are based on the misconception that abiogenesis is a component of , or necessary precursor to , evolution . Similar objections sometimes conflate the Big Bang with evolution . 
 Christian apologist and philosopher Alvin Plantinga , a supporter of intelligent design , has formalized and revised the improbability argument as the evolutionary argument against naturalism , which asserts that it is irrational to reject a supernatural , intelligent creator because the apparent probability of certain faculties evolving is so low . Specifically , Plantinga claims that evolution cannot account for the rise of reliable reasoning faculties . Plantinga argues that whereas a God would be expected to create beings with reliable reasoning faculties , evolution would be just as likely to lead to unreliable ones , meaning that if evolution is true , it is irrational to trust whatever reasoning one relies on to conclude that it is true . This novel epistemological argument has been criticized similarly to other probabilistic design arguments . It has also been argued that rationality , if conducive to survival , is more likely to be selected for than irrationality , making the natural development of reliable cognitive faculties more likely than unreliable ones . 
 = = = Unexplained aspects of the natural world = = = 
 Biochemist Michael Behe has argued that current evolutionary theory cannot account for certain complex structures , particularly in microbiology . On this basis , Behe argues that such structures were " purposely arranged by an intelligent agent . " 
 In addition to complex structures and systems , among the phenomena that critics variously claim evolution cannot explain are consciousness , hominid intelligence , instincts , emotions , metamorphosis , photosynthesis , homosexuality , music , language , religion , morality , and altruism ( see altruism in animals ) . Most of these , such as hominid intelligence , instinct , emotion , photosynthesis , language , and altruism , have been well @-@ explained by evolution , while others remain mysterious , or only have preliminary explanations . However , supporters of evolution contend that no alternative explanation has been able to adequately explain the biological origin of these phenomena either . 
 Creationists argue against evolution on the grounds that it cannot explain certain non @-@ evolutionary processes , such as abiogenesis , the Big Bang , or the meaning of life . In such instances , evolution is being redefined to refer to the entire history of the universe , and it is argued that if one aspect of the universe is seemingly inexplicable , the entire body of scientific theories must be baseless . At this point , objections leave the arena of evolutionary biology and become general scientific or philosophical disputes . 
 Astronomers Fred Hoyle and Chandra Wickramasinghe have argued in favor of cosmic ancestry , and against abiogenesis and evolution . 
 = = Impossibility = = 
 This class of objections is more radical than the above , claiming that a major aspect of evolution is not merely unscientific or implausible , but rather impossible , because it contradicts some other law of nature or is constrained in such a way that it cannot produce the biological diversity of the world . 
 = = = Creation of complex structures = = = 
 Living things have fantastically intricate features — at the anatomical , cellular and molecular level — that could not function if they were any less complex or sophisticated . The only prudent conclusion is that they are the products of intelligent design , not evolution . 
 Modern evolutionary theory posits that all biological systems must have evolved incrementally , through a combination of natural selection and genetic drift . Both Darwin and his early detractors recognized the potential problems that could arise for his theory of natural selection if the lineage of organs and other biological features could not be accounted for by gradual , step @-@ by @-@ step changes over successive generations ; if all the intermediary stages between an initial organ and the organ it will become are not all improvements upon the original , it will be impossible for the later organ to develop by the process of natural selection alone . Complex organs such as the eye had been presented by William Paley as exemplifying the need for design by God , and anticipating early criticisms that the evolution of the eye and other complex organs seemed impossible , Darwin noted that : 
 [ R ] <unk> tells me , that if numerous gradations from a perfect and complex eye to one very imperfect and simple , each grade being useful to its possessor , can be shown to exist ; if further , the eye does vary ever so slightly , and the variations be inherited , which is certainly the case ; and if any variation or modification in the organ be ever useful to an animal under changing conditions of life , then the difficulty of believing that a perfect and complex eye could be formed by natural selection , though insuperable by our imagination , can hardly be considered real . 
 Similarly , ethologist and evolutionary biologist Richard Dawkins said on the topic of the evolution of the feather in an interview for the television program The Atheism Tapes : 
 There 's got to be a series of advantages all the way in the feather . If you can 't think of one , then that 's your problem not natural selection 's problem ... It 's perfectly possible feathers began as fluffy extensions of reptilian scales to act as insulators ... The earliest feathers might have been a different approach to hairiness among reptiles keeping warm . 
 Creationist arguments have been made such as " What use is half an eye ? " and " What use is half a wing ? " . Research has confirmed that the natural evolution of the eye and other intricate organs is entirely feasible . Creationist claims have persisted that such complexity evolving without a designer is inconceivable , however , and this objection to evolution has been refined in recent years as the more sophisticated irreducible complexity argument of the intelligent design movement , formulated by Michael Behe . 
 Irreducible complexity is the idea that certain biological systems cannot be broken down into their constituent parts and remain functional , and therefore that they could not have evolved naturally from less complex or complete systems . Whereas past arguments of this nature generally relied on macroscopic organs , Behe 's primary examples of irreducible complexity have been cellular and biochemical in nature . He has argued that the components of systems such as the blood clotting cascade , the immune system , and the bacterial flagellum are so complex and interdependent that they could not have evolved from simpler systems . 
 In fact , my argument for intelligent design is open to direct experimental rebuttal . Here is a thought experiment that makes the point clear . In Darwin 's Black Box ( Behe 1996 ) I claimed that the bacterial flagellum was irreducibly complex and so required deliberate intelligent design . The flip side of this claim is that the flagellum can 't be produced by natural selection acting on random mutation , or any other unintelligent process . To falsify such a claim , a scientist could go into the laboratory , place a bacterial species lacking a flagellum under some selective pressure ( for mobility , say ) , grow it for ten thousand generations , and see if a <unk> any equally complex <unk> produced . If that happened , my claims would be neatly disproven . 
 In the years since Behe proposed irreducible complexity , new developments and advances in biology , such as an improved understanding of the evolution of flagella , have already undermined these arguments . The idea that seemingly irreducibly complex systems cannot evolve has been refuted through evolutionary mechanisms , such as exaptation ( the adaptation of organs for entirely new functions ) and the use of " scaffolding , " which are initially necessary features of a system that later degenerate when they are no longer required . Potential evolutionary pathways have been provided for all of the systems Behe used as examples of irreducible complexity . 
 = = = = Cambrian explosion complexity argument = = = = 
 The Cambrian explosion was the relatively rapid appearance around 542 million years ago of most major animal phyla as demonstrated in the fossil record , and many more phyla now extinct . This was accompanied by major diversification of other organisms . Prior to the Cambrian explosion most organisms were simple , composed of individual cells occasionally organized into colonies . Over the following 70 or 80 million years , the rate of diversification accelerated by an order of magnitude and the diversity of life began to resemble that of today , although they did not resemble the species of today . 
 The basic problem with this is that natural selection calls for the slow accumulation of changes , where a new phyla would take longer than a new class which would take longer than a new order , which would take longer than a new family , which would take longer than a new genus would take longer than emergence of a new species but the apparent occurrence of high @-@ level taxa without precedents is perhaps implying unusual evolutionary mechanisms . 
 There is general consensus that many factors helped trigger the Cambrian explosion , but there is no generally accepted consensus about the combination and the Cambrian explosion continues to be an area of controversy and research over why so rapid , why at the phylum level , why so many phyla then and none since , and even if the apparent fossil record is accurate . 
 An example of opinions involving the commonly cited rise in oxygen Great Oxidation Event from biologist PZ Myers summarizes : " What it was was environmental changes , in particular the bioturbation revolution caused by the evolution of worms that released buried nutrients , and the steadily increasing oxygen content of the atmosphere that allowed those nutrients to fuel growth ; ecological competition , or a kind of arms race , that gave a distinct selective advantage to novelties that allowed species to occupy new niches ; and the evolution of developmental mechanisms that enabled multicellular organisms to generate new <unk> readily . " The increase in molecular oxygen ( O2 ) also may have allowed the formation of the protective ozone layer ( O3 ) that helps shield Earth from lethal UV radiation from the Sun . 
 = = = Creation of information = = = 
 Another new , and increasingly common , objection of creationists to evolution is that evolutionary mechanisms such as mutation cannot generate new information . Creationists such as William A. Dembski , Werner <unk> , and Lee Spetner have attempted to use information theory to dispute evolution . Dembski has argued that life demonstrates specified complexity , and that evolution without an intelligent agent cannot account for the generation of information that would be required to produce specified complexity . 
 These claims have been widely rejected by the scientific community ; new information is regularly generated in evolution , whenever a novel mutation or gene duplication arises . Dramatic examples of entirely new , unique traits arising through mutation have been observed in recent years , such as the evolution of nylon @-@ eating bacteria , which developed new enzymes to efficiently digest a material that never existed before the modern era . In fact , when an organism is considered together with the environment it evolved in , there is no need to account for the creation of information . The information in the genome forms a record of how it was possible to survive in a particular environment . It is not created , but rather gathered from the environment through research — by trial and error , as mutating organisms either reproduce or fail . 
 A related argument against evolution is that most mutations are harmful . However , the vast majority of mutations are neutral , and the minority of mutations which are beneficial or harmful are often situational ; a mutation that is harmful in one environment may be helpful in another . 
 = = = Violation of the second law of thermodynamics = = = 
 Another objection is that evolution violates the second law of thermodynamics . Though the law applies to all systems , in the case of a closed one it states , " the entropy of an isolated system not in equilibrium will tend to increase over time , approaching a maximum value at equilibrium " . In other words , an ideal isolated system 's entropy ( a measure of the dispersal of energy in a physical system so that it is not available to do mechanical work ) will tend to increase or stay the same , not decrease . Creationists argue that evolution violates this physical law by requiring a decrease in entropy , or disorder , over time . 
 This claim is based on a manifestation of the law only applicable to isolated systems , which do not exchange matter or energy with their surroundings . Organisms , in contrast , are open systems , as they constantly exchange energy and matter with their environment : for example animals eat food and excrete waste , and radiate and absorb heat . Similarly , the Earth absorbs energy from the Sun and emits energy back into space . The Sun @-@ Earth @-@ space system does not violate the second law , because the enormous increase in entropy due to the Sun and Earth radiating into space dwarfs the local decrease in entropy caused by the existence and evolution of self @-@ organizing life . 
 Since the second law of thermodynamics has a precise mathematical definition , this argument can be analyzed quantitatively . This was done by physicist Daniel F. Styer , who concluded : " Quantitative estimates of the entropy involved in biological evolution demonstrate that there is no conflict between evolution and the second law of thermodynamics . " 
 In a published letter to the editor of The Mathematical Intelligencer titled " How anti @-@ evolutionists abuse mathematics , " mathematician Jason <unk> stated : 
 The fact is that natural forces routinely lead to local decreases in entropy . Water freezes into ice and fertilised eggs turn into babies . Plants use sunlight to convert carbon dioxide and water into sugar and oxygen , but [ we do ] not invoke divine intervention to explain the process [ ... ] thermodynamics offers nothing to dampen our confidence in Darwinism . 
 = = Moral implications = = 
 Other common objections to evolution allege that evolution leads to objectionable results , including bad beliefs , behaviors , and events . It is argued that the teaching of evolution degrades values , undermines morals , and fosters irreligion or atheism . These may be considered appeals to consequences ( a form of logical fallacy ) , as the potential ramifications of belief in evolutionary theory have nothing to do with its objective empirical reality . 
 = = = Humans as animals = = = 
 In biological classification humans are animals , a basic point which has been known for more than 2 @,@ 000 years . The creationist J. <unk> @-@ Short asserted in Creation magazine that if people are taught evolution they can be expected to behave like animals : since animals behave in all sorts of different ways , this is meaningless . In evolutionary terms , humans are able to acquire knowledge and change their behaviour to meet social standards , so humans behave in the manner of other humans . 
 = = = Social effects = = = 
 In 1917 , Vernon Kellogg published Headquarters Nights : A Record of Conversations and Experiences at the Headquarters of the German Army in France and Belgium , which asserted that German intellectuals were totally committed to might @-@ makes @-@ right due to " whole @-@ hearted acceptance of the worst of Neo @-@ Darwinism , the <unk> of natural selection applied rigorously to human life and society and Kultur . " This strongly influenced the politician William Jennings Bryan , who saw Darwinism as a moral threat to America and campaigned against evolutionary theory ; his campaign culminated in the Scopes Trial , which effectively prevented teaching of evolution in most public schools until the 1950s . 
 Some creationists claim that perceived social ills like crime , teenage pregnancies , homosexuality , abortion , immorality , wars , and genocide are caused by a belief in evolution . R. Albert Mohler , Jr . , president of the Southern Baptist Theological Seminary in Louisville , Kentucky , wrote August 8 , 2005 , in NPR 's Taking Issue essay series , that " Debates over education , abortion , environmentalism , homosexuality and a host of other issues are really debates about the origin — and thus the meaning — of human life . ... evolutionary theory stands at the base of moral relativism and the rejection of traditional morality . " 
 Henry M. Morris , engineering professor and founder of the Creation Research Society and the Institute of Creation Research , claims that evolution was part of a pagan religion that emerged after the Tower of Babel , was part of Plato 's and Aristotle 's philosophies , and was responsible for everything from war to pornography to the breakup of the nuclear family . 
 Rev. D. James Kennedy of The Center for Reclaiming America for Christ and Coral Ridge Ministries claims that Darwin was responsible for Adolf Hitler 's atrocities . In Kennedy 's documentary , and the accompanying pamphlet with the same title , Darwin 's Deadly Legacy , Kennedy states that " To put it simply , no Darwin , no Hitler . " In his efforts to expose the " harmful effects that evolution is still having on our nation , our children , and our world , " Kennedy also states that , " We have had 150 years of the theory of Darwinian evolution , and what has it brought us ? Whether Darwin intended it or not , millions of deaths , the destruction of those deemed inferior , the devaluing of human life , increasing hopelessness . " The Discovery Institute 's Center for Science and Culture fellow Richard <unk> has made similar claims , as have other creationists . The claim was central to the documentary film Expelled : No Intelligence Allowed ( 2008 ) promoting intelligent design creationism . The Anti @-@ Defamation League describes such claims as outrageous misuse of the Holocaust and its imagery , and as trivializing the " ... many complex factors that led to the mass extermination of European Jewry . Hitler did not need Darwin or evolution to devise his heinous plan to exterminate the Jewish people , and Darwin and evolutionary theory cannot explain Hitler 's genocidal madness . Moreover , anti @-@ Semitism existed long before Darwin ever wrote a word . " 
 Young Earth creationist Kent Hovind blames communism , socialism , World War I , World War II , racism , the Holocaust , Stalin 's war crimes , the Vietnam War , and Pol Pot 's Killing Fields on evolution , as well as the increase in crime , unwed mothers , and other social ills . Hovind 's son Eric Hovind claims that evolution is responsible for tattoos , body piercing , premarital sex , unwed births , sexually transmitted diseases ( STDs ) , divorce , and child abuse . 
 Supporters of evolution dismiss such criticisms as counterfactual , and some argue that the opposite seems to be the case . A study published by the author and illustrator Gregory S. Paul found that religious beliefs , including belief in creationism and disbelief in evolution , are positively correlated with social ills like crime . The Barna Group surveys find that Christians and non @-@ Christians in the U.S. have similar divorce rates , and the highest divorce rates in the U.S. are among Baptists and Pentecostals , both sects which reject evolution and embrace creationism . 
 Michael Shermer argued in Scientific American in October 2006 that evolution supports concepts like family values , avoiding lies , fidelity , moral codes and the rule of law . He goes on to suggest that evolution gives more support to the notion of an omnipotent creator , rather than a tinkerer with limitations based on a human model , the more common image subscribed to by creationists . Careful analysis of the creationist charges that evolution has led to moral relativism and the Holocaust yields the conclusion that these charges appear to be highly suspect . Such analyses conclude that the origins of the Holocaust are more likely to be found in historical Christian anti @-@ Semitism than in evolution . 
 Evolution has been used to justify Social Darwinism , the exploitation of " lesser breeds without the law " by " superior races , " particularly in the nineteenth century . Strong , typically European , nations successfully expanded their empires , and as such , these strong nations could be said to have " survived " in the struggle for dominance . With this attitude , Europeans , with the exception of Christian missionaries , seldom adopted the customs and languages of local people under their empires . 
 = = = Atheism = = = 
 Another charge leveled at evolutionary theory by creationists is that belief in evolution is either tantamount to atheism , or conducive to atheism . It is commonly claimed that all proponents of evolutionary theory are " materialistic atheists . " On the other hand , Davis A. Young argues that creation science itself is harmful to Christianity because its bad science will turn more away than it recruits . Young asks , " Can we seriously expect non @-@ Christians to develop a respect for Christianity if we insist on teaching the brand of science that creationism brings with it ? " However , evolution neither requires nor rules out the existence of a supernatural being . Philosopher Robert T. Pennock makes the comparison that evolution is no more atheistic than plumbing . H. Allen Orr , professor of biology at University of Rochester , notes that : 
 Of the five founding fathers of twentieth @-@ century evolutionary biology — Ronald Fisher , Sewall Wright , J. B. S. Haldane , Ernst Mayr , and Theodosius Dobzhansky — one was a devout Anglican who preached sermons and published articles in church magazines , one a practicing Unitarian , one a dabbler in Eastern mysticism , one an apparent atheist , and one a member of the Russian Orthodox Church and the author of a book on religion and science . 
 In addition , a wide range of religions have reconciled a belief in a supernatural being with evolution . <unk> Matsumura of the National Center for Science Education found that " of Americans in the twelve largest Christian denominations , 89 @.@ 6 % belong to churches that support evolution education . " These churches include the " United Methodist Church , National Baptist Convention USA , Evangelical Lutheran Church in America , Presbyterian Church ( USA ) , National Baptist Convention of America , African Methodist Episcopal Church , the Roman Catholic Church , the Episcopal Church , and others . " A poll in 2000 done for People for the American Way found that 70 % of the American public felt that evolution was compatible with a belief in God . Only 48 % of the people polled could choose the correct definition of evolution from a list , however . 
 One poll reported in the journal Nature showed that among American scientists ( across various disciplines ) , about 40 percent believe in both evolution and an active deity ( theistic evolution ) . This is similar to the results reported for surveys of the general American public . Also , about 40 percent of the scientists polled believe in a God that answers prayers , and believe in immortality . While about 55 % of scientists surveyed were atheists , agnostics , or nonreligious theists , atheism is far from universal among scientists who support evolution , or among the general public that supports evolution . Very similar results were reported from a 1997 Gallup Poll of the American public and scientists . 
 Traditionalists still object to the idea that diversity in life , including human beings , arose through natural processes without a need for supernatural intervention , and they argue against evolution on the basis that it contradicts their literal interpretation of creation myths about separate " kinds . " However , many religions , such as Catholicism , have reconciled their beliefs with evolution through theistic evolution . 
 = I 'm Going to Tell You a Secret ( album ) = 
 I 'm Going to Tell You a Secret is the first live album by American singer @-@ songwriter Madonna , containing songs from the documentary of same name . The film chronicled the behind @-@ the @-@ scenes of Madonna 's Re @-@ Invention World Tour ( 2004 ) , and was directed by Jonas Åkerlund . The album was released on June 20 , 2006 , in a two @-@ disc format , a CD with 13 songs from the show plus a demo from her tenth studio album Confessions on a Dance Floor ( 2005 ) , and a DVD with the documentary film . The documentary and the album were also released as digital download to the iTunes Store . 
 The live CD consisted of two pre @-@ recorded tracks , " The Beast Within " and " Hollywood " while extras on the DVD included 12 deleted scenes from the documentary . The release received positive response from critics and was nominated for a Grammy Award at the 2007 show in the category of Best Long Form Music Video . It peaked within the top @-@ ten of the album charts in Belgium , Canada , France , Germany , Italy and Switzerland , while the DVD topped the video charts in Australia , Spain and the United States . 
 = = Background and release = = 
 The Re @-@ Invention World Tour was the sixth concert tour by Madonna . It supported her ninth studio album American Life , and visited North America and Europe . Madonna was inspired to create the tour , after taking part in an art installation called X @-@ STaTIC PRo = CeSS , directed by photographer Steven Klein . She incorporated the images from the installation in the tour , whose name was in reality a dig at Madonna 's critics . A number of songs were rehearsed for the tour , with twenty @-@ four of them making the final setlist . The tour was divided into five segments : French Baroque @-@ Marie Antionette Revival , Military @-@ Army , Circus @-@ Cabaret , Acoustic and Scottish @-@ Tribal . The tour garnered positive reception from contemporary critics . The tour was chronicled in the documentary titled I 'm Going to Tell You a Secret . Originally called The Re @-@ Invented Process in reference to the world tour it documents and the exhibition , it was filmed during Madonna 's visit to North America and Europe during May 24 to September 14 , 2004 , and was directed by Jonas Åkerlund . Critical response towards the documentary was mixed , with one group of reviewers complimenting the live performances from the tour and the scenes involving her children and family , while others criticized the self @-@ indulgent nature of the documentary and the preaching nature of Madonna 's commentary in the film . 
 I 'm Going to Tell You a Secret the album was released on June 20 , 2006 , in a two @-@ disc format , a CD with 14 songs from the show and a DVD with the documentary film . The album includes the original demo version of " I Love New York " , a track later found on her 2005 album Confessions on a Dance Floor in a dance form . The track was originally recorded as a rock song before being re @-@ recorded . The documentary and the album was also released as digital download to the iTunes Store . Originally , Warner Bros. announced that the " American Life " director 's cut music video would be included as an extra with the documentary , with the press release also including this information . The music video was not included and no reason was given for the omission . 
 The DVD was shot in an aspect ratio of 1 @.@ 78 : 1 on a single sided , double layered disc , with the image being enhanced for 16 × 9 televisions . The black @-@ and @-@ white visuals had mixed a lot of visual styles according to Jacobson , and had grains and erratic focus . The non @-@ concert color sequences followed the same style , but the performance sequences were in high definition . Backgrounds were dark and Jacobson noted that the color black appeared taut and full , while the few low @-@ light bits came across well . The 5 @.@ 1 surround sound was mostly utilized during the live performance sequences . The live CD consisted of two pre @-@ recorded tracks , " The Beast Within " and " Hollywood " . There are 12 deleted scenes , spanning a total of 15 minutes and 38 seconds ; scenes include Madonna on a bike , working with vocal coach Joan Leder , affinity for French and comical sequences featuring Price and musician Steve Sidelnyk . The cover was a shot of Madonna from her performance of " Frozen " on the show , and the packaging included a 20 page booklet . 
 = = Commercial performance = = 
 In the United States , the release debuted at number 33 on the Billboard 200 with 25 @,@ 000 copies sold in its first week . It also debuted at number three on the Top Soundtracks chart , number 13 on the Top Internet Albums chart and debuted atop the Top Music Videos chart . The next week , the album slipped down to number 107 on the Billboard 200 , while holding atop the Top Music Videos chart . According to Nielsen SoundScan , the album has sold 85 @,@ 000 copies in the US as of August 2010 . In Canada , the album debuted and peaked at number four on the Canadian Albums Chart . 
 The CD + DVD version of I 'm Going to Tell You a Secret was eligible to chart on both albums and DVD charts . However , in some countries , both versions were combined and appeared on just one chart , as in Australia , where all versions counted towards the DVD chart and the release was ineligible for the albums chart . On the Australian DVD Chart , the album debuted at the top of the chart for the issue dated June 26 , 2006 , and was certified platinum by the Australian Recording Industry Association ( ARIA ) for shipment of 15 @,@ 000 copies of the release . It held the top spot for another week . In New Zealand it debuted at number eight on the RIANZ Music DVD Chart , next week falling off . 
 In the United Kingdom , I 'm Going to Tell You a Secret debuted at number 18 on the UK Albums Chart , with first week sales of 14 @,@ 449 copies . It was Madonna 's 17th release to chart there , all previous releases having achieved top @-@ five placement on the album chart . The release was certified gold by the British Phonographic Industry ( BPI ) for shipment of 25 @,@ 000 copies . In France , the release entered the French Albums Chart at its peak position of number eight . After three months , it was certified gold by the Syndicat National de l 'Édition Phonographique ( SNEP ) for shipment of 75 @,@ 000 copies of the album . The CD + DVD also reached a peak of eight on he German Albums Chart and has been certified gold by the Bundesverband Musikindustrie ( BVMI ) for more than 25 @,@ 000 units shipped . Across Europe the album reached the top @-@ ten in Belgium , Denmark , Hungary , Portugal and Switzerland . On the Pan @-@ European Top 100 Albums chart , it reached a peak of number five , and also reached the top of the charts in Italy and Mexico . 
 = = Critical response = = 
 Stephen Thomas Erlewine from Allmusic felt that the reworking of Madonna 's older hits like " Into the Groove " and " Holiday " gave them a campy , Eurotrash feel like the songs on Confessions on a Dance Floor ; he added that " [ the reworkings ] help give the disc a cohesive feel even if the live performance , like the album it 's hawking , is kind of humorless . That said , as Madonna 's first live CD , I 'm Going to Tell You a Secret is strong and entertaining , and even if the excessive minutiae on the accompanying DVD means only hardcore fans will sit through its two hours , it 's also quite well done . " Sterdan from Jam ! complimented the CD section of the release , saying that " Thankfully , the CD takes up the slack , delivering more than an hour of newer fare like ' American Life ' and ' Music ' , peppered with oldies like ' Vogue ' , ' Holiday ' and ' Like a Prayer ' . Next time Madonna wants to share a secret , she should just leave the cameras at home . " Conversely , Sébastien <unk> from Canoe.ca website preferred the DVD over the CD , saying that the disc was not " absolutely necessary " but could understand the business logic behind adding the CD to the release . 
 Barry Walters from Rolling Stone said that the live CD proved that Madonna is a better singer . A reviewer from The Buffalo News was impressed with the release , saying that " This is exactly what you 'd expect it to be – a live document of Madonna 's most recent tour , which means , essentially , a tour through the dance @-@ based pop music of the past 20 years . " Colin Jacobson from the DVD Movie Guide website explained that " though parts of I 'm Going to Tell You a Secret frustrate , it remains a reasonably entertaining program . It probably will be most interesting for Madonna 's most serious fans , though . Those in search of the broader titillation of Truth or Dare will leave disappointed . " He added that most of the shots in the DVD seemed accurate , time @-@ and @-@ again a softness crept up in the wide angle shots . Jacobson found the performance s shots to be compelling and gave the sound of the DVD a rating of B + . The album was nominated for a Grammy Award at the 49th ceremony in the category Best Long Form Music Video . 
 = = Track listing and formats = = 
 = = = Formats = = = 
 CD / DVD – double disc digipak edition containing the live DVD and the live CD 
 DVD – DVD keep case packed with the DVD and the live CD 
 iTunes Digital download – The full 2 @-@ hour documentary in digital version 
 Additional notes : 
 Recorded live in Paris on September 4 – 5 , 2004 by Effanel Music . 
 Mixed by Stuart Price . 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Credits adapted from I 'm Going to Tell You a Secret information from Allmusic . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = Coat of arms of Munich = 
 The coat of arms of Munich ( Münchner Wappen ) depicts a young monk dressed in black holding a red book . It has existed in a similar form since the 13th century , though at certain points in its history it has not depicted the central figure of the monk at all . As the German name for Munich , München , means of Monks , the monk in this case is a self @-@ explanatory symbol ( canting arms ) who represents the city of Munich . 
 Appearing on a document of May 28 , 1239 , the oldest seal of Munich has a picture of a monk wearing an open hood . While all seal impressions show the monk with the book in one hand and three outstretched fingers in the other , the monk has varied slightly , appearing in profile , then later full @-@ faced and bare @-@ headed . By the 19th century the figure was portrayed as youthful and became known as the Münchner Kindl or Munich Child . The coat of arms in its current form was created in 1957 and is still an important symbol of the Bavarian state capital . 
 = = The Monk = = 
 As the German name for Munich , i.e. München , means " of Monks " , the monk in this case is a self @-@ explanatory symbol who represents the city of Munich . The figure is portrayed wearing a golden trimmed black cowl with a black hood and red shoes . The right hand is raised and the left carries a red book . 
 The open right hand of the monk is interpreted as an oath @-@ making gesture , or a blessing gesture in Christian tradition . The red book in the left hand refers to the oath book of the city ( in accordance with the gesture of the right hand ) , or the municipal law book which is bounded in red and has been handed down since 1365 . Another interpretation is that it is a gospel book . 
 When the Munich town administration developed a constitution of its council , a seal was necessary for the purposes of asserting the authenticity of town @-@ council documents . Appearing on a document of May 28 , 1239 , the oldest seal of Munich has a picture of a monk wearing an open hood . While all seal impressions show the monk with the book in one hand and three outstretched fingers in the other , the monk has varied slightly , appearing in profile , then later full @-@ faced and bare @-@ headed . The monk as a sole heraldic figure can be found on a seal dating from the year 1304 , and on flags of the city since the middle of the 14th century . Colourful representations of the town 's coat of arms stem from the 15th century . 
 = = = Münchner Kindl = = = 
 In the course of the few centuries up until the current version of 1957 , the coat of arms has undergone some distinctly visible changes . While some 15th @-@ century portrayals already show a child figure instead of the monk , the monk in representations onwards began to lose its serious disposition , with curly hair and a more youthful @-@ looking face . By the 18th century and especially the 19th century , the monk had been minimised into the Münchner Kindl , Bavarian for Munich Child , a reference to the figure first documented in 1727 , although it is not clear when it appeared on the coat of arms for the first time or who coined the term . The transformation was brought about by artists such as sculptors and painters as well as copper and seal engravers , as opposed to a legal order . 
 In the second half of the nineteenth century , local artists also supplemented the figure with items such as radishes , pretzels , laurel wreaths and foaming beer steins . The symbol diversely appears in numerous places such as on manhole covers , beer steins and the top of the tower of the town hall . While the symbol as a man through being a monk was previously clear , its gender has become ambiguous since being designated the Kindl . One interpretation is that it is simply genderless , however in the 1920s a female inclination became apparent , and portrayals in person are to this day by young women . 
 = = History = = 
 The Munich coat of arms is verifiable from seals in 1239 and 1268 . These seals show a monk in a gate , above which is in eagle , referring to the Bishop of Freising . The city belonged to him and this was probably derived from his coat of arms . From 1313 , the city was in possession of the Wittelsbach Dukes and the eagle was replaced with a lion , a symbol of the old Bavarian and Palatine Wittelsbachs since the <unk> of Duke Ludwig in 1214 . 
 = = = Coat of arms after ratification by Max I. Joseph = = = 
 In 1808 , King Maximilian I Joseph granted the city a historicist city emblem depicting a classical portal , atop which the King 's crown lies . A golden lion sits in the gate 's threshold with a sword in one paw and a shield with the letter " M " in the other . As an enlightened monarch , Max I. Joseph wanted the city 's symbol to show its culture and at the same time dispel the stereotype of the " <unk> " , or the <unk> of the monks . However , the township decided against the complete elimination of the historical reference to the monk and thus in 1818 the M was replaced with the previous monk 's head design . 
 = = = Coat of arms after ratification by Ludwig I = = = 
 In 1834 , King Ludwig I granted the city its old coat of arms again in the form of large and small crests . These embodied the small crest seal of 1304 and the large one of 1323 . The 1835 coat of arms had a blue background , though this was later corrected to argent under Ludwig II in 1865 . The background was rarely changed . One example of its occurrence , however , was when or was used in the 16th century instead . 
 = = = Coat of arms in the Third Reich = = = 
 From 1936 to 1945 , the lion was once again replaced by an eagle , only this time the one of the Nazi party , the Reichsadler . Deemed the <unk> der Bewegung ( Capital of the Movement ) , Munich was a significant place in terms of the Nazi ideology . The city was home to the NSDAP headquarters , the Beer Hall Putsch and also saw the establishment of Dachau , the first Nazi concentration camp . Post @-@ war designs were not pursued until 1949 . 
 = = = New coat of arms = = = 
 Both a small and large coat of arms existed from 1949 until 1957 based on representations of them prior to 1936 . In 1957 both the large and small city coat of arms were newly arranged by the designer Eduard Ege . At the same time , the city council set the resolution on the December 17 , 1957 that the large one was no longer for official use but only for particular representative purposes . 
 = Geoffroy 's spider monkey = 
 Geoffroy 's spider monkey ( Ateles geoffroyi ) , also known as the black @-@ handed spider monkey , is a species of spider monkey , a type of New World monkey , from Central America , parts of Mexico and possibly a small portion of Colombia . There are at least five subspecies . Some primatologists classify the black @-@ headed spider monkey ( A. fusciceps ) , found in Panama , Colombia , and Ecuador as the same species as Geoffroy 's spider monkey . 
 It is one of the largest New World monkeys , often weighing as much as 9 kg ( 20 lb ) . Its arms are significantly longer than its legs , and its prehensile tail can support the entire weight of the monkey and is used as an extra limb . Its hands have only a vestigial thumb , but long , strong , hook @-@ like fingers . These adaptations allow the monkey to move by swinging by its arms beneath the tree branches . 
 Geoffroy 's spider monkey lives in fission – fusion societies that contain between 20 and 42 members . Its diet consists primarily of ripe fruit and it requires large tracts of forest to survive . As a result of habitat loss , hunting and capture for the pet trade , it is considered to be endangered by the IUCN . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 Geoffroy 's spider monkey belongs to the New World monkey family Atelidae , which contains the spider monkeys , woolly monkeys , muriquis and howler monkeys . It is a member of the subfamily <unk> , which includes the spider monkeys , woolly monkeys and muriquis , and of the genus Ateles , which contains all the spider monkeys . The genus name Ateles means " imperfect " , a reference to the vestigial thumb . The species name geoffroyi is in honor of French naturalist Étienne Geoffroy Saint @-@ Hilaire . 
 Agreement over the number of spider monkey species is not universal . Kellogg and Goldman ( 1944 ) based their classification on fur color , and Groves ( 1989 ) based his on fur color and geographic distribution . Kellogg and Goldman differentiated Geoffroy 's spider monkey from other species by its dark black head , hands and wrists . Recent studies use mitochondrial DNA to help differentiate species . Such studies by Collins and <unk> ( 2000 , 2001 , 2006 ) indicate the Geoffroy 's spider monkey is more closely related to the white @-@ fronted spider monkey , A. <unk> , and the brown spider monkey , A. hybridus , than it is to the red @-@ faced spider monkey , A. <unk> . According to these studies , A. <unk> branched off from the other spider monkeys approximately 3 @.@ 27 million years ago and the spider monkeys branched off from the woolly monkeys and <unk> 3 @.@ 59 million years ago . Older studies by Porter , et al. indicate the howler monkeys are believed to have branched off from the other <unk> over 10 million years ago . 
 = = Subspecies = = 
 At least five subspecies of this monkey are recognized : 
 Nicaraguan spider monkey , Ateles geoffroyi geoffroyi 
 Hooded spider monkey , A. g. <unk> 
 Ornate spider monkey , A. g. ornatus 
 Mexican spider monkey , A. g. <unk> 
 Yucatan spider monkey , A. g. <unk> 
 Some authorities also recognize A. g. azuerensis and A. g. <unk> as valid subspecies . The black @-@ headed spider monkey , Ateles fusciceps , is considered by authorities such as Groves ( 1989 ) and Rylands et al . ( 2006 ) to be a separate species from Geoffroy 's spider monkey . Other authorities , including Froelich ( 1991 ) , Collins and <unk> ( 2001 ) and Nieves ( 2005 ) , <unk> A. fusciceps to be synonymous with A. geoffroyi . Under this treatment , the two subspecies of the black @-@ headed spider monkey represent additional subspecies of Geoffroy 's spider monkey , A. g. fusciceps and A. g. rufiventris . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 The range of this species extends over much of Central America , encompassing Panama , Costa Rica , Nicaragua , Guatemala , Honduras , El Salvador , Belize and the south and much of the eastern portion of Mexico . Observations by local people indicate the southernmost subspecies , the hooded spider monkey , A. g. <unk> , may also occur in the portion of Colombia near the Panama border . In western Colombia and northeast Panama , it is replaced by the black @-@ headed spider monkey , A. fusciceps , which is considered by some primatologists to be a subspecies of Geoffroy 's spider monkey . 
 Geoffroy 's spider monkey lives in various types of forest , including rains , <unk> and mangrove forests . Higher densities of Geoffroy 's spider monkeys are generally found in areas containing evergreen forest . 
 = = Physical description = = 
 Geoffroy 's spider monkey is one of the largest New World monkeys . Its length measures between 30 and 63 cm ( 12 and 25 in ) and it weighs between 6 and 9 kg ( 13 and 20 lb ) . The tail is longer than the body at between 63 and 85 cm ( 25 and 33 in ) . Males and females are approximately the same size . 
 Its body color varies by subspecies and population , and can be buff , reddish , rust , brown or black . The hands and feet are dark or black . The face usually has a pale mask and bare skin around the eyes and muzzle . 
 Its arms and legs are long and slim . The arms are about 25 % longer than the legs . The thumb is only vestigial , but the fingers are long and strong , making the hands hook @-@ like . The long arms and hook @-@ like hands allow Geoffroy 's spider monkey to brachiate , that is , swing by its arms beneath the tree branches . 
 The prehensile tail is very strong and has a palm @-@ like pad at the end . The tail acts as an extra limb , and is used for locomotion , as well as to pick fruits and to scoop water from holes in trees . Geoffroy 's spider monkey can support its weight suspended by its tail and often does so when feeding . 
 The clitoris of female Geoffroy 's spider monkeys is large and protrudes , looking like a penis . This organ , called a pendulous clitoris because of the way it dangles externally , is actually larger than the male flaccid penis . As a result , females are sometimes mistaken for males by human observers . The enlarged clitoris is believed to aid males in determining sexual receptiveness , allowing them to touch the clitoris and smell their fingers to pick up chemical or olfactory cues to the female 's reproductive status . 
 = = Behavior = = 
 Geoffroy 's spider monkey is arboreal and diurnal , and mostly inhabits the upper portion of the forest . However , it comes to the ground more frequently than other spider monkey species . It lives in fission – fusion societies , large groups with a typical 20 to 42 members , which split into smaller subgroups to forage during the day . Subgroups typically number two to six members , and sometimes the subgroups remain separate from the main group even through the night . 
 Geoffroy 's spider monkey forages over large tracts of forest in search of food . Home ranges for groups can exceed 900 hectares ( 2 @,@ 200 acres ) . Monkeys can range about 2 @,@ 000 metres ( 6 @,@ 600 ft ) each day . Males tend to cover a larger day range than females , and dominant individuals tend to have larger day ranges . Geoffroy 's spider monkey sometimes rubs a mixture of saliva and ground lime tree Citrus <unk> leaves on its fur . This is believed to act as an insect repellent . In some locations , Geoffroy 's spider monkey interacts with the white @-@ headed capuchin . These interactions can include mutual grooming . 
 In addition to walking or running on four limbs and climbing , Geoffroy 's spider monkey uses several forms of suspensory locomotion . <unk> , or swinging from the arms with assistance from the prehensile tail , is the most common form of suspensory locomotion . Less common forms include swinging while suspended by the tail , and walking on four limbs under a branch . Studies have indicated the Geoffroy 's spider monkey uses suspensory locomotion less frequently than other spider monkey species . 
 The most common method used by spider monkeys to cross between trees is " bridging " , in which the monkey grasps for a branch from the new tree and pulls it towards itself so it can climb onto it . Airborne leaps are used when necessary , and certain populations of Geoffroy 's spider monkey , especially in Panama , are known to leap between trees more frequently than other populations . 
 When not moving , Geoffroy 's spider monkey uses not only supported postures , such as sitting or standing , but also suspended postures in which it hangs from a branch . Suspended postures always include support from the tail , and sometimes the monkey hangs by its tail alone . Other times it hangs by the tail and by one or more limbs simultaneously . Studies have indicated at least some Geoffroy 's spider monkey populations use suspended postures less frequently when feeding than other spider monkey species . 
 = = = Communication and intelligence = = = 
 Sounds produced by Geoffroy 's spider monkey include barks , whinnies , squeals , squeaks and screams . Barks are typically alarm calls . <unk> and screams can be used as distress calls , and are also made at dawn and at dusk . Each monkey makes a unique sound , which may allow monkeys to recognize each other through vocal communication alone . Several researchers have investigated the use of whinnies , which consist of between two and 12 quick increases and decreases in pitch , in more detail . This research has indicated one additional purpose of whinnies is to call other group members to a food source . Other purposes of whinnies suggested by this research have included maintaining vocal contact with other group members while traveling and distinguishing between group members and members of other groups . 
 Geoffroy 's spider monkey uses several forms of <unk> communication . A curled tail or arched back can be used as a threat display towards other spider monkeys . A head shake is used either as a threat or an invitation to play . Shaking branches or swaying arms is used as a warning of danger to the group . 
 Although they do not use tools , spider monkeys , including Geoffroy 's spider monkey , are regarded as intelligent primates . A study performed in 2007 concluded they were the third most intelligent nonhuman primate , behind only orangutans and chimpanzees , and ahead of gorillas and all other monkeys . This mental capacity may be an adaptation to spider monkeys ' frugivorous diets , which require them to be able to identify and memorize many different types of foods and their locations . 
 = = = Diet = = = 
 Geoffroy 's spider monkey eats mostly fruit – preferably ripe and fleshy – and spends 70 % to 80 % of its feeding time eating fruit . Leaves make up most of the rest of its diet . Young leaves are especially important to provide the protein that can be lacking in fruit . Other elements of its diet include flowers , bark , insects , honey , seeds and buds . 
 In addition to providing much of the monkey 's nutritional needs , fruit and leaves provide much of its water requirements . Like other spider monkeys , Geoffroy 's spider monkey drinks water from tree holes and bromeliads in trees , but unlike other spider monkeys , it also drinks from terrestrial water sources . 
 = = = Predators = = = 
 Large cats – jaguars and pumas – appear to be the only significant adult spider monkey predators , other than humans . Eagles and large snakes are also potential predators . However , predation of Geoffroy 's spider monkey has not been observed by researchers . 
 = = = Reproduction = = = 
 Females bear young every two to four years . Among males , mating is not restricted to only dominant individuals . In one study at Barro Colorado Island , all males in the group were observed mating at least once over a one @-@ year period . However , dominant males appear to mate more often than low @-@ ranking males . It is unknown whether male dominance is correlated with greater success in fathering offspring . 
 Geoffroy 's spider monkeys mate in a sitting position , both facing the same direction , with the male seated behind the female and his arms wrapped around her chest and legs wrapped around her waist . This embrace can last between 8 and 22 minutes . Prior to mating , the male and female both separate themselves from the rest of the group , so they are alone except for any of the female 's juvenile offspring . 
 The gestational period is about 7 @.@ 5 months , after which a single young is typically born , although twins sometimes occur . The young are dark in color until they begin taking on the adult coloration at the age of five months . They are carried on their mothers ' chests for the first month and a half to two months , at which point they can ride on their backs . They nurse until they are about one year old , but begin eating solid foods and moving independently at about three months . Even when they move independently , they cannot always cross gaps in the canopy that adults can manage . To help them , an adult will stretch across the gap , forming a bridge over which the young can cross . 
 Females become sexually mature at about four years , and males at about five years . Upon reaching sexual maturity , females leave their natal group , but males do not . As a result , the males in the groups are typically related , while the females are not . This may help explain why male Geoffroy 's spider monkeys form strong bonds . Maximum life span in the wild is unknown . In captivity , Geoffroy 's spider monkey can live at least 33 years . 
 = = Conservation status = = 
 Geoffroy 's spider monkey is listed as " Endangered " by the IUCN , mostly due to habitat loss . It requires large tracts of primary forest to survive , so it is vulnerable to deforestation and is sometimes hunted by humans and captured for the pet trade . Because of its low reproductive turnover , it cannot quickly replenish its numbers when affected by these events . As a result , Geoffroy 's spider monkey has disappeared from some areas where it was once common . Three subspecies are critically endangered . 
 Geoffroy 's spider monkey was extirpated on Barro Colorado Island in Panama . Hunting had eliminated the native population there by 1912 . However , between 1959 and 1966 , an effort was made to reintroduce the species to Barro Colorado . At least 18 monkeys were reintroduced , but only five , one male and four females , survived the reintroduction . This small group has thrived , and the island population had grown to 28 monkeys by 2003 . 
 = Operation Epsom = 
 Operation Epsom , also known as the First Battle of the Odon , was a British Second World War offensive that took place between 26 and 30 June 1944 , during the Battle of Normandy . The offensive was intended to outflank and seize the German @-@ occupied city of Caen , an important Allied objective , in the early stages of the Allied invasion of north @-@ west Europe . 
 Preceded by Operation Martlet to secure the right flank of the advance , Operation Epsom began early on 26 June , with units of the 15th ( Scottish ) Infantry Division advancing behind a rolling artillery barrage . Air cover was sporadic for much of the operation , because poor weather in England forced the last @-@ minute cancellation of bomber support . Accompanied by the tanks of the 31st Tank Brigade , the 15th ( Scottish ) Division made steady progress and by the end of the first day had overrun much of the German outpost line , although some difficulties remained in securing the flanks . In mutually costly fighting over the following two days , a foothold was secured across the River Odon and efforts were made to expand this , by capturing strategic points around the salient and moving up the 43rd ( Wessex ) Infantry Division . In response to powerful German counter @-@ attacks , by 30 June some of the British forces across the river were withdrawn , bringing the operation to a close . 
 Interpretations of the intention and conduct of Operation Epsom differ widely but there is general agreement concerning its effect on the balance of forces in Normandy . The Germans contained the offensive but only by committing all their strength , including two panzer divisions newly arrived in Normandy , which had been intended for an offensive against British and American positions around Bayeux . Many casualties were suffered by both sides but unlike General Bernard Montgomery , the Allied commander in Normandy , Generalfeldmarschall Erwin Rommel was unable to withdraw units into reserve after the battle , as they were needed to hold the front line . The British retained the initiative , attacked several more times over the following two weeks and captured Caen in Operation Charnwood in mid @-@ July . 
 = = Background = = 
 The Norman city of Caen was a D @-@ Day objective for the British 3rd Infantry Division that landed on Sword Beach on 6 June 1944 . The capture of Caen , while " ambitious " , was described by the official historian , L. F. Ellis , as the most important D @-@ Day objective assigned to Lieutenant @-@ General John Crocker and I Corps . Operation Overlord called for the British Second Army , commanded by Lieutenant @-@ General Miles Dempsey , to secure the city and then form a front line from Caumont @-@ l 'Éventé to the south @-@ east of Caen , to acquire airfields and protect the left flank of the First US Army ( Lieutenant General Omar N. Bradley ) , while it fought the Battle of Cherbourg . Possession of Caen and its surroundings would give the Second Army a suitable staging area for a push south to capture Falaise , which could be used as the pivot for a swing left to advance on Argentan and then towards the Touques River . 
 Hampered by congestion in the beachhead , which delayed the deployment of its armoured support and being forced to divert effort to attack strongly held German positions along the 9 @.@ 3 miles ( 15 @.@ 0 km ) route to the town , the 3rd Infantry Division was unable to assault Caen in force on D @-@ Day and was stopped short of its outskirts , by the 21st Panzer Division . Immediate follow @-@ up attacks failed as German resistance solidified . Abandoning the direct approach , Operation Perch — a pincer attack by I and XXX Corps — was launched on 7 June , to encircle Caen from the east and west . I Corps , striking south out of the Orne bridgehead , was halted by the 21st Panzer Division and the attack by XXX Corps was stopped west of Caen in front of Tilly @-@ sur @-@ Seulles by the Panzer @-@ Lehr @-@ Division . To force Panzer @-@ Lehr to withdraw or surrender and to keep operations fluid , part of the 7th Armoured Division pushed through a gap in the German front line and captured Villers @-@ Bocage . The Battle of Villers @-@ Bocage led to the vanguard of the 7th Armoured Division withdrawing from the town but by 17 June , Panzer Lehr had also been forced back and XXX Corps had taken Tilly @-@ sur @-@ Seulles . 
 Another attack by the 7th Armoured Division and other offensive operations were abandoned when a severe storm descended on the English Channel on 19 June . The storm lasted for three days and delayed the Allied build @-@ up . Most of the convoys of landing craft and ships already at sea were driven back to ports in Britain ; towed barges and other loads ( including 2 @.@ 5 miles ( 4 @.@ 0 km ) of floating roadways for the Mulberry harbours ) were lost and 800 craft were left stranded on the Normandy beaches , until the spring tides in July . Planning began for a second offensive , codenamed Operation Dreadnought , to be launched out of the Orne bridgehead by the British VIII Corps ( Lieutenant @-@ General Richard O 'Connor ) , outflanking Caen from the east . Dreadnought was cancelled following objections from O 'Connor and an attack towards Évrecy was considered . This was also cancelled , either by Montgomery , the Allied ground forces commander in Normandy , or Dempsey , the Second Army commander . Dempsey , in a post @-@ war interview with Chester Wilmot , claimed that he told Montgomery that he was going to cancel the proposed operation on 18 June . The weather from 19 – 22 June grounded Allied aircraft and the Germans took advantage of the respite from air attacks , to improve their defences , strengthening infantry positions with minefields and posting c . 70 88 mm guns in hedgerows and woods , covering the approaches to Caen . 
 = = Plan = = 
 On 20 June Field Marshal Erwin Rommel , commanding German forces in Normandy , was ordered by Hitler to launch a counter @-@ offensive against the Allies between the towns of Caumont @-@ l 'Éventé ( Caumont ) and Saint @-@ Lô . The objective was to cut a corridor between the American and British armies by recapturing the city of Bayeux ( taken by the British on 7 June ) and the coast beyond . Four SS Panzer Divisions and one Heer Panzer Division were assigned to the task . Their assault was to be spearheaded by the 9th SS Panzer Division Hohenstaufen and 10th SS Panzer Division Frundsberg of the II SS Panzer Corps , recently arrived from Ukraine . The 1st SS Panzer Division Leibstandarte SS Adolf Hitler , 2nd SS Panzer Division Das Reich and 2nd Panzer Division would be supporting the attack . Most of the tanks used by these formations were Panzer IVs and Panthers , supplemented by <unk> ( assault guns ) and Tigers — the Panthers and Tigers being among the most lethal and well @-@ protected German armoured vehicles of the time . 
 On 18 June General Bernard Montgomery , commander of all Allied ground forces in Normandy , issued a directive to Lieutenant @-@ General Miles Dempsey to launch a new pincer attack with the aim of capturing Caen . The initial plan called for I and XXX Corps to attack west of Caen for four days before VIII Corps launched the main attack out of the Orne bridgehead , east of Caen , on 22 June . However , it was soon realised that VIII Corps would not be able to assemble within the small perimeter of the Orne bridgehead and the following day the plan was revised . 
 The revised plan called for a preliminary operation to take place three days before the main assault . I Corps with the 51st ( Highland ) Infantry Division was ordered to strike south from the Orne bridgehead , pinning elements of the 21st Panzer Division into place . Operation Martlet was to commence one day before Epsom with XXX Corps ' 49th ( West Riding ) Infantry Division and the 8th Armoured Brigade securing VIII Corps ' flank by capturing the high ground on the right of their axis of advance . 
 The main role in Operation Epsom was assigned to the newly arrived VIII Corps , consisting of 60 @,@ 244 men under the command of Lieutenant @-@ General Sir Richard O 'Connor . VIII Corps would launch their offensive from the beachhead gained by the 3rd Canadian Infantry Division . Their operation was to take place in four phases with its ultimate objective the high ground near Bretteville @-@ sur @-@ Laize , south of Caen . VIII Corps would be supported by fire from 736 guns , three cruisers and the monitor HMS Roberts . The Royal Air Force was to provide a preliminary bombardment by 250 bombers and close air support thereafter . 
 The 15th ( Scottish ) Infantry Division would lead the assault . During Phase I , codenamed Gout , they were to take the villages of Sainte Manvieu and Cheux . In Phase II , codenamed Hangover , the division would advance to capture several crossings over the Odon River and the villages of Mouen and Grainville @-@ sur @-@ Odon . Should resistance during the opening phase prove light , the 11th Armoured Division would seize the bridges over the Odon River by coup de main . During the first two phases the 43rd ( Wessex ) Infantry Division — to be reinforced on 28 June with the Guards Armoured Division 's infantry brigade — was to remain on the start line to provide a " firm base " . 
 In Epsom 's third phase , <unk> , the 43rd Division would move forward to relieve all Scottish infantry north of the Odon . The 15th Division would then assemble across the river , expanding the bridgehead by capturing several important villages . In the operation 's final phase , codenamed <unk> , elements of the 43rd Division would cross the river to hold the area taken , while the 15th Division would continue to expand their bridgehead . The 11th Armoured Division would attempt to force a crossing over the River Orne and advance on their final objective of Bretteville @-@ sur @-@ Laize . The 4th Armoured Brigade , although attached to the 11th Armoured Division , was restricted to operations between the Odon and Orne to protect the Corps flank and to be in a position to attack westwards , or towards Caen , as necessary . 
 Depending on the success of VIII Corps attack , I Corps would then launch two supporting operations codenamed Aberlour and Ottawa . In the former the 3rd Infantry Division , supported by a Canadian infantry brigade , would attack north of Caen ; the latter would be a move by the 3rd Canadian Infantry Division supported by the 2nd Canadian Armoured Brigade to take the village and airfield of Carpiquet . 
 Originally planned for 22 June , Epsom was postponed until 26 June to make up deficiencies in manpower and materiel . The initial opposition the British would face was expected to come from the depleted 12th SS Panzer Division Hitlerjugend ( " Hitler Youth " ) , elements of the 21st Panzer Division and Panzer Lehr . 
 = = Operation Martlet = = 
 As planned , on 23 June , the 51st ( Highland ) Infantry Division attacked with the 152nd ( Highland ) Infantry Brigade . Before daybreak and without an artillery bombardment , the Highland infantry advanced towards the village of Sainte @-@ Honorine @-@ la @-@ <unk> . They took the German garrison by surprise and had control of the village before sunrise . During the morning the Highlanders were counter @-@ attacked by Kampfgruppe von Luck of the 21st Panzer Division . Fighting lasted all morning but by midday the village was firmly in British hands . This success diverted German attention and resources away from VIII Corps front , as it prepared for further attacks out of the Orne bridgehead . 
 At <unk> on 25 June , the 49th ( West Riding ) Infantry Division supported by the 8th Armoured Brigade and 250 guns , launched Operation Martlet against part of the Panzer Lehr and 12th SS Panzer divisions . The first objective , Fontenay @-@ le @-@ <unk> was fought over all day but stubborn German resistance prevented its capture . One infantry battalion supported by tanks , advanced around the village to the west and took <unk> Wood but was subjected to a series of German counter @-@ attacks . These were blunted by British artillery fire and close air support but by the end of the day the 49th Division had failed to reach the village of Rauray , leaving the terrain dominating the right flank of VIII Corps ' intended advance in German hands . Martlet forced the I SS Panzer Corps to commit the remaining tanks of the 12th SS Panzer Division against the XXX Corps front , for a counter @-@ attack the following day . During the night the Germans in Fontenay @-@ le @-@ <unk> withdrew to straighten the front line and infantry from the 49th Division secured the village before dawn . 
 = = Battle = = 
 = = = 26 June = = = 
 Poor weather hampered the start of Operation Epsom on 26 June , where rain over the battlefield had made the ground boggy ; over the United Kingdom in the early hours , there was a heavy mist resulting in aircraft being grounded and the bombing being called off . No. 83 Group RAF , based in Normandy , were able to provide air support throughout the operation . 
 The 49th ( West Riding ) Infantry Division resumed Operation Martlet at <unk> , although much of its artillery support from VIII Corps was diverted to the main operation . The Germans were able to slow the British advance and then launched an armoured riposte . This initially gained ground but was stalled when British armour moved up and the two sides duelled in the confined terrain . Informed during the afternoon that a big British offensive was under way further east , SS @-@ Standartenführer Kurt Meyer of 12th SS Panzer called off the counter @-@ attack and ordered his tank companies to return to their positions south of Rauray . During the rest of the day the 49th Division was able to make progress , eventually halting just north of Rauray . 
 At 0730 the 44th ( Lowland ) Infantry Brigade and the 46th ( Highland ) Infantry Brigade of the 15th ( Scottish ) Infantry Division , supported by the 31st Tank Brigade moved off their start lines behind a rolling barrage fired from 344 guns . The 46th Brigade initially advanced without armoured support , because in bypassing the mine and booby trap @-@ ridden village of Le Mesnil @-@ Patry , its tanks were forced to negotiate minefields flanking the village . The 2nd Battalion , Glasgow Highlanders faced only light resistance , while the 9th Battalion The Cameronians , ran into the grenadiers of the 12th SS Panzer Division , who had allowed the barrage to pass over their positions before opening fire . Reuniting with their tanks at around 1000 , by midday the two battalions were fighting for control of their initial objectives ; Cheux and Le Haut du Bosq . 
 The 44th Brigade encountered little opposition until coming under machine gun fire at a small stream , following which German resistance was much heavier . Between 0830 and 0930 , the 6th Battalion , The Royal Scots Fusiliers and the 8th Battalion , The Royal Scots reached their initial objectives of Sainte Manvieu and La <unk> . After much hand to hand fighting they believed the villages to be captured just after midday , although they later found that some German remnants were holding out . Tanks and infantry from the 12th SS and the 21st Panzer divisions launched two counter @-@ attacks to regain Sainte Manvieu but were repulsed with the aid of intensive artillery fire . The main German opposition in this section of their outpost line , had been from part of the I Battalion , 26th Panzergrenadier Regiment , which had been mostly overrun and the divisional pioneer battalion . The Germans in Rauray , which had not been captured the previous day , were able to subject the British brigades to observed artillery and indirect tank fire , causing considerable casualties and destruction , especially within the village of Cheux . 
 At 1250 a squadron of the 11th Armoured Division reconnaissance regiment north of Cheux , was ordered to advance towards the Odon , preparatory to an attempt by the divisional armoured brigade to rush the bridges . Owing to minefields near the village , debris blocking its streets and German holdouts attacking the tanks , it was not until 1400 that the regiment was able to make progress . By 1430 the squadron arrived on a ridge south of Cheux where it was engaged by twenty Panzer IVs , sent by the 12th SS Panzer Division from the Rauray area , Tiger tanks from the 3rd Battalion 101st Heavy SS Panzer Battalion and armour from the 21st Panzer Division . More tanks from the 11th Armoured Division arrived but determined German resistance halted any further advance and by the end of the day the division had lost twenty @-@ one tanks . At 1800 the 227th ( Highland ) of the 15th ( Scottish ) Infantry Division , was committed to the battle . The Highlanders were delayed by fighting in support of the rest of the division and only two companies from the 2nd Battalion Gordon Highlanders made much progress . They entered the northern outskirts of Colleville by 2100 but soon found themselves cut off by German counter @-@ attacks . After heavy and confused fighting one company was able to break out and rejoin the battalion . To stop the British offensive , that evening Field Marshal Rommel ordered assistance from all available units of II SS Panzer Corps . 
 = = = 27 June = = = 
 With no attacks during the night , the German command believed that the British offensive had been contained . During the early hours of 27 June , II SS Panzer Corps was ordered to resume preparations for its counter @-@ offensive towards Bayeux . On the right of the British advance , the I SS Panzer Corps launched a counter @-@ attack with 80 tanks , which was disorganised by artillery fire , before foundering on the anti @-@ tank guns of the 49th ( West Riding ) Infantry Division , who then resumed their attempt to secure VIII Corps flank . Rauray was taken by the 49th Division at 1600 on 27 June , after further heavy fighting against the 12th SS Panzer Division . German forces had been diverted from opposing VIII Corps advance and the fall of Rauray denied the Germans an important observation point , although they remained in control of an area of high ground to the south . 
 Epsom was resumed at 0445 by the 10th Battalion , Highland Light Infantry of the 227 ( Highland ) Infantry Brigade . With support from Churchill tanks ; the battalion intended to make a bid for the Odon crossing at Gavrus . The Highlanders immediately ran into stiff opposition from elements of the 12th SS Panzer Division and despite heavy artillery support were unable to advance all day . Casualties were heavy on both sides . At 0730 the 2nd Battalion , Argyll and Sutherland Highlanders , also of the 227th Highland Brigade , launched an attack aimed at capturing the Odon crossing at Tourmauville , north @-@ west of the village of Baron @-@ sur @-@ Odon . With the German forces engaged by the Highland Light Infantry , the Argyll and Sutherland Highlanders supported by the 23rd Hussars , were able to advance to Colleville with relative ease . There the small German garrison supported by 88 mm guns , inflicted heavy casualties upon the British and denied them the village until the afternoon . The battalion seized the bridge at Tourmauville at around 1700 and a bridgehead was established . By 1900 , two depleted squadrons of the 23rd Hussars and a company of the 8th Battalion , Rifle Brigade ( Prince Consort 's Own ) had crossed the Odon into the bridgehead . 
 The remainder of the 15th ( Scottish ) Infantry Division around Cheux and Sainte Manvieu , was being relieved by the 43rd ( Wessex ) Infantry Division . When the 5th Battalion , Duke of Cornwall 's Light Infantry , of the 214th Infantry Brigade , moved into the outskirts of Cheux , they found that the Scottish infantry had moved on and the vacant position had been reoccupied by grenadiers of 12th SS Panzer Division . After battling to recapture the position , at 0930 the battalion was counter @-@ attacked by six Panthers of the 2nd Panzer Division . The attack penetrated Cheux and several British anti @-@ tank guns were destroyed before it was beaten off . Further attacks by the 2nd Panzer Division were halted but the entire front was " a mass of small engagements " . For the rest of the morning and afternoon , the Scottish infantry and the 4th and 29th Armoured brigades expanded the salient north of the Odon and secured the rear of the Argyll and Sutherland Highlanders . During late evening the men of the 159th Infantry Brigade ( 11th Armoured Division ) were transported in trucks through the narrow " Scottish Corridor " to Tourville , where they dismounted and crossed the Odon on foot to reinforce the bridgehead . During the night Kampfgruppe Weidinger , a 2 @,@ 500 @-@ strong battle group from the 2nd SS Panzer Division arrived at the front and was placed under the command of the Panzer Lehr Division . 
 = = = 28 June = = = 
 During the early hours of 28 June , a battle group of the 1st SS Panzer Division , Kampfgruppe Frey , arrived at the front and was placed under the command of the 12th SS Panzer Division . At 0810 , General Friedrich Dollmann , the 7th Army commander , ordered SS @-@ Obergruppenführer Paul Hausser to divert the II SS Panzer Corps , to counter @-@ attack south of Cheux . Hausser replied that no counter @-@ attack could be launched until the following day , as so many of his units had yet to reach the front . The German command was thrown into disarray by Dollmann 's sudden death , when Rommel and Gerd von Rundstedt ( OB West ) were en route to a conference with Hitler and out of touch with the situation . It was not until 1500 that Hausser was appointed commander of the 7th Army , with Willi Bittrich replacing him as commander of II SS Panzer Corps . ( Hausser was advised to retain control of the Corps until the following morning . ) Pending the return of Rommel to Normandy , Hausser was also to be supreme commander in the invasion area . At 1700 the command structure was changed again ; the 7th Army under Hausser would be responsible for the invasion front facing the American army , while the Panzer Group West ( General Geyr von Schweppenburg ) was to be responsible for the invasion front facing the Anglo @-@ Canadian forces . 
 At 0530 elements of the 15th ( Scottish ) Infantry Division with tank support , launched a new assault to capture the village of Grainville @-@ sur @-@ Odon . After shelling and close quarter street fighting , the Scots secured the village by 1300 hours ; German counter @-@ attacks followed but were repulsed . At 0600 the Germans began two strong flanking attacks , with the intention of pinching out the British salient . Kampfgruppe Frey on the eastern flank , launched an attack north of the Odon , supported by Panzer IVs of the 21st Panzer Division . This reached the villages of Mouen and Tourville but the British counter @-@ attacked from the direction of Cheux , resulting in confused heavy fighting throughout the day . Frey 's battle group managed to gain control of Mouen and British counter @-@ attacks supported by tanks halted any further advance but were unable to retake the village . British patrols found <unk> partly empty , the German front line having been pulled back towards Carpiquet . 
 On the western flank , Kampfgruppe Weidinger supported by Panthers , tried to recapture <unk> , Grainville @-@ sur @-@ Odon and ultimately <unk> . The British defenders ( <unk> and on Point 110 : the 1st Battalion Tyneside Scottish , 11th Battalion Durham Light Infantry ( 49th ( West Riding ) Infantry Division ) and 4th / 7th Dragoon Guards ( 8th Armoured Brigade ) . In Grainville @-@ sur @-@ Odon and le Valtru : 7th Battalion Seaforth Highlanders , 9th Battalion Cameronians ( Scottish Rifles ) and 9th Royal Tank Regiment . ) held their positions , launching local counter @-@ attacks to retake lost ground and eventually the German offensive was stopped , within 0 @.@ 6 miles ( 0 @.@ 97 km ) of linking up with the lead elements of Kampfgruppe Frey . 
 South of the Odon , at 0900 the Argyll and Sutherland Highlanders advanced out of the bridgehead , to capture a bridge north of the village of Gavrus . Heavy fighting took place into the afternoon before both village and bridge were in Scottish hands . Infantry from the 11th Armoured Division , expanded the bridgehead by taking the village of Baron @-@ sur @-@ Odon and the 23rd Hussars with infantry advanced on Hill 112 ( 49 ° 7 ′ 7 ″ N 0 ° 27 ′ 34 ″ W ) . Having secured its northern slope and dislodged the defenders from its crest , they were unable to advance further , due to the Germans dug in on the reverse slope . Several counter @-@ attacks were launched by 12th SS Panzer and the battered Hussars were relieved at 1500 by the 3rd Royal Tank Regiment but neither side was able to take complete control of the hill . The 11th Armoured Division had lost nearly 40 tanks on its slopes by the end of the day and was surrounded on three sides but troops managed to reach and reinforce the position . 
 = = = 29 June = = = 
 With the weather improving over the United Kingdom and Normandy , Hausser 's preparations for his counter stroke came under continual harassment from Allied aircraft and artillery fire , delaying the start of the attack to the afternoon . From the number of German reinforcements arriving in the VIII Corps sector and aerial reconnaissance , O 'Connor suspected that the Germans were organising a counter @-@ stroke . XXX Corps was still some way to the north , leaving the VIII Corps right flank vulnerable , O 'Connor postponed attacks by I Corps and ordered VIII Corps onto the defensive . Dempsey , privy to ULTRA decrypts of intercepted German signal traffic , knew the counter @-@ attack was coming and approved O 'Connor 's precautions . VIII Corps began to reorganise to meet the attack . Supply echelons for Hausser 's divisions were located in the Évrecy – <unk> @-@ Bocage – Villers @-@ Bocage area and were the focus of RAF fighter @-@ bomber attention throughout the morning and early afternoon ; the RAF claimed the destruction of over 200 vehicles . 
 VIII Corps also launched spoiling attacks , at 0800 1st Battalion Worcestershire Regiment , from the 43rd Division , assaulted Mouen , without tanks behind an artillery barrage . By 1100 the battalion had forced the 1st SS Panzer Division panzergrenadiers back and the 7th Battalion Somerset Light Infantry moved up and dug in on the Caen – Villers @-@ Bocage road . The 129th Brigade of the 43rd Division , swept the woods and orchards around Tourville @-@ sur @-@ Odon , before crossing the river north of Baron @-@ sur @-@ Odon and clearing the south bank . An attempt by the 44th Brigade of the 15th Division to advance towards the Odon and link up with the force holding the Gavrus bridges failed , leaving this position isolated and in the salient the 44th Battalion Royal Tank Regiment failed to capture Hill 113 ( 49 ° 6 ′ 14 ″ N 0 ° 30 ′ 45 ″ W ) north of Évrecy , after clashing with 10th SS Panzer Division and losing six tanks . Elements of the 11th Armoured Division attacked <unk> @-@ Notre @-@ Dame west of Hill 112 but were repulsed and an attack by the 8th Rifle Brigade and the 3rd Royal Tank Regiment on the southern slope of the hill , drove the Germans from the position . 
 Hausser intended that the 9th SS Panzer Division , with Kampfgruppe Weidinger protecting its left flank , to cut across the British salient north of the Odon , while the 10th SS Panzer Division retook Gavrus and Hill 112 south of the river . The 9th SS Panzer attack began at 1400 , heavily supported by artillery . The 19th and 20th SS Panzergrenadier Regiments supported by Panthers , Panzer IV 's and assault guns attacked Grainville , le Haut du Bosq and le Valtru , aiming for Cheux . A British company was overrun and tanks and infantry penetrated le Valtru , where anti @-@ tank guns knocked out four German tanks in the village and artillery fire forced their supporting infantry to withdraw . Confused fighting , at times hand @-@ to @-@ hand , took place outside Grainville and the Panzergrenadiers captured a tactically important wood , before being forced back by a British counter @-@ attack . The Panzergrenadiers claimed they also captured Grainville but no British sources support this and by nightfall British infantry were in control of the village . 
 At around 1600 , the British captured an officer of the 9th SS Panzer Division who was conducting a reconnaissance . He was found to be carrying a map and notebook containing details of new attacks . Around 1830 , the Germans attacked the 15th ( Scottish ) Infantry Division on the right flank . One unit was being relieved and in the confusion , German tanks and infantry slipped through the British defences , with some units advancing 2 miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) before running into heavy resistance . By 2300 , the attack by the 9th SS Panzer had been stopped . Supporting attacks against the British eastern flank had been planned but German tank concentrations assembling in the Carpiquet area , had been so severely disrupted by RAF fighter @-@ bombers during the afternoon , that the attacks never materialised . 
 The 10th SS Panzer Division launched its attack behind schedule at 1430 . Following clashes earlier in the day the British were waiting but after five hours of battle , the Scottish infantry defending Gavrus had been pushed back into a pocket around the bridge , north of the village . An artillery bombardment caused the Germans to withdraw but the British did not reoccupy the village . Moving towards Hill 113 , the 2nd Grenadier Battalion , Panzergrenadier Regiment 21 and 2nd Battalion , Panzer Regiment 10 of 10th SS Panzer ran into the 44th Battalion The Royal Tank Regiment and 2nd Battalion ( The King 's Royal Rifle Corps ) in Évrecy , who thwarted their attempt to occupy the hill . Dealing with this obstacle took the remainder of the day and the attack on Hill 112 was postponed . The Germans claimed the destruction of 28 tanks while the British recorded the loss of 12 . 
 Believing the German attacks on 29 June indicated more counter @-@ attacks for the following day , Dempsey reinforced the Odon bridgehead with a brigade of the 43rd division and pulled in its perimeter . The 159th Infantry Brigade of the 11th Armoured Division was placed under the command of the 15th ( Scottish ) Infantry Division and acceding to O ’ Connor ’ s wishes for additional infantry , Dempsey attached the newly arrived 53rd ( Welsh ) Infantry Division to VIII Corps ; the lead brigade arrived near the Epsom start line during the night . To hold Hill 112 , it was necessary hold Évrecy and Hill 113 for which there were insufficient troops and Dempsey ordered the 29th Armoured Brigade to abandon the hill . To hold the area between Rauray and the Odon , Dempsey withdrew the 29th Armoured Brigade north across the river after dark , ready for the expected German offensive . 
 = = = 30 June = = = 
 Bittrich ordered a resumption of the offensive during the night of 29 – 30 June , hoping to avoid Allied air support . The 19th and 20th Regiments of the 9th SS Panzer Division , renewed their attacks against Grainville @-@ sur @-@ Odon and le Valtru in the dark but little progress was made against the 11th Armoured Division north of the Odon and heavy British artillery bombardments . At 0120 , the 10th SS Panzer Division started to move towards Hill 112 and at dawn , covered by a heavy artillery barrage they assaulted the vacated British positions . Unaware that the British had pulled back , Panzergrenadiers and tanks of the 10th SS Panzer advanced on the hill from the south and south @-@ west and infantry from 12th SS Panzer attacked from the east and south @-@ east . Meeting no opposition , by noon the Germans had occupied the hill . A British counter @-@ attack and artillery fire broke up a follow @-@ up attack towards Baron @-@ sur @-@ Odon . 
 Bittrich called off further offensive action against VIII Corps . In the evening Hausser , commanding the 7th Army , informed Rommel 's headquarters that his counter @-@ attacks had been temporarily suspended due to " tenacious enemy resistance " and intensive Allied artillery and naval gunfire . Unaware of this and believing that more German attacks would follow , Dempsey closed down Operation Epsom . The front gradually settled down save for skirmishing , although both sides spent the remainder of the day heavily shelling one another . The battleship HMS Rodney contributed by bombarding villages suspected of containing German headquarters ; one was later found to have housed the headquarters of the I SS Panzer Corps . With no further British offensive moves due , in the afternoon the Gavrus bridges were given up , the Scottish defenders being withdrawn across the Odon . At 2030 the town of Villers @-@ Bocage , a vital traffic centre for the German forces , was destroyed by 250 RAF heavy bombers . It had been intended to catch German troops by the bombing but only French civilians were present . 
 = = = 1 July = = = 
 The II SS Panzer Corps resumed its counter offensive on 1 July , after spending most of the preceding 24 hours regrouping . Unaware that the British had ended their operation and with overcast weather interfering with Allied air support , Bittrich believed he had an opportunity to prevent the 11th Armoured Division continuing its advance across the Orne . Before dawn the 10th SS Panzer Division advanced , supported by heavy mortar and artillery fire . The Germans took the village of Baron @-@ sur @-@ Odon quickly but a counter @-@ attack by the 31st Tank Brigade retook it by noon . Heavy shelling broke up other attacks by 10th SS Panzer from Hill 112 and British patrols later found c . 300 – 400 dead Panzergrenadiers on the northern slope of the hill . 
 The 9th SS Panzer Division spent the day attempting to force the British lines between Rauray and the Odon . Supplemented by Panzergrenadiers of the 2nd SS Panzer Division and following a preliminary bombardment , tanks and infantry of 9th SS Panzer advanced behind a smoke screen and broke through the outer British defences . The Germans were stopped by secondary positions in front of Rauray and on high ground to the south @-@ east , although some troops penetrated as far as Haut du Bosq . Further German attacks throughout the day , were met with intense artillery fire and made no progress , in the early evening a British counter @-@ attack with Sherman and flame @-@ throwing Churchill Crocodile tanks restored the original front line . The attacks were costly for both sides , thirty German tanks were claimed destroyed , mostly by the 49th ( West Riding ) Infantry Division , troops of the 12th SS Panzer Division had been repulsed during the morning and artillery fire halted attacks from other formations . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 = = = Analysis = = = 
 Having had to commit his last strategic reserves to contain the British offensive , on 29 June Rommel requested permission from Hitler to allow the 7th Army to begin a fighting withdrawal towards the River Seine ; a move which would be mirrored by German forces in southern France to form a new front line along the Seine towards the Swiss border . This was partially endorsed by Hausser , who on 30 June proposed a retirement from Caen . Encouraged by the fighting in the valley of the Odon , Hitler stated that " we must not allow mobile warfare to develop " , committing his troops in Normandy to " a policy of aggressive and unyielding defence " . On 2 July , Scottish patrols produced the first evidence of this , reporting that south of the Odon the Germans were digging in . Aerial photographs taken two days later , showed large numbers of newly dug weapon positions and by 8 July , the German forces facing VIII Corps had entrenched themselves . Some local adjustments occurred as both sides sought to improve their tactical position and the 12th SS Panzer Division captured Fontaine @-@ <unk> on 2 July . 
 The VIII Corps , in battle for the first time , had broken through elaborate German defensive positions and advanced nearly 6 miles ( 9 @.@ 7 km ) . By throwing in their last reserves , the Germans had been able to achieve a defensive success at the operational level , by containing the British offensive . More than 4 @,@ 000 casualties were inflicted upon the British but the effort cost the Germans more than 3 @,@ 000 men . The German commanders had been forced to commit their armoured reserves piecemeal to meet threats as they developed , counter @-@ attacking at a disadvantage . Over 120 German tanks were destroyed , the organisation of the remaining forces was disrupted and their offensive power much reduced . With few infantry divisions to relieve them , the panzer divisions were forced to remain in the front line rather than pulling back into reserve to recover . 
 Operation Epsom has been analysed by many military historians and commentators . S. A. Hart wrote in 2007 , that post @-@ war publication of memoirs by Allied generals had led to disputes along national lines during the 1950s and 1960s , with American historians generally critical of Montgomery and the actions of the Anglo @-@ Canadian forces , while " pro @-@ Montgomery " historians set out to refute these criticisms . Also published during this period were the national official campaign histories , which were thoroughly @-@ researched but avoided detailed critical analysis of the controversies . During the 1980s , revisionist writers concentrated on the perceived deficiencies of the Allies and since the late 1990s , two schools of thought have been revising the revisionists , some expanding on revisionist work , by providing a more detailed campaign analysis and those who have tried to show that the techniques employed by the Anglo @-@ Canadian forces were appropriate to conditions in Normandy . 
 In 1983 , Carlo D ’ Este wrote that the most logical place for a British attack would have been out of the Orne bridgehead , on the extreme eastern flank of the Allied lodgement . An attack there had been rejected by Montgomery , Dempsey and O ’ Connor as unrealistic . Some writers described the intent of Epsom as an attack to gain ground , while others have suggested that the operation had other objectives . In 2004 , Williams wrote that due to ULTRA intercepts , Montgomery was aware of Rommel 's plan to attack towards Bayeux and that Epsom was intended to forestall it . Wilmot in 1952 wrote that the operation was intended to draw the I SS Panzer Corps and the newly arrived II SS Panzer Corps into battle around Caen . Hart wrote that Montgomery wanted to keep the initiative and prevent German armoured forces from moving from to the west against the US First Army or being relieved and forming a reserve . The arrival of the II SS Panzer Corps was a catalyst for Operation Epsom , which retaining the initiative by forcing the German command to use the II SS Panzer Corps against VIII Corps . Hastings wrote in 1985 , that that " no sane commander " would mount an attack as big as Epsom without " every hope of breaking through the German defences , or at least of causing the enemy to make substantial withdrawals " . D ’ Este wrote that " No amount of pretence can conceal that the real object had been a short pincer movement to outflank Caen " . 
 Lloyd Clark wrote : " On the battlefield , Epsom ended , rather ignominiously , in a sort of draw " and that judging the effects of Operation Epsom is hampered by disagreement about Montgomery 's intent . In written orders Montgomery required an advance across the Orne River and the capture of high ground south of Caen , which was not achieved . Clark wrote that there were implicit objectives with strategic implications , more important than the capture of ground . In 1971 , Ambrose wrote of Epsom veering off @-@ course from the plan and D 'Este wrote that Epsom was " an operation of immense intentions which were not attained " , calling it a " dismal failure " . In 2004 , Trew and Badsey wrote of the British failure that it " ... took most of six Panzer Divisions to stop Epsom short of its final objectives .... " and Reynolds in 2002 , wrote that without the commitment of these six divisions , it was highly likely that the British offensive would have achieved its goals . <unk> in 2007 wrote that while the original concept of Epsom had failed , the offensive was a strategic success . By withdrawing the 11th Armoured Division across the Odon and then into reserve , the 21st Army Group had re @-@ created the threat of an offensive near Caen . By the end of June , all German armoured forces in Normandy were concentrated on the Second Army front . 
 Shulman had written in 1947 , that with the defeat of its second armoured counter @-@ attack in June , the German command had thrown away its most effective troops and Reynolds wrote that while the operation was costly for the British , it caused grievous losses to the Germans . In the VIII Corps history published in 1945 , Jackson wrote that Epsom failed in its overt goal but that " when seen as part of Montgomery 's series of rapid and consecutive blows against the German Army in Normandy , the importance of Epsom becomes more apparent and there is little doubt that it did play a significant part in the Allies ' eventual success in the region " . D 'Este wrote that the losses inflicted on the German army were " purely in terms of men and material " . Copp in 2003 wrote that too much emphasis had been given to a win @-@ lose criterion , whereas a cost @-@ benefit approach provided more insight . Describing the standard German practice of counter @-@ attacking when driven from a position , Copp wrote that the Germans courted losses that could not be readily replaced , " One such counter @-@ attack on 22 July resulted in <unk> regaining control of the Bon <unk> [ sic ] – Évrecy road , a clear victory in a win @-@ lose narrative but a typical German defeat in any cost @-@ benefit analysis " . 
 In 2013 , Buckley wrote that by 1 July , there was a stalemate in which the British were established south of the Odon but had retired from Hill 112 , in what may have been a premature decision . The Germans had maintained a continuous front but only by using reserves which made it impossible to begin the counter @-@ offensive planned by Panzergruppe West , which made the offensive a considerable Allied success , as part of a strategy of attrition based on organised fire power . Looked on as an attempt to break through and force the Germans out of Caen the operation failed but in terms of Montgomery 's strategy it was a costly victory . The German defence of Normandy never recovered from the damage inflicted during Epsom , the initiative was lost and German counter @-@ attack tactics failed in the face of Allied fire power , with even greater cost than that inflicted on the British ; the German command structure and assumptions on which the defence was based were undermined . 
 = = = Casualties = = = 
 Clark wrote that casualties in the 15th ( Scottish ) Infantry Division were 2 @,@ 331 men : 288 killed , 1 @,@ 638 wounded and 794 missing from 27 June – 2 July . Buckley gave casualties for the division as 2 @,@ 700 , including 300 men killed , 25 percent of the casualties incurred from June 1944 – May 1945 and that the other units in the operation had 2 @,@ 500 casualties . The losses among the 11th Armoured Division and 43rd ( Wessex ) Infantry Division , were 1 @,@ 256 men : 257 being killed in the 11th Armoured Division . No figures are provided for the 49th ( West Riding ) Infantry Division , 51st ( Highland ) Infantry Division or the 8th Armoured Brigade , that conducted preliminary operations and attacks in support of Epsom . From 26 – 30 June , VIII Corps lost 470 men killed , 2 @,@ 187 wounded and 706 missing . On 1 July , a further 488 men were killed and wounded and 227 men were reported missing . These figures exclude formations conducting preliminary operations and attacks in support of Epsom . German casualties during Epsom were more than 3 @,@ 000 men . The 9th SS Panzer Division suffered 1 @,@ 145 casualties , the 10th SS Panzer Division suffered 571 casualties and the 12th SS Panzer Division suffered 1 @,@ 244 casualties . The Germans lost 126 tanks from 26 June to midnight on 1 July , 41 Panthers and 25 Tigers among them . In 2015 , Napier published new figures for equipment losses , of 125 German and 150 British tanks . 
 = = = Subsequent operations = = = 
 The increasingly costly static defence led to disputes in the German high command . On the evening of 1 July in a conversation with Wilhelm Keitel , Rundstedt said " Make peace , you fools . " Shortly afterwards , Günther von Kluge replaced him as Commander in Chief West . Due to his disagreements with Hitler over how the campaign should be conducted , Schweppenburg was replaced by Heinrich Eberbach as commander of Panzer Group West . 
 During the lull both sides made changes to their dispositions . The 53rd ( Welsh ) Infantry Division relieved the 15th ( Scottish ) Infantry Division in the west of the British salient , while the 43rd ( Wessex ) Infantry Division relieved the infantry of the 11th Armoured Division who were still holding the Odon bridgehead . The Germans moved up the 277th Infantry Division which began to relieve the 9th SS Panzer Division and the battle group of the 2nd SS Panzer Division . 
 A few days later the British Second Army launched Operation Charnwood , to take Caen . This incorporated the postponed attack on Carpiquet , originally planned for Epsom as Operation Ottawa but now codenamed Operation Windsor . In a frontal assault the northern half of the city was captured , with the remaining portions being taken during Operations Atlantic and Goodwood in the third week of July . Fighting in the Odon Valley continued and on 10 July Operation Jupiter was launched by VIII Corps to push back the German forces near the village of Baron @-@ sur @-@ Odon , retake Hill 112 and advance to the River Orne . The Second Battle of the Odon began on 15 July to divert German attention from the ground where Operation Goodwood was to take place . The second battle has been called one of the bloodiest encounters of the campaign . 
 = = = Battle honours = = = 
 The British and Commonwealth system of battle honours recognised participation in Operation Epsom in 1956 , 1957 and 1958 , by the award to 34 units of the battle honour Odon , for service on and around the river from 25 June to 2 July 1944 . The award was accompanied by honours for four actions during the operation : Fontenay le <unk> on 26 – 27 June , Cheux from 26 – 27 June , Tourmauville Bridge on 27 June and Defence of Rauray from 29 June – 2 July . 
 = St Fflewin 's Church , Llanfflewin = 
 St Fflewin 's Church , Llanfflewin ( sometimes referred to as St <unk> 's Church , <unk> ) is a small rural church , situated by a farm in Anglesey , north Wales . The first church on the site is said to have been built by St Fflewin in 630 , but the present building has no structural features dating from before the 18th century , although the church has a font from the 14th or 15th century and part of an inscribed medieval gravestone has been reused in a window sill . 
 The church is still used for worship by the Church in Wales , and is one of five churches in a combined benefice . It is a Grade II listed building , a national designation given to " buildings of special interest , which warrant every effort being made to preserve them " , because it is a " simple rural church built on Medieval foundations " . A 2006 guide to the churches of Anglesey said that it is a " typical , well @-@ preserved rural church and is well worth a visit . " 
 = = History and location = = 
 St Fflewin , to whom the church is dedicated , was a Christian who was active in the 6th century . He is described as the son of <unk> Hael , who came to Britain from Armorica ( present @-@ day northern France ) towards the end of the 5th century . He established a Christian site at the location of the present church in 630 ( according to the Diocese of Bangor and a 2006 guide to the churches of Anglesey ) , although a 19th @-@ century guide to Wales by the writer Samuel Lewis says that it was sometime early in the 7th century . No part of a building from that period survives . There was a church here by 1254 , since it is recorded in the Norwich Taxation of that year . The present building is thought by Cadw ( the Welsh Assembly Government body responsible for the built heritage of Wales ) to be " probably built upon Medieval foundations " , albeit that the earliest dateable feature of the structure is from the late 18th century . After some repairs in the early part of the 19th century , St Fflewin 's was partially rebuilt ( " judiciously " , says a 2009 guide to the buildings of north @-@ west Wales ) in 1864 and further restored during the 1930s . The Welsh poet and clergyman Morris Williams ( better known by his bardic name " Nicander " ) was rector here from 1859 until his death in 1874 ; he was buried at <unk> , one of the other Anglesey churches for which he had responsibility . 
 The church is isolated , located in the countryside of north Anglesey by a farm , about 1 mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) from <unk> , in an area of Anglesey known as Mynydd <unk> . Llanfflewin takes its name from the church : the Welsh word llan originally meant " enclosure " and then " church " , so " Llanfflewin " means " Church of Fflewin " . It is set within a raised circular enclosure , with an arched lychgate ( possibly of 17th @-@ century date ) . It is still in use for worship , and belongs to the Church in Wales , as one of five churches in the combined benefice of <unk> with Bodewryd with Rhosbeirio with Llanfflewin and <unk> . It is within the deanery of Twrcelyn , the archdeaconry of Bangor and the Diocese of Bangor . As of 2012 , the rector is Canon G W Edwards . 
 = = Architecture and fittings = = 
 The church , which is small and rectangular , has no internal division between the nave and the chancel . It measures 47 feet 6 inches by 14 feet 9 inches ( 14 @.@ 5 by 4 @.@ 5 m ) . It is built of rubble masonry , and the roof is made of slate ; there is a gabled bellcote at the west end of the roof . The roof timbers can be seen from the inside . Entrance to the church is through a porch with a rounded arch at the west end of the south wall , and there is a vestry , with one window , at the west end of the north wall . 
 The windows in the south and north walls are rectangular pairs ; the window in the east wall is in the form of a rounded arch , with two lights ( sections of window separated by mullions ) . The sill of the window has a fragment of a medieval gravestone ( dating from some time after 1300 ) set into it , inscribed HIC <unk> <unk> . The church has a " roughly dressed " font with nine sides , dating from the 14th or 15th century . There are a number of slate memorial tablets on the north and south walls from the 18th century . A 1937 survey by the Royal Commission on Ancient and Historical Monuments in Wales and Monmouthshire also recorded a bier , with the initials " W.W. " and the date 1784 , and an Elizabethan silver cup with a cover @-@ paten , the paten having an engraved date of 1574 . It also noted a wooden pitch pipe and wooden shovel , both dating from the late 18th century . 
 = = Assessment = = 
 The church has national recognition and statutory protection from alteration as it has been designated by Cadw ( on behalf of the National Assembly for Wales ) as a Grade II listed building – the lowest of the three grades of listing , designating " buildings of special interest , which warrant every effort being made to preserve them " . It was given this status on 12 May 1970 , and has been listed because it is " a simple rural church built on Medieval foundations " . Cadw also notes that it retains " the vernacular character of a pre gothic revival church " . 
 Samuel Lewis said that the church , which he described as " a plain edifice " , was " beautifully situated near a small lake , and surrounded with pleasing scenery " . The Welsh politician and church historian Sir Stephen Glynne visited the church on 4 September 1867 . He said that the church " has been so completely modernised , that it is doubtful whether any original feature remains but the bell @-@ gable and one single light window in the north wall " . He said that the font was of " singular design " : " octagonal , swelling downwards and each face concave . " He also said that the site was " wild and striking . " A 2006 guide to the churches of Anglesey says that it is " a typical , well @-@ preserved rural church and is well worth a visit . " 
 = Doggystyle = 
 Doggystyle is the debut studio album by American West Coast hip hop artist , Snoop Doggy Dogg , released by Death Row Records and Interscope Records on November 23 , 1993 . The album was recorded soon following the release of Dr. Dre 's landmark debut album The Chronic ( 1992 ) , to which Snoop Dogg contributed significantly . The style he developed for Dre 's album was continued on Doggystyle . Critics have praised Snoop Dogg for the lyrical " realism " he delivers on the album and for his distinctive vocal flow . 
 Despite some mixed criticism of the album initially upon its release , Doggystyle has earned recognition from many music critics as one of the most significant albums of the 1990s , as well as one of the most important hip hop albums ever released . Much like The Chronic , the distinctive sounds of Doggystyle helped introduce the hip hop style of G @-@ funk to a mainstream audience , bringing forward West Coast hip hop as a dominant force in the early 1990s . 
 Doggystyle debuted at number one on the Billboard 200 chart , and sold 806 @,@ 858 copies in its first week alone , which was the record for a debuting artist and the fastest @-@ selling hip hop album ever until Eminem 's The Marshall Mathers LP in 2000 . Doggystyle is included in The Source magazine 's list of the 100 Best Rap Albums , as well as Rolling Stone magazine 's list of Essential Recordings of the 90s . About.com placed the album in number 17 of the greatest hip hop / rap albums of all time . The album was certified quadruple platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) . By November 2015 , the album had sold 7 million copies in the United States , and over 11 million copies worldwide . 
 = = Conception = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 Snoop Dogg came to attention of the music industry in 1992 , through his vocal contributions on Dr. Dre 's The Chronic . That album is considered to have " transformed the entire sound of West Coast rap " by its development of what later became known as the " G @-@ funk " sound . The Chronic expanded gangsta rap with profanity , anti @-@ authoritarian lyrics and multi @-@ layered samples taken from 1970 's P @-@ Funk records . Snoop Dogg contributed vocals to Dre 's solo single , " Deep Cover " , which led to a high degree of anticipation among hip hop for the release of his own solo album . 
 Doggystyle and The Chronic are associated with each other mainly because each prominently featured Snoop Dogg and because both contain G @-@ funk style production from Dr. Dre . The two releases are linked by the high number of vocal contributions from Death Row Records artists , including Tha Dogg Pound , RBX , The Lady of Rage , while both contain a high density of misogynistic lyrics and profanity in their lyrics . In addition , the two albums are each viewed by critics as early " G @-@ funk classics " , and have been described as " joined at the hip " . ' Doggystyle ' also marked the debut of Death Row vocalist , Nanci Fletcher - the daughter of jazz legend Sam Fletcher . 
 Gangsta rap has been criticized for its extreme lyrics , which are often accused of glamorizing gang violence and black @-@ on @-@ black crime . The Gangsta rappers responded that they were simply describing the realities of life in places such as Compton , California , and Long Beach , California . Describing Doggystyle in 1993 , Snoop Dogg likewise points to the album 's realism , and the extent to which it is based on his personal experience . He said , " I can 't rap about something I don 't know . You 'll never hear me rapping about no bachelor 's degree . It 's only what I know and that 's that street life . It 's all everyday life , reality . " Explaining his intentions , Snoop Dogg claims he feels he is a role model to many young black men , and that his songs are designed to relate to their concerns . " For little kids growing up in the ghettos , " he said , " it 's easy to get into the wrong types of things , especially <unk> and selling drugs . I 've seen what that was like , and I don 't glorify it , but I don 't preach . I bring it to them rather than have them go find out about it for themselves . " He further explained the " dream " that he would pursue after making the album : " I 'm going to try to eliminate the gang violence . I 'll be on a mission for peace . I know I have a lot of power . I know if I say , ' Don 't kill ' , niggas won 't kill " . 
 = = = Recording = = = 
 Doggystyle was recorded in early 1993 at Death Row Studios . It was produced in a style similar to The Chronic ; some critics called it a " carbon copy " . Snoop Dogg collaborated with two music groups , 213 and Tha Dogg Pound . Daz Dillinger , of the latter group , accused Dr. Dre of taking sole recognition for producing the album and alleged that Warren G and himself contributed substantially to the production of the project . Death Row Records co @-@ founder Marion " Suge " Knight stated in 2013 that , " Daz pretty much did the whole album " , and that credit was signed over to Dr. Dre for a fee . Snoop Dogg said Dr. Dre was capable of making beats without the help of collaborators and addressed the issues with Warren G and Daz , stating " They made beats , Dre produced that record " . He discussed the track " Ain 't No Fun " , mentioning that Daz and Warren G brought Dr. Dre the beat but " Dre took that <unk> to the next level ! " Bruce Williams , closely affiliated with Dr. Dre , discussed the recording process during Dre 's time at Death Row Records , stating : 
 Dre ’ s going to be the first one in the studio and the last one to leave . He ’ ll start messing with a beat . As the beat starts pumping , the guys start filtering in . Everybody will get their little drink and smoke in . Soon enough the beat starts to make a presence . You ’ ll look around the room and every cat that was a rapper – from Kurupt to Daz to Snoop – will grab a pen . They would start writing while Dre is making a beat so by the time he ’ s finished with the beat , they are ready to hit the booth and start spittin ' . To see those young cats – they were all hungry and wanted to make something dope . The atmosphere that was there , you couldn ’ t be wack . 
 Williams said the album was never finished and because of the demand for the record , the distributors insisted the album be completed , otherwise they would cancel the album 's orders . This resulted in Dr. Dre mixing the album and inserting the skits within 48 hours , which enabled the album to be released . Rolling Stone writer Jonathan Gold described how Dr. Dre produced a beat from scratch to complete instrumental : " Dre may find something he likes from an old drum break , loop it and gradually replace each part with a better tom @-@ tom sound , a kick @-@ drum sound he adores , until the beat bears the same relationship to the original that the Incredible Hulk does to Bill Bixby " . Gold also described how the track progressed with other musicians adding to the song , stating " A bass player wanders in , unpacks his instrument and pops a funky two @-@ note bass line over the beat , then leaves to watch CNN , though his two notes keep looping into infinity . A smiling guy in a striped jersey plays a nasty one @-@ fingered melody on an old Minimoog synthesizer that 's been obsolete since 1982 , and Dre scratches in a sort of <unk> munching noise , and then from his well @-@ stocked Akai MPC60 samples comes a shriek , a spare piano chord , an ejaculation from the first Beastie 's record -- " Let me clear my throat " — and the many @-@ layered groove is happening , bumping , breathing , almost loud enough to see . " 
 While recording Doggystyle with Dr. Dre in August 1993 , Snoop Dogg was arrested in connection with the death of Phillip <unk> , a member of a rival gang who was shot and killed in a gang fight . According to the charges , the rapper 's bodyguard , McKinley Lee , shot <unk> as Snoop Dogg drove the vehicle ; the rapper claimed it was self @-@ defense , alleging the victim was stalking Snoop Dogg . He spent most of 1995 preparing the case which went to trial in late 1995 . He was cleared of all charges in February 1996 when he began work on his second album , Tha Doggfather . 
 = = = Title significance = = = 
 The album 's title alludes to the doggy style sex position and is a reference to the musician 's name . The artwork , which was done by artist Joe Cool , represents the themes covered in the album and the style of implementation of those ideas . Some critics believe the artwork portrays a woman merely as a hole to be filled by the man , which they believe adheres to the narcissistic and sexist lyrical themes Snoop Dogg covers . In this interpretation , the cover art and lyrics convey what they refer to as the self @-@ indulgent " gangsta " lifestyle , drugs , cars , sex , and money . The artwork uses several quotes from the 1982 George Clinton single " Atomic Dog " . The quotes come from the dogs at the top of the brick wall on the album cover , which say , " Why must I feel like dat ? " , " Why must I chase da cat ? " and " Nuttin ' but da <unk> in me " . 
 = = Music = = 
 = = = Production = = = 
 Dre 's handling of the production was praised by critics . AllMusic writer Stephen Erlewine stated : " Dre realized that it wasn 't time to push the limits of G @-@ funk , and instead decided to deepen it musically , creating easy @-@ rolling productions that have more layers than they appear " . He added that the beats were " laid @-@ back funky , continuing to resonate after many listens " . Rolling Stone writer Touré noted " The Chronic 's slow , heavy beats were a sonic representation of angry depression as accurate as Cobain 's feedback blasts ; Doggystyle is leaner , with its high @-@ tempo Isaac <unk> and Curtis Mayfield @-@ derived tracks " . He went on to say that " Most of Dre 's hooks and nearly all his beats refuse to linger , as if the songs themselves are nervous , fearful of exposure , restless to get offscreen . " Entertainment Weekly magazine 's David Browne mentioned that " The mix of samples and live music on Dre 's latest , The Chronic , gave it texture and depth , and he continues his knob @-@ turning growth on Doggystyle , fluidly weaving together a gaggle of background singers and rappers , quirky samples , his trademark horror @-@ flick keyboard lines " . The Source magazine <unk> wrote : " Dre 's brand of G @-@ funk may be common now , but it is still painstakingly well @-@ produced " . 
 = = = Lyrics = = = 
 Snoop Dogg 's lyrics were generally praised by critics , although they caused some controversy . He was acclaimed for the realism in his rhymes and his harmonious flow . Allmusic 's Stephen Erlewine commended Snoop Dogg , saying : " he 's one of hip @-@ hop 's greatest vocal stylists with this record " and he " takes his time , playing with the flow of his words , giving his rhymes a nearly melodic eloquence . Snoop is something special , with unpredictable turns of phrase , evocative imagery , and a distinctive , addictive flow " . Time magazine 's Christopher John Farley noted " Snoop 's rapping isn 't flashy , but it is catchy " and stated " His relaxed vocal style is a perfect match for Dre 's bass @-@ heavy producing . Snoop 's voice is lithe enough to snake its way around the big beats " . The ideas put forward through the lyrics include Snoop Dogg 's adolescent urges , as he freely talks of casual sex , smoking marijuana and gunning down rival gang members . Time magazine remarked that the notions " are often unnecessarily graphic ; at some points they 're downright obscene " and that " the album would have been stronger if such misgivings about the criminal life , as well as Snoop 's touches of introspection , had been applied to some of the cruder songs " . The album also covered gun play , drug dealing and pimping . The New York Times said that the lyrical concepts were delivered in " crudest , rudest terms " . 
 Some critics said Snoop Dogg was " obsessed with being a ' G ' , a gangster , a lawbreaker who smokes dope and kills with impunity " and that his lyrics depict the black @-@ on @-@ black crime in the inner @-@ cities . The lyrics involve many derogatory terms against woman , with expressions such as " bitches " and " hos " being used throughout , which illustrates the feeling of sexism and oppression within American society . In certain tracks Snoop Dogg and Tha Dogg Pound casually speak of group sex , illustrating the demeaning of women . Snoop Dogg 's lyrics depict drugs , alcohol , sex , and money as methods of escape from oppression , but they also show an underside of the " gangsta " lifestyle and the results of following this lifestyle . The lyrics ' violent representations , including murder and aggressive behaviour , have also generated controversy . C. <unk> Tucker of the National Political Congress of Black Women named gangsta rap " a profane and obscene glorification of murder and rape " , which can be attributed to Doggystyle . 
 = = = Content = = = 
 " Who Am I ( What 's My Name ) ? " was the first single released from the album on November 30 , 1993 . It peaked at number eight on the Billboard Hot 100 and Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Singles & Tracks charts , and reached number one on the Hot Rap Singles . It is largely recognised as the album 's ' leading single ' , and the RIAA certified it Gold on February 8 , 1994 . It was certified Platinum later the same year . It reached number 20 on the UK Singles Chart in 1994 and re @-@ entered the chart in 2004 , reaching number 100 . In terms of critical reception and the volume of sales , it is Snoop 's most successful single to date . " Gin and Juice " was the second single released on January 15 , 1994 . Like the previous single , it was a hit on multiple charts . It reached number eight on the Billboard Hot 100 , number 13 on the Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Singles & Tracks , number one on Hot Rap Singles , and number 39 on the UK Singles Chart . The RIAA certified it Platinum on April 6 , 1994 . The song was nominated at the 1995 Grammy Awards for Best Rap Solo Performance , but lost to Queen Latifah 's " <unk> " . " Doggy Dogg World " was released as a Europe @-@ only single during June 1994 . Even though the single was not officially released in the U.S. , it received some radio airplay which resulted in position 19 on the Rhythmic Top 40 chart . A music video was produced for the single , which gained American video TV @-@ play and won the 1994 MTV Video Music Award for Best Rap Video . It reached number 32 on the UK Singles Chart . 
 " Lodi Dodi " and " Murder Was the Case " were not official singles , but they received radio airplay and charted in Rhythmic Top 40 . An 18 @-@ minute music video was shot for the two songs , with an accompanying Murder Was the Case soundtrack . The video won the 1995 Video of the Year award at The Source Hip @-@ Hop Music Awards . " Gin and Juice " was nominated at the 1995 Grammy Awards for Best Rap Solo Performance . A bonus track , " Gz Up , Hoes Down " , was included in the album 's first pressing , but not in later versions because of sample clearance issues . Snoop Dogg could not gain the rights to use the beats because the record company was not willing to pay license fees for using the samples . " Gz Up , Hoes Down " was later released on the Death Row compilation " 15 Years on Death Row " . " Tha Next Episode " was listed on the cover , but not included in any pressing . It is considered the original material used for the 2000 Dr. Dre single " The Next Episode " but bears no resemblance to the later song . It was 4 minutes and 36 seconds ( 4 : 36 ) long . " Tha Next Episode " was later released on the Dr. Dre mixtape <unk> under the name " Chronic Unreleased Studio Session " , but only 1 : 10 long . " Doggystyle " featuring George Clinton was a 5 : 26 long outtake from the album sessions . It is a singing melody with vocals dominating the song and it extensively samples " Oh I " by Funkadelic from their album " Electric Spanking of War Babies " . Jewell & The Brides of <unk> are featured on the chorus . The song was released on " Death Row : The Lost Sessions Vol . 1 " amongst other songs recorded by Snoop Doggy Dogg during his tenure at Death Row . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Commercial performance = = = 
 Doggystyle debuted on the Billboard 200 at number @-@ one , powered by spectacular first week sales 806 @,@ 000 units . As of November 2015 , the album had sold 7 million copies in the United States , and over 11 million copies worldwide . It was certified four times platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America on May 31 , 1994 . It is Snoop Dogg 's most successful album ; his following albums were certified single or double platinum . Doggystyle first appeared on music charts in 1993 , peaking on the Billboard 200 and Top R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Albums at number one . It re @-@ peaked at number one on the Billboard 200 in January 1994 , when it was already certified three times platinum by the RIAA . The record was mildly successful in Europe , reaching number 18 in Sweden , number 21 in Germany and number 35 in Austria . It also peaked at number 25 on the Recording Industry Association of New Zealand album chart . At the end of 1994 , the album was number three on the Billboard Year @-@ End Top Albums Chart and number one on the Billboard Year @-@ End Top R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Albums Chart . It re @-@ entered the charts in 2003 , peaking on the Ireland Albums Top 75 at number 70 . As of September 2015 , it had spent a total of 74 nonconsecutive weeks on the Billboard 200 album chart . 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 Doggystyle was generally praised by critics . Rolling Stone writer Touré mentioned " Doggystyle is filled with verbal and vocal feats that meet its high expectations . It speeds through 55 minutes of constant talk as if on a suicide hot line " . David Browne of Entertainment Weekly noted " It is the most limber , low @-@ rider gangsta album to date " and went on to say " Doggystyle is a grim , bleak @-@ faced record . It 's set in a dead @-@ end , no @-@ tomorrow world of cheap thrills " . Stephen Thomas Erlewine of AllMusic stated " Doggystyle and The Chronic stand proudly together as the twin pinnacles of West Coast G @-@ funk hip @-@ hop of the early ' 90s " Stylus magazine presented " The Chronic vs. Doggystyle " article , and stated a strong point of Doggystyle compared to Dre 's album was its follow @-@ up singles and that " some of the album tracks are more famous than the singles " . Vibe magazine expressed that " Snoop is no ordinary gangsta ; that 's impossible for an artist this playful . On his debut , with Dre riding shotgun anthems abound as often as gin @-@ soaked debauchery " . The Source magazine gave the album a 4 / 5 mic rating . It said Snoop Dogg emerged as a rapper who lived up to all the advance hype which came from his work on The Chronic , and discussed songs on the record , stating " If ' Murder Was The Case ' is a stroke of near genius , then ' Lodi Dodi ' is an example of total genius . " NME magazine called the lead single " a pinnacle he conquered effortlessly " and went on to name the record a " benchmark album " . 
 The album also received some negative criticism . Erlewine of AllMusic mentioned the album did not " surprise or offer anything that wasn 't already on The Chronic " . Christopher John Farley noted Snoop Dogg had little examination over his emotions and feelings . David Browne spoke of " Ain 't No Fun " , stating it was an example of how " musically artful , yet lyrically repellent , this album can be " and went on to say " It 's easy to be impressed one moment and appalled the next " . Renowned rock critic Robert Christgau gave the album a " dud " rating , which signifies " a bad record whose details rarely merit further thought . At the upper level it may merely be overrated , disappointing , or dull . Down below it may be contemptible . " Q 's Danny Kelly observed : " Snoop Dogg 's record is more or less a 19 @-@ track homage to / gleeful rip off of George Clinton 's ' Atomic Dog ' … It 's inclined to become a touch unimaginative ; a tad , let 's be honest , dull … And the sleeve competes with The Waterboys ' Dream Harder and Billy Joel 's River of Dreams as the worst attached to a recent release . " 
 Despite the initial mixed criticism , critical perception of the album later improved , as Doggystyle has earned several accolades and rankings on critics ' " best album " lists . A review of the album 's reissue upped Q 's rating from three to four stars out of five . " A modern classic , " observed reviewer Tom Doyle . The Source magazine later gave the album a classic five @-@ mic rating . 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 The information regarding accolades attributed to Doggystyle is adapted from AcclaimedMusic.net. 
 ( * ) designates lists that are unordered . 
 = = Influence = = 
 = = = Hip @-@ hop music = = = 
 Doggystyle is seen by many hip hop pundits as a " classic " and an " essential " album . It is credited with defining West Coast hip hop ; shifting the emphasis to more melodious , synth @-@ driven , and funk @-@ induced beats . About.com stated during the period the album was released , " Gangsta rap never sounded so sweet . " The album is credited for further establishment of the slurred " lazy drawl " that sacrificed lyrical complexity for clarity and rhythmic cadence on Doggystyle and The Chronic . The album is considered as one of the first G @-@ funk albums the style of which many rappers duplicated in later years . 
 = = = Hip @-@ hop culture = = = 
 It has been suggested by some writers and publications that Doggystyle has considerably affected African @-@ American culture . Some publications have held the rap genre responsible for social problems such as sexual violence and sexism , which has been blamed on Snoop Dogg and other rappers for calling their controversial lyrics " keeping it real . " The problems of sexual violence and sexism are attributed to lyrics degrading women such as " bitches " and " ho 's , " which some believe have influenced black males . Snoop Dogg and other hip hop artists , including N.W.A , especially Eazy E , Dr. Dre and Ice Cube ( due to their success ) and Tupac Shakur , have been held accountable for developing the gangsta rap form ; a genre which articulated the rage of the urban underclass and its sense of intense oppression and defiant rebellion , which has been attained through the ability to communicate free of censorship , and has allowed hip hop culture to become a dominant style and ethos throughout the world . Mariah Carey sampled the song " Ain 't No Fun ( If the Homies Can 't Have None ) " in her 1999 album Rainbow for the remix of Heartbreaker which featured Missy Elliott and Da Brat . 
 The writers of <unk> , Steven Best and Douglas Kellner , have noted that Snoop Dogg and other rappers only condemn violence when it is directed against them , otherwise " they celebrate it , internalize it , and embrace it as an ethos and means of self expression , " which some believe has an effect on the black @-@ on @-@ black crime . The release of music videos from Doggystyle and The Chronic has enabled the artists to add visual illustrations to their lyrics , which generally involve Dr. Dre and Snoop Dogg driving around South Central , Los Angeles in a lowrider ( a vehicle with lowered suspension ) . This imagery of the " gangsta lifestyle " is thought to have influenced young black males into trying to live the same lifestyle and it is also noted by T. <unk> , writer of Pimps Up , Ho 's Down : Hip Hop 's Hold on Young Black Women , that the videos highlight the representation of class , race and Black masculinity within contemporary urban America . 
 = = = Subsequent work = = = 
 Doggystyle is generally considered Snoop Dogg 's best record , in addition to being his highest charting and best @-@ selling album as his later albums were certified double Platinum , Platinum or Gold although Da Game Is to Be Sold , Not to Be Told was certified triple Platinum making it his second best selling album and also his only other one to be certified multi Platinum . It differs from following albums as his later work featured production from multiple individuals , such as The Neptunes , Timbaland and Daz Dillinger , with reduced input from Dr. Dre , which shows a shift from G @-@ funk production . Snoop Dogg 's follow @-@ up album , Tha Doggfather ( 1996 ) , did not involve Dr. Dre , as he left Death Row Records . As a result , DJ Pooh was the main beat @-@ maker for the album . Tha Doggfather followed the methods of a G @-@ funk record and initially sold well , but received mixed reviews and failed to produce a major hit single . In 1998 , Snoop Dogg left Death Row and joined No Limit Records , changing his stage name from Snoop Doggy Dogg to Snoop Dogg . During his tenure at the label , he continued several of the themes from Doggystyle with follow @-@ ups to earlier songs , such as " Gin & Juice II " ( 1998 ) and " Snoop Dogg ( What 's My Name II ) " ( 2000 ) . 
 Subsequent studio albums such as Paid tha Cost to Be da Boss ( 2002 ) and R & G ( Rhythm & Gangsta ) : The Masterpiece ( 2004 ) exhibited a more mainstream , pop @-@ oriented theme with new sounds , but remained " hardcore throughout " and featured " plenty of street and commercial appeal " . These releases included three hit singles , " Beautiful " , " Drop It Like It 's Hot " and " Signs " . Snoop Dogg was credited for returning to his G @-@ funk roots in 2006 , which was established with his eighth studio album , Tha Blue Carpet Treatment ( 2006 ) . The album was noted for being a " hard and very G @-@ Funk record " . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All songs produced by Dr. Dre . 
 = = = Cut Tracks = = = 
 " Gz Up , <unk> Down " ( featuring Hug ) - omitted on all but the original pressings , due to sample and clearance issues . 
 " Tha Next Episode " ( featuring Dr. Dre ) - listed on the track listing provided to retailers before the album 's release , but does not feature on any pressings of the album . The instrumental was later used for Warren G 's track " Runnin ' Wit No Breaks " from his album , Regulate ... G Funk Era The pair later recorded a track entitled " The Next Episode " for Dre 's second studio album , 2001 , which is completely different from the original . 
 " Doggystyle " ( featuring Jewell & George Clinton ) - recorded during the album sessions , remaining unreleased until its inclusion on the compilation album Death Row : The Lost Sessions Vol . 1 
 " The Root of All Evil ( Outro ) " ( featuring Teena Marie ) - recorded during the album sessions , remaining unreleased until its inclusion on the compilation album Death Row : The Lost Sessions Vol . 1 . The instrumental was later used for the remix of " California Love " , by 2Pac featuring Dr. Dre . 
 " Every Single Day " ( featuring Kurupt , Jewell and Nate Dogg ) - recorded during the album sessions , remaining unreleased until an alternate version was released on Tha Dogg Pound compilation album 2002 . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = = Chart precession and succession = = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Harry Potter = 
 Harry Potter is a series of fantasy novels written by British author J. K. Rowling . The novels chronicle the life of a young wizard , Harry Potter , and his friends Hermione Granger and Ron Weasley , all of whom are students at Hogwarts School of Witchcraft and Wizardry . The main story arc concerns Harry 's struggle against Lord Voldemort , the Dark wizard who intends to become immortal , overthrow the Ministry of Magic , subjugate non @-@ magic people ( Muggles ) and destroy anyone who stands in his way . 
 Since the release of the first novel , Harry Potter and the Philosopher 's Stone , on 30 June 1997 , the books have found immense popularity , critical acclaim and commercial success worldwide . They have attracted a wide adult audience as well as younger readers , and are often considered cornerstones of modern young adult literature . The series has also had its share of criticism , including concern about the increasingly dark tone as the series progressed , as well as the often gruesome and graphic violence it depicts . As of July 2013 , the books have sold more than 450 million copies worldwide , making them the best @-@ selling book series in history , and have been translated into seventy @-@ three languages . The last four books consecutively set records as the fastest @-@ selling books in history , with the final instalment selling roughly eleven million copies in the United States within twenty @-@ four hours of its release . 
 The series was originally published in English by two major publishers , Bloomsbury in the United Kingdom and Scholastic Press in the United States . A play , Harry Potter and the Cursed Child , based on a story by Rowling , is set to première in London on 30 July 2016 at the Palace Theatre , and its script will subsequently be published by Little , Brown as the eighth book in the series . The original seven books were adapted into an eight @-@ part film series by Warner Bros. Pictures , which has become the second highest @-@ grossing film series of all time as of August 2015 . The franchise has also generated much tie @-@ in merchandise , making the Harry Potter brand worth in excess of $ 15 billion . 
 A series of many genres , including fantasy , drama , coming of age and the British school story ( which includes elements of mystery , thriller , adventure , horror and romance ) , the world of Harry Potter explores numerous themes and includes many cultural meanings and references . According to Rowling , the main theme is death . Other major themes in the series include prejudice , corruption , and madness . 
 The success of the books and films has ensured that the Harry Potter franchise continues to expand , with numerous derivative works , a travelling exhibition that premièred in Chicago in 2009 , a studio tour in London that opened in 2012 , a digital platform on which J.K. Rowling updates the series with new information and insight , and a trilogy of spin @-@ off films premièring in November 2016 , among many other developments . Most recently , themed attractions , collectively known as The Wizarding World of Harry Potter , have been built at several Universal Parks & Resorts amusement parks around the world . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The central character in the series is Harry Potter , an English orphan who discovers , at the age of eleven , that he is a wizard , though he lives in the ordinary world of non @-@ magical people known as Muggles . The wizarding world exists parallel to the Muggle world , albeit hidden and in secrecy . His magical ability is inborn and children with such abilities are invited to attend exclusive magic schools that teach the necessary skills to succeed in the wizarding world . Harry becomes a student at Hogwarts School of Witchcraft and Wizardry , a wizarding academy in Scotland and it is here where most of the events in the series take place . As Harry develops through his adolescence , he learns to overcome the problems that face him : magical , social and emotional , including ordinary teenage challenges such as friendships , infatuation , romantic relationships , schoolwork and exams , anxiety , depression , stress , and the greater test of preparing himself for the confrontation , that lies ahead , in wizarding Britain 's increasingly @-@ violent second wizarding war . 
 Each novel chronicles one year in Harry 's life during the period from 1991 to 1998 . The books also contain many flashbacks , which are frequently experienced by Harry viewing the memories of other characters in a device called a Pensieve . 
 The environment Rowling created is intimately connected to reality . The British magical community of the Harry Potter books is inspired by 1990s British culture , European folklore , classical mythology and alchemy , incorporating objects and wildlife such as magic wands , magic plants , potions , spells , flying broomsticks , centaurs and other magical creatures , the Deathly Hallows , and the Philosopher 's Stone , beside others invented by Rowling . While the fantasy land of Narnia is an alternate universe and the Lord of the Rings ' Middle @-@ earth a mythic past , the wizarding world of Harry Potter exists in parallel within the real world and contains magical versions of the ordinary elements of everyday life , with the action mostly set in Scotland ( Hogwarts ) , the West Country , Devon , London and Surrey in southeast England . The world only accessible to wizards and magical beings comprises a fragmented collection of overlooked hidden streets , ancient pubs , lonely country manors and secluded castles invisible to the Muggle population . 
 = = = Early years = = = 
 When the first novel of the series , Harry Potter and the Philosopher 's Stone ( published in America and other countries as Harry Potter and the Sorcerer 's Stone ) opens , it is apparent that some significant event has taken place in the wizarding world – an event so very remarkable , even the Muggles ( non @-@ magical people ) notice signs of it . The full background to this event and Harry Potter 's past is revealed gradually through the series . After the introductory chapter , the book leaps forward to a time shortly before Harry Potter 's eleventh birthday , and it is at this point that his magical background begins to be revealed . 
 Harry 's first contact with the wizarding world is through a half @-@ giant , Rubeus Hagrid , keeper of grounds and keys at Hogwarts . Hagrid reveals some of Harry 's history . Harry learns that , as a baby , he witnessed his parents ' murder by the power @-@ obsessed Dark wizard Lord Voldemort , who subsequently attempted to kill him as well . For reasons not revealed until the fifth book , the spell with which Voldemort tried to kill Harry , rebounded . Harry survived with only a lightning @-@ shaped scar on his forehead as a memento of the attack and Voldemort disappeared afterwards . As its inadvertent saviour from Voldemort 's reign of terror , Harry has become a living legend in the wizarding world . However , at the orders of the venerable and well @-@ known wizard Albus Dumbledore , the orphaned Harry had been placed in the home of his unpleasant Muggle relatives , the Dursleys , who kept him safe but treated him poorly , having him live in a cupboard and do chores while doting on their spoiled son Dudley . Petunia Dursley was jealous of her sister 's magical abilities as a child , and later came to believe that all wizards were freaks . Therefore , the Dursleys hated wizards , so they hid Harry 's true heritage from him , saying his parents died in a car crash in the hope that he would grow up " normal " . 
 With Hagrid 's help , Harry prepares for and undertakes his first year of study at Hogwarts . As Harry begins to explore the magical world , the reader is introduced to many of the primary locations used throughout the series . Harry meets most of the main characters and gains his two closest friends : Ron Weasley , a fun @-@ loving member of an ancient , large , happy , but poor wizarding family , and Hermione Granger , a gifted and very hardworking witch of non @-@ magical parentage . Harry also encounters the school 's potions master , Severus Snape , who displays a conspicuously deep and abiding dislike for him , and the Defence Against the Dark Arts teacher , Quirinus Quirrell , who later turns out to be controlled by Lord Voldemort . The first book concludes with Harry 's second confrontation with Lord Voldemort , who , in his quest for immortality , yearns to gain the power of the Philosopher 's Stone , a substance that bestows everlasting life . 
 The series continues with Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets , describing Harry 's second year at Hogwarts . He and his friends investigate a 50 @-@ year @-@ old mystery that appears uncannily related to recent sinister events at the school . Ron 's younger sister , Ginny Weasley , enrolls in her first year at Hogwarts , and finds an old notebook which turns out to be Voldemort 's diary from his school days . Ginny becomes possessed by Voldemort through the diary and unconsciously opens the " Chamber of Secrets " , unleashing an ancient monster , later revealed to be a basilisk , which begins attacking students at Hogwarts . The novel delves into the history of Hogwarts and a legend revolving around the Chamber that soon frightened everyone in the school . The book also introduces a new Defence Against the Dark Arts teacher , Gilderoy Lockhart , a highly cheerful , self @-@ conceited wizard who goes around as if he is the most wonderful person who ever existed , who knows absolutely every single thing there is to know about everything , who later turns out to be a fraud . Harry discovers that prejudice exists in the wizarding world , and learns that Voldemort 's reign of terror was often directed at wizards who were descended from Muggles . Harry also learns that his ability to speak the snake language <unk> is rare and often associated with the Dark Arts . The novel ends after Harry saves Ginny 's life by destroying the basilisk and the enchanted diary which has been the source of the problems . 
 The third novel , Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban , follows Harry in his third year of magical education . It is the only book in the series which does not feature Lord Voldemort . Instead , Harry must deal with the knowledge that he has been targeted by Sirius Black , his father 's best friend , and , according to the Wizarding World , an escaped mass murderer who assisted in the deaths of Harry 's parents . As Harry struggles with his reaction to the <unk> – dark creatures with the power to devour a human soul , which feed on despair – which are ostensibly protecting the school , he reaches out to Remus Lupin , a Defence Against the Dark Arts teacher who is eventually revealed to be a werewolf . Lupin teaches Harry defensive measures which are well above the level of magic generally executed by people his age . Harry came to know that both Lupin and Black were best friends of his father and that Black was framed by their fourth friend , Peter Pettigrew . In this book , a recurring theme throughout the series is emphasised – in every book there is a new Defence Against the Dark Arts teacher , none of whom lasts more than one school year . 
 = = = Voldemort returns = = = 
 During Harry 's fourth year of school ( detailed in Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire ) , Harry is unwillingly entered as a participant in the Triwizard Tournament , a dangerous contest where three " champions " , one from each participating school , must compete with each other in three tasks in order to win the <unk> cup . This year , Harry must compete against a witch and a wizard " champion " from visiting schools Beauxbatons and Durmstrang , as well as another Hogwarts student , causing Harry 's friends to distance themselves from him . Harry is guided through the tournament by their new Defence Against the Dark Arts professor , Alastor " Mad @-@ Eye " Moody , who turns out to be an impostor – one of Voldemort 's supporters named Barty Crouch , Jr. in disguise . The point at which the mystery is unravelled marks the series ' shift from foreboding and uncertainty into open conflict . Voldemort 's plan to have Crouch use the tournament to bring Harry to Voldemort succeeds . Although Harry manages to escape , Cedric Diggory , the other Hogwarts champion in the tournament , is killed by Peter Pettigrew and Voldemort re @-@ enters the wizarding world with a physical body . 
 In the fifth book , Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix , Harry must confront the newly resurfaced Voldemort . In response to Voldemort 's reappearance , Dumbledore re @-@ activates the Order of the Phoenix , a secret society which works from Sirius Black 's dark family home to defeat Voldemort 's minions and protect Voldemort 's targets , especially Harry . Despite Harry 's description of Voldemort 's recent activities , the Ministry of Magic and many others in the magical world refuse to believe that Voldemort has returned . In an attempt to counter and eventually discredit Dumbledore , who along with Harry is the most prominent voice in the wizarding world attempting to warn of Voldemort 's return , the Ministry appoints Dolores Umbridge as the High Inquisitor of Hogwarts and the new Defence Against the Dark Arts teacher . She transforms the school into a dictatorial regime and refuses to allow the students to learn ways to defend themselves against dark magic . 
 With Ron and Hermione 's suggestion , Harry forms " Dumbledore 's Army " , a secret study group aimed to teach his classmates the higher @-@ level skills of Defence Against the Dark Arts that he has learned from his previous encounters with Dark wizards . An important prophecy concerning Harry and Lord Voldemort is revealed , and Harry discovers that he and Voldemort have a painful connection , allowing Harry to view some of Voldemort 's actions telepathically . In the novel 's climax , Harry and his friends face off against Voldemort 's Death Eaters at the Ministry of Magic . Although the timely arrival of members of the Order of the Phoenix saves the children 's lives , Sirius Black is killed in the conflict . 
 In the sixth book , Harry Potter and the Half @-@ Blood Prince , Voldemort begins waging open warfare . Harry and his friends are relatively protected from that danger at Hogwarts . They are subject to all the difficulties of adolescence – Harry eventually begins dating Ginny , Ron establishes a strong infatuation with fellow Hogwarts student Lavender Brown , and Hermione starts to develop romantic feelings toward Ron . Near the beginning of the novel , lacking his own book , Harry is given an old potions textbook filled with many annotations and recommendations signed by a mysterious writer ; " the Half @-@ Blood Prince . " This book is a source of scholastic success and great recognition from their new potions master , Horace Slughorn , but because of the potency of the spells that are written in it , becomes a source of concern . Harry takes private lessons with Dumbledore , who shows him various memories concerning the early life of Voldemort in a device called a Pensieve . These reveal that in order to preserve his life , Voldemort has split his soul into pieces , creating a series of horcruxes – evil enchanted items hidden in various locations , one of which was the diary destroyed in the second book . Harry 's snobbish adversary , Draco Malfoy , attempts to attack Dumbledore , and the book culminates in the killing of Dumbledore by Professor Snape , the titular Half @-@ Blood Prince . 
 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows , the last book in the series , begins directly after the events of the sixth book . Lord Voldemort has completed his ascension to power and gained control of the Ministry of Magic . Harry , Ron and Hermione drop out of school so that they can find and destroy Voldemort 's remaining horcruxes . To ensure their own safety as well as that of their family and friends , they are forced to isolate themselves . As they search for the horcruxes , the trio learns details about Dumbledore 's past , as well as Snape 's true motives – he had worked on Dumbledore 's behalf since the murder of Harry 's mother . Snape is killed by Voldemort out of paranoia . 
 The book culminates in the Battle of Hogwarts . Harry , Ron and Hermione , in conjunction with members of the Order of the Phoenix and many of the teachers and students , defend Hogwarts from Voldemort , his Death Eaters , and various dangerous magical creatures . Several major characters are killed in the first wave of the battle , including Remus Lupin and Fred Weasley . After learning that he himself is a horcrux , Harry surrenders himself to Voldemort in the Forbidden Forest , who casts a killing curse ( <unk> <unk> ) at him . The defenders of Hogwarts do not surrender after learning of Harry 's presumed death and continue to fight on . Harry awakens and faces Voldemort , whose horcruxes have all been destroyed . In the final battle , Voldemort 's killing curse rebounds off Harry 's defensive spell ( <unk> ) killing Voldemort . Harry Potter marries and has children with Ginny Weasley and Hermione Granger marries and has children with Ronald Weasley . 
 An epilogue describes the lives of the surviving characters and the effects of Voldemort 's death on the wizarding world . It also introduces the children of all the characters . 
 = = = Nineteen years later = = = 
 Harry Potter and the Cursed Child is an upcoming two @-@ part West End stage play , and the official eighth book in the Harry Potter book series , which was written by Jack Thorne and based on a story by author J. K. Rowling , Thorne and director John Tiffany . The play is scheduled to open on July 30 , 2016 at the Palace Theatre , London , England , and will feature Rowling collaborating with an experienced team to bring the production to the stage . The book will in @-@ turn be released July 31 , 2016 . The story is set nineteen years after the ending of Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows and follows Harry Potter , now a Ministry of Magic employee , and his youngest son Albus Severus Potter . 
 The play 's official synopsis was released on 23 October 2015 : 
 It was always difficult being Harry Potter and it isn ’ t much easier now that he is an overworked employee of the Ministry of Magic , a husband , and father of three school @-@ age children . 
 While Harry grapples with a past that refuses to stay where it belongs , his youngest son Albus must struggle with the weight of a family legacy he never wanted . As past and present fuse ominously , both father and son learn the uncomfortable truth : sometimes , darkness comes from unexpected places . 
 = = = Supplementary works = = = 
 = = = = In @-@ universe books = = = = 
 Rowling has expanded the Harry Potter universe with several short books produced for various charities . In 2001 , she released Fantastic Beasts and Where to Find Them ( a purported Hogwarts textbook ) and Quidditch Through the Ages ( a book Harry reads for fun ) . Proceeds from the sale of these two books benefited the charity Comic Relief . In 2007 , Rowling composed seven handwritten copies of The Tales of Beedle the Bard , a collection of fairy tales that is featured in the final novel , one of which was auctioned to raise money for the Children 's High Level Group , a fund for mentally disabled children in poor countries . The book was published internationally on 4 December 2008 . Rowling also wrote an 800 @-@ word prequel in 2008 as part of a fundraiser organised by the bookseller Waterstones . All three of these books contain extra information about the wizarding world not included in the original novels . 
 = = = = Pottermore website = = = = 
 In 2011 , Rowling launched a new website announcing an upcoming project called Pottermore . Pottermore opened to the general public on 14 April 2012 . Pottermore allows users to be sorted , be chosen by their wand and play various minigames . The main purpose of the website was to allow the user to journey though the story with access to content not revealed by JK Rowling previously , with over 18 @,@ 000 words of additional content . 
 In September 2015 the website was completely overhauled and most of the features were removed . The site has been redesigned and it mainly focuses on the information already available , rather than exploration . 
 = = Structure and genre = = 
 The Harry Potter novels are mainly directed at a young adult audience as opposed to an audience of middle grade readers , children , or adults . The novels fall within the genre of fantasy literature , and qualify as a unique type of fantasy called " urban fantasy " , " contemporary fantasy " , or " low fantasy " . They are mainly dramas , and maintain a fairly serious and dark tone throughout , though they do contain some notable instances of tragicomedy and black humour . In many respects , they are also examples of the bildungsroman , or coming of age novel , and contain elements of mystery , adventure , horror , thriller , and romance . They can be considered part of the British children 's boarding school genre , which includes Rudyard Kipling 's Stalky & Co . , Enid Blyton 's Malory Towers , St. Clare 's and the Naughtiest Girl series , and Frank Richards 's Billy Bunter novels : the Harry Potter books are predominantly set in Hogwarts , a fictional British boarding school for wizards , where the curriculum includes the use of magic . In this sense they are " in a direct line of descent from Thomas Hughes 's Tom Brown 's School Days and other Victorian and Edwardian novels of British public school life " , though they are , as many note , more contemporary , grittier , darker , and more mature than the typical boarding school novel , addressing serious themes of death , love , loss , prejudice , coming @-@ of @-@ age , and the loss of innocence in a 1990 's British setting . 
 The books are also , in the words of Stephen King , " shrewd mystery tales " , and each book is constructed in the manner of a Sherlock Holmes @-@ style mystery adventure . The stories are told from a third person limited point of view with very few exceptions ( such as the opening chapters of Philosopher 's Stone , Goblet of Fire and Deathly Hallows and the first two chapters of Half @-@ Blood Prince ) . 
 In the middle of each book , Harry struggles with the problems he encounters , and dealing with them often involves the need to violate some school rules . If students are caught breaking rules , they are often disciplined by Hogwarts professors . However , the stories reach their climax in the summer term , near or just after final exams , when events escalate far beyond in @-@ school squabbles and struggles , and Harry must confront either Voldemort or one of his followers , the Death Eaters , with the stakes a matter of life and death – a point underlined , as the series progresses , by one or more characters being killed in each of the final four books . In the aftermath , he learns important lessons through exposition and discussions with head teacher and mentor Albus Dumbledore . In the final novel , Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows , Harry and his friends spend most of their time away from Hogwarts , and only return there to face Voldemort at the dénouement . 
 = = Themes = = 
 According to Rowling , a major theme in the series is death : " My books are largely about death . They open with the death of Harry 's parents . There is Voldemort 's obsession with conquering death and his quest for immortality at any price , the goal of anyone with magic . I so understand why Voldemort wants to conquer death . We 're all frightened of it . " 
 Academics and journalists have developed many other interpretations of themes in the books , some more complex than others , and some including political subtexts . Themes such as normality , oppression , survival , and overcoming imposing odds have all been considered as prevalent throughout the series . Similarly , the theme of making one 's way through adolescence and " going over one 's most harrowing ordeals – and thus coming to terms with them " has also been considered . Rowling has stated that the books comprise " a prolonged argument for tolerance , a prolonged plea for an end to bigotry " and that they also pass on a message to " question authority and ... not assume that the establishment or the press tells you all of the truth " . 
 While the books could be said to comprise many other themes , such as power / abuse of power , violence and hatred , love , loss , prejudice , and free choice , they are , as Rowling states , " deeply entrenched in the whole plot " ; the writer prefers to let themes " grow organically " , rather than sitting down and consciously attempting to impart such ideas to her readers . Along the same lines is the ever @-@ present theme of adolescence , in whose depiction Rowling has been purposeful in acknowledging her characters ' sexualities and not leaving Harry , as she put it , " stuck in a state of permanent pre @-@ pubescence " . Rowling has also been praised for her nuanced depiction of the ways in which death and violence affects youth , and humanity as a whole . 
 Rowling said that , to her , the moral significance of the tales seems " blindingly obvious " . The key for her was the choice between what is right and what is easy , " because that … is how tyranny is started , with people being apathetic and taking the easy route and suddenly finding themselves in deep trouble . " 
 = = Origins = = 
 In 1990 , Rowling was on a crowded train from Manchester to London when the idea for Harry suddenly " fell into her head " . Rowling gives an account of the experience on her website saying : 
 " I had been writing almost continuously since the age of six but I had never been so excited about an idea before . I simply sat and thought , for four ( delayed train ) hours , and all the details bubbled up in my brain , and this scrawny , black @-@ haired , bespectacled boy who did not know he was a wizard became more and more real to me . " 
 Rowling completed Harry Potter and the Philosopher 's Stone in 1995 and the manuscript was sent off to several prospective agents . The second agent she tried , Christopher Little , offered to represent her and sent the manuscript to Bloomsbury . 
 = = Publishing history = = 
 After eight other publishers had rejected Philosopher 's Stone , Bloomsbury offered Rowling a £ 2 @,@ 500 advance for its publication . Despite Rowling 's statement that she did not have any particular age group in mind when beginning to write the Harry Potter books , the publishers initially targeted children aged nine to eleven . On the eve of publishing , Rowling was asked by her publishers to adopt a more gender @-@ neutral pen name in order to appeal to the male members of this age group , fearing that they would not be interested in reading a novel they knew to be written by a woman . She elected to use J. K. Rowling ( Joanne Kathleen Rowling ) , using her grandmother 's name as her second name because she has no middle name . 
 Harry Potter and the Philosopher 's Stone was published by Bloomsbury , the publisher of all Harry Potter books in the United Kingdom , on 30 June 1997 . It was released in the United States on 1 September 1998 by Scholastic – the American publisher of the books – as Harry Potter and the Sorcerer 's Stone , after Rowling had received US $ 105 @,@ 000 for the American rights – an unprecedented amount for a children 's book by a then @-@ unknown author . Fearing that American readers would not associate the word " philosopher " with a magical theme ( although the Philosopher 's Stone is alchemy @-@ related ) , Scholastic insisted that the book be given the title Harry Potter and the Sorcerer 's Stone for the American market . 
 The second book , Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets was originally published in the UK on 2 July 1998 and in the US on 2 June 1999 . Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban was then published a year later in the UK on 8 July 1999 and in the US on 8 September 1999 . Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire was published on 8 July 2000 at the same time by Bloomsbury and Scholastic . Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix is the longest book in the series at 766 pages in the UK version and 870 pages in the US version . It was published worldwide in English on 21 June 2003 . Harry Potter and the Half @-@ Blood Prince was published on 16 July 2005 , and it sold 9 million copies in the first 24 hours of its worldwide release . The seventh and final novel , Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows , was published on 21 July 2007 . The book sold 11 million copies in the first 24 hours of release , breaking down to 2 @.@ 7 million copies in the UK and 8 @.@ 3 million in the US . 
 = = = Translations = = = 
 The series has been translated into 67 languages , placing Rowling among the most translated authors in history . The books have seen translations to diverse languages such as Korean , Azerbaijani , Ukrainian , Arabic , Urdu , Hindi , Bengali , Welsh , Afrikaans , Albanian , Latvian and Vietnamese . The first volume has been translated into Latin and even Ancient Greek , making it the longest published work in Ancient Greek since the novels of Heliodorus of Emesa in the 3rd century AD . The second volume has also been translated into Latin . 
 Some of the translators hired to work on the books were well @-@ known authors before their work on Harry Potter , such as Viktor <unk> , who oversaw the Russian translation of the series ' fifth book . The Turkish translation of books two to seven was undertaken by Sevin <unk> , a popular literary critic and cultural commentator . For reasons of secrecy , translation on a given book could only start after it had been released in English , leading to a lag of several months before the translations were available . This led to more and more copies of the English editions being sold to impatient fans in non @-@ English speaking countries ; for example , such was the clamour to read the fifth book that its English language edition became the first English @-@ language book ever to top the best @-@ seller list in France . 
 The United States editions were adapted into American English to make them more understandable to a young American audience . 
 = = = Completion of the series = = = 
 In December 2005 , Rowling stated on her web site , " 2006 will be the year when I write the final book in the Harry Potter series . " Updates then followed in her online diary chronicling the progress of Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows , with the release date of 21 July 2007 . The book itself was finished on 11 January 2007 in the Balmoral Hotel , Edinburgh , where she scrawled a message on the back of a bust of Hermes . It read : " J. K. Rowling finished writing Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows in this room ( 552 ) on 11 January 2007 . " 
 Rowling herself has stated that the last chapter of the final book ( in fact , the epilogue ) was completed " in something like 1990 " . In June 2006 , Rowling , on an appearance on the British talk show Richard & Judy , announced that the chapter had been modified as one character " got a reprieve " and two others who previously survived the story had in fact been killed . On 28 March 2007 , the cover art for the Bloomsbury Adult and Child versions and the Scholastic version were released . 
 In September 2012 , Rowling mentioned in an interview that she might go back to make a " director 's cut " of two of the existing Harry Potter books . 
 = = = Cover art = = = 
 For cover art , Bloomsbury chose painted art in a classic style of design , with the first cover a watercolour and pencil drawing by illustrator Thomas Taylor showing Harry boarding the Hogwarts Express , and a title in the font Cochin Bold . The first releases of the successive books in the series followed in the same style but somewhat more realistic , illustrating scenes from the books . These covers were created by first Cliff Wright and then Jason Cockroft . 
 Due to the appeal of the books among an adult audience , Bloomsbury commissioned a second line of editions in an ' adult ' style . These initially used black @-@ and @-@ white photographic art for the covers showing objects from the books ( including a very American Hogwarts Express ) without depicting people , but later shifted to partial colourisation with a picture of Slytherin 's locket on the cover of the final book . 
 International and later editions have been created by a range of designers , including Mary <unk> for U.S. audiences and Mika <unk> in Finland . For a later American release , Kazu Kibuishi created covers in a somewhat anime @-@ influenced style . 
 = = Achievements = = 
 = = = Cultural impact = = = 
 Fans of the series were so eager for the latest instalment that bookstores around the world began holding events to coincide with the midnight release of the books , beginning with the 2000 publication of Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire . The events , commonly featuring mock sorting , games , face painting , and other live entertainment have achieved popularity with Potter fans and have been highly successful in attracting fans and selling books with nearly nine million of the 10 @.@ 8 million initial print copies of Harry Potter and the Half @-@ Blood Prince sold in the first 24 hours . 
 The final book in the series , Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows became the fastest selling book in history , moving 11 million units in the first twenty @-@ four hours of release . The series has also gathered adult fans , leading to the release of two editions of each Harry Potter book , identical in text but with one edition 's cover artwork aimed at children and the other aimed at adults . Besides meeting online through blogs , podcasts , and fansites , Harry Potter super @-@ fans can also meet at Harry Potter symposia . 
 The word Muggle has spread beyond its Harry Potter origins , becoming one of few pop culture words to land in the Oxford English Dictionary . The Harry Potter fandom has embraced podcasts as a regular , often weekly , insight to the latest discussion in the fandom . Both <unk> and <unk> have reached the top spot of iTunes podcast rankings and have been polled one of the top 50 favourite podcasts . 
 Some lessons identified in the series include diversity , acceptance , political tolerance , and equality . Surveys of over 1 @,@ 000 college students in the United States show that those who read the books were significantly different than those who had not . Readers of the series were found to be more tolerant , more opposed to violence and torture , less authoritarian , and less cynical . Although we cannot know if this is a cause @-@ and @-@ effect relationship , there is a clear correlation , and it seems that Harry Potter 's cultural impact may be stronger than just a fandom bond . 
 At the University of Michigan in 2009 , StarKid Productions performed an original musical parodying the Harry Potter series called A Very Potter Musical . The musical was awarded Entertainment Weekly 's 10 Best Viral Videos of 2009 . 
 = = = Commercial success = = = 
 The popularity of the Harry Potter series has translated into substantial financial success for Rowling , her publishers , and other Harry Potter related license holders . This success has made Rowling the first and thus far only billionaire author . The books have sold more than 400 million copies worldwide and have also given rise to the popular film adaptations produced by Warner Bros. , all of which have been highly successful in their own right . The films have in turn spawned eight video games and have led to the licensing of more than 400 additional Harry Potter products . The Harry Potter brand has been estimated to be worth as much as $ 15 billion . 
 The great demand for Harry Potter books motivated the New York Times to create a separate best @-@ seller list for children 's literature in 2000 , just before the release of Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire . By 24 June 2000 , Rowling 's novels had been on the list for 79 straight weeks ; the first three novels were each on the hardcover best @-@ seller list . On 12 April 2007 , Barnes & Noble declared that Deathly Hallows had broken its pre @-@ order record , with more than 500 @,@ 000 copies pre @-@ ordered through its site . For the release of Goblet of Fire , 9 @,@ 000 FedEx trucks were used with no other purpose than to deliver the book . Together , Amazon.com and Barnes & Noble pre @-@ sold more than 700 @,@ 000 copies of the book . In the United States , the book 's initial printing run was 3 @.@ 8 million copies . This record statistic was broken by Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix , with 8 @.@ 5 million , which was then shattered by Half @-@ Blood Prince with 10 @.@ 8 million copies . 6 @.@ 9 million copies of Prince were sold in the U.S. within the first 24 hours of its release ; in the United Kingdom more than two million copies were sold on the first day . The initial U.S. print run for Deathly Hallows was 12 million copies , and more than a million were pre @-@ ordered through Amazon and Barnes & Noble . 
 = = = Awards , honours , and recognition = = = 
 The Harry Potter series has been recognised by a host of awards since the initial publication of Philosopher 's Stone including four Whitaker Platinum Book Awards ( all of which were awarded in 2001 ) , three Nestlé Smarties Book Prizes ( 1997 – 1999 ) , two Scottish Arts Council Book Awards ( 1999 and 2001 ) , the inaugural Whitbread children 's book of the year award ( 1999 ) , the WHSmith book of the year ( 2006 ) , among others . In 2000 , Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban was nominated for a Hugo Award for Best Novel , and in 2001 , Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire won said award . Honours include a commendation for the Carnegie Medal ( 1997 ) , a short listing for the Guardian Children 's Award ( 1998 ) , and numerous listings on the notable books , editors ' Choices , and best books lists of the American Library Association , The New York Times , Chicago Public Library , and Publishers Weekly . 
 A 2004 study found that books in the series were commonly read aloud in elementary schools in San Diego County , California . Based on a 2007 online poll , the U.S. National Education Association listed the series in its " Teachers ' Top 100 Books for Children " . Three of the books placed among the " Top 100 Chapter Books " of all time , or children 's novels , in a 2012 survey published by School Library Journal : Sorcerer 's Stone ranked number three , Prisoner of Azkaban 12th , and Goblet of Fire 98th . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Literary criticism = = = 
 Early in its history , Harry Potter received positive reviews . On publication , the first book , Harry Potter and the Philosopher 's Stone , attracted attention from the Scottish newspapers , such as The Scotsman , which said it had " all the makings of a classic " , and The Glasgow Herald , which called it " Magic stuff " . Soon the English newspapers joined in , with more than one comparing it to Roald Dahl 's work : The Mail on Sunday rated it as " the most imaginative debut since Roald Dahl " , a view echoed by The Sunday Times ( " comparisons to Dahl are , this time , justified " ) , while The Guardian called it " a richly textured novel given lift @-@ off by an inventive wit " . 
 By the time of the release of the fifth book , Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix , the books began to receive strong criticism from a number of literary scholars . Yale professor , literary scholar , and critic Harold Bloom raised criticisms of the books ' literary merits , saying , " Rowling 's mind is so governed by clichés and dead metaphors that she has no other style of writing . " A. S. Byatt authored a New York Times op @-@ ed article calling Rowling 's universe a " secondary secondary world , made up of intelligently <unk> derivative motifs from all sorts of children 's literature ... written for people whose imaginative lives are confined to TV cartoons , and the exaggerated ( more exciting , not threatening ) mirror @-@ worlds of soaps , reality TV and celebrity gossip " . 
 Michael Rosen , a novelist and poet , advocated the books were not suited for children , who would be unable to grasp the complex themes . Rosen also stated that " J. K. Rowling is more of an adult writer . " The critic Anthony Holden wrote in The Observer on his experience of judging Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban for the 1999 Whitbread Awards . His overall view of the series was negative – " the Potter saga was essentially patronising , conservative , highly derivative , <unk> nostalgic for a bygone Britain " , and he speaks of " a pedestrian , ungrammatical prose style " . Ursula K. Le Guin said , " I have no great opinion of it . When so many adult critics were carrying on about the ' incredible originality ' of the first Harry Potter book , I read it to find out what the fuss was about , and remained somewhat puzzled ; it seemed a lively kid 's fantasy crossed with a " school novel " , good fare for its age group , but stylistically ordinary , imaginatively derivative , and ethically rather mean @-@ spirited . " 
 By contrast , author Fay Weldon , while admitting that the series is " not what the poets hoped for " , nevertheless goes on to say , " but this is not poetry , it is readable , saleable , everyday , useful prose " . The literary critic A. N. Wilson praised the Harry Potter series in The Times , stating : " There are not many writers who have JK 's Dickensian ability to make us turn the pages , to weep – openly , with tears splashing – and a few pages later to laugh , at invariably good jokes ... We have lived through a decade in which we have followed the publication of the liveliest , funniest , scariest and most moving children 's stories ever written " . Charles Taylor of Salon.com , who is primarily a movie critic , took issue with Byatt 's criticisms in particular . While he conceded that she may have " a valid cultural point – a teeny one – about the impulses that drive us to reassuring pop trash and away from the troubling complexities of art " , he rejected her claims that the series is lacking in serious literary merit and that it owes its success merely to the childhood reassurances it offers . Taylor stressed the progressively darker tone of the books , shown by the murder of a classmate and close friend and the psychological wounds and social isolation each causes . Taylor also argued that Philosopher 's Stone , said to be the most light @-@ hearted of the seven published books , disrupts the childhood reassurances that Byatt claims spur the series ' success : the book opens with news of a double murder , for example . 
 Stephen King called the series " a feat of which only a superior imagination is capable " , and declared " Rowling 's punning , one @-@ eyebrow @-@ cocked sense of humor " to be " remarkable " . However , he wrote that despite the story being " a good one " , he is " a little tired of discovering Harry at home with his horrible aunt and uncle " , the formulaic beginning of all seven books . King has also joked that " Rowling 's never met an adverb she did not like ! " He does however predict that Harry Potter " will indeed stand time 's test and wind up on a shelf where only the best are kept ; I think Harry will take his place with Alice , Huck , Frodo , and Dorothy and this is one series not just for the decade , but for the ages " . 
 = = = Social impact = = = 
 Although Time magazine named Rowling as a runner @-@ up for its 2007 Person of the Year award , noting the social , moral , and political inspiration she has given her fandom , cultural comments on the series have been mixed . Washington Post book critic Ron Charles opined in July 2007 that the large numbers of adults reading the Potter series but few other books may represent a " bad case of cultural infantilism " , and that the straightforward " good vs. evil " theme of the series is " childish " . He also argued " through no fault of Rowling 's " , the cultural and marketing " hysteria " marked by the publication of the later books " trains children and adults to expect the roar of the coliseum , a mass @-@ media experience that no other novel can possibly provide " . 
 Librarian Nancy Knapp pointed out the books ' potential to improve literacy by motivating children to read much more than they otherwise would . The seven @-@ book series has a word count of 1 @,@ 083 @,@ 594 ( US edition ) . Agreeing about the motivating effects , Diane Penrod also praised the books ' blending of simple entertainment with " the qualities of highbrow literary fiction " , but expressed concern about the distracting effect of the prolific merchandising that accompanies the book launches . However , the assumption that Harry Potter books have increased literacy among young people is " largely a folk legend . " Research by the National Endowment for the Arts ( NEA ) has found no increase in reading among children coinciding with the Harry Potter publishing phenomenon , nor has the broader downward trend in reading among Americans been arrested during the rise in the popularity of the Harry Potter books . The research also found that children who read Harry Potter books were not more likely to go on to read outside the fantasy and mystery genres . NEA chairman Dana Gioia said the series , " got millions of kids to read a long and reasonably complex series of books . The trouble is that one Harry Potter novel every few years is not enough to reverse the decline in reading . " 
 Jennifer Conn used Snape 's and Quidditch coach Madam Hooch 's teaching methods as examples of what to avoid and what to emulate in clinical teaching , and Joyce Fields wrote that the books illustrate four of the five main topics in a typical first @-@ year sociology class : " sociological concepts including culture , society , and socialisation ; stratification and social inequality ; social institutions ; and social theory " . 
 Jenny Sawyer wrote in Christian Science Monitor on 25 July 2007 that the books represent a " disturbing trend in commercial storytelling and Western society " in that stories " moral center [ sic ] have all but vanished from much of today 's pop culture ... after 10 years , 4 @,@ 195 pages , and over 375 million copies , J. K. Rowling 's towering achievement lacks the cornerstone of almost all great children 's literature : the hero 's moral journey " . Harry Potter , Sawyer argues , neither faces a " moral struggle " nor undergoes any ethical growth , and is thus " no guide in circumstances in which right and wrong are anything less than black and white " . In contrast Emily <unk> described Harry 's first passage through to Platform 9 ¾ as an application of faith and hope , and his encounter with the Sorting Hat as the first of many in which Harry is shaped by the choices he makes . She also noted the " deeper magic " by which the self @-@ sacrifice of Harry 's mother protects the boy throughout the series , and which the power @-@ hungry Voldemort fails to understand . 
 In an 8 November 2002 Slate article , Chris Suellentrop likened Potter to a " trust @-@ fund kid whose success at school is largely attributable to the gifts his friends and relatives lavish upon him " . Noting that in Rowling 's fiction , magical ability potential is " something you are born to , not something you can achieve " , Suellentrop wrote that Dumbledore 's maxim that " It is our choices that show what we truly are , far more than our abilities " is hypocritical , as " the school that Dumbledore runs values native gifts above all else " . In a 12 August 2007 New York Times review of Deathly Hallows , however , Christopher Hitchens praised Rowling for " unmooring " her " English school story " from literary precedents " bound up with dreams of wealth and class and snobbery " , arguing that she had instead created " a world of youthful democracy and diversity " . 
 In 2010 , coinciding with the release of the film Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows  Part 1 , a series of articles were written about Private Harry Potter of the British army . This real @-@ life Harry Potter was killed in the Arab Revolt near Hebron in 1939 . His grave , located in the British cemetery in Ramla , Israel , began to receive curious visitors leading the Ramla Municipality to list it on their website . The Daily Mail interviewed siblings of Harry Potter who stated , " We couldn 't believe people visit his grave , but apparently they come from miles around to have their photo taken next to it . " 
 = = = Controversies = = = 
 The books have been the subject of a number of legal proceedings , stemming from various conflicts over copyright and trademark infringements . The popularity and high market value of the series has led Rowling , her publishers , and film distributor Warner Bros. to take legal measures to protect their copyright , which have included banning the sale of Harry Potter imitations , targeting the owners of websites over the " Harry Potter " domain name , and suing author Nancy Stouffer to counter her accusations that Rowling had plagiarised her work . Various religious conservatives have claimed that the books promote witchcraft and religions such as Wicca and are therefore unsuitable for children , while a number of critics have criticised the books for promoting various political agendas . 
 The books also aroused controversies in the literary and publishing worlds . In 1997 to 1998 , Harry Potter and the Philosopher 's Stone won almost all the UK awards judged by children , but none of the children 's book awards judged by adults , and Sandra Beckett suggested the reason was intellectual snobbery towards books that were popular among children . In 1999 , the winner of the Whitbread Book of the Year award children 's division was entered for the first time on the shortlist for the main award , and one judge threatened to resign if Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban was declared the overall winner ; it finished second , very close behind the winner of the poetry prize , Seamus Heaney 's translation of the Anglo @-@ Saxon epic Beowulf . 
 In 2000 , shortly before the publication of Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire , the previous three Harry Potter books topped the New York Times fiction best @-@ seller list and a third of the entries were children 's books . The newspaper created a new children 's section covering children 's books , including both fiction and non @-@ fiction , and initially counting only hardback sales . The move was supported by publishers and booksellers . In 2004 , The New York Times further split the children 's list , which was still dominated by Harry Potter books into sections for series and individual books , and removed the Harry Potter books from the section for individual books . The split in 2000 attracted condemnation , praise and some comments that presented both benefits and disadvantages of the move . Time suggested that , on the same principle , Billboard should have created a separate " mop @-@ tops " list in 1964 when the Beatles held the top five places in its list , and Nielsen should have created a separate game @-@ show list when Who Wants to Be a Millionaire ? dominated the ratings . 
 = = Adaptations = = 
 = = = Films = = = 
 In 1998 , Rowling sold the film rights of the first four Harry Potter books to Warner Bros. for a reported £ 1 million ( $ 1 @,@ 982 @,@ 900 ) . Rowling demanded the principal cast be kept strictly British , nonetheless allowing for the inclusion of Irish actors such as the late Richard Harris as Dumbledore , and for casting of French and Eastern European actors in Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire where characters from the book are specified as such . After many directors including Steven Spielberg , Terry Gilliam , Jonathan Demme , and Alan Parker were considered , Chris Columbus was appointed on 28 March 2000 as director for Harry Potter and the Philosopher 's Stone ( titled " Harry Potter and the Sorcerer 's Stone " in the United States ) , with Warner Bros. citing his work on other family films such as Home Alone and Mrs. Doubtfire and proven experience with directing children as influences for their decision . 
 After extensive casting , filming began in October 2000 at Leavesden Film Studios and in London itself , with production ending in July 2001 . Philosopher 's Stone was released on 14 November 2001 . Just three days after the film 's release , production for Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets , also directed by Columbus , began . Filming was completed in summer 2002 , with the film being released on 15 November 2002 . Daniel Radcliffe portrayed Harry Potter , doing so for all succeeding films in the franchise . 
 Columbus declined to direct Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban , only acting as producer . Mexican director Alfonso Cuarón took over the job , and after shooting in 2003 , the film was released on 4 June 2004 . Due to the fourth film beginning its production before the third 's release , Mike Newell was chosen as the director for Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire , released on 18 November 2005 . Newell became the first British director of the series , with television director David Yates following suit after he was chosen to helm Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix . Production began in January 2006 and the film was released the following year in July 2007 . After executives were " really delighted " with his work on the film , Yates was selected to direct Harry Potter and the Half @-@ Blood Prince , which was released on 15 July 2009 . 
 In March 2008 , Warner Bros. President and COO Alan F. Horn announced that the final instalment in the series , Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows , would be released in two cinematic parts : Part 1 on 19 November 2010 and Part 2 on 15 July 2011 . Production of both parts started in February 2009 , with the final day of principal photography taking place on 12 June 2010 . 
 Rowling had creative control on the film series , observing the filmmaking process of Philosopher 's Stone and serving as producer on the two @-@ part Deathly Hallows , alongside David Heyman and David Barron . The Harry Potter films have been top @-@ rank box office hits , with all eight releases on the list of highest @-@ grossing films worldwide . Philosopher 's Stone was the highest @-@ grossing Harry Potter film up until the release of the final instalment of the series , Deathly Hallows , while Prisoner of Azkaban grossed the least . As well as being a financial success , the film series has also been a success among film critics . 
 Opinions of the films are generally divided among fans , with one group preferring the more faithful approach of the first two films , and another group preferring the more stylised character @-@ driven approach of the later films . Rowling has been constantly supportive of all the films and evaluated Deathly Hallows as her " favourite one " in the series . She wrote on her website of the changes in the book @-@ to @-@ film transition , " It is simply impossible to incorporate every one of my storylines into a film that has to be kept under four hours long . Obviously films have restrictions novels do not have , constraints of time and budget ; I can create dazzling effects relying on nothing but the interaction of my own and my readers ' imaginations " . 
 At the 64th British Academy Film Awards in February 2011 , Rowling was joined by producers David Heyman and David Barron along with directors David Yates , Alfonso Cuarón and Mike Newell in collecting the Michael Balcon Award for Outstanding British Contribution to Cinema on behalf of all the films in the series . Actors Rupert Grint and Emma Watson , who play main characters Ron Weasley and Hermione Granger , were also in attendance . 
 = = = = Spin @-@ off prequels = = = = 
 A new trilogy of films , beginning with Fantastic Beasts and Where to Find Them , will take place before the main series . The films will be released in November 2016 , 2018 and 2020 respectively . Rowling wrote the screenplay for the first instalment , marking her first foray into screenwriting . 
 = = = Games = = = 
 There are thirteen Harry Potter video games , eight of which correspond with the films and books , and five other spin @-@ offs . The film / book based games are produced by Electronic Arts , as was Harry Potter : Quidditch World Cup , with the game version of the first entry in the series , Philosopher 's Stone , being released in November 2001 . Harry Potter and the Philosopher 's Stone went on to become one of the best selling PlayStation games ever . The video games are released to coincide with the films , containing scenery and details from the films as well as the tone and spirit of the books . Objectives usually occur in and around Hogwarts , along with various other magical areas . The story and design of the games follows the selected film 's characterisation and plot ; EA worked closely with Warner Brothers to include scenes from the films . The last game in the series , Deathly Hallows , was split with Part 1 released in November 2010 and Part 2 debuting on consoles in July 2011 . The two @-@ part game forms the first entry to convey an intense theme of action and violence , with the gameplay revolving around a third @-@ person shooter style format . The spin @-@ off games , Lego Harry Potter : Years 1 – 4 and Lego Harry Potter : Years 5 – 7 are developed by Traveller 's Tales and published by Warner Bros. Interactive Entertainment . The spin @-@ off games Book of Spells and Book of Potions are developed by SCE London Studio and utilise the <unk> ; an augmented reality book which is designed to be used in conjunction with the PlayStation Move and PlayStation Eye . 
 A number of other non @-@ interactive media games have been released ; board games such as Cluedo Harry Potter Edition , Scene It ? Harry Potter and Lego Harry Potter models , which are influenced by the themes of both the novels and films . 
 = = = Audiobooks = = = 
 All seven Harry Potter books have been released in unabridged audiobook versions , with Stephen Fry reading the UK editions , and Jim Dale voicing the series for the American editions . 
 = = = Stage production = = = 
 On 20 December 2013 , J. K. Rowling announced that she was working on a Harry Potter – based play for which she would be one of the producers . British theatre producers Sonia Friedman and Colin Callender will be the co @-@ producers . 
 On 26 June 2015 , on the anniversary of the debut of the first book , Rowling revealed via Twitter that the Harry Potter stage play would be called Harry Potter and The Cursed Child . The Production is expected to open in the summer of 2016 at London 's Palace Theatre , London . The first four months of tickets for the June – September performances were sold out within several hours upon release . On 10 February 2016 , it was announced via the Pottermore website , that the script would be released in book form , the day after the play 's world premiere , making this the 8th book in the series , with events set nineteen years after the closing chapter of Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows . 
 = = Attractions = = 
 = = = The Wizarding World of Harry Potter = = = 
 After the success of the films and books , Universal and Warner Brothers announced they would create The Wizarding World of Harry Potter , a new Harry Potter @-@ themed expansion to the Islands of Adventure theme park at Universal Orlando Resort in Florida . The land officially opened to the public on 18 June 2010 . It includes a re @-@ creation of Hogsmeade and several rides . The flagship attraction is Harry Potter and the Forbidden Journey , which exists within a re @-@ creation of Hogwarts School of Witchcraft and Wizardry . Other rides include Dragon Challenge , a pair of inverted roller coasters , and Flight of the Hippogriff , a family roller coaster . 
 Four years later , on 8 July 2014 , Universal opened a Harry Potter @-@ themed area at the Universal Studios Florida theme park . It includes a re @-@ creation of Diagon Alley and connecting alleys and a small section of Muggle London . The flagship attraction is Harry Potter and the Escape from Gringotts roller coaster ride . Universal also added a completely functioning recreation of the Hogwarts Express connecting Kings Cross Station at Universal Studios Florida to the Hogsmeade station at Islands of Adventure . Both Hogsmeade and Diagon Alley contain many shops and restaurants from the book series , including Weasley 's Wizard <unk> and The Leaky Cauldron . 
 On 15 July 2014 , The Wizarding World of Harry Potter opened at the Universal Studios Japan theme park in Osaka , Japan . It includes the village of Hogsmeade , Harry Potter and the Forbidden Journey ride , and Flight of the Hippogriff roller coaster . 
 There is also The Wizarding World of Harry Potter under construction at the Universal Studios Hollywood theme park near Los Angeles , California , with a planned opening in April 2016 . 
 = = = United Kingdom = = = 
 In March 2011 , Warner Bros. announced plans to build a tourist attraction in the United Kingdom to showcase the Harry Potter film series . Warner Bros. Studio Tour London is a behind @-@ the @-@ scenes walking tour featuring authentic sets , costumes and props from the film series . The attraction is located at Warner Bros. Studios , Leavesden , where all eight of the Harry Potter films were made . Warner Bros. constructed two new sound stages to house and showcase the famous sets from each of the British @-@ made productions , following a £ 100 million investment . It opened to the public in March 2012 . 
 = Mount Garibaldi = 
 Mount Garibaldi is a potentially active stratovolcano in the Sea to Sky Country of British Columbia , 80 km ( 50 mi ) north of Vancouver , British Columbia , Canada . Located in the southernmost Coast Mountains , it is one of the most recognized peaks in the South Coast region , as well as British Columbia 's best known volcano . It lies within the Garibaldi Ranges of the Pacific Ranges . 
 This heavily eroded dome complex occupies the southwest corner of Garibaldi Provincial Park overlooking the town of Squamish . It is the only major Pleistocene age volcano in North America known to have formed upon a glacier . Although part of the Garibaldi Volcanic Belt within the Cascade Volcanic Arc , it is not considered part of the Cascade Range . 
 = = Human history = = 
 = = = Indigenous people = = = 
 To Squamish people , the local indigenous people of this territory , the mountain is called <unk> 'kay . In their language it means " Dirty Place " or " Grimy One " . This name of the mountain refers to the muddy water in the Cheekye River . This mountain , like others located in the area , is considered sacred for it plays an important part in their history . In their oral history , they passed down a story of the flood covering the land . During this time , only two mountains peaked over the water , and this mountain was one of them . It was here that the remaining survivors of the flood latched their canoes to the peak and waited for the waters to subside . The mountain also serves as weather indicator to the people , as when clouds cover the face of the mountain , it signals the coming of rain or snow . Cultural ceremonial use , hunting , trapping and plant gathering occur around the Mount Garibaldi area , but the most important resource was a lithic material called obsidian . Obsidian is a black volcanic glass that was used to make knives , chisels , adzes , and other sharp tools in pre @-@ contact times . This material appears in sites dated to 10 @,@ 000 years ago up to <unk> time periods . The source for this material is found in upper parts of the mountain area in higher elevations that surround the mountain range . 
 = = = Later history = = = 
 British Explorer Captain George Vancouver reached Howe Sound in June 1792 and became the first European to see the mountain . During this time George Vancouver met and traded with the local natives in the area . 
 In 1860 , while carrying out a survey of Howe Sound on board the Royal Navy survey ship HMS <unk> , Captain George Henry Richards was impressed by a gigantic mountain dominating the view to the northeast . Captain Richards , and his officers , renamed the mountain after the Italian military and political leader Giuseppe Garibaldi , who that year had succeeded in unifying Italy by <unk> Sicily and Naples . In August 1907 , the Vancouver mountaineers A. Dalton , W. Dalton , A. King , T. Pattison , J.J. <unk> , and G. Warren reached the summit of Mount Garibaldi . The views from the peak inspired the establishment of summer climbing camps at Garibaldi Lake . This early interest led to the creation in 1920 of a park reserve . 
 In 1927 , Garibaldi was made into a large wilderness park called Garibaldi Provincial Park . Named after Mount Garibaldi , this 1 @,@ 946 @.@ 5 square kilometre park was established to protect the rich geological history , diverse vegetation , iridescent waters , abundant wildlife , and rugged mountains , many of which are capped by glaciers . 
 When skiing caught on in the 1940s , Vancouver skiers began to search the glaciers and rugged mountains within the park . Early skiing was limited to the more easily reached area around Garibaldi Lake . In the winter of 1944 , a club group completed the first possible ski of Mount Garibaldi . The famous mountaineers Don and Phyllis Munday completed lots of tracks additionally . In the 1944 @-@ 45 Canadian Alpine Journal , the <unk> reported a ski attempt on Mount Garibaldi with Phil Brook , who was a friend of the <unk> . They skied on Sphinx Glacier and <unk> Panorama Ridge just north of Garibaldi Lake during the same trip . Most importantly , during this period a road was built on Paul Ridge near the small community of Squamish at the north end of Howe Sound , thereby affording better vehicle approach to the highlands near Mount Garibaldi . With easier access Vancouver skiers spent even more time on the glaciers of Mount Garibaldi . The result of this was the formation in the 1940s of the Garibaldi Névé Traverse , an overnight adventure that ( weather permitting ) can include a fine descent of Mount Garibaldi . 
 = = Subsidiary peaks = = 
 The broad top of Mount Garibaldi contains three named peaks . The highest peak is named as the mountain itself , reaching 2 @,@ 678 m ( 8 @,@ 786 ft ) above sea level . The second highest peak is the sharp pyramid of Atwell Peak at the southern edge of the summit plateau , which reaches a height of 2 @,@ 655 m ( 8 @,@ 711 ft ) and lies on the southwest end of Garibaldi Provincial Park . This peak is named after Atwell Duncan Francis Joseph King , leader of the first ascent of Mount Garibaldi in 1907 . The lowest of the three is the rounded Dalton Dome , 2 @,@ 653 m ( 8 @,@ 704 ft ) high , west of the highest summit . This peak is named after Arthur Tinniswood Dalton , one of the guides of the 1907 ascent . 
 A feature on the north side of the mountain , known as The Tent , reaches 2 @,@ 465 m ( 8 @,@ 087 ft ) and lies in Garibaldi Provincial Park . Another minor summit on the south side of the mountain , 2 @,@ 056 m ( 6 @,@ 745 ft ) high , is known as Diamond Head ( sometimes Little Diamond Head ) for its resemblance to Diamond Head in Hawaii . Diamond Head was the site of a ski proposal and small lodge , now derelict . On the northwest side of Mount Garibaldi , Brohm Ridge lies outside the western boundary of Garibaldi Provincial Park . The <unk> sticks up out of the Warren Glacier on the northeast side of the mountain with a height of 2 @,@ 000 m ( 6 @,@ 562 ft ) , just northeast of Squamish . Columnar Peak rises on the south side of the mountain with a height of 1 @,@ 826 m ( 5 @,@ 991 ft ) , just southwest of <unk> Lake at southwest end of Garibaldi Provincial Park . Two pinnacles of volcanic rock 5 km ( 3 mi ) south of Mount Garibaldi 's summit , which attain heights of 1 @,@ 816 m ( 5 @,@ 958 ft ) and 1 @,@ 823 m ( 5 @,@ 981 ft ) , have been known as The Gargoyles since 1978 . 
 = = Glaciers and icefields = = 
 Two pocket glaciers lie right below the east side of Atwell Peak , the Diamond Glacier to the southeast and the upper Bishop Glacier to the northeast . Straight north of Atwell toward Mount Garibaldi lies a small , high @-@ elevation ice cap called the Cheekye Glacier , the name of which is associated with Cheekye River . 
 A large icefield lies on the eastern and northern flanks of Mount Garibaldi called the Garibaldi Névé . Its drainage is to the east into the Pitt River , to the southwest into Garibaldi Lake . It has an area of 35 km2 and is an area of substantial snowfall with more than 5 m ( 16 ft ) in many winters . The Garibaldi Névé is usually accessed from the south through the Bishop Glacier or from the north through the Sentinel Glacier . 
 = = Climbing and recreation = = 
 Mountain climbing on Mount Garibaldi is fairly difficult ; it is fairly steep @-@ sided and involves climbing very loose rotten lava and volcanic ash . Fortunately , Mount Garibaldi has large areas of massive glaciation and extensive snowfields . The eastern and northern flanks of the mountain are smothered by the Garibaldi Névé where the finest climbing opportunities exist , making the easiest route a glacial travel or snow climb . Routes keep mostly to the alpine glaciers and snow slopes , which are abundant in winter and spring , but eventually melt in late spring and commonly vanish after June or July of most years . After the snow and ice melts , fissures and fractures can pose difficulty and danger , and avalanches from higher peaks of the mountain are a hazard . For this reason , early season , cold @-@ weather ascents are recommended for most routes up Garibaldi . 
 Hiking , photography , and camping are popular in the Garibaldi area . Several trailheads provide access to the backcountry . In mid to late summer , visitors pass through meadows of wildflowers along alpine trails . Garibaldi Provincial Park is also popular for winter sports , including backcountry skiing and snowshoeing . 
 = = Geology = = 
 Mount Garibaldi lies within the Coast Plutonic Complex , which is the single largest contiguous granite outcropping in North America . The intrusive and metamorphic rocks extend approximately 1 @,@ 800 km ( 1 @,@ 118 mi ) along the coast of British Columbia , the Alaska Panhandle and southwestern Yukon . This is a remnant of a once vast volcanic arc called the Coast Range Arc that formed as a result of subduction of the Farallon and Kula Plates during the Jurassic @-@ to @-@ Eocene periods . In contrast , Garibaldi , Meager , Cayley and Silverthrone areas are of recent volcanic origin . 
 Mount Garibaldi is one of the few Cascade volcanoes that is made exclusively of dacite ( Glacier Peak is the other ) . The mountain has a unique asymmetrical shape because its main cone was constructed atop part of a large glacier system associated with the Cordilleran Ice Sheet that has since melted away . Unlike many of the other Cascade volcanoes to the south , Garibaldi does not dominate the surrounding landscape , which consists of many high , rugged peaks . Many residents of Vancouver are therefore not aware that there is a volcano closer to the city than the more easily visible Mount Baker in Washington State . 
 = = = Origins = = = 
 Mount Garibaldi began erupting about 250 @,@ 000 years ago and has grown steadily since then . Like all of the Cascade volcanoes , Mount Garibaldi has its origins in the Cascadia subduction zone — a long convergent plate boundary that stretches from mid @-@ Vancouver Island to Northern California . The subduction zone separates the Juan de Fuca , Explorer , Gorda and North American Plates . Here , the oceanic crust of the Pacific Ocean sinks beneath North America at a rate of 40 millimetres ( 1 @.@ 6 in ) per year . Hot magma upwelling above the descending oceanic plate creates volcanoes , and each individual volcano erupts for a few million years . 
 The subduction zone has existed for at least 37 million years , and has created a line of volcanoes called the Cascade Volcanic Arc which stretches over 1 @,@ 000 km ( 621 mi ) along the subduction zone . Several volcanoes in the arc are potentially active . Lassen Peak in California , which last erupted in 1917 , is the southernmost historically active volcano in the arc , while Mount Meager , just north of Mount Garibaldi , which erupted about 2 @,@ 350 years ago , is generally considered the northernmost . A few isolated volcanic centres northwest of Mount Meager , such as the Silverthrone Caldera , which is a circular 20 km ( 12 mi ) wide , deeply dissected caldera complex , are considered by some geologists to be the northernmost member of the arc . 
 = = = Structure = = = 
 Mount Garibaldi is the largest volcano in southernmost British Columbia . Like other stratovolcanoes , it is composed of many layers of hardened lava , tephra , and volcanic ash . Eruptions are explosive in nature , and the most common form is the Peléan style , which involves viscous magma , glowing avalanches of hot volcanic ash and pyroclastic flows . The source magma of this rock is classified as acidic , having high to intermediate levels of silica ( as in rhyolite , dacite , or andesite ) . The tephra deposits have lower volume and range than the corresponding Plinian and Vulcanian eruptions . 
 Mount Garibaldi is known both for the very high quality exposures of its internal structure and for its conspicuous topographic anomalies , which can be attributed to the growth of the mountain onto a large glacier system and the subsequent collapse of the flanks of the volcano with the melting of the ice . The western flanks of the mountain expose basement rocks , sheared and altered quartz diorite , carved by streams and glaciers into a rugged topography with relief up to 1 @,@ 800 m ( 5 @,@ 906 ft ) . Valleys in this jagged surface have been filled with 0 @.@ 52 to 0 @.@ 22 million year old dacite and andesite flows , tuff breccias , and domes , precursors of the activity at Mount Garibaldi . About 0 @.@ 8 cubic miles ( 3 @.@ 3 km3 ) of material remains in the volcano . In modern times , the apron of material around the volcano 's main vent extends at least 4 @.@ 8 km ( 3 mi ) from its source in places that were covered by ice . In other areas its extent is less and its slope is steeper . 
 <unk> are a common feature of subduction zones . The magma that forms them arises when water , which is trapped both in hydrated minerals and in the porous basalt rock of the upper oceanic crust , is released into mantle rock of the asthenosphere above the sinking oceanic slab . The release of water from hydrated minerals is termed " dewatering " , and occurs at specific pressure / temperature conditions for specific minerals as the plate subducts to lower depths . The water freed from the subducting slab lowers the melting point of the overlying mantle rock , which then undergoes partial melting and rises due to its density relative to the surrounding mantle rock , and pools temporarily at the base of the lithosphere . The magma then rises through the crust , incorporating silica rich crustal rock , leading to a final intermediate composition . When the magma nears the surface it pools in a magma chamber under the volcano . The relatively low pressure of the magma allows water and other volatiles ( CO2 , S2 − , Cl − ) dissolved in the magma to begin to come out of solution , much like when a bottle of carbonated water is opened . Once a critical volume of magma and gas accumulates , the obstacle provided by the volcanic cone is overcome , leading to a sudden explosive eruption . 
 = = = Ancestral stages of eruptive activity = = = 
 The mountain grew in three phases . Garibaldi 's first phase resulted in the creation of a broad composite cone made of dacite and breccia that has been potassium @-@ argon dated to 250 @,@ 000 years old . Parts of this " proto @-@ Garibaldi " or ancestral volcano are exposed on Garibaldi 's lower northern and eastern flanks and on the upper 240 m ( 787 ft ) of Brohm Ridge . Around where Columnar Peak and possibly Glacier Pikes are now located , a series of coalescing dacite lava domes were constructed . During the ensuing long period of dormancy , the Cheekye River cut a deep valley into the cone 's western flank that was later filled with a glacier . 
 After reaching its maximum extent the Cheekye Glacier along with part of the area 's ice sheet were covered with volcanic ash and fragmented debris from Garibaldi . This period of growth began with the eruption of the Atwell Peak plug dome from a ridge surrounded by the several thousand foot ice sheet . As the plug dome rose , massive sheets of broken lava crumbled as talus down its sides . Numerous Peléan pyroclastic flows ( consisting of a super @-@ heated mix of gas , ash , and pumice ) accompanied these cooler avalanches , forming a fragmental cone 6 @.@ 3 cubic kilometres ( 1 @.@ 5 cu mi ) in volume and an overall slope of 12 to 15 degrees . ( Erosion has since steepened this slope . ) Some of the glacial ice was melted by the eruptions , forming a small lake against Brohm Ridge 's southern arm . The volcanic sandstones seen today atop Brohm Ridge were created by ash settling in this lake . 
 Glacial overlap was most significant on the west and somewhat to the south . Subsequent melting of the ice sheet and its component glaciers initiated a series of avalanches and mudflows on Garibaldi 's western flank that moved nearly half of the original cone 's volume into the Squamish Valley . This series of debris flows carried 2 @.@ 5 cubic kilometres ( 0 @.@ 6 cu mi ) of the mountain into the Squamish Valley where it covers 10 square miles ( 26 km2 ) to a thickness of about 300 feet ( 91 m ) . Gaps left by melting ice caused minor to moderate cone distortion where the ice sheet was thin and major distortion where it was thick . The ice was thickest in and thus cone distortion was greatest over the buried Cheekye valley . 
 Soon before or after the buried ice had melted away , dacite lava quietly erupted from Opal Cone southeast of the Atwell Peak plug dome 10 @,@ 700 to 9 @,@ 300 years ago and flowed 20 km ( 12 mi ) down Ring Creek on Garibaldi 's southern and southwestern flanks without encountering any residual glacial ice . One of the lava flows traveled down a 30 % to 35 % grade over the landslide scar on the western flank . About 0 @.@ 15 cubic miles ( 0 @.@ 63 km3 ) of dacite erupted in Garibaldi 's third period of activity . This lava forms a thin layer of solid rock on the southern and western sides of the volcano and contains well @-@ defined lava flow margin levees . The Ring Creek lava flow is very unusual because lengthy lava flows are usually attained by fluid basalt flows , except the Ring Creek flow is dacite . 
 = = = Current activity = = = 
 Mount Garibaldi is one of the eleven Canadian volcanoes most strongly associated with recent seismic activity ; the others are Castle Rock , Mount Edziza , Mount Cayley , Hoodoo Mountain , The Volcano , Crow Lagoon , Silverthrone Caldera , Mount Meager , Wells Gray @-@ Clearwater Volcanic Field and Nazko Cone . The mountain is informally described as " dormant " ( " asleep " ) because the mountain has not erupted in historic times , nor does it display fumarolic activity like nearby Mount Baker . However , seismic data suggests that these volcanoes still contain living magma plumbing systems , indicating possible future eruptive activity . Although the available data does not allow a clear conclusion , these observations are further indications that some of Canada 's volcanoes are potentially active , and that their associated hazards may be significant . The seismic activity correlates both with some of Canada 's most youthful volcanoes , and with long @-@ lived volcanic centres with a history of significant explosive behavior , such as Mount Garibaldi . No hot springs are known in the Garibaldi area like those found at Mount Meager and Mount Cayley , the other major volcanic complexes in the Garibaldi belt , although there are hints of anomalously high local heat flow in Table Meadows and elsewhere . 
 = = Volcanic hazards = = 
 Volcanic eruptions in Canada rarely cause fatalities because of their remoteness and low level of activity . The only known fatality due to volcanic activity in Canada occurred at the Tseax Cone in 1775 , when a 22 @.@ 5 km ( 14 mi ) long basaltic lava flow travelled down the Tseax and Nass Rivers , destroying a Nisga 'a village and killing approximately 2 @,@ 000 people by volcanic gases . Many towns and cities near Mount Garibaldi are home to over half of British Columbia 's human population , and there is a likelihood that future eruptions will cause damage to populated areas , making Mount Garibaldi and other Garibaldi belt volcanoes a major hazard . There are significant hazards from almost all Canadian volcanoes that require hazard maps and emergency plans . Volcanoes which exhibit significant seismic activity , such as Mount Garibaldi , appear to be most likely to erupt . A significant eruption of any of the Garibaldi belt volcanoes would significantly impact Highway 99 and communities like Pemberton , Whistler and Squamish , and possibly Vancouver . 
 = = = Explosive eruptions = = = 
 Explosive eruptions from Mount Garibaldi would pose a severe threat to the nearby communities of Whistler and Squamish . Although no Plinian eruptions have been identified in Garibaldi 's eruptive history , even Peléan eruptions could create large amounts of ash that could significantly affect these local communities . Ash columns may rise to several hundred meters above the volcano , and due to its close proximity to Vancouver this could pose a threat for air traffic . Melting of leftover glacial ice covering the Mount Garibaldi area may cause floods , lahars , or debris flows that could possibly threaten small communities such as Brackendale . Highway 99 is already plagued by landslides and debris flows from the steep rugged Coast Mountains . An eruption creating floods could demolish sections of the highway . Flooding and debris flows could also have severe issues for the salmon fishery on the Squamish , Cheakamus , and <unk> rivers . In addition , explosive eruptions and the associated ash column could cause short @-@ and long @-@ term water supply difficulties for Vancouver and most of the lower mainland . The catchment area for the Greater Vancouver watershed is close to the Garibaldi area . Pyroclastic fall could also have a deleterious effect on the ice fields to the east of Mount Garibaldi , causing more melting and spring flooding . This in turn could endanger water supplies from Pitt Lake as well as fisheries on the Pitt River . 
 = = = Lava flows = = = 
 The hazard from lava flows would be low to moderate because the nature of the lavas would prevent them from travelling far from their source , even though the Ring Creek lava flow ends only 6 km ( 4 mi ) from Squamish . Magma with high to intermediate levels of silica ( as in andesite , dacite or rhyolite ) commonly move slowly and typically cover small areas to form steep @-@ sided mounds called lava domes . Lava domes often grow by the extrusion of many individual flows less than 30 m ( 98 ft ) thick over a period of several months or years . Such flows will overlap one another and typically move less than a few meters per hour . Lava flows with high to intermediate levels of silica rarely extend more than 8 km ( 5 mi ) from their source ; for example , Garibaldi 's 20 km ( 12 mi ) long Ring Creek dacite lava flow . 
 = = = Landslides = = = 
 In the past , Garibaldi has had large debris flows . A section of the mountain collapsed into the Cheakamus River valley when the glacier Garibaldi was built on melted , creating a jagged unstable slope at the head of the Cheekye River . Repeated landslides from this steep cliff have created a huge debris fan at the mouth of the Cheekye River just north of Brackendale called the Cheekye Fan . Danger from future collapses have limited the growth of Brackendale onto the fan . 
 The steep northern edge of The Barrier in the Garibaldi area has partly collapsed several times , the most recent being in 1855 @-@ 56 . This collapse created a large boulder field below it , which gave Rubble Creek its name . Danger from future collapses prompted the provincial government to declare the area immediately below it unsafe for human habitation in 1981 . This led to the evacuation of the small resort village of Garibaldi nearby , and the relocation of residents to new recreational subdivisions away from the hazard zone . Although imminent danger is unlikely , special regulations exist to warn potential danger and to minimize the risk to life and property in the event of a landslide . 
 = = Monitoring = = 
 Currently , Mount Garibaldi is not monitored closely enough by the Geological Survey of Canada to ascertain how active the volcano 's magma system is . The existing network of seismographs has been established to monitor tectonic earthquakes and is too far away to provide a good indication of what is happening beneath the mountain . It may sense an increase in activity if the volcano becomes very restless , but this may only provide a warning for a large eruption . It might detect activity only once the volcano has started erupting . 
 A possible way to detect an eruption is studying Garibaldi 's geological history since every volcano has its own pattern of behaviour , in terms of its eruption style , magnitude and frequency , so that its future eruption is expected to be similar to its previous eruptions . 
 While there is a likelihood of Canada being critically effected by local or close by volcanic eruptions argues that some kind of improvement program is required . Benefit @-@ cost thoughts are critical to dealing with natural hazards . However , a benefit @-@ cost examination needs correct data about the hazard types , magnitudes and occurrences . These do not exist for volcanoes in British Columbia or elsewhere in Canada in the detail required . 
 Other volcanic techniques , such as hazard mapping , displays a volcano 's eruptive history in detail and speculates an understanding of the hazardous activity that could possibly be expected in the future . At present no hazard maps have been created for Mount Garibaldi because the level of knowledge is insufficient due to its remoteness . A large volcanic hazard program has never existed within the Geological Survey of Canada . The majority of information has been collected in a lengthy , separate way from the support of several employees , such as volcanologists and other geologic scientists . Current knowledge is best established at Mount Meager north of Mount Garibaldi and is likely to rise considerably with a temporary mapping and monitoring project . Knowledge at Mount Garibaldi and other volcanoes in the Garibaldi Volcanic Belt is not as established , but certain contributions are being done at least Mount Cayley . An intensive program classifying infrastructural exposure near all young Canadian volcanoes and quick hazard assessments at each individual volcanic edifice associated with recent seismic activity would be in advance and would produce a quick and productive determination of priority areas for further efforts . 
 The existing network of seismographs to monitor tectonic earthquakes has existed since 1975 , although it remained small in population until 1985 . Apart from a few short @-@ term seismic monitoring experiments by the Geological Survey of Canada , no volcano monitoring has been accomplished at Mount Garibaldi or at other volcanoes in Canada at a level approaching that in other established countries with historically active volcanoes . Active or restless volcanoes are usually monitored using at least three seismographs all within approximately 15 km ( 9 mi ) , and frequently within 5 km ( 3 mi ) , for better sensitivity of detection and reduced location errors , particularly for earthquake depth . Such monitoring detects the risk of an eruption , offering a forecasting capability which is important to mitigating volcanic risk . Currently Mount Garibaldi does not have a seismograph closer than 25 km ( 16 mi ) . With increasing distance and declining numbers of seismographs used to indicate seismic activity , the prediction capability is reduced because earthquake location accuracy and depth decreases , and the network becomes less accurate . The inaccurate earthquake locations in the Garibaldi Volcanic Belt are a few kilometers , and in more isolated northern regions they are up to 10 km ( 6 mi ) . The location magnitude level in the Garibaldi Volcanic Belt is about magnitude 1 to 1 @.@ 5 , and elsewhere it is magnitude 1 @.@ 5 to 2 . At carefully monitored volcanoes both the located and noticed events are recorded and surveyed immediately to improve the understanding of a future eruption . Undetected events are not recorded or surveyed in British Columbia immediately , nor in an easy @-@ to @-@ access process . 
 In countries like Canada it is possible that small precursor earthquake swarms might go undetected , particularly if no events were observed ; more significant events in larger swarms would be detected but only a minor subdivision of the swarm events would be complex to clarify them with confidence as volcanic in nature , or even associate them with an individual volcanic edifice . 
 = = Garibaldi Lake volcanic field = = 
 Mount Garibaldi is associated with a group of small volcanoes that form the Garibaldi Lake volcanic field . An unusual volcanic structure called The Table is located between Garibaldi Lake and Mount Garibaldi . This several @-@ hundred @-@ foot @-@ high flat @-@ topped volcano is made of layers of andesitic dacite that are arranged like a stack of more or less equal sized pancakes . The Table was formed in the early Holocene at a time when the Cordilleran ice sheet covered the region . As the volcano 's lava rose it melted the part of the ice sheet above The Table 's vent , creating space for the lava to move into . Repeated eruptions constructed the steep @-@ walled stack of lava seen today . 
 The Black Tusk is a large spire of extensively eroded dark volcanic rock that is shaped like a Walrus tusk . It is considered to be the remnant of an extinct andesitic stratovolcano which formed between about 1 @.@ 3 and 1 @.@ 1 million years ago . 
 Mount Price , west of Garibaldi Lake , 5 km south of The Black Tusk , was formed in three stages of activity , dating back 1 @.@ 1 million years , the latest of which produced two large lava flows from Clinker Peak during the early Holocene that ponded against the retreating continental ice sheet and formed The Barrier , containing Garibaldi Lake . 
 Cinder Cone stands 150 m ( 492 ft ) above a gap between two arms of Helmet Glacier on Garibaldi 's flanks . During summer its crater is filled with a snow melt lake . 
 = Charles Cabaniss = 
 Charles Cabaniss ( October 14 , 1859 – January 19 , 1882 ) was a midshipman in the United States Navy and early player of American football . Born and raised in Central Virginia , he was appointed to the United States Naval Academy at the age of 16 . At the academy , Cabaniss retained average @-@ level grades and was a member of the school 's first @-@ ever football team . He graduated in 1880 and was appointed to the USS Swatara . Cabaniss was killed in an accident on the Swatara in 1882 which received coverage throughout much of the Eastern United States . 
 = = Life = = 
 = = = At the Naval Academy = = = 
 Cabaniss was born on October 14 , 1859 in Petersburg , Virginia . He grew up in Central Virginia until he was appointed to the United States Naval Academy at the age of sixteen years and eight months . He began classes at the academy on June 21 , 1876 and was the only member of his class from Virginia . Cabaniss was an average student while at the Naval Academy ; he finished 40th in his class of 69 in his second year , earning near @-@ top marks in drawing and mathematics but very low marks in history and French language . He also spent the mandatory two months and eighteen days at sea . Cabaniss had the fewest demerits of any member of his sophomore class and earned a spot on the academy 's summer cruise on the USS Constellation . 
 Cabaniss 's academic rankings remained generally the same in his following year at the academy . His scores in drawing , mathematics , and physics were above average , while his merits in French language and history were among the worst . He finished 33rd in the class of 66 . He maintained his spot as the most disciplined in his class , earning fewer than half the demerits than the second @-@ best . 
 Cabaniss finished his final year at the Naval Academy ranking 25th out of 61 graduates . The course requirements changed that year ; Cabaniss received poor marks in seamanship , tactics , naval tactics , astronomy , and French language , but very high marks in mathematics , electricity , and English composition courses . He maintained his good conduct , earning the second @-@ fewest demerits of any cadet . This earned him an appointment as a Cadet Ensign , a temporary position as an academy officer . 
 That year , the academy fielded its first competitive football team . Although football had seen some popularity at the school , there had not been an organized effort to establish it . Two different teams were assembled in 1879 ; only first @-@ classmen ( final @-@ year students ) were allowed to join the teams . Cabaniss joined the second team as a rusher , the equivalent of a modern @-@ day offensive lineman . He played alongside future admiral Hugh Rodman and eventual Governor of Guam William John Maxwell . The academy 's team played one game , a scoreless tie with the nearby Baltimore Athletic Club . Navy 's rushers forced the Baltimore A.C. backwards into their own end zone for safeties on three separate occasions , and generally outplayed and overpowered their opponents the entire game . 
 = = = Swatara and death = = = 
 On June 10 , 1880 , Cabaniss graduated from the academy and was sent home to await his orders . He was assigned on August 17 of that year to the USS Swatara as a part of the Asiatic Squadron . For sixteen months , the ship was docked in Kobe , Japan , during which time Cabaniss earned himself a positive reputation with other sailors . Crew mates described him as always being happy , with an intimidating , six @-@ foot @-@ tall physique but a personality that did not match . His disciplined nature remained ; he reportedly was one of the best @-@ behaved sailors , who spent all of his time either carrying out his duties or practicing to be a better officer . Cabaniss was never admonished for shore misconduct , a considerable issue for most other new officers and sailors . He was reportedly a favorite of the superior officers stationed in Kobe , and was appointed to a spot on the admiral 's staff as a reward for his conduct . Cabaniss was preparing for an examination for promotion early in February 1882 . 
 Cabaniss was killed in an accident on board the Swatara on January 19 , 1882 . An official report of the incident was released on March 25 of that year . According to the report , before @-@ noon exercises on board the ship had just been completed when an order was made to prepare rifles for target practice . At around ten in the morning , Cabaniss was assisting in the instruction of the ship 's second group of sailors when he broke off and entered the ship 's engine room to instruct a sailor on his duties . An experienced sailor , Ensign James P. Parker , was explaining to new sailors how to properly load their guns . He showed them how to load and discharge the weapons using a practice round . He then reloaded his gun with live rounds , but apparently forgot this and fired one of them . The bullet ricocheted off the ship 's deck , struck one of the guns , ricocheted off the deck again , and struck Cabaniss , killing him instantly . The ball first entered through his left arm , impacting it so strongly that it broke every bone in his elbow . It then entered his side , tearing his latissimus dorsi muscle ; went into his chest , severing every major artery ; ricocheted up to near his shoulder , exited his right side , and struck the man he was instructing in the shoulder . Cabaniss was reported to have never made a sound as he fell . The other sailor recovered . 
 Cabaniss ' body was ordered to be embalmed but was not ; the damage to his body was so severe that the embalming fluid would leak out . His body was buried in Kobe on February 24 with military honors . The entire crew of the Swatara attended , as well as the entire crew of HMS Flying Fish and many noted Japanese citizens . Ensign Parker reportedly suffered from depression following the accident . Cabaniss ' death received significant media coverage in the Eastern United States . The New York Times published an article on its second page , and among other papers that carried the story were the Wilmington Morning Star and the Petersburg Index @-@ Appeal . 
 = = = Explanatory notes = = = 
 = Russian battleship Petropavlovsk ( 1911 ) = 
 The Russian battleship Petropavlovsk ( Russian : Петропавловск ) was the third of the four Gangut @-@ class dreadnoughts built before World War I for the Imperial Russian Navy , the first Russian class of dreadnoughts . She was named after the Russian victory over the British and the French in the Siege of Petropavlovsk in 1854 . The ship was completed during the winter of 1914 – 15 , but was not ready for combat until mid @-@ 1915 . Her role was to defend the mouth of the Gulf of Finland against the Germans , who never tried to enter , so she spent her time training and providing cover for minelaying operations . Her crew joined the general mutiny of the Baltic Fleet after the February Revolution of 1917 and she was the only dreadnought available to the Bolsheviks for several years after the October Revolution of 1917 . She bombarded the mutinous garrison of Fort Krasnaya Gorka and supported Bolshevik light forces operating against British ships supporting the White Russians in the Gulf of Finland in 1918 – 19 . Later , her crew joined the Kronstadt Rebellion of 1921 and she was renamed Marat after the rebellion was crushed . 
 Marat was reconstructed from 1928 to 1931 and represented the Soviet Union at the Coronation Naval Review at Spithead in 1937 . Two years later , she bombarded a Finnish coastal artillery position during the Winter War once before the Gulf of Finland iced up . Shortly afterwards , her anti @-@ aircraft armament was upgraded . When the Germans invaded on 22 June 1941 she was in Kronstadt and provided gunfire support to Soviet troops in September as the Germans approached Leningrad . Later that month she had her bow blown off and sank in shallow water after two hits by 1 @,@ 000 @-@ kilogram ( 2 @,@ 200 lb ) bombs that detonated her forward magazine . She was refloated several months later and became a stationary battery , providing gunfire support during the Siege of Leningrad . Plans were made to reconstruct her after the war , using the bow of her sister Frunze , but they were not accepted and were formally cancelled in 1948 . She was renamed Volkhov , after the nearby river , in 1950 and served as a stationary training ship until stricken in 1953 and broken up afterwards . 
 = = Design = = 
 Petropavlovsk was 180 meters ( 590 ft 7 in ) long at the waterline and 181 @.@ 2 meters ( 594 ft 6 in ) long overall . She had a beam of 26 @.@ 9 meters ( 88 ft 3 in ) and a draft of 8 @.@ 99 meters ( 29 ft 6 in ) , 49 centimeters ( 1 ft 7 in ) more than designed . Her displacement was 24 @,@ 800 tonnes ( 24 @,@ 408 long tons ) at load , over 1 @,@ 500 t ( 1 @,@ 476 long tons ) more than her designed displacement of 23 @,@ 288 t ( 22 @,@ 920 long tons ) . 
 Petropavlovsk 's machinery was built by the Baltic Works . Four Parsons @-@ type steam turbine sets drove the four propellers . The engine rooms were located between turrets three and four in three compartments . The outer compartments each had a high @-@ pressure ahead and reverse turbine for each wing propeller shaft . The central engine room had two low @-@ pressure ahead and astern turbines as well as two cruising turbines driving each of the two center shafts . The engines had a total designed output of 42 @,@ 000 shaft horsepower ( 31 @,@ 319 kW ) , but they produced 52 @,@ 000 shp ( 38 @,@ 776 kW ) during her sister Poltava 's full @-@ speed trials on 21 November 1915 and gave a top speed of 24 @.@ 1 knots ( 44 @.@ 6 km / h ; 27 @.@ 7 mph ) . Twenty @-@ five Yarrow Admiralty @-@ type small @-@ tube boilers provided steam to the engines at a designed working pressure of 17 @.@ 5 standard atmospheres ( 1 @,@ 770 kPa ; 257 psi ) . Each boiler was fitted with Thornycroft oil sprayers for mixed oil / coal burning . They were arranged in two groups . The forward group consisted of two boiler rooms in front of the second turret , the foremost of which had three boilers while the second one had six . The rear group was between the second and third turrets and comprised two compartments , each with eight boilers . At full load she carried 1 @,@ 847 @.@ 5 long tons ( 1 @,@ 877 t ) of coal and 700 long tons ( 711 t ) of fuel oil and that provided her a range of 3 @,@ 500 nautical miles ( 6 @,@ 500 km ; 4 @,@ 000 mi ) at a speed of 10 knots ( 19 km / h ) . 
 Her main armament consisted of a dozen Obukhovskii 12 @-@ inch ( 305 mm ) Pattern 1907 52 @-@ caliber guns mounted in four triple turrets distributed the length of the ship . The Russians did not believe that superfiring turrets offered any advantage as they discounted the value of axial fire and believed that superfiring turrets could not fire while over the lower turret because of muzzle blast problems . They also believed that distributing the turrets , and their associated magazines , over the length of the ship improved the survivability of the ship . Sixteen 4 @.@ 7 @-@ inch ( 119 mm ) 50 @-@ caliber Pattern 1905 guns were mounted in casemates as the secondary battery intended to defend the ship against torpedo boats . She was completed with only a single 3 @-@ inch ( 76 mm ) 30 @-@ caliber Lender anti @-@ aircraft ( AA ) gun mounted on the quarterdeck . Other AA guns were probably added during the course of World War I , but details are lacking . Conway 's says that four 75 @-@ millimeter ( 3 @.@ 0 in ) guns were added to the roofs of the end turrets during the war . Four 17 @.@ 7 @-@ inch ( 450 mm ) submerged torpedo tubes were mounted with three torpedoes for each tube . 
 = = Service = = 
 Petropavlovsk was built by the Baltic Works in Saint Petersburg . Her keel was laid down on 16 June 1909 and she was launched on 22 September 1911 . She entered service on 5 January 1915 , six months after the start of World War I , when she reached Helsingfors and was assigned to the First Battleship Brigade of the Baltic Fleet . Petropavlovsk and her sister Gangut provided distant cover for minelaying operations on 10 – 11 November and 6 December 1915 . She saw no action of any kind during 1916 . Her crew joined the general mutiny of the Baltic Fleet on 16 March 1917 , after the idle sailors received word of the February Revolution in Saint Petersburg . The Treaty of Brest @-@ Litovsk required the Soviets to evacuate their naval base at Helsinki in March 1918 or have their ships interned by newly independent Finland even though the Gulf of Finland was still frozen over . Petropavlovsk and her sisters led the first group of ships on 12 March and reached Kronstadt five days later in what became known as the " Ice Voyage " . 
 Petropavlovsk was the only operable dreadnought belonging to the Soviets and provided cover to smaller ships on raiding missions . On 31 May 1919 she fired in support of the Russian destroyer <unk> and several minesweepers that had taken the bait laid by the British forces supporting the White Russians . The British destroyer HMS Walker appeared to be operating alone and the Soviets sortied to attack her , but a number of other British destroyers were positioned to sweep in behind the Soviets . <unk> retreated at full speed and Petropavlovsk opened fire on Walker at about 14 @,@ 000 yards ( 12 @,@ 802 m ) . She hit Walker twice , inflicting only minor damage and wounding two sailors , and the British destroyers eventually disengaged when they got too close to Soviet coastal artillery and minefields . A few days later Petropavlovsk and the pre @-@ dreadnought battleship Andrei Pervozvanny bombarded Fort Krasnaya Gorka whose garrison had mutinied against the Bolsheviks . She fired no fewer than 568 12 @-@ inch shells and the garrison surrendered on 17 June when Leon Trotsky promised them their lives , only to subsequently order them machine @-@ gunned . On 17 August 1919 Petropavlovsk was claimed as torpedoed and put out of action by the British Coastal Motor Boat CMB 88 during a night attack in Kronstadt harbor , but was , in fact , not damaged at all . The crew of Petropavlovsk joined the Kronstadt Rebellion of March 1921 . After it was bloodily crushed she was renamed Marat to honor the French revolutionary leader Jean @-@ Paul Marat on 31 March 1921 . By 1922 her primary rangefinder had been moved to a platform on the foremast and she mounted three 3 @-@ inch " Lender " AA guns each on the roofs of the fore and aft turrets . 
 Marat was partially reconstructed between the fall of 1928 and 8 April 1931 at the Baltic Works . The most obvious external change was a much more elaborate forward superstructure needed to house new fire control instruments . A KDP @-@ 6 fire control director , with two 6 @-@ meter ( 20 ft ) Zeiss rangefinders , was positioned at the top of the tubular foremast . An 8 @-@ meter ( 26 ft ) Zeiss rangefinder was also added on the rear superstructure . The top of the forward funnel was lengthened by about 2 meters ( 6 ft 7 in ) and angled backwards in an attempt to keep the exhaust gases away from the control and gunnery spaces . A derrick was added to the mainmast to handle a KR @-@ 1 flying boat imported from Germany that was stored above the third turret . No aircraft catapult was fitted so the aircraft had to take off and land on the water . A forecastle was added to the bow , which was also given much more sheer and flare to improve her sea @-@ keeping abilities . Her turrets were overhauled , her guns replaced and new 8 @-@ meter rangefinders were installed on every turret . Her boilers were converted to only burn fuel oil and the more powerful boilers allowed the forward three boilers to be removed . The space freed up was used for anti @-@ aircraft ammunition and various control spaces . The cruising turbines were also removed which simplified the ship 's machinery at a small cost in power . These changes increased her displacement to 26 @,@ 170 tonnes ( 25 @,@ 757 long tons ) at full load and her overall length to 184 meters ( 604 ft ) . Her metacentric height increased to 1 @.@ 93 meters ( 6 ft 4 in ) from her designed 1 @.@ 76 meters ( 5 ft 9 in ) mainly because she now carried much of her fuel in her double bottom rather than in coal bunkers high on the sides of the ship . More weight was added to her before World War II , including an increase in the thickness of her turret roofs to 152 millimeters ( 6 @.@ 0 in ) , that decreased her metacentric height to only 1 @.@ 7 meters ( 5 ft 7 in ) . This was unsatisfactory and plans were made to reconstruct her again , but they were cancelled when the Germans attacked in 1941 . 
 Marat took part in the 1937 Coronation Review in Britain . Her participation in the Winter War was minimal as she bombarded Finnish 10 @-@ inch ( 254 mm ) coast defense guns one time at Saarenpää in the Beryozovye Islands with 133 high explosive shells before the Gulf of Finland iced over . In early 1940 her anti @-@ aircraft armament was reinforced . She exchanged her elderly 3 @-@ inch " Lender " guns for modern 76 @.@ 2 @-@ millimeter ( 3 @.@ 00 in ) 34 @-@ K guns and two twin 76 @.@ 2 mm 81 @-@ K mounts were mounted on her quarter deck . The magazines for these guns were situated in the rearmost casemates on each beam , which lost their 120 mm guns . At some point six automatic 37 @-@ millimeter ( 1 @.@ 5 in ) 70 @-@ K guns were also added . These additions boosted her displacement to 26 @,@ 700 tonnes ( 26 @,@ 278 long tons ) at full load . She sailed to Tallinn shortly after the Soviets occupied Estonia , although she returned to Kronstadt on 20 June 1941 , two days before the German invasion of Russia began . Marat opened fire on troop positions of the German 18th Army from the Leningrad Sea Canal on 8 September . She was lightly damaged by German 15 @-@ centimeter ( 5 @.@ 9 in ) guns on 16 September . 
 She was sunk at her moorings on 23 September 1941 by two near @-@ simultaneous hits by 1 @,@ 000 @-@ kilogram ( 2 @,@ 200 lb ) bombs near the forward superstructure . They caused the explosion of the forward magazine which heaved the turret up , blew the superstructure and forward funnel over to starboard and demolished the forward part of the hull from frames 20 to 57 . 326 men were killed and the ship gradually settled to the bottom in 11 meters ( 36 ft ) of water . Her sinking is commonly credited to the Stuka pilot Oberleutnant Hans @-@ Ulrich Rudel of III . / StG 2 , but Rudel dropped only one of the two bombs . The rear part of the ship was later refloated and she was used as a floating battery although all of her 120 mm guns were removed . Initially only the two rearmost turrets were operable , but the second turret was repaired by the autumn of 1942 . She fired a total of 1 @,@ 971 twelve @-@ inch shells during the Siege of Leningrad . In December 1941 granite slabs 40 – 60 millimeters ( 1 @.@ 6 – 2 @.@ 4 in ) thick from the nearby harbor walls were laid on her decks to reinforce her deck protection . Another transverse bulkhead was built behind frame 57 and the space between them was filled with concrete to prevent her sinking if the original bulkhead was ruptured . 
 She resumed her original name on 31 May 1943 . After the war there were several plans to reconstruct her , using the bow of the Frunze , but they were not accepted and were formally cancelled on 29 June 1948 . She was renamed Volkhov , after the nearby river , on 28 November 1950 and served as a stationary training ship until stricken on 4 September 1953 . The ship was subsequently broken up . 
 = José María Caro Martínez = 
 José María Caro Martínez ( Spanish pronunciation : [ <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> ] ; 1830 – 11 November 1916 ) was a Chilean politician and civil servant . In May 1894 , he was unanimously elected as the first mayor of the commune of Pichilemu , along with Pedro Nolasco de Mira , and Francisco Reyes , who were respectively elected as segundo and tercer alcalde ( second and third magistrate ) . Caro Martínez had previously served for several years as <unk> ( administrator ) of the San Antonio de Petrel hacienda , and between 1891 and 1892 was the <unk> of the 13th <unk> of San Fernando Department , which comprised the district of Cáhuil . 
 The eleven @-@ year mayorship of Caro Martínez , which lasted from 1894 and 1905 , was qualified by journalist and local historian José Arraño Acevedo as " the most fruitful " in the history of the commune . In his four terms , Caro Martínez constructed roads that connected Pichilemu with San Fernando , capital of the department of the same name , and founded several schools in Pichilemu and parts of current Marchigüe . 
 He resigned in May 1905 and completed his fourth mayoral term as a segundo alcalde . As a mayor , he was succeeded by Francisco Javier <unk> , who held the office for two non @-@ consecutive terms . Caro Martínez was the father of José María Caro Rodríguez , the first Chilean Cardinal of the Roman Catholic Church , Francisco Adriano Caro Rodríguez , who was regidor of Pichilemu for several terms between 1906 and December 1925 , when he became the 8th Mayor of Pichilemu following the resignation of Luis Barahona <unk> , and Pedro Pablo Caro Rodríguez , a lawyer from the University of Chile , who served as acting judge in several Chilean cities . 
 = = Early life = = 
 José María Caro Martínez was born in San Antonio de Petrel , in current Pichilemu , Region of O 'Higgins , to Pedro Pascual Caro Gaete and <unk> Martínez Ríos , in 1830 . The exact birth date is unknown , since all the books of the parish of Ciruelos with baptism records between 1830 and 1834 were burnt in a fire . The Caro Martínez family , of " devout Catholics " , is described as having a " profound Christian faith , " with their members " complying with unblemished devotion their Christian duties . " Since he was a child , Caro shaped his personality on the " fulfillment of his duties " ; according to a 1944 article from the Pichilemu newspaper , " his personality became even more robust in his youth as he faced an accident whose consequences stood by him until his death . " 
 Like his father , he dedicated his life to agricultural activities , and " managed to raise a small fortune . " Caro served for several years as administrator ( <unk> ) of the hacienda of San Antonio de Petrel , property of José Vicente Ortúzar <unk> . During his administration of San Antonio de Petrel , the hacienda was " rich " , as it " possessed 1 @,@ 500 cows , [ ... ] and produced yearly 15 thousand sacks of wheat , each of 100 kilograms . " 
 Caro Martínez and his family lived in the Petrel area until the 1880s , when they moved to nearby village Quebrada del Nuevo Reino ; he lived there until his death . Caro Martínez became an active member of the parish of Ciruelos . According to journalist José Arraño Acevedo , the archives of the <unk> of Santiago — which are published yearly — show he was elected as a steward of the Confraternity of the Blessed Sacrament for the years of 1888 , 1890 , 1892 , and 1900 . 
 = = Political career = = 
 Caro Martínez was a member of the Conservative Party of Chile , and was appointed by the party 's leaders as the perpetual president of the party 's seat in the commune of Pichilemu . In 1891 , he was appointed by President Jorge Montt Álvarez as <unk> of the 13th <unk> of San Fernando Department , which comprised the district of Cáhuil , territory of the current commune of Pichilemu . He held the position until 1892 , and was succeeded by José Domingo <unk> . 
 Also in 1891 , on 21 December , the commune of Pichilemu was created by the Autonomous Commune Law ( Spanish : Ley de <unk> Autónoma ) , written by Ministry of the Interior Manuel José Irarrázabal Larraín . The new commune comprised the districts of Cáhuil , Peñablanca , and <unk> . It was one of the most extensive communes of the department of San Fernando . However , the local government was yet to be established . 
 On 21 March 1894 , a preparatory meeting was held to create a Junta <unk> de <unk> — an organisation that would be in charge of the elections . Caro Martínez was elected president of the Junta <unk> in the meeting . Later that year , on 6 May , the first municipal meeting ( <unk> municipal ) was held . During the meeting , Caro Martínez , aged 64 , was unanimously elected as the first Mayor of Pichilemu since its creation as a commune . Pedro Nolasco de Mira , and Francisco Reyes were elected as segundo , and tercer alcalde , respectively , and Francisco Cerón , José Leonardo <unk> , <unk> Rosales , Benjamín Calderón , and Francisco León as <unk> . 
 Immediately after his election , Caro Martínez created the local police force ( Cuerpo de <unk> Local ) . He also constructed roads all over the commune of Pichilemu , with special attention to those that would connect Pichilemu with the central area of the department of San Fernando , specifically the commune of San Fernando , and Santiago , the capital of Chile . As part of this project , he constructed a bridge over the Petrel Lake , known as the Puente Negro ( Black Bridge ) , and another in Cáhuil , connecting that town with its saltworks . He also founded several schools in the Pichilemu area , which only had one , located in Ciruelos . Those include the schools of <unk> <unk> , Las <unk> , Trinidad , <unk> , Peñablanca , all in the current territory of the commune of Marchigüe , and one in central Pichilemu . 
 Other works during Caro Martínez 's mayorship include the grant of 1 @,@ 300 Chilean pesos for the design of plans for the construction of the railway from <unk> to Pichilemu , and the installation of a water tank , located in the house of municipal secretary Albino <unk> . Additionally , the government of Caro Martínez determined the urban limits of the commune of Pichilemu , gave help to victims of heavy rainstorms that hit the area in the time , brought Carabineros forces to " scare away " bandits from the local farms , and made repairs to the roads of Marchigüe , Trinidad , <unk> , and Peñablanca . 
 Caro Martínez was re @-@ elected mayor ( primer alcalde ) of Pichilemu in 1897 , 1900 , and 1903 . On 7 May 1905 , just one year before his fourth term expired , he decided to resign to the primer alcalde office , and took a position as segundo alcalde of Pichilemu until 1906 . Following his resignation , Francisco Javier <unk> became the mayor , and held the office between that year and 1909 , and again in 1912 , but only for less than a month . 
 His mayorship was described by historian José Arraño Acevedo as " the most fruitful [ ... ] in the municipal life of Pichilemu . " Caro Martínez was described by Virgilio Figueroa , biographer of his son José María Caro Rodríguez , as " an individual with public spirit and leadership skills . " According to Washington Saldías in an article published in Pichilemu News , Caro Martínez 's mayorship has been the longest in the history of Pichilemu . 
 = = Later life , death , and legacy = = 
 According to José Arraño Acevedo 's 1980 article " José María Caro Martínez , Primer Alcalde de Pichilemu " , following his retirement from politics in 1906 , Caro Martínez " stayed watchful to everything that was being done in favour of the commune he led so aptly . " He appears as a subscriber of El Puerto , the first newspaper published in Pichilemu , which only printed three editions . In the first edition of the newspaper , dated 16 January 1908 , an article states that José María Caro Martínez and <unk> Fernández were awarded 200 pesos in a raffle held on the previous day in the headquarters of the La Unión newspaper , in Santiago . 
 In late September – early October 1916 , he became ill with an unspecified disease , which forty days later , in the night of that 11 November , " won against his strong physique " and provoked his death at age 86 . Caro was subsequently cremated and is buried with his wife Rita , who died at age 97 on 7 August 1931 , in a mausoleum constructed by their son José María , located at the churchyard of Ciruelos . 
 Almost eighty years after his death , in December 1991 , the government of Mayor René Maturana Maldonado decreed , as part of the celebrations of the centennial of the commune 's creation , the renaming of several streets of the commune whose original names " caused confusion because they were repeated in other streets " , to new names of " relevant people of the [ local ] history . " As a result , J. M. Caro street ( Calle J. M. Caro ) in the Pavez Polanco neighborhood was renamed to Alcalde Caro Martínez street ( Calle Alcalde Caro Martínez ) in honour of the commune 's first mayor . 
 = = Family = = 
 Caro Martínez married Rita Rodríguez Cornejo ( 1833 – 1931 ) on 20 February 1860 at the chapel of San Antonio de Petrel . The couple had nine children , all born in San Antonio de Petrel : Rita , Cristina , <unk> , José María , Pedro Pascual , Francisco Adriano , Pedro Pablo , <unk> , and Rosa . 
 José María ( 1866 – 1958 ) became a Catholic priest ; he served as Archbishop of Santiago from 1939 until his death , and in 1946 he became the first Chilean Cardinal of the Church . Francisco Adriano became , like his father , involved in politics , serving for several terms as regidor of the commune of Pichilemu between 1906 and 24 December 1925 , when he became the 8th Mayor of Pichilemu , following the resignation of Luis Antonio Barahona <unk> to run for a deputy seat . Francisco held the office until 22 May 1927 , when President Carlos Ibáñez del Campo appointed Evaristo Merino as mayor of Pichilemu . Pedro Pablo ( 1875 – 1959 ) was a University of Chile lawyer , who served as acting judge in Castro , Cachapoal ( Peumo ) , amid others ; Pedro Pablo also served as secretary and treasurer of the commune of Buin . 
 = The King and I = 
 The King and I is a musical , the fifth by the team of composer Richard Rodgers and dramatist Oscar Hammerstein II . It is based on the 1944 novel Anna and the King of Siam by Margaret Landon , which is in turn derived from the memoirs of Anna Leonowens , governess to the children of King Mongkut of Siam in the early 1860s . The musical 's plot relates the experiences of Anna , a British schoolteacher hired as part of the King 's drive to modernize his country . The relationship between the King and Anna is marked by conflict through much of the piece , as well as by a love that neither can admit . The musical premiered on March 29 , 1951 , at Broadway 's St. James Theatre . It ran nearly three years , then the fourth longest @-@ running Broadway musical in history , and has had many tours and revivals . 
 In 1950 , theatrical attorney Fanny Holtzmann was looking for a part for her client , veteran leading lady Gertrude Lawrence . Holtzmann realized that Landon 's book would provide an ideal vehicle and contacted Rodgers and Hammerstein , who were initially reluctant but agreed to write the musical . The pair initially sought Rex Harrison to play the supporting part of the King , a role that he had played in the 1946 film made from Landon 's book , but he was unavailable . They settled on the young actor and television director Yul Brynner . 
 The musical was an immediate hit , winning Tony Awards for Best Musical , Best Actress ( for Lawrence ) and Best Featured Actor ( for Brynner ) . Lawrence died unexpectedly of cancer a year and a half after the opening , and the role of Anna was played by several actresses during the remainder of the Broadway run of 1 @,@ 246 performances . A hit London run and U.S. national tour followed , together with a 1956 film for which Brynner won an Academy Award , and the musical was recorded several times . In later revivals , Brynner came to dominate his role and the musical , starring in a four @-@ year national tour culminating in a 1985 Broadway run shortly before his death . 
 Christopher Renshaw directed major revivals on Broadway ( 1996 ) , winning the Tony Award for Best Revival , and in the West End ( 2000 ) . A 2015 Broadway revival won another Tony for Best Revival . Both professional and amateur revivals of The King and I continue to be staged regularly throughout the English @-@ speaking world . 
 = = Historical background = = 
 Mongkut , King of Siam , was about 57 years old in 1861 . He had lived half his life as a Buddhist monk and was an able scholar , founding a new order of Buddhism and a temple in Bangkok ( paid for by his half @-@ brother , King Nangklao ) . Through his decades of devotion , Mongkut acquired an ascetic lifestyle and a firm grasp of Western languages . When Nangklao died in 1850 , Mongkut became king . At that time , various European countries were striving for dominance , and American traders sought greater influence , in Southeast Asia . He ultimately succeeded in keeping Siam an independent nation , partly by familiarizing his heirs and harem with Western ways . 
 In 1861 , Mongkut wrote to his Singapore agent , Tan Kim Ching , asking him to find a British lady to be governess to the royal children . At the time , the British community in Singapore was small , and the choice fell on a recent arrival there , Anna Leonowens ( 1831 – 1915 ) , who was running a small nursery school in the colony . Leonowens was the Anglo @-@ Indian daughter of an Indian Army soldier and the widow of Thomas Owens , a clerk and hotel keeper . She had arrived in Singapore two years previously , claiming to be the genteel widow of an officer and explaining her dark complexion by stating that she was Welsh by birth . Her deception was not detected until long after her death , and had still not come to light when The King and I was written . 
 Upon receiving the King 's invitation , Leonowens sent her daughter , Avis , to school in England , to give Avis the social advantage of a prestigious British education , and traveled to Bangkok with her five @-@ year @-@ old son , Louis . King Mongkut had sought a Briton to teach his children and wives after trying local missionaries , who used the opportunity to proselytize . Leonowens initially asked for $ 150 in Singapore currency per month . Another request by Leonowens , that she live in or near the missionary community to ensure she was not deprived of Western company , aroused suspicion in Mongkut , who cautioned in a letter , " we need not have teacher of Christianity as they are abundant here " . King Mongkut and Leonowens came to an agreement : $ 100 per month and a residence near the royal palace . At a time when most transport in Bangkok was by boat , Mongkut did not wish to have to arrange for the teacher to get to work every day . Leonowens and Louis temporarily lived as guests of Mongkut 's prime minister , and after the first house offered was found to be unsuitable , the family moved into a brick residence ( wooden structures decayed quickly in Bangkok 's climate ) within walking distance of the palace . 
 In 1867 , Leonowens left Bangkok on a six @-@ month leave of absence to visit her daughter Avis in England , intending to deposit Louis at a school in Ireland and return to Siam with Avis . However , due to unexpected delays and opportunities for further travel , Leonowens was still abroad in late 1868 , when Mongkut fell ill and died . Leonowens did not return to Siam , although she continued to correspond with her former pupil , the new king Chulalongkorn . 
 = = Creation = = 
 In 1950 , British actress Gertrude Lawrence 's business manager and attorney , Fanny Holtzmann , was looking for a new vehicle for her client when the 1944 Margaret Landon novel Anna and the King of Siam ( a fictionalized version of Leonowens ' experiences ) was sent to her by Landon 's agent . According to Rodgers biographer Meryle Secrest , Holtzmann was worried that Lawrence 's career was fading . The 51 @-@ year @-@ old actress had appeared only in plays , not in musicals , since Lady in the Dark closed in 1943 . Holtzmann agreed that a musical based on Anna and the King of Siam would be ideal for her client , who purchased the rights to adapt the novel for the stage . 
 Holtzmann initially wanted Cole Porter to write the score , but he declined . She was going to approach Noël Coward next , but happened to meet Dorothy Hammerstein ( Oscar 's wife ) in Manhattan . Holtzmann told Dorothy Hammerstein that she wanted Rodgers and Hammerstein to create a show for Lawrence , and asked her to see that her husband read a book that Holtzmann would send over . In fact , both Dorothy Rodgers and Dorothy Hammerstein had read the novel in 1944 and had urged their husbands to consider it as a possible subject for a musical . Dorothy Hammerstein had known Gertrude Lawrence since 1925 , when they had both appeared in André Charlot 's London Revue of 1924 on Broadway and on tour in North America . 
 Rodgers and Hammerstein had disliked Landon 's novel as a basis for a musical when it was published , and their views still held . It consists of vignettes of life at the Siamese court , interspersed with descriptions of historical events unconnected with each other , except that the King creates most of the difficulties in the episodes , and Anna tries to resolve them . Rodgers and Hammerstein could see no coherent story from which a musical could be made until they saw the 1946 film adaptation , starring Irene Dunne and Rex Harrison , and how the screenplay united the episodes in the novel . Rodgers and Hammerstein were also concerned about writing a star vehicle . They had preferred to make stars rather than hire them , and engaging the legendary Gertrude Lawrence would be expensive . Lawrence 's voice was also a worry : her limited vocal range was diminishing with the years , while her tendency to sing flat was increasing . Lawrence 's temperament was another concern : though she could not sing like one , the star was known to be capable of diva @-@ like behavior . In spite of this , they admired her acting – what Hammerstein called her " magic light " , a compelling presence on stage – and agreed to write the show . For her part , Lawrence committed to remaining in the show until June 1 , 1953 , and waived the star 's usual veto rights over cast and director , leaving control in the hands of the two authors . 
 Hammerstein found his " door in " to the play in Landon 's account of a slave in Siam writing about Abraham Lincoln . This would eventually become the narrated dance , " The Small House of Uncle Thomas " . Since a frank expression of romantic feelings between the King and Anna would be inappropriate in view of both parties ' upbringing and prevailing social mores , Hammerstein wrote love scenes for a secondary couple , Tuptim , a junior wife of the King , and Lun Tha , a scholar . In the Landon work , the relationship is between Tuptim and a priest , and is not romantic . The musical 's most radical change from the novel was to have the King die at the end of the play . Also , since Lawrence was not primarily a singer , the secondary couple gave Rodgers a chance to write his usual " soaring " romantic melodies . In an interview for The New York Times , Hammerstein indicated that he wrote the first scene before leaving for London and the West End production of Carousel in mid @-@ 1950 ; he wrote a second scene while in the British capital . 
 The pair had to overcome the challenge of how to represent Thai speech and music . Rodgers , who had experimented with Asian music in his short @-@ lived 1928 musical with Lorenz Hart titled Chee @-@ chee , did not wish to use actual Thai music , which American audiences might not find accessible . Instead , he gave his music an exotic flavor , using open fifths and chords in unusual keys , in ways pleasant to Western ears . Hammerstein faced the problem of how to represent Thai speech ; he and Rodgers chose to convey it by musical sounds , made by the orchestra . For the King 's style of speech , Hammerstein developed an abrupt , emphatic way of talking , which was mostly free of articles , as are many East Asian languages . The forceful style reflected the King 's personality and was maintained even when he sang , especially in his one solo , " A Puzzlement " . Many of the King 's lines , including his first utterance , " Who ? Who ? Who ? " , and much of the initial scene between him and Anna , are drawn from Landon 's version . Nevertheless , the King is presented more sympathetically in the musical than in the novel or the 1946 film , as the musical omits the torture and burning at the stake of Lady Tuptim and her partner . 
 With Rodgers laid up with back trouble , Hammerstein completed most of the musical 's book before many songs were set to music . Early on , Hammerstein contacted set designer Jo Mielziner and costume designer Irene Sharaff and asked them to begin work in coordination with each other . Sharaff communicated with Jim Thompson , an American who had revived the Thai silk industry after World War II . Thompson sent Sharaff samples of silk cloth from Thailand and pictures of local dress from the mid @-@ 19th century . One such picture , of a Thai woman in western dress , inspired the song " Western People Funny " , sung by the King 's chief wife , Lady Thiang , while dressed in western garb . 
 Producer Leland Hayward , who had worked with the duo on South Pacific , approached Jerome Robbins to choreograph a ballet for " The Small House of Uncle Thomas " . Robbins was very enthusiastic about the project and asked to choreograph the other musical numbers as well , although Rodgers and Hammerstein had originally planned little other dancing . Robbins staged " The Small House of Uncle Thomas " as an intimate performance , rather than a large production number . His choreography for the parade of the King 's children to meet their teacher ( " March of the Royal Siamese Children " ) drew great acclaim . Robert Russell Bennett provided the orchestrations , and Trude Rittmann arranged the ballet music . 
 The pair discussed having an Act 1 musical scene involving Anna and the King 's wives . The lyrics for that scene proved to be very difficult for Hammerstein to write . He first thought that Anna would simply tell the wives something about her past , and wrote such lyrics as " I was dazzled by the splendor / Of Calcutta and Bombay " and " The celebrities were many / And the parties very gay / ( I recall a curry dinner / And a certain Major Grey ) . " Eventually , Hammerstein decided to write about how Anna felt , a song which would not only explain her past and her motivation for traveling with her son to the court of Siam , but also serve to establish a bond with Tuptim and lay the groundwork for the conflict that devastates Anna 's relationship with the King . " Hello , Young Lovers " , the resulting song , was the work of five exhausting weeks for Hammerstein . He finally sent the lyrics to Rodgers by messenger and awaited his reaction . Hammerstein considered the song his best work and was anxious to hear what Rodgers thought of it , but no comment came from Rodgers . Pride kept Hammerstein from asking . Finally , after four days , the two happened to be talking on the phone about other matters , and at the end of the conversation , Rodgers stated , very briefly , that the lyric was fine . Josh Logan , who had worked closely with Hammerstein on South Pacific , listened to the usually unflappable writer pour out his unhappy feelings . It was one of the few times that Hammerstein and Rodgers did not display a united front . 
 = = Casting and auditions = = 
