 Although the part of the King was only a supporting role to Lawrence 's Anna , Hammerstein and Rodgers thought it essential that a well @-@ known theatrical actor play it . The obvious choice was Rex Harrison , who had played the King in the movie , but he was booked , as was Noël Coward . Alfred Drake , the original Curly in Oklahoma ! , made contractual demands which were deemed too high . With time running short before rehearsals , finding an actor to play the King became a major concern . Mary Martin , the original Nellie Forbush in South Pacific , suggested that her co @-@ star in a 1946 musical set in China , Lute Song , try for the role . Rodgers recounted the audition of the Russian @-@ American performer , Yul Brynner : 
 They told us the name of the first man and out he came with a bald head and sat cross @-@ legged on the stage . He had a guitar and he hit his guitar one whack and gave out with this unearthly yell and sang some heathenish sort of thing , and Oscar and I looked at each other and said , " Well , that 's it . " 
 Brynner termed Rodgers ' account " very picturesque , but totally inaccurate " . He recalled that as an established television director ( in CBS 's Starlight Theatre , for example ) , he was reluctant to go back on the stage . His wife , his agent , and Martin finally convinced him to read Hammerstein 's working script , and once he did , he was fascinated by the character of the King and was eager to do the project . In any case , Brynner 's fierce , mercurial , dangerous , yet surprisingly sensitive King was an ideal foil for Lawrence 's strong @-@ willed , yet vulnerable Anna , and when the two finally came together in " Shall We Dance ? " , where the King hesitantly touches Anna 's waist , the chemistry was palpable . 
 Pre @-@ rehearsal preparations began in late 1950 . Hammerstein had wanted Logan to direct and co @-@ write the book , as he had for South Pacific , but when Logan declined , Hammerstein decided to write the entire book himself . Instead of Logan , the duo hired as director John van Druten , who had worked with Lawrence years earlier . The costume designer , Sharaff , wryly pointed the press to the incongruity of a Victorian British governess in the midst of an exotic court : " The first @-@ act finale of The King and I will feature Miss Lawrence , Mr. Brynner , and a pink satin ball gown . " Mielziner 's set plan was the simplest of the four Rodgers and Hammerstein musicals he had worked on , with one main set ( the throne room ) , a number of front @-@ stage drops ( for the ship and Anna 's room , for example ) and the entire stage cleared for " The Small House of Uncle Thomas " . 
 The show was budgeted at $ 250 @,@ 000 ( US $ 2 @,@ 280 @,@ 000 in 2016 dollars ) making it the most expensive Rodgers and Hammerstein production to that point , and prompting some mockery that costs exceeded even their expensive flop Allegro . Investors included Hammerstein , Rodgers , Logan , Martin , Billy Rose and Hayward . The children who were cast as the young princes and princesses came from a wide range of ethnic backgrounds , including Puerto Rican or Italian , though none were Thai . Johnny Stewart was the original Prince Chulalongkorn but left the cast after only three months , replaced by Ronnie Lee . Sandy Kennedy was Louis , and Broadway veteran Larry Douglas played Lun Tha . 
 Shortly before rehearsals began in January 1951 , Rodgers had the first Tuptim , <unk> Morrow , sing the entire score to Lawrence , including Lawrence 's own songs . Lawrence listened calmly , but when she met Rodgers and Hammerstein the following day , she treated Rodgers coldly , apparently seeing the composer 's actions as flaunting her vocal deficiencies . Hammerstein and Rodgers ' doubts about whether Lawrence could handle the part were assuaged by the sheer force of her acting . James Poling , a writer for Collier 's who was allowed to attend the rehearsals , wrote of Lawrence preparing " Shall I Tell You What I Think of You ? " : 
 She took the center of the barren stage wearing , for practice , a dirty muslin hoop over her slacks , with an old jacket thrown over her shoulders for warmth . She began rather quietly on the note , " Your servant ! Your servant ! Indeed I 'm not your servant ! " Then she gradually built the scene , slowly but powerfully , until , in a great crescendo , she ended prone on the floor , pounding in fury , and screaming , " Toads ! Toads ! Toads ! All of your people are toads . " When she finished , the handful of professionals in the theatre burst into admiring applause . 
 At his first meeting with Sharaff , Brynner , who had only a fringe of hair , asked what he was to do about it . When told he was to shave it , Brynner was horror @-@ struck and refused , convinced he would look terrible . He finally gave in during tryouts and put dark makeup on his shaved head . The effect was so well @-@ received that it became Brynner 's trademark . 
 Lawrence 's health caused her to miss several rehearsals , though no one knew what was wrong with her . When the tryout opened in New Haven , Connecticut on February 27 , 1951 , the show was nearly four hours long . Lawrence , suffering from laryngitis , had missed the dress rehearsal , but managed to make it through the first public performance . The Variety critic noted that despite her recent illness she " <unk> , acts , <unk> , and in general exhibits exceedingly well her several facets for entertaining " , but the Philadelphia Bulletin printed that her " already thin voice is now starting to wear a great deal thinner " . Leland Hayward came to see the show in New Haven and shocked Rodgers by advising him to close it before it went any further . Additionally , when the show left New Haven for Boston for more tryout performances , it was still at least 45 minutes too long . <unk> de Lappe , who was one of the dancers , recalled one cut that she regretted : 
 They took out a wonderful scene . Mrs. Anna 's first entrance into the palace comes with a song in which she sings , " Over half a year I have been waiting , waiting , waiting , waiting , waiting , waiting outside your door . " At the end she points her umbrella at him , or something like that , and the King says " Off with her head " or words to that effect , and the eunuchs pick her up and carry her off . The King says " Who , who , who ? " with great satisfaction , and finds out that he has just thrown out the English schoolteacher . So he says , " Bring her back ! " and she is ushered in ... we all loved it . 
 This song , " Waiting " , was a trio for Anna , the King , and the Kralahome ( the King 's prime minister ) . " Who Would Refuse ? " , the Kralahome 's only solo , was also dropped . Left without a note to sing , Mervyn Vye abandoned the show and was replaced by John Juliano . " Now You Leave " , a song for Lady Thiang ( played by Dorothy Sarnoff in the original production ) , was also cut . After the cuts , Rodgers and Hammerstein felt that the first act was lacking something . Lawrence suggested that they write a song for Anna and the children . Mary Martin reminded them of a song that had been cut from South Pacific , " Suddenly Lucky " . Hammerstein wrote a new lyric for the melody , and the resulting song became " Getting to Know You " . " Western People Funny " and " I Have Dreamed " were also added in Boston . 
 Brynner regretted that there were not more tryout performances , feeling that the schedule did not give him an adequate opportunity to develop the complex role of the King . When he told this to Hammerstein and Rodgers , they asked what sort of performance they would get from him , and he responded , " It will be good enough , it will get the reviews . " 
 = = Plot = = 
 = = = Act 1 = = = 
 In 1862 , a strong @-@ willed , widowed schoolteacher , Anna Leonowens , arrives in Bangkok , Siam ( later known as Thailand ) at the request of the King of Siam to tutor his many children . Anna 's young son , Louis , fears the severe countenance of the King 's prime minister , the Kralahome , but Anna refuses to be intimidated ( " I Whistle a Happy Tune " ) . The Kralahome has come to escort them to the palace , where they are expected to live – a violation of Anna 's contract , which calls for them to live in a separate house . She considers returning to Singapore aboard the vessel that brought them , but goes with her son and the Kralahome . 
 Several weeks pass , during which Anna and Louis are confined to their palace rooms . The King receives a gift from the king of Burma , a lovely slave girl named Tuptim , to be one of his many wives . She is escorted by Lun Tha , a scholar who has come to copy a design for a temple , and the two are secretly in love . Tuptim , left alone , declares that the King may own her , but not her heart ( " My Lord and Master " ) . The King gives Anna her first audience . The schoolteacher is a part of his plan for the modernization of Siam ; he is impressed when she already knows this . She raises the issue of her house with him , he dismisses her protests and orders her to talk with his wives . They are interested in her , and she tells them of her late husband , Tom ( " Hello , Young Lovers " ) . The King presents her new pupils ; Anna is to teach those of his children whose mothers are in favor with him – several dozen – and is to teach their mothers as well . The princes and princesses enter in procession ( " March of the Royal Siamese Children " ) . Anna is charmed by the children , and formality breaks down after the ceremony as they crowd around her . 
 Anna has not given up on the house , and teaches the children proverbs and songs extolling the virtues of home life , to the King 's irritation . The King has enough worries without battling the schoolteacher , and wonders why the world has become so complicated ( " A Puzzlement " ) . The children and wives are hard at work learning English ( " The Royal Bangkok Academy " ) . The children are surprised by a map showing how small Siam is compared with the rest of the world ( " Getting to Know You " ) . As the crown prince , Chulalongkorn , disputes the map , the King enters a chaotic schoolroom . He orders the pupils to believe the teacher but complains to Anna about her lessons about " home " . Anna stands her ground and insists on the letter of her contract , threatening to leave Siam , much to the dismay of wives and children . The King orders her to obey as " my servant " ; she repudiates the term and hurries away . The King dismisses school , then leaves , uncertain of his next action . Lun Tha comes upon Tuptim , and they muse about having to hide their relationship ( " We Kiss in a Shadow " ) . 
 In her room , Anna replays the confrontation in her mind , her anger building ( " Shall I Tell You What I Think of You ? " ) . Lady Thiang , the King 's head wife , tells Anna that the King is troubled by his portrayal in the West as a barbarian , as the British are being urged to take over Siam as a protectorate . Anna is shocked by the accusations – the King is a polygamist , but he is no barbarian – but she is reluctant to see him after their argument . Lady Thiang convinces her that the King is deserving of support ( " Something Wonderful " ) . Anna goes to him and finds him anxious for reconciliation . The King tells her that the British are sending an envoy to Bangkok to evaluate the situation . Anna " guesses " – the only guise in which the King will accept advice – that the King will receive the envoy in European style , and that the wives will be dressed in Western fashion . Tuptim has been writing a play based on a book that Anna has lent her , Uncle Tom 's Cabin , that can be presented to the guests . News is brought to the King that the British are arriving much earlier than thought , and so Anna and the wives are to stay up all night to prepare . The King assembles his family for a Buddhist prayer for the success of the venture and also promises before Buddha that Anna will receive her own house " as provided in agreement , etc . , etc . " 
 = = = Act 2 = = = 
 The wives are dressed in their new European @-@ style gowns , which they find confining ( " Western People Funny " ) . In the rush to prepare , the question of undergarments has been overlooked , and the wives have practically nothing on underneath their gowns . When the British envoy , Sir Edward Ramsay , arrives and gazes at them through a monocle , they are panicked by the " evil eye " and lift their skirts over their heads as they flee . Sir Edward is diplomatic about the incident . When the King is called away , it emerges that Sir Edward is an old flame of Anna 's , and they dance in remembrance of old times , as Edward urges her to return to British society . The King returns and irritably reminds them that dancing is for after dinner . 
 As final preparations for the play are made , Tuptim steals a moment to meet with Lun Tha . He tells her he has an escape plan , and she should be ready to leave after the performance ( " I Have Dreamed " ) . Anna encounters them , and they confide in her ( " Hello , Young Lovers " , reprise ) . The play ( " Small House of Uncle Thomas " , narrated ballet ) is presented in a Siamese ballet @-@ inspired dance . Tuptim is the narrator , and she tells her audience of the evil King Simon of Legree and his pursuit of the runaway slave Eliza . Eliza is saved by Buddha , who miraculously freezes a river and conceals her in snow . Buddha then causes the river to melt , drowning King Simon and his hunting party . The anti @-@ slavery message is blunt . 
 After the play , Sir Edward reveals that the British threat has receded , but the King is distracted by his displeasure at Tuptim 's rebellious message . After Sir Edward leaves , Anna and the King express their delight at how well the evening went , and he presents her with a ring . Secret police report that Tuptim is missing . The King realizes that Anna knows something ; she parries his inquiry by asking why he should care : Tuptim is just another woman to him . He is delighted ; she is at last understanding the Siamese perspective . Anna tries to explain to him the Western customs of courtship and tells him what it is like for a young woman at a formal dance ( " Shall We Dance ? " ) . He demands that she teach him the dance . She does , and in that dance they experience and express a love for each other that they can never speak aloud . They are interrupted by the Kralahome . Tuptim has been captured , and a search is on for Lun Tha . The King resolves to punish Tuptim , though she denies she and Lun Tha were lovers . Anna tries to dissuade him , but he is determined that her influence shall not rule , and he takes the whip himself . He turns to lash Tuptim , but under Anna 's gaze is unable to swing the whip , and hurries away . Lun Tha is found dead , and Tuptim is dragged off , swearing to kill herself ; nothing more is heard about her . Anna asks the Kralahome to give her ring back to the King ; both schoolteacher and minister state their wish that she had never come to Siam . 
 Several months pass with no contact between Anna and the King . Anna is packed and ready to board a ship leaving Siam . Chulalongkorn arrives with a letter from the King , who has been unable to resolve the conflicts within himself and is dying . Anna hurries to the King 's bedside and they reconcile . The King persuades her to take back the ring and to stay and assist the next king , Chulalongkorn . The dying man tells Anna to take dictation from the prince , and instructs the boy to give orders as if he were King . The prince orders the end of the custom of kowtowing that Anna hated . The King grudgingly accepts this decision . As Chulalongkorn continues , prescribing a less arduous bow to show respect for the king , his father dies . Anna kneels by the late King , holding his hand and kissing it , as the wives and children bow or curtsey , a gesture of respect to old king and new . 
 = = Principal roles and notable performers = = 
 = = Musical numbers = = 
 = = Productions = = 
 = = = Original productions = = = 
 The King and I opened on Broadway on March 29 , 1951 , with a wide expectation of a hit by the press and public . Both Hammerstein and Rodgers professed to be worried . The composer complained that most people were not concerned about whether the show was good , but whether it was better than South Pacific . Even the weather cooperated : heavy rain in New York stopped in time to allow the mostly wealthy or connected opening night audience to arrive dry at the St. James Theatre . Margaret Landon , author of the book on which the musical was based , was not invited to opening night . 
 Brynner turned in an outstanding performance that night , nearly stealing the show . Lawrence knew that the company was nervous because of her illnesses . The director , John van Druten , described how her opening night performance put all worries to rest : " She came on the stage with a new and dazzling quality , as if an extra power had been granted to the brilliance of her stage light . She was radiant and wonderful . " The rave reviews in the newspapers lifted Lawrence 's spirits , and she expected a lengthy run as Anna , first on Broadway , then in London 's West End , and finally on film . Lawrence won a Tony Award for her leading role , while Brynner won the award for best featured actor . The show won the Tony for best musical , and designers Mielziner and Sharaff received awards in their categories . 
 De Lappe remembered the contrast between Lawrence 's indifferent singing voice and the force of her performance : 
 I used to listen to Gertrude Lawrence on the public address system every night in our dressing rooms , and she 'd get onto a note and sag down off of it . The night after I left the show to go into Paint Your Wagon , Yul Brynner gave me house seats and I saw her from the front and I was so taken by her . She had such a star quality , you didn 't care if she sang off @-@ key . She more than dominated the stage . Boy , was that a lesson to me . 
 Lawrence had not yet discovered that she was dying from liver cancer , and her weakened condition was exacerbated by the demands of her role . At the age of 52 , she was required to wear dresses weighing 75 pounds ( 34 kg ) while walking or dancing a total of 4 miles ( 6 @.@ 4 km ) during a 3 ½ hour performance eight times a week . Lawrence found it hard to bear the heat in the theatre during the summer months . Understudy Constance Carpenter began replacing her in matinee performances . Later in the year Lawrence 's strength returned , and she resumed her full schedule , but by Christmas she was battling pleurisy and suffering from exhaustion . She entered the hospital for a full week of tests . Just nine months before her death , the cancer still was not detected . In February 1952 , bronchitis felled her for another week , and her husband Richard Aldrich asked Rodgers and Hammerstein if they would consider closing the show for Easter week to give her a chance to recover fully . They denied his request , but agreed to replace her with the original Ado Annie from Oklahoma ! , Celeste Holm , for six weeks during the summer . Meanwhile , Lawrence 's performances were deteriorating , prompting audiences to become audibly restive . Rodgers and Hammerstein prepared a letter , never delivered , advising her that " eight times a week you are losing the respect of 1 @,@ 500 people " . In late August , Lawrence fainted following a matinee and was admitted to the NewYork – Presbyterian Hospital . She slipped into a coma and died on September 6 , 1952 , aged 54 . Her autopsy revealed liver cancer . On the day of her funeral , the performance of The King and I was cancelled . The lights of Broadway and the West End were dimmed ; she was buried in the ball gown she wore during Act 2 . 
 Carpenter assumed the role of Anna and went on to play it for 620 performances . Other Annas during the run included Holm , <unk> Dickey and Patricia Morison . Although Brynner later boasted of never missing a show , he missed several , once when stagehands at the St. James Theatre accidentally struck him in the nose with a piece of scenery , another time due to appendicitis . Also , for three months in 1952 ( and occasionally in 1953 ) , Alfred Drake replaced Brynner . One young actor , Sal Mineo , began as an extra , then became an understudy for a younger prince , then an understudy and later a replacement for Crown Prince Chulalongkorn . Mineo began a close friendship and working relationship with Brynner which would last for more than a decade . The last of the production 's 1 @,@ 246 performances was on March 20 , 1954 . The run was , at the time , the fourth longest ever for a Broadway musical . A U.S. national tour began on March 22 , 1954 , at the Community Theatre , Hershey , Pennsylvania , starring Brynner and Morison . The tour played in 30 cities , closing on December 17 , 1955 , at the Shubert Theatre , Philadelphia . 
 The original London production opened on October 8 , 1953 , at the Theatre Royal , Drury Lane , and was warmly received by both audiences and critics ; it ran for 946 performances . The show was restaged by Jerome Whyte . The cast featured Valerie Hobson , in her last role , as Anna ; Herbert Lom as the King ; and Muriel Smith as Lady Thiang . Martin Benson played the Kralahome , a role he reprised in the 1956 film . Eve Lister was a replacement for Hobson , and George Pastell replaced Lom during the long run . The New York Times theatre columnist Brooks Atkinson saw the production with Lister and Pastell , and thought the cast commonplace , except for Smith , whom he praised both for her acting and her voice . Atkinson commented , " The King and I is a beautifully written musical drama on a high plane of human thinking . It can survive in a mediocre performance . " 
 The musical was soon premiered in Australia , Japan , and throughout Europe . 
 = = = Early revivals = = = 
 The first revival of The King and I in New York was presented by the New York City Center Light Opera Company in April and May 1956 for three weeks , starring Jan Clayton and Zachary Scott , directed by John Fearnley , with Robbins ' choreography recreated by June Graham . Muriel Smith reprised her London role of Lady Thiang , and Patrick Adiarte repeated his film role , Chulalongkorn . This company presented the musical again in May 1960 with Barbara Cook and Farley Granger , again directed by Fearnley , in another three @-@ week engagement . Atkinson admired the purity of Cook 's voice and thought that she portrayed Anna with " a cool dignity that gives a little more stature to the part than it has had before . " He noted that Granger brought " a fresh point of view – as well as a full head of hair " . Joy Clements played Tuptim , and Anita Darian was Lady Thiang . City Center again presented the show in June 1963 , starring Eileen Brennan and Manolo Fabregas , directed by Fearnley . Clements and Darian reprised Tuptim and Thiang . In the final City Center Light Opera production , Michael Kermoyan played the King opposite Constance Towers for three weeks in May 1968 . Darian again played Lady Thiang . For all of these 1960s productions , Robbins ' choreography was reproduced by Yuriko , who had played the role of Eliza in the original Broadway production and reprised the role in the City Center productions . 
 The Music Theatre of Lincoln Center , with Rodgers as producer , presented the musical in mid @-@ 1964 at the New York State Theater , starring Risë Stevens and Darren McGavin , with Michael Kermoyan as the Kralahome . Lun Tha , Tuptim and Thiang were played by Frank Porretta , Lee Venora and Patricia <unk> . Costumes were by Irene Sharaff , the designer for the original productions and the film adaptation . The director was Edward Greenberg , with the Robbins choreography again reproduced by Yuriko . This was Music Theatre 's debut production , a five @-@ week limited engagement . 
 The King and I was revived at London 's Adelphi Theatre on October 10 , 1973 , running for 260 performances until May 25 , 1974 , starring Sally Ann Howes as Anna and Peter Wyngarde as the King . Roger <unk> directed , and Sheila O 'Neill choreographed . The production , which began in June 1973 with a tour of the English provinces , earned mixed to warm reviews . Michael Billington in The Guardian called the revival " well played and well sung " . Although he was enthusiastic about Howes as Anna , Billington thought Wyngarde " too fragile to be capable of inspiring unholy terror " . He praised <unk> 's production – " whipped along at a good pace and made a sumptuous <unk> out of the interpolated ballet on ' Uncle Tom 's Cabin ' . " Less favorably , Robert Cushman in The Observer thought the production " scenically and economically under @-@ nourished " . He liked Wyngarde 's King ( " a dignified clown " ) but thought Howes not formidable enough to stand up to him as Anna . He noted that " she sings beautifully and the songs are the evening 's real justification " . 
 = = = Brynner reprises the role = = = 
 In early 1976 , Brynner received an offer from impresarios Lee Gruber and Shelly Gross to star , in the role that he had created 25 years before , in a U.S. national tour and Broadway revival . The tour opened in Los Angeles on July 26 , 1976 , with Constance Towers reprising the role of Anna . On opening night , Brynner suffered so badly from laryngitis that he lip @-@ synched , with his son Rock singing and speaking the role from the orchestra pit . The production traveled across the United States , selling out every city it appeared in and finally opening in New York at the Uris Theatre ( today the Gershwin Theatre ) on May 2 , 1977 . The production featured Martin Vidnovic as Lun Tha , and Susan Kikuchi danced the part of Eliza , recreating the role that her mother , Yuriko , had originated . Yuriko both directed the production and recreated the Robbins choreography . Sharaff again designed costumes , and Michael Kermoyan reprised the role of the Kralahome , while June Angela was Tuptim . The run lasted 696 performances , almost two years , during which each of the stars took off three weeks , with Angela Lansbury replacing Towers and Kermoyan replacing Brynner . The production was nominated for the Drama Desk Award for Outstanding Musical . 
 Brynner insisted on renovations to the Uris before he would play there , stating that the theatre resembled " a public toilet " . He also insisted that dressing rooms on the tour and at the Uris be arranged to his satisfaction . According to his biographer Michelangelo Capua , for years afterwards , performers thanked Brynner for having backstage facilities across the country cleaned up . New York Times reviewer Clive Barnes said of the revival , " The cast is a good one . Mr. Brynner grinning fire and snorting charm is as near to the original as makes little difference " and called Towers " <unk> ladylike and sweet without being dangerously saccharine " . However , fellow Times critic Mel Gussow warned , later in the run , that " to a certain extent [ Brynner ] was coasting on his charisma " . 
 The tour was extended in 1979 , after the New York run , still starring Brynner and Towers . The production then opened in the West End , at the London Palladium , on June 12 , 1979 , and was reported to have the largest advance sale in English history . Brynner stated , " It is not a play , it is a happening . " Virginia McKenna starred in London as Anna , winning an Olivier Award for her performance . June Angela again played Tuptim , and John Bennett was the Kralahome . It ran until September 27 , 1980 . 
 Brynner took only a few months off after the London run ended , which contributed to his third divorce ; he returned to the road in early 1981 in an extended U.S. tour of the same production , which eventually ended on Broadway . Mitch Leigh produced and directed , and Robbins ' choreography was reproduced by Rebecca West , who also danced the role of Simon of Legree , which she had danced at the Uris in 1977 . Patricia <unk> played Anna , Michael Kermoyan was again the Kralahome , Patricia Welch was Tuptim . During 1981 , Kate Hunter Brown took over as Anna , continuing in the role for at least a year and a half . By 1983 , Mary Beth Peil was playing Anna . On September 13 , 1983 , in Los Angeles , Brynner celebrated his 4,000th performance as the King ; on the same day he was privately diagnosed with inoperable lung cancer , and the tour had to shut down for a few months while he received painful radiation therapy to shrink the tumor . The Washington Post reviewer saw Brynner 's " absolutely last farewell tour " in December 1984 and wrote of the star : 
 When Brynner opened in the original production in 1951 , he was the newcomer and Gertrude Lawrence the established star . Now , 33 years and 4 @,@ 300 performances later , he is the king of the mountain as well as the show ... The genius of his performance – and it must be some sort of genius to maintain a character this long – is its simplicity . There is not a superfluous expression nor a vague gesture . And if at times , the arms on hips posture , the shining dome and fierce expression remind one of Mr. Clean , it should be remembered that Brynner was there first . 
 The production reached New York in January 1985 , running for 191 performances at the Broadway Theatre , with Brynner , Peil , Welch and West still playing their roles . The part of Eliza was played by the leading man 's fourth wife , Kathy Lee Brynner , and newcomer Jeffrey Bryan Davis played Louis . During the run , Brynner was unable to sing " A Puzzlement " , due to what was announced as a throat and ear infection , but he " projected bursting vitality to the top of the balcony . " He received a special Tony Award for his role as the King and had come to dominate the musical to such an extent that Piel was nominated merely for a featured actress Tony as Anna . Leigh was nominated for a Tony for his direction . New York Times critic Frank Rich praised Brynner but was ambivalent about the production , which he called " sluggish " , writing that Brynner 's " high points included his fond , paternalistic <unk> with his brood in ' The March of the Siamese Children , ' his dumb @-@ show antics while attempting to force the English schoolteacher Anna to bow , and , of course , the death scene . ... The star aside , such showmanship is too often lacking in this King and I. " The last performance was a special Sunday night show , on June 30 , 1985 , in honor of Brynner and his <unk> performance of the role . Brynner died less than four months later , on October 10 , 1985 . 
 From August 1989 to March 1990 , Rudolf Nureyev played the King in a North American tour opposite Liz Robertson , with Kermoyan as the Kralahome , directed by Arthur Storch and with the original Robbins choreography . Reviews were uniformly critical , lamenting that Nureyev failed to embody the character , " a King who stands around like a sulky teenager who didn 't ask to be invited to this party . ... Not even his one dance number ... goes well . ... Rodgers and Hammerstein 's King [ is ] supposed to be a compelling personality [ but Nureyev 's ] bears no resemblance to the man described ... in the " Something Wonderful " number . The show therefore comes across as something of a charade ... with everyone pretending to be dealing with a fearsome potentate who , in fact , is displaying very little personality at all . " 
 = = = Renshaw 's production : 1991 to 2002 = = = 
 The first major revival to break away from the original staging and interpretation was an Australian production directed by Christopher Renshaw , starring Hayley Mills as Anna , in 1991 . Renshaw pointedly ignored the printed stage directions in the script when reshaping the piece into what he called " an authentic Thai experience " . The production had a more sinister Siamese setting , a less elegant but more forceful Anna , and a younger King ( Tony <unk> ) . The attraction between Anna and the King was made explicit . Renshaw " cut a few lines and lyrics , and translated others into Thai to reinforce the atmosphere of a foreign land " , and all Asian roles were played by Asian actors . He also asked choreographers Lar Lubovitch and Jerome Robbins to create a " spiritual " ballet , for the King 's entrance in Act 1 , and a procession with a sacred white elephant in Act II . According to Renshaw , " The reds and golds were very much inspired by what we saw at the royal palace " , and set and costume elements reflected images , architecture and other designs in the palace and elsewhere in Bangkok . For example , the stage was framed by columns of elephant figures , a large emerald Buddha loomed over Act I , and hundreds of elephant images were woven into the set . Renshaw said , " The elephant is regarded as a very holy creature ... they believe the spirit of Buddha often resides in the form of the elephant . " 
 Stanley Green , in his Encyclopedia of the Musical Theatre , viewed the central theme of The King and I as " the importance of mutual understanding between people of differing ethnic and cultural backgrounds " , but Renshaw felt that the musical suffered from 1950s attitudes when " Orientalism was used as an exoticism rather than a real understanding of the particular culture . " He stated that his production was informed by authentic Thai cultural , aesthetic and religious ideas that he learned from visiting Thailand . A feature in Playbill commented that the production focused on the " clash of ideologies and cultures , of East versus West " . Theatre arts professor Eileen Blumenthal , however , called the production " a King and I for the age of political correctness " . While she acknowledged that the musical 's treatment of Asian cultures had come to be understood as insensitive in the nearly half century since its premiere , she argued that Rodgers and Hammerstein 's script was more sensitive than most orientalist literature of its day , in that " West learns from East as well as the other way around " , and that , moreover , the musical 's treatment of its Asian subject is fantastical , not intended to be realistic . She concluded that the show is a documentary of " who we 've been " in the West , and that a work like The King and I should not be suppressed , because it is " too good " . 
 The production was reproduced on Broadway , opening on April 11 , 1996 at the Neil Simon Theatre , starring Donna Murphy as Anna , who won a Tony Award for her performance , and Lou Diamond Phillips as the King , with Randall Duk Kim as the Kralahome , Jose Llana as Lun Tha , <unk> Choi as Tuptim and Taewon Yi Kim as Lady Thiang . Jenna Ushkowitz made her Broadway debut as one of the children . The production was nominated for eight Tony Awards , winning best revival and three others , with acting nominations for Phillips and Choi , who each won Theatre World Awards , and seven Drama Desk Awards , winning for Outstanding Revival of a Musical ; Renshaw won for his direction . The production was praised for " lavish ... sumptuous " designs by Roger Kirk ( costumes ) and Brian Thomson ( sets ) , who both won Tony and Drama Desk Awards for their work . Faith Prince played the role of Anna later in the run , followed by Marie Osmond . The revival ran on Broadway for 780 performances , and Kevin Gray replaced Phillips . The production then toured in the U.S. with Mills and Victor Talmadge . Other Annas on this tour included Osmond , Sandy Duncan , Stefanie Powers and Maureen McGovern , who ended the tour in Chicago in June 1998 . 
 The production opened on May 3 , 2000 at the London Palladium , directed by Renshaw and choreographed by Lubovitch , and using the Kirk and Thomson designs . It reportedly took in £ 8 million in advance ticket sales . The cast included Elaine Paige as Anna and Jason Scott Lee as the King , with Sean Ghazi as Luan Tha and Ho Yi as the Kralahome . Lady Thiang was , again , played by Taewon Yi Kim , of whom The Observer wrote , " Her ' Something Wonderful ' was just that . " The show was nominated for an Olivier Award for outstanding musical . Later in the run , Lee was replaced as the King by Paul Nakauchi . The revival was generally well received . The Daily Mirror said : " The King and I waltzed back to the West End in triumph last night . " The Daily Express noted , " Love it or loathe it , The King and I is an unstoppable smash . " Variety , however , noted a lack of chemistry between the leads , commenting that " there ’ s something not entirely right in Siam when the greatest applause is reserved for Lady Thiang " . Replacements included Josie Lawrence as Anna , Keo Woolford as the King and Saeed Jaffrey as the Kralahome . The show closed on January 5 , 2002 . 
 = = = 2004 to present = = = 
 Another U.S. national tour began in mid @-@ 2004 , directed by <unk> Lee ( who appeared in the original production at age 5 ) , with choreography by Susan Kikuchi , reproducing the Robbins original . Sandy Duncan again starred as Anna , while Martin Vidnovic played the King . He had played Lun Tha in the 1977 Broadway production and voiced the King in the 1999 animated film . Stefanie Powers took over for Duncan throughout 2005 . Near the end of the tour in November 2005 , Variety judged that Lee had successfully " harnessed the show 's physical beauty and its intrinsic exotic flavor . " 
 Jeremy Sams directed , and Kikuchi choreographed , a limited engagement of the musical in June 2009 at the Royal Albert Hall in London . It starred Maria Friedman and Daniel Dae Kim . A U.K. national tour starred Ramon Tikaram as the King and Josefina Gabrielle as Anna , directed by Paul <unk> , with choreography by David Needham . It opened in December 2011 in Edinburgh and continued into May 2012 . 
 In June 2014 , Théâtre du Châtelet in Paris presented an English @-@ language production of The King and I directed by Lee Blakeley and starring Susan Graham , who was " close to perfection as Anna " , Lambert Wilson , " also excellent as the king " , and Lisa Milne as Lady Thiang . The New York Times called it " a grand new staging that has set French critics searching for superlatives . " The Renshaw production was revived again in April 2014 by Opera Australia for performances in Sydney , Melbourne and Brisbane , directed by Renshaw and featuring Lisa McCune and Teddy Tahu Rhodes . Some critics questioned anew the portrayal of the Siamese court as barbaric and asked why a show where " the laughs come from the Thai people mis @-@ understanding British ... culture " should be selected for revival . 
 A fourth Broadway revival began previews on March 12 and opened on April 16 , 2015 at the Vivian Beaumont Theater . The production was directed by Bartlett Sher and starred Kelli O 'Hara as Anna and Ken Watanabe , as the King , in his American stage debut . It featured Ruthie Ann Miles as Lady Thiang , Paul Nakauchi as the Kralahome , Ashley Park as Tuptim , Conrad <unk> as Lun Tha , Jake Lucas as Louis Leonowens , and Edward Baker @-@ Duly as Sir Edward Ramsey . Choreography by Christopher <unk> was based on the original Jerome Robbins dances . The <unk> included Michael <unk> ( sets ) , Catherine Zuber ( costumes ) and Donald Holder ( lighting ) . Reviews were uniformly glowing , with Ben Brantley of The New York Times calling it a " resplendent production " , praising the cast ( especially O 'Hara , " one of our greatest <unk> of musical standards ... something wonderful " ) , direction , choreographer , designs and orchestra , and commenting that Sher " sheds a light [ on the vintage material ] that isn 't harsh or misty but clarifying [ and ] balances epic sweep with intimate sensibility . " The production was nominated for nine Tony Awards , winning four , including Best Revival of a Musical , Best Leading Actress ( for O 'Hara ) , Best Featured Actress ( for Miles ) and best costume design ( for Zuber ) , and won the Drama Desk Award for Outstanding Revival . Replacements for the King included Jose Llana Hoon Lee and Daniel Dae Kim . Replacements for Anna included Marin <unk> . The revival closed on June 26 , 2016 after 538 performances . A U.S. national tour of the production is scheduled to begin in November 2016 . 
 The King and I continues to be a popular choice for productions by community theatres , school and university groups , summer camps and regional theatre companies . 
 = = Adaptations = = 
 The musical was filmed in 1956 with Brynner re @-@ creating his role opposite Deborah Kerr . The film won five Academy Awards and was nominated for four more . Brynner won an Oscar as Best Actor for his portrayal , and Kerr was nominated as Best Actress . Sharaff won for best costume design . The film was directed by Walter Lang ( who was also nominated for an Oscar ) and choreographed by Robbins . Marni Nixon dubbed the singing voice of Anna , and Rita Moreno played Tuptim . Other notable performers included Adiarte as Chulalongkorn and Benson as the Kralahome , reprising their stage roles , as did dancers Yuriko and de Lappe . Alan Mowbray appeared in the new role of the British Ambassador , while Sir Edward Ramsey ( demoted to the Ambassador 's aide ) was played by Geoffrey Toone . The movie 's script was faithful to the stage version , although it cut a few songs ; reviews were enthusiastic . Thomas Hischak , in his The Rodgers and Hammerstein Encyclopedia , states : " It is generally agreed that the [ movie ] is the finest film adaptation of any R & H musical " . Thai officials judged the film offensive to their monarchy and banned both film and musical in 1956 . 
 A non @-@ musical 1972 television adaptation , starring Brynner , was broadcast in the U.S. by CBS but was cancelled in mid @-@ season after 13 episodes . It followed the main storyline of the musical , focusing on the relationship between the title characters . Samantha Eggar played " Anna Owens " , with Brian Tochi as Chulalongkorn , Keye Luke as the Kralahome , Eric Shea as Louis , Lisa Lu as Lady Thiang , and Rosalind Chao as Princess Serena . The first episode aired on September 17 , 1972 , and the last aired on December 31 , 1972 . Margaret Landon was unhappy with this series and charged the producers with " inaccurate and mutilated portrayals " of her literary property ; she unsuccessfully sued for copyright infringement . 
 Jerome Robbins ' Broadway was a Broadway revue , directed by Robbins , showcasing scenes from some of his most popular earlier works on Broadway . The show ran from February 1989 to September 1990 and won six Tony Awards , including best musical . It featured " Shall We Dance " and " The Small House of Uncle Thomas " ballet , with Kikuchi as Eliza . Yuriko was the choreographic " reconstruction assistant " . 
 <unk> Animation Studios and Morgan Creek Productions released a 1999 animated film adaptation of the musical . Except for using some of the songs and characters , the story is unrelated to the Rodgers and Hammerstein version . Geared towards children , the adaptation includes cuddly animals , including a dragon . Voices were provided by Miranda Richardson as Anna ( speaking ) , Christiane Noll as Anna ( singing ) , Martin Vidnovic as the King , Ian Richardson as the Kralahome and Adam Wylie as Louis . Hischak dislikes the film but praises the vocals , adding that one compensation of the film is hearing Barbra Streisand sing a medley of " I Have Dreamed " , " We Kiss in a Shadow " and " Something Wonderful " , which is borrowed from Streisand 's 1985 The Broadway Album and played under the film 's closing credits . He expressed surprise " that the Rodgers & Hammerstein Organization allowed it to be made " and noted that " children have enjoyed The King and I for five decades without relying on dancing dragons " . Ted Chapin , president of that organization , has called the film his biggest mistake in granting permission for an adaptation . 
 = = Music and recordings = = 
 = = = Musical treatment = = = 
 In his music , Rodgers sought to give some of the music an Asian flavor . This is exhibited in the piercing major seconds that frame " A Puzzlement " , the flute melody in " We Kiss in a Shadow " , open fifths , the exotic 6 / 2 chords that shape " My Lord and Master " , and in some of the incidental music . The music for " The Small House of Uncle Thomas " was for the most part written not by Rodgers , but by dance music arranger Trude Rittmann , though " Hello , Young Lovers " and a snatch of " A Puzzlement " are quoted within it . 
 Before Rodgers and Hammerstein began writing together , the AABA form for show tunes was standard , but many of the songs in The King and I vary from it . " I Have Dreamed " is an almost continuous repetition of variations on the same theme , until the ending , when it is capped by another melody . The first five notes ( a triplet and two quarter notes ) of " Getting to Know You " also carry the melody all the way through the refrain . According to Mordden , this refusal to accept conventional forms " is one reason why their frequently heard scores never lose their appeal . They attend to situation and they unveil character , but also , they surprise you . " 
 According to Rodgers ' biographer William Hyland , the score for The King and I is much more closely tied to the action than that of South Pacific , " which had its share of purely entertaining songs " . For example , the opening song , " I Whistle a Happy Tune " , establishes Anna 's fear upon entering a strange land with her small son , but the merry melody also expresses her determination to keep a stiff upper lip . Hyland calls " Hello , Young Lovers " an archetypical Rodgers ballad : simple , with only two chords in the first eight bars , but moving in its directness . 
 = = = Recordings = = = 
 The original cast recording was released by Decca Records in 1951 . While John Kenrick admires it for the performances of the secondary couple , Larry Douglas and <unk> Morrow , and for the warmth of Lawrence 's performance , he notes that " Shall We Dance " was abridged , and there are no children 's voices – the chorus in " Getting to Know You " is made up of adults . In 2000 , the recording was inducted into the Grammy Hall of Fame . Hischak comments that in the London cast album , Valerie Hobson 's vocals were no stronger than Lawrence 's and that the highlight is Muriel Smith 's " Something Wonderful " in a disc with too many cuts . He calls Anna 's songs " well served " by Marni Nixon 's singing in the 1956 film soundtrack and judges the recording as vocally satisfying ; Kenrick describes it as a " mixed bag " : he is pleased that it includes several songs cut from the film , and he praises Nixon 's vocals , but he dislikes the supporting cast and suggests watching the movie instead for its visual splendor . 
 Kenrick prefers the 1964 Lincoln Center cast recording to the earlier ones , especially approving of the performances of Risë Stevens as Anna and Patricia <unk> as Lady Thiang . The inclusion on that recording , for the first time , of " The Small House of Uncle Thomas " , was notable because LP technology limited a single @-@ disc album to about fifty minutes , and thus inclusion of the ballet required the exclusion of some of the other numbers . Kenrick finds the recording of the 1977 Broadway revival cast to be " [ e ] asily the most satisfying King & I on CD " . He judges it to be Brynner 's best performance , calling Towers " great " and Martin Vidnovic , June Angela and the rest of the supporting cast " fabulous " , though lamenting the omission of the ballet . Hischak , in contrast , says that some might prefer Brynner in his earlier recordings , when he was " more vibrant " . Kenrick enjoys the 1992 Angel studio recording mostly for the Anna of Julie Andrews , who he says is " pure magic " in a role she never performed on stage . Kenrick praises the performance of both stars on the 1996 Broadway revival recording , calling Lou Diamond Phillips " that rarity , a King who can stand free of Brynner 's shadow " . Hischak finds the soundtrack to the 1999 animated film with Christiane Noll as Anna and Martin Vidnovic as the King , as well as Barbra Streisand singing on one track , more enjoyable than the movie itself , but Kenrick writes that his sole use for that CD is as a coaster . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Opening night reviews of the musical were strongly positive . Richard Watts in the New York Post termed it " [ a ] nother triumph for the masters " . Critic John Mason Brown stated , " They have done it again . " The New York Times drama critic Brooks Atkinson wrote : " This time Messrs. Rodgers and Hammerstein are not breaking any fresh trails , but they are accomplished artists of song and words in the theater ; and The King and I is a beautiful and lovable musical play . " Barely less enthusiastic was John Lardner in The New Yorker , who wrote , " Even those of us who find [ the Rodgers and Hammerstein musicals ] a little too unremittingly wholesome are bound to take pleasure in the high spirits and technical skill that their authors , and producers , have put into them . " Otis Guernsey wrote for the New York Herald Tribune , " Musicals and leading men will never be the same after last night ... Brynner set an example that will be hard to follow ... Probably the best show of the decade . 
 The balance of opinion among the critics of the original London production was generally favorable , with a few reservations . In The Observer , Ivor Brown predicted that the piece would " settle down for some years at Drury Lane . " The anonymous critic of The Times compared the work to Gilbert and Sullivan : " Mr. Rodgers charmingly echoes Sullivan in the king 's more topsy @-@ turvy moments ; and Mr. Hammerstein attends very skilfully to the lurking Gilbertian humour . " Less favorably , in The Daily Express , John Barber called the work " this treacle @-@ bin Mikado " , and declared that only one of the cast , Muriel Smith , could really sing . 
 In 1963 , New York Times reviewer Lewis <unk> said of the musical , " Mr. Hammerstein put all of his big heart into the simple story of a British woman 's adventures , heartaches , and triumphs . ... A man with a world @-@ view , he seized the opportunity provided by [ Landon 's book ] to underscore his thoughts on the common destiny of humanity . " Fourteen years later , another Times reviewer , Clive Barnes , called the musical " unsophisticated and untroubled . Even its shadows are lightened with a laugh or a sweetly sentimental tear ... we can even be persuaded to take death as a happy ending " . 
 The reworked 1996 Broadway production received mixed reviews . Vincent Canby of The New York Times disliked it : " This latest King and I might look like a million dollars as a regional production ; on Broadway ... it 's a disappointment . The score remains enchanting but , somewhere along the line , there has been a serious failure of the theatrical imagination . " But Liz Smith enthused : " The King and I is perfect " ; and the Houston Chronicle wrote , of the subsequent tour , " The King and I is the essence of musical theater , an occasion when drama , music , dance and decor combine to take the audience on an unforgettable journey . " Critic Richard Christiansen in the Chicago Tribune observed , of a 1998 tour stop at the Auditorium Theatre : " Written in a more leisurely and innocent and less politically correct period , [ The King and I ] cannot escape the 1990s onus of its condescending attitude toward the pidgin English monarch and his people . And its story moves at a pace that 's a mite too slow for this more hurried day and age . " When the production reached London in 2000 , however , it received uniformly positive reviews ; the Financial Times called it " a handsome , spectacular , strongly performed introduction to one of the truly great musicals " . 
 The 2015 Broadway revival initially received uniformly glowing reviews . Ben Brantley of The New York Times called it a " resplendent production " and commented : 
 [ In the ] 1996 production ... [ a ] dark strain of sadomasochistic tension born of Victorian repression and Eastern sensuality was introduced into sunny Siam . ... Mr. Sher is no strong @-@ armed revisionist . He works from within vintage material , coaxing shadowy emotional depths to churn up a surface that might otherwise seem shiny and slick . ... [ T ] he show is both panoramic and personal , balancing dazzling musical set pieces with sung introspective soliloquies . [ The direction ] enhances [ scenes ' ] emotional weight . No one is merely a dancer or an extra or an archetype , which may be the greatest defense this show offers against what can come across as cute condescension toward the exotic East . ... [ The ] portrayal of the varied forms and content of love [ and ] some of [ Rodgers and Hammerstein 's ] lushest ballads ... acquire <unk> nuance and anchoring conviction " . 
 Marilyn Stasio , in Variety , termed the production " sumptuous " and " absolutely stunning " . She noted a " still pertinent theme : the dissonant dynamic when Western civilization tries to assert its values on ancient Eastern cultures . " In USA Today , Elysa Gardner wrote of the grins and tears evoked by the production . " [ W ] <unk> these people from vastly different cultures carefully but joyfully reach for common ground ... can be almost unbearably moving . ... [ Rodgers and Hammerstein 's ] textured humanity and appeals for tolerance , like their shimmering scores , only gain resonance as time passes . " The production 's attempts to achieve historical accuracy and explore the work 's dark themes with a modern sensibility led some reviewers to conclude that it succeeds at converting the musical 's orientalism into " a modern critique of racism and sexism " . Other commentators , however , such as composer Mohammed Fairouz , argued that an attempt at sensitivity in production cannot compensate for " the inaccurate portrayal of the historic King Mongkut as a childlike tyrant and the infantilization of the entire Siamese population of the court " , which demonstrate a racist subtext in the piece , even in 1951 when it was written . Benjamin Ivry opined that " the Rodgers and Hammerstein organization should shelve the [ musical ] as a humanitarian gesture toward Southeast Asian history and art " . 
 Fifty years after its premiere , Rodgers biographer Meryle Secrest summed up the musical : 
 The King and I is really a celebration of love in all its guises , from the love of Anna for her dead husband ; the love of the King 's official wife , Lady Thiang , for a man she knows is flawed and also unfaithful ; the desperation of forbidden love ; and a love that is barely recognized and can never be acted upon . 
 = Lego Star Wars II : The Original Trilogy = 
 Lego Star Wars II : The Original Trilogy is a Lego @-@ themed action @-@ adventure video game developed by Traveller 's Tales and published by LucasArts and TT Games Publishing . It was released on 11 September 2006 . Part of the Lego Star Wars series , it is based on the Star Wars science fiction media franchise and Lego Group 's Star Wars @-@ themed toy line . It follows the events of the Star Wars films Star Wars , The Empire Strikes Back and Return of the Jedi . The game allows players to assume the roles of over 50 Lego versions of characters from the film series ; customized characters can also be created . Camera movement was improved from its predecessor — Lego Star Wars : The Video Game ; and the concept of " vehicle levels " was explored more thoroughly . The game was revealed at American International Toy Fair 2006 . Promotions for the game were set up at chain stores across the United States . 
 Lego Star Wars II was critically and commercially successful ; it has sold over 8 @.@ 2 million copies worldwide as of May 2009 . Critics praised the game for its comedic and " adorable " portrayal of the film series and for their preference of the original trilogy to the prequel trilogy . However , the game 's low difficulty , and its Game Boy Advance and Nintendo DS versions in general , were received more poorly . The game received awards from the British Academy of Film and Television Arts and Spike TV , among others . A mobile phone adaptation , Lego Star Wars II Mobile , was later developed by <unk> , published by THQ , and released on 19 December 2006 . Lego Star Wars and Lego Star Wars II were compiled in Lego Star Wars : The Complete Saga , released on 6 November 2007 . The OS X version of the game was released in April 2007 by Feral Interactive . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Lego Star Wars II 's gameplay is from a third @-@ person perspective , and takes place in a 3D game world that contains objects , environments and characters designed to resemble Lego pieces . Its gameplay — a combination of the action @-@ adventure , platform , and sometimes puzzle genres — shares elements with that of Lego Star Wars : The Video Game ( 2005 ) . While Lego Star Wars followed the events of The Phantom Menace ( 1999 ) , Attack of the Clones ( 2002 ) and Revenge of the Sith ( 2005 ) , Lego Star Wars II is based on Star Wars ( 1977 ) , The Empire Strikes Back ( 1980 ) and Return of the Jedi ( 1983 ) . The game comically retells the trilogy 's events using cut scenes without dialogue . The player assumes the roles of the films ' characters , each of which possess specific weapons and abilities . At any time , a second player can join the game by activating a second controller . During game play , players can collect Lego studs – small , disk @-@ shaped objects that serve as the game 's currency . The player has a health meter , which is displayed on the game 's heads @-@ up display . The player 's health is represented by four hearts ; when these hearts are depleted the player dies and a small amount of their studs bounce away . However , they instantly respawn and can often recollect the lost studs . 
 The game 's central location is the Mos Eisley Cantina , a spaceport bar on the planet Tatooine . At the counter , the player may use their Lego studs to purchase characters , vehicles , gameplay hints and extras , or activate cheat codes . In a small area outside the cantina , players may view collected vehicles . The game is broken into levels , which are accessed from the cantina ; each film is represented by six levels , representing key locations and scenes in that film . The locations include Hoth , Bespin , Dagobah , Tatooine , the Death Star , and Endor . The game also features bonus levels . During levels , the player defeats enemies , builds objects out of Lego bricks and drives vehicles , Certain levels are played entirely while piloting vehicles , including a TIE fighter , a <unk> , and the Millennium Falcon . Levels must first be played in Story Mode . This unlocks the next level as well as a Free Play mode for the recently completed level . Gameplay is identical in the two modes . However , Story Mode restricts playable characters to those followed in the film scenes the levels are based on , while Free Play offers all those unlocked . Levels can be replayed in either mode to collect studs and secret items . 
 Three types of secret items are available : gold bricks , minikits and power bricks . Within each level is hidden one power brick . When a power brick is collected , its corresponding extra , such as invincibility or stud multipliers , becomes available for purchase . Each level also contains ten hidden minikits , that is , ten pieces of a Star Wars vehicle . When all ten have been collected , the player is awarded a gold brick . Collecting a certain number of gold bricks unlocks free rewards , such as a spigot that spews out studs . Gold bricks are also awarded when levels are completed and when a predefined number of studs is accumulated in a level ; ninety @-@ nine gold bricks are available . The vehicles represented by the minikits are displayed outside the cantina . As each vehicle is completed ( all ten minikits collected ) , it becomes available for play in a bonus level . 
 = = = Playable characters = = = 
 Over 50 characters from the films are playable over the course of the game , including variations of Luke Skywalker , Princess Leia , Han Solo , Chewbacca , Lando Calrissian , R2 @-@ D2 , C @-@ 3PO , Darth Vader , Wicket the Ewok , and Boba Fett . Character abilities have a greater role in Lego Star Wars II than in Lego Star Wars . Certain characters armed with guns can use a grappling hook in predesignated areas . Characters wielding lightsabers can deflect projectiles , double jump and use the Force . R2 @-@ D2 , C @-@ 3PO , and other droid characters are needed to open certain doors . Small characters like the Ewok and Jawa can crawl through hatches to reach otherwise inaccessible areas . Bounty hunters , such as Boba Fett , may use thermal detonators to destroy otherwise indestructible objects . Sith , like Darth Vader , can use the Force to manipulate black Lego objects . Some characters have unique abilities ; for example , Chewbacca can rip enemies ' arms from their sockets , Darth Vader can choke enemies with the Force , Princess Leia possesses a slap attack , and Lando Calrissian can use a kung @-@ fu @-@ like attack . Special abilities are often necessary to unlock secrets , and story mode does not always provide characters with needed abilities . This means that some secrets can only be found in free play mode . The player can unlock the " Use Old Save " extra , which imports all unlocked characters from Lego Star Wars for use in free play ; however , a Lego Star Wars saved game must be present on the same memory card that contains Lego Star Wars II 's save data . 
 Players can create two customized characters in the Mos Eisley Cantina . These characters can be built using both miscellaneous parts and those of unlocked characters ; 2 @,@ 258 @,@ 163 @,@ 204 combinations are possible . Entering two cheat codes , publicized by IGN , makes pieces for a Santa Claus character available . The game generates names for the characters based on the pieces used ( for example , a character made from pieces of Darth Vader and C @-@ 3PO might have the name " Darth @-@ 3PO " ) ; alternately , the player may create a name . 
 = = Development = = 
 Lego Star Wars II was created by the Cheshire , England , game developer Traveller 's Tales . LucasArts — busy with other projects — had deferred publishing of Lego Star Wars to Eidos Interactive , but regained the " necessary resources " to publish its sequel alongside TT Games Publishing . Lego Star Wars II was created for Microsoft Windows , OS X , Xbox , GameCube , PlayStation 2 , Game Boy Advance ( GBA ) , Nintendo DS , PlayStation Portable ( PSP ) , and Xbox 360 . Differences exist between platforms : the DS and GBA versions have some different playable characters than the other versions , and the DS and PSP versions support a " Wireless Lobby " for multiplayer gameplay . The Xbox 360 and PlayStation 2 versions of the game feature higher @-@ definition graphics . 
 Lego Star Wars II uses a modified Lego Star Wars engine . However , many gameplay improvements were made over its predecessor , most notably camera angles and movement . Camera movement in co @-@ op was a specific point of concern , as LucasArts received critical feedback from fans over this issue . Traveller 's Tales looked to expand upon the concept of levels completed entirely in vehicles . These " vehicle levels " were explored more thoroughly in Lego Star Wars II than in its predecessor . In response to complaints from fans , LucasArts and Traveller 's Tales granted the ability to build bricks to all non @-@ droid characters . Character customization , an entirely new concept , was considered a significant improvement over the original game , and is one of three features highlighted on the game 's final back cover . Tom Stone , director at Traveller 's Tales , stated of the various improvements made over the original game : 
 The designers attempted to recreate the films ' characters and events in a " cute " way . Assistant producer Jeff Gullet said that , in the game 's recreation of a Return of the Jedi scene where Luke Skywalker " jumps off the plank ... and somersaults onto the skiff " , Skywalker " performs an all @-@ out acrobatic routine with all sorts of jumps from the plank . It 's hilarious " . LucasArts producer David Perkinson said , " unless you 've got the heart of the Emperor , you are going to chuckle at many of [ the characters ] the first time you see them – you just have to . They 're so darn cute ! " 
 = = Marketing and release history = = 
 On 2 February 2006 , images of the game were leaked to the Internet . However , they were quickly removed , and LucasArts , if telephoned , did not confirm or deny the game 's development . The game was formally announced on 10 February at American International Toy Fair 2006 . A preview was later hosted at Electronic Entertainment Expo ( E3 ) 2006 . Because the original Lego Star Wars had been well received commercially and critically , selling 3 @.@ 3 million copies by March 2006 and winning several awards , its sequel was highly anticipated by both fans of the original game and video game publications such as IGN and GameSpot . Shortly before the game 's release , promotions were set up at chain stores across the United States , including Toys " R " Us , Wal @-@ Mart , Target , Best Buy , GameStop , and Circuit City . 
 In Europe , Lego Star Wars II was released on 11 September 2006 , for PC , Xbox , GameCube , GBA , DS , and Xbox 360 ; on 15 September for PlayStation 2 ; and on 10 November for PSP . The game 's North American release fell on 12 September for all platforms , coinciding with the release of the individual two @-@ disc DVD releases of the films on which it was based . The game 's Australian release fell on 15 September for all platforms , but the Xbox 360 version was not released in this region . The OS X version of the game was released in 2007 . The PlayStation 2 and Nintendo DS versions were the only versions that saw release in Japan , which occurred on 2 November 2006 . The game received a rating of E10 + from the Entertainment Software Rating Board ( for " cartoon violence " and " crude humor " ) , 3 + from PEGI , and A from CERO . 
 = = = Mobile phone adaptation = = = 
 A mobile phone adaptation of the game was developed by <unk> and published by THQ . It was released on 19 December 2006 . Several gameplay features — such as two @-@ dimensional graphics , limited character selection , and coverage only of the film Star Wars — distinguish this version of the game from the versions for other platforms . 
 = = = Compilation = = = 
 Lego Star Wars and Lego Star Wars II were compiled in Lego Star Wars : The Complete Saga , developed by Traveller 's Tales and published by LucasArts . The Complete Saga incorporated improvements from the sequel into the original game , and expanded the Mos Eisley Cantina to allow access to both games ' levels . It was created for Windows , PlayStation 3 , Xbox 360 , Wii , and DS . It was released on 6 November 2007 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 Upon release , Lego Star Wars II was positively received by critics , who praised its portrayal of the films ' characters and events . Nintendo Power staff writer Chris Shepperd claimed that " [ t ] he adorable LEGO adaptations also led to some hilarious story moments : the ' I am your father ' scene from The Empire Strikes Back is priceless " . Reviewers from GameSpy , 1UP.com , GameSpot , IGN , and PlayStation : The Official Magazine offered similar opinions . Shepperd and Variety 's Ben Fritz called the game " adorable " . In reviews of the Xbox 360 version , Official Xbox Magazine praised the game 's " off @-@ kilter humor " , and Electronic Gaming Monthly stated that " [ y ] ou have to give credit to the brilliant blockhead who forced this awesome yet fundamentally bizarro idea on LucasArts . " 
 The game was praised as a result of reviewers ' preference of the original trilogy over the prequel trilogy . Andrew Reiner of Game Informer said that " comparing [ the prequel trilogy ] to the films in the original trilogy is similar to comparing Jar Jar Binks to Han Solo " . Shepperd praised the level design of Lego Star Wars II , and called its predecessor 's environments " sterile " . These views were echoed by reviewers from 1UP.com , Variety , GameSpot , GameSpy , Official U.S. PlayStation Magazine ( for the PlayStation 2 ) , and BusinessWeek . 
 Critics were divided on the game 's level of difficulty . Fritz claimed that , though Lego Star Wars II provided only a " short journey " , it was " loads of fun " . GameSpot 's Ryan Davis estimated that it could be completed in six hours , but praised its bonus content . GameSpy and 1UP.com 's reviewers thought similarly . A review by USA Today 's Brett Molina claimed that " [ t ] he game 's difficulty is balanced well enough so kids won 't feel too frustrated while older gamers will still find a solid challenge " and gave the game an overall score of 8 out of 10 . Official Xbox Magazine 's review praised its " weird puzzles " . IGN 's Jeremy Dunham and Reiner were more critical of the perceived low difficulty . 
 Critics disliked the game 's Game Boy Advance and Nintendo DS versions . Davis believed that the Game Boy Advance version could be completed in two hours . GameSpy staff writer Phil Theobald bemoaned this version 's poor controls , easy levels and vehicle @-@ piloting sections . He concluded that " for goodness sake , [ one should ] buy one of the [ home ] console versions " . Theobald , Davis , and IGN 's Craig Harris criticized the high number of glitches in the DS version . 
 = = = Awards and accolades = = = 
 Lego Star Wars II won and was nominated for numerous awards , and ranked on several video game lists . The official Star Wars website declared Lego Star Wars II to be the best Star Wars @-@ related product of 2006 . The game won <unk> Media Awards ' " 2006 Greatest Products Call " , and was placed on Reader 's Digest 's September 2006 " 5 Things We Don 't Want You to Miss " list , Time magazine 's list of the top ten video games of 2006 , and GameSpy 's PC " Game of the Year " list . It received the 2006 Game of the Year award from Nick Jr. and from IGN ( for PC games only ) . It won Spike TV Video Game Awards 2006 's " Best Game Based on a Movie or TV Show " , and " Best Gameplay " from the British Academy of Film and Television Arts 's 3rd British Academy Video Games Awards . It received BAFTA nominations in three other categories , including " Best Game " . In contrast , the previously poorly received DS version was listed as one of the " tears " on IGN 's September 2009 " Cheers & Tears " list of action games for the DS . 
 = = = Sales = = = 
 Lego Star Wars II sold over 1 @.@ 1 million copies worldwide in its opening week . The PlayStation 2 , GameCube , Xbox 360 , and Xbox versions were the third , fifth , eighth , and ninth @-@ best selling games of September 2006 , respectively . The GameCube , Xbox , and PlayStation 2 versions were the third , eighth , and ninth @-@ best selling games of 2006 , respectively . All platforms except PC combined , the game was the third @-@ highest selling of 2006 in the United States , behind Madden NFL 07 and Cars . All platforms combined , the game was the fifth @-@ highest selling of 2006 in the United Kingdom . The GameCube , GBA , and DS versions were the first , second , and fifth best @-@ selling of January 2007 for their respective platforms . By 2 May 2009 , the game 's worldwide sales had surpassed 8 @.@ 2 million . It has been certified as part of the budget lines Platinum Hits for the Xbox 360 , Greatest Hits for the PlayStation 2 ( each represents a worldwide sales total of at least 400 @,@ 000 on its respective platform ) , and Player 's Choice for the GameCube ( 250 @,@ 000 ) . 
 = = = Legacy = = = 
 Jeff Bell , corporate vice president of global marketing for Microsoft , commended Lego Star Wars II for expanding the range of consumers for the Xbox 360 , noting its family @-@ friendly appeal . Character customization — a new feature in Lego Star Wars II — reappeared in subsequent Lego video games such as Lego Batman : The Videogame . A prequel called Lego Star Wars III : The Clone Wars was released in 2011 . It covers some of the time period of the Clone Wars . 
 = Sadie Harris = 
 Sadie Harris is a recurring fictional character from the American television medical drama Grey 's Anatomy , which airs on the American Broadcasting Company ( ABC ) in the United States . The character was created by series producer Shonda Rhimes and portrayed by actress Melissa George . Introduced as a surgical intern who has an old companionship with the series ' protagonist Meredith Grey ( Ellen Pompeo ) , she eventually forms a friendship with Lexie Grey ( Chyler Leigh ) , and departs after it is revealed she cheated her way into the surgical program . 
 George was invited to meet with Grey 's Anatomy 's executive producers after the show 's casting agents saw her in the 2008 television drama , In Treatment . The actress ' original contract included eight to eleven episodes of recurring appearances in season five , with the possibility of becoming a series regular . She was originally planned to be a romantic foil for Erica Hahn ( Brooke Smith ) and Callie Torres ( Sara Ramirez ) , but the role was retooled after the former departed in November 2008 . 
 After speculation as to whether the character would become a series regular , it was confirmed that George 's character would not be joining the series and would soon depart . George explained that it was her own decision to leave the show , in response to the assertions that her departure was done to " de @-@ gay " Grey 's Anatomy . The character has received mixed feedback from critics , and has been characterized as " naughty " , " mischievous " , and " nutty " . 
 = = Storylines = = 
 Sadie Harris first appears in the season five episode " These Ties That Bind " , in which it is made known that she was once a very close friend of Meredith Grey ( Ellen Pompeo ) . Harris and Meredith Grey had given each other nicknames during an extended vacation in Europe : " Die " and " Death " , respectively . Meredith Grey 's best friend is Cristina Yang ( Sandra Oh ) ; Yang becomes jealous of the friendship between Meredith Grey and Harris . Having joined Seattle Grace Hospital as a surgical intern , Harris begins a friendship with fellow intern Lexie Grey ( Chyler Leigh ) , Meredith Grey 's sister . The hospital 's interns are frustrated with their lack of surgical opportunities , so Harris cuts her own shoulder and then lets the interns stitch it back together . 
 Harris later volunteers herself to have an appendectomy to help the interns learn that surgical procedure , on the condition that she gets a chance to perform one afterwards . The interns make a mistake in the surgery , and Harris is seriously endangered , but is rescued by the residents . The interns are put on probation and rebuked by Meredith Grey , although Harris tells Lexie Grey that she is not apologetic . Following the surgery fiasco , Harris approaches the hospital 's chief of surgery Richard Webber ( James Pickens , Jr . ) , and claims responsibility for the incident . He informs her that the reason she has not been fired is because of his personal friendship with her father . 
 Later , she flirts with Callie Torres ( Sara Ramirez ) , although the relationship is never pursued . Harris continues to pursue a friendship with Lexie Grey , even going as far as to help her cover up Lexie Grey 's blooming relationship with Mark Sloan ( Eric Dane ) . In " Before and After " , during a competition among the interns set up by Izzie Stevens ( Katherine Heigl ) , George O 'Malley ( T.R. Knight ) notices Harris ' lack of medical knowledge . Although he offers to tutor Harris , she declines and chooses not to tell Webber , which O 'Malley does instead . When Harris comes out from a talk with Webber , she tells Meredith Grey that she has decided to quit , and that she did not qualify for the surgical program . When she tries to get Meredith Grey to go back to vacationing in Europe , Meredith Grey declines and Harris departs . 
 = = Development = = 
 = = = Casting and creation = = = 
 Melissa George received an invitation to meet the show 's executive producers , Shonda Rhimes and Betsy Beers , from Grey 's Anatomy 's casting agents after they saw her recurring guest performances in the television drama In Treatment ( 2008 ) . George explained that after meeting with the producers , she was set to begin working . 
 George 's initial contract included eight to eleven episodes of recurring appearances , with the possibility of becoming a series regular . However , according to George 's representative , she did not intend to do more than eight episodes . Harris was first planned to have a romance with Torres , but Rhimes eventually changed that after George started filming . She was initially written as a lesbian , but was revised as bisexual . 
 In January 2009 , George confirmed her departure from Grey 's Anatomy , and several reasons were cited for her leaving . George said she had decided to leave to pursue another project , and offered praise to the cast members . However , a representative of the show claimed the actress ' departure was due to a mutual agreement between Grey 's Anatomy and George , explaining that the character 's storyline " came to a natural end " , but that everyone was upset with her departure . Following Erica Hahn ( Brooke Smith ) ' s departure , E ! Online 's Kristin Dos Santos asserted that Smith 's dismissal from the show , and the rewrite of Harris ' storyline , was enforced by the American Broadcasting Company ( ABC ) , as part of an attempt to " de @-@ gay " Grey 's Anatomy , but these claims were rebuked by Rhimes . 
 = = = Characterization = = = 
 George 's character has been described as " naughty " and " mischievous " , as well as " nutty " . She added that Harris ' sexuality is not the main aspect of her personality . George called her character " broken " , and opined that her outgoing personality is meant to cover up something else . George stated that the way she portrayed Harris was influenced by the outspokenness of Lisa Rowe , a sociopathic character from Girl , Interrupted ( 1999 ) played by Angelina Jolie . 
 Peter Nowalk , one of the show 's writers , characterized Harris as " quite a flirty gal " . Other Grey 's Anatomy cast members have also commented on the character of Harris ; Chandra Wilson stated that Harris is fast paced , whereas Leigh said that the character is there to " wreak havoc on Seattle Grace " . Entertainment Weekly 's Michael Ausiello said that Harris is " an intern with an open mind towards sexuality " . 
 Debbie Chang , writing for BuddyTV , and Jonathan Toomey of The Huffington Post also cast ideas about Harris ' self @-@ incision in the episode " In the Midnight Hour " , wondering if she " has a death wish " and " what is wrong with her " . Stacy McKee , a primary writer for the show , said Harris is Meredith Grey 's " pre @-@ Cristina Cristina " and that she shares " a history with Meredith that Cristina can 't " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Throughout her run on Grey 's Anatomy , the character received mixed feedback among critics . Jon Caramanica of the Los Angeles Times was critical of her character development , calling George " woefully misused " . Writing for The Age , Michael Idato opined that the storyline between Harris and Yang was " frosty " , adding that the writing was in a " true soap fashion " . 
 Darren Devlyn of the Herald Sun wondered if the producers brought in George to " shake up the show " , and found the character 's bisexual storyline similar to Hahn 's . Speaking of George 's exit , Kris De Leon of BuddyTV noted that she departed on the " best of terms " in comparison with Isaiah Washington ( Preston Burke ) , Smith , and Knight — former cast members who had " rocky " exits . 
 Erin McWhirter of The Daily Telegraph called George 's character " outrageous " in response to the appendectomy . Former Star @-@ Ledger editor Alan Sepinwall was critical of the character , saying he rolled his eyes in regard to her letting the interns perform procedures on her , sarcastically writing : " Ooooh , she 's damaged ! And sexy ! She takes off her top and then eagerly cuts herself for the other interns ! That 's hot ! " TV Guide 's Erin Lulevitch referred to her as a " masochist " due to her self @-@ incision . 
 Scott Ellis of The Sydney Morning Herald enjoyed the character , calling her " intriguing " . Entertainment Weekly 's Jennifer Armstrong enjoyed Harris in " Sympathy for the Devil " , finding it " sweet " when she took the blame for causing Sloan 's penile fracture , to avoid Lexie Grey being embarrassed . Chang of BuddyTV claimed that Harris is " kind of a rebel " , and the Daily News ' Lauren Johnston deemed her personality " brash " . 
 = LW10 = 
 LW10 is a para @-@ Alpine and para @-@ Nordic sit @-@ skiing classification for skiers who cannot sit up without support . For international skiing competitions , classification is conducted by International Paralympic Committee ( IPC ) Alpine Skiing and IPC Nordic Skiing , while national federations such as Alpine Canada handle classification for domestic competitions . 
 In para @-@ Alpine skiing , the skier uses a mono @-@ ski , which is required to have breaks on both sides of the ski . The para @-@ Nordic sit @-@ ski configuration has two skis . Skiers in this class use outrigger skis for balance , as leverage to right themselves when they fall , and for turning . A factoring system is used in the sport to allow different classes to compete against each other when there are too few individual competitors in one class in a competition . Factoring for the 2011 / 2012 alpine ski season was done based on subclass , with <unk> factoring being 0 @.@ 7234 for Slalom , 0 @.@ <unk> for Giant Slalom , 0 @.@ 7942 for Super @-@ G and 0 @.@ <unk> for Downhill , and <unk> factoring being 0 @.@ <unk> for Slalom , 0 @.@ <unk> for Giant Slalom , 0 @.@ <unk> for Super @-@ G and 0 @.@ <unk> for downhill . The percentage for the para @-@ Nordic 2012 / 2013 ski season was 86 % and for LW10.5 was 91 % . 
 = = Definition = = 
 LW10 is a para @-@ Alpine and para @-@ Nordic sit @-@ skiing classification , where LW stands for Locomotor Winter . LW10 skiers cannot sit up without support , which includes people with cerebral palsy in all their limbs . Competitors in this class lack " buttock sensibility " . 
 The International Paralympic Committee ( IPC ) defined this para @-@ Alpine classification as " a . Disabilities in the lower limbs , no functional sitting <unk> b . CP with disabilities in all four limbs ( functional classification ) . " In 2002 , the Australian Paralympic Committee defined this classification for para @-@ Alpine as a sit skiing classification for " Athletes with disabilities in the lower limbs and no sitting balance ( i.e. Cannot sit upright without support ) . " 
 In para @-@ Nordic skiing , the IPC defines this class as for " those with impairments in the lower limb ( s ) and the trunk . " Cross Country Canada defines this para @-@ Nordic classification as " Impairment in the lower limbs and trunk with minimal trunk muscle activity in flexion and extension and no functional sitting balance . [ The ] athlete is unable to stand . " A skier in this class " will have minimal trunk muscle activity in flexion and extension so that the athlete is unable to maintain a sitting position against gravity while properly strapped to the test table and without arm support " . 
 For international para @-@ Alpine skiing competitions , classification is done through IPC Alpine Skiing . A national federation such as Alpine Canada handles classification for domestic competitions . For para @-@ Nordic skiing events , classification is handled by IPC Nordic Skiing Technical Committee on the international level and by the national sports federation such as Cross @-@ Country Canada on a country by country level . A skier must meet a minimum of one of several conditions to be eligible for a sit @-@ skiing classification . These conditions include a single below knee but above ankle amputation , monoplegia that exhibits similar to below knee amputation , legs of different length where there is at least a 7 centimetres ( 2 @.@ 8 in ) difference , and combined muscle strength in the lower extremities less than 71 . Assessment for this classification includes consideration of the skier 's medical history and disability , a physical examination , and an in @-@ person assessment of the skier training or competing . During the assessment process , six different tests are conducted that look at the skier 's balance on different planes , and test for upper body strength and levels of mobility . The guideline scores for people to be assessed in this classification are 0 — 8 . 
 = = = LW10.5 = = = 
 Cross Country Canada defined this para @-@ Nordic classification as " impairment in the lower limbs and trunk with some upper abdominal and trunk muscle activity and no functional sitting balance . [ The ] athlete is unable to stand " . In para @-@ Nordic skiing , LW10.5 is for sit skiers with disability affecting their lower extremities and trunk function , and who lack " buttock sensibility S1 @-@ S5 " . 
 = = Equipment = = 
 In para @-@ Alpine skiing , the skier uses a monoski , which is required to have breaks on both sides of the ski . The chair can detach from a ski . Helmets are required in LW10 para @-@ Alpine competition ; Slalom helmets for Slalom and crash helmets for the Giant Slalom . The para @-@ Nordic sit @-@ ski configuration has two skis . LW10 para @-@ Nordic sit @-@ skiers can use a sit @-@ ski with outrigger skis , which are forearm crutches with a miniature ski on a rocker at the base . They sometimes use a quadriplegic ski , called a " Swing @-@ Bo " , which was designed to give the skier better steering , and rely less on outriggers . In the Biathlon , athletes with amputations can use a rifle support while shooting . 
 = = Technique = = 
 Skiers use outriggers for balance and as leverage when they fall to right themselves . Outriggers are also used for turning ; skiers use the outrigger and their upper body by leaning into the direction they want to turn . In para @-@ Nordic skiing , outriggers or ski poles are used to propel the skier forward . If skiers fall , they may require assistance in righting themselves , and / or getting back to the fall line . Doing this on their own , they need to position their mono @-@ ski facing uphill relative to the fall line . 
 In the Biathlon , all Paralympic athletes shoot from a prone position . 
 = = Sport = = 
 A factoring system is used in para @-@ Alpine and para @-@ Nordic skiing to allow different classes to compete against each other when there are too few individual competitors in one class . A number is given to each class of skiers based on their functional mobility or vision levels ; the results are calculated by multiplying the finish time by the factored number . The resulting number is used to determine the winner in events where the factor system is used . During the 1997 / 1998 ski season , the percentage for this para @-@ Nordic classification was 84 % . For the 2003 / 2004 para @-@ Nordic skiing season , the percentage for was 87 % . The percentage for the 2008 / 2009 and 2009 / 2010 para @-@ Nordic ski seasons was 86 % and for LW10.5 was 91 % . Factoring for the 2011 / 2012 alpine ski season was done based on subclass ; <unk> factoring was 0 @.@ 7234 for Slalom , 0 @.@ <unk> for Giant Slalom , 0 @.@ 7942 for Super @-@ G and 0 @.@ <unk> for downhill . <unk> factoring was 0 @.@ <unk> for Slalom , 0 @.@ <unk> for Giant Slalom , 0 @.@ <unk> for Super @-@ G and 0 @.@ <unk> for downhill . The percentage for the para @-@ Nordic 2012 / 2013 ski season was 86 % and was 91 % for <unk> 
 In para @-@ Alpine skiing events , LW10 skiers are grouped with sitting classes , who are seeded to start after visually impaired classes , and the classes in the Slalom and Giant Slalom . In downhill , Super @-@ G and Super Combined , this group competes after the visually impaired classes and before standing classes . In cross @-@ country and biathlon events , this classification is grouped with other sitting classes . The IPC advises event organisers to run the men 's sit @-@ ski group first , then the women 's sit @-@ ski group section , the visually impaired , and the standing skiers . 
 For alpine events , a skier is allowed one push , without running , from the starting position at the start of the race . If the competitor skis off the course during a para @-@ Nordic race , a race official may assist him or her back onto the course . Skiers cannot use their legs to break or steer during the race . 
 Skiers in the LW10 class can injure themselves while skiing . Between 1994 and 2006 , one skier in the LW10 class was injured on the German national para @-@ Alpine skiing team . He had a clavicle fracture in 2001 , which corresponds to the higher rate of " plexus brachialis distorsion and a higher rate of shoulder injuries " in the LW10 class compared to able bodied skiers . 
 = = Events = = 
 At the 2002 Winter Paralympics in alpine @-@ skiing , this classification was not grouped with others for the men 's downhill , Giant Slalom , Slalom and Super @-@ G events . At the 2002 Games , women skiers in the Giant Slalom , Slalom , and Super @-@ G were grouped with LW11 and L12 for one medal event , and they were grouped with LW11 for the downhill event . At the 2004 Alpine World Championships , LW10 , LW11 and LW12 women competed against each other in a competition with factored results during the downhill event . At the 2005 IPC Nordic Skiing World Championships , this class was grouped with other sit @-@ skiing classifications . In cross country , this class was eligible to compete in the men 's 5 km , 10 km and 20 km individual race , and women were eligible to compete in the 2 @.@ 5 km , 5 km and 10 km individual races . In the men and women 's biathlon , this classification was again grouped with sit @-@ ski classes in the 7 @.@ 4 km race with 2 shooting stages 12 @.@ 5 km race , which had four shooting stages . At the 2009 Alpine World Championships , the class was grouped with other sitting classes , with four male ( only one of whom finished ) and one female LW10 skier competing in their respective downhill events . 
 = = Competitors = = 
 Skiers in this classification include British skier <unk> Skeels @-@ <unk> , United States skier Chris Waddell , and Japan 's <unk> <unk> . 
 = Castillonnais = 
 The <unk> or Cheval <unk> de Castillon , once called the cheval du Biros or Saint @-@ <unk> , is an ancient breed of small riding horse from the Ariège département of southwestern France . The breed 's phenotype is currently in flux , but overall it resembles ( and is sometimes confused with ) the more common Merens horse . Members of the breed are either dark bay or black , and all have pangare color modification , which results in paler color around the eyes and muzzle and on the underside of the body . Today it is used principally for pleasure riding ( including equine tourism ) and driving . 
 The Castillonnais probably descends from the horses that inspired the Magdalenian @-@ era paintings found , for example , at the Cave of Niaux , with Oriental and Iberian blood added later . Originally bred as a multipurpose breed used for cavalry , agriculture and driving , the breed declined in population during the 20th century , and almost became extinct . In 1980 , a group of supporters began to work to save the breed , and a breed association , now called the Association Nationale du Cheval Castillonnais d <unk> Pyrénées ( <unk> ) , was formed in 1992 . The breed was officially recognized by the French Ministry of Agriculture in 1996 . The French government , breed association and a regional conservation group all now share an interest in the preservation of the breed . Population numbers are still quite low , and inbreeding is a concern . 
 = = Characteristics = = 
 The physical characteristics seen in the breed are currently in flux , so there is not a single breed phenotype , though many members of the breed closely resemble the Mérens . Enthusiasts are breeding for a rustic mountain horse , of medium size , with good gaits and good temperament . Some members of the breed closely resemble Iberian horses such as the Andalusian horse . The official breed standard calls for a moderately long neck and long , sloped shoulder , broad back , rounded croup and muscular legs . Some members of the breed are branded on the left hindquarter . Because of its relative rarity and physical similarities , the Castillonnais is commonly confused with the Mérens . 
 Castillonnais horses range from 13 @.@ 1 to 15 @.@ 1 hands ( 53 to 61 inches , 135 to 155 cm ) high , with the ideal height for mares being 14 @.@ 1 hands ( 57 inches , 145 cm ) and 14 @.@ 2 hands ( 58 inches , 147 cm ) for stallions . Two colors are allowed in the breed : dark bay and black , both with pangare modification , which results in paler color around the eyes and muzzle and on the underside of the body . Horses of any other color are prohibited from entry into the studbook and all horses are genetically tested to officially determine their color before they are allowed into the studbook . The breed is considered to be an easy keeper , with an easygoing temperament . The horses are agile , sure @-@ footed on mountain paths , and exhibit extended gaits , with strong engagement of the hindquarters . 
 = = History = = 
 Like many other French breeds from the Pyrenees , the Castillonnais probably descends from the horses that inspired the Magdalenian @-@ era paintings found , for example , at the Cave of Niaux . Over time , blood from Oriental and Iberian horses was added to the breed , and influenced its physical appearance and temperament . The Castillonnais was originally known as the " cheval du Biros " ( Biros horse ) or " Saint @-@ <unk> " , a name from the town of Saint @-@ <unk> in Ariege in the Pyrenees , where a large horse fair was held the day after All Saints ' Day . In the late nineteenth century , horses of the Pyrenees were known for their use as mounts by light cavalry . In 1908 , Gabriel Lamarque , equine historian and president of the Société d ’ agriculture de l ’ Ariège ( Agricultural Society of Ariege ) , began to study the breed as part of his work in the development of native horse populations in France . 
 The breed was originally a multipurpose horse , used for agriculture , cavalry and pulling diligences ( a type of carriage ) . Because of a lack of support from a breeding syndicate , such as the one in existence for the Mérens horse , once the need for a multipurpose breed declined , the population of the Castillonnais dwindled . Many horses were crossbred with draft horses , and the breed almost became extinct . The intervention of a group of supporters in 1980 saved the breed from extinction , and in 1992 L 'Association <unk> <unk> du Cheval Castillonnais ( the Ariege Pyrenees Association of Castillonnais Horses ) was formed , with support from several French government agencies and stud farms . Annually , in August , the association holds a small competition and sale for the breed in Castillon @-@ en @-@ Couserans , which also includes inspections to register horses for the breed studbook . 
 In 1996 , the Castillonnais was officially recognized by the French Ministry of Agriculture , due to the efforts of a small number of breed enthusiasts , though by that time only 50 purebred mares remained . The breed association 's name was changed to L ’ association Nationale du Cheval Castillonnais d <unk> Pyrénées ( <unk> ) ( National Association of Castillonnais Horses of the Ariège Pyrenees ) , and is headquartered in Castillon @-@ en @-@ Couserans . Le Conservatoire du Patrimoine <unk> Régional de Midi @-@ Pyrénées ( Conservatory of the Biological Heritage of the Midi @-@ Pyrénées Region ) , an organization that has worked to protect the diversity of animal species in the region since 1980 , is also committed to protecting the breed . 
 Population numbers for the Castillonnais are quite low . The majority of breeders are located in Castillon @-@ en @-@ Couserans , in Ariège , but a few can be found in Brittany and Provence . In November 2005 , there were only around 260 existing Castillonnais , and a goal was created by the breed association to double the number of purebred mares between 2005 and 2014 . Inbreeding is a concern due to low population numbers , and the national stud farm at Tarbes and Institut National de la Recherche <unk> ( National Institute of <unk> Research ) have been brought in to help safeguard the genetic resources of the breed . 
 = = Uses = = 
 The Castillonnais is used mainly for pleasure riding , and it is well adapted to the mountainous terrain of the Pyrenees , which makes is useful for equestrian tourism in the area . It can be used for driving , and is sometimes seen in dressage competitions . Some Castillonnais are used for logging and as pack horses for taking food and equipment to mountainous areas otherwise only accessible by helicopter . 
 = Gabras = 
 Gabras or Gavras ( Greek : <unk> ) , feminine form <unk> ( <unk> ) , is the surname of an important Byzantine aristocratic family , which became especially prominent in the late 11th and early 12th centuries as the semi @-@ independent and quasi @-@ hereditary rulers of Chaldia . 
 The Gabrades are attested for the first time in the late 10th century , when Constantine Gabras participated in the revolt of Bardas Skleros . The general Theodore Gabras captured Trebizond and ruled it and the theme of Chaldia as a virtually autonomous state ( ca . 1081 – 1098 ) . He was celebrated for his martial exploits , and was later venerated as a saint in the region . His son , Constantine Gabras , also became governor of Chaldia ( ca . 1119 – 1140 ) and ended up ruling it as a quasi @-@ independent prince . Several members of the family entered service with the Seljuk Turks in the 12th and 13th centuries , and in the 14th century , several Gabrades are attested in administrative positions in Byzantium , most notably the official and scholar Michael Gabras , known for his extensive correspondence with the main Byzantine literary and political figures of his day , and his brother John . A branch of the family also became rulers of the Principality of Theodoro in the Crimea . 
 = = Origins and first members = = 
 The family first appears in the northeastern corner of the Byzantine world , the province of Chaldia , centred on Trebizond . The family 's ethnic origin is unknown . Some scholars like Alexander Vasiliev and Alexander <unk> suggested an Armenian origin , as with many other aristocratic families of the time , but the surname " Gabras " is neither Armenian nor Greek . Persian and Aramaic origins for the name have been suggested , including a suggestion by Konstantinos <unk> that it is a corruption of the name " Gabriel " . The historian Anthony Bryer , however , considers more likely that the name is a cognate of the Arabic <unk> , Persian <unk> or Turkish <unk> , terms meaning " infidel " or " unbeliever " , which is appropriate for the Christian – Muslim borderlands where the Gabrades first appear . It seems that the Gabrades arose from the Inner Pontus , a region with its own distinct identity : a mountainous area , it was scarcely affected by Hellenization and preserved a traditional and archaic societal structure , with tiny lordships centred on mountain strong @-@ holds . 
 The first known member of the family , Constantine Gabras , participated in the 976 – 979 revolt of Bardas Skleros , and was killed in battle in 979 . A patrikios Gabras appears in 1018 , who was blinded for plotting along with the Bulgarian <unk> to restore the recently subdued Bulgarian Empire ; it is unclear , however , what his relation with the <unk> Gabrades is , or whether he might be a Bulgarian noble . In 1040 , a Michael Gabras was one of the leaders of a failed aristocratic conspiracy against the Domestic of the Schools Constantine , a brother of Emperor Michael IV ( r . 1034 – 1041 ) . He too was blinded along with his fellow conspirators . 
 = = The Gabrades as autonomous rulers in Chaldia = = 
 The first important member of the family was Saint Theodore Gabras . A native of Chaldia , he was an energetic and valiant man . He recaptured Trebizond from the Turks in 1075 , and was appointed governor ( doux ) of Chaldia by Alexios I Komnenos in 1081 . Gabras ruled Chaldia as a virtually independent ruler , and until his death in battle in 1098 , he fought with success against the <unk> Turks and the Georgians . He became a heroic figure in both Pontic Greek and Turkoman poetry , and was recognized by the Orthodox Church as a martyr and saint . By his first wife , Irene ( possibly a <unk> ) , Theodore had a son , Gregory Gabras , who was kept as a hostage in Constantinople , where he was initially betrothed to one of the daughters of the sebastokrator Isaac Komnenos and later to Maria Komnene , daughter of Alexios I. Theodore tried to kidnap him in 1091 , but failed . Nothing further is known of Gregory Gabras , but he may be identical to Gregory Taronites , who as doux of Chaldia in 1103 – 1106 also led a rebellion against Alexios . Another member of the family , Constantine Gabras , whose exact relation to Theodore is unknown , was also appointed doux of Chaldia by John II Komnenos ( r . 1118 – 1143 ) ca . 1119 . He ruled it practically independently from 1126 until 1140 , when John II subdued him . His exploits also formed part of an extensive oral tradition in the Pontus , but the so @-@ called " Song of Gabras " , written down ca . 1900 , has been shown to be a modern work drawing from other medieval sources . 
 The Gabrades ' success in creating a more or less autonomous domain is not surprising : northeastern Asia Minor , including Chaldia , had had a long history of disaffection with the central Byzantine government in the 11th century , helped by its mixed Greek and Armenian population — the latter introduced in the early 11th century and quickly coming to dominate the Pontic hinterland . Already before the Battle of Manzikert in 1071 , the renegade Frankish mercenary Robert Crispin had made the fortress of Koloneia the centre of a separate domain , and was succeeded in 1073 by Roussel de Bailleul . Thus , when Theodore Gabras appeared at Trebizond in 1075 and again in 1081 , he was seen as a native leader for the Pontic Greeks of the coastlands , and his regime relied on local forces , i.e. the old thematic levies of the province . The Gabrades ' Turkish counterpart and main rivals were the <unk> emirs of <unk> and Sebasteia . On the other hand , as Bryer comments , " although rivals , the Gabrades and the <unk> probably had more in common with each other than they had with the Komnenoi of Constantinople or the Seljuks of Konya " ; the two often allied with each other , especially against efforts by their respective suzerains to bring them to heel , and the Gabrades are remembered as gallant foes in Turkoman heroic poetry . 
 = = Service under the Komnenoi and the Seljuks = = 
 Following the collapse of their independent power , many of the Gabrades came to serve under the new Seljuk Sultanate at Konya , while others went to serve the Komnenoi emperors at Constantinople and mostly lost their ties to the Pontus . 
 Already in the 1140s , a nameless member of the family fought on the side of the Seljuks and was captured and executed by Manuel I Komnenos ( r . 1143 – 1180 ) in 1146 . Another Gabras , possibly the son of the former , defected from Byzantium to Kilij Arslan II ( r . 1155 – 1192 ) and became one of his leading advisors . He may be identical with , or the father of , Kilij Arslan 's vizier during the last part of his reign ( ca . 1180 – 1192 ) , <unk> al @-@ Din Hasan ibn <unk> . Other members of the family in Seljuk service include Constantine Gabras , possibly the son of the doux Constantine , who " betrayed " the emperor while on a diplomatic mission in 1162 / 3 ; an unnamed Gabras who was accused of poisoning Kilij Arslan II in 1192 ; John Gabras ( " Giovanni de <unk> " ) , who was sent to a diplomatic mission in Europe on behalf of Sultan Kayqubad I in 1234 – 1236 ; and a Michael ( " Mikhail bar Gavras " ) who was a physician at Malatya ca . 1256 . 
 On the other hand , the pansebastos sebastos Michael Gabras was a general of Manuel I Komnenos , fighting against the Hungarians and the Seljuks , and became related to the imperial dynasty as a son @-@ in @-@ law of Andronikos Komnenos . 
 = = In late Byzantium and the Empire of Trebizond = = 
 The surname of Gabras is still attested in the Byzantine world during the 13th and 14th centuries , but the family had lost its prestige . Some of the Gabrades of this period were peasants who adopted the surname of their masters , and most of the family members attested in government service were lowly officials . 
 Under the Empire of Nicaea , the Gabrades appear in Macedonia and western Asia Minor . A pansebastos sebastos <unk> or <unk> Gabras is mentioned in the ca . 1216 ; a <unk> Gregory Gabras is mentioned as governor of a village near Prilep in the 1220s , and the latter 's relative , the pansebastos sebastos Stephen Gabras , was active near Ohrid ; a John Gabras sold land near Miletus in 1236 ; and a Constantine Gabras was <unk> ( " senior priest " ) of the Metropolis of Miletus ca . 1250 . In the Palaiologan period , the pansebastos sebastos Christopher Gabras died as a monk ca . 1264 / 5 ; Manuel Doukas Komnenos Gavras is attested as benefactor of a monastery in 1300 / 1 ; other members of the family are occasionally mentioned in legal documents , epigrams or correspondence as active in Constantinople and Macedonian cities like Serres or <unk> . Gabras Komnenos , of unknown first name , held the post of " judge of the army " ( <unk> tou <unk> ) and is recorded by Manuel Philes as a " slayer of the barbarians " ; a John Gabras <unk> was hetaireiarches at Serres ca . 1348 ; another family member held a pronoia estate at <unk> before 1347 . Other Gabrades were serfs ( paroikoi ) , attached to large estates : Michael Gabras at Leros ca . 1263 ; Demetrios and his sons Michael and <unk> , as well as a probably related Basil Gabras , as paroikoi of the <unk> monastery at <unk> ca . 1300 ; finally , Demetrios Gabras <unk> [ u ] s and George Gabras were paroikoi of the <unk> monastery at <unk> in the early 14th century . 
 The most famous of the Palaiologan @-@ era Gabrades , however , is Michael Gabras , a sakellarios of the Patriarchate of Constantinople and " the most prolific of all Byzantine letter writers " ( A. Bryer ) , whose correspondence spans the period 1305 – 1341 and includes most of the major political and literary figures of his day . He also had a brother John , who wrote a theological treatise against the doctrines of Gregory Palamas . 
 A few Gabrades also remained in the Pontus , where they entered the service of the Empire of Trebizond , established by the exiled Komnenoi shortly before the dissolution of the Byzantine Empire by the Fourth Crusade in 1204 : most notably , a member of the family was governor of Sinope during the brief period when it was reclaimed from the Turks by Trebizond ( ca . 1254 or 1258 / 9 – 1265 or 1267 / 8 ) . Other family members are mentioned as landholders , mostly in the <unk> ( province ) of <unk> , south of Trebizond : Andronikos Gavras , probably in the 13th century ; a George Gabras ca . 1344 / 5 ; Kosmas , a military leader ( <unk> ) in the <unk> of <unk> ca . 1378 ; and Theodore Gabras in <unk> in the early 15th century . 
 = = In Crimea and the Principality of Theodoro = = 
 A branch of the Gabras family is commonly identified by scholars with the family known from Russian sources as " <unk> " . This family ruled the small Principality of Theodoro , which was founded in the mid @-@ 14th century in the southwestern Crimea ( in the area of " Gothia " ) and survived until conquered by the Ottoman Turks in 1475 . The southern Crimea had been part of the Byzantine Empire until the late 12th century , and then came under the control of the Empire of Trebizond for a generation , but retained close links with the Pontic coast long after . While several hypotheses have been put forward as to how , when , and which branch of the Gabrades relocated there , none can be conclusively proven . 
 The first Gabras of Theodoro to be mentioned is Stephen ( " Stepan Vasilyevich <unk> " ) , prince of Gothia , who emigrated to Moscow in 1391 or 1402 along with his son Gregory . The two became monks , and Gregory later founded the Simonov Monastery there . The Russian noble families of <unk> and Golovin claimed descent from them . Stephen 's son , Alexios ( " Alexis " ) I , ruled Gothia after his father 's departure until 1444 / 5 or 1447 . He was succeeded briefly by John , possibly his son . John 's son Alexios died young ca . 1446 / 7 , and his epitaph was composed by John <unk> . Another son of Alexios , Olubei , succeeded as prince ca . 1447 and ruled until ca . 1458 , while a daughter of Alexios , Maria of Gothia , became in 1426 the first wife of the last <unk> emperor , David . 
 After the disappearance of Olubei from the scene ca . 1458 , no princes are known by name until Isaac in 1465 , possibly Olubei 's son . Isaac was overthrown in 1475 by his brother Alexander due to his pro @-@ Ottoman stance . His reign was brief , as the Ottoman Empire laid siege and conquered Theodoro itself in December . Alexander and his family were taken captive to Constantinople , where the prince was beheaded , his son was forcibly converted to Islam , and his wife and daughters became part of the Sultan 's harem . 
 = = Later Gabrades = = 
 The last notable members of the family are mentioned in Constantinople during the early centuries of the Ottoman Empire , as with Michael or <unk> Gabras , active ca . 1555 – 65 , or Cyril Gabras , megas <unk> of the Patriarchate in 1604 . Other family members are attested in Crete and the Aegean islands . Thus an unnamed Gabras held lands in Santorini in the early 17th century ; and numerous Gabrades are to be found at Chios and in Crete , especially around <unk> , until the early 19th century . For Crete in particular , it has been often supposed , although with no definitive evidence , that the local Gabrades came directly from the Pontus . 
 = Richard Goldstone = 
 Richard Joseph Goldstone ( born 26 October 1938 ) is a South African former judge . After working for 17 years as a commercial lawyer , he was appointed by the South African government to serve on the Transvaal Supreme Court from 1980 to 1989 and the Appellate Division of the Supreme Court of South Africa from 1990 to 1994 . 
 He is considered to be one of several liberal judges who issued key rulings that undermined apartheid from within the system by tempering the worst effects of the country 's racial laws . Among other important rulings , Goldstone made the Group Areas Act – under which non @-@ whites were banned from living in " whites only " areas – virtually unworkable by restricting evictions . As a result , prosecutions under the act virtually ceased . His critics have noted that despite his liberal positions he has been responsible for sentencing to death 2 black South Africans while also being involved in upholding the death sentences of over 20 other black South Africans . 
 During the transition from apartheid to multiracial democracy in the early 1990s , he headed the influential Goldstone Commission investigations into political violence in South Africa between 1991 and 1994 . Goldstone 's work enabled multi @-@ party negotiations to remain on course despite repeated outbreaks of violence , and his willingness to criticise all sides led to him being dubbed " perhaps the most trusted man , certainly the most trusted member of the white establishment " in South Africa . He was credited with playing an indispensable role in the transition and became a well known public figure in South Africa , attracting widespread international support and interest . 
 Goldstone 's work investigating violence led directly to his being nominated to serve as the first chief prosecutor of the United Nations International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia and for Rwanda from August 1994 to September 1996 . He prosecuted a number of key war crimes suspects , notably the Bosnian Serb political and military leaders , Radovan Karadžić and Ratko Mladić . On his return to South Africa he took up a seat on the newly established Constitutional Court of South Africa , to which he had been nominated by President Nelson Mandela . In 2009 , Goldstone led a fact @-@ finding mission created by the UN Human Rights Council to investigate international human rights and humanitarian law violations related to the Gaza War . The mission concluded that Israel and Hamas had both potentially committed war crimes and crimes against humanity , findings which sparked outrage in Israel and the initiation of a personal campaign against Goldstone . In 2011 , in the light of investigations by the Israeli forces which indicated that they had not intentionally targeted civilians as a matter of policy , Goldstone wrote that if evidence which had been available later had been available at the time , the Goldstone Report would have been a different document . 
 = = Family life and religious background = = 
 Goldstone is a third @-@ generation South African born into a Jewish family in <unk> near Johannesburg . He is of mixed English @-@ Lithuanian descent ; his mother 's father was English and his grandfather was a Lithuanian Jew who emigrated in the 19th century . 
 His family was non @-@ religious , but he credits his Jewishness with having shaped his ethical views through being part of a community that has been persecuted throughout history . Goldstone has written about the role that those of Jewish heritage played in the fight against apartheid noting , subsequent to Nelson Mandela ’ s death , that Mandela had himself observed " I have found Jews to be more broad @-@ minded than most whites on issues of race and politics , perhaps because they themselves have historically been victims of prejudice . " 
 He is married to <unk> Goldstone . They have two daughters and four grandsons . 
 = = Career = = 
 = = = South Africa = = = 
 While Goldstone was still a child , his grandfather encouraged him to study law . He later recalled : " My grandfather decided when I was about four [ that ] I was going to be a barrister , so I just always assumed I was . It turned out to be a wise decision . " Goldstone was educated at King Edward VII School in Johannesburg and subsequently undertook a six @-@ year legal studies course at the University of the Witwatersrand , from which he graduated in 1962 with a BA LLB cum laude . 
 At the university Goldstone became involved in the international effort to end South Africa 's apartheid system . He had been brought up in an anti @-@ apartheid atmosphere ; although his parents were not activists , they were opposed to racial discrimination and this was to have a profound influence on his later career . Like many other South African Jews , he chose to become conspicuously active in public life in an effort to oppose or alleviate the worst aspects of apartheid . While he was chairman of the university 's Students ' Representative Council , he campaigned against the exclusion of black students . He also attracted attention from the state security police by having contact with anti @-@ apartheid groups within South Africa , including the African National Congress , which was a banned organisation at the time . On one occasion he secretly tape @-@ recorded a spy sent by the police to infiltrate the anti @-@ apartheid student movement at the university . The recording was later used as evidence in the firing of the national police commissioner . 
 He was elected president of the National Union of South African Students , in which capacity he represented South African youth abroad at international gatherings . 
 = = = = Career as corporate / intellectual property barrister and judge = = = = 
 After being admitted to the Johannesburg Bar in 1963 , Goldstone practised corporate and intellectual property law as a barrister in Johannesburg for 17 years , a " 100 percent commercial practice " . He was appointed senior counsel in 1976 . 
 In 1980 he was selected by the government to serve as a judge on the Transvaal Supreme Court . At the time of his appointment he was the youngest Supreme Court judge in South Africa . 
 His elevation came despite his known opposition to apartheid . South Africa 's National Party government occasionally promoted " opposition " barristers to the Supreme Court Bench to demonstrate its claimed commitment to an independent judiciary and to confer legitimacy on the system through the presence of judges who enjoyed a reputation for independence and integrity . This raised obvious moral issues for Goldstone – as a judge , he would be expected to uphold South Africa 's apartheid laws . Some eminent lawyers did refuse to become judges , but liberal lawyers had already served as judges ; throughout the apartheid era , no one sitting on the bench had ever resigned for overtly political reasons . Goldstone sought the advice of prominent anti @-@ apartheid lawyers , who urged him to take up the position on the basis that he could do more to undermine apartheid as a judge working within the system than as an attorney working on the outside . 
 He commented later : " I took an appointment to the bench , as did a number of liberal judges , and we had to uphold the law of the country . It was a moral dilemma to do that , but the approach was that it was better to fight from inside than not at all . The moral dilemma came up when I had to apply the law . " He noted in 1992 that most South African judges " applied such [ apartheid ] laws without commenting upon their moral turpitude . " A number , including Goldstone , were more outspoken – a policy that he felt aided the credibility of the courts . There was a fine dividing line between applying moral standards and promoting political doctrines , but Goldstone believed that " in my view , if a judge is to err , it should be on the side of defending morality . " He took the view that " judges have a duty to act morally , and if they 're dealing with laws which have an unjust effect , I think it 's their duty – if they can , within the powers they 've got legitimately – to interpret the laws and give judgments which will make them less harsh and less unjust . " Being a judge in apartheid @-@ era South Africa was a challenge , but it had its rewards ; " I hated in the morning the thought of having to do this for another day , [ but ] by the end of the day , I was exhilarated at the reaction and how important the work was . " 
 Goldstone 's career as a judge was characterised by bold acts of judicial activism that soon attracted national and international interest . He was described as " an outstanding commercial lawyer who had shrewdly and inventively applied the law to secure justice in politically controversial and human rights cases . " Employing the bench as a means of making ordinary South Africans aware of the iniquities of apartheid , he gained a reputation as a committed , compassionate , legally meticulous and politically astute jurist who championed international human rights and sought to temper the effects of South Africa 's apartheid laws . He sought to retain his independence , refusing to kowtow to the authorities . As Reinhard Zimmermann puts it , Goldstone " emerged as one of the leading ' liberal ' judges who never showed any propensity towards the then prevailing executive @-@ mindedness " . 
 His judicial approach was influenced by the fact that although the ruling National Party had built up a framework of racist and unequal laws aimed at repressing the rights of non @-@ whites , the country had retained the underlying structure and principles of Anglo @-@ Dutch common law . According to Davis & Le Roux ( 2009 ) , a group of liberal judges that included Goldstone , Gerald Friedman , Ray Leon , Johann Kriegler , John Milne and <unk> Ackermann sought to read the apartheid legislation " as narrowly as possible to give effect to the values of the common law " . 
 This philosophy led Goldstone to issue rulings that undermined key aspects of the apartheid system . One of his most significant rulings concerned the Group Areas Act that mandated the eviction of non @-@ whites from areas reserved for whites . His ruling in the case of S v Govender in 1982 that evictions of non @-@ whites were not automatically required by the Act led to the virtual cessation of such evictions . Following the judgement it became so difficult to evict non @-@ whites from whites @-@ only areas that the system of housing segregation began to break down . Prosecutions under the Act fell from 893 between 1978 – 1981 to only one in 1983 . Geoffrey <unk> , former director of the anti @-@ apartheid Legal Resources Centre , commented of Goldstone 's decision in the Govender case that " it was an alert judge trying to apply human rights standards to a repressive piece of legislation . And it was Goldstone 's work ; it wasn 't our work that stopped the Group Areas prosecutions in the end . " <unk> noted that " it was a matter of great debate in the eighties about whether decent people should accept appointments to the bench , because they were enforcing repressive laws , " but stated that " [ f ] rom the point of view of the practitioner trying to run human rights cases and public @-@ interest cases , we prayed for a Goldstone or a [ John ] <unk> on the bench . That was our dream . " 
 In 1985 , Goldstone ruled that the government 's mass sacking of 1 @,@ 700 black staff at <unk> Hospital in Soweto had been illegal . The following year , he was the first judge to free a political prisoner who had been detained under a recently imposed state of emergency under which the government had given itself draconian police powers . Another important ruling against the state in 1988 resulted in the release of a detainee who had not been advised by the police that he was entitled to a lawyer . In 1989 , Goldstone became the first South African judge under apartheid to take on a black law clerk , an African @-@ American Yale Law student named Vernon Grigg . Goldstone also used his judicial prerogatives to visit thousands of people who had been imprisoned without trial , including some who later became members of the post @-@ apartheid South African government . Although he could do little to free them , his visits served to reassure the prisoners – and serve notice to the prison administration – that someone in a position of power was taking an active interest in their well @-@ being . Few white judges at the time enjoyed the trust and respect of the black majority ; Goldstone became a notable exception . 
 Some of South Africa 's laws and emergency regulations mandated particular penalties which judges had no discretion to modify . South Africa 's whites @-@ only parliament pursued a doctrine of parliamentary supremacy , passing laws which judges were absolutely bound to enforce if they had been enacted by parliament or were faithful to what parliament had done . Goldstone distressed civil rights lawyers in 1986 when he concurred without comment with a decision that allowed the jailing of a 13 @-@ year @-@ old boy for disrupting school . Goldstone later remarked that he was constrained by the law , that " the emergency regulations covered the situation . " The laws and regulations also included the death penalty for certain crimes such as murders committed without any extenuating circumstances ; although Goldstone was personally opposed to the death penalty , he was nonetheless required to pass death sentences on two convicted murderers . His reluctance to impose death penalties prompted criticism from judges who were in favour of capital punishment . Another Transvaal Supreme Court judge , D. <unk> , commented in 1991 that " a person who deserves to hang was more likely to get the death sentence from me or my ilk " than Goldstone or other liberal judges , who were " at heart abolitionists for one reason or another ... Obviously , and for that reason , they cannot be sound on the imposition of the death penalty . " 
 Goldstone was promoted to the Supreme Court of South Africa in 1989 , a post which he took up in October 1990 after a year 's study at Harvard University . As one of three judges on the Supreme Court 's appellate panel , he upheld a majority of appeals to the court . He also served as the founding national president of the National Institute of Crime Prevention and the Rehabilitation of Offenders ( <unk> ) , a body established to look after prisoners who had been released ; chairperson of the <unk> Foundation , a charitable educational trust ; and head of the board of the Human Rights Institute of South Africa ( <unk> ) . 
 Albie Sachs , who was later to serve alongside Goldstone on the Constitutional Court of South Africa , commented that Goldstone 's judicial career demonstrated " that an honest and dignified judge who 's sensitive to fundamental human rights of all human beings , even in the most dire circumstances , could find some space for concepts of legality and respect for human dignity . " 
 = = = = Sebokeng Inquiry and Goldstone Commission = = = = 
 In 1990 , President F. W. de Klerk began the negotiation process that was to lead to the end of apartheid in 1994 . At the time , South Africa was plagued by regular massacres as members of the African National Congress ( ANC ) and the Inkatha Freedom Party ( IFP ) fought for dominance . The police and security forces often reacted to demonstrations with indiscriminate force , and the ANC claimed that a hypothesised " Third Force " was engaged in covert destabilisation . The violence caused serious problems in building trust between the parties . 
 The negotiations broke down soon after they started due to a mass shooting at Sebokeng township near Johannesburg in March 1990 , in which 281 demonstrators were shot and 11 killed by South African police . After pressure from the ANC , de Klerk appointed Goldstone to investigate the incident . His report was published in September 1990 and was described at the time as " one of the strongest indictments of South Africa 's police ever made by a government @-@ appointed investigator . " He condemned the police for a breakdown in discipline and recommended that a number of individual police officers be prosecuted . Nine policemen were subsequently charged with murder . 
 To aid the transition to multiracial democracy , the South African government established a Commission of Inquiry Regarding the Prevention of Public Violence and Intimidation in October 1991 to investigate human rights abuses committed by the country 's various political factions . Its members were chosen by consensus among the three main parties . Goldstone had by now become reputed as an impartial and unimpeachable judge , and was asked by ANC chairman Nelson Mandela to head the commission ; it became known as the Goldstone Commission . Goldstone explained later that he had been selected because he had earned the confidence of both sides : " The government was aware that I would not make findings against it without good cause , and the majority of South Africans had confidence that I would quote hesitate to make findings against the government if the evidence justified it . " He nonetheless received numerous death threats . He continued to work as an appeals court judge throughout his time chairing the Commission , hearing cases during the mornings and afternoons and then continuing through to midnight on Commission business . 
 The Commission sat for three years , carrying out 503 investigations that triggered the initiation of 16 prosecutions . It had no judicial powers and could not issue binding regulations but had to establish its legitimacy through its reports and recommendations . It soon gained a reputation for even handedness , criticising all sides in often trenchant terms . The rivalry between the ANC and IFP was blamed for being " the primary cause " of violence and Goldstone urged both sides to " abandon violence and intimidation as political weapons " . The government 's security forces were found to have been involved in numerous abuses of human rights , though Goldstone rejected Nelson Mandela 's claims that President de Klerk was personally involved and described such suggestions as " unwise , unfair and dangerous " . One of Goldstone 's most important findings was the revelation in November 1992 that a secret military intelligence unit of the South African Defence Force was working to sabotage the ANC while posing as a legitimate business corporation . The ensuing scandal led to De Klerk purging the army and intelligence services . 
 Goldstone 's findings attracted praise and criticism from all sides . Some anti @-@ apartheid activists criticised Goldstone for what they saw as balancing his reports by apportioning blame equally ; Goldstone responded that his findings reflected the fact that all sides had " dirty hands " . Nonetheless , his impartiality and willingness to speak out led to him becoming , as the Christian Science Monitor put it in 1993 , " arguably the most indispensable arbitrator in South Africa 's turbulent transition to democracy . " He became a household name and was voted the top <unk> of 1992 in a South African poll , well ahead of either de Klerk or Mandela . His character was cited by other lawyers as a key asset in making the commission a success ; one lawyer commented , " He has the rare ability to straddle both the legal and political worlds . He is a great strategist and combines a deep humanity with a political sensitivity . " 
 As well as reporting on political violence , Goldstone proposed practical measures to end the violence in venues such as commuter trains , taxis , mines , township hostels and the troubled Natal region . He also succeeded in persuading the government to accept an international rôle in the transition – which it had previously strongly opposed – as well as forcing it to undertake a major restructuring of the security forces and purging subversive elements in the military . According to Goldstone , the commission 's work helped to calm South Africa during the transition period . He regarded it as " a vitally important safety valve " that provided a " credible public instrument " to deal with incidents that might otherwise have derailed the negotiations . The international community took a similar view ; his work was supported and funded by the UN , the Commonwealth and the European Community , who regarded it as vital to expose the truth behind political violence in order to achieve democratic stability . 
 Goldstone 's work was to pave the way for the establishment of the Truth and Reconciliation Commission in 1995 , a body that he strongly supported . Its chairman , Archbishop Desmond Tutu , commented that Goldstone had made an " indispensable " contribution to the peaceful democratic transition in South Africa . The Commission 's final report was strongly critical of the apartheid @-@ era legal system but commended the role of a few judges , including Goldstone , who " exercised their judicial discretion in favour of justice and liberty wherever proper and possible " . It noted that although they were few in number , such figures were " influential enough to be part of the reason why the ideal of a constitutional democracy as the favoured form of government for a future South Africa continued to burn brightly throughout the darkness of the apartheid era . " The Commission found that " the alleviation of suffering achieved by such lawyers substantially outweighed the admitted harm done by their participation in the system . " Reinhard Zimmermann commented in 1995 that " Goldstone 's reputation as a sound and impeccably impartial lawyer coupled with his genuine concern for social justice have invested him , across the political spectrum , with a degree of legitimacy that is probably unequalled in South Africa today . " 
 = = = Chief UN Prosecutor in Yugoslavia and Rwanda = = = 
 In August 1994 , Goldstone was named as the first chief prosecutor of the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia ( ICTY ) , which was established by a resolution of the UN Security Council in 1993 . When the Security Council established the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda ( ICTR ) in late 1994 , he became its chief prosecutor , too . His appointment to the tribunals came as something of a surprise , even to Goldstone himself , as he had only limited experience of international law and Yugoslavian affairs and had never been a prosecutor before . He owed his appointment to the Italian chief judge of the ICTY , Antonio <unk> . There had been lengthy wrangling between UN member states about whom to appoint as a prosecutor and none of the candidates proposed so far had been accepted . The French national counsel , Roger Errera , suggested Goldstone , commenting that " if he is Jewish , that goes down well . Everyone suspects everyone in the former Yugoslavia . So it 's better that he is neither Catholic , nor Orthodox , nor Muslim . " 
 Goldstone was approached by <unk> and expressed an interest in the position . President Mandela supported his wish to take up the position at The Hague , as Goldstone later recalled : " He certainly encouraged me . He thought it was important to take what was the first offer of a major international position after South Africa ceased to be a pariah . " However , the offer put Mandela in a difficult spot . He wanted Goldstone , who was one of the few South African jurists to have earned the respect of both blacks and whites , for South Africa 's newly established Constitutional Court . Mandela struck a deal with the UN Secretary @-@ General , Boutros Boutros @-@ Ghali , that Goldstone would serve only half of his four @-@ year term as prosecutor and would then return to take up his post in South Africa . The president rushed through a constitutional amendment that would allow Goldstone to be named , take an immediate period of leave to serve at the tribunal and then return to his spot on the Constitutional Court . He proved to be an ideal candidate , as he had been suggested by the French , was not too hot @-@ headed for the British , was strong enough to satisfy the Americans and his credentials as a white South African who had opposed apartheid satisfied the Russians and Chinese . The UN Security Council unanimously approved his appointment to the rôle of prosecutor . 
 In his roles at the ICTY and ICTR he had to design prosecutorial strategies for both those ground @-@ breaking tribunals , from scratch . In doing so , he sought to be scrupulously even @-@ handed – a goal he was more easily able to achieve at ICTY than at ICTR . He built his strategy at both courts to a large degree on that pursued by the prosecutors at the Nuremberg Tribunal of 1945 – 46 . He served as the chief prosecutor of the two tribunals until September 1996 . Among his most notable legal achievements as chief prosecutor was securing the recognition of rape as a war crime under the Geneva Convention . 
 Goldstone was hindered by the inflexible bureaucracy of the UN , finding the newly established ICTY in a shambles when he joined the tribunal . The tribunal lacked political legitimacy , financial support and prosecutorial direction ; its failure to even bring any prosecutions had led to it being criticised by the media as " a fig leaf for inaction " , and Goldstone was asked by the former British prime minister Edward Heath : " Why did you accept such a ridiculous job ? " He had to make repeated appeals to the UN 's hierarchy and to donor nations for the equipment and funding that the tribunal needed to operate . He quickly found that the key to the job was to take " [ the ] big @-@ picture diplomatic role and [ recognise ] that the hands @-@ on prosecution work could be pushed down to experienced prosecutors and investigators like [ Graham ] Blewitt – at least for the time being . " He undertook a flurry of media appearances and financial negotiations that led to the tribunal being properly staffed for the first time , with many staff being recruited through his own personal networks ; a budget of eight million dollars from thirteen countries , supplemented by a $ 300 @,@ 000 donation from George Soros ; and the first indictment , of Bosnian Serb prison camp guard Duško Tadić . 
 Another problem Goldstone faced was the reluctance of NATO peacekeeping forces in Bosnia to apprehend war crimes suspects . He was bitterly critical of what he called the " highly inappropriate and <unk> policy " of Western countries in declining to pursue suspected war criminals , singling out France and the United Kingdom as particular culprits . By the end of his time as prosecutor he had issued 74 indictments but only seven of the accused had been apprehended . 
 Goldstone was instrumental in preventing the Dayton Agreement of December 1995 including amnesty provisions for those accused of war crimes in the former Yugoslavia . Some commentators had advocated including an amnesty as the price for peace ; Goldstone was resolutely opposed to this , not only because it would enable those responsible for atrocities to escape justice but also because of the dangerous precedent it could set , where powerful actors such as the United States could bargain away the ICTY 's mandate for political convenience . In response , Goldstone pushed through a new indictment of the Bosnian Serb president Radovan Karadžić and his army chief Ratko Mladić for the Srebrenica massacre , which was issued two weeks into the peace talks at Dayton . He lobbied President Bill Clinton to resist any such demands and made it clear that an amnesty would not be a legal basis for the ICTY to suspend indictments . In the end , no amnesty was included in the Dayton Agreement . Goldstone 's actions were later credited with making the negotiations a success . The chief US negotiator , Richard Holbrooke , described the tribunal as " a huge valuable tool " which had enabled Karadžić and Mladić to be excluded from the talks , with the Serbian side represented instead by the more conciliatory <unk> . The Dayton Agreement put direct responsibility on all sides to send suspects to The Hague , committing the Serbian , Bosnian and Croatian governments to cooperating with the ICTY in future . 
 When he retired from the Office of the Prosecutor in 1996 , Goldstone was replaced by the distinguished Canadian lawyer Louise Arbour . His contribution was praised by colleagues at the ICTY : " Goldstone was absolutely right for his time because he came with moral clout from South Africa and his own particular status as a champion of human rights . " 
 = = = Constitutional Court = = = 
 On his return from The Hague , Goldstone took up his seat on the Constitutional Court , which he held until retiring in 2003 . Justice Albie Sachs described Goldstone as representing " a sense of continuity " between the traditions of the past that managed to survive the years of apartheid , and the whole new era of the constitution that governs South Africa today . 
 = = = Argentina = = = 
 He was a member of the International Panel of the Commission of Enquiry into the Activities of Nazism in Argentina ( <unk> ) which was established in 1997 to identify Nazi war criminals who had emigrated to Argentina , and transferred victim assets ( Nazi gold ) there . 
 = = = Kosovo = = = 
 Goldstone was chair of the Independent International Commission on Kosovo from August 1999 until December 2001 . 
 = = = Volcker Committee = = = 
 In April 2004 , he was appointed by Kofi Annan , the UN Secretary General , to the Independent Inquiry Committee , chaired by Paul Volcker , to investigate the Iraq Oil for Food program . 
 = = = UN Fact @-@ Finding Mission on the Gaza Conflict = = = 
 During the Gaza War between Israel and Hamas in December 2008 – January 2009 , the UN Human Rights Council ( UNHRC ) passed a resolution condemning Israel for " grave violations " of human rights and calling for an independent international investigation . The UNHRC appointed a four @-@ person team , headed by Goldstone , to investigate " all violations of international human rights law and international humanitarian law that might have been committed at any time in the context of the military operations that were conducted in Gaza during the period from 27 December 2008 and 18 January 2009 , whether before , during or after . " 
 According to a report in Reuters , Goldstone said he had spent many days and " sleepless nights " deciding whether to accept the mandate , saying that it had come as " quite a shock " . He continued , " I can approach the daunting task I have accepted in an even @-@ handed and impartial manner and give it the same attention that I have to situations in my own country , " where his experience had been that " transparent , public investigations are very important , important particularly for the victims because it brings acknowledgement of what happened to them . " He explained that he had long " taken a deep interest in Israel , in what happens in Israel , and I have been associated with organisations that have worked in Israel " and " decided to accept it because of my deep concern for peace in the Middle East , and my deep concern for victims in all sides in the Middle East . " 
 Goldstone insisted that he would not follow a one @-@ sided mandate but would investigate any abuses committed by either side during the conflict . He said that he had initially not been willing to take on the mission unless the mandate was expanded to cover all sides . Despite then @-@ president of the Human Rights Council , Ambassador Martin <unk> 's verbal commitment that there was no objection to the revised mandate , the Human Rights Council never voted to revise the mandate , and resolution S @-@ 9 / 1 remained unchanged . 
 The Israeli government refused to cooperate with the investigation , accusing the UN Human Rights Council of anti @-@ Israel bias and arguing that the report could not possibly be fair . 
 In a 20 January 2011 panel discussion at Stanford University , Goldstone said that the UNHRC " repeatedly rush to pass condemnatory resolutions in the face of alleged violations of human rights law by Israel but ... have failed to take similar action in the face of even more serious violations by other States . Until the Gaza Report they failed to condemn the firing of rockets and mortars at Israeli civilian centers . " 
 The report , released on 15 September 2009 , concluded that both sides had committed violations of the laws of war . It stated that Israel had used disproportionate force , targeted Palestinian civilians , used them as human shields and destroyed civilian infrastructure . Hamas and other armed Palestinian groups were found to have deliberately targeted Israeli civilians and sought to spread terror in southern Israel by mounting indiscriminate rocket attacks . The report 's conclusions were endorsed by the UN Human Rights Council . 
 On 16 October 2009 , UN Human Rights Council voted in support of the Goldstone Report where twenty @-@ five member nations voted in favour of the resolution endorsing the report , six voted against endorsement while another eleven remained impartial . Goldstone has criticised the United Nations Human Rights Council 's selective endorsement of the report his commission compiled , since the resolution adopted chastises Israel only , when the report itself is critical of both parties . 
 The Israeli government and some Jewish groups strongly criticised the report , which they asserted was biased and commissioned by a UN body that was hostile to Israel . Hamas also dismissed the findings that it had committed war crimes . Goldstone himself came under sustained personal attack , with critics accusing him of bias , dishonesty and improper motives in being party to the report . Goldstone denied the accusations , saying he felt that being a Jew increased his obligation to participate in the investigation . 
 In a 1 April 2011 article in the Washington Post reflecting on the Commission 's work , Goldstone wrote that the report would have been different if he had been aware of information that has become known since its issuance . While expressing regret that Israel 's failure to co @-@ operate with the Commission had hindered its ability to gather exculpatory facts , he approved Israel 's subsequent internal investigations into incidents described in the report as well as their establishment of policies to better protect civilians in future conflicts . He contrasted the Israeli reaction with the failure of Hamas to investigate or modify their methods and procedures . Goldstone said he had hoped that the Commission 's inquiry " would begin a new era of <unk> at the U.N. Human Rights Council , whose history of bias against Israel cannot be doubted " . In addition , according to a report in Haaretz , Goldstone told associates in early 2011 that " he has been in great distress and under duress " ever since publication of his report . 
 = = Academic and charity activities = = 
 In March 1996 , Goldstone was named chancellor of the University of the Witwatersrand in Johannesburg . He served for two terms , stepping down in September 2006 . In October 2003 , Goldstone gave a lecture entitled " Preventing Deadly Conflict " at the University of San Diego 's Joan B. Kroc Institute for Peace & Justice Distinguished Lecture Series . He was a Global Visiting Professor of Law at New York University School of Law in spring 2004 , and in the fall , he was the William Hughes Mulligan Visiting Professor at Fordham University School of Law . In spring 2005 , he was the Henry Shattuck Visiting Professor Law at Harvard Law School . Goldstone participated as guest faculty in the Oxford @-@ George Washington International Human Rights Program in 2005 . 
 Goldstone was named the 2007 Weissberg Distinguished Professor of International Studies at Beloit College , in Beloit , Wisconsin . From 17 – 28 January 2007 he visited classes , worked with faculty and students , participated in panel discussions on human rights and transitional justice with leading figures in the field and delivered the annual Weissberg Lecture , " South Africa 's Transition to Democracy : The Role of the Constitutional Court " on 24 January at the Moore Lounge in Pearsons Hall . In Fall 2007 he was the William Hughes Mulligan Professor of International Law at Fordham University School of Law , and held that position again in Fall 2009 . Fordham Law presented him with a Doctor of Laws , honoris causa , in 2007 , the highest honor the school can bestow . Goldstone also was the Woodrow Wilson Visiting Scholar in Political Science at Washington & Jefferson College in 2009 . 
 From 2004 through 2008 , in addition to his teaching appointments , Goldstone was the chair of the Advisory Committee to the Institute for Historical Justice and Reconciliation . In 2008 , the Institute became an independent entity , with Goldstone as its chairman . He also continues as a member of the board of directors of the Salzburg Global Seminar . Goldstone serves as a trustee for Link @-@ SA , a charity which funds the tertiary education of South Africans from impoverished backgrounds . 
 Goldstone serves on the Board of Directors of several nonprofit organisations that promote justice , including Physicians for Human Rights , the International Center for Transitional Justice , the Institute for Justice and Reconciliation , the South African Legal Services Foundation , the Brandeis University Center for Ethics , Justice , and Public Life , Human Rights Watch , and the Center for Economic and Social Rights . Goldstone was president of the Jewish training and education charity World ORT between 1997 and 2004 . He was an honorary member of the Board of Governors of Hebrew University for over ten years prior to June 2010 , when the University announced he had been dropped from the Board due to inactivity " for a decade or more " . In April 2010 , Jerusalem lawyer David Schonberg had requested Goldstone be removed from the Board because of the UN report on Gaza . A University spokesperson stated that removing inactive members was a routine procedure , that other inactive members had also been removed , and that Goldstone 's removal had " nothing to do with his Report about Gaza " . 
 = = Awards and honours = = 
 Goldstone has received the 1994 International Human Rights Award of the American Bar Association , the 2005 Thomas J. Dodd Prize in International Justice and Human Rights , and the 2009 MacArthur Award for International Justice , announced by the John D. and Catherine T. MacArthur Foundation . 
 He holds honorary degrees from Hebrew University , the University of Notre Dame , the University of Maryland , and the Universities of Cape Town , British Columbia , Glasgow , and Calgary among others . He was the first person to be granted the title , " The Hague Peace Philosopher " in 2009 , as part of the new Spinoza Fellowship of The Hague , the Netherlands Institute for Advanced Study in the Humanities and Social Sciences ( <unk> ) , Radio Netherlands , and The Hague Campus of Leiden University . He is an honorary fellow of St John 's College , Cambridge , an honorary member of the Association of the Bar of the City of New York , a foreign member of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences . Goldstone was a fellow of the Weatherhead Center for International Affairs at Harvard University in 1989 . 
 = = Publications = = 
 = = = Books = = = 
 International judicial institutions : the architecture of international justice at home and abroad , co @-@ authored with Adam M. Smith . London and New York : Routledge , 2009 . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 415 @-@ <unk> @-@ 5 ( hardback ) ; ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 415 @-@ <unk> @-@ 2 ( paperback . ) 
 For humanity : reflections of a war crimes investigator . New Haven , Connecticut : Yale University Press , 2000 . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 300 @-@ <unk> @-@ 0 
 Do judges speak out ? . Johannesburg : South African Institute of Race Relations , 1993 . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ <unk> @-@ 431 @-@ 3 
 = = = Lectures = = = 
 The Future of International Criminal Justice in the Lecture Series of the United Nations Audiovisual Library of International Law 
 The Developing Global Rule of Law in the Lecture Series of the United Nations Audiovisual Library of International Law 
 = = = Contributions to edited volumes , and forewords to books by others = = = 
 Goldstone , Richard J. ( 1996 ) . " From the Holocaust : Some Legal and Moral Implications " . In Rosenbaum , Alan S. Is the Holocaust Unique ? : Perspectives on Comparative Genocide ( 3rd ed . ) . Boulder , Colorado : Westview Press ( published 2008 ) . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 8133 @-@ 4406 @-@ 5 . 
 Goldstone , Richard ( 2005 ) . " The Tension Between Combating Terrorism and Protecting Civil Liberties " . In Wilson , Richard Ashby . Human Rights in the ' War on Terror ' . Cambridge University Press . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 521 @-@ <unk> @-@ 4 . 
 Goldstone has written forewords to books including Martha Minow 's Between Vengeance and Forgiveness : Facing History after Genocide and Mass Violence ( ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 8070 @-@ <unk> @-@ 7 ) and War Crimes : The Legacy of Nuremberg ( ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 8133 @-@ 4406 @-@ 5 ) , which examines the political and legal influence of the Nuremberg trials on contemporary war crime proceedings . 
 Goldstone , writing in The New York Times in October 2011 , said that " in Israel , there is no apartheid . Nothing there comes close to the definition of apartheid under the 1998 Rome Statute . " 
 = Big Fish = 
 Big Fish is a 2003 American fantasy drama film based on the 1998 novel of the same name by Daniel Wallace . The film was directed by Tim Burton and stars Ewan McGregor , Albert Finney , Billy Crudup , Jessica Lange , and Marion Cotillard . Other roles are performed by Helena Bonham Carter , Matthew McGrory , and Danny DeVito among others . Edward Bloom ( Finney ) , a former traveling salesman in the Southern United States with a gift for storytelling , is now confined to his deathbed . Will ( Crudup ) , his estranged son , attempts to mend their relationship as Bloom relates tall tales of his eventful life as a young adult ( portrayed by Ewan McGregor in the flashback scenes ) . 
 Screenwriter John August read a manuscript of the novel six months before it was published and convinced Columbia Pictures to acquire the rights . August began adapting the novel while producers negotiated with Steven Spielberg who planned to direct after finishing Minority Report ( 2002 ) . Spielberg considered Jack Nicholson for the role of Edward Bloom , but eventually dropped the project to focus on Catch Me If You Can ( 2002 ) . Tim Burton and Richard D. Zanuck took over after completing Planet of the Apes ( 2001 ) and brought Ewan McGregor and Albert Finney on board . 
 The film 's theme of reconciliation between a dying father and his son had special significance for Burton , as his father had died in 2000 and his mother in 2002 , a month before he signed on to direct . Big Fish was shot on location in Alabama in a series of fairy tale vignettes evoking the tone of a Southern Gothic fantasy . The film received award nominations in multiple film categories , including four Golden Globe Award nominations , seven nominations from the British Academy of Film and Television Arts , two Saturn Award nominations , and an Oscar and a Grammy Award nomination for Danny Elfman 's original score . 
 = = Plot = = 
 At Will ’ s wedding party , Edward Bloom recalls the day Will was born , claiming he caught an enormous catfish using his wedding ring as bait . Will , having heard these stories all his life , believes them to be lies and falls out with his father . Three years later , Edward is stricken with cancer , so Will and his pregnant French wife Joséphine return to his childhood home in Alabama to spend time with his father . Edward ’ s life is told through flashbacks , beginning with his encounter with a witch in his hometown , Ashton . She shows him his death but he reacts to it without fear . As he grows into adulthood , he finds his home too confining , and sets out into the world with a misunderstood giant , Karl , who has come to town with a traveling circus . 
 Edward and Karl find a fork in the road and travel down separate paths . Edward follows a path through a swamp and discovers the secret town of Spectre , the cheery locals claiming he was expected . There , he befriends Ashton poet <unk> Winslow and the mayor ’ s daughter Jenny . However , Edward leaves Spectre , unwilling to settle down but promises Jenny he will return . In the present day , Joséphine speaks to the bed @-@ ridden Edward and asks him to tell her the story of how he met his wife Sandra , with Will listening outside the door . Returning to his reminisces , Edward reunites with Karl and they visit the Calloway Circus , where Edward falls in love with a beautiful woman . Karl and Edward get jobs in the circus where the ringmaster Amos Calloway reveals to Edward one detail about the woman at the end of every month . 
 Three years later , Edward discovers that Amos is secretly a werewolf but shows no ill @-@ will towards his employer . Amos , upon returning to normal , reveals the woman is Sandra , and she attends Auburn University . Edward confesses his love to Sandra , but she declines his wedding proposal despite numerous romantic gestures . He then learns she is already engaged to Don Price , a fellow Ashton citizen . Don beats Edward in a fight , prompting Sandra to break off their engagement and marry Edward . Shortly after , Edward is conscripted into the army and sent to fight in the Korean War . He parachutes into the middle of a North Korean military show , steals important documents , and convinces Siamese twins Ping and Jing to help him go home in exchange for making them celebrities . 
 Upon returning home , Edward becomes a travelling salesman and crosses paths with Winslow , unwittingly helping him rob a failing bank , inspiring the poet to work on Wall Street . In the present , Will investigates the truth behind his father ’ s tales and travels to Spectre . He meets an older Jenny , who explains that Edward rescued the town from bankruptcy and rebuilt it with help from his friends from Calloway Circus . Will suggests that Jenny had an affair with his father , but she reveals while she loved Edward , he remained loyal to Sandra . Will returns home but learns Edward has had a stroke and stays with him at the hospital . 
 Edward wakes up but , unable to speak much , asks Will to narrate how his life ends . Though struggling , Will tells his father of their imagined daring escape from the hospital to the nearby lake , where everyone from Edward ’ s past is there to see him off . Will takes Edward into the river , where he transforms into the giant catfish and swims away . A satisfied Edward dies , knowing Will understands his love for storytelling . At the funeral , Will and Joséphine are surprised when all the people from Edward ’ s stories come to the service , though each one is a slightly less fantastical version than described . Will , finally understanding his father ’ s love for life , passes on Edward ’ s stories to his own son . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Ewan McGregor as young Edward Bloom 
 Perry Walston as 10 @-@ year old Edward Bloom 
 Albert Finney as old Edward Bloom 
 Billy Crudup as Will Bloom 
 Grayson Stone as 6 – 8 @-@ year old Will Bloom 
 Jessica Lange as Sandra K. Bloom , Edward 's dream girl and wife 
 Helena Bonham Carter as Jenny Hill . Bonham Carter also plays an elderly witch who gives a young Bloom a vision of his future death in her evil eye . 
 Hailey Anne Nelson as 8 @-@ year @-@ old Jenny Hill 
 Alison Lohman as the young Sandra , née Templeton 
 Robert Guillaume as Dr. Bennett , the family doctor 
 Karlos <unk> as young Dr. Bennett 
 Marion Cotillard as Joséphine Bloom 
 Matthew McGrory as Karl , the misunderstood giant 
 David Denman as Don Price , Sandra Templeton 's boyfriend when Edward meets her 
 John Lowell as 12 @-@ year old Don Price 
 Loudon Wainwright III as <unk> , the mayor of Spectre , and Jenny 's father 
 Missi Pyle as Mildred , <unk> 's wife 
 Ada Tai and Arlene Tai as Ping and Jing , conjoined twins who perform as singers for soldiers in North Korea 
 Steve Buscemi as <unk> Winslow , a poet from Ashton who supposedly went missing , having never left the idyllic town of Spectre 
 Danny DeVito as Amos Calloway , a circus ringmaster and werewolf 
 Bevin Kaye as River Woman ( Fish ) 
 Miley Cyrus as 8 @-@ year @-@ old Ruthie ( credited as Destiny Cyrus ) 
 Daniel Wallace as Economics teacher 
 Deep Roy as Mr. <unk> , the circus clown and Calloway 's attorney 
 George McArthur as Colossus , former giant in the circus , replaced by Karl 
 = = Themes = = 
 The reconciliation of the father @-@ son relationship between Edward and William is the key theme in Big Fish . Novelist Daniel Wallace 's interest in the theme of the father @-@ son relationship began with his own family . Wallace found the " charming " character of Edward Bloom similar to his father , who used charm to keep his distance from other people . In the film , Will believes Edward has never been honest with him because Edward creates extravagant myths about his past to hide himself , using storytelling as an avoidance mechanism . Edward 's stories are filled with fairy tale characters ( a witch , mermaid , giant , and werewolf ) and places ( the circus , small towns , the mythological city of Spectre ) , all of which are classic images and archetypes . The quest motif propels both Edward 's story and Will 's attempt to get to the bottom of it . Wallace explains : " The father 's quest is to be a big fish in a big pond , and the son 's quest is to see through his tall tales . " 
 Screenwriter John August identified with Will 's character and adapted it after himself . In college , August 's father died , and like Will , August had attempted to get to know him before his death , but found it difficult . Like Will , August had studied journalism and was 28 years old . In the film , Will says of Edward , " I didn 't see anything of myself in my father , and I don 't think he saw anything of himself in me . We were like strangers who knew each other very well . " Will 's description of his relationship with Edward closely resembled August 's own relationship with his father . Burton also used the film to confront his thoughts and emotions concerning the death of his father in 2000 : " My father had been ill for a while ... I tried to get in touch with him , to have , like in this film , some sort of resolution , but it was impossible . " 
 Religion and film scholar Kent L. <unk> observes how the father @-@ son relationship resolves itself at the end of the film . As Edward dies , Will finally lets go of his anger and begins to understand his father for the first time : 
 In a final gesture of love and comprehension , after a lifetime of despising his father 's stories and his father as story @-@ teller , Will finishes the story his father has begun , pulling together the themes , images and characters of his father 's storied life to blend reality and fantasy in act of communion and care . By unselfishly releasing the anger he has held about his father 's stories , Will gains the understanding that all we are our stories and that his father 's stories gave him a reality and substance and a dimension that was as real , genuine , and deep as the day @-@ to @-@ day experiences that Will sought out . Will comes to understand , then , that his father — and the rest of us — are our stories and that the deeper reality of our lives may , in fact , not be our truest self . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 About six months before it was published , screenwriter John August read a manuscript of Big Fish : A Novel of Mythic <unk> ( 1998 ) by author Daniel Wallace . August read the unpublished novel following the death of his father . In September 1998 , August convinced Columbia Pictures to acquire the film rights on his behalf . August worked hard to make the episodic book into a cohesive screenplay , deciding on several narrators for the script . In August 2000 , producers Bruce Cohen and Dan Jinks began discussions for Steven Spielberg to direct . Spielberg planned to have DreamWorks co @-@ finance and distribute Big Fish with Columbia , and planned to have filming start in late 2001 , after completing Minority Report ( 2002 ) . 
 Spielberg courted Jack Nicholson for the role of Edward Bloom , Sr. and towards this end , had August compose two additional drafts for Nicholson 's part . August recalls : " There was this thought that there wasn 't enough for Jack Nicholson to do in the movie so we built new sequences . Pieces got moved around , but it wasn 't a lot of new stuff being created . It ended up being a really good intellectual exercise in my explaining and defending and <unk> pieces of the story . " Spielberg eventually left Big Fish when he became distracted with Catch Me If You Can ( 2002 ) , and DreamWorks also backed out of the film . 
 With Spielberg no closer to committing , August , working with Jinks and Cohen , considered Stephen Daldry as a potential director . " Once Steven decided he wasn 't going to do it , we put the script back to the way it was , " recalls Jinks . " Steven even said , ' I think I made a mistake with a couple of things I asked you guys to try . ' " August took his favorite elements from the previous drafts , coming up with what he called " a best @-@ of Big Fish script . " By the time we approached Tim Burton , the script was in the best shape it had ever been . " 
 Burton had never been particularly close to his parents , but his father 's death in October 2000 and his mother 's in March 2002 affected him deeply . Following the production of Planet of the Apes ( 2001 ) , the director wanted to get back to making a smaller film . Burton enjoyed the script , feeling that it was the first unique story he was offered since Beetlejuice ( 1988 ) . Burton also found appeal in the story 's combination of an emotional drama with exaggerated tall tales , which allowed him to tell various stories of different genres . He signed to direct in April 2002 , which prompted Richard D. Zanuck , who worked with Burton on Planet of the Apes , to join Big Fish as a producer . Zanuck also had a difficult relationship with his own father , Darryl F. Zanuck , who once fired him as head of production at 20th Century Fox . 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 For the role of Edward Bloom , Burton spoke with Jack Nicholson , Spielberg 's initial choice for the role . Burton had previously worked with Nicholson on Batman ( 1989 ) and Mars Attacks ! ( 1996 ) . In order to depict Nicholson as the young Bloom , Burton intended to use a combination of computer @-@ generated imagery and prosthetic makeup . The director then decided to cast around for the two actors in question . Jinks and Cohen , who were then working with Ewan McGregor on Down with Love ( 2003 ) , suggested that Burton cast both McGregor and Albert Finney for Edward . Burton later compared McGregor 's acting style to regular colleague Johnny Depp . Viewing Finney 's performance in Tom Jones ( 1963 ) , Burton found him similar to McGregor , and coincidentally found a People magazine article comparing the two . McGregor , being Scottish , found it easier performing with a Southern American English accent . " It 's a much easier accent to do than a standard American accent because you can really hear it . You can get your teeth into it . Standard American is much harder because it 's more lyrical . " The same dual casting applied to the role of Bloom 's wife , Sandra , who would be played by Jessica Lange and Alison Lohman . Burton commented that he was impressed with Lohman 's performance in White Oleander ( 2002 ) . Burton 's girlfriend , Helena Bonham Carter , was also cast in two roles . Her prosthetic makeup for The Witch took five hours to apply . " I was pregnant throughout filming , so it was weird being a pregnant witch , " the actress reflected . " I had morning sickness , so all those fumes and the make @-@ up and the rubber ... it was hideous . " 
 Burton personalized the film with several cameos . While filming in Alabama , the crew tracked down Billy Redden , one of the original banjo players from Deliverance ( 1972 ) . Redden was working as a part @-@ owner of a restaurant in Clayton , Georgia , and he agreed to reprise his role in the Spectre vignette . As Edward Bloom first enters the town , Redden can be seen on a porch plucking a few notes from " Dueling Banjos " . Burton was pleased with the result : " If you 're watching the film and don 't recognise the solitary , enigmatic figure on the porch , that 's fine . But if you do – well , it just makes me so happy to see him and I think other people will feel the same way . " Original Big Fish author Daniel Wallace makes a brief appearance as Sandra 's economics teacher in the " Courtship of Sandra Templeton " scene . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 Burton planned to start filming in October 2002 , but principal photography in Alabama did not begin until January 13 , 2003 . Apart from filming in Paris for one week in May , Big Fish was entirely shot in Alabama , mostly in <unk> and Montgomery ( such as the Cloverdale neighborhood ) Brief filming also took place in Tallassee and on the campus of Huntingdon College . Scenes for the town of Spectre were filmed on a custom set located on an island in Lake Jackson between Montgomery and Millbrook , Alabama , adjacent to the Alabama River . Principal photography for Big Fish in Alabama continued until the first week of <unk> and is estimated to have generated as much as $ 25 million for the local economy . 
 Burton filmed all the dramatic hospital scenes and most of those involving Finney first , before moving on to the McGregor section of Bloom 's life . Although McGregor was on set from the beginning of filming , Burton chose to shoot all Finney 's scenes first . Location filming in Alabama was delayed by inclement weather ; during the Calloway circus scenes filming , a tornado watch was issued and flooding on the set interrupted filming for several weeks . Despite the delays , Burton delivered the film on budget and on schedule . 
 The director attempted to limit the use of digital effects . However , because he wanted to evoke a Southern Gothic fantasy tone for Big Fish , color grading techniques were applied by Sony Pictures Imageworks . Stan Winston Studios , with whom Burton worked with on Edward Scissorhands ( 1990 ) and Batman Returns ( 1992 ) , designed Helena Bonham Carter 's prosthetic makeup and created the animatronics . Scenes with Karl the Giant were commissioned using forced perspective filmmaking . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 The soundtrack was composed by regular Burton collaborator Danny Elfman . Burton approached Pearl Jam during post @-@ production to request an original song for the soundtrack and closing credits . After screening an early print of the film , Pearl Jam vocalist Eddie Vedder wrote " Man of the Hour " , completing the demo by the next day . It was recorded by the band four days later . Guitarist Mike McCready stated , " We were so blown away by the movie ... Eddie and I were standing around talking about it afterwards and were teary @-@ eyed . We were so emotionally charged and moved by the imagination and humanity that we felt because of the movie . " 
 = = Release = = 
 Columbia Pictures planned to wide release Big Fish in the United States on November 26 , 2003 before pushing it back to December 10 for a limited release . The film premiered on December 4 , 2003 at the Hammerstein Ballroom in Manhattan . The domestic wide release in the US came on January 9 , 2004 , with the film appearing in 2 @,@ 406 theaters and earning $ 13 @.@ 81 million in its opening weekend . The film eventually grossed $ 66 @.@ 81 million in U.S. totals and $ 56 @.@ 11 million in foreign countries , with a total of $ 122 @.@ 92 million worldwide . 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 Big Fish received positive reviews from film critics . Based on 212 reviews collected by Rotten Tomatoes , 77 % of the critics positively reviewed Big Fish , for an average score of 7 @.@ 2 / 10 . Metacritic calculated an average score of 58 / 100 , based on 43 reviews . 
 Observations modeled the film after Forrest Gump ( 1994 ) . " Big Fish turns into a wide @-@ eyed Southern Gothic picaresque in which each lunatic twist of a development is more enchanting than the last , " Owen Gleiberman of Entertainment Weekly wrote . " It 's like Forrest Gump without the bogus theme @-@ park politics . " Peter Travers from Rolling Stone magazine praised Burton 's direction , feeling it was a celebration of the art of storytelling and a touching father – son drama . 
 Mike Clark of USA Today commented that he was most fascinated by the casting choices . " Equally delightful is the Alison Lohman character 's evolution into an older woman ( Jessica Lange ) . It 's a metamorphosis to equal any in screen history . " Internet reviewer James Berardinelli found the fairy tale approach reminiscent of The Princess Bride ( 1987 ) and the films of Terry Gilliam . " Big Fish is a clever , smart fantasy that targets the child inside every adult , " Berardinelli said , " without insulting the intelligence of either . " Roger Ebert , in a mixed review , wrote " there is no denying that Will has a point : The old man is a blowhard . There is a point at which his stories stop working as entertainment and segue into sadism . " Richard Corliss of Time magazine was disappointed , finding the father @-@ son reconciliation storyline to be over @-@ dramatically cliché . " You recall The Boy Who Cried Wolf ? Edward Bloom is the man who cried fish . " Big Fish was # 85 on Slant Magazine 's best films of the 2000s . 
 = = = Home media = = = 
 The Region 1 DVD was released on April 27 , 2004 , and Region 2 was released on June 7 . The DVD features a Burton audio commentary track , seven featurettes and a trivia quiz . A special edition was released on November 1 , 2005 , with a 24 @-@ page hardback book entitled Fairy Tale for a Grown Up . The film was released on Blu @-@ ray Disc on March 20 , 2007 . 
 = = Accolades = = 
 Big Fish received four nominations at the 61st Golden Globe Awards ( but no winners ) for Best Motion Picture ( Musical or Comedy ) , Best Supporting Actor ( Finney ) , Best Original Score and Best Original Song ( Pearl Jam 's " Man of the Hour " ) . 
 At the 57th British Academy Film Awards , the film received seven nominations from the British Academy of Film and Television Arts , including Best Film , Best Direction ( Tim Burton ) , Best Adapted Screenplay ( John August ) , Best Actor in a Supporting Role ( Albert Finney ) , Best Production Design ( Dennis Gassner ) , Best Visual Effects ( Kevin Scott Mack , Seth Maury , Lindsay MacGowan , Paddy Eason ) as well as Best Makeup and Hair ( Jean Ann Black and Paul LeBlanc ) . 
 Finney received another nomination for Best Actor at the 30th Saturn Awards , where the film was also nominated for Best Fantasy Film . 
 At the 76th Academy Awards , Danny Elfman was nominated for the Academy Award for Best Original Score . In 2005 , Elfman received a nomination at the 47th Grammy Awards for the Best Score Soundtrack Album for a Motion Picture . 
 = Angkor Wat = 
 Angkor Wat ( Khmer : <unk> ្ <unk> ្ <unk> or " Capital Temple " ) is a temple complex in Cambodia and the largest religious monument in the world , with the site measuring 162 @.@ 6 hectares ( 1 @,@ 626 @,@ 000 m2 ; 402 acres ) . It was originally constructed as a Hindu temple for the Khmer Empire , gradually transforming into a Buddhist temple toward the end of the 12th century . It was built by the Khmer King Suryavarman II in the early 12th century in <unk> ( Khmer : <unk> , present @-@ day Angkor ) , the capital of the Khmer Empire , as his state temple and eventual mausoleum . Breaking from the Shaiva tradition of previous kings , Angkor Wat was instead dedicated to Vishnu . As the best @-@ preserved temple at the site , it is the only one to have remained a significant religious center since its foundation . The temple is at the top of the high classical style of Khmer architecture . It has become a symbol of Cambodia , appearing on its national flag , and it is the country 's prime attraction for visitors . 
 Angkor Wat combines two basic plans of Khmer temple architecture : the temple @-@ mountain and the later galleried temple . It is designed to represent Mount Meru , home of the devas in Hindu mythology : within a moat and an outer wall 3 @.@ 6 kilometres ( 2 @.@ 2 mi ) long are three rectangular galleries , each raised above the next . At the centre of the temple stands a quincunx of towers . Unlike most Angkorian temples , Angkor Wat is oriented to the west ; scholars are divided as to the significance of this . The temple is admired for the grandeur and harmony of the architecture , its extensive bas @-@ reliefs , and for the numerous devatas adorning its walls . 
 The modern name , Angkor Wat , means " Temple City " or " City of Temples " in Khmer ; Angkor , meaning " city " or " capital city " , is a vernacular form of the word <unk> ( <unk> ) , which comes from the Sanskrit word nagara ( Devanāgarī : <unk> ) . Wat is the Khmer word for " temple grounds " , also derived from Sanskrit <unk> ( Devanāgarī : <unk> ) , meaning " enclosure " . 
 = = History = = 
 Angkor Wat lies 5 @.@ 5 kilometres ( 3 @.@ 4 mi ) north of the modern town of Siem Reap , and a short distance south and slightly east of the previous capital , which was centred at <unk> . In an area of Cambodia where there is an important group of ancient structures , it is the southernmost of Angkor 's main sites . 
 According to legend , the construction of Angkor Wat was ordered by Indra to act as a palace for his son <unk> <unk> <unk> . According to the 13th century Chinese traveler <unk> Zhou , it was believed by some that the temple was constructed in a single night by a divine architect . 
 The initial design and construction of the temple took place in the first half of the 12th century , during the reign of Suryavarman II ( ruled 1113 – c . 1150 ) . Dedicated to Vishnu , it was built as the king 's state temple and capital city . As neither the foundation stela nor any contemporary inscriptions referring to the temple have been found , its original name is unknown , but it may have been known as " Varah Vishnu @-@ <unk> " after the presiding deity . Work seems to have ended shortly after the king 's death , leaving some of the bas @-@ relief decoration unfinished . In 1177 , approximately 27 years after the death of Suryavarman II , Angkor was sacked by the Chams , the traditional enemies of the Khmer . Thereafter the empire was restored by a new king , Jayavarman VII , who established a new capital and state temple ( Angkor Thom and the Bayon respectively ) a few kilometers to the north . 
 Toward the end of the 12th century , Angkor Wat gradually transformed from a Hindu center of worship to Buddhism , which continues to the present day . Angkor Wat is unusual among the Angkor temples in that although it was somewhat neglected after the 16th century it was never completely abandoned , its preservation being due in part to the fact that its moat also provided some protection from encroachment by the jungle . 
 One of the first Western visitors to the temple was António da Madalena , a Portuguese monk who visited in 1586 and said that it " is of such extraordinary construction that it is not possible to describe it with a pen , particularly since it is like no other building in the world . It has towers and decoration and all the refinements which the human genius can conceive of . " 
 By the 17th century , Angkor Wat was not completely abandoned and functioned as a Buddhist temple . Fourteen inscriptions dated from the 17th century discovered in Angkor area , testify to Japanese Buddhist pilgrims that might had established small settlements alongside Khmer locals . At that time , the temple was thought by the Japanese visitors as the famed Jetavana garden of the Buddha , which originally located in the kingdom of Magadha , India . The best @-@ known inscription tells of <unk> <unk> , who celebrated the Khmer New Year at Angkor Wat in 1632 . 
 In the mid @-@ 19th century , the temple was visited by the French naturalist and explorer , Henri Mouhot , who popularised the site in the West through the publication of travel notes , in which he wrote : 
 " One of these temples — a rival to that of Solomon , and erected by some ancient Michelangelo — might take an honorable place beside our most beautiful buildings . It is grander than anything left to us by Greece or Rome , and presents a sad contrast to the state of barbarism in which the nation is now plunged . " 
 Mouhot , like other early Western visitors , found it difficult to believe that the Khmers could have built the temple , and mistakenly dated it to around the same era as Rome . The true history of Angkor Wat was pieced together only from stylistic and epigraphic evidence accumulated during the subsequent clearing and restoration work carried out across the whole Angkor site . There were no ordinary dwellings or houses or other signs of settlement including cooking utensils , weapons , or items of clothing usually found at ancient sites . Instead there is the evidence of the monuments themselves . 
 Angkor Wat required considerable restoration in the 20th century , mainly the removal of accumulated earth and vegetation . Work was interrupted by the civil war and Khmer Rouge control of the country during the 1970s and 1980s , but relatively little damage was done during this period . Camping Khmer Rouge forces used whatever wood remained in the building structures for firewood , a pavilion was ruined by a stray American shell , and a shoot @-@ out between Khmer Rouge and Vietnamese forces put a few bullet holes in a bas relief . Far more damage was done after the wars , by art thieving working out of Thailand , which , in the late 1980s and early 1990s , claimed almost every head that could be lopped off the structures , including reconstructions . 
 The temple is a powerful symbol of Cambodia , and is a source of great national pride that has factored into Cambodia 's diplomatic relations with France , the United States and its neighbor Thailand . A depiction of Angkor Wat has been a part of Cambodian national flags since the introduction of the first version circa 1863 . From a larger historical and even <unk> perspective , however , the temple of Angkor Wat did not become a symbol of national pride sui generis but had been inscribed into a larger politico @-@ cultural process of French @-@ colonial heritage production in which the original temple site was presented in French colonial and universal exhibitions in Paris and Marseille between 1889 and 1937 . Angkor Wat 's aesthetics were also on display in the plaster cast museum of Louis <unk> called musée Indo @-@ <unk> which existed in the Parisian Trocadero Palace from <unk> to the mid @-@ 1920s . 
 The splendid artistic legacy of Angkor Wat and other Khmer monuments in the Angkor region led directly to France adopting Cambodia as a protectorate on 11 August 1863 and invading Siam to take control of the ruins . This quickly led to Cambodia reclaiming lands in the northwestern corner of the country that had been under Siamese ( Thai ) control since 1351 AD ( <unk> Jumsai 2001 ) , or by some accounts , 1431 AD . Cambodia gained independence from France on 9 November 1953 and has controlled Angkor Wat since that time . It is safe to say that from the colonial period onwards until the site 's nomination as UNESCO World Heritage in 1992 , this specific temple of Angkor Wat was instrumental in the formation of the modern and gradually globalized concept of built cultural heritage . 
 In December 2015 , it was announced that a research team from University of Sydney had found a previously unseen ensemble of buried towers built and demolished during the construction of Angkor Wat , as well as massive structure of unknown purpose on its south side and wooden fortifications . The findings also include evidence of low @-@ density residential occupation in the region , with a road grid , ponds and mounds . These indicate that the temple precinct , bounded by moat and wall , may not have been used exclusively by the priestly elite , as was previously thought . The team used LiDAR , ground @-@ penetrating radar and targeted excavation to map Angkor Wat . 
 = = Architecture = = 
 = = = Site and plan = = = 
 Angkor Wat , located at 13 ° 24 ′ 45 ″ N 103 ° 52 ′ 0 ″ E , is a unique combination of the temple mountain ( the standard design for the empire 's state temples ) and the later plan of concentric galleries . The temple is a representation of Mount Meru , the home of the gods : the central quincunx of towers symbolises the five peaks of the mountain , and the walls and moat symbolise the surrounding mountain ranges and ocean . Access to the upper areas of the temple was progressively more exclusive , with the laity being admitted only to the lowest level . 
 Unlike most Khmer temples , Angkor Wat is oriented to the west rather than the east . This has led many ( including Maurice Glaize and George <unk> ) to conclude that Suryavarman intended it to serve as his funerary temple . Further evidence for this view is provided by the bas @-@ reliefs , which proceed in a counter @-@ clockwise direction — <unk> in Hindu terminology — as this is the reverse of the normal order . Rituals take place in reverse order during <unk> funeral services . The archaeologist Charles Higham also describes a container which may have been a funerary jar which was recovered from the central tower . It has been nominated by some as the greatest expenditure of energy on the disposal of a corpse . Freeman and Jacques , however , note that several other temples of Angkor depart from the typical eastern orientation , and suggest that Angkor Wat 's alignment was due to its dedication to Vishnu , who was associated with the west . 
 A further interpretation of Angkor Wat has been proposed by Eleanor Mannikka . Drawing on the temple 's alignment and dimensions , and on the content and arrangement of the bas @-@ reliefs , she argues that the structure represents a claimed new era of peace under King Suryavarman II : " as the measurements of solar and lunar time cycles were built into the sacred space of Angkor Wat , this divine mandate to rule was anchored to consecrated chambers and corridors meant to perpetuate the king 's power and to honor and placate the deities manifest in the heavens above . " Mannikka 's suggestions have been received with a mixture of interest and scepticism in academic circles . She distances herself from the speculations of others , such as Graham Hancock , that Angkor Wat is part of a representation of the constellation Draco . 
 = = = Style = = = 
 Angkor Wat is the prime example of the classical style of Khmer architecture — the Angkor Wat style — to which it has given its name . By the 12th century Khmer architects had become skilled and confident in the use of sandstone ( rather than brick or laterite ) as the main building material . Most of the visible areas are of sandstone blocks , while laterite was used for the outer wall and for hidden structural parts . The binding agent used to join the blocks is yet to be identified , although natural resins or slaked lime has been suggested . 
 The temple has drawn praise above all for the harmony of its design . According to Maurice Glaize , a mid @-@ 20th @-@ century conservator of Angkor , the temple " attains a classic perfection by the restrained monumentality of its finely balanced elements and the precise arrangement of its proportions . It is a work of power , unity and style . " 
 Architecturally , the elements characteristic of the style include : the ogival , <unk> towers shaped like lotus buds ; half @-@ galleries to broaden passageways ; axial galleries connecting enclosures ; and the cruciform terraces which appear along the main axis of the temple . Typical decorative elements are devatas ( or apsaras ) , bas @-@ reliefs , and on pediments extensive garlands and narrative scenes . The statuary of Angkor Wat is considered conservative , being more static and less graceful than earlier work . Other elements of the design have been destroyed by looting and the passage of time , including gilded stucco on the towers , gilding on some figures on the bas @-@ reliefs , and wooden ceiling panels and doors . 
 = = = Features = = = 
 = = = = Outer enclosure = = = = 
 The outer wall , 1 @,@ 024 m ( 3 @,@ 360 ft ) by 802 m ( 2 @,@ 631 ft ) and 4 @.@ 5 m ( 15 ft ) high , is surrounded by a 30 m ( 98 ft ) apron of open ground and a moat 190 m ( 620 ft ) wide . Access to the temple is by an earth bank to the east and a sandstone causeway to the west ; the latter , the main entrance , is a later addition , possibly replacing a wooden bridge . There are gopuras at each of the cardinal points ; the western is by far the largest and has three ruined towers . Glaize notes that this gopura both hides and echoes the form of the temple proper . Under the southern tower is a statue of Vishnu , known as Ta Reach , which may originally have occupied the temple 's central shrine . Galleries run between the towers and as far as two further entrances on either side of the gopura often referred to as " elephant gates " , as they are large enough to admit those animals . These galleries have square pillars on the outer ( west ) side and a closed wall on the inner ( east ) side . The ceiling between the pillars is decorated with lotus rosettes ; the west face of the wall with dancing figures ; and the east face of the wall with <unk> windows , dancing male figures on prancing animals , and devatas , including ( south of the entrance ) the only one in the temple to be showing her teeth . 
 The outer wall encloses a space of 820 @,@ 000 square metres ( 203 acres ) , which besides the temple proper was originally occupied by the city and , to the north of the temple , the royal palace . Like all secular buildings of Angkor , these were built of perishable materials rather than of stone , so nothing remains of them except the outlines of some of the streets . Most of the area is now covered by forest . A 350 m ( 1 @,@ 150 ft ) causeway connects the western gopura to the temple proper , with naga balustrades and six sets of steps leading down to the city on either side . Each side also features a library with entrances at each cardinal point , in front of the third set of stairs from the entrance , and a pond between the library and the temple itself . The ponds are later additions to the design , as is the cruciform terrace guarded by lions connecting the causeway to the central structure . 
 = = = = Central structure = = = = 
 The temple stands on a terrace raised higher than the city . It is made of three rectangular galleries rising to a central tower , each level higher than the last . Mannikka interprets these galleries as being dedicated to the king , Brahma , the moon , and Vishnu . Each gallery has a gopura at each of the points , and the two inner galleries each have towers at their corners , forming a quincunx with the central tower . Because the temple faces west , the features are all set back towards the east , leaving more space to be filled in each enclosure and gallery on the west side ; for the same reason the west @-@ facing steps are shallower than those on the other sides . 
 The outer gallery measures 187 m ( 614 ft ) by 215 m ( 705 ft ) , with pavilions rather than towers at the corners . The gallery is open to the outside of the temple , with columned half @-@ galleries extending and buttressing the structure . Connecting the outer gallery to the second enclosure on the west side is a cruciform cloister called Preah <unk> ( the " Hall of a Thousand Gods " ) . Buddha images were left in the cloister by pilgrims over the centuries , although most have now been removed . This area has many inscriptions relating the good deeds of pilgrims , most written in Khmer but others in Burmese and Japanese . The four small courtyards marked out by the cloister may originally have been filled with water . North and south of the cloister are libraries . 
 Beyond , the second and inner galleries are connected to each other and to two flanking libraries by another cruciform terrace , again a later addition . From the second level upwards , devatas abound on the walls , singly or in groups of up to four . The second @-@ level enclosure is 100 m ( 330 ft ) by 115 m ( 377 ft ) , and may originally have been flooded to represent the ocean around Mount Meru . Three sets of steps on each side lead up to the corner towers and gopuras of the inner gallery . The very steep stairways represent the difficulty of ascending to the kingdom of the gods . This inner gallery , called the <unk> , is a 60 m ( 200 ft ) square with axial galleries connecting each gopura with the central shrine , and subsidiary shrines located below the corner towers . The <unk> of the galleries are decorated with the motif of the body of a snake ending in the heads of lions or garudas . Carved lintels and pediments decorate the entrances to the galleries and to the shrines . The tower above the central shrine rises 43 m ( 141 ft ) to a height of 65 m ( 213 ft ) above the ground ; unlike those of previous temple mountains , the central tower is raised above the surrounding four . The shrine itself , originally occupied by a statue of Vishnu and open on each side , was walled in when the temple was converted to Theravada Buddhism , the new walls featuring standing Buddhas . In 1934 , the conservator George <unk> excavated the pit beneath the central shrine : filled with sand and water it had already been robbed of its treasure , but he did find a sacred foundation deposit of gold leaf two metres above ground level . 
 = = = = Decoration = = = = 
 Integrated with the architecture of the building , and one of the causes for its fame is Angkor Wat 's extensive decoration , which predominantly takes the form of bas @-@ relief friezes . The inner walls of the outer gallery bear a series of large @-@ scale scenes mainly depicting episodes from the Hindu epics the Ramayana and the Mahabharata . Higham has called these , " the greatest known linear arrangement of stone carving " . From the north @-@ west corner anti @-@ clockwise , the western gallery shows the Battle of Lanka ( from the Ramayana , in which Rama defeats Ravana ) and the Battle of Kurukshetra ( from the Mahabharata , showing the mutual annihilation of the Kaurava and Pandava clans ) . On the southern gallery follow the only historical scene , a procession of Suryavarman II , then the 32 hells and 37 heavens of Hinduism . 
 On the eastern gallery is one of the most celebrated scenes , the Churning of the Sea of Milk , showing 92 asuras and 88 devas using the serpent Vasuki to churn the sea under Vishnu 's direction ( Mannikka counts only 91 asuras , and explains the asymmetrical numbers as representing the number of days from the winter solstice to the spring equinox , and from the equinox to the summer solstice ) . It is followed by Vishnu defeating asuras ( a 16th @-@ century addition ) . The northern gallery shows Krishna 's victory over Bana ( where according to Glaize , " The workmanship is at its worst " ) , and a battle between the Hindu gods and asuras . The north @-@ west and south @-@ west corner pavilions both feature much smaller @-@ scale scenes , some unidentified but most from the Ramayana or the life of Krishna . 
 Angkor Wat is decorated with depictions of apsaras and devata ; there are more than 1 @,@ 796 depictions of devata in the present research inventory . Angkor Wat architects employed small apsara images ( 30 cm ( 12 in ) – 40 cm ( 16 in ) ) as decorative motifs on pillars and walls . They incorporated larger devata images ( all full @-@ body portraits measuring approximately 95 cm ( 37 in ) – 110 cm ( 43 in ) ) more prominently at every level of the temple from the entry pavilion to the tops of the high towers . In 1927 , Sappho Marchal published a study cataloging the remarkable diversity of their hair , headdresses , garments , stance , jewelry and decorative flowers , which Marchal concluded were based on actual practices of the Angkor period . 
 = = = Construction techniques = = = 
 The stones , as smooth as polished marble , were laid without mortar with very tight joints that are sometimes hard to find . The blocks were held together by mortise and tenon joints in some cases , while in others they used dovetails and gravity . The blocks were presumably put in place by a combination of elephants , coir ropes , pulleys and bamboo scaffolding . Henri Mouhot noted that most of the blocks had holes 2 @.@ 5 cm ( 0 @.@ 98 in ) in diameter and 3 cm ( 1 @.@ 2 in ) deep , with more holes on the larger blocks . Some scholars have suggested that these were used to join them together with iron rods , but others claim they were used to hold temporary pegs to help manoeuvre them into place . 
 The monument was made out of millions of tonnes of sandstone and its volume and mass are similar to those of the Pyramid of Menkaure in Egypt . The Angkor Wat temple consumed about 5 million to 10 million <unk> bricks with a maximum weight of 1 @.@ 5 tons each . In fact , the entire city of Angkor used up far greater amounts of stone than all the Egyptian pyramids combined , and occupied an area significantly greater than modern @-@ day Paris . Moreover , unlike the Egyptian pyramids which use limestone quarried barely 0 @.@ 5 km ( 0 @.@ 31 mi ) away all the time , the entire city of Angkor was built with sandstone quarried 40 km ( 25 mi ) ( or more ) away . This sandstone had to be transported from Mount Kulen , a quarry approximately 25 miles ( 40 km ) to the northeast . The route has been suggested to span 35 kilometres ( 22 mi ) along a canal towards Tonlé Sap lake , another 35 kilometres ( 22 mi ) crossing the lake , and finally 15 kilometres ( 9 @.@ 3 mi ) against the current along Siem Reap River , making a total journey of 90 kilometres ( 56 mi ) . However , <unk> Uchida and <unk> Shimoda of Waseda University in Tokyo , Japan have discovered in 2012 a shorter 35 @-@ kilometre ( 22 mi ) canal connecting Mount Kulen and Angkor Wat using satellite imagery . The two believe that the Khmer used this route instead . 
 Virtually all of its surfaces , columns , lintels and even roofs are carved . There are miles of reliefs illustrating scenes from Indian literature including unicorns , griffins , winged dragons pulling chariots as well as warriors following an elephant @-@ mounted leader and celestial dancing girls with elaborate hair styles . The gallery wall alone is decorated with almost 1 @,@ 000 square metres of bas reliefs . Holes on some of the Angkor walls indicate that they may have been decorated with bronze sheets . These were highly prized in ancient times and were a prime target for robbers . While excavating Khajuraho , Alex Evans , a stonemason and sculptor , recreated a stone sculpture under 4 feet ( 1 @.@ 2 m ) , this took about 60 days to carve . Roger Hopkins and Mark Lehner also conducted experiments to quarry limestone which took 12 quarrymen 22 days to quarry about 400 tons of stone . The labor force to quarry , transport , carve and install so much sandstone must have run into the thousands including many highly skilled artisans . The skills required to carve these sculptures were developed hundreds of years earlier , as demonstrated by some artifacts that have been dated to the seventh century , before the Khmer came to power . 
 = = Angkor Wat today = = 
 = = = Restoration and conservation = = = 
 As with most other ancient temples in Cambodia , Angkor Wat has faced extensive damage and deterioration by a combination of plant overgrowth , fungi , ground movements , war damage and theft . The war damage to Angkor Wat 's temples has been very limited , compared to the rest of Cambodia 's temple ruins , and it has received the most attentive restoration . 
 The restoration of Angkor Wat in the modern era began with the establishment of the Conservation d 'Angkor ( Angkor Conservancy ) by the École française d 'Extrême @-@ Orient ( EFEO ) in 1908 ; before that date , activities at the site were primarily concerned with exploration . The Conservation d 'Angkor was responsible for the research , conservation , and restoration activities carried out at Angkor until the early 1970s , and a major restoration of Angkor was undertaken in the 1960s . However , work on Angkor was abandoned during the Khmer Rouge era and the Conservation d 'Angkor was disbanded in 1975 . Between 1986 and 1992 , the Archaeological Survey of India carried out restoration work on the temple , as France did not recognize the Cambodian government at the time . Criticism has been raised about both the early French restoration attempts and particularly the later Indian work , with concerns over damage done to the stone surface by the use of chemicals and cement . 
 In 1992 , following an appeal for help by Norodom Sihanouk , Angkor Wat was listed in UNESCO 's World Heritage in Danger ( later removed in 2004 ) and World Heritage Site together with an appeal by UNESCO to the international community to save Angkor . Zoning of the area was set up to protect the Angkor site in 1994 , APSARA was established in 1995 to protect and manage the area , and a law to protect Cambodian heritage was passed in 1996 . A number of countries such as France , Japan and China are involved in various Angkor Wat conservation projects . The German Apsara Conservation Project ( <unk> ) is working to protect the devatas and other bas @-@ reliefs which decorate the temple from damage . The organisation 's survey found that around 20 % of the devatas were in very poor condition , mainly because of natural erosion and deterioration of the stone but in part also due to earlier restoration efforts . Other work involves the repair of collapsed sections of the structure , and prevention of further collapse : the west facade of the upper level , for example , has been buttressed by scaffolding since 2002 , while a Japanese team completed restoration of the north library of the outer enclosure in 2005 . World Monuments Fund began conservation work on the Churning of the Sea of Milk Gallery in 2008 after several years of studies on its condition . The project restored the traditional Khmer roofing system and removed cement used in earlier restoration attempts that had resulted in salts entering the structure behind the bas @-@ relief , discoloring and damaging the sculpted surfaces . The main phase of work ended in 2012 , with the final component being the installation of finials on the roof of the gallery in 2013 . 
 Microbial biofilms have been found degrading sandstone at Angkor Wat , Preah Khan , and the Bayon and West Prasat in Angkor . The <unk> and radiation @-@ resistant filamentous cyanobacteria can produce organic acids that degrade the stone . A dark filamentous fungus was found in internal and external Preah Khan samples , while the alga Trentepohlia was found only in samples taken from external , pink @-@ stained stone at Preah Khan . Replicas were also made to replace some of the lost or damaged sculptures . 
 = = = Tourism = = = 
 Since the 1990s , Angkor Wat has become a major tourist destination . In 1993 , there were only 7 @,@ 650 visitors to the site ; by 2004 , government figures show that 561 @,@ 000 foreign visitors had arrived in Siem Reap province that year , approximately 50 % of all foreign tourists in Cambodia . The number reached over a million in 2007 , and over two million by 2012 . Most visited Angkor Wat , which received over two million foreign tourists in 2013 . The site has been managed by the private <unk> group since 1990 , which rented it from the Cambodian government . The influx of tourists has so far caused relatively little damage , other than some graffiti ; ropes and wooden steps have been introduced to protect the bas @-@ reliefs and floors , respectively . Tourism has also provided some additional funds for maintenance — as of 2000 approximately 28 % of ticket revenues across the whole Angkor site was spent on the temples — although most work is carried out by foreign government @-@ sponsored teams rather than by the Cambodian authorities . 
 Since Angkor Wat has seen significant growth in tourism throughout the years UNESCO and its International Co @-@ ordinating Committee for the Safeguarding and Development of the Historic Site of Angkor ( ICC ) , in association with representatives from the Royal Government and APSARA , organized seminars to discuss the concept of " cultural tourism " . Wanting to avoid commercial and mass tourism , the seminars emphasized the importance of providing high quality accommodation and services in order for the Cambodian government to benefit economically , while also incorporating the richness of Cambodian culture . In 2001 , this incentive resulted in the concept of the " Angkor Tourist City " which would be developed with regard to traditional Khmer architecture , contain leisure and tourist facilities , and provide luxurious hotels capable of accommodating large amounts of tourists . 
 The prospect of developing such large tourist accommodations has encountered concerns from both APSARA and the ICC , claiming that previous tourism developments in the area have neglected construction regulations and more of these projects have the potential to damage landscape features . Also , the large scale of these projects have begun to threaten the quality of the nearby town 's water , sewage , and electricity systems . It has been noted that such high frequency of tourism and growing demand for quality accommodations in the area , such as the development of a large highway , has had a direct effect on the underground water table , subsequently straining the structural stability of the temples at Angkor Wat . Locals of Siem Reap have also voiced concern that the charm and atmosphere of their town have been compromised in order to entertain tourism . Since this local atmosphere is the key component to projects like Angkor Tourist City , the local officials continue to discuss how to successfully incorporate future tourism without sacrificing local values and culture . 
 At the ASEAN Tourism Forum 2012 , it was agreed that Borobudur and Angkor Wat would become sister sites and the provinces sister provinces . 
 = = Gallery = = 
 = Zanzibar Revolution = 
 The Zanzibar Revolution occurred in 1964 and led to the overthrow of the Sultan of Zanzibar and his mainly Arab government by local African revolutionaries . Zanzibar was an ethnically diverse state consisting of a number of islands off the east coast of Tanganyika which had been granted independence by Britain in 1963 . In a series of parliamentary elections preceding independence , the Arab minority succeeded in retaining the hold on power it had inherited from Zanzibar 's former existence as an overseas territory of Oman . Frustrated by under @-@ representation in Parliament despite winning 54 % of the vote in the July 1963 election , the mainly African Afro @-@ Shirazi Party ( ASP ) allied itself with the left @-@ wing Umma Party , and early on the morning of 12 January 1964 ASP member John Okello mobilised around 600 – 800 revolutionaries on the main island of Unguja ( Zanzibar Island ) . Having overrun the country 's police force and appropriated their weaponry , the insurgents proceeded to Zanzibar Town where they overthrew the Sultan and his government . Reprisals against Arab and South Asian civilians on the island followed ; the resulting death toll is disputed , with estimates ranging from several hundred to 20 @,@ 000 . The moderate ASP leader Abeid Karume became the country 's new president and head of state , and positions of power were granted to Umma party members . 
 The new government 's apparent communist ties concerned Western governments . As Zanzibar lay within the British sphere of influence , the British government drew up a number of intervention plans . However , the feared communist government never materialised , and because British and United States citizens were successfully evacuated these plans were not put into effect . Meanwhile , the communist bloc powers of China , East Germany and the Soviet Union established friendly relations with the new government by recognising the country and sending advisors . Karume succeeded in negotiating a merger of Zanzibar with Tanganyika to form the new nation of Tanzania ; an act judged by contemporary media to be an attempt to prevent communist subversion of Zanzibar . The revolution ended 200 years of Arab dominance in Zanzibar , and is commemorated on the island each year with anniversary celebrations and a public holiday . 
 = = Background = = 
 The Zanzibar Archipelago , now part of the Southeast African republic of Tanzania , is a group of islands lying in the Indian Ocean off the coast of Tanganyika . It comprises the main southern island of Unguja ( also known as Zanzibar ) , the smaller northern island of Pemba , and numerous surrounding islets . With a long history of Arab rule dating back to 1698 , Zanzibar was an overseas territory of Oman until it achieved independence in 1858 under its own Sultanate . In 1890 during Ali ibn Sa 'id 's reign , Zanzibar became a British protectorate , and although never formally under direct rule was considered part of the British Empire . 
 By 1964 , the country was a constitutional monarchy ruled by Sultan Jamshid bin Abdullah . Zanzibar had a population of around 230 @,@ 000 Africans — some of whom claimed Persian ancestry and were known locally as <unk> — and also contained significant minorities in the 50 @,@ 000 Arabs and 20 @,@ 000 South Asians who were prominent in business and trade . The various ethnic groups were becoming mixed and the distinctions between them had blurred ; according to one historian , an important reason for the general support for Sultan Jamshid was his family 's ethnic diversity . However , the island 's Arab inhabitants , as the major landowners , were generally wealthier than the Africans ; the major political parties were organised largely along ethnic lines , with Arabs dominating the Zanzibar Nationalist Party ( ZNP ) and Africans the Afro @-@ Shirazi Party ( ASP ) . 
 In January 1961 , as part of the process of decolonisation , the island 's British authorities drew up constituencies and held democratic elections . Both the ASP and the ZNP won 11 of the available 22 seats in Zanzibar 's Parliament , so further elections were held in June with the number of seats increased to 23 . The ZNP entered into a coalition with the Zanzibar and Pemba People 's Party ( ZPPP ) and this time took 13 seats , while the ASP , despite receiving the most votes , won just 10 . Electoral fraud was suspected by the ASP and civil disorder broke out , resulting in 68 deaths . To maintain control , the coalition government banned the more radical opposition parties , filled the civil service with its own appointees , and politicised the police . 
 In 1963 , with the number of parliamentary seats increased to 31 , another election saw a repeat of the 1961 votes . Due to the layout of the constituencies the ASP , led by Abeid Amani Karume , won 54 percent of the popular vote but only 13 seats , while the ZNP / ZPPP won the rest and set about strengthening its hold on power . The Umma Party , formed that year by disaffected radical Arab socialist supporters of the ZNP , was banned , and all policemen of African mainland origin were dismissed . This removed a large portion of the only security force on the island , and created an angry group of paramilitary @-@ trained men with knowledge of police buildings , equipment and procedures . Furthermore , the new Arab @-@ dominated government made it clear that in foreign policy , the Sultanate of Zanzibar would be seeking close links with the Arab world , especially Egypt and had no interest in forging relationships with the nations on the African mainland as the black majority wished . Slavery had been abolished in Zanzibar in 1897 , but much of the Arab elite who dominated the island 's politics made little effort to hide their racist views of the black majority as their inferiors , a people fit only for slavery . Memories of Arab slave @-@ trading in the past ( some of the older blacks had been slaves in their youth ) together with a distinctly patronizing view of the Arab elite towards the black majority in the present meant that much of the black population of Zanzibar had a ferocious hatred of the Arabs , viewing the new Arab @-@ dominated government as illegitimate . 
 Complete independence from British rule was granted on 10 December 1963 , with the ZNP / ZPPP coalition as the governing body . The government requested a defence agreement from the United Kingdom , asking for a battalion of British troops to be stationed on the island for internal security duties , but this was rejected as it was deemed inappropriate for British troops to be involved in the maintenance of law and order so soon after independence . British intelligence reports predicted that a civil disturbance , accompanied by increasing communist activity , was likely in the near future and that the arrival of British troops might cause the situation to deteriorate further . However , many foreign nationals remained on the island , including 130 Britons who were direct employees of the Zanzibar government . 
 = = Revolution = = 
 Around 3 : 00 am on 12 January 1964 , 600 – 800 poorly armed , mainly African insurgents , aided by some of the recently dismissed ex @-@ policemen , attacked Unguja 's police stations , both of its police armouries , and the radio station . The Arab police replacements had received almost no training and , despite responding with a mobile force , were soon overcome . Arming themselves with hundreds of captured automatic rifles , submachine guns and Bren guns , the insurgents took control of strategic buildings in the capital , Zanzibar Town . Within six hours of the outbreak of hostilities , the town 's telegraph office and main government buildings were under revolutionary control , and the island 's only airstrip was captured at 2 : 18 pm . The Sultan , together with Prime Minister Muhammad <unk> Hamadi and members of the cabinet , fled the island on the royal yacht <unk> Khalifa , and the Sultan 's palace and other property was seized by the revolutionary government . At least 80 people were killed and 200 injured , the majority of whom were Arabs , during the 12 hours of street fighting that followed . Sixty @-@ one American citizens , including 16 men staffing a NASA satellite tracking station , sought sanctuary in the English Club in Zanzibar Town , and four US journalists were detained by the island 's new government . 
 According to the official Zanzibari history , the revolution was planned and headed by the ASP leader Abeid Amani Karume . However , at the time Karume was on the African mainland as was the leader of the banned Umma Party , Abdulrahman Muhammad Babu . The ASP branch secretary for Pemba , Ugandan @-@ born ex @-@ policeman John Okello , had sent Karume to the mainland to ensure his safety . Okello had arrived in Zanzibar from Kenya in 1959 , claiming to have been a field marshal for the Kenyan rebels during the Mau Mau Uprising , although he actually had no military experience . He maintained that he heard a voice commanding him , as a Christian , to free the Zanzibari people from the Muslim Arabs , and it was Okello who led the revolutionaries — mainly unemployed members of the Afro @-@ Shirazi Youth League — on 12 January . One commentator has further speculated that it was probably Okello , with the Youth League , who planned the revolution . During the revolution , there was an orgy of violence committed against the South Asian and Arab communities with thousands of women being raped by the Okello 's followers , much looting and massacres of Arabs all over the island . The American diplomat Don Petterson described the killings of Arabs by the African majority as an act of genocide . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 A Revolutionary Council was established by the ASP and Umma parties to act as an interim government , with Karume heading the council as President and Babu serving as the Minister of External Affairs . The country was renamed the People 's Republic of Zanzibar and Pemba ; the new government 's first acts were to permanently banish the Sultan and to ban the ZNP and ZPPP . Seeking to distance himself from the volatile Okello , Karume quietly sidelined him from the political scene , although he was allowed to retain his self @-@ bestowed title of field marshal . However , Okello 's revolutionaries soon began reprisals against the Arab and Asian population of Unguja , carrying out beatings , rapes , murders , and attacks on property . He claimed in radio speeches to have killed or imprisoned tens of thousands of his " enemies and stooges " , but actual estimates of the number of deaths vary greatly , from " hundreds " to 20 @,@ 000 . Some Western newspapers give figures of 2 @,@ 000 – 4 @,@ 000 ; the higher numbers may be inflated by Okello 's own broadcasts and exaggerated reports in some Western and Arab news media . The killing of Arab prisoners and their burial in mass graves was documented by an Italian film crew , filming from a helicopter , for Africa Addio and this sequence of film comprises the only known visual document of the killings . Many Arabs fled to safety in Oman , although by Okello 's order no Europeans were harmed . The post @-@ revolution violence did not spread to Pemba . 
 By 3 February Zanzibar was finally returning to normality , and Karume had been widely accepted by the people as their president . A police presence was back on the streets , looted shops were re @-@ opening , and unlicensed arms were being surrendered by the civilian populace . The revolutionary government announced that its political prisoners , numbering 500 , would be tried by special courts . Okello formed the Freedom Military Force ( FMF ) , a paramilitary unit made up of his own supporters , which patrolled the streets and looted Arab property . The behaviour of Okello 's supporters , his violent rhetoric , Ugandan accent , and Christian beliefs were alienating many in the largely moderate Zanzibari and Muslim ASP , and by March many members of his FMF had been disarmed by Karume 's supporters and the Umma Party militia . On 11 March Okello was officially stripped of his rank of Field Marshal , and was denied entry when trying to return to Zanzibar from a trip to the mainland . He was deported to Tanganyika and then to Kenya , before returning destitute to his native Uganda . 
 In April the government formed the People 's Liberation Army ( PLA ) and completed the disarmament of Okello 's remaining FMF militia . On 26 April Karume announced that a union had been negotiated with Tanganyika to form the new country of Tanzania . The merger was seen by contemporary media as a means of preventing communist subversion of Zanzibar ; at least one historian states that it may have been an attempt by Karume , a moderate socialist , to limit the influence of the radically left @-@ wing Umma Party . However , many of the Umma Party 's socialist policies on health , education and social welfare were adopted by the government . 
 = = Foreign reaction = = 
 British military forces in Kenya were made aware of the revolution at 4 : 45 am on 12 January , and following a request from the Sultan were put on 15 minutes ' standby to conduct an assault on Zanzibar 's airfield . However , the British High Commissioner in Zanzibar , Timothy Crosthwait , reported no instances of British nationals being attacked and advised against intervention . As a result , the British troops in Kenya were reduced to four hours ' standby later that evening . Crosthwait decided not to approve an immediate evacuation of British citizens , as many held key government positions and their sudden removal would further disrupt the country 's economy and government . To avoid possible bloodshed , the British agreed a timetable with Karume for an organised evacuation . 
 Within hours of the revolution , the American ambassador had authorised the withdrawal of US citizens on the island , and a US Navy destroyer , the USS Manley , arrived on 13 January . The Manley docked at Zanzibar Town harbour , but the US had not sought the Revolutionary Council 's permission for the evacuation , and the ship was met by a group of armed men . Permission was eventually granted on 15 January , but the British considered this confrontation to be the cause of much subsequent ill will against the Western powers in Zanzibar . 
 Western intelligence agencies believed that the revolution had been organised by communists supplied with weapons by the Warsaw Pact countries . This suspicion was strengthened by the appointment of Babu as Minister for External Affairs and Abdullah Kassim Hanga as Prime Minister , both known leftists with possible communist ties . Britain believed that these two were close associates of Oscar <unk> , the Foreign Affairs Minister of Tanganyika , and that former members of the Tanganyika Rifles had been made available to assist with the revolution . Some members of the Umma Party wore Cuban military fatigues and beards in the style of Fidel Castro , which was taken as an indication of Cuban support for the revolution . However this practice was started by those members who had staffed a ZNP branch office in Cuba and it became a common means of dress amongst opposition party members in the months leading up to the revolution . The new Zanzibar government 's recognition of the German Democratic Republic ( the first African government to do so ) , and of North Korea , was further evidence to the Western Powers that Zanzibar was aligning itself closely with the communist bloc . Just six days after the revolution the New York Times stated that Zanzibar was " on the verge of becoming the Cuba of Africa " , but on 26 January denied that there was active communist involvement . Zanzibar continued to receive support from communist countries and by February was known to be receiving advisers from USSR , East Germany and China . Cuba also lent its support with Che Guevara stating on 15 August that " Zanzibar is our friend and we gave them our small bit of assistance , our fraternal assistance , our revolutionary assistance at the moment when it was necessary " but denying there were Cuban troops present during the revolution . At the same time , western influence was diminishing and by July 1964 just one Briton , a dentist , remained in the employ of the Zanzibari government . It has been alleged that Israeli spymaster David Kimche was a backer of the revolution with Kimche in Zanzibar on the day of the Revolution . 
 The deposed Sultan made an unsuccessful appeal to Kenya and Tanganyika for military assistance , although Tanganyika sent 100 paramilitary police officers to Zanzibar to contain rioting . Other than the Tanganyika Rifles ( formerly the colonial King 's African Rifles ) , the police were the only armed force in Tanganyika , and on 20 January the police absence led the entire Rifles regiment to mutiny . Dissatisfied with their low pay rates and with the slow progress of the replacement of their British officers with Africans , the soldiers ' mutiny sparked similar uprisings in both Uganda and Kenya . However , order on the African mainland was rapidly restored without serious incident by the British Army and Royal Marines . 
 The possible emergence of an African communist state remained a source of disquiet in the West . In February , the British Defence and Overseas Policy Committee said that , while British commercial interests in Zanzibar were " minute " and the revolution by itself was " not important " , the possibility of intervention must be maintained . The committee was concerned that Zanzibar could become a centre for the promotion of communism in Africa , much like Cuba had in the Americas . Britain , most of the Commonwealth , and the USA withheld recognition of the new regime until 23 February , by which time it had already been recognised by much of the communist bloc . In Crosthwait 's opinion , this contributed to Zanzibar aligning itself with the Soviet Union ; Crosthwait and his staff were expelled from the country on 20 February and were only allowed to return once recognition had been agreed . 
 = = = British military response = = = 
 Following the evacuation of its citizens on 13 January , the US government stated that it recognised that Zanzibar lay within Britain 's sphere of influence , and would not intervene . The US did , however , urge that Britain cooperate with other Southeast African countries to restore order . The first British military vessel on the scene was the survey ship HMS Owen , which was diverted from the Kenyan coast and arrived on the evening of 12 January . Owen was joined on 15 January by the frigate Rhyl and the Royal Fleet Auxiliary ship Hebe . While the lightly armed Owen had been able to provide the revolutionaries with an unobtrusive reminder of Britain 's military power , the Hebe and Rhyl were different matters . Due to inaccurate reports that the situation in Zanzibar was deteriorating , the Rhyl was carrying a company of troops of the first battalion of the Staffordshire Regiment from Kenya , the embarkation of which was widely reported in the Kenyan media , and would hinder British negotiations with Zanzibar . The Hebe had just finished removing stores from the naval depot at Mombasa and was loaded with weapons and explosives . Although the Revolutionary Council was unaware of the nature of Hebe 's cargo , the Royal Navy 's refusal to allow a search of the ship created suspicion ashore and rumours circulated that she was an amphibious assault ship . 
 A partial evacuation of British citizens was completed by 17 January , when the army riots in Southeast Africa prompted Rhyl 's diversion to Tanganyika so the troops she was carrying could assist in quelling the mutiny . In replacement , a company of the Gordon Highlanders was loaded aboard Owen so an intervention could still be made if necessary . The aircraft carriers Centaur and Victorious were also transferred to the region as part of Operation Parthenon . Although never enacted , Parthenon was intended as a precaution should Okello or the Umma party radicals attempt to seize power from the more moderate ASP . In addition to the two carriers , the plan involved three destroyers , Owen , 13 helicopters , 21 transport and reconnaissance aircraft , the second battalion of the Scots Guards , 45 Commando of the Royal Marines and one company of the second battalion of the Parachute Regiment . The island of Unguja , and its airport , were to be seized by parachute and helicopter assault , followed up by the occupation of Pemba . Parthenon would have been the largest British airborne and amphibious operation since the Suez Crisis . 
 Following the revelation that the revolutionaries may have received communist bloc training , Operation Parthenon was replaced by Operation Boris . This called for a parachute assault on Unguja from Kenya , but was later abandoned due to poor security in Kenya and the Kenyan government 's opposition to the use of its airfields . Instead Operation Finery was drawn up , which would involve a helicopter assault by Royal Marines from HMS Bulwark , a commando carrier then stationed in the Middle East . As Bulwark was outside the region , Finery 's launch would require 14 days ' notice , so in the event that a more immediate response was necessary , suitable forces were placed on 24 hours ' notice to launch a smaller scale operation to protect British citizens . 
 With the merger of Tanganyika and Zanzibar on 23 April , there were concerns that the Umma Party would stage a coup ; Operation Shed was designed to provide for intervention should this happen . Shed would have required a battalion of troops , with scout cars , to be airlifted to the island to seize the airfield and protect Karume 's government . However , the danger of a revolt over unification soon passed , and on 29 April the troops earmarked for Shed were reduced to 24 hours ' notice . Operation Finery was cancelled the same day . Concern over a possible coup remained though , and around 23 September Shed was replaced with Plan Giralda , involving the use of British troops from Aden and the Far East , to be enacted if the Umma Party attempted to overthrow President Julius Nyerere of Tanzania . An infantry battalion , tactical headquarters unit and elements of the Royal Marines would have been shipped to Zanzibar to launch an amphibious assault , supported by follow @-@ on troops from British bases in Kenya or Aden to maintain law and order . Giralda was scrapped in December , ending British plans for military intervention in the country . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 One of the main impacts of the revolution in Zanzibar was to break the power of the Arab / Asian ruling class , who had held it for around 200 years . Despite the merger with Tanganyika , Zanzibar retained a Revolutionary Council and House of Representatives which was , until 1992 , run on a one @-@ party system and has power over domestic matters . The domestic government is led by the President of Zanzibar , Karume being the first holder of this office . This government used the success of the revolution to implement reforms across the island . Many of these involved the removal of power from Arabs . The Zanzibar civil service , for example , became an almost entirely African organisation , and land was redistributed from Arabs to Africans . The revolutionary government also instituted social reforms such as free healthcare and opening up the education system to African students ( who had occupied only 12 % of secondary school places before the revolution ) . 
 The government sought help from the Soviet Union , the German Democratic Republic ( GDR ) , and P. R. China for funding for several projects and military advice . The failure of several GDR @-@ led projects including the New Zanzibar Project , a 1968 urban redevelopment scheme to provide new apartments for all Zanzibaris , led to Zanzibar focussing on Chinese aid . The post @-@ revolution Zanzibar government was accused of draconian controls on personal freedoms and travel and exercised nepotism in appointments to political and industrial offices , the new Tanzanian government being powerless to intervene . Dissatisfaction with the government came to a head with the assassination of Karume on 7 April 1972 , which was followed by weeks of fighting between pro and anti @-@ government forces . A multi @-@ party system was eventually established in 1992 , but Zanzibar remains dogged by allegations of corruption and vote @-@ rigging , though the 2010 general election was seen to be a considerable improvement . 
 The revolution itself remains an event of interest for Zanzibaris and academics . Historians have analysed the revolution as having a racial and a social basis with some stating that the African revolutionaries represent the proletariat rebelling against the ruling and trading classes , represented by the Arabs and South Asians . Others discount this theory and present it as a racial revolution that was exacerbated by economic disparity between races . 
 Within Zanzibar , the revolution is a key cultural event , marked by the release of 545 prisoners on its tenth anniversary and by a military parade on its 40th . Zanzibar Revolution Day has been designated as a public holiday by the government of Tanzania ; it is celebrated on 12 January each year . 
 = HMS Emperor of India = 
 HMS Emperor of India was an Iron Duke @-@ class battleship of the British Royal Navy . She was originally to have been named Delhi but was renamed before she was completed , to honour King George V , who was also Emperor of India . The ship was laid down on 31 May 1912 at the Vickers shipyard , and was launched on 27 November 1913 . The finished ship was commissioned a year later in November 1914 , shortly after the start of the First World War . She was armed with a main battery of ten 13 @.@ 5 @-@ inch ( 340 mm ) guns and was capable of a top speed of 21 @.@ 25 knots ( 39 @.@ 36 km / h ; 24 @.@ 45 mph ) . 
 Upon commissioning , Emperor of India joined the 4th Battle Squadron of the Grand Fleet , based at Scapa Flow . She took part in numerous sorties into the northern North Sea to enforce the blockade of Germany , along with frequent training exercises and gunnery drills . Emperor of India was in dock for a refit in late May 1916 , so she was unavailable for the Battle of Jutland . The increased danger from submarines led both the Grand Fleet and the German High Seas Fleet to pursue more cautious strategies after Jutland , which led to a less eventful war . 
 After the war , Emperor of India was sent to the Mediterranean Fleet , where she became involved in the Allied intervention in the Russian Civil War in the Black Sea in 1919 – 1921 . She remained in the Mediterranean until 1926 , when she was transferred to the Atlantic Fleet . The London Naval Treaty of 1930 mandated that Emperor of India and her three sister ships be dismantled . In 1931 , she and HMS Marlborough underwent a series of weapons tests that proved to be highly beneficial for future British battleship designs . Emperor of India was ultimately sold for scrap in February 1932 , and was broken up shortly thereafter . 
 = = Design = = 
 Emperor of India was 622 feet 9 inches ( 190 m ) long overall and had a beam of 90 ft ( 27 m ) and an average draught of 29 ft 6 in ( 9 m ) . She displaced 25 @,@ 000 long tons ( 25 @,@ 401 t ) as designed and up to 29 @,@ 560 long tons ( 30 @,@ 034 t ) at combat loading . Her propulsion system consisted of four Parsons steam turbines , with steam provided by eighteen Babcock & Wilcox boilers . The engines were rated at 29 @,@ 000 shaft horsepower ( 21 @,@ 625 kW ) and produced a top speed of 21 @.@ 25 kn ( 39 km / h ; 24 mph ) . Her cruising radius was 7 @,@ 800 nautical miles ( 14 @,@ 446 km ; 8 @,@ 976 mi ) at a more economical 10 kn ( 19 km / h ; 12 mph ) . Emperor of India had a crew of 995 officers and enlisted men , though during wartime this grew to up to 1 @,@ 022 . 
 Emperor of India was armed with a main battery of ten BL 13 @.@ 5 @-@ inch Mk V naval guns mounted in five twin gun turrets . They were arranged in two superfiring pairs , one forward and one aft ; the fifth turret was located amidships , between the funnels and the rear superstructure . Close @-@ range defence against torpedo boats was provided by a secondary battery of twelve BL 6 @-@ inch Mk VII guns . The ship was also fitted with a pair of QF 3 @-@ inch 20 cwt anti @-@ aircraft guns and four 47 mm ( 2 in ) 3 @-@ pounder guns . As was typical for capital ships of the period , she was equipped with four 21 in ( 530 mm ) torpedo tubes submerged on the broadside . Emperor of India was protected by a main armoured belt that was 12 in ( 305 mm ) thick over the ship 's vitals . Her deck was 2 @.@ 5 in ( 64 mm ) thick . The main battery turret faces were 11 in ( 279 mm ) thick , and the turrets were supported by 10 in ( 254 mm ) thick barbettes . 
 = = Service history = = 
 Emperor of India was laid down at the Vickers shipyard on 31 May 1912 , originally to have been named Delhi . She was launched on 27 November 1913 and christened Emperor of India . The ship was commissioned into the Royal Navy 's Grand Fleet under Admiral John Jellicoe in November 1914 for sea trials , three months after the outbreak of World War I. The following month she was assigned to the 4th Battle Squadron as the second division flagship , where she served for the first two years of the war . On 1 December , Emperor of India and her sister ship Benbow arrived at the 4th Squadron to begin working up , before being pronounced fit for service with the fleet on 10 December . During this period , the rearmost 6 @-@ inch guns were removed from the four Iron Duke @-@ class ships and their casemates were sealed off , as they were too low in the hull and permitted water to continually enter the ship . 
 = = = World War I = = = 
 On 23 and 24 December , the 4th and 2nd Squadrons conducted gunnery practice north of the Hebrides . The following day , the entire fleet sortied for a sweep in the North Sea , which concluded on 27 December ; this was Emperor of India 's first fleet operation . Another round of gunnery drills followed on 10 – 13 January 1915 west of the Orkneys and Shetlands , this time with the entire fleet . On the evening of 23 January , the bulk of the Grand Fleet sailed in support of Beatty 's Battlecruiser Fleet , but the main fleet did not become engaged in the Battle of Dogger Bank that took place the following day . On 7 – 10 March , the Grand Fleet conducted a sweep in the northern North Sea , during which it conducted training manoeuvres . Another such cruise took place on 16 – 19 March . On 11 April , the Grand Fleet conducted a patrol in the central North Sea and returned to port on 14 April ; another patrol in the area took place on 17 – 19 April , followed by gunnery drills off the Shetlands on 20 – 21 April . 
 The Grand Fleet conducted a sweep into the central North Sea on 17 – 19 May without encountering any German vessels . In mid @-@ June , the fleet conducted another round of gunnery training . On 2 – 5 September , the fleet went on another cruise in the northern end of the North Sea and conducted gunnery drills . Throughout the rest of the month , the Grand Fleet conducted numerous training exercises . On 13 October the majority of the fleet conducted another sweep into the North Sea , returning to port on the 15th . On 2 – 5 November , Emperor of India participated in another fleet training operation west of the Orkneys . Another such cruise took place on 1 – 4 December . 
 The typical routine of gunnery drills and squadron exercises occurred in January . The fleet departed for a cruise in the North Sea on 26 February ; Jellicoe had intended to use the Harwich Force to sweep the Heligoland Bight , but bad weather prevented operations in the southern North Sea . As a result , the operation was confined to the northern end of the sea . On the night of 25 March , Emperor of India and the rest of the fleet sailed from Scapa Flow to support the Battlecruiser Fleet and other light forces that raided the German zeppelin base at Tondern . By the time the Grand Fleet approached the area on 26 March , the British and German forces had already disengaged and a severe gale threatened the light craft . Iron Duke , the fleet flagship , guided the destroyers back to Scapa while Emperor of India and the rest of the fleet retired independently . 
 On 21 April , the Grand Fleet conducted a demonstration off Horns Reef to distract the Germans while the Russian Navy relaid its defensive minefields in the Baltic Sea . The fleet returned to Scapa Flow on 24 April and refuelled before proceeding south in response to intelligence reports that the Germans were about to launch a raid on Lowestoft . The Grand Fleet did not arrive in the area until after the German High Seas Fleet had withdrawn , however . On 2 – 4 May , the fleet conducted another demonstration off Horns Reef to keep German attention focused on the North Sea . Emperor of India was not available for the Battle of Jutland on 31 May – 1 June , as she was in dock for a refit . Following Jutland , she was transferred to the 1st Battle Squadron , where she again served as the second division flagship . She remained in the 1st Squadron for the rest of the war . 
 On 18 August , the Germans again sortied , this time to bombard Sunderland ; Vice Admiral Reinhard Scheer , the German fleet commander , hoped to draw out Beatty 's battlecruisers and destroy them . British signals intelligence decrypted German wireless transmissions , allowing Jellicoe enough time to deploy the Grand Fleet in an attempt to engage in a decisive battle . Both sides withdrew , however , after their opponents ' submarines inflicted losses : the British cruisers Nottingham and Falmouth were both torpedoed and sunk by German U @-@ boats , and the German battleship SMS Westfalen was damaged by the British submarine E23 . After returning to port , Jellicoe issued an order that prohibited risking the fleet in the southern half of the North Sea due to the overwhelming risk from mines and U @-@ boats . Later that year , Emperor of India was equipped with equipment to handle a kite balloon . Following the investigation into the Battle of Jutland , the Royal Navy determined that deck protection was insufficient in all of its capital ships ; as a result , Emperor of India had an additional 100 t ( 98 long tons ; 110 short tons ) of armour over the magazines between October and December 1916 . 
 A series of minor modifications followed throughout 1917 and 1918 ; these included the installation of larger and additional searchlights to improve night combat capabilities , funnel caps to reduce smoke interference with the spotting tops , and rangefinder baffles that were intended to make it more difficult to estimate the range for enemy gunners . The baffles were later removed in 1918 . In late 1917 , the Germans began using destroyers and light cruisers to raid the British convoys to Norway ; this forced the British to deploy capital ships to protect the convoys . In April 1918 , the German fleet sortied in an attempt to catch one of the isolated British squadrons , though the convoy had already passed safely . The Grand Fleet sortied too late to catch the retreating Germans , though the battlecruiser SMS Moltke was torpedoed and badly damaged by the submarine HMS E42 . 
 Following the capitulation of Germany in November 1918 , the Allies interned most of the High Seas Fleet in Scapa Flow . The fleet rendezvoused with the British light cruiser Cardiff , which led the ships to the Allied fleet that was to escort the Germans to Scapa Flow . The massive fleet consisted of some 370 British , American , and French warships . The fleet remained in captivity during the negotiations that ultimately produced the Treaty of Versailles . Reuter believed that the British intended to seize the German ships on 21 June 1919 , which was the deadline for Germany to have signed the peace treaty . That morning , the Grand Fleet left Scapa Flow to conduct training maneuvers , and while they were away Reuter issued the order to scuttle the High Seas Fleet . 
 = = = Post @-@ war career = = = 
 In 1919 , Emperor of India was assigned to the Mediterranean Fleet , as part of the 4th Battle Squadron , along with her three sisters and two Centurion @-@ class battleships . During this period , she served in the Black Sea during the Allied intervention in the Russian Civil War to support the Whites against the Red Bolsheviks . Admiral Edward Hobart Seymour , the commander of British forces in the Black Sea , hoisted his flag aboard the ship on 14 April . The ship bombarded Bolshevik troops on 5 May 1919 outside Theodosia , and later to disrupt the operations of a railway being used to supply the Bolshevik assault on the port . On 26 March 1920 , Emperor of India provided gunfire support to White Russian forces outside Novorossiysk , along with the French armoured cruiser Waldeck @-@ Rousseau . Shortly thereafter , Emperor of India came under fire from an armoured train , prompting the ship to leave the harbour , bound for Theodosia . The ship was also involved in observing the Greco @-@ Turkish War of 1919 – 22 ; this included stops in the ports of <unk> and Smyrna . 
 She returned to Britain for a refit in 1922 , during which new long @-@ base rangefinders were installed on " X " turret . This was followed by another stint in the Mediterranean Fleet that lasted until 1926 . During this period , she took part in a demonstration in Smyrna against Turkish demands that foreign warships leave the port . She was thereafter transferred to the Atlantic Fleet , where she served until 1930 . In May 1926 , stability tests were conducted with the ship ; these provided the basis for a 1927 proposal from the Director of Naval Construction to add anti @-@ torpedo bulges to the four Iron Duke @-@ class ships . The proposal was sent to the Board for review , but concerns over the further value of the ships , which were due to be replaced in 1931 – 32 under the terms of the Washington Naval Treaty , and the cost of the reconstruction led the Board to cancel it . From July to September 1927 , she had a refit in Devonport . She served as the squadron flagship from June 1929 until January 1931 , when she was relieved by Marlborough . 
 According to the terms of the London Naval Treaty of 1930 , the four ships of the Iron Duke class were to be scrapped or demilitarised ; Emperor of India was scheduled to be removed from service in 1931 and broken up for scrap . The ship provided one final service to the Navy by serving as a gunnery target , along with Marlborough . The tests included firing destroyer armament at the upper works at close range to test their effectiveness in a simulated night engagement , direct hits from 13 @.@ 5 @-@ inch shells , aerial attacks , and experiments with flash tightness in the magazines . The main tests for Emperor of India took place in June off Bognor Regis . She departed Portsmouth on 6 June and ran aground on the Owers Bank . Salvage efforts proved fruitless , and so the Navy decided to conduct the gunnery tests there . The tests were conduced on 10 – 11 June , with her sister Iron Duke , which hit Emperor of India with twelve 13 @.@ 5 @-@ inch shells over the two days . The first round of shells were fired from 12 @,@ 000 yards ( 11 @,@ 000 m ) , while on the second day the range was increased to 18 @,@ 000 yards ( 16 @,@ 000 m ) . She was refloated later and sold for scrap to the Alloa Shipbreaking Co. on 6 February 1932 . She arrived in Rosyth for demolition on 16 February . 
 The tests provided invaluable experience that was incorporated into the King George V and Lion classes and HMS Vanguard . Of particular importance was a shell that struck Emperor of India on the bottom edge of the main belt , which penetrated into one of the boiler rooms , where it caused tremendous damage . This showed that the depth of British belt armour was too shallow , which influenced the design of the King George V class . In addition , the tests with Emperor of India and Marlborough highlighted the weaknesses of the deck armour of British battleship designs , particularly over the ammunition magazines , and the other First World War @-@ vintage battleships that continued in service had additional armour installed in subsequent modernisations in the 1930s . 
 = Adrift ( Torchwood ) = 
 " Adrift " is the eleventh episode of the second series of British science fiction television series Torchwood , which was first broadcast by BBC Three on 19 March 2008 , and repeated on BBC Two one week later . The episode was written by series one and two head writer Chris Chibnall , directed by Mark Everest and produced by Sophie Fante and Richard Stokes . The episode featured the five initial series regulars John Barrowman , Eve Myles , Burn Gorman , Naoko Mori and Gareth David Lloyd plus recurring actors Kai Owen and Tom Price . 
 The episode begins with Torchwood employee Gwen Cooper ( Eve Myles ) being called in to investigate a missing person case by her former colleague Andy Davidson ( Tom Price ) . When bereaved mother Nikki Bevan ( Ruth Jones ) starts a support group for missing people , Gwen realises the problem is widespread . She pursues the investigation against the wishes of her boss Jack Harkness ( John Barrowman ) and is able to track Nikki 's son to an isolation facility . It is revealed that Nikki 's son Jonah , like the other missing individuals around Cardiff , was taken by the space @-@ time rift and returned physically and mentally scarred . After realising she cannot have a relationship with her son , Nikki implores Gwen not to reveal the truth to any other bereaved relative . 
 Chris Chibnall wanted to write a story that tackled the issue of loss and revolved around a missing person case . Executive producer Russell T Davies appreciated the character dynamics and domestic themes in the episode and cited the script as one of his inspirations in continuing the series . Ruth Jones , who is generally better known for her comedic roles , was cast against type in the central guest role of Nikki Bevan . The episode was filmed largely on location in South Wales with the island of Flat Holm featuring prominently . Response to the episode was generally positive . Reviewers generally praised the episode for illuminating the conflicting elements of Gwen 's character and providing a central dilemma with no easy answer . Some critics identified ostensible plot holes , though felt that the episode 's emotional successes negated these . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Jonah Bevan ( Oliver <unk> ) is walking home across the Cardiff Bay Barrage when a mysterious bright light appears . He vanishes . Seven months later , at the instigation of her former police colleague Andy Davidson ( Tom Price ) , Torchwood agent Gwen Cooper ( Eve Myles ) is investigating Jonah 's disappearance . After Jonah 's mother Nikki ( Ruth Jones ) starts a support group for relatives of missing people in the Cardiff area , Gwen realises that there are more cases resembling Jonah 's disappearance . Gwen collates a chart of the missing people and her colleague Toshiko ( Naoko Mori ) discovers that all the disappearances occurred during negative spikes of activity from the Cardiff space @-@ time rift . The two women postulate the implications of this : that the rift can take people away and discard them elsewhere . Gwen confronts her boss Jack Harkness ( John Barrowman ) with her research but he informs her that nothing can be done and orders her to stop the investigation . 
 Gwen becomes consumed with the issue of the missing individuals and this takes its toll on her relationship with her husband Rhys ( Kai Owen ) . They argue , and he states that if Gwen is working to safeguard ordinary life then she has not been successful . Returning to Torchwood 's headquarters , Gwen interrupts Jack and fellow Torchwood employee Ianto ( Gareth David @-@ Lloyd ) during a sexual encounter . After apologising , she tells Jack that she wants to continue the investigation . Jack refuses to help , but Ianto later gives Gwen a GPS device with coordinates to a hidden location , leading Gwen to a facility on Flat Holm . It harbors 17 of the missing people that the rift has taken and subsequently brought back . Gwen finds Jack there , and demands access to Jonah . Jonah ( now Robert Pugh ) has aged and become physically deformed after being stuck on a burning planet shortly before witnessing the burning of a solar system . Jack reveals that he set up the facility when he first took command of Torchwood , in order to care for the victims of the rift , who had previously been locked away in the Torchwood vaults . 
 Gwen brings Nikki in to see Jonah under the supervision of a facility staff member . At first Nikki is horrified , believing it to be a cruel joke , but Jonah starts reminiscing on his childhood . Nikki calms and thinks about taking Jonah home to care for him herself . However , Jonah starts screaming horribly , necessitating that everyone leave his company . In a voiceover , Gwen reveals that the scream lasts for 20 hours every day because Jonah looked into the heart of a Dark Star , which had the effect of driving him insane . Gwen visits Nikki a week later , who implores her not to show the island to anyone else . Nikki states that it would have been better for her to have remembered her son as he was , rather than to know of his true fate . Nikki packs up Jonah 's belongings and knowing he can never return home , breaks down into sobs . At home that night Gwen prepares a romantic candle @-@ lit dinner for Rhys who , realising that she is upset , insists that Gwen shares her burden . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Adrift " was produced as part of its own production block : block seven . Filming of the episode was " double banked " with block five , which consisted of the episodes " From Out of the Rain " and " Fragments " . This accounted for the lack of availability of some of the regular cast members . Unlike the rest of the episodes in the series , this episode was not solely produced by regular series Richard Stokes but by guest producer Sophie Fante . Discussing the premise of the story writer Chris Chibnall states that " the issue of loss " is what drives the narrative and that he had " always wanted to write a story about people who go missing " . Director Mark Everest noted that " people go missing all the time " and that to tackle this theme was " a brave thing to do " . Executive producer Russell T Davies felt it provided good drama to have a story that would also examine elements of " paranoia " and " fear " and " mistrust " between Gwen and Jack as result of her realising she does not know the full extent of his work within Torchwood . Davies later stated in his book The Writer 's Tale that " Adrift " was one of the scripts that " paved the way " for the third series of the show ; his intention being to write Torchwood characters as " real people " with " families , feuds , aches and pains " . The episode underwent less rewriting than any other script from the first two series with the final version being essentially a second draft . Gwen was initially referred to by her husband 's surname , Williams , but Eve Myles vetoed this idea as she believed that an independent professional woman would want to keep her maiden name . A change made in the editing of the episode was the cutting of a short scene hinting at a possible romance between Nikki and Andy . This scene is included in the deleted scenes included in the series two boxset . 
 Ruth Jones was cast in the central guest role of Nikki . The actress stated that she was both " excited " and " scared " to appear in the series as it was " a very serious role " and comedy had previously been her " comfort zone " . Robert Pugh was cast as the aged and scarred version of Nikki 's son Jonah . Richard Stokes estimated that the actor had to spend between two and two and a half hours in make @-@ up in addition to a twelve @-@ hour filming day to have prosthetics applied to create the appearance of scarring . Ruth Jones found the prosthetics to be " absolutely fantastic " and " very gruesome " . The reveal of Jonah 's Scream was initially going to be a wholly alien effect with Pugh just miming on set . However , Pugh was keen to give the scream a go . Everest states that in the final dub the scream was " tweaked " and " layers were added " although stated that the fundamental basis of it was Pugh " screaming his lungs out " . Discussing the return of Andy , Stokes stated that it was always the plan for the production team to give the character greater focus in an episode due to his " comic value " , whilst Eve Myles had joked it was her " personal mission " to get the character back . 
 The episode was largely filmed on location around South Wales . Jonah 's disappearance and Jack 's subsequent investigation were filmed at the Cardiff Bay Barrage . The exteriors of Nikki 's house were filmed at the Penarth Marina , whilst the scenes of the missing persons meeting were filmed at the Church of All Saints on Victoria Square , Penarth on 22 September 2007 . The café sequences with Gwen and Andy were recorded in Fortes Café on Barry Island whilst the scene of Gwen and Rhys ' picnic and argument were shot in Bute Park , Cardiff . The main location shoot for the episode was the island of Flat Holm in the Bristol Channel where exterior shots were filmed at the end of September . As the island does not allow vehicular access the production team were restricted in the filming equipment they could take on to the island . Though Flat Holm does possess a derelict cholera isolation hospital , the scenes of Torchwood 's isolation facility were in fact filmed inside a Ministry of Defence building in Caldicot , Monmouthshire . Incidental music used included Richard Hawley 's song " Serious " from his 2007 album Lady 's Bridge and the song " Hard to Beat " by Hard @-@ Fi from their album Stars of CCTV which are heard the first and second time Gwen and Andy meet in the café . Also used is the song " Other Side of the World " from KT Tunstall 's album Eye to the Telescope which plays during a scene where Gwen brings Rhys breakfast . 
 = = Broadcast and reception = = 
 " Adrift " was first broadcast on the digital channel BBC Three on 19 March 2008 at 10 : 00 pm . It received its first terrestrial broadcast two days later , 21 March , at 9 : 00 pm on BBC Two . A pre @-@ watershed version of the episode was aired at 7 : 00 pm 25 March 2008 . According to consolidated figures the episode 's BBC Three broadcast was watched by 0 @.@ 97 million viewers , its BBC Two debut by 2 @.@ 52 million viewers and the pre @-@ watershed version by 1 @.@ 00 million viewers , amounting to an aggregated total of 4 @.@ 49 million viewers across its three initial showings . The episode was also available to watch on the online catch up service BBC iPlayer , where it was the 16th most viewed individual broadcast between 1 January and 31 March 2008 . 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 Ian Berriman of SFX rated the episode four and a half stars out of five and felt that it showed " how every SF @-@ related casualty is more than just a statistic – it ’ s also someone ’ s life @-@ destroying tragedy " . He thought the episode had a few logic gaps but that the emotional focus was enough to distract the audience from this . He felt that the sequence where Gwen 's husband Rhys " tears a strip off Gwen , then reminds her what Torchwood is fighting for " was the episode 's highlight . Ben Rawson @-@ Jones of Digital Spy stated that the script " neatly brings out the conflicting components within Gwen 's character " and praised the episode for raising the moral dilemma of whether to reveal the truth or not . He gave the episode four stars , feeling it to highlight the versatility of Torchwood as a series and to show " how badly science @-@ fiction is overlooked as serious , well @-@ crafted drama " . IGN 's Travis Fickett rated the episode 9 @.@ 5 out of ten ( " Amazing " ) and stated it to be " the kind of science fiction that every series should aspire to create . " He felt that the episode worked for viewers unfamiliar with the show whilst managing to progress " every regular character in the series " . He felt that the episode handled the subject matter of missing people thoughtfully and sensitively whilst furthering the relationship between Rhys and Gwen , stating that it was the " best episode Gwen has had to date " which showcased " Eve Myles range " and Kai Owen 's " tremendous power as an actor . " Fickett concluded his review by stating that " this is very nearly a perfect episode of not just Torchwood , but the genre of science fiction and the medium of television " . 
 Joan O 'Connell Hedman of Slant Magazine also gave a positive review feeling the episode to explore " Torchwood 's bread and butter topic : the intersection of the human and the alien , and what it means to be human in the aftermath . " She stated that the episode " played to its strengths , namely Eve Myles ' Gwen and how she relates to both human and alien " and stated it to demonstrate " how perfect Rhys is for Gwen " . She felt that the episode was flawed in its " cop @-@ out " ending and Jack 's handling of Gwen but in her conclusion noted it be " the first episode of Torchwood that left me choked up , crying with Gwen at the end " . Airlock Alpha 's Alan Stanley Blair felt the episode to be a vast improvement on its predecessors stating it be " hard hitting , edgy and explores much bleaker and darker avenues to life in Torchwood " . He also felt that the personal effect of Gwen 's struggles on her domestic life was one of the most interesting aspects comparing it to the television series Angel which " touched on some of these threads through the meta @-@ story and vampire mythology " but not " on the scale of this [ episode ] " . He concluded that the episode 's conclusion was both to its credit and its biggest disappointment because it showed that there is " no way to make everything all right " but left its audience " screaming for a happy ending that will never come " . Jason Hughes of AOL TV was more mixed in his review . He felt that the episode was a " vast improvement over last week 's episode " and stated that it lived up to Torchwood 's reputation as " the darker , more mature cousin of Doctor Who " . However , he stated that the episode had " some logistical problems " and " at least one ridiculously convenient coincidence that the emotional hook of the episode hinged on " . He praised the " tragic emotional impact of the moment when Jonah 's mom told Gwen to promise her not to do that to any other families " and stated that he liked " that there weren 't any easy answers " . io9 's Charlie Jane Anders described " Adrift " as " easily the best episode of the Doctor Who spin @-@ off since the one where Martha Jones showed up " . She stated that " the fact that it offered no easy solutions and gave us that super @-@ bleak ending was enough to win me over " . 
 = Silent Alarm Remixed = 
 Silent Alarm Remixed is the remix album to Silent Alarm , the debut album by British indie rock band Bloc Party . It was released on 29 August 2005 in the British Isles on Wichita Recordings , the band 's primary label , and on 13 September 2005 in the United States through Vice Records to coincide with Bloc Party 's worldwide touring schedule . The record peaked at number 54 on the UK Albums Chart . In the US , it achieved a peak of number four on the Billboard Top Electronic Albums . 
 Bloc Party commissioned Silent Alarm Remixed to show that remixes and dance music were relevant to the band and to the rock landscape at large . The band members gave each of the original tracks to a number of musicians from different genres ; Ladytron , Four Tet , and Nick Zinner were amongst those who reworked the songs . Critics often considered the record as showcasing the potential high quality of remix albums , although some reviewers treated it as disjunct and a poor marketing decision . 
 = = Origins and release = = 
 Bloc Party 's critically acclaimed debut album Silent Alarm charted in 18 countries on four continents by the end of April 2005 . The Japanese edition included three bonus songs which later appeared on Silent Alarm Remixed : " So Here We Are ( Four Tet Remix ) " , " Plans ( Mogwai Remix ) " , and " Pioneers ( M83 Remix ) " . The US double LP version contained another two tracks which later formed part of the track list : " Positive Tension ( Jason Clark Remix ) " and " Price of Gas ( Automato Remix ) " . During the month of May , other musical acts were asked to remix the rest of the songs from the band 's work . Frontman Kele Okereke has stated that the decision was taken because the band members wanted to show that dance music was significant to them as a rock quartet . 
 Fellow Vice Records band Death from Above 1979 were the first act to be asked and covered " Luno " as a B @-@ side to their June 2005 single " Black History Month " . Engineers reworked " Blue Light " after supporting Bloc Party at several concerts during the first half of 2005 . Before their fame , Okereke and lead guitarist Russell Lissack were regular visitors to Erol Alkan 's Trash club in London ; the early contact with the band led Alkan to rework their first single " She 's Hearing Voices " . The band had also performed at Dave Pianka 's Philadelphia club and the gig inspired the owner to remix " This Modern Love " with Adam Sparkle into something more suited to a disco . Ladytron were early fans of the band and invited the quartet for a performance at their Liverpool club before reworking " Like Eating Glass " for the release . 
 Whitey and Yeah Yeah Yeahs ' Nick Zinner were the only acts to be hired based on their respective musical credentials . Bloc Party spent the whole of August 2005 promoting Silent Alarm Remixed at several European festivals . The record was released on 29 August following the band 's headlining slots at the Reading and Leeds Festivals on 26 – 28 August . The final track list included the Bloc Party EP edit of " Banquet " by Silent Alarm producer Paul Epworth . The cover art is a negative of the bare winter landscape by freelance photographer Ness Sherry used on Silent Alarm . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 AllMusic 's Heather Phares described the album as more consistent than most remix collections and noted that it functions well as a record in its own right . Priya Elan of NME explained that " the results are pretty much all quality " and that some of the tracks are better than the original songs on Silent Alarm . <unk> 's Thomas Hannan stated , " It 's all very clever , but the most intelligent thing about it is that it makes you think about the original in a completely altered way . " Pitchfork Media 's Nitsuh Adebe was impressed with the album and indicated that it is " surprisingly good , and surprisingly often " . 
 Christian Hoard of Rolling Stone was less receptive and commented that the tracks are flawed in conception , because Bloc Party is not a disco @-@ oriented band despite its propulsive rhythm section . Nick Southall of Stylus suggested that the inherent problem with record is that the vocals have been removed from the " sympathetic stereo @-@ treatment and layering " of Silent Alarm . Liam Colle of PopMatters was not impressed by Silent Alarm Remixed and commented that " the new tricks aren 't quite charming , or very tricky for that matter " , because the album " reeks of a marketing brainstorm " . Drowned in Sound 's Mike Diver concluded that the disparate nature of the record 's contributors denies it the coherency of the original . 
 = = Composition = = 
 Ladytron 's mix of " Like Eating Glass " replaces the lead and rhythm guitars with looped synthesisers and adds a large amount of reverberation to the vocals ; the resulting effect was described by Pitchfork Media 's Nitsuh Adebe as " walking out of your apartment and thinking you can hear Bloc Party playing a festival six blocks over " . Whitey reworked " Helicopter " in a minimalist fashion and introduced wolf howls and a xylophone staccato to the song . The musician 's effects gave the track a rawer sound than the original version according to Heather Phares of Allmusic . " Positive Tension " was remixed by Jason Clark of art punk band Pretty Girls Make Graves under the pseudonym " <unk> " . The song includes elements of oldschool jungle . The Paul Epworth edit of single " Banquet " , under his " Phones " moniker , is more sparse than the original and is closer to dance music than indie rock . 
 Engineers ' " Blue Light " was dubbed the ' Anti @-@ Gravity ' mix and resulted in an ambient track which Nick Southall of Stylus considered as good as Bloc Party 's version . Erol Alkan 's reworking of debut single " She 's Hearing Voices " is a dub version over twice the length of the blueprint . The song accentuates the punk funk elements in Bloc Party 's work . Alkan has noted that his priority was to get more out of the track 's groove and melody since " the original is so fast it kind of flies by without you being able to recognise [ its ] beauty " . Dave Pianka and Adam Sparkle 's work on " This Modern Love " resulted in a musical construction akin to 1980s new wave bands Blondie and The Cure . M83 used several studio effects to create an ambient version of single " Pioneers " by adding strings and synthesisers to the original composition . Automato 's remix of " Price of Gas " infuses Bloc Party 's blueprint with electronica elements . 
 Solo act Kieran Hebden , under his Four Tet alias , provided the remix for " So Here We Are " and created a folktronica version of the original , reminiscent of the music once produced by Windham Hill Records according to Christian Hoard of Rolling Stone . Death From Above 1979 's version of " Luno " is the only re @-@ recording on Silent Alarm Remixed and is wholly in the dance @-@ punk genre . Bloc Party drummer Matt Tong has stated , " It 's a really aggressive take on our music . " Mogwai 's mix of " Plans " adds an extensive use of echo to the original song , while Nick Zinner 's remix of " Compliments " created in Shibuya , Tokyo accentuates Okereke 's whispers to create vocal effects similar to those of The Cure 's Robert Smith according to Adebe . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All songs originally written and composed by Bloc Party and remixed by each credited artist . 
 = = = Bonus tracks = = = 
 " Banquet " ( Cornelius Remix ) – 10 : 47 ( there is also a 4 : 37 version ) – track 14 on the Japanese edition 
 " Tulips " ( Minotaur Shock Remix ) – 5 : 19 – hidden track begins at 5 : 21 of the last song on the UK and US editions and at 5 : 28 of the last song on the Japanese edition . 
 = = Release history = = 
 = = Chart positions = = 
 = William de Ufford , 2nd Earl of Suffolk = 
 William de Ufford , 2nd Earl of Suffolk KG ( 30 May 1338 – 15 February 1382 ) was an English nobleman in the reigns of Edward III and Richard II . He was the son of Robert de Ufford , who was created Earl of Suffolk by Edward III in 1337 . William had three older brothers who all predeceased him , and in 1369 he succeeded his father . In the 1370s , he participated in several campaigns of the Hundred Years ' War , but this period was not a successful one for England . Suffolk was closely connected to Thomas Beauchamp , Earl of Warwick and John of Gaunt , Duke of Lancaster , and his conciliatory skills were highly valued in national politics . He helped arbitrate in the conflict between Gaunt and the parliamentary Commons during the Good Parliament . In 1381 , Suffolk took part in suppressing the Peasants ' Revolt in East Anglia , after narrowly escaping the rebels himself . He died suddenly in 1382 while attending parliament , and since he had no surviving children , his title became extinct and his property was dispersed . 
 = = Early life = = 
 William 's father Robert , the first Ufford Earl of Suffolk , was a close associate of King Edward III and a trusted military commander in the early stages of the Hundred Years ' War . His military career included the Battle of Crécy , the Siege of Calais and the Battle of Poitiers , where he greatly distinguished himself . In 1324 , Robert married Margaret , daughter of Walter Norwich , Treasurer of the Exchequer , expanding his already substantial territorial holdings in East Anglia . 
 Little is known of William 's early years . He was the fourth son of the family , and up until three years before his father died , he still had two surviving older brothers . For this reason , his early biography is based largely on conjecture . It is known that he managed to establish an independent position for himself through a fortunate marriage . By 1361 he was married to Joan Montagu , the daughter of Alice of Norfolk , and – through Alice – a granddaughter of Thomas of Brotherton , a younger son of Edward I. The first recorded evidence for his military activity dates from 1367 , but he was probably also present in earlier campaigns . His father campaigned in France in 1355 – 6 and 1359 – 60 , and it is likely that William also took part in these expeditions , along with Thomas Beauchamp , the future Earl of Warwick . The two men would develop a close affinity , and their careers were strikingly similar : they were born around the same time , they were probably knighted together in July 1355 , neither was born as heir to their earldoms but came to their titles through the death of older brothers , and both succeeded their fathers in 1369 . 
 = = Service to Edward III = = 
 In the autumn of 1367 , William de Ufford and Thomas Beauchamp were going overseas , probably on a crusade to Prussia . On 4 November 1369 , William 's father died , shortly after his oldest son Robert , who was childless . William , who was now the heir of the family , was invested with the earldom of Suffolk soon after . As earl of Suffolk he participated in several campaigns in the rather unsuccessful stage of the Hundred Years ' War in the 1370s , along with Beauchamp , who had recently become Earl of Warwick . They escorted King Charles II of Navarre to and from Cherbourg for his visit to England in 1370 . In 1372 , they were summoned by King Edward III for an abortive expedition to France , and in 1373 – 74 , they accompanied the king 's son John of Gaunt , Duke of Lancaster , on the prince 's fruitless chevauchée from Calais to Bordeaux . In 1375 or 1376 , Suffolk was bestowed the Order of the Garter . Also around this time , the relationship between the earls of Suffolk and Warwick was strengthened further . Suffolk 's first wife Joan must have died at some unknown point before 1376 , when he married Isabel , Warwick 's sister . 
 Suffolk 's connection with John of Gaunt was strong , a family connection that went back to the times of Suffolk 's father . Suffolk 's second wife Isabel had a daughter from a previous marriage , who was in Gaunt 's wardship . This daughter , Elizabeth , who was an heiress of Lord Strange , was probably transferred to Isabel 's household at her marriage to Suffolk . The two lords also maintained some of the same men as servants , or retainers . At the Good Parliament in 1376 , Suffolk was elected to a committee that would discuss the parliament 's grievances concerning the failed fiscal and military policies of Gaunt , who was the de facto ruler of England . In spite of his association with Gaunt , the parliament trusted Suffolk 's neutrality and equality in such a position . After parliament disbanded , Suffolk attended a lavish dinner given by the House of Commons , where Gaunt was conspicuously absent . 
 = = Service to Richard II = = 
 Edward III died in 1377 and was succeeded by his ten @-@ year @-@ old grandson , Richard II . At Richard 's coronation , Suffolk carried the new king 's sceptre , and he was later appointed to Richard 's minority council . Even after the council was disbanded in January 1380 , he remained a central figure at court , participating in the negotiations for the king 's marriage to Anne of Bohemia , and mediating in a conflict between John of Gaunt and Henry Percy , Earl of Northumberland . 
 Suffolk was the dominant magnate in the East Anglia region . When the region 's peasants revolted in 1381 , he became a central figure in their repression . While in Bury St Edmunds , he was taken by surprise by the rebels while eating dinner . The rebel leader , Geoffrey Litster , attempted to force Suffolk to join the rebellion , hoping to lend legitimacy to the cause . When this failed , Litster turned to other prominent men . Suffolk then fled disguised as a groom , reaching London by way of St Albans . He soon returned to Bury with a force of 500 lances , and met little resistance . Much of the work suppressing the rebellion had been undertaken by Henry Despenser , Bishop of Norwich , leaving Suffolk to apprehend the remaining rebels for trial . In the rebellion Suffolk suffered financially : the peasants plundered property worth £ 1 @,@ 000 from his castle at <unk> . 
 = = Death and dispersal of estates = = 
 On 15 February 1382 , Suffolk attended parliament at Westminster Hall . As he ascended the stairs to the chamber where the lords had retired , he fell down and died instantly . According to Walsingham , Suffolk was an amiable man , much liked by all layers of society , and the news of his death was received with great sadness . Politically , he was a conciliatory person , and this quality had facilitated reconciliation in situations such as Gaunt 's conflict with parliament or the quarrel between Gaunt and Percy . He was buried in his family 's traditional burial place <unk> Priory , an Augustinian nunnery in <unk> Ashe , Suffolk . 
 William de Ufford 's first marriage , to Joan Montagu , brought him significant land holdings in Norfolk . With Joan he had at least five children , none of whom survived him , and his second marriage , to Isabel , was apparently childless . The lands he had acquired through Joan were reunited with the earldom of Norfolk , while his patrimony reverted to the crown . According to the late earl 's will , much of the Suffolk lands – though not the title – descended on the Willoughby family , who were connected to the <unk> through marriage . In 1385 , the earldom of Suffolk was restored for Michael de la Pole , who received a great portion of Ufford 's lands to support his title . 
 = Battle of Cape Henry = 
 The Battle of Cape Henry was a naval battle in the American War of Independence which took place near the mouth of Chesapeake Bay on 16 March 1781 between a British squadron led by Vice Admiral Mariot Arbuthnot and a French fleet under Admiral Charles René Dominique <unk> , Chevalier Destouches . Destouches , based in Newport , Rhode Island , had sailed for the Chesapeake as part of a joint operation with the Continental Army to oppose the British army of Brigadier General Benedict Arnold that was active in Virginia . 
 Admiral Destouches was asked by General George Washington to take his fleet to the Chesapeake to support military operations against Arnold by the Marquis de Lafayette . Sailing on 8 March , he was followed two days later by Admiral Arbuthnot , who sailed from eastern Long Island . Arbuthnot 's fleet <unk> that of Destouches , reaching the Virginia Capes just ahead of Destouches on 16 March . After manoeuvring for several hours , the battle was joined , and both fleets suffered some damage and casualties without losing any ships . However , Arbuthnot was positioned to enter the Chesapeake as the fleets disengaged , frustrating Destouches ' objective . Destouches returned to Newport , while Arbuthnot protected the bay for the arrival of additional land troops to reinforce General Arnold . 
 = = Background = = 
 In December 1780 , British General Sir Henry Clinton sent Brigadier General Benedict Arnold ( who had changed sides to the British the previous September ) with about 1 @,@ 700 troops to Virginia to do some raiding and to fortify Portsmouth . General George Washington responded by sending the Marquis de Lafayette south with a small army to oppose Arnold . Seeking to trap Arnold between Lafayette 's army and a French naval detachment , Washington asked the French admiral Destouches , the commander of the fleet at Newport , Rhode Island for help . Destouches was wary of the threat posed by the slightly larger British North American fleet anchored at Gardiner 's Bay off the eastern end of Long Island , and was reluctant to help . 
 A storm in early February damaged some of Arbuthnot 's fleet , which prompted Destouches to send a squadron of three ships south shortly after . When they reached the Chesapeake , the British ships supporting Arnold moved up the shallow Elizabeth River , where the French ships were unable to follow . The French fleet returned to Newport , having as their only success the capture of HMS Romulus , a heavy frigate that was one of several ships sent by the British to investigate the French movements . This modest success , and the encouragement of General Washington , prompted Destouches to embark on a full @-@ scale operation . On 8 March , Washington was in Newport when Destouches sailed with his entire fleet , carrying 1 @,@ 200 troops for use in land operations when they arrived in the Chesapeake . 
 Vice Admiral of the White Mariot Arbuthnot , the British fleet commander in North America , was aware that Destouches was planning something , but did not learn of Destouches ' sailing until 10 March , and immediately led his fleet out of Gardiner Bay in pursuit . He had the speed advantage of copper @-@ clad vessels and a favourable wind , and reached Cape Henry on 16 March , slightly ahead of Destouches . 
 = = Battle = = 
 Although the two fleets both had eight ships in their lines , the British had an advantage in firepower : the 90 @-@ gun HMS London was the largest ship of either fleet ( compared to the 84 @-@ gun Duc de Bourgogne ) , while the French fleet also included the recently captured 44 @-@ gun Romulus , the smallest vessel on either line . When Arbuthnot spotted the French fleet to his northeast at 6 am on 16 March , they were about 40 nmi ( 74 km ) east @-@ northeast of Cape Henry . Arbuthnot came about , and Destouches ordered his ships to form a line of battle heading west , with the wind . Between 8 and 9 am the winds began shifting , but visibility remained poor , and the two fleets manoeuvred for several hours , each seeking the advantage of the weather gage . By 1 pm the wind had stabilised from the northeast , and Arbuthnot , with superior seamanship , was coming up on the rear of the French line as both headed east @-@ southeast , tacking against the wind . Destouches , in order to escape this position , gave orders to wear ship in sequence , and brought his line around in front of the advancing British line . With this manoeuvre he surrendered the weather gage ( giving Arbuthnot the advantage in determining the attack ) , but it also positioned his ships relative to the wind such that he could open his lower gundecks in the heavy seas , which the British could not do without the risk of water washing onto the lower decks . 
 Arbuthnot responded to the French manoeuvre by ordering his fleet to wear . When the ships in the van of his line made the maneuver , they were fully exposed to the French line 's fire , and consequently suffered significant damage . Robust , Europe , and Prudent were virtually unmanageable due to damage to their sails and rigging . Arbuthnot kept the signal for maintaining the line flying , and the British fleet thus lined up behind the damaged vessels . Destouches at this point again ordered his fleet to wear in succession , and his ships raked the damaged British ships once more , taking off London 's topsail yard before pulling away to the east . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 French casualties were 72 killed and 112 wounded , while the British suffered 30 killed and 73 wounded . Arbuthnot pulled into Chesapeake Bay , thus frustrating the original intent of Destouches ' mission , while the French fleet returned to Newport . After transports delivered 2 @,@ 000 men to reinforce Arnold , Arbuthnot returned to New York . He resigned his post as station chief due to age and infirmity in July and left for England , ending a stormy , difficult , and unproductive relationship with General Clinton . 
 General Washington , unhappy that the operation had failed , wrote a letter that was mildly critical of Destouches . This letter was intercepted and published in an English newspaper , prompting a critical response to Washington by the Comte de Rochambeau , the French army commander at Newport . The Comte de Barras , who arrived in May to take command of the Newport station , justified Destouches ' failure to pursue the attack : " It is a principle in war that one should risk much to defend one 's positions , and very little to attack those of the enemy . " Naval historian Alfred Thayer Mahan points out that " this aversion from risks [ ... ] goes far to explain the French want of success in the war . " 
 Lafayette , when he learned of the French failure , turned back north to rejoin Washington . Washington then ordered Lafayette to stay in Virginia , having learned of the reinforcements sent to Arnold . Although the French operation to support Lafayette was unsuccessful , the later naval operations by the Comte de Grasse that culminated in the French naval victory in the September 1781 Battle of the Chesapeake paved the way for a successful naval blockade and land siege of Lord Cornwallis ' army at Yorktown , Virginia . 
 The battle has been memorialized by American singer @-@ songwriter Todd Snider in " The Ballad of Cape Henry " . Although there is a marker commemorating the Battle of the Chesapeake at the Cape Henry Memorial in Virginia , there is no recognition of this battle at the site . 
 = = Order of battle = = 
 Basic information ( ship names and gun counts ) are provided by Morrissey unless otherwise cited . The names of ship captains are provided by Mahan unless otherwise cited , and casualty figured are provided by Lapeyrouse . Mahan and Lapeyrouse disagree on the casualty count ; Mahan reports that the British had 30 killed and 73 wounded , and that the French had 72 killed and 112 wounded . 
 Sources also disagree on which ship carried Destouches and his flag . The English @-@ language sources ( Mahan , p . 492 , and Morrissey , p . 51 ) list his flag on board the Neptune , while Lapeyrouse ( p . 170 ) lists the Duc de Bourgogne . The Duc de Bourgogne was the flagship of Destouches ' predecessor , the Chevalier de Ternay , during which time Destouches was captain of the Neptune ; Destouches may have moved to the Duc de Bourgogne upon Ternay 's death . 
 = = In Popular Culture = = 
 Americana singer <unk> Todd Snider recorded The Ballad Of Cape Henry on his 2008 album Peace Queer based upon the naval engagement and included the following lyrics : 
 Other ships 
 <unk> ( frigate , 28 , Hugh Robinson ) 
 Pearl ( frigate , 32 , George Montagu ) 
 Iris ( frigate , 32 , George Dawson ) 
 Medea ( frigate , 28 , Henry Duncan ) 
 Other ships 
 Hermione ( frigate , 36 , Latouche ) 
 Gentille ( frigate , 32 , M. de <unk> ) 
 Fantasque ( 14 , M. de <unk> ) 
 = John Douglas ( architect ) = 
 John Douglas ( 11 April 1830 – 23 May 1911 ) was an English architect who designed over 500 buildings in Cheshire , North Wales , and northwest England , in particular in the estate of Eaton Hall . He was trained in Lancaster and practised throughout his career from an office in Chester . Initially he ran the practice on his own , but from 1884 until two years before his death he worked in partnerships with two of his former assistants . 
 Douglas 's output included new churches , restoring and renovating existing churches , church furnishings , new houses and alterations to existing houses , and a variety of other buildings , including shops , banks , offices , schools , memorials and public buildings . His architectural styles were eclectic . Douglas worked during the period of the Gothic Revival , and many of his works incorporate elements of the English Gothic style . He was also influenced by architectural styles from the mainland of Europe and included elements of French , German and Dutch architecture . However he is probably best remembered for his incorporation of vernacular elements in his buildings , in particular half @-@ timbering , influenced by the black @-@ and @-@ white revival in Chester . Other vernacular elements he incorporated include tile @-@ hanging , <unk> , and the use of decorative brick in diapering and the design of tall chimney stacks . Of particular importance is Douglas 's use of joinery and highly detailed wood carving . 
 Throughout his career he attracted commissions from wealthy landowners and industrialists , especially the Grosvenor family of Eaton Hall . Most of his works have survived , particularly his churches . The city of Chester contains a number of his structures , the most admired of which are his half @-@ timbered black @-@ and @-@ white buildings and Eastgate Clock . The highest concentration of his work is found in the Eaton Hall estate and the surrounding villages of Eccleston , Aldford and Pulford . 
 = = Biography = = 
 = = = Early life and training = = = 
 John Douglas was born at Park Cottage , Sandiway , Cheshire , on 11 April 1830 and baptised on 16 May 1830 at St Mary 's Church , <unk> . He was the second of the four children , and the only son , of John Douglas and his wife Mary née <unk> ( 1792 – 1863 ) . John Douglas senior was born in Northampton about 1798 – 1800 and his wife was born in Aldford , a village on the Eaton estate in Cheshire ; her father was the village blacksmith at Eccleston , another village in the Eaton estate . John Douglas senior was by trade a builder and joiner , and also described himself as a surveyor and a timber merchant . In 1835 he acted as architect for a house at Hartford , a village between Sandiway and Northwich . At the time of the 1851 census he was employing 48 men . He owned land in Sandiway , and a house and land in the neighbouring village of <unk> . 
 Nothing is known of John Douglas junior 's school education . He gained knowledge and experience in his father 's building yard and workshop which were attached to the family house . In the mid or late 1840s he was articled to E. G. Paley , of Sharpe and Paley , architects in Lancaster , Lancashire . When his articles were completed , Douglas became Paley 's chief assistant . In either 1855 or 1860 he established his own office at No. 6 Abbey Square , Chester . 
 = = = Family and personal life = = = 
 Douglas 's elder sister , Elizabeth , was born in 1827 . His younger sisters were Mary Hannah and Emma , who were born in 1832 and 1834 respectively . Mary Hannah died five months before Emma 's birth , and Emma herself died in 1848 . Douglas married Elizabeth Edmunds , a farmer 's daughter from Bangor @-@ is @-@ y @-@ Coed , Flintshire , on 25 January 1860 in St <unk> 's Church in the village , a church he was later to restore . Initially the couple lived over the office at 6 Abbey Square , and later they moved next door to No. 4 . Their five children were born in these houses , John Percy in 1861 , Colin Edmunds in 1864 , Mary Elizabeth in 1866 , Sholto Theodore the following year , and Jerome in 1869 . Only two of the children survived to adulthood ; Mary Elizabeth died from scarlet fever in 1868 , Jerome lived for only a few days , and John Percy died aged 12 in 1873 . 
 About 1876 the family moved to live at 31 and 33 Dee Banks , Chester , one of a pair of semi @-@ detached houses overlooking the River Dee , which were built by Douglas . His wife died in 1878 from laryngitis after a year 's illness . Douglas did not remarry . His son Colin trained as an architect and worked in Douglas 's office but died in 1887 at the age of 23 from consumption . His other son Sholto is not known to have had any profession but he was a heavy drinker of alcohol . During the 1890s Douglas built a large house for himself , Walmoor Hill , also at Dee Banks overlooking the river . Here he lived until his death on 23 May 1911 at the age of 81 . His funeral was held at <unk> old cemetery , Chester , where he was buried . The following Sunday a memorial service was held at St John the Evangelist 's Church , Sandiway . His estate amounted to a little over £ 32 @,@ 000 ( equivalent to £ 2 @,@ 940 @,@ 000 in 2015 ) . Apart from his surviving buildings , only two memorials remain to his memory . One is a tablet in St Paul 's Church , Boughton , the church in which he worshipped and which he had rebuilt . The other is a plaque placed on one of his buildings in St Werburgh Street , Chester , in 1923 by his pupils and assistants . 
 = = Practice and personality = = 
 Douglas practised on his own until 1884 , when his son , Colin , became ill . He then took Daniel Porter Fordham into partnership and practised as Douglas & Fordham . Fordham was born around 1846 and had been an assistant in Douglas 's office since at least 1872 . In 1898 , having developed consumption , Fordham retired from the practice and went to live in Bournemouth where he died the following year . He was replaced as partner by Charles Howard Minshull , who had been born in Chester in 1858 and who became articled to Douglas in 1874 ; the practice became Douglas & Minshull . During the first decade of the 20th century , Douglas became less active but , for reasons which are unknown , the partnership was dissolved in 1909 . The practice returned to the title of John Douglas , Architect . Minshull went into partnership with E. J. Muspratt in Foregate Street , Chester . When Douglas died , this partnership worked from the Abbey Square address as Douglas , Minshull & Muspratt . 
 Little is known about Douglas 's private life and personality . Only two images of him are known to survive . One is a photograph taken in later middle age . The other is a caricature sketch made by an assistant in his office . This shows him in old age , bowed , bent and bespectacled , carrying a portfolio and an ear trumpet . According to architectural historian Edward Hubbard , Douglas 's life " seems to have been one of thorough devotion to architecture ... which may well have been intensified by the death of his wife and other domestic worries " . His obituary in the Chester Chronicle stated that he " lived heart and soul in his profession " . 
 Douglas was a dedicated Christian who regularly attended his local church , St Paul 's Church , Boughton , a church he rebuilt . His house , Walmoor Hill , included an oratory . He also had a " strong sense of national loyalty " , incorporating statues of Queen Victoria in niches at Walmoor Hill and in his buildings in St Werburgh Street , Chester . Douglas was not good at handling the financial matters of his practice . The Duke of Westminster 's secretary wrote of him in 1884 , " A good architect but a poor hand at accounts ! " . Delay in presenting his accounts often led to difficulties and confusion ; such delay sometimes amounted to as much as ten years . Otherwise very little is known about his personal life . No family papers have survived and none of the documents from the office at 6 Abbey Square has been found . 
 = = Styles and practice = = 
 = = = Output and patronage = = = 
 Douglas designed some 500 buildings . He built at least 40 new churches or chapels , restored , altered or made additions to many other churches , and designed fittings and furniture for the interiors of churches . He designed new houses , altered or made additions to others , and built various structures associated with those houses . Douglas 's works also included farms , shops , offices , hotels , a hospital , drinking fountains , clocks , schools , public baths , a library , a bridge , an obelisk , cheese factories , and public conveniences . As his office was in Chester , most of his works were in Cheshire and North Wales , although some were further afield , in Lancashire , Staffordshire , Warwickshire and Scotland . 
 Throughout his career Douglas attracted commissions from wealthy and important patrons . His first @-@ known independent work was an ornament , which is no longer in existence , for the garden of the Honourable Mrs Cholmondeley . She was the sister @-@ in @-@ law of Hugh Cholmondeley , 2nd Baron Delamere , and it was from the 2nd Baron that Douglas received his first major commission , a considerable rebuilding of the south wing of his seat at Vale Royal Abbey in 1860 . Around the same time , Lord Delamere commissioned him to build the church of St John the Evangelist at Over , Winsford , as a memorial to his first wife . 
 Douglas 's most important patrons were the Grosvenor family of Eaton Hall , Cheshire . In 1865 he was commissioned to design the entrance lodge and other structures for Grosvenor Park in Chester , and St John 's Church in the village of Aldford in the Eaton Hall estate for Richard Grosvenor , 2nd Marquess of Westminster . When the marquess died in 1869 he was succeeded by his son Hugh Grosvenor , 1st Duke of Westminster . Douglas received a large number of commissions from the 1st Duke and from his son , the 2nd Duke , throughout his career . It is estimated that for the 1st Duke alone he designed four churches and chapels , eight <unk> and large houses , about 15 schools , around 50 farms ( in whole or in part ) , about 300 cottages , lodges and smithies , two factories , two inns and about 12 commercial buildings on the Eaton Hall estate alone . He also designed buildings on the duke 's Halkyn estate in Flintshire , including another church . 
 Other wealthy landowners who commissioned work from Douglas included William Molyneux , 4th Earl of Sefton , Francis Egerton , 3rd Earl of Ellesmere , George Cholmondeley , 5th Marquess of Cholmondeley , Rowland Egerton @-@ Warburton of Arley Hall , Cheshire , and in Wales , the family of Lord Kenyon , and the Gladstone family , including W. E Gladstone . He also received commissions from industrialists , including John & Thomas Johnson , soap and alkali manufacturers from Runcorn , Richard Muspratt , a chemical industrialist from Flint , Flintshire , and W. H. Lever , soap manufacturer and creator of the village of Port Sunlight . 
 = = = Styles = = = 
 Although the firm where Douglas received his training was in a provincial city in the north of England , it was at the forefront of the Gothic Revival in the country . The Gothic Revival was a reaction against the neoclassical style , which had been popular in the 18th and early 19th centuries , and it incorporated features of the Gothic style of the Middle Ages . Both Edmund Sharpe and E. G. Paley had been influenced by the Cambridge Camden Society and , more specifically , by A. W. N Pugin who believed that " Gothic was the only correct and Christian way to build " . Sharpe had also been influenced by Thomas Rickman , and he had written papers on medieval scholarship himself . Paley had been influenced by his brother , Frederick Apthorp Paley , who was enthusiastic about Gothic architecture , and who had also been influenced by Rickman . During the time Douglas was working in Lancaster the firm was responsible for building and restoring churches in Gothic Revival style , one of which was St Wilfrid 's Church in the Cheshire village of <unk> , some 3 miles ( 5 km ) from Sandiway . Douglas 's first church , that of St John the Evangelist at Over , Winsford , was entirely English Gothic in style , more specifically Early Decorated . 
 Douglas 's influences were not from England alone . Although he never travelled abroad , he incorporated Gothic styles from continental countries , especially Germany and France . This combination of Gothic styles contributed to what has come to be known as the High Victorian style . Its features include a sense of massiveness , steep roofs which are frequently hipped , round turrets with conical roofs , pinnacles , heavy corbel tables , and the use of <unk> . Many of Douglas 's works , especially his earlier ones , are High Victorian in style , or incorporate High Victorian features . One characteristic feature of Douglas 's work is the inclusion of dormer windows rising through the eaves and surmounted by hipped roofs . 
 Another major influence in his work was the rise of interest in vernacular architecture . By the time Douglas moved to Chester , the black @-@ and @-@ white revival using half @-@ timbering was well under way , and Douglas came to incorporate this style in his buildings in Chester and elsewhere . The black @-@ and @-@ white revival did not start in Chester , but it did become Chester 's speciality . The first Chester architect involved in the revival had been Thomas Mainwaring Penson , whose first work in this genre was the restoration of a shop in Eastgate Street in the early 1850s . Other early Chester architects involved in the revival were T. A. Richardson and James Harrison and it came to be developed mainly by T. M. Lockwood and by Douglas . Part of Douglas 's earliest work for the Grosvenor family , the entrance lodge to Grosvenor Park , used half @-@ timbering in its upper storey ; this is the first known use by Douglas of black @-@ and @-@ white . Other vernacular motifs were taken from earlier styles of English architecture , in particular , the Tudor style . These include tile @-@ hanging , pargetting and massive brick ribbed chimney stacks . In this style , Douglas was influenced by the architects Nesfield and Shaw . Douglas also used vernacular elements from the continent , especially the late medieval brickwork of Germany and the Low Countries . 
 A characteristic of Douglas 's work is his attention to both external and internal detailing . Such detailing was not derived from any particular style and Douglas chose elements from whichever style suited his purpose for each specific project . His detailing applied particularly to his joinery , perhaps inspired by his experience in his father 's workshop , and was applied both to wooden fittings and to the furniture he designed . A further Continental influence was his use of a Dutch gable . The most important and consistently used element in Douglas 's vernacular buildings was his use of half @-@ timbering , which was usually used for parts of the building . However , in the cases of Rowden Abbey and St Michael and All Angels Church , Altcar , the entire buildings were timber @-@ framed . 
 = = Significant works = = 
 = = = Early works ( 1860 – 70 ) = = = 
 Douglas 's earliest significant commissions were for the 2nd Baron Delamere and were very different in type and style from each another . The addition of a wing to Vale Royal Abbey ( 1860 ) was in Elizabethan style while St John 's Church at Over ( 1860 – 63 ) was of the Gothic Revival in Early Decorated style . The Congregational Chapel , also at Over ( 1865 ) was again different , being built in <unk> brick in High Victorian style . Meanwhile , Douglas had designed a shop at 19 – 21 Sankey Street , Warrington ( 1864 ) with Gothic arcades and detailed stone carving which Hubbard considers to be his " first building of real and outstanding quality ... in its way one of the best things he ever did " . Shortly after this came the first commissions for the Grosvenor family , consisting of a lodge and other structures in Grosvenor Park , Chester ( 1865 – 67 ) , and St John the Baptist 's Church , Aldford ( 1865 – 66 ) . His first commission for a large house was <unk> Hall ( 1867 ) for John & Thomas Johnson , industrialists of Runcorn . It is in High Victorian style and includes a main block and a service wing , a large tower on the south face , a small tower with turrets , a porte @-@ cochère , steep roofs and dormer windows . Another early church was St Ann 's at Warrington ( 1868 – 69 ) , again High Victorian in style , which is described as being " quite startlingly bold " and " a prodigy church in Douglas 's output " . By 1869 – 70 Douglas had started to design buildings on the Eaton Hall estate . Around this time he also re @-@ modelled St Mary 's Church , <unk> . 
 = = = Early mature buildings ( 1870 – 84 ) = = = 
 = = = = Secular = = = = 
 Many of the secular buildings in this period were smaller @-@ scale structures . These include cottages in Great Budworth , and cottages , houses , schools and farms in the Eaton Hall estate and its associated villages . In 1872 he designed <unk> Park , a large house in Great Saughall , built in brick with some half @-@ timbering ; it has steep roofs , tall ribbed chimneys and turrets . About the same time he reconstructed Broxton Higher Hall , incorporating much half @-@ timbering . Commissions for more large houses came in the late 1870s and 1880s . The Gelli ( 1877 ) is a house in three ranges designed for the Kenyon sisters in the village of <unk> Green , Flintshire . Also built for the Kenyon family is Llannerch Panna in Penley , Flintshire ( 1878 – 79 ) , which is " competent in its handling of timberwork " . An entirely black @-@ and @-@ white house with <unk> is Rowden Abbey ( 1881 ) in Hertfordshire . Back in North Wales , Plas <unk> ( 1883 ) in Barmouth includes much detailed woodwork internally . 
 In about 1879 – 81 Douglas built a terrace of houses on his own land in Chester , 6 – 11 Grosvenor Park Road , the road leading to the main entrance to Grosvenor Park , in High Victorian style . About 1883 he designed <unk> Hall ( or Barrow Court ) at Great Barrow ( since demolished ) which was one of his largest houses . Also around this time he designed buildings on the Eaton Hall estate , including Eccleston Hill ( 1881 – 82 ) , a large house for the Duke 's secretary , the Stud Lodge , a smaller building of the same dates , Eccleston Hill Lodge ( 1881 ) , a three @-@ storey gatehouse at the main entrance to the park , with a high hipped roof and turrets , and The Paddocks ( 1882 – 83 ) , another large house , this time for the Duke 's land agent . In Chester city centre his designs included the Grosvenor Club and North and South Wales Bank ( 1881 – 83 ) in Eastgate Street , built in stone and brick , with a turret and a stepped gable , and 142 Foregate Street for the Cheshire County Constabulary ( 1884 ) , with a shaped gable in Flemish style . 
 = = = = Churches = = = = 
 St Mary 's Church , <unk> was restored in 1874 – 75 for the 2nd Baron Delamere , retaining much of the medieval interior but rebuilding the exterior , adding a short chancel , and incorporating half @-@ timbering . St Paul 's Church , Boughton in Chester was Douglas 's own parish church which he rebuilt in 1876 incorporating parts of the pre @-@ existing building . Douglas 's only church built entirely in half @-@ timbering is the small church of St Michael and All Angels at Great Altcar in Lancashire . A church built in brick with half @-@ timbering is St Chad 's ( 1881 ) at <unk> in Staffordshire . During this period Douglas built or restored a series of churches entirely in stone , incorporating mainly Gothic features together with vernacular elements . These include St John the Baptist 's Church , Hartford ( 1873 – 75 ) , St Paul 's , Marston ( 1874 , now demolished ) , the Presbyterian Chapel ( 1875 ) at <unk> , Denbighshire , St Stephen 's , Moulton ( 1876 ) , the rebuilding of Christ Church , Chester ( also in 1876 ) , the Church of St Mary the Virgin ( 1877 – 78 ) at Halkyn , Flintshire , and the Welsh Church of St John the Evangelist ( 1878 ) in Mold , also in Flintshire . Later in this period he built St Mary 's Church , at Pulford in 1881 – 84 for the Duke of Westminster and in 1882 – 85 St Werburgh 's New Church at Warburton for Rowland Egerton @-@ Warburton . 
 = = = Partnerships = = = 
 = = = = Douglas & Fordham ( 1884 – 98 ) = = = = 
 In 1885 – 87 the partnership designed <unk> House for the 4th Earl of Sefton in North Lancashire . Hubbard describes this as " the finest of Douglas 's Elizabethan houses , and one of the largest which he ever designed " . During this time additions were made to Jodrell Hall in Cheshire and Halkyn Castle in Flintshire . In 1885 the Castle Hotel at Conwy , Caernarfonshire , was remodelled , and in 1887 – 88 a strongroom was added to Hawarden Castle , followed by a porch in 1890 . During this period more buildings were added to the Eaton Hall estate , and these included houses and cottages , such as Eccleston Hill , and Eccleston Ferry House , and farms such as <unk> Lane Farm . In 1890 – 91 an obelisk was built in the Belgrave Avenue approach to Eaton Hall . The last house designed by Douglas on a large scale was <unk> Hall ( 1893 ) in Derbyshire . This was a country house in Elizabethan style using diapered brick and stone dressings with a clock tower . In Chester city centre , 38 Bridge Street ( 1897 ) is a timber @-@ framed shop that incorporates a section of Chester Rows and contains heavily decorated carving . From 1892 the partnership designed houses and cottages in Port Sunlight for Lever Brothers . Also in the village they designed the Dell Bridge ( 1894 ) , and the school ( 1894 – 96 ) , which is now called the Lyceum . In 1896 Douglas designed a house for himself , Walmoor Hill in Dee Banks , Chester , in Elizabethan style . Between 1895 and 1897 he designed a range of buildings on the east side of St Werburgh Street in the centre of Chester . At its south end , on the corner of Eastgate Street , is a bank whose ground storey is built in stone , and behind this leading up St Werburgh Street , the ground storey consists of shop fronts . Above this the range consists of two storeys plus an attic , which are covered in highly ornamented timber @-@ framing . On the first floor is a series of oriel windows , the second floor is jettied , and at the top are eleven gables . Pevsner considers that this range of buildings is " Douglas at his best ( though also at his showiest ) " . Hubbard expresses the opinion that " in this work , the city 's half @-@ timber revival reached its very apogee " . 
 During the partnership , work continued on designing new churches and restoring older ones . In 1884 – 85 a chapel was built at <unk> Park at Eastham in the Wirral and in 1884 – 87 St Deiniol 's Church was built in Criccieth , Caernarfonshire . Christ Church , <unk> ( 1886 – 92 ) , St Paul 's Church , Colwyn Bay ( 1887 – 88 with later additions ) , and St Andrew 's Church , West Kirby ( 1889 – 91 ) followed . St John 's Church in Barmouth , Merionethshire was built between 1889 and 1895 . It is one of the largest of Douglas 's churches , although in 1891 , during its construction , the tower collapsed and had to be rebuilt . Other churches built in North Wales were Christ Church in Bryn @-@ y @-@ Maen , Colwyn Bay , and All Saints , Deganwy ( both 1897 – 99 ) . 
 In about 1891 – 92 the Church of St James the Great , Haydock , was built . This was constructed in half @-@ timber to give protection against possible mining subsidence . Other new churches built during this partnership were St <unk> 's Church , Bickley ( 1892 ) , St David 's Welsh Church in <unk> , Denbighshire , All Saints Church , Higher Kinnerton ( 1893 ) , the Congregational Church in Great Crosby ( 1897 – 98 ) , and St John the Evangelist 's Church , Weston , Runcorn ( 1897 – 1900 ) . A spire was added to St Peter 's Church , Chester in 1886 – 87 and a tower was added to Holy Trinity Church , Capenhurst in about 1889 – 90 . In 1886 – 87 Douglas added a bell tower to St John the Baptist 's Church , Chester and this was followed by the rebuilding of its north aisle . Other restorations , embellishments , and additions of monuments and furniture were carried out in churches during this partnership . 
 = = = = Douglas & Minshull ( 1898 – 1909 ) and Douglas alone ( 1909 – 11 ) = = = = 
 In 1898 the firm designed St Oswald 's Chambers in St Werburgh Street , Chester , and this was followed by further buildings in the city . In 1902 – 03 Douglas built St John the Evangelist 's Church , in the village of his birth , Sandiway . It was built on land owned by Douglas and he paid for the cost of the chancel and the lych gate . In 1899 the Diamond Jubilee Memorial Clock , constructed in open wrought iron , was erected on the Eastgate in Chester to commemorate Queen Victoria 's Diamond Jubilee in 1897 . In 1898 – 1901 Chester 's public baths were built ; this was an unusual work for Douglas as it involved specialist engineering work . During this period one of Douglas 's most important secular buildings was designed , St Deiniol 's Library , at Hawarden , Flintshire , for W. E. Gladstone and his family . The first phase was constructed between 1899 and 1902 , and the library was completed in 1904 – 06 . Around this time the practice was commissioned to work on two churches in association with Gladstone ; St Ethelwold 's ( 1898 – 1902 ) was a new church at Shotton in Flintshire , and additions were made to St Matthew 's at Buckley , also in Flintshire , between 1897 and 1905 . The other new churches built during this period were Douglas 's only Scottish church , the Episcopal Church ( 1903 ) in Lockerbie , Dumfriesshire , and St Matthew 's Church ( 1910 – 11 ) in <unk> , Flintshire . Alterations were made and furniture was designed for other churches . Douglas 's last major project was the addition of a tower to his church of St Paul 's at Colwyn Bay , but he died before this could be completed . 
 = = = Publication = = = 
 Douglas published no writings of his own and left no records of his ideas and thoughts . The only publication with which he was associated was the Abbey Square Sketch Book , which he edited . The book appeared in three volumes , the first dated 1872 and the others undated ; it consisted of sketches and drawings ( with some photographs in the third volume ) by many contributors . The pictures depicted buildings and furniture , mainly dating from the late medieval period and the 16th and 17th centuries , and mostly from Cheshire and northwest England . Douglas 's only contribution was a jointly ascribed plate in the third volume . It is likely that he designed the title pages , or at least the drawing incorporated in it , of the Abbey Gateway in Chester . 
 = = Reputation , influences and legacy = = 
 Douglas practised for the whole of his career in a provincial county town , and most of his works were concentrated in Cheshire and North Wales , yet he " conducted a practice which achieved national renown " . He was never a member of the Royal Institute of British Architects , but his works featured frequently in national publications , including Building News , The Builder , The Architect , and The British Architect , the last of which particularly praised many of his works . A number of Douglas 's works were exhibited at the Royal Academy and appeared in Academy Architecture . Douglas 's obituary in The British Architect referred to him as having " achieved a reputation which has long placed him in the front rank of living architects " . In the series The Buildings of England , Nikolaus Pevsner described him , without reservation , as " the best Cheshire architect " . In the companion series The Buildings of Wales : Clwyd , Hubbard expressed the opinion that he was " the most important and active local architect of the period " . Critical praise was not confined to Britain ; Douglas 's works were acclaimed by the French architect Paul <unk> , and the German architect and writer Hermann Muthesius . Despite this , the only official recognition he received in his lifetime was a medal for <unk> House , which was shown at an exhibition in Paris . 
 Many of the architects training and working in Douglas 's office were influenced by him . Perhaps the best known of these were Edmund Kirby and Edward Ould . Kirby is best remembered for his Roman Catholic churches . Ould went on to design a number of buildings in Chester and further afield in a Douglas @-@ like style , including notably Wightwick Manor and various buildings at Port Sunlight . Other architects who did not work in his office were also influenced by him ; these include Thomas Lockwood , Richard Thomas Beckett , Howard <unk> , A. E. Powers , James Strong and the Cheshire County Architect , Henry Beswick . 
 A large proportion of Douglas 's buildings still exist , many of them being listed buildings , in a wide variety of types and styles . Douglas is not remembered for any one building type ; his churches and houses are considered to be of equal importance . He was not a pioneer of any particular new development , but instead followed national stylistic trends while still retaining his individuality . His buildings are " anything but copyist " and they " bear a highly individual and nearly always recognisable stamp " . The major characteristics of his buildings are " sure proportions , imaginative massing and grouping ... immaculate detailing and a superb sense of craftsmanship and feeling for materials " . His work is " architecture which can be enjoyed as well as admired " . 
 = Street newspaper = 
 Street newspapers ( or street papers ) are newspapers or magazines sold by homeless or poor individuals and produced mainly to support these populations . Most such newspapers primarily provide coverage about homelessness and poverty @-@ related issues , and seek to strengthen social networks within homeless communities . Street papers aim to give these individuals both employment opportunities and a voice in their community . In addition to being sold by homeless individuals , many of these papers are partially produced and written by them . 
 In the late 19th and early 20th centuries several publications by charity , religious , and labor organizations tried to draw attention to the homeless , but street newspapers only became common after the founding of New York City 's Street News in 1989 . Similar papers are now published in over 30 countries , with most located in the United States and Western Europe . They are supported by governments , charities , and coalitions such as the International Network of Street Papers and the North American Street Newspaper Association . Although street newspapers have multiplied , many still face challenges , including funding shortages , unreliable staff and difficulty in generating interest and maintaining an audience . 
 Street newspapers are sold mainly by homeless individuals , but the newspapers vary in how much content is submitted by them and how much of the coverage pertains to them : while some papers are written and published mainly by homeless contributors , others have a professional staff and attempt to emulate mainstream publications . These differences have caused controversy among street newspaper publishers over what type of material should be covered and to what extent the homeless should participate in writing and production . One popular street newspaper , The Big Issue , has been a focus of this controversy because it concentrates on attracting a large readership through coverage of mainstream issues and popular culture , whereas other newspapers emphasize homeless advocacy and social issues and earn less of a profit . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Historical foundations = = = 
 Although the modern street newspaper began with the 1989 publication of Street News in New York City , and the Street Sheet in San Francisco , 1989 , newspapers sold by the poor and homeless to generate income and to bring attention to social problems date back to the late 19th century ; journalism scholar Norma Fay Green has cited The War Cry , created by the Salvation Army in London in 1879 , as an early form of " dissident , underground , alternative publication " . The War Cry was sold by Salvation Army officers and the working poor to draw people 's attention to the poor living conditions of these individuals . Another precursor to the modern street newspaper was Cincinnati 's Hobo News , which ran from 1915 to 1930 and featured writing from prominent labor and social activists as well as Industrial Workers of the World members , alongside contributions of oral history , creative writing , and artwork from <unk> , or itinerant beggars . Most street papers published before 1970 , such as The Catholic Worker ( founded in 1933 ) , were affiliated with religious organizations . Like workers ' papers and other forms of alternative media in the late 19th and early 20th centuries , early street newspapers were often created because the founders believed mainstream news did not cover issues that were relevant to ordinary people . 
 = = = Modern street newspapers = = = 
 Modern street newspapers began to emerge in the United States in the late 1980s in response to increasing levels of homelessness and homeless advocates ' dissatisfaction with the mainstream media 's portrayals of the homeless . At the time , many media outlets portrayed homeless people as being all criminals and drug addicts , and suggested that homelessness was a result of laziness rather than societal or political factors . Thus , one motivation for the creation of the first street newspapers was to counter the negative coverage of homeless people that was coming from existing media . 
 Street News , founded in late 1989 in New York City , is frequently cited as the first modern street newspaper . Street Sheet in San Francisco started organically around the same time , without the knowledge of Street News ' existence , and is considered the longest @-@ running continuously published street newspaper . While some small papers were already being published when it was founded , Street News attracted the most attention and became the " catalyst " for many other papers . Many more street papers were launched in the early 1990s , crediting the high @-@ profile New York paper as their inspiration , such as Spare Change News in Boston founded in 1992 . During this period , an average of five new papers were created every year . This growth has been attributed both to changing attitudes and policies towards homeless individuals and to the ease of publishing provided by desktop computers ; After 1989 , at least 100 papers sprung up in over 30 countries . By 2008 , an estimated 32 million people worldwide read street newspapers , and 250 @,@ 000 poor , disadvantaged , or homeless individuals sold or contributed to them . 
 Street papers have been started in many major cities worldwide , mainly in the United States and Western Europe . They have especially proliferated in Germany , which in 1999 had more street newspapers than the rest of Europe combined , and in Sweden , where the street papers <unk> , Situation <unk> and <unk> won the 2006 grand prize award for journalism of the Swedish <unk> ' Association . Street papers have been established in some cities in Canada , Africa , South America , and Asia . Even within the United States , some street newspapers ( such as Chicago 's bilingual Hasta Cuando ) are published in languages other than English . 
 In the mid @-@ 1990s , coalitions were established to strengthen the street newspaper movement . The International Network of Street Papers ( INSP ) ( founded in 1994 ) and the North American Street Newspaper Association ( <unk> ) ( founded in 1997 ) aim to provide support for street papers and to " uphold ethical standards " . In particular , the INSP was established to help groups that were starting new street newspapers , to bring more mainstream media attention to the street newspaper movement during the 1990s , and to support interaction and cross @-@ talk between street paper publishers and staff from different countries . The INSP and the <unk> voted to combine their resources in 2006 ; they have collaborated to found the Street News Service , a project which collects articles from member papers and archives them on the internet . National street paper coalitions have also been formed in Europe ( there is a national coalition in Italy , and the Netherlands has the <unk> <unk> Nederland ) . 
 = = Description = = 
 Most street newspapers have three main purposes : 
 To provide income and job skills to the homeless and other marginalized individuals , who act as vendors of and often contributors to the newspapers 
 To provide coverage of , and to educate the general public about , issues pertaining to homelessness and poverty 
 To establish social networks within homeless communities and between homeless individuals and service providers 
 The defining characteristic of a street newspaper is that it is sold by homeless or marginalized vendors . While many street newspapers aim to provide coverage of social issues and educate the public about homelessness , this goal is often secondary : many people who buy street newspapers do so to support and express solidarity with the homeless vendor , rather than to read the paper . 
 The precise demographics of the readership of street newspapers is unclear . A pair of 1993 surveys conducted by Chicago 's StreetWise suggested that the paper 's readers at the time tended to be college @-@ educated , with slightly over half being female , and slightly over half unmarried . 
 = = = Operations and business = = = 
 Most street newspapers operate by selling the papers to homeless vendors for a fraction of the retail price ( usually between 10 % and 50 % ) , after which the vendors sell the papers for the retail price and retain all the proceeds from street sales . The income vendors earn from sales is intended to help them " get back on their feet " . The purpose of requiring vendors to purchase papers up front and earn back the money by selling them is to help them develop skills in financial management . Vendors for most newspapers are identifiable by badges or messenger bags . Many newspapers require that vendors sign a code of conduct or otherwise " clean up their act " . 
 Most street newspaper vendors in the United States and United Kingdom are homeless individuals , although in several other countries ( especially in Europe ) papers are mainly sold by refugees . Nevertheless , not all vendors are homeless ; some have stable housing situations but are unable to hold other jobs , while others started out homeless but were eventually able to use their income from sales to find housing . In general , the major American street newspapers do not require prospective vendors to show proof of homelessness or poverty , and they do not require vendors to retire once they find stable housing . In the United States , since 2008 there have been a growing number of vendors who are " newly needy " — only recently homeless , or with only temporary financial difficulty — as opposed to the " chronically homeless " who have traditionally made up the majority of the vendor force . These vendors are often well @-@ educated and have extensive work experience , but lost their jobs in the 2008 financial crisis . 
 Street papers start in a variety of ways . Some , such as Street Sense , are begun by homeless or formerly homeless individuals , whereas others are more professional ventures . Many , particularly in the United States , receive aid from local government and charities , and coalitions such as the International Network of Street Papers and the North American Street Newspaper Association provide workshops and support for new street papers . Many develop in a bottom @-@ up fashion , starting up through volunteer work and " newcomers to the media business " and gradually expanding to include professionals . For most papers , the majority of revenue comes from sales , donations , and government grants , while some receive advertising revenue from local businesses . There has been some disagreement among street newspaper publishers and supporters over whether papers should accept advertising , with some arguing that advertising is practical and helps support the paper , and others claiming that many kinds of advertisements are inappropriate in a paper that is mainly geared towards the poor . 
 Specific business models for street newspapers vary widely , ranging from vendor @-@ managed papers that place the highest value upon homeless empowerment and involvement to highly professionalized and commercialized weeklies . Some papers ( especially in Europe ) operate as autonomous businesses , while others operate as parts of existing organizations or projects . There are papers that are very successful , such as the UK @-@ based The Big Issue , which in 2001 sold nearly 300 @,@ 000 copies a week and earned the equivalent of over 20 million USD in profits , but many papers sell as few as 3 @,@ 000 copies a month and barely generate a profit at all for the publishers . 
 = = = Coverage = = = 
 Most street newspapers report on issues regarding homelessness and poverty , sometimes functioning as a main source of information on policy changes and other practical issues that are relevant to the homeless but may go unreported in mainstream media . Many feature contributions from the homeless and the poor in addition to articles by activists and community organizers , including profiles of individual street newspaper vendors . For example , the first edition of Washington , D.C. ' s Street Sense included a description of a prominent homeless community , an interview with a congresswoman , an editorial about the costs and benefits of taking a job , several poems about homelessness , a how @-@ to column , and a section for recipes . A 2009 issue of the Lawrence , Kansas @-@ based Change of Heart included a story on the recent bulldozing of a homeless camp , a review of a book on homelessness , a description of the Family Promise organization for homeless support , and a list of community resources ; much of this content was submitted by the homeless . The writing style is often simple and clear ; social scientist Kevin Howley describes street newspapers as having a " native eloquence " . 
 According to Howley , street newspapers are similar to citizen journalism in that both are a response to the perceived shortcomings of the mainstream media and both encourage involvement by non @-@ professionals . A major difference between the two , however , is that the citizen journalism movement does not necessarily advocate a particular position , whereas street newspapers openly advocate for the homeless and poor . 
 Unlike most street newspapers , the UK @-@ based The Big Issue focuses mostly on celebrity news and interviews , rather than coverage of homelessness and poverty . It is still sold by homeless vendors and uses the bulk of its proceeds to support homeless individuals and advocacy organizations for the homeless , but the paper 's content is mostly written by professional staff and geared towards a broad audience . Because of its professional nature and high production values , it has been a frequent target of criticism in an ongoing debate between adherents of professional and grassroots ideals of how street newspapers should work . 
 = = = Social benefits = = = 
 In addition to providing some individuals with income and employment , street newspapers are intended to give homeless participants responsibility and independence , and to create a tight @-@ knit homeless community . Many offer additional programs to vendors , such as job training , housing placement assistance , and referral to other direct services . Others operate as a program of a larger social services organization — for instance , Chicago 's StreetWise can refer vendors to providers of " drug and alcohol treatment , high school equivalency classes , career counseling , and permanent housing " . Most are engaged in some form of organizing and advocacy regarding homelessness and poverty , and many function as " watchdogs " for the local homeless communities . Howley has described street newspapers as a means of mobilizing the networks of " formal and informal relationships that exist between the homeless , the unemployed , and the working poor , and shelter managers , healthcare workers , community organizers , and others who work on their behalf " . 
 = = = Challenges and criticisms = = = 
 In the early days of street newspapers , people were often reluctant to buy from homeless vendors for fear that they were being scammed . Furthermore , many of the more activist papers fail to sell well because their writing and production are perceived to be unprofessional and lackluster . Topics covered are sometimes seen as lacking newsworthy content , and of little relevance or interest to the general public or the homeless community . Organizations in Montreal and San Francisco have responded to these criticisms by offering workshops in writing and journalism for homeless contributors . Papers such as StreetWise have in the past been criticized as " grim " and for having vendors that are too loud and intrusive . Some newspapers sell well but may not be widely read , as many people will donate to vendors without buying , or buy the newspaper and then throw it away . Howley has described readers ' hesitance or unwillingness to read the papers as " compassion fatigue " . On the other hand , those papers that do sell well and are widely read , such as The Big Issue , are often targets of criticism for being too " mainstream " or commercial . 
 Other difficulties street newspapers face include high turnover of " transient " or unreliable staff , lack of adequate funding , lack of journalistic freedom for papers that are funded by local government , and , among some demographics , lack of interest in homeless issues . For example , journalism professor Jim Cunningham has attributed the difficulties in selling Calgary 's Calgary Street Talk to the fact that the mostly middle @-@ class , conservative population has " not enough sensitivity to the causes of homelessness " . Finally , anti @-@ homeless legislation often targets street newspapers and vendors ; for example , in New York City and Cleveland , laws have prevented vendors from selling papers on public transit or other high @-@ traffic areas , making it difficult for the papers Street News and Homeless Grapevine to earn revenue . 
 = = = Differing approaches = = = 
 Among proponents and publishers of street newspapers there is disagreement over how street newspapers should be run and what their goals should be , reflecting a " clash between two philosophies for advocating social change " . On one side of the debate are papers that seek to function like a business and generate a profit and a wide readership in order to benefit the homeless in a practical way ; on the other are papers that seek to provide a " voice " to the homeless and poor without watering down their message for a broad readership . Timothy Harris , the director of Real Change , has described the two camps as " liberal entrepreneurial " and " radical , grassroots activist " . 
 Controversy surrounding The Big Issue , the world 's most widely circulated street newspaper , is a good example of these two schools of thought . The Big Issue is mostly a tabloid covering celebrity news ; while it is sold by the homeless and generates a profit that is used to benefit the homeless , the content is not written by them and there is little coverage of social issues that are relevant to them . In the late 1990s when the London @-@ based paper began making plans to enter markets in the United States , many American street newspaper publishers reacted defensively , saying they could not compete with the production values and mainstream appeal of the professionally produced The Big Issue or that The Big Issue did not do enough to provide a voice to the homeless . The reaction to The Big Issue raised what is now an ongoing conflict between commercialized , professional papers and more grassroots @-@ style ones , with papers such as The Big Issue emulating mainstream papers and magazines in order to generate a large profit to invest in homeless issues and others focusing on political and social issues rather than on content that will generate money . Some street newspaper proponents believe that the primary aim of the papers should be to give homeless individuals a voice and to " fill the void " in mainstream media coverage , whereas others believe it should be to provide homeless individuals with jobs and an income . 
 Other frequent areas of disagreement include the extent that the homeless should participate in the writing and printing of street newspapers , and whether street newspapers should accept advertising to generate revenue . Kevin Howley sums up the division between different street newspaper models when he questions if it is " possible ( or desirable for that matter ) to publish a dissident newspaper — that is , a publication committed to progressive social change — and still attract a wide audience " . 
 = = List of street newspapers = = 
 = Fajsz = 
 Fajsz ( Hungarian pronunciation : [ <unk> ] ) , also <unk> ( pronounced [ <unk> ] ) , was Grand Prince of the Hungarians from about 950 to around 955 . All information on him comes from De administrando imperio , a book written by the Byzantine Emperor Constantine VII Porphyrogenitus . No other contemporary source or later Hungarian chronicle preserved his name , suggesting that he did not take an active role in the politics of the Hungarian tribes ' confederation . 
 = = Life = = 
 Fajsz was the only known son of <unk> , the third son of Árpád who led the Hungarian tribes ' confederation at the time of their conquest of the Carpathian Basin between around 895 and 907 . After Árpád 's death , fundamental changes happened in the government of the tribal confederation . Although the various tribes could even thereafter act in concert for raids , they did not obey a strong central authority any more . 
 Even so , as the historian Miklós Molnár emphasizes , " the supremacy of the House of Árpád seems to have remained unshaken . " For instance , Hungarian visitors to Constantinople – including <unk> , a great @-@ grandson of Árpád – informed Emperor Constantine VII around 948 that the " first chief " of the Hungarians " comes by succession of Árpád 's family " . Constantine VII also mentions that Fajsz was the head of the confederation of the Hungarian tribes around 950 . The historian Gyula Kristó proposes that Fajsz abdicated after the Hungarians ' catastrophic defeat by the Germans in the battle of Lechfeld in 955 . 
 = = Name and legacy = = 
 Fajsz 's name , which was preserved in two forms – " <unk> " and " <unk> " – may be connected either to the Hungarian word for " half " ( <unk> ) or to the verb fal ( " to gobble up " ) . Historian György Györffy proposes that the villages named Fajsz in the Carpathian Basin – for instance , the one in Bács @-@ <unk> County ( Hungary ) – were named after him . Based on the recorded <unk> form of Fajsz 's name , Gyula Kristó rejects this hypothesis . 
 = Red Alarm = 
 Red Alarm ( <unk> , <unk> <unk> ) is a 1995 shoot ' em up video game developed by T & E Soft and published by Nintendo . Released as a Virtual Boy launch game , it requires the player to pilot a space fighter and defeat the army of a malevolent artificial intelligence called " KAOS " . The game takes inspiration from the 1993 title Star Fox , and it is one of the few third @-@ party titles for the Virtual Boy . Unlike most of the console 's games , Red Alarm features three @-@ dimensional ( 3D ) polygonal graphics . However , hardware constraints limited the visuals to bare wire @-@ frame models , similar to those of the 1980 arcade game Battlezone . Reviewers characterized Red Alarm 's graphics as confusing , but certain publications praised it as one of the most enjoyable Virtual Boy titles . 
 = = Gameplay and plot = = 
 Red Alarm is a shoot ' em up that takes place in a three @-@ dimensional ( 3D ) graphical environment . As a Virtual Boy game , it features a red @-@ and @-@ black color palette and stereoscopic 3D visuals , the depth of which may be adjusted by the player . The game is set during the 21st century , in the aftermath of a 70 @-@ year world war that led to the establishment of a utopian society without weapons . An artificially intelligent defense system called " KAOS " , which had been used to end the war , becomes sentient and builds an army to wipe out humanity . 
 Assuming control of a " Tech @-@ Wing " space fighter , the player seeks to destroy KAOS 's forces and finally its mainframe . The game is broken up into six levels , each of which culminates in a boss fight . The player uses the Tech @-@ Wing 's laser cannons to attack , and its guided missiles to destroy armored enemies . Shields on the craft offer limited protection from enemy fire ; evasion is critical . The Tech @-@ Wing may be maneuvered in any direction , and certain levels contain branching corridors and dead ends that force players to retrace their paths . Four camera angles — three third @-@ person viewpoints and the first @-@ person " cockpit view " — are available . When a level is completed , the player may watch a replay of their performance from multiple perspectives . 
 = = Development and release = = 
 Red Alarm was published by Nintendo and developed by T & E Soft , one of the few third @-@ party companies approached to develop for the Virtual Boy . According to the console 's creator , Gunpei Yokoi , Nintendo tried to " maintain as much control as possible " over Virtual Boy game development so that low @-@ quality releases by outside companies could be avoided . Although T & E Soft was known for golf video games , the design of Red Alarm was inspired by that of Star Fox , a rail shooter for the Super Nintendo Entertainment System . This decision was considered by Patrick Kolan of IGN to be " a departure for the team " . Unlike many Virtual Boy games , Red Alarm features an engine that displays 3D graphics : the game world is rendered in wire @-@ frame polygonal visuals similar to those of the 1980 arcade game Battlezone . Because of the console 's limited technology , solid 3D graphics were not viable . 
 Red Alarm debuted in North America at the 1995 Winter Consumer Electronics Show , and it was confirmed as a launch game for the Virtual Boy at that year 's Electronic Entertainment Expo . Later that year , Red Alarm and several other titles were released alongside the console , which debuted on July 21 in Japan and August 14 in the United States . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Writing for Weekly Famicom Tsūshin , Isabella Nagano called Red Alarm 's stereoscopic visuals " amazing " , and Sawada Noda recommended the game to all owners of the Virtual Boy . In a more negative review , the publication 's Mizu Pin characterized the wire @-@ frame graphics as confusing and frustrating , a criticism echoed by the four reviewers of Electronic Gaming Monthly . A GamePro writer under the pseudonym " Slo Mo " found the visuals confusing as well , but felt that players could adjust to them . Slo Mo and Electronic Gaming Monthly 's Danyon Carpenter and Al Manuel praised the title 's control scheme , and the latter magazine 's Andrew Baran summarized Red Alarm as " a nifty show @-@ off game " . 
 The reviewer for Next Generation saw significant promise in Red Alarm , and believed that its elements should add up to " a fantastic game " ; but the writer panned the final product as a wasted opportunity . Similarly , Danny Wallace of Total ! wrote , " On the one hand , it 's a pretty impressive 3D spacey shoot @-@ em @-@ up , with a real grip on the Virtual world and all those fancy techniques , and on the other it 's an often visually confusing , headache @-@ inducing attempt at being something it 's quite obviously not . " However , Dave Halverson of DieHard GameFan called Red Alarm " a great shooter " with excellent graphics . Co @-@ reviewer Nicholas Barres hailed it as a " masterpiece " , and he considered it to be " the one and only reason to buy a Virtual Boy " . 
