 A retrospective feature by the Australian Broadcasting Corporation 's program Good Game highlighted Red Alarm as one of the Virtual Boy 's most visually impressive games due to its polygonal graphics . The outlet praised it as one of the most entertaining titles on the console . Video game database AllGame gave the game a two and a half out of five rating , noting how the graphics made it difficult to play . The review stated that the design of the graphics " makes structures hard to see because there is empty space between the lines defining them . Add multiple enemy fighters and ground defenses [ sic ] into the mix , and it can be very difficult to navigate your ship , especially when you are trying to fight back ! " The review concluded that the developers " have created a very detailed setting for which to fight in . Walls have faces stretching out of them like a scene from The Abyss , there are several interesting bosses to combat , and you 'll even hear some speech . Deep down there is a fine shooter that is simply hard to enjoy due to the limitations of the hardware ... and that is truly a shame . " In 2008 , Kolan called it " a really competent shooter " with strong visuals and gameplay . The following year , Damien McFerran of Retro Gamer summarized Red Alarm as " pretty good fun to play " , although inferior to Star Fox . However , Wired 's Chris Kohler later opined that the game " kind of sucked " . 
 = Pat Collins = 
 <unk> Leslie " Pat " Collins ( September 13 , 1896 – May 20 , 1960 ) was an American baseball catcher who played ten seasons in Major League Baseball ( MLB ) . He played for the St. Louis Browns , New York Yankees and Boston Braves from 1919 to 1929 . He batted and threw right @-@ handed and also played five games at first base . 
 Collins played minor league baseball for the Joplin Miners until 1919 , when he signed with the St. Louis Browns . After spending six seasons with the organization , Collins spent a one @-@ year sojourn in the minor leagues before he was traded to the New York Yankees , where he spent the next three years and played in the famous 1927 Murderers ' Row lineup . At the conclusion of the 1928 season , he was traded to the Boston Braves , with whom he played his last game on May 23 , 1929 . A two @-@ time World Series champion , he is famous for being the only major league player to pinch hit and pinch run in the same game . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Collins was born on September 13 , 1896 in Sweet Springs , Missouri . His mother , Sarah , ran a boarding house , and he had three siblings : Ola , Mildred , and <unk> . He attended school in Sweet Springs before moving to Kansas City , Kansas to play sandlot ball . He was married to Daisy C. Collins . During his time with the Yankees , his teammate Babe Ruth — who usually called everyone " Kid " due to his inability to remember people 's names — mockingly gave Collins the nickname " Horse Nose " . After his major league career ended , he went on to run a restaurant in Kansas City , then operate a tavern in Lawrence , Kansas until 1952 . 
 In April 1952 , the state of Kansas took Collins to court over alleged unpaid federal income tax from 1945 to 1950 . Although he was convicted in December of evading $ 4 @,@ 037 , a federal judge ordered a new trial after evidence emerged showing his friend had deposited $ 48 @,@ 300 in a safety deposit box for him . After being treated for a heart condition , Collins died in his sleep on May 20 , 1960 in Kansas City at the age of 63 and was interred at the city 's Memorial Park Cemetery . 
 = = Professional career = = 
 = = = Minor leagues = = = 
 Collins began his professional baseball career in 1917 with the Joplin Miners , a minor league baseball team that were members of the Class A Western League . In 1919 , his last season with the Miners , he had a breakthrough year , posting a batting average .316 and amassing 100 hits , 19 doubles and 10 home runs in 96 games played . This caught the attention of the St. Louis Browns , who signed him near the end of the season . 
 = = = St. Louis Browns ( 1919 – 24 ) = = = 
 Collins made his major league debut for the Browns on September 5 , 1919 , at the age of 22 , entering the game as a pinch @-@ hitter for pitcher Bert Gallia and drawing a walk in a 12 – 3 loss against the Detroit Tigers . Between 1920 and 1922 , he never played more than 31 games nor started more than 20 games a season as catcher , and his role was limited to occasional pinch @-@ hitting appearances . 
 During the 1923 season , Collins played 47 games ( 37 starts ) and had the fifth highest caught stealing percentage in the American League ( AL ) at 44 @.@ 4 % . During a June 8 road game at Shibe Park , he became the first and only major league player to pinch hit and pinch run in the same game . His teammate Homer <unk> reached base in the third inning , but needed to use the restroom . Collins was inserted into the game as a pinch runner until <unk> returned . In the ninth inning , Collins returned to pinch hit for pitcher Ray Kolp after the Philadelphia Athletics ' manager Connie Mack agreed to drop the no free substitution rule and allowed Collins to pinch hit . However , the official box score lists his pinch hit appearance only . 
 In 1924 , there were two factors which limited Collins to just 20 games ( 11 starts ) as catcher . Firstly , he dislocated the joint in his left thumb during spring training after splitting the finger . Then on June 22 , Collins — along with Browns manager George Sisler and coach Jimmy Austin — were suspended indefinitely after arguing balls and strikes with the umpire . Sisler lodged a formal protest to AL president Ban Johnson , and the suspensions were rescinded four days later . After the season ended , Collins was not re @-@ signed by the Browns , so he spent the 1925 season with the St. Paul Saints , a minor league baseball team that competed in the American Association ( AA ) . There , he batted .316 and hit 19 home runs in 132 games . 
 = = = New York Yankees ( 1926 – 28 ) = = = 
 The Saints traded Collins to the New York Yankees on August 30 , 1925 , in exchange for $ 25 @,@ 000 and three players to be named later ( the Yankees later sent Pee @-@ Wee <unk> to St. Paul on December 16 ) . During his years with the team , he developed a reputation of being slow @-@ footed and having a throwing arm that was described as " terrible " and " weak " . However , his steadiness behind the plate and his bat kept him in lineup . He became the starting catcher " by default " after Benny Bengough — who was Miller Huggins ' first choice for the job — suffered from a sore arm before spring training commenced . In his first season with the organization , Collins had the fourth highest on @-@ base percentage ( .433 ) and tenth best at bats per home run ratio ( 41 @.@ 4 ) in the AL , though he also recorded the fifth highest number of strikeouts in the league with 57 . Defensively , he played the fourth highest number of games at catcher ( 100 ) , during which he finished second in errors committed by a catcher ( 14 ) , fifth in passed balls ( 6 ) and fourth in stolen bases allowed in the AL . However , he compensated for this by turning the most double plays ( 14 ) and recording the second highest range factor ( 4 @.@ 75 ) as catcher , while finishing fourth in putouts ( 401 ) and fifth in assists ( 74 ) at his position and catching the fifth highest number of baserunners stealing ( 34 ) . On July 20 , in the final game of a series against the Browns ( his former team ) , Collins injured a side ligament while attempting to run down catcher Wally Schang , who was also facing his former team . This , along with Bengough 's recurring problems with his arm , prompted the Yankees to buy Hank Severeid from the Washington Senators . In the postseason , the Yankees advanced to the 1926 World Series , where they lost to the St. Louis Cardinals in seven games . Collins did not receive much playing time throughout the series , appearing in just three games and getting no hits and one strikeout in two plate appearances . 
 The 1927 season saw Collins split catching duties with Johnny Grabowski and Bengough . He appeared in the most games behind the plate out of the three players – 89 games caught by Collins versus 68 by Grabowski and Bengough 's 30 . He was usually placed near the bottom of the Yankees lineup , which was given the nickname " Murderers ' Row " . Many sports analysts , baseball writers and fans consider the 1927 team the greatest baseball team of all time . Although Collins was labelled an " offensive afterthought " , he still managed to bat a respectable .275 and drove in 36 runs in 311 plate appearances . Defensively , he once again finished fourth in the AL in number of games ( 89 ) and putouts ( 267 ) at catcher , while also recording the fourth highest fielding percentage at the position ( .976 ) . At the end of the year , the Yankees once again advanced to the World Series , where they swept the Pittsburgh Pirates in four games . Collins played in Games 1 and 4 ; in the first game , he was hitless in two at bats but garnered two walks , while in the latter game he went 3 @-@ for @-@ 3 with a double . His series average of .600 was the highest among his teammates . 
 After the Yankees purchased Bill Dickey from the Jackson Senators before the start of the 1928 season , the team now had four catchers on their roster . The increase competition restricted Collins to 45 starts and 70 games in total . In the 1928 World Series , the Yankees achieved a second consecutive Fall Classic sweep , this time against the Cardinals in a rematch of the series from two years before . However , he played just one game in the series , entering the 7th inning of Game 4 as a defensive substitute and hitting a double two innings later . The catching situation — along with his dismal .221 batting average that year — made Collins redundant , and at the end of the season , he was sold to the Boston Braves . 
 = = = Boston Braves and back to the minors ( 1929 – 32 ) = = = 
 Collins managed to play just seven games for the Braves during the 1929 season , making his final major league appearance on May 23 . During his brief tenure with the team , he was hitless , but drove in 2 runs , drew 3 walks and had 3 sacrifice bunts in 11 plate appearances . After the Braves acquired several younger catchers , he was released and sent to the Buffalo Bisons of the Class AAA International League There , he batted <unk> and had 5 hits in 16 games played before manager Bill Clymer cut him loose after the season ended . He promptly signed a one @-@ year contract with the Seattle Indians , a minor league team that played in the Class AAA Pacific Coast League . He batted .244 during his stint with the team and was traded midway through the 1930 season to the Kansas City Blues , thus returning to the AA . His numbers improved tremendously — he recorded a .358 batting average , amassed 39 hits and slugged 7 doubles and 3 home runs in 109 at bats . The 1931 season saw Collins play just 27 games with the Blues and his average dipped to .182 . He was scheduled to be traded to the Omaha Packers in July , but the deal fell through and he remained with the team through to the 1932 season . That year , he played 105 games and batted .268 , collected 78 hits with 14 doubles , 3 triples and 4 home runs before retiring from professional baseball at the end of the season . 
 = = Post @-@ playing career = = 
 After playing his final major league season in 1929 , Collins returned to minor league baseball and played for several teams until 1932 . In 1936 , he teamed up with former minor league pitcher Van Hammer in attempting to establish a new Western League franchise in St. Joseph , Missouri , after the St. Joseph Saints moved to Waterloo , Iowa and became the Waterloo Hawks . However , the plan fell through after a court injunction was issued barring him from using the stadium in St. Joseph for professional baseball . Because of this , Collins forfeited the St. Joseph franchise and subsequently bought the Western League 's Rock Island Islanders instead . 
 = Nanbu clan = 
 The Nanbu clan ( <unk> , Nanbu @-@ shi ) was a Japanese samurai clan originating in northern Japan , specifically Mutsu Province ( the northeast coast of Honshū ) . The Nanbu claimed descent from the Minamoto clan , and its members first enter the historical record as residents of Kai Province during the Kamakura period . The clan later moved to Mutsu . In the Sengoku period , the clan frequently clashed with its neighbors , including the Tsugaru clan , one of its branches which declared independence . The Nanbu clan was on the winning side of the Battle of Sekigahara , and entered the Edo period as the lordly ( daimyo ) family of the Morioka Domain . Over the course of the Edo period , several branch families were established , each of which received its own fief . 
 During the Boshin War of 1868 @-@ 69 , the Nanbu clan and its branches fought on the side of the <unk> Reppan <unk> , the northern alliance of domains . After the collapse of the alliance , the Nanbu clan had much of its land confiscated , and in 1871 , the heads of its branches were relieved of office . In the Meiji era , they became part of the new nobility . The main Nanbu line survives to the present day ; Toshiaki Nanbu was the chief priest of Yasukuni Shrine . 
 = = Origins = = 
 The Nanbu clan claimed descent from the <unk> Genji , via the Takeda clan of Kai Province . Minamoto no <unk> , the great @-@ great grandson of Minamoto no Yoshimitsu , was the first to take the Nanbu name , after the area in Kai where he resided . The earliest written reference to the Nanbu region of Kai is in the late @-@ 13th @-@ century writings of the Buddhist monk Nichiren . It was in the <unk> period that the Nanbu left Kai and moved to Mutsu Province , where they would remain until 1871 . 
 = = Sengoku and Azuchi @-@ Momoyama era = = 
 In the Sengoku period , the Nanbu clan reached the zenith of its power under the headship of Nanbu Harumasa . Harumasa was very politically active , and corresponded with Oda Nobunaga . 
 A major point of conflict for the Nanbu clan during these years was its relationship with the Ōura clan . The Ōura were a cadet branch of the Nanbu . They declared their independence from the Nanbu in 1571 , during the headship of Ōura Tamenobu . Tamenobu had been vice @-@ district magistrate ( <unk> , <unk> <unk> ) under the Nanbu clan 's local magistrate Ishikawa Takanobu ; however , he attacked and killed Ishikawa and began taking the Nanbu clan 's castles . Tamenobu also attacked Kitabatake <unk> ( another local power figure ) and took his castle at <unk> . The Ōura clan 's fight against the Nanbu clan , under Nanbu Nobunao , would continue in the ensuing years . In 1590 , Tamenobu pledged fealty to Toyotomi Hideyoshi ; Hideyoshi confirmed Tamenobu in his holdings , effectively putting him out of the Nanbu clan 's grasp . As the Ōura fief had been in the Tsugaru region on the northern tip of Honshū , the family then changed its name to Tsugaru . 
 Nanbu Harumasa 's heir Nobunao pledged allegiance to Toyotomi Hideyoshi in 1590 . Hideyoshi confirmed Nobunao 's lordship over the Nanbu fief , and helped suppress an uprising by Nobunao 's relative <unk> <unk> . Nobunao thus helped to secure northern Honshū for Toyotomi Hideyoshi . 
 = = Edo era = = 
 The Nanbu clan sided with Tokugawa Ieyasu 's Eastern Army during the Battle of Sekigahara . In the wake of Ieyasu 's victory , the Nanbu clan was confirmed in its lordship of the Morioka Domain ( <unk> , Morioka @-@ han ) ( also known as the Nanbu Domain ( <unk> , Nanbu @-@ han ) ) . The income rating was placed at 100 @,@ 000 koku , but later in the Edo era , Morioka was given the political ranking of a domain twice its size . The Nanbu clan remained here for the entirety of the Edo Period , surviving until the Meiji Restoration . Over the course of the Edo period , two new branches of the Nanbu clan were founded . One of them was granted the fief of Hachinohe , and the other one was granted the fief of Shichinohe . In 1821 , the old tensions between the Nanbu and Tsugaru flared once more , in the wake of the Sōma Daisaku Incident ( <unk> , Sōma Daisaku jiken ) , a foiled plot by Sōma Daisaku , a former retainer of the Nanbu clan , to assassinate the Tsugaru lord . The Nanbu clan 's territories were also among those effected by the <unk> famine of the mid @-@ 1830s . 
 Though no Nanbu lord ever held shogunate office , the Nanbu of Morioka ( together with many of the other domains of northern Honshū ) assisted the shogunate in policing the frontier region of Ezochi ( now Hokkaido ) . The clan 's first direct encounter with foreigners came in the late 16th century , when a Dutch ship , the <unk> , arrived in Nanbu territory . A shore party from the ship was captured by local authorities and taken to Edo . 
 Over the course of its history particularly in the Edo period , there were several retainers of the Nanbu clan who became famous on a national scale . Narayama Sado , a clan elder ( karō ) who was active during the Boshin War , was one of them ; he was responsible for leading the Nanbu clan 's political activity and interaction with neighboring domains . Hara Takashi , who later became Prime Minister of Japan , was another . Some 20th @-@ century figures in Japanese politics also came from families of former Nanbu retainers ; perhaps the most well known ones were Seishirō Itagaki and Hideki Tōjō . 
 = = Boshin War = = 
 During the Boshin War of 1868 @-@ 69 , the Nanbu clan was initially neutral . However , under the leadership of Nanbu <unk> and the clan elder ( <unk> , karō ) Narayama Sado , the Nanbu clan later sided with the northern alliance ( the Ōuetsu Reppan Dōmei ) . On September 23 , 1868 , the Nanbu clan 's troops joined in the attack on the Akita Domain , which had seceded from the alliance and sided with the imperial government . By October 7 , Nanbu troops took Ōdate , one of the Akita domain 's castles . However , due to the collapse of the alliance , the Nanbu clan surrendered to the imperial army on October 29 , 1868 . After the war , the Nanbu clan 's holdings were drastically reduced by the imperial government as punishment for siding with the northern domains . The Nanbu of Morioka were then briefly moved to Shiroishi before being returned to Morioka . Two years after the war , as with all other daimyo , the heads of all three Nanbu branches were relieved of their offices by the abolition of the han system . 
 = = Meiji era and beyond = = 
 In the early years of the Meiji era , the main Nanbu line was ennobled with the title of count ( <unk> ) in the new nobility system . The Nanbu of Hachinohe and Shichinohe were also ennobled with the title of viscount ( shishaku ) . Count <unk> Nanbu , the 42nd generation Nanbu family head , was an officer of the Imperial Japanese Army , he died in battle during the Russo @-@ Japanese War . He was succeeded by his brother Toshiatsu ; Toshiatsu was a proponent of the arts and studied painting under Kuroda Seiki . As Toshiatsu 's presumptive heir <unk> died at age 18 , Toshiatsu adopted Toshihide Ichijō , his son @-@ in @-@ law , as his heir . Toshihide was the son of Duke Ichijō <unk> , who was a former court noble . Upon adoption , Toshihide assumed the Nanbu name , and after Toshiatsu 's death , became 44th generation Nanbu family head . After Toshihide 's death in 1980 , his son Toshiaki became 45th generation head . From 2004 through 2009 , Toshiaki was the chief priest of Yasukuni Shrine . 
 = = Family heads = = 
 Main line ( <unk> , later Morioka ) 
 Branch line ( Hachinohe ) 
 Branch line ( Shichinohe ) 
 = = = English = = = 
 Contemporary Japan : A Review of Japanese Affairs ( 1939 ) . Tokyo : The Foreign Affairs Association of Japan . 
 <unk> , Katsuji ( 1937 ) . The Japan Year Book . Tokyo : Foreign affairs association of Japan . 
 Iwao , Seiichi . ( 1978 ) . Biographical dictionary of Japanese history . Berkeley : University of California . 
 " Japan Focus " article on Yasukuni Shrine ( accessed 13 Dec. 2007 ) 
 Oka , Yoshitake ( 1986 ) . Five Political Leaders of Modern Japan . Tokyo : University of Tokyo Press . 
 <unk> , <unk> ( 1996 ) . Taken Captive : A Japanese POW 's Story . Ann Arbor : University of Michigan Press . 
 <unk> , Edmund . ( 1948 ) . Historical and Geographical Dictionary of Japan . New York : Overbeck Co . 
 <unk> , Conrad . ( 1993 ) . Early Modern Japan . Berkeley : University of California Press . 
 = = = French = = = 
 <unk> , Jacques Edmund Joseph . ( 1906 ) Dictionnaire d 'histoire et de géographie du <unk> . Tokyo : <unk> <unk> . <unk> du <unk> ( 2003 , abridged online text of 1906 book ) . ] 
 = = = German = = = 
 List of Meiji @-@ era Japanese nobility ( accessed 15 August 2008 ) 
 = = = Japanese = = = 
 <unk> , <unk> ( 2005 ) . Boshin <unk> sensō to Tōhoku <unk> Sendai : Kita no mori . 
 " Hachinohe @-@ han " on Edo 300 HTML ( accessed 15 August 2008 ) . 
 Hoshi , <unk> ( 1997 ) . Ōuetsu Reppan Dōmei . Tokyo : <unk> @-@ <unk> . 
 " Morioka @-@ han " on Edo 300 HTML ( accessed 15 August 2008 ) . 
 <unk> ( 1913 ) . Nanbu <unk> <unk> n.p. : Kikuchi Gorō . ( Accessed from National Diet Library , 15 August 2008 ) 
 " Nanbu @-@ shi " on <unk> ( accessed 15 August 2008 ) . 
 <unk> ( 2000 ) . <unk> <unk> . Tokyo : Yamakawa <unk> . 
 Noguchi Shin 'ichi ( 2005 ) . Aizu @-@ han . Tokyo : Gendai <unk> . 
 " Shichinohe @-@ han " on Edo 300 HTML ( accessed 15 August 2008 ) . 
 " Tokugawa Bakufu to <unk> 117 han . " <unk> <unk> Magazine , April 1976 . 
 " Tsugaru @-@ shi " on <unk> ( accessed 15 August 2008 ) . 
 = = = Nonfiction = = = 
 <unk> , <unk> H. ( 2002 ) . Prisoners from Nambu : reality and make @-@ believe in seventeenth @-@ century Japanese diplomacy . Honolulu : University of Hawai 'i Press . 
 Mori , <unk> ( 1967 ) . Nanbu Nobunao . Tokyo : <unk> <unk> . 
 = = = Fiction = = = 
 Asada , Jirō ( 2008 ) . Mibu <unk> . Tokyo : Kashiwa <unk> . 
 = = Popular Culture = = 
 The Nanbu are a playable nation in the grand strategy game Europa Universalis IV . 
 = Britomart Redeems Faire Amoret = 
 Britomart Redeems Faire Amoret is an oil painting on canvas by English artist William Etty , first exhibited in 1833 and now in Tate Britain . Intended to illustrate the virtues of honour and chastity , it depicts a scene from Edmund Spenser 's The Faerie Queene in which the female warrior Britomart slays the evil magician Busirane and frees his captive , the beautiful Amoret . In Spenser 's original poem Amoret has been tortured and mutilated by the time of her rescue , but Etty disliked the depiction of violence and portrayed her as unharmed . 
 Despite being a depiction of an occult ritual , a violent death , a near @-@ nude woman and strongly implied sexual torture , Britomart Redeems Faire Amoret was uncontroversial on its first exhibition in 1833 and was critically well received . Sold by Etty to a private collector in 1833 , it passed through the hands of several more before entering the collection of the Lady Lever Art Gallery . In 1958 it was acquired by the Tate Gallery , and it remains in the collection of Tate Britain . 
 = = Background = = 
 William Etty was born in York in 1787 , the son of a miller and baker . He showed artistic promise from an early age , but his family were financially insecure , and at the age of 12 he left school to become an apprentice printer in Hull . On completing his seven @-@ year indenture he moved to London " with a few pieces of chalk @-@ crayons in colours " , with the aim of emulating the Old Masters and becoming a history painter . Etty gained acceptance to the Royal Academy Schools in early 1807 . After a year spent studying under renowned portrait painter Thomas Lawrence , Etty returned to the Royal Academy , drawing at the life class and copying other paintings . In 1821 the Royal Academy exhibited one of Etty 's works , The Arrival of Cleopatra in Cilicia ( also known as The Triumph of Cleopatra ) . The painting was extremely well received , and many of Etty 's fellow artists greatly admired him . He was elected a full Royal Academician in 1828 , ahead of John Constable . He became well respected for his ability to capture flesh tones accurately in painting and for his fascination with contrasts in skin tones . 
 Following the exhibition of Cleopatra , Etty attempted to reproduce its success , concentrating on painting further history paintings containing nude figures . He exhibited 15 paintings at the Summer Exhibition in the 1820s ( including Cleopatra ) , and all but one contained at least one nude figure . In so doing Etty became the first English artist to treat nude studies as a serious art form in their own right , capable of being aesthetically attractive and of delivering moral messages . Although some nudes by foreign artists were held in private English collections , Britain had no tradition of nude painting , and the display and distribution of nude material to the public had been suppressed since the 1787 Proclamation for the Discouragement of Vice . The supposed prurient reaction of the lower classes to his nude paintings caused concern throughout the 19th century . Many critics condemned his repeated depictions of female nudity as indecent , although his portraits of male nudes were generally well received . ( Etty 's male nude portraits were primarily of mythological heroes and classical combat , genres in which the depiction of male nudity was considered acceptable in England . ) From 1832 onwards , needled by repeated attacks from the press , Etty remained a prominent painter of nudes but made conscious efforts to try to reflect moral lessons in his work . 
 = = Composition = = 
 Britomart Redeems Faire Amoret illustrates a scene from book III of The Faerie Queene , a 16th @-@ century allegorical epic poem by Edmund Spenser , in which Busirane , an evil sorcerer , abducts the beautiful Amoret ( representing married virtue ) , and tortures her to the point of death . The heroic female warrior Britomart ( representing both chastity and Elizabeth I ) battles through obstacles to reach the chamber in which Amoret is being held , and slays Busirane moments before he is able to kill Amoret . 
 Britomart Redeems Faire Amoret was intended by Etty to illustrate the virtues of chastity and honour . It shows the moment in which Busirane is interrupted by Britomart as he prepares to kill Amoret . Amoret is chained to a gilded Solomonic column , carved with depictions of Venus , and her clothes fall from her shoulders as she struggles . Britomart , clad in armour , enters Busirane 's Moorish chamber , and tramples a blood @-@ stained grimoire as she draws her sword . Busirane , naked from the waist up and with Chinese @-@ style trousers and queue , falls to the floor , his blade still pointing at Amoret 's heart . Unusually for Etty , Britomart is painted very thinly , with the canvas weave still visible through the paint . Art historian Alison Smith considers that this was likely inspired by Henry Fuseli , who painted a depiction of Britomart using the same style of painting . 
 In the original poem , Busirane had tortured and cut out the heart of the still @-@ living Amoret by the time of her rescue . When he came to paint Britomart Redeems Faire Amoret Etty had created numerous scenes of combat and death , and would later achieve a degree of critical approbation when it became known that he visited mortuaries to sketch cadavers to ensure the accuracy of his depictions of bodies in varying stages of decomposition . However , he had an aversion to " the offensive and revolting butchery , some have delighted and even revelled in " , and disliked the depiction of gratuitous violence . Consequently , in Etty 's work Amoret is depicted as physically unharmed by her ordeal , although his composition implies " sadistic torture and occult sexual sorcery " . 
 Although there is a strong suggestion in his letters that in his early years he had a sexual encounter with one of his models and possibly also a sexual encounter of some kind while in Venice in 1823 – 24 , Etty was devoutly Christian and famously abstemious . Alison Smith considers the composition of Britomart Redeems Faire Amoret a conscious effort on his part to praise the virtue of chastity by creating a " challenge for the presumably male viewer ... to vanquish lust and cast a pure gaze on vulnerable womanhood " . Throughout his career Etty had championed the use of female models in life classes , creating some controversy , and this painting may have been intended to emphasise his belief that " To the pure in heart all things are pure " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In 1832 , the exhibition of Etty 's Youth on the Prow , and Pleasure at the Helm had led to significant criticism in some parts of the press for its use of nude figures , with The Morning Chronicle condemning it as an " indulgence of what we once hoped a classical , but which are now convinced , is a lascivious mind " . When it was exhibited at the Royal Academy Summer Exhibition in 1833 , Britomart Redeems Faire Amoret received much more favourable treatment . 
 Although it depicted a near @-@ nude woman , a violent death , an occult ritual and the strong implication of sexual torture , critical coverage was overwhelmingly positive . The New Monthly Magazine considered it " a wondrous and rare piece of colour " , while The Gentleman 's Magazine considered it " a beautiful cabinet picture " of a " truly poetical character " . The most effusive praise came from The Literary Gazette : 
 Grace and beauty in the female form , spirited action in the knight , and fiend @-@ like expression in the magician , unite with the splendid depth of effect produced by the architecture to render this , notwithstanding a slight tendency to blackness in some of the half @-@ tints , one of Mr. Etty 's " gems of art " . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Etty considered Britomart Redeems Faire Amoret one of his major works . Following its exhibition at the 1833 Summer Exhibition , it was exhibited in August of the same year at the Royal Manchester Institution . It was sold at this second exhibition for £ 157 ( about £ 13 @,@ 000 in today 's terms ) to an anonymous collector listed in Etty 's records only as " Mr. L. , Manchester " . It was one of 133 Etty paintings exhibited in a major retrospective exhibition of his work at the Royal Society of Arts in June – August 1849 ; during this exhibition it was sold on to Lord Charles Townshend for a sum of 520 guineas ( about £ 51 @,@ 000 in today 's terms ) . 
 Etty died in 1849 , having continued working and exhibiting up to his death , and continued to be regarded by many as a pornographer . Charles Robert Leslie observed shortly after Etty 's death that " [ Etty ] himself , thinking and meaning no evil , was not aware of the manner in which his works were regarded by grosser minds " . Interest in him declined as new movements came to characterise painting in Britain , and by the end of the 19th century the costs of all his paintings had fallen below their original prices . 
 Townshend sold Britomart Redeems Faire Amoret two years after Etty 's death for 510 guineas . It then passed through the hands of several owners over subsequent years , selling for a slightly lower sum each time . It was likely an influence on John Everett Millais 's 1870 The Knight Errant , which also showed a distressed nude woman being rescued ; although Millais disliked Etty 's later works , several of his paintings were strongly influenced by the artist . 
 In 1919 Britomart Redeems Faire Amoret was bought for 410 guineas ( about £ 18 @,@ 000 in today 's terms ) by William Lever , 1st Viscount Leverhulme , and was one of the 13 Etty works transferred to the Lady Lever Art Gallery , where it remained until 1958 . In 1958 it was bought by the Tate Gallery , and as of 2015 it remains in Tate Britain . It was one of four Etty paintings shown as part of Tate Britain 's Exposed : The Victorian Nude exhibition , and in 2011 – 12 it was exhibited as part of a major retrospective of Etty 's work at the York Art Gallery . In 2013 Franco Moretti argued that Britomart Redeems Faire Amoret was the " prototypical " example of the Victorian nudes of the later 19th century in which nudity ceased to be a symbol of innocence and instead became a symbol of the coercion of women at the hands of savages , criminals and tyrants . 
 = Emma Pillsbury = 
 Emma Pillsbury Schuester is a fictional character from the Fox musical comedy @-@ drama series Glee . Portrayed by actress Jayma Mays , Emma has appeared in Glee from its pilot episode , first broadcast on May 19 , 2009 . Emma was developed by Glee creators Ryan Murphy , Brad Falchuk and Ian Brennan . She is a guidance counselor at the fictional William McKinley High School in Lima , Ohio where the series is set . Emma suffers from obsessive @-@ compulsive disorder and has romantic feelings for glee club director Will Schuester ( Matthew Morrison ) , but becomes engaged to football coach Ken Tanaka ( Patrick Gallagher ) as Will is married . Ken ultimately breaks up with her on their wedding day because of her feelings for Will , and when Will leaves his wife Terri ( Jessalyn Gilsig ) , he and Emma share a kiss . Their relationship is short @-@ lived , and in the second season , Emma and her dentist boyfriend Carl Howell ( John Stamos ) marry in Las Vegas . The wedding is later annulled as it was unconsummated . At the beginning of the third season , she and Will are living together ; they become engaged shortly after New Years , and consummate their relationship near the end of the school year . Emma leaves Will at the altar midway through the fourth season , but the two later reconcile and marry in the season finale . She becomes pregnant during the middle of the fifth season . 
 Mays feels the character has a lot of depth , juxtaposing Emma 's position helping the students with her own phobia of germs and love for a married man . She explained that " the character is not a stereotypical TV @-@ style husband @-@ stealer who immediately would be luring the dude into the sack , but rather seems like a real person facing real issues . " Mays has performed several musical numbers in the show , including " I Could Have Danced All Night " from My Fair Lady , Madonna 's " Like a Virgin " , " Touch @-@ a , Touch @-@ a , Touch @-@ a , Touch Me " from The Rocky Horror Show , " Afternoon Delight " by the Starland Vocal Band , and The 5th Dimension 's " Wedding Bell Blues " . " Touch @-@ a , Touch @-@ a , Touch @-@ a , Touch Me " was originally Mays ' audition piece ; her performance of it on Glee was met with critical acclaim . The songs appear on the series ' soundtrack albums and EPs . 
 The character has been well received by critics , including Mike Hale of the New York Times who praised Mays for being able to " [ register ] Emma 's devastation with just the slightest widening of [ her ] enormous eyes . " Critics responded well to the development of Emma and Will 's relationship . Eric Goldman of IGN wrote that their first kiss was " hard to not feel good about " . Dan Snierson of Entertainment Weekly , however , suggested that it may have been " more intriguing " to leave their romance unresolved . 
 = = Storylines = = 
 Emma is introduced as the guidance counselor at William McKinley High School . She has romantic feelings for Spanish and glee teacher Will Schuester ( Matthew Morrison ) , and encourages him in his attempt to revitalise the school glee club . She is dismayed to learn that Will 's wife Terri ( Jessalyn Gilsig ) is pregnant and that he is considering leaving the teaching profession to become an accountant , but is able to convince him to reconsider by showing him a video of him singing . In an attempt to get over Will , Emma begins dating football coach Ken Tanaka ( Patrick Gallagher ) , and becomes engaged to him in the episode " Vitamin D " . However , when Will is unable to attend a competition with the glee club , Emma volunteers to take them in his place , and postpones her own wedding by several hours . Acknowledging her continuing feelings for Will , Ken breaks up with her on their wedding day . Emma tells Will that she has resigned from the school , as she is ashamed of her behavior with Ken , and is heartbroken that she cannot be with Will . Will tells her that he has left Terri , but Emma feels it is too soon for him to move on . Regardless , as she later prepares to leave the school , Will finds her and stops her with a kiss . 
 Emma and Will pursue a relationship , but Emma fears that he may be repeating patterns from his relationship with Terri because of his difficulties with being alone . She reveals that she is a virgin , and though she decides to have sex with Will , she changes her mind at the last moment . Will suggests that she see a counselor for help with her debilitating issues . Emma later discovers that Will kissed another woman and verbally berates him , terminating their relationship . In the season finale , Will kisses Emma and tells her that he loves her . Emma begins a relationship with her dentist , Dr. Carl Howell ( John Stamos ) , which leads to a Vegas wedding . Her reservations about sex lead her to become faculty advisor to the school 's celibacy club . Carl arranges a meeting with sex education teacher Holly Holliday ( Gwyneth Paltrow ) , and reveals that they have yet to sleep together . Emma confesses that she may still have feelings for Will , and Carl tells her he will be moving into a hotel until she is certain of her feelings . 
 In " A Night of Neglect " , Emma reveals to Will that Carl has left her for good and wants an annulment , since their marriage was never consummated . Because of the stress , Emma 's OCD affects her far more than usual , and she feels regretful because she thought she would have overcome it by that point in her life . Will tells Emma that he will be there for her no matter what , and also urges her to get treatment for her OCD . She starts seeing a psychiatrist in the episode " Born This Way " , and is showing signs of improvement by the end of season two . Over the summer , Will and Emma move in together , although they have not consummated their relationship . That they are both thinking of an eventual marriage is made clear in the episode " Asian F " , and when Will invites her parents to dinner in that episode , he discovers that they are " ginger supremacists " who mock Emma 's OCD , the roots of which are shown in flashbacks with them and an eight @-@ year @-@ old Emma . Will asks Emma to marry him in " Yes / No " and she accepts . Later that winter , a tenured position opens at McKinley High , and although Will and Sue Sylvester compete against each other for the position , it is ultimately given to Emma rather than either of them . Will and Emma finally consummate their relationship in " Nationals " after New Directions wins the show choir championship . 
 When Will is named to a national blue @-@ ribbon panel on the arts in Washington , DC , early in the fourth season , he expects Emma to come with him , but Emma is very reluctant to do so : she doesn 't want to leave her job for several months while he 's away . They ultimately agree that Emma will stay behind and the two will reunite on weekends . They also agree to get married when Will returns , but the stress of planning a big wedding proves too much for Emma , and she leaves the church before the ceremony begins . She and Will eventually reconcile , and the two finally get married in the choir room with the glee club as witnesses in " All or Nothing " , after New Directions win Regionals . Following their marriage , the couple decide to have children , but are unable to conceive for several months . They are desperately trying to do so in the fifth season 's tenth episode " Trio " , and are caught having sex in the school by Becky Jackson ( Lauren Potter ) . At the end of the episode , Emma reveals to Will that she is pregnant . In " Opening Night " Emma gives birth to a boy , Daniel Finn Schuester . During the final season , in the episode Transitioning , she convinces a torn Will to choose what 's best for him , to stay at Vocal Adrenaline with a promising salary and facility but unhappy or to stop . In a parallel episode to the Pilot , 2009 , she is aware and <unk> with Kurt 's depression and consults with his father about it and also convince Will to stay with the Glee Club as the kids still needs him and that it what makes him happy . In the series finale , " Dreams Come True " , she is now living happily with the newly promoted Will as the principal and in the future they have more kids together . She appears at the McKinley 's auditorium rededication to Finn Hudson and enjoys the final performance of the New Directions . She is visibly shocked when Will and Terri hug and together with all of the Glee Cast take a final bow . 
 = = Development = = 
 = = = Casting and creation = = = 
 Emma is portrayed by actress Jayma Mays . In the third season episode " Asian F " , Hannah Spiros plays an eight @-@ year @-@ old Emma . Prior to her casting in Glee , Mays was already an established actress in both the television and film industry , but had little theatrical experience . In casting Glee , series creator Ryan Murphy sought actors who could identify with the rush of starring in theatrical roles . Auditioning actors with no theatrical experience were required to prove they could sing and dance as well as act , and Mays auditioned with the song " Touch @-@ a , Touch @-@ a , Touch @-@ a , Touch Me " from The Rocky Horror Show . Asked what originally drew her to the role of Emma , Mays said : 
 " Everything , really . Actually , the second I got the sides . I got the sides just for that character before I got the whole script . And just from the sides alone in the pilot , I could tell she was such a well developed character . And there was so much going on with her just from those few sheets of paper that I had kind of describing who she was . I knew immediately that there was a lot that was going to be going on with her . And I think that 's hard to find sometimes with roles for women . There 's maybe not so many layers to them , always . And I just felt from the get go that there was so much going on . And I also knew that Ryan Murphy was involved . I knew that was exciting to me , too . As soon as I heard that , I knew that there would be something good on the page . So I was immediately drawn to it . " 
 = = = Characterization = = = 
 In the first episode , it is revealed that Emma has obsessive @-@ compulsive disorder , suffering from <unk> , a fear of germs . The show garnered mostly praise for its portrayal of a character with OCD and for accurately @-@ depicting OCD as a serious but treatable anxiety disorder . 
 Bill Harris of the Toronto Sun assessed that her phobia is " comical " and that Emma 's initial role in the series is comic relief . Mays has explained that " the character is not a stereotypical TV @-@ style husband @-@ stealer who immediately would be luring the dude into the sack , but rather seems like a real person facing real issues . " Mays added : " This is something that ’ s part of a lot of people ’ s lives . But Emma is not a cheater . They ’ ve portrayed her as being somewhat virginal . There ’ s purity there . She doesn ’ t just hone in and say , ‘ I want to destroy this guy ’ s relationship . ' So Emma is hopeful and sad at the same time . Funny , too . Sounds like real life , where , as stated earlier , you can ’ t help who you love . " David Hinckley of the New York Daily News described her as " good @-@ hearted and smart . Emma is also so obsessive @-@ compulsive she counts the bristles on her toothbrush . " 
 Mays has deemed Emma an " amazing " character to play , and has explained : " I don 't find that female characters are always written with a lot of depth , but she 's so well defined on the page . Sure , she 's terrified of germs and in love with a married man , so seeing her as the voice of reason for the kids is amazing . " Emma 's relationship with Will will continue to grow , as " she has these moments of clarity when she 's talking to Will because he calms her . " Mays described her in an interview with <unk> : " She is a romantic at heart . But she ’ s practical . She ’ s very interesting , because she does have those dreams and hopes of finding the right man . And in her mind , even though Will Schuester ’ s married , that sort of guy is like the perfect guy for her . She ’ s very practical in the fact that she doesn ’ t want to be alone and she knows that she ’ s somewhat limited in a small town to men . And Ken Tanaka is a very nice man , he ’ s not exactly like Will , but he ’ s good to her and he ’ s solid . He ’ s got a job , and he understands her and he understands all her quirks and stuff . So she ’ s practical , she knows that just might be her lot in life . So it ’ s weird . She ’ s got this very dreamy side about her and who she wants to be and what she wants her life to be like . But she ’ s also got this very practical , down @-@ to @-@ earth , well this is kind of the best I can do thing . It ’ s funny a lot of people have thought that part about her is weak . Like a weak character flaw , but I actually don ’ t think that ’ s true . I really just think that ’ s the practical side of her . I think that ’ s her being practical . And I think a lot of people are like that sometimes . " 
 Discussing Emma 's style and costuming , Glee 's costume designer Lou Eyrich has explained : " We wanted to make her look like everything ’ s so neat — perfectly ironed and tucked @-@ in shirts with matching belts , shoes and pins . We wanted to make her stand out from the other teachers . She ’ s always so happy and excited , so we wanted her outfits to represent that sunny disposition . In the pilot , we made her look much more teacher @-@ y . Now we 're having more fun with her character , keeping her bright and unusual . Quirky is the word . Emma ’ s also always in stacked Mary Janes or T @-@ strap heels . It takes the outfit down from being too stylish or too sexy . It makes her look prim and almost old @-@ fashioned . " 
 = = = Relationships = = = 
 Emma 's relationship with glee club coach Will Schuester is an integral part of her character . They have had an on and off relationship since the show 's first season . Television critics have responded extremely well to the pairing between the two . Mandi Bierly for Entertainment Weekly said of the episode " Vitamin D " : " Matthew Morrison communicates so much with his eyes . There ’ s a softness and a longing in them that I ’ m always surprised Emma ( Jayma Mays ) matches . " Critics also commented positively on the development of Will and Emma 's relationship in the episode Sectionals . Natalie Abrams of TV Guide noted that she had been waiting for them to kiss since the pilot episode , and Eric Goldman of IGN has deemed their coming together " very hard to not feel good about " . Dan Snierson , however , wrote that although there was satisfaction in the episode ending on the kiss , it may have been " more intriguing " to conclude when Will finds Emma 's empty office , and having him then question whether it was too soon for the two of them to begin a relationship . Eric Goldman of IGN commented of the following episode : " I would have liked to at least see Shue and Emma as a couple for a few episodes , rather than such a quick split . It felt rushed . " Todd VanDerWerff added : " I loved Emma 's eruption to Will about how Sue Sylvester must have cheated and the kids deserved to win . " Robert Canning said of the Britney Spears oriented episode : " The true focus of the episode was Will dealing with his lack of spontaneity . This stood as a contrast to the impulsiveness of Emma 's new boyfriend , sexy dentist Carl played by the somehow always charming John Stamos . There 's a fun love triangle building here which should only get better as Will becomes less of an insecure whiner . " 
 Jayma Mays commented of their relationship : " Oh no ! I don ’ t know if I can say ! That ’ s a hard question because when you see the scenes of Emma and Will , you obviously think ' Oh of course they ’ re supposed to be together , of course , of course ! ' but the fact is , is that he ’ s a married man and Emma knows that ’ s wrong , and she doesn ’ t want to be a homewrecker . She doesn ’ t want to ruin a relationship . So I guess in a perfect world , she could find someone like Will , or maybe Ken Tanaka ( laughs ) can become a little bit more like Will . But maybe it ’ s all about respect . Maybe if she can respect Ken enough , that will develop into true love . " She also commented of her co @-@ star Matthew Morrison ( Will ) : " We were friends . We knew each other before we started this job . We worked together once before . So , that ’ s always helpful when you know the person that you ’ re working with , and you already feel comfortable around them . But yeah , he ’ s a really good friend , so that makes that stuff a little bit easier . " 
 = = Reception = = 
 Variety 's Brian Lowry deemed the adult cast of early Glee " over @-@ the @-@ top buffoons " , however opined that Emma offered " modest redemption " . The Los Angeles Times 's Denise Martin called Mays as Emma " just as funny " as Lynch 's Sue , and noted : " Emma doesn 't get the zingers Coach Sue gets , but she makes me laugh just as hard . " Harris commented that , " Despite the sad seriousness of [ Emma 's love for Will ] , the tightly wound Emma [ ... ] also is one of the funniest characters in Glee . Go figure . It 's funny , because everything is kind of heavy that 's going on in her life , with these phobias and this guy she loves who ’ s married , yet she still is a bit of the comic relief . " Mandi Bierly for Entertainment Weekly noted of the episode " Vitamin D " that she had hoped Emma would decline Ken 's proposal : " I want Emma to be strong and know it ’ s better to be without someone for the right reason than to be with someone for the wrong one . " Mike Hale for the New York Times praised Mays ' performance in the episode . He noted : " Jayma Mays registered Emma ’ s devastation with just the slightest widening of those enormous eyes . In fact all the best non @-@ singing moments in the episode were hers . " 
 Critics commented positively on the development of Will and Emma 's relationship ; TV Guide 's Natalie Abrams wrote that she had been waiting for them to kiss since the pilot episode . Flandez felt that the kiss made the " poignant moment " of the glee club 's final performance " even more dear " , and hoped that it would not be the last between them , while Aly Semigran of MTV praised the development and called the kiss " sweet [ and ] longing " . Goldman wrote : " Schue and Emma finally coming together was very hard to not feel good about , even though you know it just won 't be that easy when the show returns " . Gerrick Kennedy of the Los Angeles Times opined that it was clear Ken and Emma would not marry , and added that when Will kissed Emma : " I died " . In discussing Will and Emma 's conversation about how she would have left Ken if Will had shown any interest in her , Pardue commented : " That 's maybe the sweetest and the saddest thing I 've ever heard . " She called the kiss between Will and Emma " romantic " commenting that it made her " heart happy " . Entertainment Weekly 's Dan Snierson commented that although there was satisfaction in the episode ending on the kiss , it may have been " more intriguing " to conclude with Will finding Emma 's office empty , or " before she smiled approvingly after their kiss " , questioning whether it was too soon for the two of them to begin a relationship , or " about freakin ' time " . 
 Todd VanDerWerff of The A.V Club was critical of Emma in the show 's second season . He said : " Emma is apparently married , but we haven ’ t seen her husband since October , and even when he was more of a “ fixture ” on the show ( which is difficult to say about a character who ’ s appeared as little as Carl Howell has ) , his relationship with Emma made no sense as anything other than a plot device . Now , as it turns out , Emma and Carl haven ’ t consummated their marriage at all , and this has something to do with the fact that the show has combined Emma ’ s germ @-@ phobia and virginity into some sort of terrifying psychosexual pathology that doesn ’ t make much sense and doesn ’ t resemble the somewhat levelheaded person she used to be . ( The plotting in Will Schuester ’ s love life is the one place where the show attempts to have even a modicum of continuity , for whatever reason . ) Anyway , Carl is necessarily upset about this , and he ’ s also upset when Holly Holliday gets Emma to admit that she still has confusing feelings for Will , so he resolves to let her stay in the condo while he stays in the Radisson where all of the good big @-@ name Glee guest stars go to hope their pilots for the fall are picked up . " 
 = = Musical performances = = 
 Mays performed a cover version of " I Could Have Danced All Night " from My Fair Lady in the episode " Mash @-@ Up " , a studio recording of which was included as a bonus @-@ track on copies of Glee : The Music , Volume 1 purchased from Target stores . Raymund Flandez of The Wall Street Journal called the performance " lovely " , and Andrea Reiher for Zap2it similarly praised the piece : " wow , she has a nice voice ! She 's no Julie Andrews , but she 'll do . " Eric Goldman for IGN commented : " Seeing Emma sing " I Could Have Danced All Night " was sweet , though was it just me ( or my TV ) , or was the volume on her vocals a bit unusually loud ? I also could have done without Will 's line telling her she should sing to help her keep the beat as she danced – come on Glee , you 're a musical . Embrace it and just let her sing . " 
 Mays said that she " had fun singing , " but found the experience " terrifying , " as she had never given a musical performance on camera before . She derided her choreography skills , and elaborated : " I was so nervous that day . I had to keep eating bread and toast because my stomach was so sick . But it was an interesting experience . It was definitely a challenge for me . Of course if they ask me to do it again , I would do it again . But I ’ m not going to go begging them for it . " 
 In her first lead solo performance since the first season , Mays performed " Touch @-@ a , Touch @-@ a , Touch @-@ a , Touch Me " from The Rocky Horror Show during the themed episode " The Rocky Horror Glee Show " ; it was the song she 'd used when auditioning for the role of Emma . Anthony Benigno of the Daily News named it the best song of the episode , and graded it " A + " . Despite finding the episode " abrupt , uneven [ and ] sanitized " , Flandez felt that it was saved by this performance . Erica Futterman of Rolling Stone remarked that having Emma in the role of Janet was " ideal " , but preferred the song visually to vocally . Slant Magazine 's Matt Zoller Seitz disliked the change in Emma 's characterization which brought about the number , and while he wrote that " Mays was so charming that she almost , almost saved it " , he ultimately found the " motivational contortions " insulting to the audience . The track was included on the EP Glee : The Music , The Rocky Horror Glee Show . It charted at number 72 in the UK , and 96 in Canada . 
 In season three , Mays performs " Wedding Bell Blues " in the episode " Yes / No " , which was described by Bobby Hankinson of The Houston Chronicle as " the perfect combination of a great song , plot relevance , and Princess Beatrice hat " . TV Guide 's Kate Stanhope agreed with him on all three points , and added that it was " a great pick for her vocals " . TVLine 's Michael Slezak described those vocals as " a breath of dewy spring air " and gave the song an " A " , but Joseph Brannigan Lynch of Entertainment Weekly thought Emma was not " much of a singer " and gave the number a " B − " , though he said " the curiosity of backup vocals from Coach Beiste and Sue Sylvester made this entirely worthwhile " . 
 In season four , Mays is one of eight singers featured in the performance of " The Scientist " by Coldplay in the episode " The Break @-@ Up " . She also performed the song " ( Not ) Getting Married Today " from the musical Company with Morrison and Amber Riley in the episode " I Do " and " You 're All The World to Me " from Royal Wedding in the following episode , again with Morrison . 
 = LaRouche criminal trials = 
 The LaRouche criminal trials in the mid @-@ 1980s stemmed from federal and state investigations into the activities of American political activist Lyndon LaRouche and members of his movement . They were charged with conspiring to commit fraud and soliciting loans they had no intention of repaying . LaRouche and his supporters disputed the charges , claiming the trials were politically motivated . 
 In 1986 , hundreds of state and federal officers raided LaRouche offices in Virginia and Massachusetts . A federal grand jury in Boston , Massachusetts , indicted LaRouche and 12 associates on credit card fraud and obstruction of justice . The subsequent trial , described as an " extravaganza " , was repeatedly delayed and ended in mistrial . Following the mistrial , a federal grand jury in Alexandria , Virginia , indicted LaRouche and six associates . After a short trial in 1988 , LaRouche was convicted of mail fraud , conspiracy to commit mail fraud , and tax evasion , and was sentenced to prison for fifteen years . He entered prison in 1989 and was paroled five years later . At the same trial , his associates received lesser sentences for mail fraud and conspiracy . In separate state trials in Virginia and New York , 13 associates received terms ranging from one month to 77 years . The Virginia state trials were described as the highest @-@ profile cases that the state Attorney General 's office had ever prosecuted . Fourteen states issued injunctions against LaRouche @-@ related organizations . Three LaRouche @-@ related organizations were forced into bankruptcy after failing to pay contempt of court fines . 
 Defense lawyers filed numerous unsuccessful appeals that challenged the conduct of the grand jury , the contempt fines , the execution of the search warrants and various trial procedures . At least ten appeals were heard by the United States court of appeals , and three were appealed to the U.S. Supreme Court . Former U.S. Attorney General Ramsey Clark joined the defense team for two appeals . Following the convictions , the LaRouche movement mounted failed attempts at exoneration . 
 = = Background = = 
 Beginning in the late 1960s and early 1970s , Lyndon LaRouche formed a variety of political organizations , including the U.S. Labor Party and the National Democratic Policy Committee . These organizations served as the platforms for presidential campaigns by LaRouche starting in 1976 , and by his followers in scores of local races . According to one candidate , supporters viewed LaRouche as " the greatest political leader and economist of the 20th century , and they 're proud to be associated with him . They feel he 's leading the battle to save Western civilization . " The Survey of Jewish Affairs , 1987 called the LaRouche movement one of the two most prominent " extremist political groups " of 1986 . 
 The movement 's greatest electoral success came in 1986 when two supporters , Janice Hart and Mark J. Fairchild , won the Democratic Party nominations for Illinois Secretary of State and Lieutenant Governor . Both lost in the general election . Also in 1986 , the " Prevent AIDS Now Initiative Committee " ( <unk> ) got an initiative on the California ballot , Proposition 64 ( also known as the " LaRouche Initiative " ) , which attracted widespread opposition and was defeated that November . 
 = = Investigations = = 
 = = = Early 1980s = = = 
 According to arguments made by LaRouche 's attorneys in later appeals , the government investigations were started under the FBI 's COINTELPRO in the 1960s . Edward Spannaus , a defendant in the trials , further notes that there was a memorandum written on January 12 , 1983 , by former FBI chief William Webster to Oliver " Buck " Revell , head of the Bureau 's General Investigative Division . It requested information on the funding of LaRouche and the U.S. Labor Party , including whether the U.S. Labor Party might be funded by hostile intelligence agencies . The LaRouche organization asserts that this formulation was specifically tailored to enable FBI " active measures " against LaRouche under Executive Order 12333 , which permits such measures if a political movement receives foreign funding . The memo was eventually obtained by LaRouche 's attorneys and submitted as an exhibit in the 1987 trial of LaRouche and co @-@ defendants in Boston . 
 In August 1982 , former Secretary of State Henry Kissinger sent a memo to Webster requesting an investigation of the LaRouche movement due to their " increasingly obnoxious " harassment of him , which was raised at a meeting that day of the President 's Foreign Intelligence Advisory Board by senior member David Abshire . Revell replied to Kissinger that there was sufficient evidence to proceed with an investigation . The FBI conducted an investigation but did not find evidence of a violation of Kissinger 's civil rights . The investigation was closed in late 1983 . 
 = = = Mid @-@ 1980s = = = 
 In the mid @-@ 1980s , the U.S. government and eleven states began investigations into alleged financial improprieties by LaRouche groups . A federal grand jury reportedly began investigating " an extensive nationwide pattern of credit card fraud " by LaRouche organizations in November 1984 . That same year a New Jersey bank froze the accounts of LaRouche 's 1984 presidential campaign due to allegedly fraudulent credit @-@ card charges . 
 In January 1985 , the grand jury in Boston , Massachusetts , subpoenaed documents from the National Democratic Policy Committee ( <unk> ) , and three other LaRouche organizations : Caucus Distributors Inc . , Fusion Energy Foundation , and Campaigner Publications Inc . Seven weeks later , on March 29 , 1985 , a U.S. District Court Judge A. David <unk> held them to be in contempt and fined them $ 45 @,@ 000 per day . The fines for all the organizations eventually totaled over $ 20 million . The same grand jury subpoenaed Elliot I. Greenspan , an official of Caucus Distributors Inc . , to appear but he pleaded the Fifth Amendment and refused to testify . He was granted immunity and compelled to testify but only did so after being jailed for contempt for two days . A spokesman for LaRouche called the investigation " a political terror operation " . 
 Investigations by a separate federal grand jury in Alexandria , Virginia , along with state agencies in New York , California , Minnesota , Illinois and Washington were also underway . The FBI , IRS , FEC and personnel of other federal agencies were conducting separate investigations . The Internal Revenue Service revoked the tax @-@ exempt status of the Fusion Energy Foundation in September 1985 , and a year later the State of New York sought to dissolve the corporation , alleging that it used " persistently fraudulent and illegal " means to solicit donations . U.S. Attorney William Weld announced in January 1986 , that he would convene a national conference " to coordinate a prosecutive and investigative effort " against LaRouche . The conference was held the following month in Boston . Three states , Alaska , Indiana and Maryland , banned fund raising by Caucus Distributors Inc. in May 1986 , due to the sale of unregistered promissory notes . The Illinois Secretary of State began civil proceedings against Caucus Distributors Inc. in June 1986 , seeking an injunction to bar deceptive business practices . Minnesota officials banned " Independent Democrats for LaRouche " from fund raising , an order that was affirmed on appeal to the U.S. Supreme Court . 
 LaRouche lawyers filed a series of related civil suits against individuals , agencies and businesses . They sued Weld and former Attorney General William French Smith to try to stop the FBI investigation of the credit card case . They sued the New Jersey bank that had frozen their credit card merchant accounts ; and they sued Chemical Bank in a similar suit . Edward Spannaus , a treasurer for LaRouche campaigns , filed complaints with the state bar and the U.S. Justice Department against one of the Assistant U.S. Attorneys in the case . 
 = = Raid and indictments = = 
 Beginning October 6 , 1986 , the Leesburg , Virginia , headquarters of the LaRouche organization was searched in a coordinated , two @-@ day raid by hundreds of officers of the FBI , IRS , other federal agencies , and Virginia state authorities , supported by armored cars and a helicopter . The agents also surrounded LaRouche 's heavily guarded estate for the duration of the search but did not enter it . While surrounded , LaRouche sent a telegram to President Ronald Reagan saying that an attempt to arrest him " would be an attempt to kill me . I will not submit passively to such an arrest , but ... I will defend myself " . He later assured that he would comply peaceably with any warrant . LaRouche offices in Quincy , Massachusetts were searched as well . US Attorney Henry E. Hudson held a press conference to say that the searches had recovered subpoenaed materials , including notebooks and index cards . 
 Warren J. <unk> , Chair of the <unk> , said the searches " conducted by Donald Regan 's associate William Weld 's forces against presidential candidate Lyndon LaRouche 's headquarters coincides with Don Regan 's desperate attempts to maintain the cover @-@ up on AIDS " . LaRouche later said that the Soviet Premier had ordered the raid as part of an assassination attempt . " The man with the mark of the beast on his head , Mikhail <unk> , has demanded my elimination " , said LaRouche . In his 1987 autobiography , he wrote that the raid was ordered by Raisa Gorbachev , whom he described as outranking her husband in the nomenklatura due to her leadership of the Soviet Cultural Fund . 
 On the same day as the Leesburg search , the Boston grand jury handed down a 117 @-@ count indictment that named ten LaRouche associates , two corporations , and three campaign committees . Authorities charged them with making unauthorized credit charges that defrauded $ 1 million from over 1 @,@ 000 people . The charges also included a scheme to raise funds by soliciting loans with no intention of repaying them . The National Caucus of Labor Committees was charged , along with others , of conspiring to obstruct justice . Prosecutors charged that defendants had burned records , sent potential grand jury witnesses out of the country , and failed to provide subpoenaed evidence . The indictment quoted LaRouche telling an associate that , in reaction to legal problems , " we are going to stall , tie them up in the courts ... just keep stalling , stall and appeal , stall and appeal " . Three of the indicted associates remained at large for over a year , and investigators were allegedly given false information . On June 30 , 1987 , the U.S. grand jury in Boston indicted LaRouche on one count of conspiracy to obstruct justice . 
 Meanwhile , the state cases were progressing . On February 16 , 1987 , the Commonwealth of Virginia indicted 16 LaRouche associates on securities fraud and other felonies . On March 3 , 1987 , the State of New York indicted 15 LaRouche associates on charges of grand larceny and securities fraud . 
 = = Involuntary bankruptcy = = 
 In early April 1987 , the government charged in court that LaRouche organizations may have been trying to sell properties for cash to more easily conceal their assets and avoid paying $ 21 @.@ 4 million in contempt of court fines . The U.S. Department of Justice filed an involuntary bankruptcy petition on April 20 , 1987 , to collect the debt from Caucus Distributors Inc . , Fusion Energy Foundation , and Campaigner Publications Inc . In a rare procedure , the companies were seized before the bankruptcy came to trial . Assistant U.S. Attorney S. David Schiller wrote in a brief that the debtors had a " pattern of transferring or commingling substantial corporate assets to their members and other insiders for little or no consideration and for non @-@ business purposes " . The trustees later reported they were only able to locate about $ 86 @,@ 000 in assets . 
 The bankruptcy halted the publication of a weekly newspaper , New Solidarity , and a bi @-@ monthly science magazine , Fusion . At least one publication , Fusion , was reborn with a new name but the same editor and material . 
 The attorneys who represented the LaRouche entities in the bankruptcy trial filed a brief stating that the action was unprecedented and improper , alleging that it deviated from the standard rules of involuntary bankruptcy , and that members of the Alexandria prosecution team from the second criminal trial were involved in the planning and execution of the bankruptcy . 
 During the bankruptcy trial in September 1989 , an FBI agent destroyed evidence ( credit card receipts , cancelled checks , and FEC filings ) immediately after he had promised the court he would preserve them . On October 25 , 1989 , Judge Martin V.B. Bostetter dismissed the government 's involuntary bankruptcy petition , finding that two of the entities involved were nonprofit fund @-@ raisers and therefore not subject to involuntary bankruptcy actions . According to the LaRouche movement , Bostetter said the government 's actions amounted to bad faith regardless of whether government agents and attorneys had intended this outcome . He found that the government 's actions and representations in obtaining the bankruptcy had the effect of misleading the court as to the status of the organization , leading to a " constructive fraud on the court " . In 1993 , an appeals court decision said that Bostetter had specifically rejected that view , and said that the defendants had " greatly distorted the character of much of the evidence " . Appeals that went all the way up to the U.S. Supreme Court found that the matter of the involuntary bankruptcy would not change the outcome of LaRouche 's conviction . 
 The LaRouche organization asserts that it has proof , obtained under the Freedom of Information Act , which shows that the purpose of the bankruptcy was simply to shut down the affected entities rather than to collect fines . The U.S. Attorney said , " Essentially the court holds that we did not abuse the bankruptcy filing , just that we should have filed differently . " He also noted that only a minimal amount of money had been collected . 
 = = Boston trials = = 
 = = = Trial of Frankhouser = = = 
 United States District Judge Robert Keeton presided in Boston . Jury selection was completed in September 1987 . Before the trial could begin , Keeton granted a motion to sever the case of Roy Frankhouser , whose case was tried first in front of a different jury . Frankhouser had been an informant for the ATF and other law enforcement agencies , in addition to being a neo @-@ Nazi and a former Pennsylvania Ku Klux Klan grand dragon . Frankhouser became a security consultant for LaRouche after convincing him that he was actively connected to U.S. intelligence agencies . 
 In U.S. v. Frankhauser , Frankhouser testified that he and LaRouche security employee Forrest Lee Fick had invented a connection to the CIA in order to justify his $ 700 a week salary . They persuaded a friend to play a former top CIA official ( " Mr. Ed " ) in meetings with LaRouche associates who , according to LaRouche group lawyers , came to believe that they had a direct line of communication to the White House and Kremlin through Mr. Ed and — as " a national resource in security matters " — were immune from prosecution . When LaRouche found out about the grand jury investigation , he reportedly told Frankhouser to get the CIA to quash it . Frankhouser told LaRouche that the CIA wanted him to destroy evidence and hide witnesses . Frankhouser claimed that on another occasion LaRouche sent him to Boston to check on the grand jury investigation . Instead of going to Boston he went to a Star Trek convention in Scranton , Pennsylvania and called to warn LaRouche that the FBI had wiretapped his phones . LaRouche was called as a defense witness in Frankhouser 's trial but he refused to testify , exercising his Fifth Amendment right to avoid self @-@ incrimination . 
 Frankhouser was found guilty of obstruction of the federal investigation into credit @-@ card fraud . He was sentenced to three years and a $ 50 @,@ 000 fine . After his conviction , he was granted immunity against further prosecution and compelled to testify against LaRouche in the Boston trial . Frankhouser appealed his conviction on April 3 , 1989 , arguing that his case should not have been severed from the main case , that his counsel had inadequate time to prepare , and that he was not provided with allegedly exculpatory evidence . The appeal was rejected in July . 
 = = = Trial of LaRouche , et al . = = = 
 The trial of LaRouche and his six co @-@ defendants , U.S. v. LaRouche Campaign , began on December 17 , 1987 , with the jury that had been picked in September , before the Frankhouser trial . The 12 defense lawyers made 400 pretrial motions . 
 The prosecution argued that pressure to fill fund raising quotas had led to 2 @,@ 000 instances of credit card fraud , and that organization members had sought to obstruct the investigation . The defense presented the case that the prosecution was the culmination of a 20 @-@ year campaign of harassment by the FBI and CIA , and that the prosecution was acting on the orders of the CIA when they destroyed evidence and hid witnesses . 
 During the trial , a search of the personal files of Oliver North was ordered by Judge Keeton to look for evidence that North had led an effort to harass and infiltrate the LaRouche movement , causing an additional delay in the trial . The search produced a May 1986 telex from Iran @-@ Contra defendant General Richard Secord to North , discussing the gathering of information against LaRouche . After this memo surfaced , Judge Keeton ordered a search of Vice President George Bush 's office for documents relating to LaRouche . Another delay came when the trial was halted to give time for the FBI to search their files for exculpatory documents . The trial was delayed again when federal agents seized LaRouche properties as part of the involuntary bankruptcy procedure in 1988 . 
 Originally expected to last from three to six months , the trial stretched out much longer . One local reporter called the Boston trial a " long , complex and costly <unk> extravaganza " . After several jurors asked to be excused due to the length of the trial , the defense refused to proceed with fewer than 12 jurors , forcing the judge to declare a mistrial on May 4 , 1988 . According to one of the jurors , all defendants , including LaRouche , would have been found not guilty . He told a reporter " it seemed some of the government 's people caused the problem " , and that people working on behalf of the government " may have been involved in some of this fraud to discredit the campaign . " At the time of the mistrial , a spokesperson said that the Constitutional Defense Fund , a LaRouche organization , had spent over $ 2 million on legal and administrative expenses . Defense attorneys said they would appeal if the government sought a new trial . 
 A retrial in Boston was scheduled for January 3 , 1989 , but the charges were dismissed after the Alexandria convictions ; this was over the objections of the LaRouche lawyers who said they were seeking vindication . The Assistant U.S. Attorney who handled both the Boston and Alexandria cases said after the dismissal , " It was the Boston prosecuting effort which led to the evidence which allowed the indictment and convictions in Alexandria , and I think justice was served by the substantial sentences received . " 
 Throughout the trial , three of the indicted individuals were fugitives : Michael Gelber , Charles Park , and Richard Sanders . According to Roy Frankhouser , they had been sent to Europe . They surrendered to the court in 1990 and were sentenced by Judge Keeton to one year each for obstructing the investigation . 
 = = = Related appeals = = = 
 On July 3 , 1986 , the First Circuit Court of Appeals upheld the contempt of court fines from the Boston grand jury . That decision was appealed to the U.S. Supreme Court , which let it stand . The First Circuit Court heard an appeal on September 11 , 1987 , alleging abuse of the grand jury and denied it six days later . On November 3 , 1987 , six organizations affiliated with LaRouche argued that their documents were seized improperly during the October 1986 search . The court denied the appeal the following January . Jeffrey Steinberg said on December 11 , 1987 , that 100 notebooks compiled by himself and his wife should not have been included in the grand jury subpoena or the search . He lost that appeal the following January . The court heard an appeal from NBC on January 5 , 1988 , over a lower court subpoena of NBC outtakes of a videotaped interview with a witness , Forrest Lee Fick . The lower court ruled the subpoenaed outtakes were to be placed under seal and subject to in camera review only , giving the court discretion whether to release any portion to the defendants . LaRouche had asserted the outtakes could be used to impeach Fick 's testimony . The court affirmed the lower court 's ruling in March . 
 Following the mistrial in Boston , the prosecution moved to schedule a new trial . LaRouche and the other defendants appealed that effort on October 5 , 1988 , saying that a new trial would create double jeopardy . The appeal was denied four months later . The contempt of court fines were appealed again on January 9 , 1989 , and affirmed again on March 29 . Following the convictions in the Alexandria court , prosecutors moved to dismiss the charges from the Boston court , canceling the retrial . The LaRouche lawyers appealed that decision on March 13 , 1989 , arguing that they needed the trial to exonerate LaRouche . 
 = = Alexandria trial = = 
 Judge Albert V. Bryan Jr. presided over U.S. v. LaRouche in the U.S. District Court for the Eastern District of Virginia , where LaRouche resided . That court was known as a " rocket docket " for its speed in disposing of cases . LaRouche and six associates were indicted on October 14 , 1988 on charges of mail fraud and conspiracy to commit mail fraud . Trial was scheduled for six weeks after the indictment . Defense lawyers made an unusual appeal asking for a delay , which was rejected . 
 Judge Bryan granted a prosecution motion in limine , ruling that the defense would not be permitted to discuss , or even allude to , the fact that the indebted entities had been placed in involuntary bankruptcy . It also excluded claims of vindictive prosecution and political harassment by the government . Bryan wrote , " the court will not allow a delving into any details of alleged infiltration ... for the reason that ... this would divert the jury from the issues raised in the indictment . " 
 The prosecution , led by Assistant U.S. Attorney Kent Robinson , presented evidence that LaRouche and his staff solicited US $ 34 million in loans since 1983 with false assurances to potential lenders and showed " reckless disregard for the truth " . In his opening statement to the trial , Robinson said , " Members of the jury , this case is about money . It 's about how the defendants got money , and to a lesser extent , what they did with that money when they got it ... The defendants , all seven of them , are charged in engaging in a scheme to defraud . That is , to obtain those loans by making false promises , false pretences , saying things to potential lenders which they knew weren 't true . " 
 The most important evidence was the testimony of lenders , many of them elderly retirees , who had loaned a total of $ 661 @,@ 300 to help LaRouche fight the " war on drugs " but only received $ 10 @,@ 000 in repayment . One of the prosecutors , John Markham , said those loans represented " just a very small portion of <unk> borrowing " . Other testimony asserted that , as of 1987 , half of the $ 4 million borrowed by the 1984 presidential campaign was unpaid , and that only $ 5 million had been repaid out of $ 30 million in non @-@ campaign loans . LaRouche supporters claim the <unk> amount was $ 294 @,@ 000 but , according to testimony at trial , the amount owed by 1987 topped $ 25 million . 
 Several witnesses were LaRouche followers who testified under immunity from prosecution . A former fundraiser testified that he was told , " No matter what the person you are talking to says , get the money . [ ... ] If you are talking to an unemployed worker who says he has got to feed ... a dozen children , forget it . Get the money . Most of these people are immoral anyway . This is the most moral thing they have ever done is to give you money . " 
 None of the defendants testified . Outside of court , LaRouche denied all the charges , calling them " an all @-@ out frame @-@ up by a state and federal task force , " and said that the federal government was trying to kill him . " The purpose of this frame @-@ up is not to send me to prison . It 's to kill me , " LaRouche said . " In prison it 's fairly easy to kill me ... If this sentence goes through , I 'm dead . " 
 = = = Income tax = = = 
 One of the charges against LaRouche was that he had conspired to avoid paying income tax , not having filed a return in ten years . LaRouche claimed to have had no income . LaRouche lived on a 172 @-@ acre ( 700 @,@ 000 m2 ) estate near Leesburg , Virginia , with a pond and horse ring . It was purchased for his use by Oklahoma oilman David Nick Anderson for $ 1 @.@ 3 million , with LaRouche organizations paying rent to cover the $ 9 @,@ 605 mortgage . LaRouche had named the property " <unk> Farm " after a work by Friedrich Schiller . His wife , Helga LaRouche , is reported to have overseen hundreds of thousands of dollars in renovations to the property . In all , the LaRouche group spent over US $ 4 million on Virginia real estate during this period , according to trial testimony . The LaRouche defense argued that <unk> Farm was a " safehouse " needed for the security of LaRouche and others . The government argued that security expenditures were " misplaced priorities . " 
 In 1985 , a judge in a separate case had described LaRouche 's testimony about being almost penniless as " completely lacking in credibility " . In 1986 , in the same case , LaRouche said that he did not know who had paid the rent on the estate , or for his food , lodging , clothing , transportation , bodyguards , or lawyers since 1973 . The judge fined him for failing to answer . 
 = = = Conviction and imprisonment = = = 
 On December 16 , 1988 , LaRouche was convicted of conspiracy to commit mail fraud involving more than $ 30 million in defaulted loans ; 11 counts of actual mail fraud involving $ 294 @,@ 000 in defaulted loans ; and one count of conspiring to defraud the U.S. Internal Revenue Service . The judge said that the claim of a vendetta was " arrant nonsense " , and that , " the idea that this organization is a sufficient threat to anything that would warrant the government bringing a prosecution to silence them just defies human experience . " Jury foreman Buster Horton told The Washington Post that it was the failure of LaRouche aides to repay loans which swayed the jury in the Virginia case . He said that the jury " all agreed [ LaRouche ] was not on trial for his political beliefs . We did not convict him for that . He was convicted for those 13 counts he was on trial for . " 
 As part of the trial in Alexandria , six of LaRouche 's associates were also found guilty . His chief fund @-@ raiser , William <unk> , was convicted on ten mail fraud counts . LaRouche 's legal adviser and treasurer , Edward Spannaus , along with fund raising operatives Dennis Small , Paul Greenberg , Michael Billington , and Joyce Rubinstein , were convicted of conspiracy to commit mail fraud . <unk> and Spannaus were sentenced to five years imprisonment each , with Spannaus serving a total of two and a half years until his release from custody . Both were fined $ 1 @,@ 000 . The others received three @-@ year terms and various fines . 
 While in prison LaRouche released claims that he was tortured as part of an assassination attempt . LaRouche ran two political campaigns from prison : for Virginia 's 10th Congressional District in 1990 and for U.S. President in 1992 . One of his cellmates during his incarceration at the Federal Medical Center , Rochester in Minnesota was televangelist Jim Bakker . Bakker later devoted a chapter of his book , I Was Wrong , to his experience with LaRouche . Bakker described his astonishment at LaRouche 's detailed knowledge of the Bible . According to Bakker , LaRouche received a daily briefing each morning by phone , often in German , and on more than one occasion LaRouche had information days before it was reported on the network news . Bakker also wrote that his cellmate was convinced that their cell was bugged . In Bakker 's view , " to say LaRouche was a little paranoid would be like saying that the Titanic had a little leak . " LaRouche also befriended Richard Miller , a former FBI agent and fellow inmate who was imprisoned on espionage charges . LaRouche was paroled in 1994 after serving five years of the 15 @-@ year sentence , the normal schedule for parole at that time . LaRouche commented later that " ... in effect , George H. W. Bush put me in the jug , and Bill Clinton got me out " . 
 = = = Appeal of convictions = = = 
 The defendants in the Alexandria trial appealed their convictions to Fourth Circuit Court of Appeals on October 6 , 1989 . Former U.S. Attorney General Ramsey Clark joined the defense team , which contended that there were six faults in the trial . In the words of the Circuit Court 's opinion , the alleged errors were : 
 The district court erred in denying their motion for a continuance of the trial date . 
 The district court erroneously denied their discovery request for exculpatory material . 
 The district court made numerous evidentiary rulings , in limine and at trial , that unconstitutionally restricted their ability to defend against the charges . 
 The trial judge failed to conduct a voir dire sufficient to <unk> an unbiased jury and improperly failed to excuse several jurors for cause . 
 The mail fraud counts were improperly joined with the tax conspiracy count . 
 The sentence imposed on LaRouche was excessive . 
 The district court erroneously instructed the jury on the tax count . 
 The district court erred in allowing the introduction of illegally seized evidence . 
 Seventeen amicus curiae ( " friend of the court " ) briefs were filed in the appeal . One , by Albert <unk> , director of the Institute for Public Law and Political Sciences at the University of Münster , objected to the lack of voir dire , the exclusion of evidence under the motion in limine , the fact that the government did not approach LaRouche about his tax situation before indicting him for tax violations , and concerns about double jeopardy because of the nearly identical charges in the Boston and Alexandria trials . A brief by a French lawyer said that , " a crime of thought seems to have been camouflaged as a common law crime . " Notable submitters of amicus briefs included : James Robert Mann , Charles E. Rice , Jay Alan <unk> and George P. Monaghan . 
 The three @-@ judge panel reviewed and rejected each item , affirming the defendants ' convictions and sentences unanimously on January 22 , 1990 . Five months later the U.S. Supreme Court declined to review the case . 
 = = State trials = = 
 The Attorney General of Virginia , Mary Sue Terry , prosecuted eight LaRouche organizations on charges of securities fraud relating to $ 30 million in loans . The first trials were in Leesburg , but later trials moved to the larger city of Roanoke . In order for the prosecutions to proceed , a decision by the State Corporation Commission ( SCC ) was needed verifying that the loans solicited by LaRouche organizations were securities . Attorneys for the LaRouche organizations argued that a prohibition on raising funds through loans would violate their First Amendment rights . The SCC rejected that argument and decided , on March 4 , 1987 , that the promissory notes were securities . It ordered six LaRouche organizations — Fusion Energy Foundation Inc . , Caucus Distributors Inc . , Publication and General Management Inc . , Campaigner Publications Inc . , <unk> News Service Inc. and Publication Equities Inc . — to stop their sale . Five other states had already issued injunctions , and 14 states eventually followed . At least one injunction , by the State of Minnesota against Independent Democrats for LaRouche , was appealed to the U.S. Supreme Court , which confirmed the lower court ruling . 
 Six of LaRouche 's associates were convicted and two pleaded guilty . Rochelle Ascher , a fundraiser , was sentenced in Leesburg to 86 years ( reduced to 10 years ) for six charges of fraudulently selling securities and one count each of selling an unregistered security with intent to defraud , selling a security by an unregistered agent with intent to defraud , and conspiracy to commit security fraud . In two Roanoke trials , four other associates were found guilty of securities fraud charges : Donald Phau , Lawrence Hecht , Paul Gallagher and Anita Gallagher . Richard Welsh and Martha M. <unk> pleaded guilty and received 12 month and one month terms , respectively . 
 Michael Billington was charged in a Roanoke court with having knowingly solicited 131 loans that would never be repaid from 85 people , totaling $ 1 @.@ 24 million . Represented by a court @-@ appointed lawyer , he rejected a plea bargain that would have limited his prison sentence to the three years he had already served in the federal case . The lawyer , Brian <unk> , doubted Billington 's competence and told the court that he believed LaRouche was making the decisions in the case rather than his client . The court ordered two psychiatric tests . The first physician deemed him competent . Billington refused to cooperate with a second examination that was to be conducted by an expert on cults . Billington sought to fire <unk> , who had already tried to quit over competency question , but the judge refused to permit Billington to substitute a different attorney . A LaRouche spokesman said that Billington was prepared for trial . Billington was convicted on nine counts of " conspiracy to fail to register as a securities broker " . Under Virginia 's court system , the jury determines prison terms although a judge may override the jury 's recommendation . The jury in this case recommended 77 years ( out of a possible 90 ) ; the judge refused to lower it because Billington continued to insist upon his innocence ( which the judge deemed lack of remorse ) and because he had warned that he would accept the jury recommendation if Billington requested a jury trial . Billington served a total of ten years in prison before being released on parole . The lead prosecutor said the case involved " willful and massive fraud that has caused a lot of people to suffer " . 
 A trial in New York state courts on charges of scheming to defraud resulted in the conviction of Robert <unk> , Marielle Kronberg and Lynne Speed . 
 = = Reactions from LaRouche and supporters = = 
 " My imprisonment is the American Dreyfus case " , LaRouche said in a January 1989 interview from prison . The prosecutor denied claims of a conspiracy , describing the theory as an " Orwellian fantasy ... that we are hiding some <unk> spy plot which , if exposed , would exonerate them " . LaRouche supporters insisted that LaRouche was jailed , not for any violation of the law , but for his beliefs . 
 LaRouche also alleged systematic government misconduct : 
 The record shows , that for nearly thirty years , elements of the U.S. Department of Justice have been engaged in world @-@ wide political targeting of me and my associates . This includes early 1970s operations run in conjunction with Secretary of State Henry A. Kissinger 's U.S. State Department . During the last ten years or so of that period , some U.S. officials , and others , have challenged the relevant agencies with some of the evidence which shows , that those prosecutions and correlated harassment of me and my associates , had been clearly fraudulent , politically motivated targeting . 
 LaRouche and his lawyers asserted that the Anti @-@ Defamation League ( ADL ) sought to destroy his organization , and that the prosecution was the result of a conspiracy between the ADL , the government and the media . This claim stemmed from a series of meetings that LaRouche publications refer to as the John Train " Salon " . 
 In testimony submitted to the Senate Judiciary Committee on July 13 , 1998 , the LaRouche @-@ affiliated Schiller Institute claimed that " [ t ] he inability to repay lenders and other <unk> [ sic ] was the consequence of an unprecedented involuntary bankruptcy proceeding initiated by the Justice Department against those companies in 1987 , initiated in an ex parte , in camera proceeding " . 
 Friedrich August Freiherr von der Heydte , a professor of constitutional and international law at the University of Mainz in Germany , compared the LaRouche trial to the Dreyfus affair , which he called " a classical example of a political trial " . He wrote , " Just as LaRouche was , the French Capt. Alfred Dreyfus was deprived by the structure of the trial procedures , of any opportunity to prove his innocence , and facts critical for his defense were excluded from the trial . " 
 On November 8 , 1991 , Angelo Vidal d <unk> Ribeiro , the Special Rapporteur for the United Nations Commission on Human Rights , filed a request to the U.S. Government based on a complaint that had been filed concerning the LaRouche case . The U.S. government responded by saying that LaRouche had been given due process under the laws of the United States . The U.N. Commission took no further action . 
 = = <unk> attempts = = 
 Ramsey Clark wrote a letter in 1995 to then @-@ Attorney General Janet Reno in which he said that the case involved " a broader range of deliberate and systematic misconduct and abuse of power over a longer period of time in an effort to destroy a political movement and leader , than any other federal prosecution in my time or to my knowledge " . He asserted that , " The government , ex parte , sought and received an order effectively closing the doors of these publishing businesses , all of which were involved in First Amendment activities , effectively preventing the further repayment of their debts . " He called the convictions " a tragic miscarriage of justice which at this time can only be corrected by an objective review and courageous action by the Department of Justice " . The LaRouche movement organized two panels to review the cases : the Curtis Clark Commission , and the Mann @-@ Chestnut hearings . 
 On September 18 , 1996 , a full @-@ page advertisement appeared in the New Federalist , a LaRouche publication , as well as The Washington Post and Roll Call . Entitled " Officials Call for LaRouche 's <unk> " , its signatories included Arturo Frondizi , former President of Argentina ; figures from the 1960s American Civil Rights Movement such as Amelia Boynton Robinson ( a leader of the Larouche @-@ affiliated Schiller Institute ) , James Bevel ( a Larouche movement participant ) and Rosa Parks ; former Minnesota Senator and Democratic Presidential Candidate Eugene McCarthy ; Mervyn M. <unk> , who chaired the Congressional Black Caucus ; and artists such as classical vocalist William Warfield and violinist Norbert Brainin , former 1st Violin of the Amadeus Quartet . 
 = = Later developments = = 
 In 2009 , Molly Kronberg , widow of Kenneth Kronberg , sued LaRouche in federal court for the Eastern District of Virginia , in Alexandria , alleging that he and his associates libelled and harassed her on account of her compelled testimony in the 1988 case which led to his conviction . LaRouche alleges that Kronberg perjured herself and colluded with the prosecutors to frame him in order to cover up a bad check issued in 1979 by her from a New Benjamin Franklin House Publishing Company account for royalties owed him . One of the prosecutors in the 1988 case , John Markham , is representing Kronberg in the suit . 
 = = United States court of appeals = = 
 In Re Grand Jury <unk> of Campaigner Publications , Inc . , et al . , 795 F.2d 226 ( 1st Cir . July 3 , 1986 ) . 
 U.S. v. Larouche Campaign , 829 F.2d 250 ( 1st Cir . September 17 , 1987 ) . 
 Fusion Energy Foundation v. Terry , 836 F.2d 1342 ( 4th Cir . January 7 , 1988 ) . 
 In Re Jeffrey Steinberg , 837 F.2d 527 ( 1st Cir . January 22 , 1988 ) . 
 U.S. v. LaRouche Campaign , appeal of National Broadcasting Company , Inc , 841 F.2d 1176 ( 1st Cir . March 9 , 1988 ) . 
 U.S. v. LaRouche Campaign , 866 F.2d 512 ( 1st Cir . January 31 , 1989 ) . 
 In Re Grand Jury <unk> of Caucus Distributors , Inc . , et al . , 871 F.2d 156 ( 1st Cir . May 30 , 1989 ) . 
 U.S. v. Frankhauser , 878 F.2d 1571 ( 4th Cir . July 4 , 1989 ) . [ Note : Court records spell the name " Frankhauser " while most other sources spell it " Frankhouser " . ] 
 U.S. v. LaRouche , 896 F.2d 815 ( 4th Cir . January 22 , 1990 ) . 
 U.S. v. LaRouche , 4 F.3d 987 ( 4th Cir . September 13 , 1993 ) . 
 Welsh v. Holt , 78 F.3d 580 ( 4th Cir . February 28 , 1996 ) . 
 = Illinois Route 98 = 
 Illinois Route 98 ( IL 98 , Route 98 ) is a 8 @.@ 36 @-@ mile ( 13 @.@ 45 km ) east – west state highway located entirely within Tazewell County in central Illinois . The route runs from Route 29 on the border of Pekin and North Pekin east to Interstate 155 ( I @-@ 155 ) in Morton . The highway connects Pekin , North Pekin , Morton , and the community of Groveland ; it passes through a variety of landscapes between the towns . Route 98 is maintained by the Illinois Department of Transportation . 
 The state of Illinois created Route 98 in 1924 ; the original route connected several cities in western Illinois . The eastern section of this route appeared on maps by 1928 , and the highway was completed in 1929 . In 1939 , Route 98 moved to its current alignment ; it has not changed since . 
 = = Route description = = 
 Route 98 begins at an intersection with Route 29 on the border of Pekin and North Pekin ; Worley Lake and the Illinois River lie to the west . The route heads east as a divided two @-@ lane road called Edgewater Drive , passing a group of houses which lie between two small lakes . After entering North Pekin , the highway becomes undivided and runs through a business district . It intersects County Route 25 , known locally as Parkway Road , before crossing into Pekin . Route 98 enters a forested area in Pekin and passes to the north of John T. McNaughton Park near the city 's eastern border . 
 After leaving Pekin , Route 98 passes through farmland in unincorporated Groveland Township . The highway meets Cole Hollow Road and California Road at successive intersections in a residential area . Past a creek , the road heads into a rural area with sections of farmland and forest . As it enters Groveland , the highway intersects County Route 1 , which runs south through the community . Route 98 leaves Groveland to the east , running through another farmed area . The route curves into Morton and takes the name Birchwood Street , traversing a creek before entering an industrial district . In this area , Route 98 briefly becomes a divided highway before terminating at exit 31 on I @-@ 155 . The road continues past the terminus as a local street , still carrying the name Birchwood Street . 
 Route 98 is maintained by the Illinois Department of Transportation ( IDOT ) , an Illinois state agency responsible for maintaining highways and other transport infrastructure in the state . IDOT is responsible for collecting traffic data on Illinois state highways ; this data is measured in terms of annual average daily traffic , an estimate of the number of vehicles which use a road on any given day in a particular year . In 2009 , IDOT estimated that 4400 vehicles used the western portion of Route 98 , 3900 used the central portion , and 3700 used the eastern portion . No part of Route 98 is included in the National Highway System , a network of roads considered significant to the nation 's economy , defense , and mobility . 
 = = History = = 
 Route 98 was initially designated in 1924 on a route in western Illinois . The state planned the road to connect Route 3 east of Macomb to Route 95 near Havana by way of Adair , Table Grove , <unk> , and Duncan Mills . The route was first marked on the 1928 Illinois highway map ; at this point , the road connected Table Grove in the west to U.S. Route 24 ( US 24 ) and Route 31 at Duncans Mills in the east . By 1929 , the highway 's western terminus was extended to Route 9 east of Macomb . The original route became part of Route 10 between 1936 and 1939 , at which time the Route 98 designation was transferred to its present alignment . The original Route 98 is now part of US 136 . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The entire route is in Tazewell County . 
 = Japanese battleship Satsuma = 
 Satsuma ( <unk> ) was a semi @-@ dreadnought battleship built for the Imperial Japanese Navy ( IJN ) in the first decade of the 20th century . Lead ship of her class , she was the first battleship built in Japan . She was named for Satsuma Province , now a part of Kagoshima prefecture . The ship saw no combat during World War I , although she led a squadron that occupied several German colonies in the Pacific Ocean in 1914 . Satsuma was disarmed and sunk as a target in 1922 – 24 in accordance with the terms of the Washington Naval Treaty of 1922 . 
 = = Background = = 
 The Satsuma class was ordered in late 1904 under the 1904 War Naval Supplementary Program during the Russo @-@ Japanese War . Unlike the previous Katori @-@ class pre @-@ dreadnought battleships , they were the first battleships ordered from Japanese shipyards , although Satsuma used many imported components . They were originally designed with a dozen 12 @-@ inch ( 305 mm ) guns , but had to be redesigned because of a shortage of guns in Japan and to reduce costs . 
 = = Design and description = = 
 The ship had an overall length of 482 feet ( 146 @.@ 9 m ) , a beam of 83 feet 6 inches ( 25 @.@ 5 m ) , and a normal draft of 27 feet 6 inches ( 8 @.@ 4 m ) . She displaced 19 @,@ 372 long tons ( 19 @,@ 683 t ) at normal load . The crew ranged from 800 to 940 officers and enlisted men . 
 Satsuma was powered by a pair of vertical triple @-@ expansion steam engines , each driving one propeller , using steam generated by 20 Miyabara water @-@ tube boilers using a mixture of coal and fuel oil . The engines were rated at a total of 17 @,@ 300 indicated horsepower ( 12 @,@ 900 kW ) and designed to reach a top speed of 18 @.@ 25 knots ( 33 @.@ 80 km / h ; 21 @.@ 00 mph ) . During the ship 's sea trials she reached 18 @.@ 95 knots ( 35 @.@ 10 km / h ; 21 @.@ 81 mph ) from 18 @,@ 507 ihp ( 13 @,@ 801 kW ) . Satsuma carried enough coal and oil to give her a range of 9 @,@ 100 nautical miles ( 16 @,@ 900 km ; 10 @,@ 500 mi ) at a speed of 10 knots ( 19 km / h ; 12 mph ) . 
 The ship was completed with four 45 @-@ caliber 12 @-@ inch 41st Year Type guns in two gun turrets , one each fore and aft of the superstructure . They fired 850 @-@ pound ( 386 kg ) armor @-@ piercing ( AP ) shells to a maximum range of 24 @,@ 000 yd ( 22 @,@ 000 m ) . The intermediate armament consisted of six twin @-@ gun turrets equipped with 45 @-@ caliber Type 41 10 @-@ inch guns , three turrets on each side of the superstructure . Her heavy intermediate armament is why the ship is considered to be a semi @-@ dreadnought . 
 Satsuma was equipped with a dozen 40 @-@ caliber 4 @.@ 7 @-@ inch 41st Year Type quick @-@ firing ( QF ) guns , mounted in casemates in the sides of the hull . The ship was also equipped with four 40 @-@ caliber 12 @-@ pounder 12 @-@ cwt QF guns and four 28 @-@ caliber 12 @-@ pounder QF guns . In addition , she was fitted with five submerged 18 @-@ inch ( 457 mm ) torpedo tubes , two on each broadside and one in the stern . 
 The waterline main belt of the Satsuma @-@ class vessels consisted of Krupp cemented armor that had a maximum thickness of 9 inches ( 229 mm ) amidships . It tapered to a thickness of 4 inches ( 102 mm ) inches at the ends of the ship . A 6 @-@ inch ( 152 mm ) strake of armor protected the casemates . The barbettes for the main guns were 7 – 9 @.@ 5 inches ( 180 – 240 mm ) thick . The armor of Satsuma 's main gun turrets had a maximum thickness of nine inches . The deck armor was 2 – 3 inches ( 51 – 76 mm ) thick and the conning tower was protected by six inches of armor . 
 = = Construction and career = = 
 Satsuma , named for Satsuma Province , was laid down at Yokosuka Naval Arsenal on 15 May 1905 . She was launched on 15 November 1906 with Emperor Meiji , the Navy Minister , and other high officials on hand for the ceremony , and completed on 25 March 1910 . At the time of her launching , Satsuma had the largest displacement of any battleship in the world . 
 On 5 August 1911 , the ship suffered an explosion in one of her 12 @-@ inch guns when it failed to fire during gunnery practice . After some time passed , the breech was opened and ignited the propellant ; the resulting fire killed 16 crewmen and several officers . 
 She was lightly damaged by a typhoon on 22 September 1912 . Satsuma was assigned to the 1st Battleship Squadron when World War I began in August 1914 . She served as Rear Admiral Tatsuo Matsumura 's flagship in the Second South Seas Squadron as it seized the German possessions of the Caroline and the Palau Islands in October 1914 . 
 Satsuma rejoined the 1st Battleship Squadron in 1915 , was refitted at Sasebo Naval Arsenal in 1916 and served with the 1st Squadron for the rest of the war . Sometime during the war , she was fitted with two 12 @-@ pounders on high @-@ angle mounts to serve as anti @-@ aircraft guns . 
 The ship was disarmed at Yokosuka Naval Arsenal in 1922 to comply with the provisions of the Washington Naval Treaty , stricken from the Navy List on 20 September 1923 and converted into a target ship . Satsuma was sunk by the battleships Mutsu and Nagato off the southern tip of the Bōsō Peninsula , near the mouth of Tokyo Bay on 7 September 1924 . 
 = E and F @-@ class destroyer = 
 The E and F @-@ class destroyers were a group of 18 destroyers built for the Royal Navy during the 1930s . The ships were initially assigned to the Home Fleet , although they reinforced the Mediterranean Fleet during the Italian invasion of Abyssinia of 1935 – 36 and enforced the Non @-@ Intervention Agreement during the Spanish Civil War of 1936 – 39 . After the beginning of the Second World War in August 1939 , the E @-@ class ships were mostly assigned to escort duties under the Western Approaches Command , while the Fs were assigned to escort the ships of the Home Fleet . Between them they sank four German submarines through March 1940 while losing only one ship to a submarine . 
 Most of the sisters were committed to the Norwegian Campaign in April – June where they helped to sink one German destroyer and a submarine . The two E @-@ class minelayer @-@ destroyers helped to evacuate Allied troops from Dunkirk in May – June . Most of the Fs were sent to Gibraltar around the end of June and formed part of Force H where they participated in the attack on Mers @-@ el @-@ Kébir . Two months later they participated in the Battle of Dakar where they sank three Vichy French submarines . During the rest of 1940 , they sank one Italian submarine while losing two ships to mines and torpedoes . Force H covered a number of convoys to Malta in 1941 , during which they sank one German submarine and lost one destroyer to bombs . Three E @-@ class ships began escorting convoys to Russia in late 1941 and three others were transferred to the Eastern Fleet . 
 Two of these latter were sunk by Japanese forces in early 1942 and two Fs were transferred to replace them . Many of the Fs reinforced the Arctic convoy escorts during which they fought several engagements with German destroyers and sank one German submarine . Several were detached to escort Malta convoys , during which one ship was lost . Several ships were converted to escort destroyers in late 1942 – early 1943 for duty in the North Atlantic and many others were assigned there for extended periods of time where they sank two German submarines . Three of these ships were later transferred to the Royal Canadian Navy . Four of the Es and Fs were sent to the Mediterranean Fleet in mid @-@ 1943 to support the invasion of Sicily and remained there into 1944 . One of these was transferred to the Royal Hellenic Navy that same year and remained in Greek service until 1956 . The ships that remained in the Atlantic sank two German submarines in 1944 before they were recalled to the UK in May to prepare for the invasion of Normandy . There they sank two submarines , although another F @-@ class ship was lost to a mine . The ships mostly returned to the North Atlantic after Overlord or began long refits in Canada . 
 The three Canadian ships were used to transport troops back to Canada after the end of the war before being broken up in 1947 . Most of the British ships were broken up around the same time , although one ship was sold to the Dominican Navy in 1949 and served until 1968 . 
 = = Design and description = = 
 The E class were ordered as part of the 1931 Naval Construction Programme , the F class following in 1932 . These ships were based on the preceding D class with minor changes to the hull and armament . Two of the ships were modified to accommodate 60 mines . The F class were repeats of the E 's with some minor differences . All of the destroyers were fitted with ASDIC ( sonar ) and the ability to use the Two @-@ Speed Destroyer Sweep ( TSDS ) minesweeping gear . 
 The E- and F @-@ class destroyers displaced 1 @,@ 405 long tons ( 1 @,@ 428 t ) at standard load and 1 @,@ 940 long tons ( 1 @,@ 970 t ) at deep load . They had an overall length of 329 feet ( 100 @.@ 3 m ) , a beam of 33 feet 3 inches ( 10 @.@ 1 m ) and a draught of 12 feet 6 inches ( 3 @.@ 8 m ) . The ships ' complement was 145 officers and ratings . They were powered by two Parsons geared steam turbines , each driving one propeller shaft , using steam provided by three Admiralty 3 @-@ drum boilers that operated at a pressure of 300 psi ( 2 @,@ 068 kPa ; 21 kgf / cm2 ) and a temperature of 620 ° F ( 327 ° C ) . The turbines developed a total of 36 @,@ 000 shaft horsepower ( 27 @,@ 000 kW ) and gave a maximum speed of 35 @.@ 5 knots ( 65 @.@ 7 km / h ; 40 @.@ 9 mph ) . The destroyers carried a maximum of 470 – 480 long tons ( 480 – 490 t ) of fuel oil that gave them a range of 6 @,@ 350 nautical miles ( 11 @,@ 760 km ; 7 @,@ 310 mi ) at 15 knots ( 28 km / h ; 17 mph ) . 
 All of the ships had the same main armament , four quick @-@ firing ( QF ) 4 @.@ 7 @-@ inch ( 120 mm ) Mark IX guns in single mounts , designated ' A ' , ' B ' , ' X ' , and ' Y ' from front to rear . The guns had a maximum elevation of 40 ° which was achieved by using a lowered section of the deck around the mount , the " well " , that allowed the breech of the gun to be lowered below deck height . They fired a 50 @-@ pound ( 22 @.@ 7 kg ) shell at a muzzle velocity of 2 @,@ 650 ft / s ( 810 m / s ) to a range of 16 @,@ 970 yards ( 15 @,@ 520 m ) . For anti @-@ aircraft ( AA ) defence , they had two quadruple mounts for the QF 0 @.@ 5 @-@ inch Vickers Mk III machine gun on platforms between the funnels . The E- and F @-@ class ships were fitted with two quadruple mounts for 21 @-@ inch ( 533 mm ) torpedo tubes . The ships , except for the minelayers , were also equipped with two throwers and one rack for 20 depth charges . The stern of the minelayers was fitted with a pair of sponsons that housed part of the mechanical chain @-@ conveyor system and to ensure smooth delivery of her mines . To compensate for the weight of her Mark XIV mines , their rails , two 4 @.@ 7 @-@ inch guns , their ammunition , both sets of torpedo tubes , their whalers and their davits had to be removed . 
 The main guns were controlled by an Admiralty Fire Control Clock Mk I that used data derived from the manually @-@ operated director @-@ control tower and the separate 9 @-@ foot ( 2 @.@ 7 m ) rangefinder situated above the bridge . They had no capability for anti @-@ aircraft fire and the anti @-@ aircraft guns were aimed solely by eye . 
 = = = Wartime modifications = = = 
 Beginning in May 1940 , the after bank of torpedo tubes was removed and replaced with a QF 12 @-@ pounder 20 @-@ cwt anti @-@ aircraft gun , the after mast and funnel being cut down to improve the gun 's field of fire . Four to eight QF 20 mm Oerlikon cannons were added to the surviving ships , usually replacing the .50 @-@ calibre machine gun mounts between the funnels . One pair of these was added to the bridge wings and the other pair was mounted abreast the searchlight platform . Early in the war , depth charge stowage increased to 38 . By 1943 , all the surviving ships , except Fury had the ' Y ' gun on the quarterdeck removed to allow for additional depth charge stowage and two additional depth charge throwers . The 12 @-@ pounder was removed to allow for the installation of a Huff @-@ Duff radio direction finder on a short mainmast and for more depth charges . All of the survivors , except perhaps for Echo , had ' A ' or ' B ' gun replaced by a Hedgehog anti @-@ submarine spigot mortar , and their director @-@ control tower and rangefinder above the bridge removed in exchange for a Type 271 target @-@ indication radar , Fame had her ' A ' gun reinstalled by 1944 . A Type 286 short @-@ range , surface @-@ search radar , adapted from the Royal Air Force 's ASV radar , was also added . The early models , however , could only scan directly forward and had to be aimed by turning the entire ship . Express 's modifications differed somewhat in that ' B ' gun was replaced by a twin @-@ gun QF 6 @-@ pounder Hotchkiss mount and a split Hedgehog installation . In addition , she retained her 12 @-@ pounder gun , but her remaining torpedo tubes were removed . 
 = = = Flotilla leaders = = = 
 For the first time since the A class of the 1927 programme , the flotilla leaders were built to an enlarged design , being lengthened to incorporate an additional QF 4 @.@ 7 @-@ inch gun between the funnels . The lengthened design resulted in a three boiler room layout to enhance water @-@ tight integrity . The leaders were not fitted for minesweeping or minelaying . They displaced 1 @,@ 475 – 1 @,@ 495 long tons ( 1 @,@ 499 – 1 @,@ 519 t ) at standard load and 2 @,@ 010 – 2 @,@ 050 long tons ( 2 @,@ 040 – 2 @,@ 080 t ) at deep load . The ships had an overall length of 343 feet ( 104 @.@ 5 m ) , a beam of 33 feet 9 inches ( 10 @.@ 3 m ) and a draught of 12 feet 6 inches ( 3 @.@ 8 m ) . The ships carried a total of 175 personnel which included the staff of the Captain ( D ) , commanding officer of the flotilla . Their turbines were 2 @,@ 000 shp ( 1 @,@ 500 kW ) more powerful than the private ships , which made them 0 @.@ 5 knots ( 0 @.@ 93 km / h ; 0 @.@ 58 mph ) faster ; their propulsion machinery was otherwise identical . Exmouth was an early wartime loss and consequently received no modifications , but Faulknor survived the war . Her modifications differed somewhat from those of the private ships . She received a 4 @-@ inch ( 102 mm ) AA gun in lieu of her aft torpedo tubes , although they were later reinstalled and the 4 @-@ inch gun replaced ' X ' 4 @.@ 7 @-@ inch gun . Two Oerlikons were later added on the forward part of her aft superstructure and a quadruple QF two @-@ pounder " pom @-@ pom " mount replaced ' Q ' gun between the funnels . Finally her rangefinder was replaced by a high @-@ angle director fitted with a Type 285 gunnery radar . 
 = = Ships = = 
 = = = E class = = = 
 = = = F class = = = 
 = = Service = = 
 All of the E class were assigned to the 5th Destroyer Flotilla ( DF ) of the Home Fleet upon commissioning during 1934 . Following the Italian invasion of Abyssinia , the entire flotilla was sent to the Red Sea in August 1935 to monitor Italian warship movements until April 1936 . Refitted upon their return , many were deployed to Spanish waters during the Spanish Civil War in 1936 – 39 to intercept shipping carrying contraband goods to Spain and to protect British @-@ flagged ships . While the F @-@ class ships were assigned to the 6th Destroyer Flotilla of the Home Fleet , they followed much the same pattern as their E @-@ class sisters . In April 1939 the 5th and 6th DFs were renumbered the 7th and 8th Destroyer Flotillas , respectively . In mid @-@ 1939 , newly @-@ commissioned J @-@ class destroyers began to replace the E @-@ class ships and they were reduced to reserve for lack of manpower . Increasing tensions with Nazi Germany in August , caused the British to mobilize the Navy 's reserves , which allowed the ships to be manned again and assigned to the 12th Destroyer Flotilla of the Home Fleet . 
 When the war began on 3 September , the E @-@ class ships , except for the two minelayers , Esk and Express , were assigned to the Western Approaches Command ( WAC ) for convoy escort and patrolling duties , while the Fs remained with the Home Fleet , performing the same sorts of tasks . On 14 September , Faulknor , Firedrake , and Foxhound , escorting the aircraft carrier Ark Royal , sank U @-@ 39 , the first German submarine to be lost during the war , after she had unsuccessfully attacked the carrier . Six days later , Fearless , Faulknor , Forester , and Fortune sank U @-@ 27 . Most of the E class remained with the WAC until April 1940 , but several were transferred to Rosyth Command at the end of 1939 . Exmouth was one of these and was sunk by U @-@ 22 on 21 January 1940 in the Moray Firth . On the other hand , Escapade forced U @-@ 63 to the surface on 25 February , which was then scuttled by her crew , and Fortune sank U @-@ 44 on 20 March . Esk and Express were assigned to the specialist 20th Destroyer Flotilla shortly after the war began , together with the four I @-@ class destroyer @-@ minelayers , and were busy laying mines in the North Sea and off the English coast through April – May 1940 . 
 The beginning of the Norwegian Campaign in April saw almost all of the E and F class transferred to the Home Fleet for operations in Norwegian waters . For the most part they escorted the ships of the Home Fleet and the various convoys to and from Norway , but Forester and Foxhound were part of the escort for the battleship Warspite during the Second Battle of Narvik on 13 April and the latter helped to sink one German destroyer . While escorting one convoy , Fearless and the destroyer Brazen sank U @-@ 49 two days later . Esk and Express were the only two ships committed to the evacuation of Dunkirk in May – June , each rescuing thousands of Allied troops . 
 Fearless , Escapade , Faulknor , and Foxhound of the 8th DF escorted Ark Royal and the battlecruiser Hood to Gibraltar in late June , where they formed Force H. Eight days later , they participated in the attack on Mers @-@ el @-@ Kébir against the Vichy French ships stationed there , together with Forester , Foresight and Escort . The latter ship was sunk by an Italian submarine on 11 July while covering a Malta convoy . Most of Force H returned to the UK for a brief refit in early August , but upon their return at the end of the month , the 8th DF now consisted of Faulknor , Forester , Foresight , Firedrake , Fortune , Fury , and Greyhound . On the night of 31 August / 1 September , Esk , Express and three other minelaying destroyers laid a minefield off the Dutch island of Texel . While doing so , the latter ship struck a mine that blew her bow off . While closing to render aid , Esk struck two mines that broke her in half with heavy casualties . Express was towed back to England for repairs that lasted until October 1941 . On 13 September , Force H met a convoy that was carrying troops intended to capture Dakar from the Vichy French that was escorted by Inglefield , Eclipse , Echo , Encounter , and Escapade . Ten days later they attacked Dakar where Foresight and Inglefield sank the French submarine <unk> , Fortune sank the submarine Ajax a day later and Foresight sank the submarine Bévéziers on the 25th . After the battle , Escapade and Echo returned to the Home Fleet and resumed their regular duties of fleet escort . On 17 October , Fame ran aground and could not be refloated for several months . The following day , Firedrake together with the destroyer Wrestler and two Royal Air Force flying boats sank the Italian submarine <unk> . Fury , Encounter , Faulknor , Firedrake , and Forester participated in the inconclusive Battle of Cape Spartivento on 27 November . 
 In 1941 , the 8th DF escorted Force H as it covered multiple convoys and aircraft carriers flying off aircraft to Malta . While returning from one of the latter missions , Forester , Foresight , Faulknor , Fearless and Foxhound sank U @-@ 138 on 18 June . A month later , Fearless was crippled by Italian bombs on 23 July while escorting a convoy to Malta and had to be scuttled by her sister Foresight while Firedrake was badly damaged by near misses and had to return to Gibraltar for repairs . The ships of the 8th DF mostly returned home between August and October for repairs and refits . Encounter was transferred to the Mediterranean Fleet in April and spent several months under repair as she was badly damaged by bombs at Malta . The ship was then transferred to the Eastern Fleet in November and arrived at Singapore the following month . Eclipse , Echo , and Electra were assigned to the 3rd Destroyer Flotilla of the Home Fleet at the beginning of 1941 where they escorted the larger ships of the fleet while they were searching for German commerce raiders and on other missions . Escapade began escorting convoys to Russia in August and continued to do so for most of the following year . Electra did the same for several months until she was detailed to escort the battleship Prince of Wales and the battlecruiser Repulse to Singapore in October , together with Express . 
 Express and Electra were half of the escorts for Prince of Wales and Repulse as they sailed north on 9 December , but could do little as the Japanese bombers sank the two capital ships other than help to rescue the 3 @,@ 000 @-@ odd survivors . Upon their return to Singapore , they joined Encounter and the other destroyers there escorting ships between Singapore and the Sunda Strait . Electra and Encounter escorted the heavy cruiser Exeter during the Battle of the Java Sea on 27 February 1942 . The former ship was sunk by a Japanese destroyer as she covered Exeter 's withdrawal . Several days later , Encounter and the American destroyer Pope were escorting the damaged Exeter en route to Ceylon when they encountered four Japanese heavy cruisers and their escorts . Encounter and Exeter were sunk in the subsequent battle on 1 March . Express did not participate in any of these battles because she 'd been damaged by a boiler room fire in early February and her repairs did not begin until April . Fortune joined her sister with the Eastern Fleet in February , with Foxhound following two months later . 
 On 27 March , Fury , Eclipse and the light cruiser Trinidad were escorting Convoy PQ 13 in the Arctic when they were intercepted by three German destroyers . In the ensuing action , the cruiser was damaged by one of her own torpedoes and Eclipse was hit twice , although the cruiser sank the German destroyer <unk> . Foresight , Forester and the light cruiser Edinburgh were the close escort for Convoy QP 11 , returning from Murmansk to Iceland , when Edinburgh was torpedoed on 29 April . The two hits disabled her steering and she had to be towed by the two destroyers . Two days later , they were attacked by three German destroyers which badly damaged Foresight and Forester and put another torpedo into Edinburgh , crippling her . The two destroyers took off the survivors and scuttled the cruiser . Temporarily repaired at Murmansk , the sisters were part of Trinidad 's escort home when she was set on fire by a German bomber and had to be scuttled on 15 May . Faulknor , Fury , Escapade , Echo , and Eclipse escorted more Arctic convoys in May – September , Faulknor sinking U @-@ 88 on 12 September while escorting Convoy PQ 18 . Foresight and Fury were briefly detached to escort the fleet during Operation Pedestal in August , during which the former was torpedoed and had to be scuttled . While being repaired , Fame was converted into an escort destroyer and was assigned to the WAC , joining her sister , Fearless , upon its completion in September . A month later , she sank U @-@ 353 while protecting Convoy SC 104 . Fearless was torpedoed and sunk by U @-@ 211 on 16 December . 
 When convoys to Russia resumed in December 1942 , Fury , Forester , Faulknor , Eclipse , and Echo were assigned as escorts . Fury , and Eclipse were detached to augment the escorts of the WAC in March – May 1943 , joining their sisters , Fame and Escapade , when German submarine attacks reached their peak . The former had already sunk U @-@ 69 on 17 February while escorting Convoy ONS 165 . Express , Fortune and Foxhound was assigned to the Eastern Fleet at the beginning of 1943 , but the first two returned to Britain in February to begin refits , during which they were transferred to the Royal Canadian Navy and renamed Gatineau and Saskatchewan in June and May , respectively . Foxhound followed in August and was converted into an escort destroyer before being given to the Canadians in February 1944 and renamed Qu 'Appelle . Forester was assigned to Escort Group C1 of the WAC in June . Escapade was badly damaged by a premature detonation of her Hedgehog projectiles in September and was under repair until the end of 1944 . Faulknor , Fury , Echo , and Eclipse were transferred to the Mediterranean Fleet to escort the covering force during the invasion of Sicily in July and the subsequent landings in mainland Italy . Faulknor , Fury , and Eclipse participated in the Dodecanese Campaign after the surrender of Italy in September and the latter ship sank after hitting a mine on 24 October . 
 Echo began a long refit at Malta in December and was loaned to the Royal Hellenic Navy upon its completion in April 1944 . Renamed <unk> , she supported government forces during the Greek Civil War and was retained after the end of the war . Faulknor and Fury later supported operations in Italy before returning to the UK for Operation Overlord in June . While escorting Convoy HX 280 , Gatineau helped to sink U @-@ 744 on 6 March , four days later Forester participated in the sinking of U @-@ 845 . Fame , Forester , Gatineau , Saskatchewan , and Qu 'Appelle joined their sisters covering the preparations for the invasion of Normandy and the invasion itself . Fame and two others destroyers sank U @-@ 767 on 18 June . Fury struck a mine on 21 June and was forced to beach herself to prevent her from sinking . She was written off after she was salvaged and was broken up for scrap beginning in September . Saskatchewan and Gatineau returned to Canada in August for lengthy refits that lasted into 1945 after which they returned to the UK . Qu 'Appelle returned to the North Atlantic in October and Forester helped to sink U @-@ 413 on 20 August and then was sent back to the North Atlantic . Escapade was fitted with the new Squid anti @-@ submarine mortar when her repairs were finished . 
 = = = Postwar = = = 
 Gatineau , Saskatchewan , and Qu 'Appelle were used to ferry Canadian troops back home before they were placed in reserve in 1946 and subsequently sold for scrap , although Gatineau was scuttled in 1948 in British Columbia to serve as a breakwater . Faulknor and Forester were reduced to reserve in 1945 and broken up the following year ; Escapade lasted on active duty a year longer as she served in the Anti @-@ Submarine Training Flotilla until 1946 , but the ship was scrapped the next year . Unlike most of her sisters , Fame remained on active duty until 1947 when she was placed in reserve . She was sold to the Dominican Republic in 1949 and renamed Generalissimo . The ship was renamed Sanchez in 1962 and finally discarded in 1968 . <unk> later became a training ship before she was returned to the Royal Navy in 1956 and broken up the following year . 
 = Orison ( The X @-@ Files ) = 
 " Orison " is the seventh episode of the seventh season of the science fiction television series The X @-@ Files . It premiered on the Fox network in the United States on January 9 , 2000 . It was written by Chip Johannessen , directed by Rob Bowman , and featured guest appearances by Nick Chinlund . The episode is a " Monster @-@ of @-@ the @-@ Week " story , unconnected to the series ' wider mythology . In addition , " Orison " serves as a sequel , and brings closure , to the second season episode " Irresistible " , with Chinlund reprising his role as Donnie Pfaster . " Orison " earned a Nielsen household rating of 9 @.@ 4 , being watched by 15 @.@ 63 million people in its initial broadcast . The episode received mixed reviews from critics , with several heavily criticizing the final scene featuring Scully killing Pfaster , calling it a betrayal of characterization . 
 The show centers on FBI special agents Fox Mulder ( David Duchovny ) and Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) who work on cases linked to the paranormal , called X @-@ Files . Mulder is a believer in the paranormal , while the skeptical Scully has been assigned to debunk his work . In this episode , Reverend Orison releases Donnie Pfaster , Scully 's former kidnapper , from jail in the hopes of passing judgment on him . What he discovers instead is that he has released pure evil , and it ’ s headed for Scully . 
 " Orison " was written by Johannessen , who had formerly been an executive producer on the television series Millennium . Johannessen 's first draft featured an escaped prisoner who could stop time . Executive producers Chris Carter , Frank Spotnitz , and John Shiban enjoyed the premise and decided to bring back Donnie Pfaster . However , instead of continuing in the style of " Irresistible " , the episode went in a " substantial new direction " . 
 = = Plot = = 
 At a prison in Saint Paul , Minnesota , a man gets his fingers chopped off during a workshop and all the other inmates move very slowly to help him , while one man walks out at regular speed . The man is revealed to be Donnie Pfaster ( Nick Chinlund ) , who kidnapped Scully five years earlier . Pfaster , who happens to be a " death fetishist " , is obsessed with cutting women 's hair and eating their fingers . After hearing that Pfaster escaped from prison , Fox Mulder ( David Duchovny ) and Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) take the case and investigate . It turns out three men escaped from three prisons and all had contact with a prison chaplain named Reverend Orison ( Scott Wilson ) . Eventually , the US Marshals corner Pfaster and Orison at a diner , but Orison uses his power of persuasion to distract the Marshals , allowing the two to escape . Pfaster takes Orison 's car and runs Orison over . Meanwhile , Scully keeps hearing the same song , " Don 't Look Any Further " , everywhere she goes and soon begins to believe it is a sign . After finding him unconscious , Mulder and Scully question Orison and show him a photo of the remains of a prostitute Pfaster killed . They also find that Orison killed someone and spent 22 years in prison himself . Orison claims he is being spoken to by God and doing his work . After a medical exam , Mulder finds out that Orison has three times the <unk> capacity of the brain and he drilled a hole in head , allowing him to perform mental tricks by hypnotizing people . He does this while repeating the phrase " Glory , Amen . " 
 Later , Orison hypnotizes the security guard in his room and escapes . Pfaster hires a prostitute , but soon realizes she is wearing a wig and attempts to attack her , but she gets away . Orison finds Pfaster and takes him at gunpoint while he digs a grave for him , but Pfaster morphs into a demonic beast and kills Orison , burying him in his own shallow grave . Pfaster then calls the police , tells them where Orison is buried , and goes to Scully 's house . He attacks Scully and Scully confesses to him that the only reason he was not given the death penalty was because she asked the judge for life . He overpowers her and locks her in her own closet . Mulder thinks something may be wrong when he hears the same song on his radio and calls Scully . After receiving no answer , he goes over to her house and stumbles upon Pfaster , promptly arresting him . Meanwhile , Scully escapes from the closet and shoots Pfaster , despite him being unarmed , killing him . Scully later confides in Mulder , telling him she 's scared because she 's not sure who 's in control of her , God or something else . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Writing = = = 
 " Orison " was written by Chip Johannessen , who had formerly been an executive producer on the Chris Carter @-@ created television series Millennium . In Johannessen 's first draft , the episode 's main antagonist was a prisoner with the ability to stop time . Executive producers Carter , Frank Spotnitz , and John Shiban found the episode 's premise promising . However , Carter enjoyed the story because it bore stylistic similarities to the first season episode " Beyond the Sea " . 
 After reading the first draft , Spotnitz and Carter decided to reintroduce Donnie Pfaster , a character from the second season episode " Irresistible " . Carter noted that , " we had talked about possibly revisiting some old monster this season , and this seemed like the perfect opportunity . " The writers and producers decided to take " Orison " in a " substantial new direction " . Although Donnie Pfaster was originally portrayed as a " death fetishist " , his nature was non @-@ supernatural . In " Orison " , however , it was decided to make Pfaster into a true demon . Shiban explained " we decided late in the process to turn him into this totally demonic character , essentially evil as an entity . " Spotnitz was very excited about bringing closure to the Pfaster @-@ Scully story . He explained , " For me , what really justified bringing Donnie back was the final act of the script when Donnie comes for Scully and she ends up shooting him full of holes . " The final scene , however , proved difficult to script . Director Rob Bowman noted , that the act " was a tough scene . Frank and I had spoken on the phone about the dialogue in the wrap @-@ up scene with Mulder and Scully . Even though she shot him in the heightened state , you couldn 't deny the fact that she killed Donnie <unk> [ sic ] in cold blood . How do we deal with that ? " 
 = = = Casting and filming = = = 
 Nick Chinlund returned to the series to reprise his role as Pfaster . Rick Millikan , the show 's casting director , eventually settled on Scott Wilson for the role of Orison believing that he could pull off the " dual nature " of the character better than anyone else . The episode featured several complex scenes , most notably the shot at the beginning , where time slows to a stop . Bowman used several different takes , all filmed at different film speeds in order to achieve the right effect . The final fight scene between Scully and Pfaster took a day and a half to film . Many of the episodes scenes were filmed in Downey , California . Make @-@ up for the episode was done by John Vulich , who sought to " pay homage " to the make @-@ up in the original episode . In order to do this , Vulich perused several fan sites and downloaded photos that he used as models . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 The song that Scully keeps hearing in the episode is " Don 't Look Any Further " , originally by former Temptations lead singer Dennis Edwards . The production staff went through several cover versions in order to find the right one for the episode . Unfortunately , according to Paul Rabwin , none of the songs " really worked . " Originally , Rabwin wanted Lyle Lovett to record a cover for the episode , but he was unavailable , so the staff asked singer @-@ songwriter John Hiatt . Rabwin later called Hiatt 's version " chilling , eerie , and soulful . " . Mark Snow , the show 's composer , used various musical effects for emphasis . He explained , " There 's a slo @-@ mo scene where Mulder comes in the room with Scully and guns are drawn . They 're looking around , and I do these big boom single hits with a lot of reverb . There 's nothing else but that . Sometimes , that is really effective . " 
 = = Broadcast and reception = = 
 " Orison " first aired in the United States on January 9 , 2000 . This episode earned a Nielsen rating of 9 @.@ 4 , with a 14 share , meaning that roughly 9 @.@ 4 percent of all television @-@ equipped households , and 14 percent of households watching television , were tuned in to the episode . It was viewed by 15 @.@ 63 million viewers . The episode aired in the United Kingdom and Ireland on Sky1 on April 30 , 2000 @.@ and received 0 @.@ 78 million viewers , making it the fourth most watched television episode of any program that week . Fox promoted the episode with the tagline " Five years ago , a demonic madman tried to murder Scully . Tonight he strikes again . " 
 The episode received mixed reviews from critics . Kenneth Silber from Space.com wrote positively of the episode , saying , " ' Orison ' rises above its origins in the depressing , hackneyed genre of serial @-@ killer dramas . The episode combines a fast pace with a richly gloomy mood , and even serves to blur the all @-@ too @-@ sharp distinction between standalone X @-@ Files stories and the series ' ' mythology arc . ' " Rich Rosell from Digitally Obsessed awarded the episode 4 @.@ 5 out of 5 stars and called the episode " creepy , dark and wonderful " . Rosell argued that the episode " adds fuel to the fiery argument that it is [ Scully ] , and not Mulder , that the real heart of the series was built on . " Tom Kessenich , in his book Examinations , gave the episode a largely positive review , writing " [ ' Orison ' ] was a journey filled with horror , mystery , and self @-@ analysis . It was also one of the most exhilarating journeys the seventh season has produced thus far . " Furthermore , Kessenich defended Scully 's actions at the end of the episode writing that " what we saw at the end of ' Orison ' was a human being pushed beyond the breaking point by a man [ ... ] it doesn 't make what she did right , but it certainly wasn 't a difficult thing to understand . " Zack Handlen of The A.V. Club awarded the episode a " B " and felt that the episode , despite its faults , had elements that were particularly interesting . He noted that the titular chaplain was a " potentially fascinating figure " who was never explored to his full extent , and that the ending was effective in that it " helps transform the episode ’ s climax into something more than a simple regurgitation " . Finally , he positively compared the mood and thematic elements of the episode to Carter 's other series Millennium . 
 Not all reviews were positive . Robert Shearman and Lars Pearson , in their book Wanting to Believe : A Critical Guide to The X @-@ Files , Millennium & The Lone Gunmen , were extremely critical of the episode and rated it one star out of five . Shearman and Pearson called the episode a " mess " , with the effect that " it cheapens ' Irresistible ' badly " . The two , however , point out the sequence wherein Scully murders Pfaster as the worst scene in the episode , arguing that the scene was " at worst a betrayal of characterization that has badly damaged the moral fibre of the series . " Paula Vitaris from Cinefantastique gave the episode a largely negative review and awarded it one star out of four . Vitaris heavily criticized the episode as " a retread of ' Irresistible ' " . Furthermore , she derided the ending , noting that " nothing in the episode [ indicated ] that Scully [ was ] on the verge of losing her self @-@ control " . 
 = Star Wars : Dark Forces = 
 Star Wars : Dark Forces is a first @-@ person shooter video game developed and published by LucasArts . It was released in 1995 for DOS and Apple Macintosh , and in 1996 for the PlayStation . The storyline is set in the Star Wars fictional universe and follows the character Kyle Katarn , a mercenary working on behalf of the Rebel Alliance . He discovers the Empire 's " Dark Trooper Project " , which involves the development of a series of powerful new battle droids and power @-@ armored stormtroopers . 
 Dark Forces uses the Jedi game engine , which was developed specifically for the game . The engine adds gameplay features to the first @-@ person shooter genre which were uncommon at the time of release , including level designs with multiple floors and the ability to look up and down . 
 Critics gave very favorable reviews to the DOS and Macintosh versions of Dark Forces , which were praised for the level design and technological advances . The PlayStation version was criticized for having poor graphics and slow frame rates , reducing playability . A sequel to Dark Forces , Star Wars Jedi Knight : Dark Forces II , followed in 1997 . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Dark Forces is a first @-@ person shooter ( FPS ) . The player controls Kyle Katarn from a first @-@ person perspective , with a focus on combat against various creatures and characters from the Star Wars universe , although the game also includes environmental puzzles and hazards . Dark Forces follows a central storyline outlined in mission briefings and cutscenes . Each mission includes specific objectives which are related to the story . The missions take place in a variety of environments across the Star Wars universe , including a Star Destroyer interior , Jabba the Hutt 's space yacht , and the planet Coruscant , where the player must infiltrate a computer vault . 
 Dark Forces ' gameplay expands on the FPS standards set by Doom in 1993 , and features gameplay elements that are now common in the FPS genre . These include the ability to look up and down , duck , and jump . A variety of power @-@ ups are made available to the player , including health , shields , weapons and ammunition . The game also features several non @-@ combat items to aid the player . The head lamp illuminates the area in front of the player , but will reveal the player 's position to enemies in dark rooms . Ice cleats provide traction in icy areas , and an air mask protects the player from areas with toxic atmosphere . Many inventory items are powered by batteries ( separate from weapon ammunition types ) which can be found around the levels . 
 For combat , the player may use fists , explosive land mines and thermal detonators , as well as blasters and other ranged weapons . Gameplay leans towards ranged combat , although some enemies have melee attacks such as punching , biting , and using axes . All player weapons except the fist require ammunition , which can be collected in power @-@ ups . Many weapons also offer an alternate fire mode . The player has health and shields which are damaged by enemy attacks and some environmental hazards , and may be replenished through power @-@ ups . 
 In addition to combat , Dark Forces provides physical obstacles for the character , such as jumping from ledges or traversing across flowing rivers , and includes multi @-@ step puzzles such as mazes controlled by switches . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The storyline in Dark Forces follows Kyle Katarn ( voiced by Nick Jameson ) , a mercenary employed by the Rebel Alliance . Before the game begins , Katarn was a student learning the skills required to follow in his father 's career of agricultural mechanics . While he was studying at an academy , he was told by officials that Rebels had killed his parents . The pain from this caused him to enlist in the Imperial army . 
 Subsequently , Katarn met Jan Ors ( Julie Eccles ) , a Rebel working undercover as a double agent in the Empire . Ors uncovered the real information about Katarn 's parents ' death ; that the Empire was behind it . The Empire eventually discovered that Ors was working for the Rebels and she was taken prisoner . Katarn helped her escape , thus ending his career with the Empire . He soon became a mercenary and , due to his hatred of the Empire for killing his parents , he began to take on jobs from the Rebel Alliance . Dark Forces begins with Katarn being recruited by the Rebel Alliance to recover the plans to the Death Star , a heavily armed space station capable of destroying an entire planet . The Alliance use the plans to find a weakness in and subsequently destroy the Death Star . 
 One year later , the Alliance hires Katarn again , this time to investigate an assault on one of their bases by a new type of Imperial soldier . His investigation reveals the Imperial Dark Trooper project , led by General Rom Mohc ( Jack Angel ) . His mission to stop the project takes him to the sewers of <unk> City , where he captures Moff Rebus , an Imperial weapons specialist who developed the Dark Trooper weapon . Rebus ' interrogation leads Katarn to a weapons research facility in the mountains of Fest and the <unk> mines where minerals are extracted for the Dark Troopers . 
 After learning of Crix Madine 's ( a former Imperial Commander , who had defected to the Alliance ) capture and imminent execution , Kyle proceeds to a high security detention center on <unk> to rescue him . Madine provides the Rebel Alliance with information about the smuggling of Dark Trooper materials , leading Katarn to investigate the <unk> Hed docking port on Cal @-@ Seti . He then destroys a robotics facility on the icy planet <unk> , the second stage of the Dark Trooper production line . After being captured by Jabba the Hutt and having to escape his ship , Katarn infiltrates a computer vault on Coruscant which reveals the location of the Ergo fuel station , the final stage in the smuggling route . He masquerades as a smuggler , gaining access to the Super Star Destroyer Executor , which brings him finally to the Arc Hammer starship , the headquarters of General Mohc 's Dark Trooper project , where he successfully destroys the operation and kills Mohc . 
 = = Development = = 
 Development of Dark Forces was led by Daron Stinnett . The programming was led by Ray <unk> , and the graphics and storyline by Justin Chin . Production began in September 1993 , at a time when the first @-@ person shooter genre was very popular . The idea of creating a first @-@ person shooter in the Star Wars universe was inspired by fan mods of Doom which had levels set on the Death Star . The developers of Dark Forces wanted to adapt the FPS format into an adventure game . To do this they introduced puzzles and strategy , along with a Star Wars plot . Originally Luke Skywalker was intended to be the main character in the game , however the developers realized that this would add constraints to gameplay and storyline . Instead a new character , Kyle Katarn , was created . 
 Upon release , Dark Forces was commonly called a " Doom clone , " but the game makes significant expansions upon the gameplay features present in Doom . New gameplay mechanisms that were not common at the time of release include the ability to look up and down , duck , jump , and swim . The use of multiple floor levels is another technical advance in the first @-@ person shooter genre . To produce these new features , the developers wrote a game engine from scratch . The Jedi game engine can create gameplay and graphical elements such as fully 3D objects , atmospheric effects such as fog and haze , animated textures and shading . Stinnett indicated that the developers wanted these elements to be part of an " active environment , " and features were included to create this : " ships come and go at the flight decks , rivers sweep along , platforms and conveyor belts move and much of the machinery functions . " 
 The Dark Troopers in Dark Forces were created specifically for the game by Justin Chin and Paul Mica . Chin notes that they were designed as a more advanced enemy when compared to standard stormtroopers : " Instead of just <unk> up the stormtroopers , I designed them to be more efficient . I wanted something more terrifying and more omnipotent . " Three designs for the Dark Troopers were produced for Dark Forces . Lucasfilm licensing department initially rejected two of the designs for looking too much out of character , so Chin produced new designs which were ultimately approved . The development team collaborated with staff at Skywalker Ranch for the sounds , music , and costumes used in the cutscenes . 
 Dark Forces was ported from DOS to Apple Macintosh . This presented several challenges for the developers . LucasArts requested the game to be produced for both DOS and Macintosh with the same system requirements , specifically the random @-@ access memory ( RAM ) . The Mac OS runs a graphical user interface which uses up RAM while DOS does not , meaning the Macintosh version has less RAM available for Dark Forces to use . Aaron Giles , who was the Macintosh programmer for Dark Forces , explained that to resolve this problem the memory had to be managed more efficiently . 
 Although set in the Star Wars universe , lead artist and author Justin Chin " invented " new weapons for the game , such as the Bryar pistol and <unk> mortar gun , which were named after his personal favorites , such as composer Gavin Bryars and 1950s Packard automobiles , respectively . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 Music for Star Wars : Dark Forces was mostly original works composed by Clint Bajakian , though they are based on cues from John Williams ' original Star Wars works through the utilization of the iMUSE system to create interactive music . The game also features full speech and sound effects in stereo . 
 = = Release = = 
 Dark Forces became LucasArts ' highest sell @-@ in with more than 300 @,@ 000 copies accounted for at launch . The game went on to sell 952 @,@ 000 copies over the next five years , to become the eleventh highest selling game from 1993 to 1999 . Dark Forces achieved a strong following on the internet , and custom levels and maps were created for the game . 
 The popularity of characters from Dark Forces resulted in LucasArts licensing toys based on the game . Hasbro produced Kyle Katarn and Dark Trooper toys , which are among the Star Wars expanded universe items to be turned into action figures . The Dark Troopers were also included in books and comics . William C. Dietz 's novelizations of the Dark Forces storyline were adapted to full @-@ cast audio dramatizations . 
 LucasArts extended Dark Forces with Star Wars Jedi Knight : Dark Forces II in 1997 , and later two more sequels . The Jedi Knight series continues the story of Kyle Katarn and has been praised for its quality as a whole . 
 In September 2009 , Dark Forces was re @-@ released as a downloadable version on Valve Corporation 's Steam network for Windows XP , 2000 and Vista . The game is available to purchase individually or as part of a package including all of the games in the Jedi Knight series . 
 On April 29 , 2010 , the game was made available on the PlayStation Network as a " PSone Classic " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The DOS and Macintosh versions of Star Wars : Dark Forces were well received , with the DOS version holding an aggregate score on GameRankings of 77 % . Publications compared Dark Forces to Doom , a significant video game in the first @-@ person shooter genre at the time , but also indicated that Dark Forces improved upon Doom 's features . Criticisms tended to focus on the game being too short , as well as lacking a multiplayer feature . 
 Steven Kent of The Seattle Times believes that the general aspects of the game appeal to most computer gamers , not just Star Wars fans . Kent argued that the Star Wars setting is a high point for the game , saying that the level designs recreate the Star Wars style well : " Though most of the Dark Forces sets are original to the game , they were created in the ' Star Wars ' spirit . " 
 Dark Forces ' gameplay has been described as " challenging " and has generally received praise . Ron Dulin , reviewing the game for GameSpot , highlights the implementation of puzzles within levels : " The levels are diverse and ingenious , with plenty of creative obstacles standing between you and your goal . While they can be occasionally frustrating , Dark Forces ' diverse gameplay requirements make this title more mentally challenging than your average key hunt . " The graphics and sound were both praised as helping to immerse the player in the environment . 
 The PlayStation version of Dark Forces received less positive reviews than the DOS and Macintosh versions . It holds an aggregate score on GameRankings of 59 @.@ 57 % . Directly comparing the PlayStation version with the DOS / Mac version , GameSpot wrote " Though the speed of the Playstation allows for smooth movement , Dark Forces boasts a horrendously choppy frame rate . " IGN made a similar point ; " Unlike the PC and Mac versions , PlayStation Dark Forces is <unk> than a loaf of bread . Close up , everything is blocky and pixelated , but even from far away the walls and textures look like big , chunky blocks . Even worse than the graphics , though , is the frame rate . Or lack thereof . The choppy motion takes so much away from the enjoyment of actually playing the game . " Alex Constantides of Computer and Video Games offers the same view , saying that the game is " visually dated . " 
 = Football in the Philippines = 
 Association football is a developed and well @-@ known sport in the Philippines , played by amateur and professional Filipino football clubs . The Philippine Football Federation ( PFF ) is the governing body of international football in the country . 
 Football is a popular sport among the country 's Southeast Asian neighbors , yet it is overshadowed by basketball , which is the most popular sport in the Philippines . However , football has a long history in the archipelago , dating back to more than 100 years ago when Paulino Alcántara <unk> became the first Filipino and Asian player to play for a European club . He made his debut as a striker at the age of 15 at Barcelona , which made him the club 's youngest and second highest goalscorer behind Lionel Messi . Since then , the first football teams began to form , including the Manila Sporting Club in 1906 , the Sandow Athletic Club in 1909 , and the Bohemian Sporting Club in 1910 . 
 To promote and revive the sport , some international and local football clubs helped the Philippines . FIFA also assisted the country by building and upgrading facilities including the creation of the PFF headquarters in 2009 . As well , the establishment of the United Football League ( UFL ) and the National Men 's Club Championship to provide more local competitions . 
 The Philippines national football team is the representative of men 's international football for the Philippines . They won the Far Eastern Games once ( in 1913 ) and became a two @-@ time Philippine Peace Cup champion ( in 2012 and 2013 ) . The Philippines women 's national football team , representing women 's international football in the Philippines , achieved a third @-@ place ( bronze ) finish at the 1985 Southeast Asian Games . 
 There are many stadiums that can be found in the Philippines like the Rizal Memorial Stadium in Manila which is the national stadium of the country . It is also the home stadium of the Philippine football team <unk> , the <unk> Stadium in Bacolod is the secondary venue for the Philippines . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Introduction = = = 
 Around 1895 , football was introduced in the Philippines by English sportsmen . In addition , some Filipinos sent to college in Hong Kong and China returned home and taught their friends a little bit about the game of football . Within a year , there were two or three football clubs established in Manila . In 1898 , the U.S. Navy battleship Maine was anchored in Havana harbor to protect the Americans from a riot between Cuba and Spanish officers , and after the ship sank resulting in significant casualties , the Americans declared war against Spain , beginning the Spanish – American War . They damaged every ship in Manila Bay , This ended Spanish colonization of the Philippines , and replaced the colonizing Spaniards with Americans . When the war broke out , those football teams disbanded and abandoned the city , either to save themselves and their families from the bombardment they expected at any moment , or to cast their lot with the Filipino troops outside the city limits . After the war when peace reigned again , six football teams were formed , among them the Manila Sporting Club , the Paris Club , and the Manila Jockey Club . In 1906 , the Sandow football team was established ( further developed as Sandow Athletic Club in 1909 ) . 
 On 15 October 1907 , the first official football match was held in Manila , with the celebration of the opening of the Philippine Assembly . The trophy , a silver cup donated by 27th President of the United States William Howard Taft , was won by the Sandow Athletic Club . Soon , more clubs were formed . In 1910 , the Bohemian Sporting Club was organized and began to train football players . In 1920 , the <unk> Social Deportivo was established and produced a football team . To further propagate the love of the sport and to regulate soccer championship contests , all football teams within the city banded themselves together and organized the Philippine Amateur Football Association in 1907 ( now the Philippine Football Federation ) , and held its first championship in 1921 with Bohemian Sporting Club as champions . 
 On 25 February 1912 , Paulino Alcántara was the first Filipino and Asian footballer to play for a European club . Alcántara made his debut for Barcelona at the age of 15 against Català Sporting Club , where he scored his first hat @-@ trick . Alcántara remains the youngest player to play or score for the club . He scored 369 goals in 357 matches , making him the second club 's highest goalscorer ( counting goals scored in both official games and friendlies ) with Lionel Messi ranking first in the record . In 1917 , he was selected by the Philippines to represent the country at the Far Eastern Championship Games in Tokyo , helping them defeat Japan 15 – 2 , which remains the largest win in Philippine international football history . Alcántara only played once for the Philippines that finished second in the tournament . He also made some appearances in other national teams , including Catalonia and Spain . In 1916 , while continuing his studies in medicine , he played football for a local team , the Bohemian Sporting Club , whom he helped win two Philippine Championships in 1917 and 1918 . 
 However , the popularity of " The Beautiful Game " decreased when the Americans founded basketball in the Philippines in 1910 as part of the physical education curriculum in Philippine schools . Filipinos easily embraced basketball due to its competitive and action @-@ packed nature , unlike football , which some Filipinos were uninterested in watching or playing . Two surveys were conducted in parts of Metro Manila in 2012 — the first found that basketball is the most @-@ watched sport at 74 @.@ 4 % , and football is fourth at 17 @.@ 9 % . In the second survey , basketball was found to be the most @-@ played sport during leisure time at 9 @.@ 6 % , while association football did not make the list . 
 = = = 1950s @-@ 1970s = = = 
 Football saw some rise in the fifties where the country saw enthusiasm for the sport built through the football teams of top educational institutions such as the Ateneo , <unk> , La Salle , San Beda , University of San Carlos , University of Santo Tomas , <unk> , and the University of Visayas . 
 The Philippine Football Association partnered with San Miguel Brewery to seek foreign assistance in developing football in the country . In the early sixties , British coaches Alan Rogers and Brian Birch were brought in and funded by San Miguel to train referees , coaches and players in the country . Due to lack of facilities , the two coaches organized a five @-@ a @-@ side football competition which was played in a field with the same size of a basketball court . The two were later relieved and Danny McClellan and Graham Adams were tasked train national and youth players . 
 San Miguel through the Philippine Football Association , brought in Spanish medical students who were knowledgeable in football in 1961 . Association president , Felipe Monserrat , tasked the Spaniards to garner interest in football in the country and to train local players . The composition of the Spanish quarter were Francisco <unk> , Enrique <unk> Mata , Claudio Sanchez and Juan <unk> , with the former two leaving after a year . The group was followed by Peter Leaver from the United Kingdom who focused on developing school football and assisted schools such as Ateneo and La Salle . Philippine football also received promotional support from the Elizalde Company . 
 In 1971 Juan <unk> , selected four Spanish players and one Chinese in an effort to boost the Philippine national team . The national team joined the tournaments such as the <unk> Merdeka , Pesta Sukan , Jakarta Anniversary <unk> and the President Park Tournament . The Philippines managed to cause upsets results against Thailand , Singapore and South Korea . When the Spanish players , Tomas Lozano , <unk> Cuenca , Juan <unk> and Julio Roxas left the football team due to financial reasons , football in the country saw another decline and basketball gained foothold in the country . 
 = = = Revival = = = 
 = = = = Help from foreign countries and clubs = = = = 
 There have been four projects accepted by the Fédération Internationale de Football Association ( FIFA ) , to build and upgrade football facilities in the Philippines . In the first project , approved in August 2000 , FIFA built six technical centers on Iloilo , Laguna , Negros Occidental , Cagayan de Oro , Zamboanga , and <unk> del Sur , with a total budget of ₱ 458 @,@ 046 ( ≈ € 7 @,@ 500 or ≈ $ 10 @,@ 000 ) . The next project , in December 2006 , constructed the headquarters of the PFF in Pasig . Its third project was to upgrade the pitch in the Rizal Memorial Stadium to an artificial turf from August to September 2012 , but it was discontinued because Philippine Football Federation President Mariano Araneta said that conducting the 2012 Philippine Peace Cup in Manila would lessen the expenses of the PFF in the event . FIFA 's final project was to build a technical center in <unk> , which includes a natural grass pitch , dormitories , changing rooms , lecture rooms and offices . 
 A number of foreign countries and clubs have offered to help promote and popularise the sport within the country . In 2010 , the German Football Association ( DFB ) recommended the services of former Rwanda U @-@ 17 coach Michael Weiß as coach of the " Azkals " , a nickname for the national team , after Dan <unk> 's three @-@ day visit in Frankfurt . The DFB gave the Philippine Football Federation a grant of € 500 @,@ 000 ( ≈ ₱ 31 million or ≈ $ 11 @,@ 000 ) . However , after three years as a head coach , Weiß was no longer part of the Azkals after the PFF 's year @-@ end evaluation . 
 On 18 October 2011 , officials from the Real Madrid Foundation visited the Philippines to sign an agreement with local non @-@ governmental organizations ( NGO ) to open a social and sports academy for youths in Mindanao to 70 poor children with under age 14 . On 15 May 2012 , English club Chelsea was joined by international development manager Ian Woodroffe , and Adrian New , managing director for Asia , arrived in the country to formally launched a football school at the SM Mall of Asia . It is the third football school created by Chelsea in Asia , after two others in Hong Kong and Kuala Lumpur . The school is operated by Phil Younghusband and James Younghusband , brothers and former members of Chelsea 's Reserves and Youth Team . After a year , Smart Communications sponsored the soccer school through its partnership with the Younghusband Football Academy ( <unk> ) to visit schools throughout the Philippines in conjunction with Smart 's program . Soon after its establishment , they built an artificial grass football field named as Gatorade @-@ Chelsea Blue Pitch in Ayala <unk> . The opening ceremonies was joined with Ayala Corporation president , Fernando Zobel de Ayala , Makati mayor Jun <unk> and Makati representative Monique <unk> last 15 January 2014 . The venue has a dimension of 64 @.@ 5 by 100 metres ( 212 by 328 ft ) and it is set to be the new facility for the school . 
 Another Spanish club , Barcelona , conducted a camp in <unk> named " Barcelona Escola Camp 2013 " . It began on 17 April and ended on 21 April 2013 . Two coaches from Barcelona Escola , Joseph <unk> and Jordi Blanco , came to the Philippines . The camp was organized by Team <unk> . A second camp was scheduled on 18 December to 22 December 2013 , held in Emperador Stadium , Taguig . Coaches from the camp shared their training , philosophy , methodology , and values with the children . 
 After the destruction of Typhoon Haiyan in the country , FIFA gave the PFF $ 1 million to rebuild and rehabilitate damaged football facilities . Leyte Football Association President Dan <unk> and other football officials are planning to construct a training center in Tacloban from the grant FIFA gave . 
 On 3 December 2011 , the Philippines faced U.S. club LA Galaxy as a part of their Asia @-@ Pacific Tour in the Rizal Memorial Stadium , which Galaxy won 6 – 1 . 
 Manchester United with its sponsor , a shampoo brand Clear made a " multi @-@ year partnership " as they will hold training camps facilitated by coaches in the sport . The Manchester United Soccer School will teach 32 amateur footballers in an " intense and rigorous " program . <unk> were held in March 2014 . 
 = = = = Development of international and local competitions = = = = 
 In 2008 , the Filipino Premier League ( FPL ) was established as the top @-@ flight competition in the Philippines . It featured eight clubs from the National Capital Region . The PFF also planned a Visayas and Mindanao FPL tournament in 2009 , which never materialized . The first and only champion of the league , which was cancelled at the season 's conclusion , was the Philippine Army . 
 Shortly after the dissolution of the Filipino Premier League , the Football Alliance sought to renew the interest of Filipinos in football . The Alliance entered into discussions with the United Football Clubs Association for the possibility of establishing another top @-@ flight football competition in the Philippines . Instead of creating a whole system and competition , the United Football Clubs Association agreed to partner with the Football Alliance in operating the United Football League ( UFL ) , a semi @-@ professional league . After the league 's second season , <unk> became its official TV broadcaster with the signing of a ₱ 150 million ( ~ $ 3 @.@ 3 million or ~ € 2 @.@ 5 million ) , five @-@ year deal , which ensures the airing of two live matches every week . The deal was further improved with a new TV arrangement in which four live matches would be aired every week on primetime television on <unk> . 
 By 2015 or 2016 , the PFF seeks to establish a professional national football league , which would be supported by the Asian Football Confederation ( AFC ) and FIFA . It was proposed that the league will have at least 10 clubs — four clubs in Luzon , four in Visayas , and two in Mindanao . The United Football League is currently the de facto top tier national league in the country . As the league is under the National Capital Region Football Association , the league cannot be officially defined as a national league . 
 The Philippine Football Federation has not been able to organize a national tournament since 2007 , when they staged the PFF Centennial Men 's Open Championship due to " variety of reasons " . In January 2011 , Smart Communications approached the PFF with an offer to finance a new local football cup competition , the PFF National Men 's Club Championship . The proposed partnership was set to last 10 years , with Smart releasing ₱ 80 million in funds with the aim of providing more playing opportunities for football players , and the eventual creation of a national cup . In March 2011 , the first season of the cup began . 
 Since 2012 , the Chinese Taipei Football Association ( <unk> ) requested if the PFF can host the third staging of the Long Teng Cup in the Philippines . It was then accepted , the Philippines which has been a regular participant since its inception in 2010 , renamed the tournament the Paulino Alcántara Cup , then renamed it once again to the Paulino Alcántara Peace Cup . The tournament was eventually renamed the Philippine Peace Cup because the Philippine Sports Commission , which operates the Rizal Memorial Stadium where the tournament was held , has a rule against events named after an individual . The tournament takes place in September to celebrate Peace Month in the Philippines . 
 = = = = National team performance = = = = 
 The inaugural season of the Far Eastern Games ( FEG ) in 1913 was the first championship held in Manila . The tournament provided the first matches in international football for all three nations , including the Republic of China and Japan . In the same season , the Philippines clinched their first championship title in international soccer when they defeated China 2 – 1 . They also competed in 1915 in Shanghai , where the Chinese grabbed their first FEG title against the Filipinos . The Philippine team has competed in every Far Eastern Games , but has not yet won another tournament since 1913 . In 1938 , the FEG was cancelled due to the outbreak of the Second Sino @-@ Japanese War . 
 The Philippine team competed in the Asian Games numerous times , making their debut in 1954 when the Philippines hosted the tournament . The Filipinos were in Group A with South Vietnam and Chinese Taipei . All games was held in Rizal Memorial Stadium . Their matches were both losses , resulting in early elimination . They returned in 1958 in Tokyo , this time competing in Group C. The Azkals recorded their first win at the games over Japan , but eventually lost to Hong Kong . In 1962 , the Asian Games were held in Jakarta . Chinese Taipei and Israel were excluded in the tournament when the Indonesian government refused to issue visas for the Israeli and Taiwanese delegations . Meanwhile , Burma withdrew from competition . The Philippine team finished last in the standings , behind South Vietnam , Indonesia , and Malaya . The team finished last again in 1974 after losing every game . Beginning in 2002 , an age division of under @-@ 23 was approved for men , which is the same as in football competitions in the Olympic Games . The Philippines U @-@ 23 has never yet made an appearance at the Asian Games since 2002 . 
 The Philippine team is yet to qualify at the AFC Asian Cup . They have played at the AFC Challenge Cup , which serves as a qualifier for the Asian Cup . They have made two appearances , in 2006 and 2012 . The 2006 AFC Challenge Cup was the opening season of the competition , held in Bangladesh . The Philippines advanced automatically because there was no qualification stages . After competing in Group A , they concluded the standings with a loss over Chinese Taipei and two draws with India and Afghanistan . However , in the second season , they did not advanced because of their performance at the qualification phase , finishing short at second place only by goal difference . Their first match was a victory over Brunei , followed by a goalless draw from Tajikistan and a 3 – 0 win against Bhutan . The conclusion was the same in the 2010 qualification stage , where they ended their campaign by finishing third . The Filipinos grabbed their best finish in the cup when they were ranked third in the 2012 edition , with a loss from Turkmenistan in the semi @-@ finals , and a victory against Palestine in the third place playoff . 
 The Philippine team has participated in minor tournaments such as the Merdeka Tournament in 1962 , 1971 and 1972 , where each was finished in the group stages . The Philippines won two minor competitions , both in the Philippine Peace Cup . Since winning the 2012 Peace Cup , for the first time in 99 years , the national team earned their first international title after winning all of their games . Also in 2013 , they retained the title after a win over Pakistan . 
 The Philippines has not made an appearance in the World Cup . However , in 2011 , the Philippines made history in the FIFA World Cup qualification – AFC First round when they defeated Sri Lanka in the second leg 4 – 0 ( 5 – 1 <unk> . ) , advancing to the next round for the first time . However , they eventually lost to Kuwait in the second stage . 
 In the national team 's 2013 season , they capped off the year by finishing 127th in the FIFA World Rankings as their new all @-@ time high . 
 = = United Football League = = 
 In the 2014 season , the United Football League is divided into two divisions , with nine teams in Division I and 12 teams in Division II . The 2009 UFL Cup was created to determine the composition of teams that will be playing in the league . However , new teams that did not participate in the 2009 UFL Cup will automatically join Division II . 
 Division I clubs will face their opponents three times ( formerly twice ) for league play , which it will run a month longer than the previous year 's league . Meanwhile , the rule will not apply for Division II teams , as they retain the double round robin format . After the home and away fixtures are concluded , a league table will be used to determine which teams will be champions , relegated , or promoted . 
 When a club places first in the standings in Division I , they will become champions . However , if they rank first in the standings in Division II , they will be the winners and will receive promotion to Division I. If the team places last in the table in Division I , they will be automatically relegated to Division II . Every season , the UFL regularly organizes a promotion @-@ relegation playoff match , in which the second rank team in Division II and the eighth @-@ placed team in Division I will face off in a two legged match . The winning team will be determined by an aggregate score . If the Division I team wins the series , they will retain their place in Division I. If the Division II team wins , they will receive a promotion to Division I and the losing team will be relegated . 
 = = = Qualification for men 's Asian competitions = = = 
 In the AFC President 's Cup , the winner of the PFF National Men 's Club Championship will qualify to participate in the competition . In the 2013 AFC President 's Cup , Global qualified because they were the champions of the 2012 United Football League , but all teams in the league were from the National Capital Region Football Association . The PFF decided that the National Men 's Club Championship will serve as the qualifiers for the Philippines ' club representative to the 2014 President 's Cup . 
 = = National teams = = 
 The Philippine national men 's football team represents the Philippines in men 's international football . In addition , there are other youth national teams that represent the country in other competitions such as the Philippines national under @-@ 23 football team , also known as the Philippine Olympic team , the Philippines national under @-@ 19 football team , and the Philippines national under @-@ 17 football team . The Philippines national futsal team represents men 's international futsal , and the Philippines national beach soccer team in men 's international beach soccer . 
 The women 's team , also known as the " <unk> , " represents the country in women 's international football and in the Olympics . The <unk> captured a third @-@ place ( bronze ) finish in the 1985 Southeast Asian Games , and were victorious in the 2012 LA Vikings Cup . 
 = = Stadiums = = 
 For a list of football stadiums in the Philippines with Wikipedia articles , see Category : Football venues in the Philippines . 
 The Rizal Memorial Stadium in Manila is the national stadium of the Philippines , as well as the home venue of the national team . It has served as the main stadium of the 1954 Asian Games and a former venue for the United Football League . Established in 1934 , the stadium has a capacity of 12 @,@ 873 . Another stadium , <unk> Stadium in Bacolod , is an alternative home stadium for the Philippines with 20 @,@ 000 seats . 
 The Emperador Stadium in Taguig , the main stadium of the UFL , has an all @-@ weather football pitch made of artificial turf , developed by real estate developer <unk> Corporation and constructed by All Asia Structures , Inc . The University of Makati Stadium , another former UFL venue , is the first football stadium built by a local university , and has a capacity of 4 @,@ 000 . Iloilo Sports Complex is the host of home matches from Iloilo <unk> .. It hosted an international competition in the group stages of the 2013 AFC President 's Cup . 
 = Hurricane Daniel ( 2006 ) = 
 Hurricane Daniel was the second strongest hurricane of the 2006 Pacific hurricane season . The fourth named storm of the season , Daniel originated on July 16 from a tropical wave off the coast of Mexico . It tracked westward , intensifying steadily to reach peak winds of 150 mph ( 240 km / h ) on July 22 . At the time , the characteristics of the cyclone resembled those of an annular hurricane . Daniel gradually weakened as it entered an area of cooler water temperatures and increased wind shear , and after crossing into the Central Pacific Ocean , it quickly degenerated into a remnant low pressure area on July 26 . 
 Initial predictions suggested that the cyclone would pass through the Hawaiian Islands as a tropical storm ; however , Daniel 's remnants dissipated southeast of Hawaii . The storm brought light to moderate precipitation to the islands of Hawaii and Maui , causing minor flooding , although no major damage or fatalities were reported . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 Hurricane Daniel began as a tropical wave that moved off the west coast of Africa on July 2 . The wave moved across the Atlantic Ocean and Caribbean Sea with little associated convection , and on July 12 , it crossed Central America into the eastern Pacific Ocean . Convection increased on July 13 , and two days later the system began to exhibit signs of tropical development to the south of Mexico . It tracked westward at about 15 mph ( 25 km / h ) , and on July 16 , the disturbance became better organized . With convective rainbands near an associated low @-@ level circulation , it is estimated the tropical wave spawned a tropical depression late on July 16 . At the time , it was located about 525 miles ( 845 km ) south @-@ southwest of Manzanillo , Colima . 
 Classified as Tropical Depression Five @-@ E , the system tracked westward under the steering currents of a mid @-@ level ridge . In the hours after formation , the depression lacked a concentration of deep convection near the center . Conditions favored development , including warm sea surface temperatures , very low amounts of wind shear , and an established anticyclone over the cyclone . Convection became more centralized , coinciding with the improvement of upper @-@ level outflow . Based on Dvorak classifications , it is estimated that the cyclone intensified into Tropical Storm Daniel at 1200 UTC on July 17 . Daniel quickly became better organized , exhibiting increased thunderstorm activity and banding features . A central dense overcast developed , and a well @-@ defined rainband wrapped around the center of circulation . Based on the formation of an eye feature , the National Hurricane Center upgraded Daniel to hurricane status late on July 18 while it was located about 885 miles ( 1420 km ) south @-@ southwest of Cabo San Lucas . 
 On July 19 , the eye of Daniel became apparent on satellite imagery , which organized into a pinhole eye . It underwent an eyewall replacement cycle as it turned to the west @-@ northwest , temporarily halting its intensification trend , before quickly strengthening and attaining major hurricane status on July 20 . Later that day , Hurricane Daniel organized into a very symmetric cyclone with a distinct eye about 30 miles ( 50 km ) in diameter . Upon attaining Category 4 status on the Saffir @-@ Simpson Hurricane Scale , the cyclone resembled the appearance of an annular hurricane ; an annular hurricane is one with a large and symmetric eye , surrounded by a thick ring of intense convection , and usually is able to maintain its intensity and structure for several days . On July 21 the hurricane underwent another eyewall replacement cycle . After completing the cycle , Daniel attained its peak winds of 150 mph ( 240 km / h ) early on July 22 . It maintained peak winds for about 18 hours , and Daniel began a weakening trend as it crossed into an area of progressively cooler water temperatures . The eye became more distinct on July 23 , before the cloud tops again warmed as the winds decreased . 
 The hurricane crossed into the area of forecast responsibility of the Central Pacific Hurricane Center on July 24 , and upon doing so , its eye disappeared from satellite imagery . Daniel was forecast to track through the Hawaiian Islands as a tropical storm as water temperatures near the islands were warmer , and wind shear was expected to be minimal . However , it decelerated as the ridge to its north weakened , and due to the combination of cool waters and increasing easterly shear , Daniel weakened to a tropical storm on July 25 . Later that day , no active convection remained near the exposed circulation center , and early on July 26 it weakened to tropical depression status . Thunderstorm activity failed to redevelop , and Daniel degenerated into a remnant low pressure area by 0000 UTC on July 27 . The remnant low continued west @-@ northwestward , dissipating just south @-@ east of the Big Island of Hawaii on July 28 . 
 = = Preparations and impact = = 
 When Hurricane Daniel was forecast to pass through the Hawaiian islands as a tropical storm , state and Hawaii County officials recommended residents prepare hurricane kits . They also suggested purchasing non @-@ perishable foods and batteries . Initially , the storm was several days away from potentially affecting the state , and as a result few residents rushed to prepare . The Honolulu National Weather Service issued a high surf advisory for east facing beaches in Hawaii , and warned beachgoers to remain out of the water . The National Weather Service issued a flash flood watch and wind advisory in association with the remnants of Daniel . 
 The remnants produced 2 – 5 inches ( 50 – 125 mm ) of rainfall throughout windward areas of the Big Island of Hawaii and Maui on July 28 and 29 . West <unk> on Maui recorded 3 @.@ 87 inches ( 98 @.@ 3 mm ) in one day , which was the highest daily rainfall total from the hurricane . The storm also dropped precipitation on the East Maui watershed . The rainfall — particularly in Kailua @-@ Kona on the Big Island — caused ponding on roadways , as well as flooding of small streams . However , no injuries or serious damage were reported . A station in Ka Lae briefly reported sustained winds of about 35 mph ( 55 km / h ) with gusts to 45 mph ( 75 km / h ) . 
 During the 61st Interdepartmental Hurricane Conference , the Hawaii State Civil Defense requested the retirement of the name Daniel , citing that it became one of the several storms memorable for threat or damage . However , the World Meteorological Organization did not approve the request . 
 = Sable ( wrestler ) = 
 Rena Marlette Lesnar ( née Greek ; born August 8 , 1967 ) , better known as Sable , is an American model , actress , and retired professional wrestler . She is primarily known for her time in WWE . Before gaining popularity in the world of professional wrestling , she began working for WWE in 1996 . As Sable , she was one of the first WWE Divas , and gained considerable popularity . After feuding with Luna Vachon , and Jacqueline , Sable became the second WWF Women 's Champion after the title was reinstated into the company . After becoming a heel and leaving the company , she filed a $ 110 million lawsuit against the company , citing allegations of sexual harassment and unsafe working conditions . 
 In 2003 , she returned to WWE and was put into a feud with Torrie Wilson , and another storyline as Vince McMahon 's mistress . In 2004 , she left the company to spend more time with her family . Outside of wrestling , she has been featured on the cover of Playboy three times . The April 1999 issue of the magazine with her on the cover was one of the highest selling issues in Playboy history . She has guest starred on several television series , including Pacific Blue , and appeared in the film Corky Romano . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Rena Greek was born in Jacksonville , Florida . She was active in her youth and was interested in activities such as gymnastics , horseback riding , and softball . After winning her first beauty pageant at twelve years of age , she eventually became a model in 1990 , working with companies such as L 'Oréal , Pepsi , and Guess ? . 
 = = Professional wrestling career = = 
 = = = World Wrestling Federation = = = 
 = = = = Debut and storyline with Marc Mero ( 1996 – 1998 ) = = = = 
 She made her World Wrestling Federation debut as Sable at WrestleMania XII in March 1996 , escorting Hunter Hearst Helmsley to the ring as he took on the returning Ultimate Warrior . Sable 's first major angle involved her then real @-@ life husband , who debuted at WrestleMania XII as " Wildman " Marc Mero . The storyline started when Marc Mero witnessed Sable being mistreated by Helmsley backstage , so Mero attacked Helmsley and took Sable as his manager . She remained Mero 's manager until his injury in 1997 . Between 1997 and the time he returned from his injury in 1998 , Sable became popular on her own . In her next storyline , a returning Marc Mero ( now known as " Marvelous " Marc Mero ) became jealous , refused to let Sable get any of the spotlight , and mistreated her . The duo entered into a feud with Luna Vachon and The Artist Formerly Known as Goldust , which climaxed in a match at WrestleMania XIV in March 1998 . Sable delivered a superkick to Goldust and executed a " Sable Bomb " , a version of the powerbomb , on Luna . She also delivered a TKO and pinned Luna to finish the match , with the crowd chanting Sable 's name in the background . At the following pay @-@ per @-@ view event , Unforgiven in April 1998 , Sable lost to Luna in an Evening Gown match after being distracted by Marc Mero . 
 After Marc 's interference at Unforgiven , Sable came to the ring and challenged Marc to a match . Sable then kicked him in the groin and delivered a Sable Bomb to get revenge . Sable eventually broke away from " Marvelous " Marc Mero , who debuted Jacqueline as his new manager , resulting in a storyline feud between the two women . The two met in a bikini contest in July 1998 at Fully Loaded . Sable , only wearing impressions of hands painted on her exposed breasts , won the contest after receiving the most cheers from the audience . The next night on Raw however , Vince McMahon disqualified Sable from the previous night 's contest since she did not actually wear a bikini , and the trophy was then awarded to Jacqueline . In response , Sable gave McMahon the double finger . At SummerSlam , Sable and her mystery partner , federation newcomer Edge , defeated Marc Mero and Jacqueline in a mixed tag team match . 
 = = = = Women 's Championship feuds ( 1998 – 1999 ) = = = = 
 Sable and Jacqueline faced off for the newly reinstated WWF Women 's Title on the September 21 , 1998 edition of Raw . Jacqueline claimed the title after Marc Mero interfered . On November 15 , 1998 at Survivor Series , she dropped the title to Sable , who won after powerbombing both Marc and Jacqueline during the match . During this time , Rena had a guest appearance on an episode of the USA Network show Pacific Blue . Sable then briefly entered a storyline where she was forced to play a subservient role to Vince and Shane McMahon , but the storyline was cut short . 
 In 1999 , as part of a new storyline , Sable was attacked by a masked woman named Spider Lady , who turned out to be Luna . Sable defeated Luna in a Strap match at the Royal Rumble after an assist from a planted female Sable fan , WWF newcomer Tori . Tori 's debut signified a change in Sable 's persona . After the Rumble , Rena ( under her Sable ring name ) was featured as the cover girl for the April 1999 issue of Playboy . The issue was one of the highest selling issues of Playboy ever . Surrounding the release of the issue , the Sable character turned heel by " going Hollywood " and having an inflated ego . Rarely defending her title , Sable continually berated her fan Tori , and she feuded with both Tori and Luna Vachon ( who had turned face ) . She debuted a new catchphrase : " This is for all the women who want to be me and all the men who come to see me " and a dance move called " the grind . " The feud with Tori led to a match at WrestleMania XV . During the contest , Nicole Bass debuted as Sable 's bodyguard and helped Sable win the match . 
 Sable went on with Bass making Bass do all of her dirty work . Sable continued to hold the championship for almost six months , but on May 10 , 1999 , Debra " won " the Women 's Championship from Sable in an Evening Gown match . Normally in an Evening Gown match , the winner is the woman who forcibly removes her opponent 's dress , which Sable did . As part of the storyline , WWF Commissioner Shawn Michaels , however , ruled that the woman who had lost her dress was the winner , making Debra the new Women 's Champion . Off @-@ screen , Sable was in a dispute with the WWF , which is why she was stripped of the title on @-@ screen . Sable at this time was also very unpopular backstage , to the extent that Sean Waltman has since admitted to playing a nasty practical joke on her last day with the WWF . 
 = = = Post – WWF ( 1999 – 2001 ) = = = 
 In June 1999 , Sable quit the WWF and filed a $ 110 million lawsuit against the company , citing allegations of sexual harassment and unsafe working conditions . She claims to have filed the lawsuit after refusing to go topless . During the course of the lawsuit , Vince McMahon counter @-@ sued her over control of the stagename " Sable " . Sable reduced the amount she was seeking in damages , and they eventually settled out of court in August 1999 . Sable used her real name for her appearance in the September 1999 issue of Playboy . She was the first woman in history to be given two Playboy covers in the same year . After her WWF exit , she made an on @-@ camera appearance as an audience member on World Championship Wrestling 's Nitro on June 14 , 1999 . 
 During this time , she made appearances on The Howard Stern Show and Late Night with Conan O 'Brien . She also made appearances on television shows such as Relic Hunter and First Wave and in the films Corky Romano as a female bouncer and Ariana 's Quest . She released her autobiography , entitled Undefeated in August 2000 . She also released a comic book entitled The 10th Muse starring herself as a superhero . In May 2001 , she was given an advice column on CompuServe . On November 13 and November 14 , 2001 , she appeared as the on @-@ camera " CEO " of the newly formed X Wrestling Federation ( <unk> ) , but these were her only appearances with the company . 
 = = = Return to WWE = = = 
 = = = = Relationship with Vince McMahon ( 2003 ) = = = = 
 Rena Mero returned to the WWF , which is now known as World Wrestling Entertainment ( WWE ) on the April 3 , 2003 episode of SmackDown ! , reprising her role as Sable . Sable continued portraying a villainess and spent several months in a storyline with new Playboy covergirl Torrie Wilson . During their angle , the evil Sable followed Wilson down to her matches , talked with her backstage , and on one occasion , she left Wilson in a tag match alone to fend for herself . Sable eventually challenged Wilson to a showdown bikini contest at Judgment Day . After Sable got the bigger applause , Wilson removed her bikini to reveal an even smaller bikini underneath , and Special Guest Referee Tazz declared Wilson the winner . After the match , Wilson went up to Sable and kissed her before exiting the ring . Sable then had an altercation with the guest judge Tazz , dumping water on him on the following edition of SmackDown ! , as a means of gaining revenge for declaring Wilson the winner . 
 Sable then feuded with Stephanie McMahon in a storyline in which she was Vince McMahon 's mistress . Vince appointed Sable as Stephanie 's personal assistant against Stephanie 's will , sparking the feud between the duo . During the feud , they competed in several catfights , a food fight , a parking lot brawl in which Sable 's bra was ripped off , revealing both her breasts on live television , and a match in which Sable smacked a clipboard over Stephanie 's head . At Vengeance , Sable defeated Stephanie after interference by her new ally , A @-@ Train . At SummerSlam , Sable accompanied A @-@ Train in his match against The Undertaker , which he lost . After the match , The Undertaker held Sable so that Stephanie could use a Spear attack on her . After SummerSlam , Vince and Sable focused on getting rid of Stephanie for good , so Vince made an " I Quit " match at No Mercy . During the match , Sable slapped Stephanie and was involved in a scuffle with Linda McMahon . 
 = = = = Various storylines and departure ( 2004 ) = = = = 
 Sable briefly became a face again when she appeared on the cover of Playboy magazine ( March 2004 issue ) for the third time in her career . On the cover , she appeared with fellow diva Torrie Wilson , making them the first WWE Divas to pose in Playboy together . Surrounding the release of the cover , the duo feuded with Raw divas Stacy Keibler and Miss Jackie , even though all four women were faces at the time . The two teams squared off at WrestleMania XX in an Interpromotional Tag Team Evening Gown match , but the divas started the match in their underwear , making it more of a lingerie match . Sable and Wilson were victorious . The change was rumored to have occurred because Sable had suffered damage to her breast . 
 Following WrestleMania XX , Sable quickly turned heel again and engaged in another short feud with Torrie Wilson . The feud culminated at The Great American Bash , where Sable defeated Wilson despite the referee not noticing that one of Wilson 's shoulders were not down . On the July 1 edition of SmackDown , Sable was defeated by Wilson in a rematch . Sable 's final appearance in WWE was on SmackDown ! when she , Dawn Marie , and Wilson accompanied Eddie Guerrero to the ring in his lowrider . On August 10 , 2004 , WWE 's official website announced that Sable and WWE had parted ways , this time on good terms . Lesnar claimed that she left the company to spend more time with her family . 
 = = = New Japan Pro Wrestling ( 2006 – 2007 ) = = = 
 She made her debut for New Japan Pro Wrestling on January 4 , 2006 at a NJPW show , along with Brock Lesnar as special guests , and continued to accompany Lesnar until late June 2007 . Sable and Lesnar later departed from the company after Lesnar battled WWE in a lawsuit . 
 = = Other media = = 
 Sable made her video game debut in the WWE game WWF Attitude , and appears in the games WWE SmackDown ! Here Comes the Pain and WWE SmackDown ! vs. Raw . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Rena Greek married Wayne W. Richardson in 1986 . The couple had a daughter named Mariah in 1988 . The two remained married until Richardson died in a drunk driving accident in 1991 . She met her second husband , professional wrestler and former boxer Marc Mero , in 1993 . She had breast implants that same year . After marrying Mero in 1994 , she broke into the wrestling business through what was then known as the World Wrestling Federation . 
 After Rena and Marc Mero divorced in 2004 , she began dating Brock Lesnar , whom she became engaged to later on that year . The engagement was called off in early 2005 , but they were engaged again in January 2006 . They were married on May 6 , 2006 . The couple has two sons together , Turk ( born June 2009 ) and Duke ( born July 2010 ) . She 's also stepmother to Mya ( born April 2002 ) , the daughter of Brock 's ex @-@ fiancée , Nicole . In September 2012 , Rena became a grandmother , as her daughter Mariah gave birth to a baby girl . 
 = = In wrestling = = 
 Finishing moves 
 Sable Bomb ( Powerbomb ) 
 TKO – Total Knock Out - adopted from Marc Mero 
 Signature moves 
 Hair pull whip 
 Multiple kick variations 
 Repeated shoot , to a bent over or cornered opponent 
 Super , sometimes to an oncoming opponent 
 Running clothesline , sometimes done repeatedly in succession 
 Slap 
 Sable @-@ <unk> ( Super frankensteiner ) 
 Managers 
 Tori 
 Nicole Bass 
 Wrestlers managed 
 A @-@ Train 
 Hunter Hearst Helmsley 
 Marc Mero 
 Mr. McMahon 
 The Oddities 
 Entrance themes 
 " Wild Cat " by Jim Johnston ( 1997 – 1999 , 2003 – 2004 ) 
 " No Chance in Hell " performed by Peter <unk> and composed by Jim Johnston ( 2003 ; used while managing Mr. McMahon ) 
 = = Championships and accomplishments = = 
 World Wrestling Federation 
 WWF Women 's Championship ( 1 time ) 
 Slammy Award ( 2 time ) 
 Dressed to Kill ( 1997 ) 
 Diva of The Year ( 1997 ) 
 = History of York City F.C. ( 1980 – present ) = 
 York City Football Club is a professional association football club based in York , North Yorkshire , England . Its history from the 1980 – 81 to the current season saw fluctuating fortunes in the 1980s and 1990s , and relegation from and return to the Football League . 
 York made their seventh re @-@ election bid after 1980 – 81 , before the club won its first and only league title after finishing first in the Fourth Division in 1983 – 84 with 101 points . They were the first team to score this many points in a Football League season . After four seasons in the Third Division in 1987 – 88 , York were relegated . They beat Crewe Alexandra on penalties at Wembley Stadium in the play @-@ off final in 1992 – 93 , winning promotion back into the third tier of English football , now renamed as the Second Division . The following season , York competed in the play @-@ off semi @-@ final , when they were beaten by Stockport County . Later in the 1990s , they knocked Premier League clubs Manchester United and Everton out of the League Cup in successive seasons . After six seasons , York were relegated into the Third Division in 1998 – 99 . 
 In the following years , the club experienced financial troubles ; chairman Douglas Craig offered the club and its ground for sale in December 2001 . The club was bought by John Batchelor in March 2002 , but the following December they went into administration . In March 2003 , York were taken over by the club 's Supporters ' Trust , and were relegated into the Conference National in 2003 – 04 , ending seventy @-@ five years of Football League membership . The team were unsuccessful in the play @-@ offs in the 2006 – 07 and 2009 – 10 seasons , and were beaten in the 2009 FA Trophy Final at the newly rebuilt Wembley Stadium . In 2011 – 12 , York defeated Newport County in the 2012 FA Trophy Final at Wembley , and shortly after returned to the Football League with a 2 – 1 win over Luton Town in the play @-@ off final . In their second season in League Two , the club reached the play @-@ offs but were knocked out in the semi @-@ final by Fleetwood Town . 
 = = 1980 – 98 : Fourth Division championship and first play @-@ off success = = 
 The 1980 – 81 season started comfortably for York City , and the team were fourteenth in the table by mid @-@ January 1981 . However , three wins from the last eighteen matches saw them finish in bottom place . York 's seventh application for re @-@ election was successful with forty @-@ six votes . Poor form at home contributed to York occupying the bottom half of the table for most of 1981 – 82 , and a club record of twelve successive matches without a home win . Barry Lyons was sacked as manager in December 1981 , and under caretaker manager Kevin Randall the club dropped into the bottom four . Former York player and club director Barry Swallow took over as caretaker manager in March 1982 , and several convincing home wins toward the end of the season helped the team to seventeenth place . Denis Smith , who had played on loan from Stoke City the previous season , was appointed player @-@ manager in May 1982 , with Viv Busby as his assistant player @-@ coach . York finished 1982 – 83 in seventh place ; their inconsistent away form in the last half of the season led to them missing out on promotion . The club occupied one of the top two places in 1983 – 84 from the second week of the season onwards , and won the Fourth Division championship with 101 points . They became the first team to achieve a three @-@ figure points total in a Football League season . The Yorkshire Evening Press billed them the " Team of the Century " . York set new club records for most wins ( thirty @-@ one ) , most away wins ( thirteen ) and most goals ( ninety @-@ one ) . For the first time since 1954 – 55 , York had two players score over twenty league goals in a season ; these were John Byrne and Keith Walwyn . A profit of almost £ 15 @,@ 000 was posted and the club aspired to further progress and promotion . 
 Winning six of their first eight matches in 1984 – 85 , York were top of the Third Division by early @-@ October 1984 . After a run of two wins from eleven matches they slipped to eleventh place in mid @-@ December 1984 , though they continued to occupy a top half position before finishing the season in eighth place . In January 1985 , York beat First Division side Arsenal 1 – 0 at home in the FA Cup fourth round , <unk> of a late penalty scored by Keith Houchen . They reached the fifth round for the third time and drew 1 – 1 at home to European Cup holders Liverpool . They lost 7 – 0 in the replay at Anfield — the club 's record cup defeat . York started 1985 – 86 well and were second in the table by late @-@ November 1985 , before a poor mid @-@ season spell saw them drop into mid @-@ table . After being unbeaten in the last nine matches , they finished seventh in the table , marking the fifth consecutive season in which York 's end @-@ of @-@ season league placing improved . They reached the FA Cup fifth round for the second consecutive season , again drawing 1 – 1 at home to Liverpool , before losing 3 – 1 after extra time at Anfield . York made a strong start to 1986 – 87 , and in late @-@ September 1986 they were in second place . They won only seven of their remaining thirty @-@ eight matches and needed a point from their last match to avoid the danger of relegation , which they achieved with a 1 – 1 draw against Notts County . York finished 1986 – 87 in twentieth place . 
 Smith left to take over at Sunderland in May 1987 , and former Blackburn Rovers manager Bobby Saxton was appointed in June . Only two players were under contract at the time of Saxton 's arrival ; his hastily arranged squad struggled from the start of 1987 – 88 , and only won their first match in late @-@ October 1987 . York were bottom of the table for most of the season , and were relegated after finishing in twenty @-@ third place . The season was statistically the club 's worst in the Football League , with the fewest wins ( eight ) , most defeats ( twenty @-@ nine ) and the fewest points since the three points for a win system was introduced ( thirty @-@ three ) . York made a poor start to 1988 – 89 , and Saxton resigned with the club bottom of the Fourth Division in mid @-@ September 1988 . Swallow took over on a caretaker basis before the former Hartlepool United manager John Bird was appointed in October 1988 . York 's away form improved in the second half of the season , and in the last week they had a slim chance of reaching the play @-@ offs . They missed out on a play @-@ off place and finished the season in eleventh place . A record loss of £ 190 @,@ 000 was posted for the season , but the club carried no overdraft because of interest @-@ free loans from directors and a £ 100 @,@ 000 share issue . York started 1989 – 90 strongly and were in third place by mid @-@ December 1989 . Successive home defeats in late @-@ December 1989 marked the start of a decline that saw them finish the season thirteenth in the table . 
 In September 1990 , York player David Longhurst collapsed and died after suffering heart failure during a home match against Lincoln City . A few months later , a newly built , covered stand at the Shipton Street End of Bootham Crescent was named after him . York were the Fourth Division 's second lowest scorers in 1990 – 91 , as they finished twenty @-@ first in the table . Douglas Craig , who had been on the board since 1978 , succeeded Michael Sinclair as chairman in June 1991 . York had won two of eleven matches by mid @-@ October 1991 ; Bird was sacked and was replaced in November by Aston Villa assistant manager John Ward . York continued to be placed in lower mid @-@ table , and finished fourth from bottom for the second year running in 1991 – 92 . They started 1992 – 93 with a club @-@ record start of four wins , and led the table until late @-@ December 1992 . Ward left for Bristol Rovers in March 1993 , shortly after a mid @-@ season slump in which York won only one of thirteen matches . Ward 's assistant Alan Little took over and York finished the season in fourth place . They played Bury in the play @-@ off semi @-@ final , drawing the first leg 0 – 0 at Gigg Lane before winning the second leg 1 – 0 at home with a goal from Gary Swann . In the final at Wembley Stadium , York beat Crewe Alexandra 5 – 3 on penalties , after the score had finished 1 – 1 after extra time . Wayne Hall scored the decisive penalty as York won promotion into the third tier , now named the Second Division after the formation of the Premier League in 1992 . 
 York made a good start to 1993 – 94 , before a series of poor results saw them slip to seventeenth place in late @-@ November 1993 . They only lost five of their last thirty fixtures to finish the season fifth in the Second Division table — their highest league placing since 1976 . They lost to Stockport County in the play @-@ off semi @-@ final , being beaten 1 – 0 in the second leg at Edgeley Park after drawing 0 – 0 at home in the first leg . York were in lower mid @-@ table for the first half of 1994 – 95 , but improving form saw them move up the table , before finishing in ninth place . They struggled through most of 1995 – 96 , and only avoided relegation by winning their last match away to Brighton & Hove Albion ; they finished in twentieth place . This season saw York record a 4 – 3 aggregate victory over Manchester United in the League Cup second round . York defeated a strong United side including some younger players 3 – 0 at Old Trafford in the first leg ; in the second leg United fielded some more experienced players , but York defeated them 3 – 1 to progress on aggregate . United went on to win the Premier League and FA Cup double . York finished twentieth in 1996 – 97 , only securing safety in the penultimate match with an away win over Rotherham United . For the second consecutive season , they eliminated Premier League opponents from the League Cup in the second round , with a 4 – 3 aggregate win over Everton . After drawing the first leg 1 – 1 at Goodison Park , York progressed after winning the second leg 3 – 2 at home . In mid @-@ December 1997 , York were fourth in the table , but declining form after New Year saw them finish 1997 – 98 in sixteenth place . 
 = = 1998 – 2010 : Financial problems and relegation from Football League = = 
 By mid @-@ October 1998 , York were placed eighth in the Second Division . They slipped to the bottom third of the table after winning one point from a possible twenty @-@ one . Despite improved results over Christmas , York played eleven consecutive matches without a win . In mid @-@ March 1999 , the club was just above the bottom four places , when Little was sacked and player @-@ coach Neil Thompson appointed caretaker manager . A flurry of transfers , including the departure of leading scorer Richard Cresswell to Premier League side Sheffield Wednesday for a club @-@ record fee of £ 950 @,@ 000 , followed . After losing away to Manchester City on the last day of 1998 – 99 , York dropped into the bottom four for the first time that season , and were relegated in twenty @-@ first place . The club 's trading loss for the season was £ 483 @,@ 096 , despite a record profit of £ 1 @,@ 274 @,@ 202 from lucrative transfers . Club historian David Batters said , " the stark reality was that the club had to sell to survive " . In July 1999 , the club and its real property assets , including the ground , were transferred to a holding company called Bootham Crescent Holdings ( BCH ) for £ 165 @,@ 000 . Thompson was sacked in February 2000 after a run of one win from twelve matches during the middle of 1999 – 2000 . Former Hull City manager Terry Dolan took over , and York finished the season in twentieth place after conceding only five goals in the last twelve matches . Losses for the season were £ 667 @,@ 255 , and the wage bill of £ 1 @,@ 635 @,@ 736 was twice that of 1995 . 
 By mid @-@ February 2001 , York were bottom of the Third Division table , but after losing only two of their last sixteen matches they finished 2000 – 01 in seventeenth . They reached the FA Cup third round for the second time since 1986 , but were beaten 3 – 0 by Premier League side Leicester City at Filbert Street . Record losses of £ 1 @,@ 261 @,@ 038 were reported in November 2001 , before Craig announced in December that the club and the ground had been put up for sale for £ 4 @.@ 5 million . Craig later said Bootham Crescent would close by June 2002 , and the club would resign from the Football League if a buyer was not found . The club was taken over by motor racing driver John Batchelor in March 2002 . He pledged to give the Supporters ' Trust ( ST ) two seats on the board and announced a sponsorship deal with Persimmon that would see an undisclosed amount split between the club and his racing team . By late @-@ March 2002 , York were second from bottom , before a run of five wins from the last eight matches saw them finish 2001 – 02 in fourteenth place . They reached the FA Cup fourth round for the first time since 1986 , losing 2 – 0 at home to Premier League team Fulham . 
 In May 2002 , the club was rebranded York City Soccer Club as part of Batchelor 's plan to market it in the United States . Persimmon , which had bought ten percent of the shares in BCH , submitted planning applications for ninety @-@ three homes on the site of Bootham Crescent , and Batchelor spoke of building York a new stadium at Clifton Moor . The club entered a creditors ' voluntary agreement in November 2002 , and the York Evening Press said York had been " plunged into the darkest , coldest days of its history " . The club went into administration in December 2002 , and was given five weeks to find a buyer or face bankruptcy . The ST donated £ 92 @,@ 000 to give the club a temporary reprieve . The ST took control over the club in March 2003 after the Inland Revenue accepted an offer of £ 100 @,@ 000 as payment for £ 160 @,@ 000 owed in tax . Steve Beck became the new chairman . Batchelor had diverted almost all of the £ 400 @,@ 000 Persimmon sponsorship money away from York to his racing team , and his promise of having ST members on the board never materialised . He left the club with a profit of £ 120 @,@ 000 and admitted to asset stripping during his time as owner . Despite the off @-@ field problems , York pushed for promotion in 2002 – 03 and were in an automatic promotion place by late @-@ March 2003 . They won none of their last six games and finished the season in tenth place . 
 Dolan was sacked in May 2003 , the new board citing financial reasons for his departure . At twenty @-@ seven years , York player Chris Brass was appointed player @-@ manager in June 2003 , which made him the youngest Football League managerial appointment since 1946 . The club 's lease of Bootham Crescent was extended to May 2004 , and plans proceeded to develop Huntington Stadium ahead of a possible move , but problems bringing the ground to Football League standards were encountered . The board preferred to stay at Bootham Crescent , and they bought the site in February 2004 after six months of negotiations . The deal came after York were lent £ 2 million by The Football Stadia Improvement Fund ( FSIF ) , with which they bought 75 @.@ 89 % of BCH shares and all of the 20 @,@ 000 shares owned by Persimmon . Once plans for a new stadium were settled , the loan would be converted a grant to help fund the move . York equalled a club record by winning the first four matches of 2003 – 04 , and by mid @-@ January 2004 were tenth in the table . They won none of their final twenty fixtures , garnering only five more points as they finished bottom of the Third Division . York were relegated into the Conference National after seventy @-@ five years of Football League membership . Beck renounced his title of chairman in September 2004 because he favoured a more democratic approach for a fan @-@ owned club . The board was restructured and Jason McGill became the managing director . 
 In November 2004 , Brass was sacked after a home defeat to Forest Green Rovers , which left York fourth from the bottom of the table . His assistant Viv Busby took over as caretaker manager before former Derby County coach Billy McEwan was appointed in February 2005 . Under McEwan , York avoided relegation into the Conference North , with a seventeenth @-@ place finish in 2004 – 05 . One @-@ third into 2005 – 06 , York were in second place but poor mid @-@ season results saw them slide down the table . They pushed for the play @-@ offs after six consecutive wins but finished in eighth place after faltering in the run @-@ in . With twenty @-@ two goals , Andy Bishop was the Conference National top scorer in 2005 – 06 . Financial problems arose again ; a loss of £ 150 @,@ 000 was reported for the season , and there were problems meeting the first annual payment of £ 100 @,@ 000 to the FSIF . McGill 's company JM Packaging made a proposal to the ST to become majority shareholders , and would lend the club £ 650 @,@ 000 to cover the current losses and meet the loan repayments for the next five years . ST members approved the proposal in June 2006 , and JM Packaging became seventy @-@ five percent shareholders , reducing the ST 's previous eighty @-@ five percent ownership to twenty @-@ five percent . York made a good start to 2006 – 07 , and were never out of the top five from early @-@ November 2006 . They finished the season in fourth place and played Morecambe in the play @-@ off semi @-@ final ; after drawing 0 – 0 at home in the first leg they were beaten 2 – 1 at Christie Park in the second leg . 
 York started 2007 – 08 by losing seven of their first ten matches . Despite improving form , their home results remained poor , leading to McEwan 's sacking in November 2007 . He was succeeded by his assistant Colin Walker , after the team won five of his six matches as caretaker manager . York finished the season in fourteenth place , and reached the semi @-@ final of the FA Trophy , losing 2 – 1 on aggregate to Torquay United . In May 2008 , City of York Council announced its commitment to build a community stadium , to be used by York and the city 's rugby league club , York City Knights . An agreement with the FSIF was reached in September 2008 ; the club would stop making loan repayments and would repay the outstanding amount once Bootham Crescent was sold . At the start of 2008 – 09 , York won only five of their nineteen league matches , resulting in Walker 's sacking in November 2008 . Under his replacement , former Port Vale manager Martin Foyle , the team avoided relegation in the penultimate game of the season against Weymouth , and they finished seventeenth in the table . York participated in the 2009 FA Trophy Final at the new Wembley Stadium , where they were beaten 2 – 0 by Stevenage Borough . After starting 2009 – 10 with only one win from five matches , York won eight successive matches in a bid for promotion . They finished in fifth place and faced Luton Town in the play @-@ off semi @-@ final , winning each leg 1 – 0 , but were beaten 3 – 1 by Oxford United in the final at Wembley . They reached the FA Cup third round that season , and were beaten 3 – 1 by Premier League Stoke City at the Britannia Stadium . Richard Brodie was the Conference Premier joint top scorer in 2009 – 10 , with twenty @-@ six goals . 
 = = 2010 – present : Return into Football League = = 
 After winning only three of their first ten matches of 2010 – 11 , Foyle resigned as manager in September 2010 , and was replaced with Tamworth manager Gary Mills the following month . Improving form saw York challenge for the play @-@ offs , and by mid @-@ March 2011 they were sixth in the table — one place away from a play @-@ off spot . They won only three of ten matches in the run @-@ in and missed out on the play @-@ offs to finish the season in eighth place . York reached the FA Cup third round for the second consecutive year , and lost 2 – 0 to Premier League club Bolton Wanderers at the Reebok Stadium . York won three of the opening seven matches in 2011 – 12 and were only once below a play @-@ off place from early @-@ October 2011 , finishing the season in fourth place . Playing a passing style of football but producing results when needed , they earned eighty @-@ three points that season — the second highest in the club 's history . York drew 1 – 1 at home to Mansfield Town in the play @-@ off semi @-@ final first leg and won the second leg 1 – 0 after extra time at Field Mill . They then beat Newport County 2 – 0 at Wembley in the 2012 FA Trophy Final , which was the first time the club had won a national knockout competition . A week later they returned to Wembley for the play @-@ off final , where they beat Luton Town 2 – 1 , with goals from Ashley Chambers and Matty Blair . The club was promoted into League Two , returning to the Football League after an eight @-@ year absence . In between the two matches at Wembley , City of York Council granted planning permission for a new community stadium to be built at Monks Cross . 
 York started 2012 – 13 by winning five of fourteen matches , and by late @-@ October 2012 were ninth in the table . They dropped down the table in the following months , but were still in contention for a play @-@ off place after beating Burton Albion 3 – 0 in the New Year . After this match , York failed to win eleven consecutive matches , and Mills was sacked in March 2013 after a 2 – 0 home defeat to Bradford City . Under his replacement , former Northern Ireland manager Nigel Worthington , York avoided relegation by winning four of their last five matches . They finished their first League Two season in seventeenth place . York won four of their first twenty @-@ three matches of 2013 – 14 , and by late @-@ December 2013 were third from the bottom of the table . A number of influential signings in January 2014 helped York improve their form , and from early @-@ February they were unbeaten in seventeen consecutive matches , conceding no goals from open play . York finished in seventh place and played Fleetwood Town in the play @-@ off semi @-@ final . After losing the first leg 1 – 0 at home , they drew 0 – 0 at Highbury Stadium in the second leg . Worthington resigned as manager in October 2014 after York won only one of their opening fourteen matches of 2014 – 15 . He was succeeded by former Scunthorpe United manager Russ Wilcox . York remained in the lower reaches of the table . They avoided relegation with a late @-@ season run of four wins from five matches , and they finished the season in eighteenth place . 
 With York twenty @-@ first in the table after a nine @-@ match run without a league win , Wilcox was sacked in October 2015 . He was succeeded in November 2015 by the former Dundee United manager Jackie McNamara . 
 = 1939 Atlantic hurricane season = 
 The 1939 Atlantic hurricane season officially began on June 12 , 1939 , and lasted until November 7 , 1939 . These dates mark the period of each year when most tropical cyclones form in the Atlantic basin . The 1939 season had below normal activity , with only six tropical storms , of which two became hurricanes and one became a major hurricane , equivalent to Category 3 status or higher on the modern @-@ day Saffir @-@ Simpson Hurricane Scale . The first tropical cyclone formed on June 12 , and the last dissipated on November 6 . 
 All of the storms affected land to some extent . The first two cyclones of the season made landfall along the coast of the United States , collectively causing only minor damage . Hurricane Five , the strongest of the year , took a northeastern path through the western Atlantic , striking Bermuda on October 16 . The fifth and final storm was a minimal hurricane that wrought damage throughout the western Caribbean Sea , most notably in Jamaica and Cuba . The weakest known storm was Tropical Storm Four , with winds of only 50 miles per hour ( 80 km / h ) and a minimum barometric pressure of 1 @,@ 003 millibars ( 29 @.@ 62 inHg ) . 
 = = Timeline = = 
 = = Storms = = 
 = = = Tropical Storm One = = = 
 The first tropical storm of the season developed in the extreme western Caribbean Sea on June 12 . Reports of the storm first came from the Mexican Weather Service office in Chetumal , Quintana Roo , and during the afternoon of June 12 , vessels just offshore recorded squally conditions and choppy seas . The cyclone moved northward , parallel to the coast of Belize , before moving over the northeastern corner of the Yucatán Peninsula . It continued steadily northward through the Gulf of Mexico , slowly strengthening to a peak of 50 miles per hour ( 80 km / h ) on June 14 with a minimum central pressure of 1 @,@ 000 @.@ 0 hectopascals ( 29 @.@ 53 inHg ) . An area of high pressure to the north caused the storm to execute a counter @-@ clockwise loop . A trough of low pressure turned it back to the north , and the cyclone made landfall near Mobile , Alabama , as a minimal tropical storm on June 16 . Turning to the northwest , it quickly weakened to a tropical depression and dissipated on June 17 over Mississippi . 
 In advance of the system , officials issued storm warnings for coastal areas of Alabama and western Florida , and residents in low @-@ lying areas were advised to seek higher ground . Damage associated with the cyclone was generally minor , and only one life was lost when a boy fell into the swollen waters of a river and drowned . 
 = = = Hurricane Two = = = 
 On August 7 , a tropical storm formed north of the Leeward Islands , likely from a tropical wave . It tracked to the west @-@ northwest , slowly strengthening to a hurricane as it moved through the Bahamas on August 11 . Later that day , it met the east coast of Florida , and crossed the state in around 15 hours . After weakening to a tropical storm , it quickly re @-@ strengthened upon emerging into the Gulf of Mexico , and made another landfall near Apalachicola , Florida , on August 13 . Over land , the cyclone slowed considerably and quickly deteriorated . By August 14 , the storm had weakened to a tropical depression as it drifted through Alabama . The depression turned to the northeast , and remained a tropical depression until it dissipated over New York on August 20 . Due to timely reports and warnings , the storm was reportedly forecast with " exceptional accuracy " . 
 In Florida , damage was minor , amounting to uprooted trees , broken windows , moderate crop damage , and downed power lines . A few flimsy structures and small watercraft also sustained damage . Along the Florida Panhandle , the storm 's winds impacted power , telephone , and telegraph lines , and inflicted $ 2 @,@ 000 worth of damage to a dock warehouse . A man in Cedar Key , Florida , drowned after rough surf overturned his rowboat , and at least two other people suffered minor storm @-@ related injuries . Torrential rain fell in Alabama as a result of the storm 's slow forward movement , leading to severe flooding . Further inland , the storm spawned a tornado in North Carolina which caused one death . As the depression continued heading inland , it dropped heavy precipitation throughout the Mid @-@ Atlantic States , exceeding 14 inches ( 36 cm ) in Tuckerton , New Jersey , and 18 inches ( 460 mm ) in Manahawkin , New Jersey . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Three = = = 
 An operationally unnoticed tropical storm developed on August 15 . At its peak , sustained winds were 65 mph ( 100 km / h ) and the minimum pressure of 1 @,@ 000 mbar ( 30 inHg ) . By August 19 , the storm dissipated . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Four = = = 
 An area of disturbed weather over Central America organized into a tropical storm in the Bay of Campeche on September 23 . <unk> , it moved generally north @-@ northeastward through the Gulf of Mexico and its winds strengthened to a peak of 50 miles per hour ( 80 km / h ) . The storm made landfall on south @-@ central Louisiana on September 26 , and dissipated later that day . The Weather Bureau office in New Orleans posted numerous advisories , although the effects from the storm were minimal . 
 = = = Hurricane Five = = = 
 On the afternoon of October 9 , reports from the Leeward Islands of low pressures and unsettled weather indicated that a storm was forming in the vicinity . The disturbance strengthened into a tropical storm on October 12 to the northeast of Puerto Rico . The quickly escalating storm tracked northwestward before turning towards the northeast , away from a high pressure area building in from the west . Early on October 15 , the storm attained hurricane intensity and continued to mature until October 16 , when it reached its peak at a strength corresponding to Category 4 status on the modern @-@ day Saffir @-@ Simpson Hurricane Scale . That same day it passed just east of Bermuda . It weakened as it accelerated to the northeast , and became extratropical near Newfoundland a couple of days later . 
 Numerous ships encountered the hurricane along its course . On the President Harding , en route to New York , one crew member drowned due to the rough conditions and 73 crew and passengers suffered injury , of various severity , requiring a call for emergency medical supplies . The ship itself sustained a bit of damage . As the storm passed near the island of Bermuda , it generated strong winds — gusting to 131 miles per hour ( 211 km / h ) — and heavy precipitation . Damage was fairly significant ; the winds uprooted trees , shattered windows , and disrupted public utilities . 
 = = = Hurricane Six = = = 
 On October 29 , the fifth and final known tropical cyclone of the season developed in the western Caribbean Sea from a tropical wave . It initially moved northwestward , but turned toward the east shortly thereafter . Drifting due eastward , the storm grew into a minimal hurricane on October 31 while passing over the Cayman Islands . The hurricane 's center passed just north of the island of Jamaica later that day as it weakened back into a tropical storm . Eventually , the storm turned abruptly northeastward and crossed the eastern tip of Cuba . By November 3 , it had emerged into the Atlantic and entered the southern Bahamas . Beginning to accelerate , the tropical storm passed to the west of Bermuda before becoming extratropical on November 6 . 
 At Grand Cayman , winds from the storm reached 92 miles per hour ( 148 km / h ) with a minimum pressure of 990 @.@ 0 hectopascals ( 29 @.@ 23 inHg ) . According to press reports , the hurricane inflicted considerable damage on the Cayman Islands . In northern Jamaica , property damage was also widespread . The hurricane brought heavy rainfall , high winds , and pounding surf to the island , leaving one dead . Another death was reported in Cuba , where the torrential rains also caused extensive flooding and losses to livestock and crops . 
 = The Boat Race 1849 ( December ) = 
 The 10th Boat Race took place on the River Thames on 15 December 1849 . Typically held annually , the event is a side @-@ by @-@ side rowing race between crews from the Universities of Oxford and Cambridge . The race was won by Oxford who triumphed over Cambridge after they were disqualified . It is the only time the Boat Race has been held twice in a calendar year , and as of 2015 remains the only time the event has been decided as a result of a disqualification . 
 = = Background = = 
 The Boat Race is a side @-@ by @-@ side rowing competition between the University of Oxford ( sometimes referred to as the " Dark Blues " ) and the University of Cambridge ( sometimes referred to as the " Light Blues " ) . The race was first held in 1829 , and since 1845 has taken place on the 4 @.@ 2 @-@ mile ( 6 @.@ 8 km ) Championship Course on the River Thames in southwest London . 
 Cambridge had beaten Oxford " easily " in the race earlier that year . It was as a result of the manner of the defeat , and with doubts over the construction of the Oxford boat that they issued a challenge to Cambridge University Boat Club in October to race again in December . The invitation to race was " immediately accepted . " Cambridge held the overall lead , with seven victories to Oxford 's two . 
 = = Crews = = 
 Oxford 's crew contained four rowers who had featured in the previous race in March , with Chitty , Steward , Sykes and Rich returning for the Dark Blues . Cambridge welcomed back five rowers and the cox , George Booth . The difference in weight between the crews was marginal , Oxford 's rowers weighing an average of just under 11 st 6 lb ( 72 @.@ 4 kg ) were 0 @.@ 125 pounds ( 0 @.@ 06 kg ) per man heavier than Cambridge . 
 = = Race = = 
 Oxford won the toss and elected to start from the Middlesex station , leaving Cambridge with Surrey . Weather conditions were poor : rain and a strong wind provided a " pitiless pelting " to spectators and the crews alike . Although pre @-@ race betting indicated no clear favourite , the high winds were thought to provide Cambridge with a slight advantage " as their style of rowing was deemed to be more suitable to stormy weather " and so the Light Blues went into the race as marginal favourites . 
 Both crews were on the river before 3pm in boats constructed by Searle and Sons , described as " masterpieces of art " , complete with splashboards to reduce the amount of water taken on board . Cambridge made the better start and were clear by the Searles boathouse . They increased the lead by a further half @-@ a @-@ length and held it for another 0 @.@ 5 miles ( 0 @.@ 8 km ) , at which point Oxford produced a " marked improvement in speed " and began to reduce the deficit . As Cambridge had already moved in front of Oxford , they steered back towards the Surrey shore in preparation for shooting Hammersmith Bridge . In doing so , a collision ensued , causing Oxford to come to halt . Although Cambridge made a three @-@ to @-@ four length headstart , Oxford 's subsequent pace combined with Cambridge 's wayward steering reduced the gap and by the end of the race , the boats were nearly level . 
 Immediately upon the conclusion , the race umpire , Thomas Howard Fellows of Leander Club declared the result in favour of Oxford , disqualifying Cambridge for the foul . Cambridge , although believing the foul was against them , did not object to the decision . The Cambridge University Boat Club secretary Charles Bagot wrote : " It is much to be regretted that a foul should have taken place , as , besides rendering the race an imperfect test of the merits of the respective crews , it very much disturbed the harmony and good feeling which should exist between members of the rival Universities in such contests . " As of 2015 , it remains the only time that the Boat Race has been decided by a disqualification . 
 = Ludlow Castle = 
 Ludlow Castle is a ruined medieval fortification in the town of the same name in the English county of Shropshire , standing on a promontory overlooking the River Teme . The castle was probably founded by Walter de Lacy after the Norman conquest and was one of the first stone castles to be built in England . During the civil war of the 12th century the castle changed hands several times between the de Lacy 's and rival claimants , and was further fortified with a Great Tower and a large outer bailey . In the mid @-@ 13th century , Ludlow was passed on to Geoffrey de Geneville who rebuilt part of the inner bailey , and the castle played a part in the Second Barons ' War . Roger Mortimer acquired the castle in 1301 , further extending the internal complex of buildings , and the Mortimer family went on to hold Ludlow for over a century . 
 Richard , the Duke of York , inherited the castle in 1425 , and it became an important symbol of Yorkist authority during the Wars of the Roses . When Richard 's son , Edward IV , seized the throne in 1461 it passed into the ownership of the Crown . Ludlow Castle was chosen as the seat of the Council in the Marches of Wales , effectively acting as the capital of Wales , and it was extensively renovated during throughout the 16th century . By the 17th century the castle was luxuriously appointed , hosting cultural events such as the first performance of John Milton 's masque Comus . Ludlow Castle was held by the Royalists during the English Civil War of the 1640s , until it was besieged and taken by a Parliamentarian army in 1646 . The contents of the castle were sold off and a garrison was retained there for much of the interregnum . 
 With the Restoration of 1660 , the Council was reestablished and the castle repaired , but Ludlow never recovered from the civil war years and when the Council was finally abolished in 1689 it fell into neglect . Henry Herbert , the Earl of Powis , leased the property from the Crown in 1772 , extensively landscaping the ruins , and his brother @-@ in @-@ law , Edward Clive , bought the castle outright in 1811 . A mansion was constructed in the outer bailey but the remainder of the castle was left largely untouched , attracting an increasing number of visitors and becoming a popular location for artists . After 1900 , Ludlow Castle was cleared of vegetation and over the course of the century it was extensively repaired by the Powis Estate and government bodies . In the 21st century it is still owned by the Earl of Powis and operated as a tourist attraction . 
 The architecture of Ludlow reflects its long history , retaining a blend of several styles of building . The castle is approximately 500 by 435 feet ( 152 by 133 m ) in size , covering almost 5 acres ( 2 @.@ 0 ha ) . The outer bailey includes the Castle House building , now used by the Powis Estate as offices and accommodation , while the inner bailey , separated by a trench cut out of the stone , houses the Great Tower , Solar block , Great Hall and Great Chamber block , along with later 16th century additions , as well as a rare , circular chapel , modelled on the shrine in the Church of the Holy Sepulchre . English Heritage notes that the ruins represent " a remarkably complete multi @-@ phase complex " and considers Ludlow to be " one of England 's finest castle sites " . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = 11th century = = = 
 Ludlow Castle was probably founded by Walter de Lacy around 1075 . Walter had arrived in England in 1066 as part of William fitzOsbern 's household during the Norman conquest of England . FitzOsbern was made the Earl of Hereford and tasked with settling the area ; at the same time , several castles were founded in the west of the county , securing its border with Wales . Walter de Lacy was the earl 's second in command , and was rewarded with 163 manors spread across seven counties , with 91 in Herefordshire alone . 
 Walter began building a castle within the manor of Stanton Lacy ; the fortification was originally called <unk> Castle , before it acquired its later name of Ludlow . Ludlow was the most important of Walter 's castles : as well as being at the heart of his new estates , the site also lay at a strategic crossroads over the Teme River , on a strong defensive promontory . Walter died in a construction accident at Hereford in 1085 and was succeeded by his son , Roger de Lacy . 
 The castle 's Norman stone fortifications were added possibly as early as the 1080s onwards , and were finished before 1115 , based around what is now the inner bailey of the castle , forming a stone version of a ringwork . It had four towers and a gatehouse tower along the walls , with a ditch dug out of the rock along two sides , the excavated stone being reused for the building works , and would have been one of the very first masonry castles in England . With its circular design and grand entrance tower , it has been likened to the earlier Anglo @-@ Saxon <unk> designs . In 1096 , Roger was stripped of his lands after rebelling against William II and they were reassigned to Roger 's brother , Hugh . 
 = = = 12th century = = = 
 Hugh de Lacy died childless around 1115 , and Henry I gave Ludlow Castle and most of the surrounding estates to Hugh 's niece , Sybil , marrying her to Pain fitzJohn , one of his household staff . Pain used Ludlow as his caput , the main castle in his estates , using the surrounding estates and knight 's fees to support the castle and its defences . Pain died in 1137 fighting the Welsh , triggering a struggle for the inheritance of the castle . Robert <unk> , who had been planning to marry Pain 's daughter , laid claim to it , as did Gilbert de Lacy , Roger de Lacy 's son . By now , King Stephen had seized the English throne , but his position was insecure and he therefore gave Ludlow to <unk> in 1137 , in exchange for promises of future political support . 
 A civil war between Stephen and the Empress Matilda soon broke out and Gilbert took his chance to rise up against Stephen , seizing Ludlow Castle . Stephen responded by taking an army into the Welsh Marches , where he attempted to garner local support by marrying one of his knights , Joce de Dinan , to Sybil and granting the future ownership of the castle to them . Stephen took the castle after several attempts in 1139 , famously rescuing his ally Prince Henry of Scotland when the latter was caught on a hook thrown over the walls by the garrison . Gilbert still maintained that he was the rightful owner of Ludlow , however , and a private war ensued between Joce and himself . Gilbert was ultimately successful and retook the castle around a few years before the end of the civil war in 1153 . He ultimately left for the Levant , leaving Ludlow in the hands of firstly , his eldest son , Robert , and then , after Robert 's death , his younger son , Hugh de Lacy . 
 During this period , the Great Tower , a form of keep , was constructed by converting the entrance tower , probably either around the time of the siege of 1139 , or during the war between Gilbert and Joce . The old Norman castle had also begun to become too small for a growing household and , probably between 1140 and 1177 , an outer bailey was built to the south and east of the original castle , creating a large open space . In the process , the entrance to the castle shifted from the south to the east , to face the growing town of Ludlow . Gilbert probably built the circular chapel in the inner bailey , resembling the churches of the Templar order which he later joined . 
 Hugh took part in the Norman invasion of Ireland and in 1172 was made Lord of Meath ; he spent much time away from Ludlow , and Henry II confiscated the castle in his absence , probably to ensure that Hugh stayed loyal while in Ireland . Hugh died in Ireland in 1186 and the castle passed to his son , Walter , who was a minor and did not take charge of the property until 1194 . During Prince John 's rebellion against Richard I in 1194 , Walter joined in the attacks against the prince ; Richard did not approve of this and confiscated Ludlow and Walter 's other properties . Walter de Lacy offered to buy back his land for 1 @,@ 000 marks , but the offer was rejected until in 1198 the vast sum of 3 @,@ 100 marks was finally agreed . 
 = = = 13th century = = = 
 Walter de Lacy travelled to Ireland in 1201 and the following year his properties , including Ludlow Castle , were once again confiscated to ensure his loyalty and placed under the control of William de Braose , his father @-@ in @-@ law . Walter 's lands were returned to him , subject to the payment of a fine of 400 marks , but in 1207 his disagreements with royal officials in Ireland led to King John seizing the castle and putting it under the control of William again . Walter reconciled himself with John the following year , but meanwhile William himself had fallen out with the King ; violence broke out and both Walter and William took refuge in Ireland , with John taking control of Ludlow yet again . It was not until 1215 that their relationship recovered and John agreed to give Ludlow back to Walter . At some point during the early 13th century , the innermost bailey was constructed in the castle , creating an additional private space within the inner bailey . 
 In 1223 , King Henry III met with the Welsh prince Llywelyn ab Iorwerth at Ludlow Castle for peace talks , but the negotiations were unsuccessful . The same year Henry became suspicious of Walter 's activities in Ireland and , among other measures to secure his loyalty , Ludlow Castle was taken over by the Crown for a period of two years . This was cut short in May 1225 when Walter carried out a campaign against Henry 's enemies in Ireland and paid the King 3 @,@ 000 marks for the return of his castles and lands . During the 1230s , however , Walter had accumulated a thousand pounds of debt to Henry and private moneylenders which he was unable to repay . As a result , in 1238 he gave Ludlow Castle as collateral to the King , although the fortification was returned to him sometime before his death in 1241 . 
 Walter 's granddaughters Maud and Margaret were due to inherit Walter 's remaining estates on his death , but they were still unmarried , making it hard for them to hold property in their own right . Henry informally divided the lands up between them , giving Ludlow to Maud and marrying her to one of his royal favourites , Peter de Geneva , cancelling many of the debts they had inherited from Walter at the same time . Peter died in 1249 and Maud married a second time , this time to Geoffrey de Geneville , a friend of the Prince Edward , the future king . In 1260 , Henry officially split up Walter 's estate , allowing Geoffrey to retain the castle . 
 Henry lost control of power in the 1260s , resulting in the Second Barons ' War across England . Following the Royalist defeat in 1264 , the rebel leader Simon de Montfort seized Ludlow Castle , but it was recaptured shortly afterwards by Henry 's supporters , probably led by Geoffrey de Geneville . Prince Edward escaped from captivity in 1265 and met up with his supporters at the castle , before commencing his campaign to retake the throne , culminating in de Montfort 's defeat at Evesham later that year . Geoffrey continued to occupy the castle for the rest of the century under Edward I 's rule , prospering until his death in 1314 . Geoffrey built the Great Hall and the Solar block during his tenure of the castle , either between 1250 and 1280 , or later , in the 1280s and 1290s . The town walls of Ludlow also began to be constructed in the 13th century , probably from 1260 onwards , and these were linked to the castle to form a continuous ring of defences around the town . 
 = = = 14th century = = = 
 Geoffrey and Maud 's oldest granddaughter , Joan , married Roger Mortimer in 1301 , giving Mortimer control of Ludlow Castle . Around 1320 , Roger built the Great Chamber block alongside the existing Great Hall and Solar complex , copying what was becoming a popular tripartite design for domestic castle buildings in the 14th century ; an additional building was also constructed by Roger on the location of the later Tudor Lodgings , and the <unk> Tower was added to the curtain wall . Between 1321 and 1322 Mortimer found himself on the losing side of the Despenser War and , after being imprisoned by Edward II , he escaped from the Tower of London in 1323 into exile . 
 While in France , Mortimer formed an alliance with Queen Isabella , Edward 's estranged wife , and together in 1327 they seized power in England . Mortimer was made the Earl of March and became extremely wealthy , possibly entertaining Edward III at the castle in 1329 . The earl built a new chapel in the Outer Bailey , named after Saint Peter , honouring the saint 's day on which he had escaped from the Tower . Mortimer 's work at Ludlow was probably intended to produce what the historian David Whitehead has termed a " show castle " with chivalric and Arthurian overtones , echoing the now archaic Norman styles of building . Mortimer fell from power the following year but his widow Joan was permitted to retain Ludlow . 
 Ludlow Castle gradually became the Mortimer family 's most important property , but for much of the rest of the century its owners were too young to control the castle personally . The castle was first briefly inherited by Mortimer 's son , Edmund , and then in 1331 Mortimer 's young grandson , Roger , who eventually became a prominent soldier in the Hundred Years War . Roger 's young son , Edmund , inherited the castle in 1358 , and also grew up to become involved in the war with France . Both Roger and Edmund used a legal device called " the use " , effectively giving Ludlow Castle to trustees during their lifetimes in exchange for annual payments ; this reduced their tax liabilities and gave them more control over the distribution of the estates on their deaths . Edmund 's son , another Roger , inherited the castle in 1381 , but King Richard II took the opportunity of Roger 's minority to exploit the Mortimer estates until they were put into the control of a committee of major nobles . When Roger died in 1398 , Richard again took wardship of the castle on behalf of the young heir , Edmund , until he was deposed from power in 1399 . 
 = = = 15th century = = = 
 Ludlow Castle was in the wardship of King Henry IV , when the Owain Glyndŵr revolt broke out across Wales . Military captains were appointed to the castle to protect it from the rebel threat , in the first instance John <unk> and then Henry 's half @-@ brother , Sir Thomas Beaufort . Roger Mortimer 's younger brother , Edmund , set out from the castle with an army against the rebels in 1402 , but was captured at the Battle of Bryn Glas . Henry refused to ransom him , and he eventually married one of Glyndŵr 's daughters , before dying during the siege of Harlech Castle in 1409 . 
 Henry placed the young heir to Ludlow , another Edmund Mortimer , under house arrest in the south of England , and kept a firm grip on Ludlow Castle himself . This persisted until Henry V finally granted Edmund his estates in 1413 , with Edmund going on to serve the Crown overseas . As a result , the Mortimers rarely visited the castle during the first part of the century , despite the surrounding town having become prosperous in the wool and cloth trades . Edmund fell heavily into debt and having sold his rights to his Welsh estates to a consortium of nobles , before dying childless in 1425 . 
 The castle was inherited by Edmund 's sister 's young son , Richard the Duke of York , who took possession in 1432 . Richard took a keen interest in the castle , which formed the administrative base for his estates around the region , possibly living there in the late 1440s and definitely residing there for much of the 1450s . Richard also established his sons , including the future Edward IV , and their household at the castle in the 1450s , and was possibly responsible for rebuilding the northern part of the Great Tower during this period . 
 The Wars of the Roses broke out between the Lancastrians and Richard 's Yorkist faction in the 1450s . Ludlow Castle did not find itself in the front @-@ line of most of the conflict , instead acting as a safe retreat away from the main fighting . An exception to this was the Battle of Ludford Bridge which took place just outside the town of Ludlow in 1459 , resulting in a largely bloodless victory for the Lancastrian Henry VI . After the battle , in a bid to break Richard 's power over the region , Edmund de la Mare was placed in charge of the castle as constable , with John Talbot , the Earl of Shrewsbury , being given the wider lordship . Richard was killed in battle in 1460 , and his son Edward seized the throne the following year , retaking control of Ludlow Castle and merging it with the property of the Crown . 
 The new Edward IV visited the castle regularly and established a council there to govern his estates in Wales . He probably conducted only modest work on the property , although he may could have been responsible for the remodelling of the Great Tower . In 1473 , possibly influenced by his own childhood experiences at Ludlow , Edward sent his eldest son , the future Edward V , and his brother Prince Richard to live at the castle , which was also made the seat of the newly created Council in the Marches of Wales . By now Ludlow had become primarily residential , rather than military , but was still rich in chivalric connotations and a valuable symbol of the Yorkist authority and their claim to the throne . Edward died in 1483 , but after Henry VII took the throne in 1485 he continued to use Ludlow Castle as a regional base , granting it to his son , Prince Arthur , in 1493 , and reestablishing the dormant Council in the Marches at the property . 
 = = = 16th century = = = 
 In 1501 , Prince Arthur arrived in Ludlow for his honeymoon with his bride Catherine of Aragon , before dying the following year . The Council in the Marches of Wales continued to operate , however , under the guidance of its president , Bishop William Smyth . The council evolved into a combination of a governmental body and a court of law , settling a range of disputes across Wales and charged with maintaining general order , and Ludlow Castle became effectively the capital of Wales . 
 Mary Tudor , daughter of Catherine of Aragon and Henry VIII , spent 19 months at Ludlow overseeing the Council of the Marches between 1525 and 1528 , along with her entourage of servants , advisors , and guardians . The relatively small sum of £ 5 was spent restoring the castle before her arrival . The council 's wide ranging role was reinforced in legislation in 1534 , and its purpose was further elaborated in the Act of Union of 1543 ; some presidents , such as Bishop Rowland Lee , used its harsher powers extensively to execute local criminals , but later presidents typically preferred to punish with the pillory , whipping or imprisonment in the castle . The Great Chamber itself was used as the council 's meeting room . 
 The establishment of the Council in Ludlow Castle gave it a new lease of life , during a period in which many similar fortifications were falling into decay . By the 1530s , the castle needed considerable renovation ; Lee began work in 1534 , borrowing money to do so , but Sir Thomas <unk> complained the following year that the castle was still unfit for habitation . Lee repaired the castle roofs , probably using lead from the Carmelite friary in the town , and using the fines imposed and the goods confiscated by the court . He later claimed that the work on the castle would have cost around £ 500 , had the Crown had to pay for it all directly . The porter 's lodge and prison were built in the outer bailey around 1552 . The woods around the castle were gradually cut down during the 16th century . 
 Elizabeth I , influenced by her royal favourite Robert Dudley , appointed Sir Henry Sidney as President of the Council in 1560 , and he took up residence at Ludlow Castle . Henry was a keen antiquarian with an interest in chivalry , and used his post to restore much of the castle in a late @-@ perpendicular style . He extended the castle by building family apartments between the Great Hall and Mortimer 's Tower , and used the former royal apartments as a guest wing , starting a tradition of decorating the Great Hall with the coats of arms of council officers . The larger windows in the castle were glazed , a clock installed and water piped into the castle . The judicial facilities were improved with a new courthouse converted out of the 14th @-@ century chapel , facilities for prisoners and storage facilities for the court records , Mortimer 's Tower in the outer bailey being turned into a record depository . The restoration was generally sympathetic and , although it included a fountain , a real tennis court , walks and viewing platform , it was less ephemeral a make @-@ over than seen in other castle restorations of the period . 
 = = = 17th century = = = 
 The castle was luxuriously appointed by the 17th century , with an expensive , but grand , household based around the Council of the Marches . The future Charles I was declared Prince of Wales in the castle by James I in 1616 , and Ludlow was made his principal castle in Wales . A company called the " Queen 's Players " entertained the Council in the 1610s , and in 1634 John Milton 's masque Comus was performed in the Great Hall for John Egerton , Earl of Bridgewater . The Council faced increased criticism over its legal practices , however , and in 1641 an Act of Parliament stripped it of its judicial powers . 
 When the English Civil War broke out in 1642 between the supporters of King Charles and those of Parliament , Ludlow and the surrounding region supported the Royalists . A Royalist garrison was put in place in the town , under the command of Sir Michael Woodhouse , and the defences were strengthened , with artillery being brought from nearby <unk> Forge for the castle . As the war turned against the King in 1644 , the garrison was drawn down to provide reinforcements for the field army . The military situation deteriorated and in 1645 the remaining outlying garrisons were drawn in to protect Ludlow itself . In April 1646 Sir William Brereton and Colonel John Birch led a Parliamentary army from Hereford to take Ludlow ; after a short siege , Woodhouse surrendered the castle and town on good terms on 26 May . 
 During the years of the interregnum , Ludlow Castle continued to be run by Parliamentarian governors , the first being the military commander Samuel More . There was a Royalist plot to retake the castle in 1648 , but no other military activity took place . The most valuable items in the castle were removed shortly after the siege , and the remainder of the luxurious furnishings were sold off in the town in 1650 . The castle was initially kept garrisoned , but in 1653 , most of the weapons in the castle were removed on the grounds of security and sent to Hereford , then in 1655 the garrison was disbanded altogether . In 1659 , the political instability in the Commonwealth government led to the castle being <unk> by 100 men under the command of William <unk> . 
 Charles II returned to the throne in 1660 and reinstated the Council of the Marches in 1661 , but the castle never recovered from the war . Richard Vaughan , the Earl of Carberry , was appointed president and given £ 2 @,@ 000 to renovate the castle , and between 1663 and 1665 , a company of infantry soldiers was garrisoned there , overseen by the earl , with the task of safeguard the money and contents of the castle as well as the ammunition for the local Welsh militia . The Council of the Marches failed to reestablish itself and was finally disbanded in 1689 , bringing an end to Ludlow Castle 's role in government . <unk> for , the condition of the castle rapidly deteriorated . 
 = = = 18th century = = = 
 The castle remained in disrepair , and in 1704 its governor , William Gower , proposed dismantling the castle and building a residential square on the site instead , in a more contemporary style . His proposal was not adopted but , by 1708 , only three rooms were still in use in the hall range , many of the other buildings in the inner bailey had fallen into disuse , and much of the remaining furniture was rotten or broken . Shortly after 1714 , the roofs were stripped of their lead and the wooden floors began to collapse ; the writer Daniel Defoe visited in 1722 , and noted that the castle " is in the very Perfection of Decay " . Nonetheless , some rooms remained usable for many years afterwards , possibly as late as the 1760s and 1770s , when drawings show the entrance block to the inner bailey to still be intact , and visitors remarked on the good condition of the round chapel . The stonework became overgrown with ivy , trees and shrubs , and by 1800 the chapel of Saint Mary Magdalene had finally degenerated into ruin . 
 Alexander Stuart , an Army captain who served as the last governor of the castle , stripped down what remained of the fortification in the mid @-@ 1700s . Some of the stone was reused to build the Bowling Green House – later renamed the Castle Inn – on the north end of the tennis courts , while the north side of the outer bailey was used to make the bowling green itself . Stuart lived in a house in Ludlow itself , but decorated the Great Hall with the remains of the castle armoury , and may have charged visitors for admittance . 
 It became fashionable to restore castles as private homes , and the future George II may have considered making Ludlow habitable again , but was deterred by the estimated costs of £ 30 @,@ 000 . Henry Herbert , the Earl of Powis , later became interested in acquiring the castle and in 1771 approached the Crown about leasing it . It is uncertain if he intended to further strip the castle of its materials or , more likely , if he intended to turn it into a private home , but the castle was , according to Powis ' surveyor 's report later that year , already " extremely ruinous " , the walls " mostly rubble and the battlements greatly decayed " . The Crown offered a 31 @-@ year lease at £ 20 a year , which Powis accepted in 1772 , only to die shortly afterwards . 
 Henry 's son , George Herbert , maintained the lease and his wife , Henrietta , constructed gravel @-@ laid public walks around the castle , dug into the surrounding cliffs , and planted trees around the grounds to improve the castle 's appearance . The castle walls and towers were given superficial repairs and tidied up , usually when parts threatened to collapse , and the interior of the inner bailey levelled , costing considerable sums of money . The landscape also required expensive maintenance and repairs . 
 The town of Ludlow was increasingly fashionable and frequented by tourists , with the castle forming a particularly popular attraction . Thomas Warton published an edition of Milton 's poems in 1785 , describing Ludlow Castle and popularising the links to Comus , reinforcing the castle 's reputation as a picturesque and sublime location . The castle became a topic for painters interested in these themes : J. M. W. Turner , Francis Towne , Thomas Hearne , Julius Ibbetson , Peter de Wint and William Marlowe all produced depictions of the castle during the late 18th and early 19th centuries , usually taking some artistic licence with the details in order to produce atmospheric works . 
 = = = 19th century = = = 
 Lord Clive , George 's brother @-@ in @-@ law and heir , attempted to acquire the lease after 1803 , citing the efforts that the family had put in to restoring the castle . He faced competition for the lease from the government 's Barrack Office , who were considering using the castle as a French prisoner @-@ of @-@ war camp for up to 4 @,@ 000 inmates from the Napoleonic wars . After some extensive discussions the prisoner @-@ of @-@ war plan was finally dropped , and Lord Clive , by now declared the Earl of Powis , was offered the chance to buy the castle outright for £ 1 @,@ 560 , which he accepted in 1811 . 
 Between 1820 and 1828 the earl had converted the abandoned tennis court and the Castle Inn – which he closed in 1812 after buying the castle – into a new , grand building , called Castle House , overlooking the north side of the outer bailey . By the 1840s the house had been leased out , first to George Hodges and his family , and then to William <unk> and to Robert Marston , all important members of the local landowning classes . The mansion included a drawing room , dining room , study , servants ' quarters , a conservatory and grapevines , and in 1887 was worth £ 50 a year in rent . 
 During the 19th century , vegetation continued to grow over the castle 's stonework , although after a survey by Arthur Blomfield in 1883 , which highlighted the damage being caused by the ivy , attempts were made to control the plants , cleaning them off many of the walls . Ludlow Castle was held in high esteem by Victorian antiquarians , George Clark referring to it as " the glory of the middle marches of Wales " and as being " probably without rival in Britain " for its woodland setting . When Ludlow became connected to the growing railway network in 1852 , the numbers of tourists to the castle increased , with admission costing six pence in 1887 . The castle was put to a wide range of uses . The grassy areas of the bailey were kept cropped by grazing sheep and goats , and used for fox hunting meetings , sporting events and agricultural shows ; parts of the outer bailey was used as a timber yard , and , by the turn of the century , the old prison was used as an ammunition store by the local volunteer militia . 
 = = = 20th century = = = 
 W. H. St John Hope and Harold <unk> began a sequence of archaeological investigations at Ludlow Castle in 1903 , publishing their conclusions in 1909 in an account which continues to be held in regard by modern academics . Christian Herbert , the Earl of Powis , cleared away much of the ivy and vegetation from the castle stonework . In 1915 the castle was declared an ancient monument by the state , but it continued to be owned and maintained by the earl and trustees of the Powis estate . 
 The castle was increasingly rigorously maintained , and during the 1910s and 1920s the larger trees around the castle were cut down , and the animals were cleared from the inner and outer baileys on the basis that they posed a health and safety risk to visitors . The 1930s saw a major effort to clear the remaining vegetation from the castle , the cellars were cleared of debris by the government 's Office of Works and the stable block was converted into a museum . Tourists continued to visit the castle , with the 1920s and 1930s seeing many day @-@ trips by teams of workers in the region encouraged by the growth in motor transport . The open spaces inside the castle were used by the local townsfolk for football matches and similar events , and in 1934 Milton 's Comus was restaged in the castle to mark the 300th anniversary of the first such event . 
 Castle House in the outer bailey was leased to the diplomat Sir Alexander Stephen in 1901 , who carried out extensive work on the property in 1904 , extending and modernising the north end of the house , including constructing a billiard room and a library ; he estimated the cost of the work to be around £ 800 . Castle House continued to be leased out by the Powis estate to wealthy individuals up until the Second World War . One such lessee , Richard Henderson observed that he had spent around £ 4 @,@ 000 maintaining and upgrading the property , and the rentable value of the property rose from £ 76 to £ 150 over the period . 
 During the Second World War the castle was used by the Allied military . The Great Tower was used as a look @-@ out post and United States ' forces used the castle gardens for baseball games . Castle House fell empty after the death of its final lessee , James <unk> ; the house was then briefly requisitioned in 1942 by the Royal Air Force and turned into flats for key war workers , causing extensive damage later estimated at £ 2 @,@ 000 . In 1956 , Castle House was de @-@ requisitioned and sold by the Earl of Powis the following year to Ludlow Borough Council for £ 4 @,@ 000 , which rented out the flats . 
 During the 1970s and early 1980s the Department of the Environment assisted the Powis estate by lending government staff to repair the castle . Visitor numbers were falling , however , in part due the dilapidated condition of the property , and the estate became increasingly unable to afford to maintain the castle . After 1984 , when the function of the department was taken over by English Heritage , a more systematic approach was put into place . This based around a partnership in which the Powis Estate would retain ownership of the castle and develop visitor access , in exchange for a £ 500 @,@ 000 contribution from English Heritage for a jointly @-@ funded programme of repairs and maintenance , delivered through specialist contractors . This included repairs to the parts of the curtain wall , which collapsed in 1990 , and the redevelopment of the visitor 's centre . Limited archaeological excavation was carried out in the outer bailey between 1992 and 1993 by the City of Hereford Archaeology Unit . 
 = = = 21st century = = = 
 In the 21st century , Ludlow Castle is owned by John Herbert , the current Earl of Powis , but is held and managed by the Trustees of the Powis Castle Estate as a tourist attraction . The castle was receiving over 100 @,@ 000 visitors a year by 2005 , more than in previous decades . The castle traditionally hosts a Shakespearean play as part of the annual cultural Ludlow Festival in the town , and is at the centre of the Ludlow Food and Drink Festival each September . 
 English Heritage considers Ludlow to be " one of England 's finest castle sites " , with the ruins representing " a remarkably complete multi @-@ phase complex " . It is protected under UK law as a Scheduled Monument and a Grade I listed building . By the 21st century , however , Castle House had become dilapidated and English Heritage placed it on its " at risk " register . In 2002 , the Powis Estate repurchased the property from the South Shropshire District Council for £ 500 @,@ 000 , renovating it and converting it for use as offices and rental apartments , reopening the building in 2005 . 
 = = Architecture = = 
 Ludlow Castle sits on a rocky promontory , overlooking the modern town of Ludlow on lower ground to the east , while the ground slopes steeply from the castle to the rivers <unk> and Teme to the south and west , about 100 feet ( 30 m ) below . The castle is broadly rectangular in shape , and approximately 500 by 435 feet ( 152 by 133 m ) in size , covering almost 5 acres ( 2 @.@ 0 ha ) in total . The interior is divided into two main parts : an inner bailey which occupies the north @-@ west corner and a much larger outer bailey . A third enclosure , known as the innermost bailey , was created in the early 13th century when walls were built to enclose the south @-@ west corner of the inner ward . The castle 's walls are linked to Ludlow 's medieval town wall circuit on the south and east sides . The castle is built from a range of different types of stone ; the Norman stone work is constructed from greenish @-@ grey siltstone rubble , with the ashlar and quoin features carved from red sandstone , with the later work primarily using local red sandstone . 
 = = = Outer bailey = = = 
 The outer bailey is entered through a gatehouse ; inside , the space within the curtain walls is divided into two . On the north side of the outer bailey is Castle House and its gardens ; the house is a two @-@ storeyed property , based around the old walls of the tennis court and the Castle Inn , and the curtain wall . The north end of Castle House butts onto Beacon Tower , overlooking the town . 
 The other half of the outer bailey houses the 16th @-@ century porter 's lodge , prison and stable block which run along its eastern edge . The porter 's lodge and prison comprise two buildings , 40 feet ( 12 m ) and 58 by 23 feet ( 17 @.@ 7 by 7 @.@ 0 m ) across , both two @-@ storeyed and well built in ashlar stone , with a stable block on the far end , more crudely built in stone and 66 by 21 feet ( 20 @.@ 1 by 6 @.@ 4 m ) in size . The exterior of the prison was originally decorated with the coats of arms of Henry , the Earl of Pembroke , and Queen Elizabeth I , but these have since been destroyed , as have the barred windows which once protected the property . 
 Along the south of the bailey are the remains of St Peter 's , a former 14th @-@ century chapel , approximately 21 by 52 feet ( 6 @.@ 4 by 15 @.@ 8 m ) in size , later converted to a courthouse by the addition of an extension reaching up to the western curtain wall . The courtroom occupied the whole of the combined first floor with records kept in the rooms underneath . The south @-@ west corner of the outer bailey is cut off by a modern wall from the rest of the bailey . 
 The western curtain wall is approximately 6 @-@ foot @-@ 5 @-@ inch ( 1 @.@ 96 m ) thick , and guarded by the 13th @-@ century Mortimer 's Tower , 18 feet ( 5 @.@ 5 m ) across externally , with a ground floor vaulted chamber inside , 12 @-@ foot ( 3 @.@ 7 m ) large . When first built , Mortimer 's Tower was a three storey gateway with an unusual D @-@ shaped design , possibly similar to those at Trim Castle in Ireland , but in the 15th century the entrance way was blocked up to turn it into a conventional mural tower , and in the 16th century an additional internal floor was inserted . The tower is now roofless , although it was roofed as late as the end of the 19th century . 
 = = = Inner bailey = = = 
 The inner bailey represents the extent of the original Norman castle and is protected by a curtain wall between 5 @-@ foot ( 1 @.@ 5 m ) and 6 @-@ foot ( 1 @.@ 8 m ) thick . On the south and west sides the wall is protected by a ditch , originally up to 80 @-@ foot ( 24 m ) deep , cut out of the rock and navigated by a bridge which still contains part of the ashlar stone of its 16th century predecessor . Within the inner bailey , a separate area , called the innermost bailey , was created by the addition of a 5 @-@ foot ( 1 @.@ 5 m ) thick stone wall around the south @-@ west corner in the early 13th century . 
 The gatehouse to the inner bailey has the coats of arms of Sir Henry Sidney and Queen Elizabeth I displayed over it , dating to 1581 , and was originally a three @-@ storeyed building with transomed windows and fireplaces , probably used as the lodgings for the judges . There were probably additional heraldic supporters displayed alongside the arms , since lost . A porter 's lodge would have been on the right hand side of the entrance to control access , with the rooms accessed by a spiral staircase in a protruding tower , with prominent triple chimneys , since lost . Alongside the gatehouse was originally a half @-@ timbered building , possibly a laundry , approximately 48 by 15 feet ( 14 @.@ 6 by 4 @.@ 6 m ) , which has since been lost . 
 On the east side of the bailey is the 12th @-@ century chapel of Saint Mary Magdalene . The circular , Romanesque design of the chapel is unusual , with only three similar examples existing in England , at Castle Rising , Hereford and Pevensey . Built from sandstone , the circular design imitates the shrine at the Church of the Holy Sepulchre . Originally the chapel had a nave , a square presbytery , 3 @.@ 8 by 3 @.@ 8 metres ( 12 by 12 ft ) in size , and a chancel , but this design was heavily altered in the 16th century and only the nave survives . Although roofless , the nave survives to its full height and is 26 feet 3 inches ( 8 @.@ 00 m ) in diameter , visibly divided into two sections by different bands of stonework , and with some plaster surviving on the lower level . Around the inside of the nave are 14 arcaded bays in the walls . 
 The north end of the bailey is occupied by a range of buildings , the Solar block , the Great Hall and the Great Chamber block , with the Tudor Lodgings in the north @-@ east corner . The Tudor Lodgings take the form of two <unk> to fit into the space provided by the curtain wall , divided by a cross @-@ wall , the west side being approximately 33 by 15 feet ( 10 @.@ 1 by 4 @.@ 6 m ) , and the east side 33 by 21 feet ( 10 @.@ 1 by 6 @.@ 4 m ) . They were entered by a shared spiral staircase , a design used in various episcopal palaces in the 16th century , and originally provided sets of individual offices and personal rooms for the court officials , later being converted into two distinct apartments . 
 The Great Chamber block adjoining the Tudor Lodgings dates from around 1320 . Another rhomboid design , approximately 53 by 34 feet ( 16 by 10 m ) across , this originally had its main chamber on the first floor , but has been much altered over the subsequent years . The carved corbel heads that survive on the first floor may represent Edward II and Queen Isabella . Behind the Great Chamber block is the <unk> Tower , a four storeyed construction , providing a combination of bed chambers and <unk> . 
 In the 13th @-@ century Great Hall , the hall itself was also positioned on the first floor , originally fitted with a wooden floor supported by stone pillars in the basement , and a massive wooden roof . It was 60 by 30 feet ( 18 @.@ 3 by 9 @.@ 1 m ) across : this 2 : 1 ratio between length and width was typical for castle halls of this period . The hall was reached by a flight of stone steps at the west end , and lit by three tall , <unk> windows , each originally with its own window seat and south @-@ facing to receive the sunlight . Originally the hall had an open fire in the centre , which was normal for the 13th century , but the middle window was turned into a more modern fireplace around 1580 . 
 To the west of the Great Hall is the three @-@ storeyed Solar block , an irregular oblong measuring up to 26 by 39 feet ( 7 @.@ 9 by 11 @.@ 9 m ) in size . The first floor chamber would probably have been used as a solar , with the cellar being used as a service area . The Great Hall and Solar block were built at the same time in the 13th century , the builders carving out the inside of the old Norman tower behind them in the process . They were probably built in two phases and were originally intended to be smaller , less grand buildings , only for the design to be changed about halfway through construction ; they were finished in a rushed manner , the traces of which can still be seen , along with other changes made in the 16th and 17th centuries . 
 The North @-@ West and North @-@ East towers behind the northern range are Norman in origin , from the 11th and early 12th century . When first built , they were created by pushing or folding the line of the curtain wall outwards to create the desired external shape , and then adding timber floors and a timber wall at the back , rather than being designed as individual buildings . The timber parts of the towers were later replaced in stone , and incorporated into the later range of buildings . The North @-@ East Tower , also known as the <unk> Tower , was originally two @-@ storeys high , with a third floor added on in the 14th century , followed by an extensive remodelling of the inside in the 16th century . It has chamfered angles on the external corners to make it harder to attack the stonework , although this has weakened the structural strength of the tower as a whole . The North @-@ West Tower had similar chamfered corners , but the Closet Tower was built alongside it in the 13th century , altering the external appearance . Two more Norman towers survive in the innermost bailey , the West Tower , also known as the Postern Tower , because it contained a postern gate , and the South @-@ West tower , also called the Oven Tower , on account of its cooking facilities . The Norman towers looked out towards Wales , probably to make a symbolic statement . 
 A range , now lost , once stretched from the innermost bailey towards the Great Hall , including a large stone house running along the curtain wall , 54 by 20 feet ( 16 @.@ 5 by 6 @.@ 1 m ) in size , and on the other side of the innermost bailey , the Great Kitchen , 31 by 23 feet ( 9 @.@ 4 by 7 @.@ 0 m ) in size , built around the same time as the Great Hall , and an oven building , since lost , 21 by 27 feet ( 6 @.@ 4 by 8 @.@ 2 m ) . 
 The Great Tower , or keep , is on the south side of the innermost bailey . A roughly square building , four storeys tall , most of its walls are 8 @-@ foot @-@ 6 @-@ inch ( 2 @.@ 59 m ) thick , with the exception of its newer northern facing wall , only 7 @-@ foot @-@ 6 @-@ inch ( 2 @.@ 29 m ) thick . The Great Tower was constructed in several stages . Originally it was a relatively large gatehouse in the original Norman castle , probably with accommodation over the gateway , before being extended to form the Great Tower in the mid @-@ 12th century , although still being used as a gatehouse for the inner bailey . When the innermost bailey was created in the early 13th century , the gateway was then filled in and a new gateway cut into the inner bailey wall just to the east of the Great Tower . Finally , the north side of the tower was rebuilt in the mid @-@ 15th century to produce the Great Tower that appears today . The keep has a vaulted basement , 20 @-@ foot ( 6 @.@ 1 m ) high , with Norman wall arcading , and a row of windows along the first floor , since mostly blocked . The arcading echoes that in the chapel , and probably dates from around 1080 . The windows and large entrance @-@ way would have looked impressive , but would also have been very hard to defend ; this form of tower probably reflected earlier Anglo @-@ Saxon high @-@ status towers and was intended to display lordship . The first floor originally formed a tall hall , 29 by 17 feet ( 8 @.@ 8 by 5 @.@ 2 m ) across , which was subsequently subdivided into two separate floors . 
 = = = = Early 12th century chapel = = = = 
 = Photovoltaic power station = 
 A photovoltaic power station , also known as a solar park , is a large @-@ scale photovoltaic system ( PV system ) designed for the supply of merchant power into the electricity grid . They are differentiated from most building @-@ mounted and other decentralised solar power applications because they supply power at the utility level , rather than to a local user or users . They are sometimes also referred to as solar farms or solar ranches , especially when sited in agricultural areas . The generic expression utility @-@ scale solar is sometimes used to describe this type of project . 
 The solar power source is via photovoltaic modules that convert light directly to electricity . However , this differs from , and should not be confused with concentrated solar power , the other large @-@ scale solar generation technology , which uses heat to drive a variety of conventional generator systems . Both approaches have their own advantages and disadvantages , but to date , for a variety of reasons , photovoltaic technology has seen much wider use in the field . As of 2013 , PV systems outnumber concentrators by about 40 to 1 . 
 In some countries , the nameplate capacity of a photovoltaic power stations is rated in megawatt @-@ peak ( MWp ) , which refers to the solar array 's DC power output . However , Canada , Japan , Spain and some parts of the United States often specify using the converted lower nominal power output in MWAC ; a measure directly comparable to other forms of power generation . A third and less common rating is the mega volt @-@ amperes ( MVA ) . Most solar parks are developed at a scale of at least 1 MWp . As of 2015 , the world 's largest operating photovoltaic power stations have capacities of close to 600 megawatts and projects up to 1 gigawatt are planned . As at the end of 2015 , about 3 @,@ 400 projects with a combined capacity of 60 <unk> were solar farms larger than 4 MW . 
 Most of the existing large @-@ scale photovoltaic power stations are owned and operated by independent power producers , but the involvement of <unk> and utility @-@ owned projects is increasing . To date , almost all have been supported at least in part by regulatory incentives such as feed @-@ in tariffs or tax credits , but as levelized costs have fallen significantly in the last decade and grid parity has been reached in an increasing number of markets , it may not be long before external incentives cease to exist . 
 = = History = = 
 The first 1 MWp solar park was built by Arco Solar at Lugo near Hesperia , California at the end of 1982 , followed in 1984 by a 5 @.@ 2 MWp installation in Carrizo Plain . Both have since been decommissioned , though Carrizo Plain is the site for several large plants now being constructed or planned . The next stage followed the 2004 revisions to the feed @-@ in tariffs in Germany when a substantial volume of solar parks were constructed . 
 Several hundred installations over 1 MWp have been since been installed in Germany , of which more than 50 are over 10 MWp . With its introduction of feed @-@ in tariffs in 2008 , Spain became briefly the largest market , with some 60 solar parks over 10 MW , but these incentives have since been withdrawn . The USA , China India , France , Canada , and Italy , amongst others , have also become major markets as shown on the list of photovoltaic power stations . 
 The largest sites under construction have capacities of hundreds of MWp and projects at a scale of 1 <unk> are being planned . 
 = = Siting and land use = = 
 The land area required for a desired power output , varies depending on the location , and on the efficiency of the solar modules , the slope of the site and the type of mounting used . Fixed tilt solar arrays using typical modules of about 15 % efficiency on horizontal sites , need about 1 hectare / MW in the tropics and this figure rises to over 2 hectares in northern Europe . 
 Because of the longer shadow the array casts when tilted at a steeper angle , this area is typically about 10 % higher for an adjustable tilt array or a single axis tracker , and 20 % higher for a 2 @-@ axis tracker , though these figures will vary depending on the latitude and topography . 
 The best locations for solar parks in terms of land use are held to be brown field sites , or where there is no other valuable land use . Even in cultivated areas , a significant proportion of the site of a solar farm can also be devoted to other productive uses , such as crop growing or biodiversity . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 <unk> is co @-@ developing the same area of land for both solar photovoltaic power as well as for conventional agriculture . A recent study found that the value of solar generated electricity coupled to shade @-@ tolerant crop production created an over 30 % increase in economic value from farms deploying <unk> systems instead of conventional agriculture . 
 = = = Co @-@ location = = = 
 In some cases several different solar power stations , with separate owners and contractors , are developed on adjacent sites . This can offer the advantage of the projects sharing the cost and risks of project infrastructure such as grid connections and planning approval . Solar farms can also be co @-@ located with wind farms . Sometimes the title ' solar park ' is used , rather than an individual solar power station . 
 Some examples of such solar clusters are the Charanka Solar Park , where there are 17 different generation projects ; <unk> , with eleven plants , and the <unk> solar parks with total reported capacity over <unk> . An extreme example is calling all of the solar farms in the Gujarat state of India a single solar park , the Gujarat Solar Park . 
 = = Technology = = 
 Most Solar parks are ground mounted PV systems , also known as free @-@ field solar power plants . They can either be fixed tilt or use a single axis or dual axis solar tracker . While tracking improves the overall performance , it also increases the system 's installation and maintenance cost . A solar inverter converts the array 's power output from DC to AC , and connection to the utility grid is made through a high voltage , three phase step up transformer of typically 10 kV and above . 
 = = = Solar array arrangements = = = 
 The solar arrays are the subsystems which convert incoming light into electrical energy . They comprise a multitude of solar modules , mounted on support structures and interconnected to deliver a power output to electronic power conditioning subsystems . 
 A minority of utility @-@ scale solar parks are configured on buildings and so use building @-@ mounted solar arrays . The majority are ' free field ' systems using ground @-@ mounted structures , usually of one of the following types : 
 = = = = Fixed arrays = = = = 
 Many projects use mounting structures where the solar modules are mounted at a fixed inclination calculated to provide the optimum annual output profile . The modules are normally oriented towards the Equator , at a tilt angle slightly less than the latitude of the site . In some cases , depending on local climatic , topographical or electricity pricing regimes , different tilt angles can be used , or the arrays might be offset from the normal East @-@ West axis to favour morning or evening output . 
 A variant on this design is the use of arrays , whose tilt angle can be adjusted twice or four times annually to optimise seasonal output . They also require more land area to reduce internal shading at the steeper winter tilt angle . Because the increased output is typically only a few percent , it seldom justifies the increased cost and complexity of this design . 
 = = = = Dual axis trackers = = = = 
 To maximise the intensity of incoming direct radiation , solar panels should be orientated normal to the sun 's rays . To achieve this , arrays can be designed using two @-@ axis trackers , capable of tracking the sun in its daily orbit across the sky , and as its elevation changes throughout the year . 
 These arrays need to be spaced out to reduce inter @-@ shading as the sun moves and the array orientations change , so need more land area . They also require more complex mechanisms to maintain the array surface at the required angle . The increased output can be of the order of 30 % in locations with high levels of direct radiation , but the increase is lower in temperate climates or those with more significant diffuse radiation , due to overcast conditions . For this reason , dual axis trackers are most commonly used in subtropical regions , and were first deployed at utility scale at the Lugo plant . 
 = = = = Single axis trackers = = = = 
 A third approach achieves some of the output benefits of tracking , with a lesser penalty in terms of land area , capital and operating cost . This involves tracking the sun in one dimension – in its daily journey across the sky – but not adjusting for the seasons . The angle of the axis is normally horizontal , though some , such as the solar park at Nellis Airforce Base , which have a 20 ° tilt , incline the axis towards the equator in a north @-@ south orientation – effectively a hybrid between tracking and fixed tilt . 
 Single axis tracking systems are aligned along axes roughly North @-@ South . Some use linkages between rows so that the same actuator can adjust the angle of several rows at once . 
 = = = Power conversion = = = 
 Solar panels produce direct current ( DC ) electricity , so solar parks need conversion equipment to convert this to alternating current ( AC ) , which is the form transmitted by the electricity grid . This conversion is done by inverters . To maximise their efficiency , solar power plants also incorporate maximum power point trackers , either within the inverters or as separate units . These devices keep each solar array string close to its peak power point . 
 There are two primary alternatives for configuring this conversion equipment ; centralised and string inverters , although in some cases individual , or micro @-@ inverters are used . Single inverters allows optimizing the output of each panel , and multiple inverters increases the reliability by limiting the loss of output when an inverter fails . 
 = = = = Centralised inverters = = = = 
 These units have relatively high capacity , typically of the order of 1 MW , so they condition that the output of a substantial block of solar arrays , up to perhaps 2 hectares ( 4 @.@ 9 acres ) in area . Solar parks using centralised inverters are often configured in discrete rectangular blocks , with the related inverter in one corner , or the centre of the block . 
 = = = = String inverters = = = = 
 String inverters are substantially lower in capacity , of the order of 10 kW , and condition the output of a single array string . This is normally a whole , or part of , a row of solar arrays within the overall plant . String inverters can enhance the efficiency of solar parks , where different parts of the array are experiencing different levels of insolation , for example where arranged at different orientations , or closely packed to minimise site area . 
 = = = = Transformers = = = = 
 The system inverters typically provide power output at voltages of the order of 480 VAC . Electricity grids operate at much higher voltages of the order of tens or hundreds of thousands of volts , so transformers are incorporated to deliver the required output to the grid . Due to the long lead time , the Long Island Solar Farm chose to keep a spare transformer onsite , as transformer failure would have kept the solar farm offline for a long period . Transformers typically have a life of 25 to 75 years , and normally do not require replacement during the life of a photovoltaic power station . 
 = = = System performance = = = 
 The performance of a solar park is a function of the climatic conditions , the equipment used and the system configuration . The primary energy input is the global light irradiance in the plane of the solar arrays , and this in turn is a combination of the direct and the diffuse radiation . 
 A key determinant of the output of the system is the conversion efficiency of the solar modules , which will depend in particular on the type of solar cell used . 
 There will be losses between the DC output of the solar modules and the AC power delivered to the grid , due to a wide range of factors such as light absorption losses , mismatch , cable voltage drop , conversion efficiencies , and other parasitic losses . A parameter called the ' performance ratio ' has been developed to evaluate the total value of these losses . The performance ratio gives a measure of the output AC power delivered as a proportion of the total DC power which the solar modules should be able to deliver under the ambient climatic conditions . In modern solar parks the performance ratio should typically be in excess of 80 % . 
 = = = System degradation = = = 
 Early photovoltaic systems output decreased as much as 10 % / year , but as of 2010 the median degradation rate was 0 @.@ 5 % / year , with modules made after 2000 having a significantly lower degradation rate , so that a system would lose only 12 % of its output performance in 25 years . A system using modules which degrade 4 % / year will lose 64 % of its output during the same period . Many panel makers offer a performance guarantee , typically 90 % in ten years and 80 % over 25 years . The output of all panels is typically <unk> at plus or minus 3 % during the first year of operation . 
 = = The business of developing solar parks = = 
 Solar power plants are developed to deliver merchant electricity into the grid as an alternative to other renewable , fossil or nuclear generating stations . 
 The plant owner is an electricity generator . Most solar power plants today are owned by independent power producers ( <unk> 's ) , though some are held by <unk> or community @-@ owned utilities . 
 Some of these power producers develop their own portfolio of power plants , but most solar parks are initially designed and constructed by specialist project developers . Typically the developer will plan the project , obtain planning and connection consents , and arrange financing for the capital required . The actual construction work is normally contracted to one or more EPC ( engineering , procurement and construction ) contractors . 
 Major milestones in the development of a new photovoltaic power plant are planning consent , grid connection approval , financial close , construction , connection and commissioning . At each stage in the process , the developer will be able to update estimates of the anticipated performance and costs of the plant and the financial returns it should be able to deliver . 
 = = = Planning approval = = = 
 Photovoltaic power stations occupy at least one hectare for each megawatt of rated output , so require a substantial land area ; which is subject to planning approval . The chances of obtaining consent , and the related time , cost and conditions , varying from jurisdiction to jurisdiction and location to location . Many planning approvals will also apply conditions on the treatment of the site after the station has been decommissioned in the future . A professional health , safety and environment assessment is usually undertaken during the design of a PV power station in order to ensure the facility is designed and planned in accordance with all HSE regulations . 
 = = = Grid connection = = = 
 The availability , locality and capacity of the connection to the grid is a major consideration in planning a new solar park , and can be a significant contributor to the cost . 
