 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 This fungus is widespread in North America and Europe . In North America , the distribution extends north to Alberta , Canada . In Mexico , it has been collected from State of Mexico , Guanajuato , Guerrero , and Tlaxcala . It is also found in Israel , Jordan , Turkey , Iran China ( Xinjiang ) and Japan . 
 The fruit bodies grows solitary , scattered , or clustered together on soil in both coniferous and deciduous woods , typically in spring and summer . A preference for growing in association with coast live oak ( Quercus agrifolia ) has been noted for Californian populations . 
 = Benjamin Mountfort = 
 Benjamin <unk> Mountfort ( 13 March 1825 – 15 March 1898 ) was an English emigrant to New Zealand , where he became one of that country 's most prominent 19th @-@ century architects . He was instrumental in shaping the city of Christchurch 's unique architectural identity and culture , and was appointed the first official Provincial Architect of the developing province of Canterbury . Heavily influenced by the Anglo @-@ Catholic philosophy behind early Victorian architecture , he is credited with importing the Gothic revival style to New Zealand . His Gothic designs constructed in both wood and stone in the province are considered unique to New Zealand . Today , he is considered the founding architect of the province of Canterbury . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Mountfort was born in Birmingham , an industrial town in the Midlands of England , the son of perfume manufacturer and jeweller Thomas Mountfort and his wife Susanna ( née <unk> ) . As a young adult he moved to London , where he was an early pupil of George Gilbert Scott ( from 1841 – 46 ) . He also studied architecture under the Anglo @-@ Catholic architect Richard Cromwell Carpenter , whose medieval Gothic style of design was to have a lifelong influence on Mountfort . After completion of his training in 1848 , Mountfort practised architecture in London . He married Emily Elizabeth Newman on 20 August 1850 , and 18 days later the couple emigrated to New Zealand . They were some of the first settlers to the province of Canterbury , arriving on one of the famed First Four Ships , the Charlotte @-@ Jane on 16 December 1850 . These first settlers , known as " The Pilgrims " , have their names engraved on marble plaques in Cathedral Square , Christchurch , in front of the cathedral that Mountfort helped to design . 
 = = New Zealand = = 
 Mountfort arrived in Canterbury full of ambition and drive to begin designing in 1850 as one of a wave of settlers encouraged to immigrate to the new colony of New Zealand by the British Government . With him and his wife from England came also his brother Charles , his sister Susannah , and Charles ' wife , all five of them aged between 21 and 26 . Life in New Zealand at first was hard and disappointing : Mountfort found that there was little call for architects . Christchurch was little more than a large village of basic wooden huts on a windswept plain . The new émigré 's architectural life in New Zealand had a disastrous beginning . His first commission in New Zealand was the Church of the Most Holy Trinity in Lyttelton , built in 1852 by Isaac Luck . The building proved vulnerable to high winds and was considered unsafe . It was demolished in 1857 . This calamity was attributed to the use of unseasoned wood and his lack of knowledge of the local building materials . Whatever the cause , the result was a crushing blow to his reputation . A local newspaper called him " ... a half @-@ educated architect whose buildings ... have given anything but satisfaction , he being evidently deficient in all knowledge of the principles of construction , though a clever draughtsman and a man of some taste . " . 
 Due to this blow to his reputation , he began running a stationery shop , working as a newspaper agent , and giving drawing lessons until 1857 to supplement his architectural work . It was during this period in the architectural wilderness that he developed a lifelong interest in photography and supplemented his meagre income by taking photographic portraits of his neighbours . 
 Mountfort was a Freemason and an early member of the Lodge of Unanimity , the main building of which he designed in 1863 . The Lodge of Unanimity was the first Masonic Lodge in the South Island . 
 = = Return to architecture = = 
 In 1857 he returned to architecture and entered into a business partnership with his sister Susannah 's new husband , Isaac Luck . Mountfort 's career received a fillip when he was commissioned to design the St John 's Anglican church at <unk> in Otago . A small timber structure in the Gothic style , it was completed on 19 December 1858 on land donated by the ex @-@ whaler Johnny Jones . It is still in use as a church , the oldest such structure in southern New Zealand . Now within the boundaries of the city of Dunedin its simple pit @-@ sawn timber interior successfully conjures a sense of spirituality . 
 Christchurch was under heavy development at this time , as it had just been granted city status and was the new administrative capital of the province of Canterbury . This provided Mountfort and Luck ample opportunity to practice their trade . In 1855 they produced a preliminary design for the new Canterbury Provincial Council Buildings in timber . The buildings were constructed from 1857 – 59 , but in a more limited form than the original design . As the Provincial Council gained new functions with growth in the population and economy of the province , the buildings were enlarged with a North wing in stone and an iron clock tower from 1859 – 60 , and further enlarged with a stone council chamber and refreshment rooms in 1864 – 65 . The buildings today are regarded as one of Mountfort 's most important works . 
 From the exterior , the building appears austere , as was much of Mountfort 's early work : a central tower dominates two flanking gabled wings in the Gothic revival style . However the interior was a riot of colour and medievalism as perceived through Victorian eyes ; it included stained glass windows , and a large double @-@ faced clock , thought to be one of only five around the globe . The chamber is decorated in a rich , almost <unk> style , with carvings by a local sculptor William <unk> . Included in the carvings are representations of indigenous New Zealand species . 
 = = Gothic architecture = = 
 The Gothic revival style of architecture began to gain in popularity from the late 18th century as a romantic backlash against the more classical and formal styles which had predominated the previous two centuries . At the age of 16 , Mountfort acquired two books written by the Gothic revivalist Augustus Pugin : The True Principles of Christian or Pointed Architecture and An Apology for the Revival of Christian Architecture . From this time onwards , Mountfort was a disciple of Pugin 's strong Anglo @-@ Catholic architectural values . These values were further cemented in 1846 , at the age of 21 , Mountfort became a pupil of Richard Cromwell Carpenter . 
 Carpenter was , like Mountfort , a devout Anglo @-@ Catholic and subscribed to the theories of Tractarianism , and thus to the Oxford and Cambridge Movements . These conservative theological movements taught that true spirituality and concentration in prayer was influenced by the physical surroundings , and that the medieval church had been more spiritual than that of the early 19th century . As a result of this theology , medieval architecture was declared to be of greater spiritual value than the classical Palladian @-@ based styles of the 18th and early 19th centuries . Augustus Pugin even pronounced that medieval architecture was the only form suitable for a church and that Palladianism was almost heretical . Such theory was not confined to architects , and continued well into the 20th century . This school of thought led intellectuals such as the English poet Ezra Pound to prefer Romanesque buildings to Baroque on the grounds that the latter represented an abandonment of the world of intellectual clarity and light for a set of values based on the notion of hell and the increasing dominance of society by bankers , a breed to be despised . 
 Whatever the philosophy behind the Gothic revival , in London the 19th @-@ century rulers of the British Empire felt that Gothic architecture was suitable for the colonies because of its then strong Anglican connotations , representing hard work , morality and conversion of native peoples . The irony of this was that many of Mountfort 's churches were for Roman Catholics , as so many of the new immigrants were of Irish origin . To the many middle @-@ class English empire builders , Gothic represented a nostalgic reminder of the parishes left behind in Britain with their true medieval architecture ; these were the patrons who chose the architects and designs . 
 Mountfort 's early Gothic work in New Zealand was of the more severe Anglican variety as practised by Carpenter , with tall lancet windows and many gables . As his career progressed , and he had proved himself to the employing authorities , his designs developed into a more European form , with towers , turrets and high ornamental roof lines in the French manner , a style which was in no way peculiar to Mountfort but was endorsed by such architects as Alfred Waterhouse in Britain . 
 Mountfort 's skill as an architect lay in adapting these flamboyant styles to suit the limited materials available in New Zealand . While wooden churches are plentiful in certain parts of the US , they are generally of a simple classic design , whereas Mountfort 's wooden churches in New Zealand are as much ornate Gothic fantasies as those he designed in stone . Perhaps the flamboyance of his work can be explained in a statement of principles he and his partner Luck wrote when bidding to win the commission to design Government House , Auckland in 1857 : 
 Accordingly , we see in Nature 's buildings , the mountains and hills ; not regularity of outline but diversity ; buttresses , walls and turrets as unlike each other as possible , yet producing a graduation of effect not to be approached by any work , moulded to regularity of outline . The simple study of an oak or an elm tree would suffice to <unk> the regularity theory . 
 = = Provincial Architect = = 
 As the " Provincial Architect " — a newly created position to which Mountfort was appointed in 1864 — Mountfort designed a wooden church for the Roman Catholic community of the city of Christchurch . This wooden erection was subsequently enlarged several times until it was renamed a cathedral . It was eventually replaced in 1901 by the Cathedral of the Blessed Sacrament , a more permanent stone building by the architect Frank Petre , though the cenotaph by Mountfort was preserved . Mountfort often worked in wood , a material he in no way regarded as an impediment to the Gothic style , though he was unique in this respect as Gothic buildings were often created from stone and mortar . Between 1869 and 1882 he designed the Canterbury Museum and subsequently Canterbury College and its clock tower in 1877 . 
 Construction on the buildings for the Canterbury College , which later became the University of Canterbury , began with the construction of the clock tower block . This edifice , which opened in 1877 , was the first purpose built university in New Zealand . The College was completed in two subsequent stages in Mountfort 's usual Gothic style . 
 George Gilbert Scott , the architect of ChristChurch Cathedral , and an <unk> of Mountfort 's teacher and mentor Carpenter , wished his former pupil Mountfort to be the clerk of works and supervising architect of the new cathedral project . This proposal was originally vetoed by the Cathedral Commission . Nevertheless , following delays in the building work attributed to financial problems , the position of supervising architect was finally given to Mountfort in 1873 . Mountfort was responsible for several alterations to the absentee main architect 's design , most obviously the tower and the west porch . He also designed the font , the Harper Memorial , and the north porch . The cathedral was however not finally completed until 1904 , six years after Mountfort 's death . The cathedral is very much in the European decorated Gothic style with an attached campanile tower beside the body of the cathedral , rather than towering directly above it in the more English tradition . 
 In 1872 Mountfort became a founding member of the Canterbury Association of Architects , a body which was responsible for all subsequent development of the new city . Mountfort was now at the pinnacle of his career . Mountfort notably altered the use of a segmented arch rather than one in the Romanesque style ; the latter of which was considered by Augustus Pugin to be fundamentally important to the Gothic style . The college posed a challenge in its main hall ; on the hall 's completion in 1882 , it was the largest public space in Christchurch . Additionally , a level of detail not possible in previous works was present in the hall 's design due to the superior funding for the college . The completion of the first stage was met with praise and optimism , though extensions such as a biological lab were added in the early 1890s . By the 1880s , Mountfort was hailed as New Zealand 's premier ecclesiastical architect , with over forty churches to his credit . 
 In 1888 , he designed St John 's Cathedral in Napier . This brick construction was demolished in the disastrous 1931 earthquake that destroyed much of Napier . Between 1886 and 1897 , Mountfort worked on one of his largest churches , the wooden St Mary 's , the cathedral church of Auckland . Covering 9 @,@ 000 square feet ( 840 m2 ) , St Mary 's is the largest and last timber church built by Mountfort , and the largest wooden Gothic church in the world . At its completion , it was said that " in point of design , completeness and beauty [ it ] reaches a high level mark not yet approached in the diocese " . The emphasis placed on the sweeping roof by the great aisle windows struck a balance to the great area the church enclosed . In 1982 the entire church , complete with its stained glass windows , was transported to a new site , across the road from its former position where a new cathedral was to be built . St Mary 's church was consecrated in 1898 , one of Mountfort 's final grand works . 
 Outside of his career , Mountfort was keenly interested in the arts and a talented artist , although his artistic work appears to have been confined to art pertaining to architecture , his first love . He was a devout member of the Church of England and a member of many Anglican church councils and diocese committees . 
 Mountfort 's later years were blighted by professional jealousies , as his position as the province 's first architect was assailed by new and younger men influenced by new orders of architecture . Benjamin Mountfort died in 1898 , aged 73 . He was buried in the cemetery of Holy Trinity Avonside , the church which he had extended in 1876 . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Evaluating Mountfort 's works today , one has to avoid judging them against a background of similar designs in Europe . In the 1860s , New Zealand was a developing country , where materials and resources freely available in Europe were conspicuous by their absence . When available they were often of inferior quality , as Mountfort discovered with the unseasoned wood in his first disastrous project . His first buildings in his new homeland were often too tall , or steeply pitched , failing to take account of the non @-@ European climate and landscape . However , he soon adapted , and developed his skill in working with crude and unrefined materials . 
 Christchurch and its surrounding areas are unique in New Zealand for their particular style of Gothic architecture , something that can be directly attributed to Benjamin Mountfort . While Mountfort did accept small private domestic commissions , he is today better known for the designs executed for public , civic bodies , and the church . His monumental Gothic stone civic buildings in Christchurch , which would not be out of place in Oxford or Cambridge , are an amazing achievement over adversity of materials . His hallmark wooden Gothic churches today epitomise the 19th @-@ century province of Canterbury . They are accepted , and indeed appear as part of the landscape . In this way , Benjamin Mountfort 's achievement was to make his favoured style of architecture synonymous with the identity of the province of Canterbury . Following his death , one of his seven children , Cyril , continued to work in his father 's Gothic style well into the 20th century . Cyril Mountfort was responsible for the church of St Luke 's in the City , which was an unexecuted design of his father 's . In this way , and through the daily public use of his many buildings , Mountfort 's legacy lives on . He ranks today with his contemporary R A Lawson as one of New Zealand 's greatest 19th @-@ century architects . 
 = = Selected buildings = = 
 Most Holy Trinity in Lyttelton , 1852 ( demolished , 1857 ) 
 Canterbury Provincial Council Buildings , 1858 – 1865 ( partially collapsed in the 2011 Canterbury earthquake ) 
 Christchurch Cathedral , begun 1864 ( replaced with new building , 1901 ; partially collapsed in the 2011 Canterbury earthquake ) 
 Canterbury Museum , 1869 – 1882 
 St. Augustine 's Church , <unk> 1872 ( photo ) 
 Trinity Church , Christchurch , 1872 ( partially collapsed in the 2011 Canterbury earthquake , but will be restored ) 
 Holy Trinity Avonside Church Chancel , 1874 – 1877 ( photo ) 
 St Paul 's Anglican Church , <unk> , 1876 – 1877 
 Canterbury College Hall , Christchurch , 1882 ( photo ) 
 Church of the Good Shepherd , <unk> , 1884 – 1885 
 St Mary 's Church , Auckland , begun 1886 ( relocated , 1982 ) 
 St John 's Cathedral , Napier , 1886 – 1888 
 Sunnyside Asylum , Christchurch , 1881 – 1893 
 = 25th Battalion ( New Zealand ) = 
 The 25th Battalion was an infantry battalion of the New Zealand Military Forces , which served during the Second World War as part of the 6th Infantry Brigade , 2nd New Zealand Division . 
 The 25th Battalion was formed in New Zealand in 1940 and after a period of training , it , along with the rest of the 6th Brigade , embarked for the Middle East where it joined up with the 2nd New Zealand Division . Moved to Greece to help defend against a German invasion , the battalion participated in the Battle of Greece but was evacuated at the conclusion of the fighting in the country . It then fought in the North African Campaign and suffered heavy losses during Operation Crusader , when it was effectively destroyed by the 15th Panzer Division . From December 1941 to February 1942 the battalion was brought back up to strength before being transferred to Syria . It returned to Egypt in March 1942 and suffered heavy casualties during the First Battle of El Alamein . 
 After the fighting in North Africa ceased in 1943 , the 25th Battalion participated in the Italian Campaign , fighting in actions at Orsogna and later at Cassino . It finished the war in Trieste , and remained there to counter the presence of Yugoslav partisans that had entered the city . After the withdrawal of the partisans several weeks later , the battalion moved to Florence while its long @-@ serving personnel began returning to New Zealand . Not required for service in the Pacific theatre of operations , the battalion was disestablished in late 1945 . 
 = = Formation = = 
 Following the outbreak of the Second World War , the New Zealand government authorised the formation of the 2nd New Zealand Expeditionary Force ( 2NZEF ) , for service at home and abroad . Following consultation with the British government , it was decided that the main New Zealand contribution to the war effort would be in the form of an infantry division , the 2nd New Zealand Division , which would require nine battalions of infantry . Consequently , several infantry battalions were formed from 1939 to 1940 with New Zealand volunteers . 
 The 25th Battalion was the eighth such unit raised for the 2NZEF and was formed on 15 May 1940 at Trentham Military Camp with personnel drawn largely from Wellington , Hawke 's Bay and the Taranaki region . With an establishment of around 780 men , it was organised into four rifle companies , a headquarters company consisting of specialised personnel such as signals and a battalion headquarters . It was one of three infantry battalions that were part of what was initially known as the Third Echelon of the 2NZEF and which would later be designated the 6th Infantry Brigade , one of three infantry brigades of the 2nd New Zealand Division . 
 Under the command of Lieutenant Colonel Allan Wilder , who had served with the Wellington Mounted Rifles during the First World War , the battalion embarked for active service aboard the Cunard liner RMS Mauretania on 27 August 1940 . After transferring to the Orient liner SS Ormonde at Bombay , the battalion arrived in the Middle East on 29 September and immediately commenced intensive training at Maadi Camp , the 2NZEF base near the town of Maadi , in Egypt . 
 = = Greece = = 
 The British Government anticipated an invasion of Greece by the Germans in 1941 and decided to send troops to support the Greeks , who were already engaged against the Italians in Albania . The 2nd New Zealand Division was one of a number of Allied units dispatched to Greece in early March . The 6th Infantry Brigade was tasked with the defence of the coastal portion of the Aliakmon Line in northern Greece , with the 25th Battalion preparing and manning the defences around Agios Ilias . 
 On 6 April , the Germans invaded Greece and their advance was so rapid that it quickly threatened to outflank the Aliakmon Line . The brigade had to abandon its positions and was withdrawn to the Olympus Pass on 9 April . This marked the beginning of a gradual retreat down the country , during which a series of rearguard actions were fought by elements of the division . The battalion fought off a sharp attack by the German 5th Panzer Division on its positions around Thermopylae on 24 April , its only major engagement of the campaign in Greece , before it successfully disengaged later that day . It was evacuated from Greece on 29 April along with the rest of the 6th Brigade , the 4th and 5th Brigades having been taken off beaches to the east of Athens . While the latter brigades disembarked at Crete , the 6th Brigade continued onto Egypt . 
 Casualties during the 25th Battalion 's campaign in Greece amounted to nearly 30 killed and wounded with 150 personnel captured and made prisoners of war . The majority of the captured personnel were from the battalion 's reinforcement company , which had been left in Athens when the 6th Brigade moved up to the Aliakmon Line , as well as a truckload of infantrymen that had been misdirected to Kalamata during the retreat . One soldier managed to escape and eventually make his way to Turkey by sea , an act for which he was later awarded the Distinguished Conduct Medal . 
 = = North Africa = = 
 By late May , and after a period of training and refitting , the 25th Battalion was back up to full strength and moved to Kantara West , near the Suez Canal . Here , along with the rest of the 6th Brigade , the battalion manned defences against a possible attack from German Fallschirmjäger ( paratroopers ) , recent events in Crete demonstrating the threat these forces could pose . The battalion shifted to the Baggush Box , near Mersa Matruh and to the west of Alexandria , in September 1941 . At the same time , its commander , Wilder , was promoted to brigadier and given command of the New Zealand Training Group at Maadi Camp . The battalion 's new commander was Lieutenant Colonel Gifford McNaught who had recently been involved in the fighting on Crete before being evacuated . At Baggush , the battalion improved the defences in the area and underwent intensive training in open desert warfare . 
 This training was in preparation for the 2nd New Zealand Division 's role in the upcoming Operation Crusader , which was planned to lift the siege of Tobruk . The New Zealanders were to be one of the 8th Army 's infantry divisions that were to surround and capture the main strong points along the front while the armoured divisions were to seek out and engage Generalleutnant ( Lieutenant General ) Erwin Rommel 's Afrika Korps . At the same time , the Tobruk garrison was to attempt a breakout . 
 = = = Operation Crusader = = = 
 In November , the 6th Brigade moved to its starting positions in Libya to be held in reserve while the initial part of the offensive commenced . The brigade entered the fray on 21 November , and moved to Bir el <unk> with the 25th Battalion leading alongside the 24th Battalion , while the 4th Brigade targeted the Bardia – Tobruk highway and the 5th Brigade the area around Bardia and Sollum . However , the following day , the 6th Brigade was ordered to advance to Point 175 , set up a perimeter and then make contact with the 5th South African Brigade , which was in some difficulty , at Sidi Rezegh . Leaving early in the morning of 23 November , the 25th and 26th Battalions led the advance . At daybreak , they stopped and bivouacked in a wadi . Units of the Afrika Korps , later discovered to be its headquarters element , moved into the wadi from the far end and this initiated a battle in which the battalion took several prisoners . 
 The 6th Brigade moved on quickly to take Point 175 , which was held by German forces . Point 175 marked the start of the Sidi Rezegh escarpment , 40 kilometres ( 25 mi ) from Tobruk . Arriving a few hours after their initial contact with the enemy earlier in the morning , the 25th Battalion made its first attempt to capture Point 175 , having received orders to do so from the brigade 's commander , Brigadier Harold Barrowclough . Initial impressions that Point 175 was only lightly defended proved incorrect and the attack needed additional support with two companies of the 24th Battalion and a squadron of Valentine tanks from 8th Royal Tank Regiment called upon to assist . After initially proceeding well , a German counterattack caused significant casualties amongst the battalion and the remaining two companies of the 24th Battalion moved forward that evening to help secure the little ground that had been won . Lieutenant Colonel Clayden Shuttleworth , commander of the 24th Battalion , took over command of the overall position following the wounding and subsequent evacuation of McNaught . The losses incurred by 25th Battalion on this day were 100 dead , 125 wounded , and another 100 made prisoners @-@ of @-@ war . 
 It was not until 27 November that all of Sidi Rezegh was under the control of the New Zealanders , with the 25th Battalion at little more than company strength following the events of 23 November . Barrowclough made the 25th Battalion , together with the 21st Battalion which had been moved to Sidi Rezegh , his brigade reserve . However , Rommel had inflicted a significant defeat on the British armour and was now returning to the Tobruk area . The 6th Brigade was strung out along Sidi Rezegh in pockets , vulnerable to a counter @-@ attack , and elements of the 15th Panzer Division made contact on 28 November . 
 By 30 November , the 6th Brigade was surrounded and the 15th Panzer Division began attacking after midday with tanks and infantry . Despite the support of anti @-@ tank guns , the New Zealanders were overrun . Shuttleworth was made a prisoner @-@ of @-@ war along with his surviving company commanders . The survivors of the 25th Battalion , now commanded by Major Henry Burton , the sole surviving company commander , had been moved into reserve a few days previously and managed to withdraw before Sidi Rezegh was overrun . 
 = = = Syria = = = 
 The battalion was reformed at Baggush from those who had escaped capture at Sidi Rezegh ( about 300 @-@ odd ) and other personnel who had been left out of battle , along with replacements from New Zealand . The battalion 's second @-@ in @-@ command , Major <unk> George , who had been left behind at Baggush when the New Zealanders moved into Libya , was promoted to lieutenant colonel and became its commander . The battalion was stationed at Baggush until late January 1942 before being moved to Maadi . Shortly afterwards it was called into Cairo for four days to increase the Allied presence there and counter potential unrest amongst the civilian population of the city . Once tensions decreased it returned to Maadi , and resumed training and this included practice in amphibious operations . 
 From late February to mid @-@ March , the 2nd New Zealand Division was transferred to Syria . The Allied high command was concerned that the Middle East was at risk from an invasion by the Germans and the New Zealanders were part of the force tasked with blocking their likely route from the Caucasus . The 25th Battalion was stationed close to the border with Turkey , near the town of Idlib , and its platoons manned frontier posts for several weeks . The battalion later shifted to the <unk> fortress area where it would prepare defences . However , following the attack on the 8th Army 's Gazala Line by Panzer Army Africa , the 2nd New Zealand Division was recalled to Egypt . By the end of June , the 25th Battalion , along with the rest of the 6th Brigade , was setting up camp in the Alamein area . 
 = = = Egypt = = = 
 The 2nd New Zealand Division was dispatched to the lines of El Alamein and while the 4th and 5th Brigades went south to Minqar Qaim , the 6th Brigade , now commanded by Brigadier George Clifton , was initially held in reserve before being ordered to man the Kaponga Box at Bab el Qattara . Arriving on 28 June , the 25th Battalion guarded the western side of the box , while the 24th and 26th Battalions were responsible for the northern and southern sides respectively . The brigade remained here , watching first the retreating British stream by and then the Germans , at a distance , for several days before moving to <unk> . It missed the action of 14 – 15 July at Ruweisat Ridge which saw the destruction of a large part of the 4th and 5th Brigades when , after securing the ridge , no armour was available to defend a counterattack by the Germans . The 6th Brigade was recalled back to the El Alamein lines to relieve what was left of the 4th Brigade . A few days later , it was involved in a night @-@ time attack on the El Mrier Depression . The aim was to secure the depression to create a route through which British armour could penetrate . The brigade , with the 25th Battalion as its reserve , successfully achieved its objective and was consolidating its positions when the 21st Panzer Division attacked on 22 July . 
 At daylight , German tanks caught the 24th and 25th Battalions , positioned in the relatively shallow El Mrier Depression together with 6th Brigade headquarters , by surprise . Firing from the edge of a low cliff overlooking the depression , the Germans caused heavy losses amongst the 24th and 25th Battalions before passing through their positions in pursuit of the British armour . George , the battalion 's commander , was captured along with 149 others . Over 200 other men were also killed or wounded . The survivors , back under the command of Burton who was once again the senior surviving company commander , were aggrieved at the lack of armoured support . The 6th Brigade moved to the southern section of the Alamein line where it manned defensive positions during the Battle of Alam Halfa , Rommel 's failed attempt to cut off the 8th Army . The battalion at this time numbered 362 personnel , which included one company which had been left back at Maadi and brought forward to rejoin the survivors of the El Mrier battle . Burton , promoted to lieutenant colonel , commanded the battalion until 12 September at which time he went on leave and was replaced by Lieutenant Colonel Ian Bonifant . 
 The 8th Army was now under the command of General Bernard Montgomery , who was planning for offensive operations against the Panzer Army Africa , which had formed a defensive position at Alamein . Minus its 4th Brigade , which had incurred significant losses at Ruweisat Ridge and had been withdrawn from the front so it could be converted to armour , the 2nd New Zealand Division was to play a major role in the forthcoming attack . In the first of its three phases , beginning on 23 October , the New Zealanders advanced behind a creeping artillery barrage which commenced at 9 : 40 pm and quickly attained all its objectives and began consolidating them . Bonifant was wounded during a bombing raid the day after the attack and was later awarded the Distinguished Service Order ( DSO ) for his role in the battle . 
 The New Zealanders were withdrawn from their positions four days later and remained out of the fighting while the Australian 9th Division took up the offensive in the northern sector of the front . Along with two British infantry brigades , the 2nd New Zealand Division resumed the fight on 2 November in Operation Supercharge , which was intended to break the frontlines in the south . The German defences collapsed and on 4 November they began retreating with the New Zealanders in pursuit . The 9th Armoured Brigade was attached to the 2nd New Zealand Division in support , and led the initial advance along with the 6th Brigade but rain turned the ground boggy and halted the advance temporarily before it could resume on 8 November . In mid @-@ November , the division was withdrawn for rest and re @-@ organisation and shortly afterwards Bonifant , recovered from the wounds that he had received on 24 October , resumed command of the <unk> . 
 = = = Advance into Libya and Tunisia = = = 
 After a month engaged in reorganisation and training at Sidi Azeiz , the New Zealanders re @-@ entered the campaign in mid @-@ December at El Agheila in an attempt to trap the Panzer Army Africa . On 11 December , the division carried out a flanking move to the south and west , led by the 6th Brigade with the 25th Battalion on the right of the advance . The move was unopposed for five days until the evening of 15 December , when a reconnaissance element that included the brigade 's commander , Brigadier William Gentry , came under fire from a ridge . The 25th Battalion supported the 24th Battalion 's subsequent attack on the ridge but it was found that the trap had failed , with the Germans slipping through the gap between the 5th and 6th Brigades . A second attempt to trap the Germans was made at Nofilia a few days later but this also failed when the rearguard prevented the 5th Brigade from closing the road along which the retreat was being made . The advance continued and on 23 January 1943 , the 2nd New Zealand Division entered Tripoli . Shortly after reaching the city , Bonifant was given command of the New Zealand Divisional Cavalry with Lieutenant Colonel Thomas Morten taking over the 25th Battalion . Initially stationed outside of Tripoli , it moved into the city proper later in February with the rest of the 6th Brigade as part of the occupying force . 
 In the meantime , the Panzer Army Africa had withdrawn to the Mareth Line in Tunisia and following a failed attack by the Germans on the 8th Army at Medenine in early March , the Allied response was for the New Zealanders , along with British and Free French forces , to drive forward to the Tebaga Gap south of the Mareth Line . On 21 March , the 6th Brigade mounted a night @-@ time attack on a feature known as Point 201 , which was defended by Italian forces . The attack was on a two battalion frontage , with the 25th Battalion on the left and tasked with the capture of Point 201 itself , and the 26th Battalion making a corresponding movement forward . Although the objective was achieved with just 50 casualties , of whom 11 were killed , many more were incurred the following day due to artillery fire on Point 201 , which was quite exposed . The breach that the attacking battalions made was not exploited by the supporting British armour . 
 The next attempt to capture the Tebaga Gap was mounted on 27 March by the infantry of the 5th Brigade along with the 6th Brigade 's 24th Battalion , supported by a regiment of the British 8th Armoured Brigade . The 25th Battalion only played a minor role , securing the extreme left flank , carrying out diversionary operations , and generally supporting the 24th Battalion during its advance . The attack was a total success and the next day the 2nd New Zealand Division moved forward with the 25th Battalion bringing up the rear of the 6th Brigade . 
 Over the coming days , the 2nd New Zealand Division , which briefly halted its advance for a week for rest and maintenance of its vehicles , advanced towards the town of Enfidaville , over 130 kilometres ( 81 mi ) to the north . Only minor opposition was encountered as it moved forward , with the 25th Battalion leading the 6th Brigade . The outskirts of Enfidaville were reached by the battalion 's carriers on 14 April , but resistance prevented the rifle companies from entering the town that day . Preparations for a full @-@ scale attack on the town had begun but the 6th Brigade was relieved before they could be implemented , with the 25th Battalion moving 14 kilometres ( 8 @.@ 7 mi ) to the rear . Focus then shifted to Takrouna , the 2nd New Zealand Division 's objective in Operation Oration , X Corps ' offensive towards Tunis . The 6th Brigade , with the 25th Battalion in reserve , was to attack north of the Takrouna – Enfidaville road , flanking 5th Brigade 's attack on Takrouna . The attack commenced on the evening of 19 April ; while the 6th Brigade easily secured its objectives , the 5th Brigade struggled and it took two days for Takrouna to fall . Shortly afterwards , the 25th Battalion was temporarily attached to the 5th Brigade , and relieved its 23rd Battalion . It remained on the frontlines to keep pressure on the enemy while other Allied units broke through to Tunis elsewhere on the front . In early May , the Axis forces in North Africa surrendered and the 2nd New Zealand Division began to return to Egypt . 
 = = Italy = = 
 With the close of the North African campaign in May 1943 , the Allies ' attention then turned to the European Theatre of Operations . Despite a preference amongst some sections of the New Zealand government for the 2nd New Zealand Division to be redeployed in the Pacific Theatre of Operations , it was decided that the division , having served with the 8th Army throughout the desert campaign would remain in Europe and take part in the fighting in Italy . Having been based in Maadi Camp since early June , the battalion left Egypt on 6 October as part of the division 's shift to Italy and reached Taranto three days later . 
 The 2nd New Zealand Division , now including the fully armoured 4th Brigade with three regiments of Sherman tanks , moved to the banks of the Sangro River later in the month and the 6th Brigade was scheduled to mount a night crossing on 21 November . Two companies of the 24th Battalion had crossed the previous night to reconnoitre the opposite bank but the attack was postponed due to bad weather . The brigade eventually crossed , with the 25th Battalion in the centre , on 27 November . As the river was forded on foot , several personnel disrobed for the crossing . Although briefly disturbed during the crossing by a German machinegun , there were no casualties , and the battalion pushed forward and seized its objective , a range of hills over 900 metres ( 980 yd ) beyond the river . 
 = = = Orsogna = = = 
 In the following weeks , the battalion was involved in the 6th Brigade 's attack on Orsogna , as part of the Moro River Campaign . The 25th Battalion made the initial attack on Orsogna on the evening of 2 December , which was launched without the use of supporting armour as Brigadier Graham Parkinson , commander of the 6th Brigade , did not anticipate any difficulty . The leading platoons penetrated into the town square but soon robust defence , supported by German tanks of the 26th Panzer Division , forced them back . Two platoons of infantry were captured . Two tank troops from the 18th Armoured Regiment were ordered forward but by the time they had reached the outskirts of Orsogna , the infantry were withdrawing from the town . The battalion supported further attacks on Orsogna by the 5th Infantry Brigade in the following days , but the German defences were too strong and the attack soon faded into a stalemate , with a number of back and forth actions as winter set in . Offensive operations around Orsogna ceased in late December and the 6th Brigade maintained its sector with two battalions , rotating the 24th , 25th and 26th Battalions out of the line in three @-@ day spells . During this time , Morten fell ill and was medically evacuated . The battalion 's second @-@ in @-@ command , Major Edward Norman , was made its commander in Morten 's stead . The New Zealanders withdrew from the area altogether on 13 January 1944 . 
 = = = Cassino = = = 
 Following its withdrawal from the Orsogna area , the 2nd New Zealand Division was one of a number of divisions that were transferred from the British Eighth Army to the U.S. Fifth Army , then engaged on the western side of the Apennines . This was part of an overall strategy to breach the Gustav Line and break an otherwise deadlocked Italian front . Together with the 4th Indian Division and supporting British and American artillery , the division became part of the newly formed New Zealand Corps , under the command of the New Zealand divisional commander , Lieutenant @-@ General Sir Bernard Freyberg . The corps moved to Cassino , the defenders of which had resisted American forces for several weeks . In the interim , the 25th Battalion had rested for several days in the Volturno valley , 50 miles ( 80 km ) from Cassino . During this time it received some reinforcements , although these were not enough to bring it up to full strength . 
 By mid @-@ February , Morten had recovered from his illness and resumed command of the battalion which , along with the rest of the division , was moved forward to the south of Cassino , taking over part of the sector of the U.S. 36th Infantry Division with the 6th Brigade in reserve . An initial attack on Cassino , which involved the 4th Indian Division , the 28th Maori Battalion and New Zealand engineers , was mounted on 15 February but failed due to a lack of air and armoured support . Two days later , the 5th Brigade attempted to capture the town 's railway station but this too failed . 
 It was soon to be the 6th Brigade 's turn . It moved out of its reserve positions and relieved the 133rd Infantry Regiment , part of the U.S. 34th Infantry Division , positioned nearly 2 kilometres ( 1 @.@ 2 mi ) to the north of Cassino . The 24th and 25th Battalions manned the front lines , uncomfortably exposed to machinegun fire from an overlooking ridge . It was planned for the 6th Brigade to mount its attack on Cassino on 24 February but rainfall delayed it by over three weeks . In the interim , command of the 25th Battalion passed to Lieutenant Colonel John McDuff , who replaced Major Norman , who in turn had taken over from Morten who , earlier in the month , had once again fallen ill and been evacuated . When the 6th Brigade 's attack finally commenced , on 15 March , the town had been thoroughly shelled and bombed during the intervening period . Supported by the 19th Armoured Regiment , the 25th Battalion pushed into Cassino . The 25th Battalion was tasked with capturing the western side of the town up to the Continental Hotel whereupon the 26th Battalion was to take up the advance . However , it was unable to achieve its objectives ; the Germans defended strongly , assisted by the rubble that hampered the easy movement of the supporting armour . After spending 16 March consolidating what gains it had made , the next day a further attempt was made but this was again largely unsuccessful with each of the 25th Battalion 's rifle companies being whittled down to strengths of around 50 men . The other battalions of the 6th Brigade were in a similar state but Parkinson , now commanding the 2nd New Zealand Division , was reluctant to commit more infantry to the battle . However , he finally ordered the 5th Brigade into the town on 20 March and the 25th Battalion was withdrawn to a secondary defensive position . The 5th Brigade was no more successful than the 6th Brigade and was reduced to simply holding what ground it had gained amongst the rubble of Cassino . 
 On 26 March , the New Zealand Corps disbanded and Freyberg reverted to command of the division which , a few days later , began to disengage from Cassino . The 6th Brigade was withdrawn on 1 April and the 25th Battalion moved 24 kilometres ( 15 mi ) to the south . Casualties amongst the battalion amounted to 220 personnel killed or wounded in action and it was left to II Polish Corps to capture Cassino in mid @-@ May . In June , McDuff was made commander of the Advance Base of 2NZEF , and Norman , promoted to lieutenant colonel , took up permanent command of 25th Battalion . The 2nd New Zealand Division was held in reserve until 9 July , having spent the intervening period recuperating in Avezzano , and assigned to XIII Corps . The infantry brigades advanced onto Florence and duly entered the city in August . After this , the 2nd New Zealand Division was transferred to I Canadian Corps , then on the Adriatic Coast , and advanced up to Rimini . 
 During the advance , the 25th Battalion formed a " Battalion Battle Group " ; this included a squadron of Shermans from 20th Armoured Regiment , a platoon of machineguns and heavy mortars , and an anti @-@ tank troop . The 24th Battalion was similarly expanded , and these two battle groups alternated as the advance guard of 6th Brigade , which in turn led the division in a series of river crossings throughout September up to and beyond Rimini . The 5th Brigade took over the advance at the end of September and the 25th Battalion was withdrawn into reserve for a rest . After a week , the battalion re @-@ entered the front lines , taking over the positions of the 21st Battalion in preparation for an assault across the Fiumicino River by the 24th and 26th Battalions ; the 25th was to be held in reserve . However , weather delayed the attack and it was abandoned altogether when the Canadians took over the sector . 
 Later in October , the New Zealanders were relieved and sent to Fabriano for rest and recuperation . During this time , the division was reorganised , with each of the infantry brigades expanding from three to four battalions . It reentered the frontlines , near the town of Faenza , in late November , under V Corps . The following month , the battalion crossed the Lamone River and joined the other infantry battalions of the 6th Brigade in attacks in and around Faenza . Along with the rest of the 2nd New Zealand Division , it then wintered along the Senio River , remaining there until March 1945 . 
 = = = Advance to Trieste = = = 
 On 9 April , the 2nd New Zealand Division crossed the Senio River . The crossing was carried out by the 5th and 6th Infantry Brigades , with the 25th Battalion on the right of the 6th Brigade 's frontage , alongside the 24th Battalion . The battalion had armoured support , including a squadron of the 20th Armoured Regiment which was under its direct command . The crossing , covered by artillery , fighter bombers , and flamethrowers , was achieved with minimal opposition ; nearly 60 Germans were captured by the leading companies . Despite suffering casualties due to being accidentally bombed by Allied bombers , the battalion continued to lead the advance of the 6th Brigade to the Santerno , which it crossed on 11 April . Ordered to continue its advance to the <unk> Sillaro , the battalion established a bridgehead over which tanks were able to cross . It was relieved by the 23rd Battalion on 16 April , leaving the 25th Battalion as the brigade reserve . Since beginning its attack across the Senio , the battalion had advanced 23 kilometres ( 14 mi ) , taken at least 68 prisoners @-@ of @-@ war and inflicted numerous casualties on the enemy for the loss of 14 men killed in action . 
 After a few days out of the line , the battalion resumed its advance on 20 April with the 6th Brigade , still as its reserve . However , a few days later the vehicle in which Norman , the battalion 's commander , was travelling ran over a landmine . Norman was wounded and had to be medically evacuated . He was replaced by the second @-@ in @-@ command of the 26th Battalion , Major A. Barnett , who was promoted to lieutenant colonel . The advance continued , effectively unopposed , with the 25th Battalion leading . Despite expecting the worst , it crossed the Po River with minimal difficulty on 25 April and the Adige River was traversed the next day , again with relative ease . The 9th Infantry Brigade then took over the advance , with the 6th Brigade taking over as the divisional reserve . Although the war was nearly over , care was still required as the battalion moved forward through the towns of Padua and Gorizia , before the surrender of all German forces in Italy on 2 May . 
 On 4 May , the 25th Battalion moved to the village of <unk> , just to the north of Trieste . Along with other elements of the 2nd New Zealand Division , the battalion remained in and around Trieste for several weeks to counter the presence of Yugoslav partisans , who had laid claim to the city . In mid @-@ June the partisans withdrew from the city and several weeks later the New Zealand government decided that the division would not be required for service in the Pacific Theatre of Operations . In early August , the battalion began demobilisation with long serving men leaving for New Zealand via Bari while the remaining personnel withdrew to wintering positions near Florence . In October , Barnett took over command of what was left of the 6th Brigade . This left command of the battalion in its final days to Major D. Muir , who oversaw its disbandment on 2 December 1945 . 
 During the war , the 25th Battalion lost 531 personnel either killed in action or who later died of their wounds , while nearly 550 others were made prisoners @-@ of @-@ war . 
 = = Honours = = 
 Some of the personnel of the 25th Battalion were highly decorated , including Lieutenant Colonel Bonifant , who received the DSO and a bar to the DSO during his time with the battalion . Five other personnel of the battalion , including some of its commanders , were also awarded the DSO . Ten officers , including Norman , were awarded the Military Cross . Four non @-@ commissioned officers were awarded the Distinguished Conduct Medal and 36 were awarded the Military Medal . 
 The 25th Battalion was awarded the following battle honours : 
 Mount Olympus , Servia Pass , Olympus Pass , Elasson , Molos , Greece 1941 , Crete , Maleme , Galatas , Canea , 42nd Street , Withdrawal to Sphakia , Middle East 1941 – 44 , Tobruk 1941 , Sidi Rezegh 1941 , Sidi Azeiz , Belhamed , Zemla , Alam Hamza , Mersa Matruh , Minqar Qaim , Defence of Alamein Line , Ruweisat Ridge , El Mreir , Alam el Halfa , North Africa 1940 – 42 , El Alamein , El Agheila , Tebaga Gap , Point 201 ( Roman Wall ) , El Hamma , Enfidaville , Takrouna , North Africa 1940 – 43 , The Sangro , Castel Frentano , Orsogna , Cassino I , Arezzo , Monte Lignano , Advance to Florence , <unk> , San Michele , Paula Line , Celle , Faenza Pocket , Rio <unk> , St. Angelo in Salute , Pisciatello , The Senio , Santerno Crossing , Bologna , Sillaro Crossing , Gaiana Crossing , Idice Bridgehead , Italy 1943 – 45 . 
 = = Commanding officers = = 
 The following officers commanded the 25th Battalion during the war : 
 Lieutenant Colonel A. S. Wilder ( May 1940 – September 1941 ) ; 
 Lieutenant Colonel G. J. McNaught ( September – November 1941 ) ; 
 Lieutenant Colonel H. G. Burton ( November – December 1941 ; July – September 1942 ) ; 
 Lieutenant Colonel C. D. A. George ( December 1941 – July 1942 ) ; 
 Lieutenant Colonel I. L. Bonifant ( September – October 1942 ; November 1942 – January 1943 ) ; 
 Major J. C. Porter ( October – November 1942 ) ; 
 Lieutenant Colonel T. B. Morten ( January – December 1943 ; February 1944 ) ; 
 Lieutenant Colonel E. K. Norman ( December 1943 – February 1944 ; March 1944 ; June 1944 – April 1945 ) ; 
 Lieutenant Colonel J. L. McDuff ( March – June 1944 ) ; 
 Lieutenant Colonel A. W. Barnett ( April – October 1945 ) ; 
 Major D. F. Muir ( October 1945 – disbandment ) . 
 = History of Sheffield = 
 The history of Sheffield , a city in South Yorkshire , England , can be traced back to the founding of a settlement in a clearing beside the River Sheaf in the second half of the 1st millennium AD . The area now known as Sheffield had seen human occupation since at least the last ice age , but significant growth in the settlements that are now incorporated into the city did not occur until the Industrial Revolution . 
 Following the Norman conquest of England , Sheffield Castle was built to control the Saxon settlements and Sheffield developed into a small town , no larger than Sheffield City Centre . By the 14th century Sheffield was noted for the production of knives , and by 1600 , overseen by the Company of Cutlers in Hallamshire , it had become the second centre of cutlery production in England after London . In the 1740s the crucible steel process was improved by Sheffield resident Benjamin Huntsman , allowing a much better production quality . At about the same time , Sheffield plate , a form of silver plating , was invented . The associated industries led to the rapid growth of Sheffield ; the town was incorporated as a borough in 1843 and granted a city charter in 1893 . 
 Sheffield remained a major industrial city throughout the first half of the 20th century , but the downturn in world trade following the 1973 oil crisis , technological improvements and economies of scale , and a wide @-@ reaching restructuring of steel production throughout the European Economic Community led to the closure of many of the steelworks from the early 1970s onward . Urban and economic regeneration schemes were initiated in the late 1980s . The city centre was blighted by empty shops and improvements were halted by the Great Recession . 
 = = Early history = = 
 The earliest known evidence of human occupation in the Sheffield area was found at Creswell Crags to the east of the city . Artefacts and rock art found in caves at this site have been dated by archaeologists to the late Upper Palaeolithic period , at least 12 @,@ 800 years ago . Other prehistoric remains found in Sheffield include a Mesolithic " house " — a circle of stones in the shape of a hut @-@ base dating to around 8000 BC , found at <unk> , in the northern part of the city . 
 During the Bronze Age ( about 1500 BC ) tribes sometimes called the Urn people started to settle in the area . They built numerous stone circles , examples of which can be found on <unk> Moor , Froggatt Edge and <unk> Edge ( <unk> Edge stone circle ) . Two Early Bronze Age urns were found at Crookes in 1887 , and three Middle Bronze Age barrows found at Lodge Moor ( both suburbs of the modern city ) . 
 = = = Iron Age = = = 
 During the British Iron Age the area became the southernmost territory of the Pennine tribe called the Brigantes . It is this tribe who in around 500 BC are thought to have constructed the hill fort that stands on the summit of a steep hill above the River Don at <unk> , in what is now northeastern Sheffield . Other Iron Age hill forts in the area are Carl Wark on Hathersage Moor to the southwest of Sheffield , and one at Scholes Wood , near Rotherham . The rivers Sheaf and Don may have formed the boundary between the territory of the Brigantes and that of a rival tribe called the Corieltauvi who inhabited a large area of the northeastern Midlands . 
 = = = Roman Britain = = = 
 The Roman invasion of Britain began in AD 43 . By 51 the Brigantes had submitted to the <unk> of Rome , eventually being placed under direct rule in the early 70s . Few Roman remains have been found in the Sheffield area . A minor Roman road linking the Roman forts at Templeborough and Brough @-@ on @-@ Noe possibly ran through the centre of the area covered by the modern city , and Icknield Street is thought to have skirted its boundaries . The routes of these roads within this area are mostly unknown , although sections of the former can still be seen between <unk> and Stanage , and remains possibly linked to the latter were discovered in Brinsworth in 1949 . 
 In April 1761 , tablets dating from the Roman period were found in the Rivelin Valley south of <unk> , close to the likely course of the Templeborough to Brough @-@ on @-@ Noe road . These tablets included a grant of citizenship and land or money to a retiring Roman auxiliary of the <unk> tribe of Belgium . In addition there have been finds dating from the Roman period on Walkley Bank Road , which leads onto the valley bottom . 
 There have been small finds of Roman coins throughout the Sheffield area , for example 19 coins were found near Meadowhall in 1891 , 13 in <unk> in 1906 , and ten coins were found at a site alongside <unk> cemetery in December 2008 . Roman burial urns were also found at Bank Street near Sheffield Cathedral , which , along with the name of the old lane behind the church ( Campo Lane ) , has led to speculation that there may have been a Roman camp at this site . It is unlikely that the settlement that grew into Sheffield existed at this time . In 2011 excavations revealed remains of a substantial 1st or 2nd century AD Roman rural estate centre , or ' villa ' on what is believed to be a pre @-@ existing Brigantian farmstead site at <unk> Hall Farm in South @-@ west Sheffield . 
 Following the departure of the Romans , the Sheffield area may have been the southern part of the Celtic kingdom of Elmet , with the rivers Sheaf and Don forming part of the boundary between this kingdom and the kingdom of Mercia . Gradually , Anglian settlers pushed west from the kingdom of Deira . The Britons of Elmet delayed this English expansion into the early part of the 7th century . An enduring Celtic presence within this area is evidenced by the settlements called Wales and <unk> close to Sheffield — the word Wales derives from the Germanic word Walha , and was originally used by the Anglo @-@ Saxons to refer to the native Britons . 
 = = The origins of Sheffield = = 
 The name Sheffield is Old English in origin . It derives from the River Sheaf , whose name is a corruption of shed or <unk> , meaning to divide or separate . Field is a generic suffix deriving from the Old English <unk> , meaning a forest clearing . It is likely then that the origin of the present @-@ day city of Sheffield is an Anglo @-@ Saxon settlement in a clearing beside the confluence of the rivers Sheaf and Don founded between the arrival of the Anglo @-@ Saxons in this region ( roughly the 6th century ) and the early 9th century . 
 The names of many of the other areas of Sheffield likely to have been established as settlements during this period end in ley , which signifies a clearing in the forest , or ton , which means an enclosed farmstead . These settlements include Heeley , Longley , Norton , <unk> , Southey , Tinsley , Totley , Wadsley , and Walkley . 
 The earliest evidence of this settlement is thought to be the shaft of a stone cross dating from the early 9th century that was found in Sheffield in the early 19th century . This shaft may be part of a cross removed from the church yard of the Sheffield parish church ( now Sheffield Cathedral ) in 1570 . It is now kept in the British Museum . 
 A document from around the same time , an entry for the year 829 in the Anglo @-@ Saxon Chronicle , refers to the submission of King Eanred of Northumbria to King Egbert of Wessex at the hamlet of Dore ( now a suburb of Sheffield ) : " Egbert led an army against the Northumbrians as far as Dore , where they met him , and offered terms of obedience and subjection , on the acceptance of which they returned home " . This event made Egbert the first Saxon to claim to be king of all of England . 
 The latter part of the 9th century saw a wave of Norse ( Viking ) settlers and the subsequent establishment of the Danelaw . The names of hamlets established by these settlers often end in <unk> , which means a farmstead . Examples of such settlements in the Sheffield area are <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , and Woodthorpe . By 918 the Danes south of the Humber had submitted to Edward the Elder , and by 926 Northumbria was under the control of King Æthelstan . 
 In 937 the combined armies of Olaf Guthfrithson , Viking king of Dublin , Constantine , king of Scotland and King Owain of Strathclyde invaded England . The invading force was met and defeated by an army from Wessex and Mercia led by King Æthelstan at the Battle of Brunanburh . The location of Brunanburh is unknown , but some historians have suggested a location between Tinsley in Sheffield and Brinsworth in Rotherham , on the slopes of White Hill . After the death of King Athelstan in 939 Olaf III Guthfrithson invaded again and took control of Northumbria and part of Mercia . Subsequently , the Anglo @-@ Saxons , under Edmund , re @-@ conquered the Midlands , as far as Dore , in 942 , and captured Northumbria in 944 . 
 The Domesday Book of 1086 , which was compiled following the Norman Conquest of 1066 , contains the earliest known reference to the districts around Sheffield as the manor of " <unk> " ( or Hallam ) . This manor retained its Saxon lord , Waltheof , for some years after the conquest . The Domesday Book was ordered written by William the Conqueror so that the value of the townships and manors of England could be assessed . The entries in the Domesday Book are written in a Latin shorthand ; the extract for this area begins : 
 <unk> <unk> DE <unk> 
 M. hi <unk> , cu XVI <unk> sunt . <unk> carucate <unk> 
 Ad <unk> . <unk> <unk> <unk> com aula ... 
 Translated it reads : 
 <unk> OF <unk> DE <unk> 
 In Hallam , one manor with its sixteen hamlets , there are twenty @-@ nine carucates [ ~ 14 km2 ] to be taxed . There Earl Waltheof had an " Aula " [ hall or court ] . There may have been about twenty ploughs . This land Roger de Busli holds of the Countess Judith . He has himself there two carucates [ ~ 1 km2 ] and thirty @-@ three villeins hold twelve carucates and a half [ ~ 6 km2 ] . There are eight acres [ 32 @,@ 000 m2 ] of meadow , and a <unk> wood , four <unk> in length and four in breadth [ ~ 10 km2 ] . The whole manor is ten <unk> in length and eight broad [ 207 km2 ] . In the time of Edward the Confessor it was valued at eight marks of silver [ £ 5 @.@ 33 ] ; now at forty shillings [ £ 2 @.@ 00 ] . 
 In Attercliffe and Sheffield , two manors , Sweyn had five carucates of land [ ~ 2 @.@ 4 km2 ] to be taxed . There may have been about three ploughs . This land is said to have been inland , demesne [ domain ] land of the manor of Hallam . 
 The reference is to Roger de Busli , tenant @-@ in @-@ chief in Domesday and one of the greatest of the new wave of Norman magnates . Waltheof , Earl of Northumbria had been executed in 1076 for his part in an uprising against William I. He was the last of the Anglo @-@ Saxon earls still remaining in England a full decade after the Norman conquest . His lands had passed to his wife , Judith of Normandy , niece to William the Conqueror . The lands were held on her behalf by Roger de Busli . 
 The Domesday Book refers to Sheffield twice , first as <unk> , then later as <unk> . Sheffield historian S. O. Addy suggests that the second form , pronounced <unk> , is the truer form , as the spelling <unk> is found in a deed issued less than one hundred years after the completion of the survey . Addy comments that the E in the first form may have been mistakenly added by the Norman scribe . 
 Roger de Busli died around the end of the 11th century , and was succeeded by a son , who died without an heir . The manor of Hallamshire passed to William de Lovetot , the grandson of a Norman baron who had come over to England with the Conqueror . William de Lovetot founded the parish churches of St Mary at Handsworth , St Nicholas at High Bradfield and St. Mary 's at Ecclesfield at the start of the 12th century in addition to Sheffield 's own parish church . He also built the original wooden Sheffield Castle , which stimulated the growth of the town . 
 Also dating from this time is Beauchief Abbey , which was founded by Robert <unk> de Alfreton . The abbey was dedicated to Saint Mary and Saint Thomas Becket , who had been canonised in 1172 . Thomas Tanner , writing in 1695 , stated that it was founded in 1183 . Samuel Pegge in his History of Beauchief Abbey notes that <unk> , the abbot of Derby , who was one of the witnesses to the charter of foundation , died in 1176 , placing foundation before that date . 
 = = Medieval Sheffield = = 
 Following the death of William de Lovetot , the manor of Hallamshire passed to his son Richard de Lovetot and then his son William de Lovetot before being passed by marriage to Gerard de Furnival in about 1204 . The de <unk> held the manor for the next 180 years . The fourth Furnival lord , Thomas de Furnival , supported Simon de Montfort in the Second Barons ' War . As a result of this , in 1266 a party of barons , led by John de <unk> , marching from north Lincolnshire to Derbyshire passed through Sheffield and destroyed the town , burning the church and castle . 
 A new stone castle was constructed over the next four years and a new church was consecrated by William de <unk> the Archbishop of York around 1280 . In 1295 Thomas de Furnival 's son ( also Thomas ) was the first lord of Hallamshire to be called to Parliament , thus taking the title Lord Furnivall . On 12 November 1296 Edward I granted a charter for a market to be held in Sheffield on Tuesday each week . This was followed on 10 August 1297 by a charter from Lord Furnival establishing Sheffield as a free borough . 
 The Sheffield Town Trust was established in the Charter to the Town of Sheffield , granted in 1297 . De Furnival , granted land to the freeholders of Sheffield in return for an annual payment , and a Common <unk> administrated them . The <unk> originally consisted of public meetings of all the freeholders , who elected a Town Collector . Two more generations of <unk> held Sheffield before it passed by marriage to Sir Thomas Nevil and then , in 1406 , to John Talbot , the first Earl of Shrewsbury . 
 In 1430 the 1280 Sheffield parish church building was pulled down and replaced . Parts of this new church still stand today and it is now Sheffield city centre 's oldest surviving building , forming the core of Sheffield Cathedral . Other notable surviving buildings from this period include the Old Queen 's Head pub in Pond Hill , which dates from around 1480 , with its timber frame still intact , and Bishops ' House and Broom Hall , both built around 1500 . 
 The fourth Earl of Shrewsbury , George Talbot took up residence in Sheffield , building the Manor Lodge outside the town in about 1510 and adding a chapel to the Parish Church <unk> to hold the family vault . Memorials to the fourth and sixth Earls of Shrewsbury can still be seen in the church . In 1569 George Talbot , the sixth Earl of Shrewsbury , was given charge of Mary , Queen of Scots . Mary was regarded as a threat by Elizabeth I , and had been held captive since her arrival in England in 1568 . 
 Talbot brought Mary to Sheffield in 1570 , and she spent most of the next 14 years imprisoned in Sheffield Castle and its dependent buildings . The castle park extended beyond the present Manor Lane , where the remains of Manor Lodge are to be found . Beside them is the Turret House , an Elizabethan building , which may have been built to accommodate the captive queen . A room , believed to have been the queen 's , has an elaborate plaster ceiling and overmantel , with heraldic decorations . During the English Civil War , Sheffield changed hands several times , finally falling to the Parliamentarians , who demolished the Castle in 1648 . 
 The Industrial Revolution brought large @-@ scale steel making to Sheffield in the 18th century . Much of the medieval town was gradually replaced by a mix of Georgian and Victorian buildings . Large areas of Sheffield 's city centre have been rebuilt in recent years , but among the modern buildings , some old buildings have been retained . 
 = = Industrial Sheffield = = 
 Sheffield 's situation — amongst fast @-@ flowing rivers and streams surrounded by hills containing raw materials such as coal , iron ore , <unk> , and millstone grit for grindstones — made it an ideal place for water @-@ powered industries to develop . Water wheels were often built for the milling of corn , but many were converted to the manufacture of blades . As early as the 14th century Sheffield was noted for the production of knives : 
 Ay by his belt he baar a long <unk> , 
 And of a <unk> ful trenchant was the blade . 
 A <unk> <unk> baar he in his <unk> ; 
 Ther was no man , for peril , <unk> <unk> touche . 
 A <unk> <unk> baar he in his hose . 
 Round was his face , and <unk> was his nose ; 
 By 1600 Sheffield was the main centre of cutlery production in England outside London , and in 1624 The Company of Cutlers in Hallamshire was formed to oversee the trade . Examples of water @-@ powered blade and cutlery workshops from around this time can be seen at the Abbeydale Industrial Hamlet and Shepherd Wheel museums in Sheffield . 
 Around a century later , Daniel Defoe in his book A tour thro ' the whole island of Great Britain , wrote : 
 This town of Sheffield is very populous and large , the streets narrow , and the houses dark and black , occasioned by the continued smoke of the forges , which are always at work : Here they make all sorts of cutlery @-@ ware , but especially that of edged @-@ tools , knives , razors , axes , & . and nails ; and here the only mill of the sort , which was in use in England for some time was set up , ( viz . ) for turning their grindstones , though now ' tis grown more common . 
 Here is a very spacious church , with a very handsome and high spire ; and the town is said to have at least as many , if not more people in it than the city of York . 
 In the 1740s Benjamin Huntsman , a clock maker in Handsworth , invented a form of the crucible steel process for making a better quality of steel than had previously been available . At around the same time Thomas Boulsover invented a technique for fusing a thin sheet of silver onto a copper ingot producing a form of silver plating that became known as Sheffield plate . Originally hand @-@ rolled Old Sheffield Plate was used for making silver buttons . Then in 1751 Joseph Hancock , previously apprenticed to Boulsover 's friend Thomas Mitchell , first used it to make kitchen and tableware . This prospered and in 1762 – 65 Hancock built the water @-@ powered Old Park Silver Mills at the confluence of the Loxley and the Don , one of the earliest factories solely producing an industrial semi @-@ manufacture . Eventually Old Sheffield Plate was supplanted by cheaper <unk> in the 1840s . In 1773 Sheffield was given a silver assay office . In the late 18th century , Britannia metal , a pewter @-@ based alloy similar in appearance to silver , was invented in the town . 
 Huntsman 's process was only made obsolete in 1856 by Henry Bessemer 's invention of the Bessemer converter , but production of crucible steel continued until well into the 20th century for special uses , as Bessemer 's steel was not of the same quality , in the main replacing wrought iron for such applications as rails . Bessemer had tried to induce <unk> to take up his improved system , but met with general rebuffs , and finally was driven to undertake the exploitation of the process himself . To this end he erected steelworks in Sheffield . Gradually the scale of production was enlarged until the competition became effective , and steel traders generally became aware that the firm of Henry Bessemer & Co. was underselling them to the extent of £ 20 a ton . One of Bessemer 's converters can still be seen at Sheffield 's Kelham Island Museum . 
 In 1857 Sheffield Football Club was formed , which is now the world 's oldest association football club . This was followed by a rapid growth of football teams in the area . 
 Stainless steel was discovered by Harry Brearley in 1912 , at the Brown Firth Laboratories in Sheffield . His successor as manager at Brown Firth , Dr William Hatfield , continued Brealey 's work . In 1924 he patented ' 18 @-@ 8 stainless steel ' , which to this day is probably the most common alloy of this type . 
 These innovations helped Sheffield to gain a worldwide recognition for the production of cutlery ; utensils such as the bowie knife were mass @-@ produced and shipped to the United States . The population of the town increased rapidly . In 1736 Sheffield and its surrounding hamlets held about 7000 people , in 1801 there were 60 @,@ 000 , and by 1901 , the population had grown to 451 @,@ 195 . 
 This growth spurred the reorganisation of the governance of the town . Prior to 1818 , the town was run by a mixture of bodies . The Sheffield Town Trust and the Church Burgesses , for example , divided responsibility for the improvement of streets and bridges . By the 19th century both organisations lacked funds and struggled even to maintain existing infrastructure . The Church Burgesses organised a public meeting on 27 May 1805 and proposed to apply to Parliament for an act to pave , light and clean the city 's streets . The proposal was defeated . 
 The idea of a Commission was revived in 1810 , and later in the decade Sheffield finally followed the model adopted by several other towns in petitioning for an Act to establish an Improvement Commission . This eventually led to the Sheffield Improvement Act 1818 , which established the Commission and included several other provisions . In 1832 the town gained political representation with the formation of a Parliamentary borough . A municipal borough was formed by an Act of Incorporation in 1843 , and this borough was granted the style and title of " City " by Royal Charter in 1893 . 
 From the mid @-@ 18th century , a succession of public buildings were erected in the town . St Paul 's Church , now demolished , was among the first , while the old Town Hall and the present Cutlers ' Hall were among the major works of the 19th century . The town 's water supply was improved by the Sheffield Waterworks Company , who built reservoirs around the town . Parts of Sheffield were devastated when , following a five @-@ year construction project , the Dale Dyke dam collapsed on Friday 11 March 1864 , resulting in the Great Sheffield Flood . 
 Sheffield 's transport infrastructure was also improved . In the 18th century turnpike roads were built connecting Sheffield with Barnsley , Buxton , Chesterfield , Glossop , Intake , Penistone , Tickhill , and Worksop . In 1774 a 2 @-@ mile ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) wooden tramway was laid at the Duke of Norfolk 's Nunnery Colliery . The tramway was destroyed by rioters , who saw it as part of a plan to raise the price of coal . A replacement tramway that used L @-@ shaped rails was laid by John <unk> in 1776 and was one of the earliest cast @-@ iron railways . The Sheffield Canal opened in 1819 allowing the large @-@ scale transport of freight . 
 This was followed by the Sheffield and Rotherham Railway in 1838 , the Sheffield , Ashton @-@ under @-@ Lyne and Manchester Railway in 1845 , and the Midland Railway in 1870 . The Sheffield Tramway was started in 1873 with the construction of a horse tram route from Lady 's Bridge to Attercliffe . This route was later extended to Brightside and Tinsley , and further routes were constructed to Hillsborough , Heeley , and Nether Edge . Due to the narrow medieval roads the tramways were initially banned from the town centre . An improvement scheme was passed in 1875 ; <unk> Street and Leopold Street were constructed by 1879 , and Fargate was widened in the 1880s . The 1875 plan also called for the widening of the High Street ; disputes with property owners delayed this until 1895 . 
 Steel production in the 19th century involved long working hours , in unpleasant conditions that offered little or no safety protection . Friedrich Engels in his The Condition of the Working Class in England in 1844 described the conditions prevalent in the city at that time : 
 In Sheffield wages are better , and the external state of the workers also . On the other hand , certain branches of work are to be noticed here , because of their extraordinarily injurious influence upon health . Certain operations require the constant pressure of tools against the chest , and engender consumption in many cases ; others , file @-@ cutting among them , retard the general development of the body and produce digestive disorders ; bone @-@ cutting for knife handles brings with it headache , <unk> , and among girls , of whom many are employed , <unk> . By far the most unwholesome work is the grinding of knife @-@ blades and forks , which , especially when done with a dry stone , entails certain early death . The <unk> of this work lies in part in the bent posture , in which chest and stomach are cramped ; but especially in the quantity of sharp @-@ edged metal dust particles freed in the cutting , which fill the atmosphere , and are necessarily inhaled . The dry grinders ' average life is hardly thirty @-@ five years , the wet grinders ' rarely exceeds forty @-@ five . 
 Sheffield became one of the main centres for trade union organisation and agitation in the UK . By the 1860s , the growing conflict between capital and labour provoked the so @-@ called ' Sheffield Outrages ' , which culminated in a series of explosions and murders carried out by union militants . The Sheffield Trades Council organised a meeting in Sheffield in 1866 at which the United Kingdom Alliance of Organised Trades — a forerunner of the Trades Union Congress ( TUC ) — was founded . 
 = = The 20th century to the present = = 
 In 1914 Sheffield became a diocese of the Church of England , and the parish church became a cathedral . During the First World War the Sheffield City Battalion suffered heavy losses at the Somme and Sheffield itself was bombed by a German zeppelin . 
 The recession of the 1930s was only halted by the increasing tension as the Second World War loomed . The steel factories of Sheffield were set to work making weapons and ammunition for the war . As a result , once war was declared , the city once again became a target for bombing raids . In total there were 16 raids over Sheffield , but it was the heavy bombing over the nights of 12 and 15 December 1940 ( now known as the Sheffield Blitz ) when the most substantial damage occurred . More than 660 lives were lost and numerous buildings were destroyed . 
 Following the war , the 1950s and 1960s saw many large scale developments in the city . The Sheffield Tramway was closed , and a new system of roads , including the Inner Ring Road , were laid out . Also at this time many of the old slums were cleared and replaced with housing schemes such as the Park Hill flats , and the <unk> Valley estate . 
 Sheffield 's traditional manufacturing industries ( along with those of many other areas in the UK ) , declined during the 20th century . 
 The building of the Meadowhall shopping centre on the site of a former steelworks in 1990 was a mixed blessing , creating much needed jobs but speeding the decline of the city centre . Attempts to regenerate the city were kick @-@ started by the hosting of the 1991 World Student Games and the associated building of new sporting facilities such as the Sheffield Arena , Don Valley Stadium and the Ponds Forge complex . Sheffield began construction of a tram system in 1992 , with the first section opening in 1994 . 
 Starting in 1995 , the Heart of the City Project has seen public works in the city centre : the Peace Gardens were renovated in 1998 , the Millennium Gallery opened in April 2001 , and a 1970s town hall extension was demolished in 2002 to make way for the Winter Garden , which opened on 22 May 2003 . A series of other projects grouped under the title Sheffield One aim to regenerate the whole of the city centre . 
 On 25 June 2007 , flooding caused millions of pounds worth of damage to buildings in the city and led to the loss of two lives . 
 In July 2013 the <unk> project , which aimed to demolish and rebuild a large part of the city centre , and had been on hold since 2009 , was further delayed and the company developing it was dropped . The city council is looking for partners to take a new version of the plan forwards . In April 2014 the council , together with Sheffield University , proposed a plan to reduce the blight of empty shops in the city centre by offering them free of charge to small businesses on a month @-@ by @-@ month basis . 
 = Casa de Estudillo = 
 The Casa de Estudillo , also known as the Estudillo House , is a historic adobe house in San Diego , California , United States . It was constructed in 1827 by José María Estudillo and his son José Antonio Estudillo , early settlers of San Diego , and was considered one of the finest houses in Mexican California . It is located in Old Town San Diego State Historic Park , and is designated as both a National and a California Historical Landmark in its own right . 
 Besides being one of the oldest surviving examples of Spanish architecture in California , the house gained much prominence by association with Helen Hunt Jackson 's wildly popular 1884 novel Ramona . The Casa de Estudillo is one of three National Historic Landmarks in Southern California that were closely tied to Ramona , a novel of Californio life shortly after the American acquisition of California ; the other two are Rancho Camulos and Rancho Guajome . 
 = = Description = = 
 The large building is a U @-@ shaped structure , measuring 113 feet ( 34 @.@ 4 m ) on the front side , and 98 feet ( 29 @.@ 9 m ) on each of the wings . It is constructed in the Spanish Colonial style , meaning that the house 's 13 rooms are set consecutively in the building and connected only by an external covered <unk> ( as opposed to an interior hallway ) . 
 The main portion ( the center ) contains the entrance , facing west . To its left is the chapel and to its right is the schoolroom . Both rooms originally were smaller , with bedrooms located at the ends of building , but a 1910 restoration eliminated those walls to enlarge the rooms . Two bedrooms , a living room , a kitchen ( which was added at a later date ) , and the servants ' dining room are in the north wing , while the south wing has three bedrooms and the family dining room . The house is topped by a cupola from which bullfights and festivals in the adjacent plaza could be seen . 
 = = Ramona = = 
 = = = Association with the novel = = = 
 José Antonio Estudillo died in 1852 , and his family stayed until 1887 , when they moved to Los Angeles , leaving the house in the hands of a caretaker . Meanwhile , the 1884 publication of Ramona , a novel set in Southern California which painted a romanticized portrait of Californio life , generated a nationwide interest in the region . This , combined with the opening of the Southern Pacific and Santa Fe Railway lines ( and the ensuing rate war , which drove prices down to as low as $ 1 from St. Louis , Missouri to Los Angeles ) , meant that hordes of tourists made their way to Southern California to see the locations in the novel . Unfortunately , Jackson died in 1885 without ever having disclosed what the actual locations in the novel were , which caused a great deal of speculation . 
 In 1887 , a front page article of the San Diego Union declared the Estudillo home to be " Ramona 's Marriage Place " , saying , " To sleepy Old Town ( the house ) is known as the <unk> , but the outside world knows it as the marriage place of ' Ramona . ' " This was despite Jackson never having visited the house , but in the novel , Ramona was married in a " long , low adobe building which had served no mean purpose in the old Presidio days , but was now fallen in decay ; and all its rooms , except those occupied by the Father , had been long uninhabited " . Despite the novel being a work of fiction , visitors flocked to the building thinking it was the actual location of Ramona 's marriage . To be clear , the Union did not simply invent this story ; a tourist had already scratched the name " Alessandro " ( Ramona 's husband in the novel ) in one of the walls . The caretaker decided to capitalize on the attendant publicity and began selling off pieces of the house as souvenirs . Naturally , the building 's condition began to deteriorate rapidly . 
 = = = 1910 restoration = = = 
 In 1906 , the dilapidated building was purchased by the San Diego Electric Railway Company , owned by prominent San Diego citizen John D. Spreckels ( who also owned the Union ) . In his vision , the house would anchor a number of tourist attractions connected via his railway which would realize his twin goals of developing San Diego into a popular locale and generate revenue for his company . To this end , he hired architect Hazel Wood Waterman to renovate the house to a condition more closely matching descriptions in the novel . The original cupola and balcony was removed because there was none mentioned in the novel , and several doors and windows were moved . Waterman was exacting in her specifications : She wanted the building to look aged as well as have the " charm of the work of half @-@ skilled Indian hands " , although modern conveniences such as electricity and indoor plumbing were included . Upon its completion in 1910 , it was marketed as a Ramona @-@ related tourist attraction , and remained popular as such for years to come , drawing 1 @,@ 632 visitors on one day in 1940 . 
 Spreckels hired Tommy Getz , a theater showman , to manage the property , and it was under Getz 's guidance that the property truly gained its Ramona association . He began strongly marketing the property : <unk> of all sorts were labeled with " Ramona 's Marriage Place " , and more postcards were printed for the adobe than any other Ramona attraction . Due to its association with Ramona 's marriage , the house was used to host weddings as well . Getz eventually purchased the adobe from Spreckels in 1924 . 
 The association with the novel was so keen that the application for National Historic Landmark status was entitled , " Casa Estudillo / Ramona 's Marriage Place . " The Journal of San Diego History goes so far as to say that without the novel 's influence and the popularity of the house , the historic buildings that make up Old Town San Diego would have been razed . In fact , for a time , the <unk> ' relationship to the house was nearly forgotten . 
 After Getz 's death in 1934 , his daughter <unk> Weiss continued to operate the business for another thirty years , finally selling it 1964 to the Title Insurance and Trust Company , which then sold it to local businessman Legler <unk> , who donated it to the State of California in 1968 . 
 = = = 1968 restoration = = = 
 The state Park Service then set about restoring it to its pre @-@ Ramona state , including the missing cupola . The house now stands as a museum and is furnished as it would likely have been during Estudillo 's ownership , but with an added kitchen . The state seemed embarrassed at the property 's association with the novel : The long @-@ standing " Ramona 's Marriage Place " sign was removed , and brochures printed in the 1970s make no mention of the novel at all . By the 1990s , the state began to acknowledge the long @-@ standing relationship to the book . 
 Ramona no longer has the same hold on the country 's imagination as it once did . It is estimated that only 1 % of visitors to the Casa de Estudillo now are aware of the house 's ties to the novel . 
 = = Photo gallery = = 
 = 1962 Commonwealth Paraplegic Games = 
 The First Commonwealth Paraplegic Games were held in Perth , Western Australia from 10 to 17 November 1962 . These Games preceded the 1962 British Empire and Commonwealth Games which were held in Perth from 22 November to 1 December of that year . The Commonwealth Paraplegic Games were conceived by Dr George Bedbrook after Perth won the right to host the Commonwealth Games . Great support was received from the Royal Perth Hospital , a leading spinal rehabilitation centre in Australia . 
 These games raised the profile of paraplegic ( spinal cord and polio ) athletes in Australia , particularly Western Australia . The Chairman of the Organising Committee , Hugh Leslie , who had lost a leg in World War Two , gave a speech aimed to change public perceptions about disabilities by addressing the power of language . These Games , he told the audience , ‘ were designed to prove to the public that the person who was bodily handicapped was not a cripple , and he hoped that that horrible word would eventually be wiped out of use . He had a slogan which he hoped would be adopted by all disabled : “ I can , I will ” . 
 Leading officials such as Bedbrook , the founder of the Stoke Mandeville Games , were impressed with the spectator turnout . Although the standards were lower than those of the Stoke Mandeville Games , there were some outstanding individual performances and several world records were broken . 
 = = Background and administration = = 
 It was decided to hold the games in Perth because the city was to host the 1962 British Empire and Commonwealth Games and Royal Perth Hospital had a well developed spinal unit that could support paraplegic athletes . The Commonwealth Paraplegic Games were held before the main Games as to not impact on this event and provide the opportunity for athletes to stay on for the main Games . 
 The Royal Perth Hospital 's board of management were the official sponsors of the event and established an organising committee in 1959 . The Australian Paraplegic Council was not formed until February 1962 . The main members of the organising committee were Hugh Leslie ( Executive Chairman ) , Dr George Bedbrook ( General Secretary ) and Mrs M.R. Fathers , ( Secretary ) . The appointment of Hugh Leslie , a leg amputee , as chairman was important due to his influence as a member of Federal Parliament , his previous experience with paraplegic sporting teams and as a champion of people with a disability . 
 The organising committee paid for all costs incurred in Australia to participating countries . They were only required to pay their transport and stop over costs to and from Australia . Other Australian States were consulted and requested to provide funding of £ 9 @,@ 250 . The specific state funding quotas were : Victoria £ 2 @,@ 500 , New South Wales £ 2 @,@ 500 , Western Australia £ 2 @,@ 600 , Queensland £ 1 @,@ 000 and South Australia £ 450 . There was a concern as to not impact on the fund raising required by the Commonwealth Games appeal . Several reports of the Games highlight the importance of large spectator attendance and ' passing the hat ' around in the fund raising efforts . The total cost at the Games was £ 11 @,@ 717 with a surplus of £ 2 @,@ 089 . 
 = = Ceremonies = = 
 = = = Opening = = = 
 " The Games were opened by the Governor of Western Australia , Sir Charles Gairdner on 10 November 1962 . In his opening speech Gairdner stated that " The public must learn that the handicapped person is not an invalid . I am handicapped , but the one thing I loathe is for people to treat me as an invalid . We , the public , must realise what can be done to rehabilitate people who have suffered a <unk> physical disadvantage " . 
 The opening ceremony was described as a " colourful spectacle " due to the Army 's Western Command Band wearing scarlet jackets and white helmets , the Army Guard of Honour in jungle green clothing and the blue uniforms of the mounted escort . The order of the <unk> was Singapore , India , New Zealand , Rhodesia , Wales , Northern Ireland , England and the host country Australia . Hugh Leslie , the Games Chairman , in his speech said " This event , apart from helping the participants , is designed to prove to the public that the person who is badly handicapped is not a cripple . I hope that this horrible word will eventually be wiped out of use . " Senator Shane <unk> , who was representing the Federal Government , said " This is one fine example of leadership taken by this State in the work to lift the paraplegic from a life of resignation to one of self respect and purpose in the community . " 
 The second half of the opening ceremony and the start of the competitive program was a basketball match between Australia and England . The game was played on a special court , constructed of timber flooring laid on a sand base , at the Agricultural Showgrounds in full view of the crowd in the grandstand . In front of a couple of thousand spectators , with the game being called on the public address system by a television sports commentator , Allan Terry , the Australians beat the English by a single basket ( 20 @-@ 18 ) . The atmosphere was summarised in The Australian Paraplegic : " The spectacle of the opening ceremony and <unk> , followed by the excitement of the basketball , sent spectators home well rewarded for their attendance at the opening day of the First Commonwealth Paraplegic Games . " The ceremony and the game received wide television , radio and newspaper coverage highlighting the importance of the event in rehabilitation . 
 = = = Closing = = = 
 The closing ceremony , before a near @-@ capacity crowd of 3 @,@ 500 , had the colour of the opening , with 35 marching bands ( 400 girls ) and Scottish bands . The crowd had been present for the recently completed basketball final game . A DC @-@ 7B aircraft , chartered by the British teams , conducted a fly past . Sir Ludwig Guttman , founder of the Paralympic Games , in his closing address , thanked Australia and stated that " What has been the most gratifying achievement is that the First Commonwealth Paraplegic Games have fulfilled the aims and ideals of the Stoke Mandeville Games in furthering friendship and understanding among various nations of the Commonwealth . " Guttman presented Dr George Bedbrook with the Stoke Mandeville pennant in recognition for the organisation of the Games . Each team then wheeled past the dais to the famous Australian song " Waltzing Matilda " . Dr Sir Arthur Porritt , Chairman of the British Empire and Commonwealth Games Federation , declared the Games closed . In his speech , he told the audience that he hoped the general public would continue to support paraplegics and their movement . 
 = = Logistics and insignia = = 
 The original plan was to hold the games at the Shenton Park Annexe of the Royal Perth Hospital but this was abandoned due the need for temporary buildings . Royal Agricultural Showgrounds in the suburb of Claremont was used as it had an oval and buildings for accommodation and events . A major advantage of the venue was that all facilities were on one level . There was no suitable facility for basketball and after much debate a wooden court was laid on a sand foundation in front of the main grandstand . The City of Perth Aquatic Centre , Beatty Park was used for swimming events . Pamela McCarthy , one of India 's two athletes , made the following comment on the showground facilities " This communal living was ideal for getting to know one and another and for making friends ; every conceivable facility was provided at the Showgrounds – such as television lounge , a shop , post office , bank , laundry and even a ladies hairdresser . " 
 The organising committee decided at the outset that transport would be a major issue and ultimately reflect on the success of the Games . The decision to locate most of the events and accommodation at the showgrounds reduced many of the issues . Car companies in Perth made cars available and volunteer drivers assisted in taking athletes and officials around Perth , particularly to Beatty Park . The biggest issue was encountered by teams from the United Kingdom that had to travel 20 @,@ 000 miles ( 32 @,@ 000 km ) . A total of 57 athletes and 23 escorts travelled from the United Kingdom in a chartered Caledonian Airways plane at the cost of 18 @,@ 500 pounds . The long flight required refuelling in Bahrain and a stop over in Colombo , Ceylon . Health checks such as measuring legs and ankles for swelling were undertaken during the flight to Perth and back home . A major logistical effort was required to transport the 80 member team to the Showgrounds on arrival at Perth airport . Royal Perth Hospital 's special coach , a Red Cross bus , private cars and a truck to carry wheelchairs were used . 
 The flag was the games emblem of a javelin thrower in a wheelchair with a background outline of the Flag of Australia on a flagpole in a slight breeze . Medals had one side with the games emblem and the reverse side name of sport with room for engraving . Badges were given to each competitor and official with the aims of identification and access to the dining hall . The badge also became a memento of the games . 
 = = Participating teams = = 
 A total of 89 athletes from nine countries competed . The countries represented and their allocated colours were : England ( dark blue ) , India ( light green ) , New Zealand ( pink ) , Northern Ireland ( dark green ) , Rhodesia ( light blue ) , Scotland ( black ) , Singapore ( red ) , Wales ( white ) and Australia ( gold ) . The only major Commonwealth country not represented was Canada , which decided not to attend . Many of the athletes competed in several sports because each country selected their team based on versatility of sporting ability to reduce their team size and costs . 
 Source – Official Programme Approximately 40 attendants assisted the teams . 
 = = Medals = = 
 There were fourteen events – archery , <unk> , javelin throw , precision javelin , club throw , shot putt , swimming , weightlifting , pentathlon , fencing , snooker , basketball and table tennis . 
 Medal Table 
 Not all events awarded silver and bronze medals due to insufficient competitors . 
 = = Awards = = 
 Seven awards were presented during the games that reflected sporting excellence and personal endeavour . 
 Lorraine Dodd from Australia was presented the Ben Richter Award for the physically handicapped person to have made the best effort to rehabilitate himself or herself . 
 Australia won the Royal Perth Hospital Paraplegic Unit Trophy for the winning country . 
 Singapore and Northern Ireland were awarded the Special Merit Award ; both countries failed to win a medal . 
 Rhodesia won the Best Team Performance , with 15 gold , 3 silver and 5 bronze medals with four team members . 
 Dick Thompson from England and Kevin Cunningham won the Australian Paraplegic Council Trophy for winning pentathlon events . 
 George Mann from Rhodesia won the trophy for the performance based on degree of physical disability . This trophy was donated by World Rehabilitation Fund in New York . 
 The Australian Basketball team won the Gordon Gooch Trophy . Gooch was the Games Patron . 
 = = Participant reflections and legacy = = 
 Reflections from athletes and officials provide an insight into the value of this inaugural event . Bill Mather @-@ Brown , an Australian athlete , said " The 1962 Games was the first time I had been asked for an autograph . We regarded it as a compliment . We were mobbed , especially at the swimming pool . Sometimes we were not sure people really wanted our signature or were just being polite and wanted us to feel good " . 
 John Buck , an English athlete , said this about his reason for attending the games : " I had been in Perth during the war years serving as an engine room artificer on H.M. submarine Thule and had the misfortune to pick up one of those endearing Australian bugs which left me in a rather poor state of health ( e.g. a paraplegic ) " . He wanted to go back to Perth to see the Stitt family who looked after him in Perth . 
 Bill Elson , an English support official , commented on the large swimming crowds " For many , this must have been a first introduction to swimming by the paralysed , and I felt that many were wondering whether paralysed persons could swim 50 metres – how many would fail to make the distance and it was all just a stunt to enlist their sympathies and raise money " . The crowd 's thunderous applause made the official more comfortable about the event . 
 Dr Gaynor Harry , an athlete from Wales , wrote " Then was the moment to think of the fabulous organization that went into the Games , from start to finish there wasn 't a hitch . If we needed a postage stamp , that was easy . If licking the back of it had given us a thirst for iced water , that was easy too . The highest tribute that can be paid is that it all appeared so effortless , as though it all just happened " . 
 Richard Hollick , an athlete from England , highlighted the importance of the games in self @-@ development " Not only do we enjoy ourselves but we also learnt more about adapting ourselves than we probably normally learn in a year " . Many athletes had to travel large distances to attend the games . 
 Shelagh Jones , an athlete from England , wrote of the nature of competition " As the various sports on the program got under way , more and more we realised a full @-@ blooded fight was on . The swimming , fencing and field events arrived at the top of the <unk> in next @-@ to @-@ no @-@ time and in these games we found success and failure , humour and disappointment , laughter and tears . Yet within this tiny cross section of life I shall never forget the honour and privilege of mounting the rostrum to collect a ' gold ' for England . " 
 These games raised the profile of paraplegic ( spinal cord and polio ) athletes in Australia , particularly Western Australia . The spectator attendance amazed leading officials such as Dr Ludwig Guttmann , the founder of the Stoke Mandeville Games . He commented that the attendance was the best he had seen at any paraplegic sports event in the world . The Games highlighted the versatility of the athletes with many winning medals in different sports . It was noted that generally the standard of performance was below that of the Stoke Mandeville Games ; however there were several outstanding performers including Vic <unk> , Bill Mather @-@ Brown , Lorraine Dodd , M. Bazeley , Lynne Gilchrist and R. Scott who broke records in their events . A film of the Games was made . 
 = Battle of Yongju = 
 The Battle of Yongju ( 21 – 22 October 1950 ) , also known as the Battle of the Apple Orchard , took place as part of the United Nations ( UN ) offensive towards the Yalu River , against the North Korean forces which had invaded South Korea during the Korean War . The battle was fought between the 27th British Commonwealth Brigade and the North Korean 239th Regiment which was encircled east of Yongju , where it was attacking the US 187th Airborne Regimental Combat Team ( US 187 RCT ) . On 20 October US 187 RCT had parachuted ahead of the advancing UN spearheads into drop zones in Sukchon and Sunchon , 40 kilometres ( 25 mi ) north of the capital Pyongyang , with the objectives of cutting off the retreating North Korean forces that were withdrawing up the west coast of the Korean Peninsula and releasing American and South Korean prisoners of war . Although the airborne drop itself was a success , the operation came too late to intercept any significant North Korean elements and the American landings initially met little resistance . However , on 21 October as US 187 RCT began to advance south to the clear the Sukchon to Yongju road towards Pyongyang the Americans came under heavy attack from the North Korean 239th Regiment , and requested assistance . 
 The 27th British Commonwealth Brigade , which was leading the US Eighth Army general advance , was subsequently ordered forward to assist the American paratroopers . The British and Australians crossed the Taedong River at Pyongyang at noon on 21 October , and moved north on the main highway to Sukchon with the task of reaching the Chongchon River . The 1st Battalion , Argyll and Sutherland Highland Regiment ( 1 ASHR ) , subsequently pushed up the road until fired upon by North Korean forces in the hills to the south of Yongju . By nightfall the hills were cleared by the Argylls , while the 3rd Battalion , US 187 RCT occupied Yongju . Cut @-@ off , about midnight the North Korean 239th Regiment attempted to break out , resulting in heavy fighting between the Americans and North Koreans . The North Korean attacks drove the American paratroopers from Yongju , forcing them back onto the battalion 's main defensive position to the north . 3rd Battalion , Royal Australian Regiment ( 3 RAR ) was ordered to take the lead the following morning . By dawn the Americans again requested assistance . At first light on 22 October , two companies of Argylls advanced into <unk> , before the Australians passed through them riding on US M4 Sherman tanks . Now leading the brigade , at 09 : 00 the Australians came under fire from a North Korean rearguard position in an apple orchard on their right flank . 
 An encounter battle developed as 3 RAR carried out an aggressive quick attack off the line of march from the road , with American tanks in support . With fire support from mortars and artillery unavailable due to the location of US 3 / 187 RCT being unknown , the Australian attack succeeded nonetheless , and the North Koreans were forced to withdraw from the high ground having suffered heavy casualties . Meanwhile , 3 RAR 's tactical headquarters came under attack and was forced to fight off a group of North Koreans . Having been forced off the high ground , the North Koreans were now caught between the advancing Australians and the American paratroopers to the north . Attacking the North Koreans from the rear , 3 RAR subsequently relieved the American paratroopers , with the 27th British Commonwealth Brigade linked up with them by 11 : 00 . Following three hours of fighting the battle was largely over by midday ; however , many of the North Koreans that had been unable to escape continued to refuse to surrender , hiding or feigning death until individually flushed out . The Australians then proceeded to sweep the area , kicking over stacks of straw and shooting the North Korean soldiers they found hiding in them as they attempted to flee . Caught between the American paratroopers and the British and Australians , the North Korean 239th Regiment was practically destroyed . In their first major battle in Korea the Australians had distinguished themselves , and the battalion was later praised for its performance . 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = Military situation = = = 
 The Korean War began early in the morning of 25 June 1950 , following the surprise invasion of the Republic of Korea ( ROK ) by its northern neighbour , the communist Democratic People 's Republic of Korea ( DPRK ) . Numerically superior and better @-@ equipped , the Korean People 's Army ( KPA ) crossed the 38th Parallel and rapidly advanced south , easily overcoming the South Koreans . In response , the United Nations ( UN ) decided to intervene on behalf of South Korea , inviting member states to send forces to restore the situation . As a consequence , American ground forces were hastily deployed in an attempt to prevent the South Koreans from collapsing , however they too were understrength and poorly equipped , and by early August had been forced back by the North Koreans to an enclave around Pusan , known as the Pusan Perimeter . Key US allies — Britain , Canada and Australia — also committed forces , although these were initially limited to naval contingents and were largely viewed as token efforts in the US . Under diplomatic pressure the British agreed to deploy an infantry brigade in July , and would later dispatch a second brigade as the crisis worsened . The Canadians also agreed to provide an infantry brigade , although the first battalion would not arrive until December 1950 . A total of 21 UN member states eventually contributed forces . 
 Australia was one of the first nations to commit units to the fighting , playing a small but sometimes significant part in the United Nations Command , which was initially led by General Douglas MacArthur . Forces deployed in Japan as part of the British Commonwealth Occupation Force formed the basis of the Australian response , with P @-@ 51 Mustang fighter @-@ bombers from No. 77 Squadron RAAF flying their first missions on 2 July , while the frigate HMAS Shoalhaven and the destroyer HMAS Bataan were also committed to naval operations . During this time the 3rd Battalion , Royal Australian Regiment ( 3 RAR ) , which had been preparing to return to Australia prior to the outbreak of the war , remained in Japan , however on 26 July the Australian government announced that it would also commit the under @-@ strength and poorly equipped infantry battalion to the fighting , following a period of preparation . Training and re @-@ equipment began immediately , while hundreds of reinforcements were hastily recruited in Australia as part of K Force ; they soon began arriving to fill out the battalion . The battalion 's commanding officer , Lieutenant Colonel Floyd Walsh , was subsequently replaced by Lieutenant Colonel Charles Green . An officer with extensive operational experience fighting the Japanese in New Guinea during the Second World War , Green took over from Walsh due to the latter 's perceived inexperience . 
 On 23 September 1950 , 3 RAR embarked for Korea , concentrating at Pusan on 28 September . There it joined the British 27th Infantry Brigade , a garrison formation hurriedly committed from Hong Kong by the British government as the situation deteriorated around the Pusan Perimeter in late August to bolster the US Eighth Army under Lieutenant General Walton Walker . Commanded by Brigadier Basil Coad , the brigade was renamed the 27th British Commonwealth Brigade and consisted of the 1st Battalion , Argyll and Sutherland Highland Regiment ( 1 ASHR ) , the 1st Battalion , Middlesex Regiment ( 1 MR ) and 3 RAR . Understrength , the two British battalions had each mustered just 600 men of all ranks , while the brigade was also short on transport and heavy equipment , and had no integral artillery support , for which it would rely entirely on the Americans until the 16th Field Regiment , Royal New Zealand Artillery arrived in January 1951 . As such , with a strength of nearly 1 @,@ 000 men , the addition of 3 RAR gave the brigade increased tactical weight as well as expediently allowing the Australians to work within a familiar organisational environment , rather than being attached to a US formation . Also under the command of the brigade were a number of US Army units , including 155 mm howitzers from the US 90th Field Artillery Battalion , M4 Sherman tanks from US 89th Tank Battalion and a company from the US 72nd Combat Engineer Battalion . 
 = = Prelude = = 
 = = = Opposing forces = = = 
 By the time 3 RAR arrived in the theatre , the North Koreans had been broken and were in rapid retreat , with MacArthur 's forces conducting a successful amphibious assault at Inchon and breaking out along the Naktong perimeter on the southern tip of the Korean peninsula . A steady advance began , driving the North Koreans northwards towards the 38th Parallel . The 27th British Commonwealth Brigade was airlifted from Taegu to Kimpo Airfield north of Seoul on 5 October , however its vehicles had to move by road , driving 420 kilometres ( 260 mi ) , and did not arrive until 9 October . It was subsequently attached to the US 1st Cavalry Division , under the command of Major General Hobart R. Gay . On 16 October the brigade took over from the US 7th Cavalry Regiment as the vanguard of the UN advance up the west coast , its axis intended to take it through Kaesong , Kumchon and Hungsu @-@ ri to Sariwon , then through Hwangju to the North Korean capital of Pyongyang . Although the North Koreans had suffered heavily in the preceding weeks , they continued to resist strongly , while a lack of accurate maps and the narrowness of the roads made rapid movement difficult for the advancing UN forces . During this time 3 RAR had a platoon of American M4 Sherman tanks attached and a battery of field guns in direct support . 
 The 27th British Commonwealth Brigade subsequently moved 70 kilometres ( 43 mi ) from Kumchon , with the Argylls capturing Sariwon , an industrial town 54 kilometres ( 34 mi ) south of Pyongyang , on 17 October . Supported by 3 RAR and American tanks , the Highlanders killed 215 North Koreans and took several thousand prisoners for the loss of one man killed and three wounded in a one @-@ sided action . Prior to the attack the Australians had moved through the town to establish a blocking position 8 kilometres ( 5 @.@ 0 mi ) to the north . During the evening 3 RAR encountered a North Korean force withdrawing north . Using the same road and moving in the same direction , the North Koreans mistook the Australians and Argylls for Russians in the poor light and were bluffed into surrendering , with the Australians capturing thousands of North Koreans and their weapons and equipment following a brief exchange . Mounted on a tank , the 3 RAR second @-@ in @-@ command , Major Ian Ferguson , captured over 1 @,@ 600 North Korean soldiers with just an interpreter . Australian involvement had been limited , however , and they regarded their first exposure to the fighting in Korea as a relatively minor incident . The North Korean capital fell to US troops on 19 October . The 27th British Commonwealth Brigade then passed to the command of the US 24th Infantry Division on 21 October , under the overall command of Major General John H. Church , while the US 1st Cavalry Division remained in Pyongyang to complete its capture . Coad had hoped to rest his men at Pyongyang ; however , the advance continued north with little respite and the brigade moved through the village of <unk> . The British and Australians were subsequently ordered to seize Chongju . 
 The previous day the US 187th Airborne Regimental Combat Team ( US 187 RCT ) had parachuted ahead of the advancing UN spearheads into drop zones around Sukchon and Sunchon , 40 kilometres ( 25 mi ) north of the capital . Commanded by Colonel Frank S. Bowen , the paratroopers were tasked with the objectives of cutting off the retreating North Korean forces that were withdrawing up the west coast of the Korean Peninsula and releasing American and South Korean prisoners of war . The plan envisioned the 1st and 3rd Battalions , US 187 RCT dropping southeast of Sukchon to seize the town , before establishing blocking positions on the two main highways and the railway to Pyongyang . The 2nd Battalion , US 187 RCT would then be dropped near Sunchon , 24 kilometres ( 15 mi ) to the east to block another highway and railway line . The American paratroopers would then hold their positions while the US Eighth Army pushed northwards to link up them , a task which was expected to be complete within two days . US intelligence indicated that a trainload of American prisoners of war was moving north by night from Pyongyang , and Bowen hoped to intercept their train and release the men . As the US Eighth Army crossed the 38th Parallel MacArthur had held US 187 RCT at Kimpo Airfield near Seoul as the theatre reserve , with the intent of using them as a blocking force to prevent the anticipated North Korean withdrawal . Yet anxious not to expose the lightly equipped paratroopers by projecting them too far forward of the advance , MacArthur kept them back , and after changing the date twice , they were not dropped until 20 October . By this time the bulk of the North Korean Army had succeeded in withdrawing safely behind the Chongchon River . Only the North Korean 239th Regiment remained , having been ordered to delay the UN forces as they attempted to follow up . With a strength of 2 @,@ 500 men the regiment subsequently occupied positions on the high ground astride the road and rail lines east of Yongju , 12 kilometres ( 7 @.@ 5 mi ) south of the American drop zones at Sukchon . 
 = = Battle = = 
 = = = US 187 RCT airdrop at Sukchon and Sunchon , 20 – 21 October 1950 = = = 
 Beginning at 14 : 00 on 20 October , 1 @,@ 470 men from Lieutenant Colonel Harry Wilson 's US 1 / 187 RCT , Regimental Headquarters and Headquarters Company , as well as supporting engineer , medical , and logistic elements , were flown by C @-@ 119 Flying Boxcar and C @-@ 47 Skytrain transport aircraft from Kimpo Airfield . After forming up over the Han River , the force was parachuted into a drop zone southeast of Sukchon — designated Drop Zone William — supported by US fighter aircraft which rocketed and strafed the ground in preparation for the landing . The Americans subsequently met occasional sniper fire , experiencing only limited resistance . American casualties included 25 men injured in the jump , while one group which landed 2 @.@ 4 kilometres ( 1 @.@ 5 mi ) east of the drop zone lost a man killed in his parachute after being attacked by the North Koreans . The heavy equipment subsequently followed the initial airdrop , including seven 105 mm M2A1 howitzers and their ammunition from A and C Battery , US 674th Field Artillery Battalion . One of the guns was damaged in the drop , however , and was unable to be used . US 1 / 187 RCT subsequently moved west , capturing Hill 97 east of Sukchon and Hill 104 to the north , before clearing the town itself and setting up a roadblock . 
 Wilson dispatched patrols to the river in the vicinity of <unk> @-@ ni , and prepared to move south towards Pyongyang . A platoon of engineers reached <unk> @-@ ni at 15 : 30 but was delayed for 45 minutes by North Korean fire . Capturing 15 prisoners , the platoon then moved to <unk> @-@ ni where it was further engaged , killing five North Koreans and capturing another 16 . Meanwhile , Bowen established his command post at Chany @-@ ni on Hill 97 , along the dykes of the <unk> River , and was dug @-@ in by 16 : 00 . US 3 / 187 RCT — under the command of Lieutenant Colonel Delbert Munson — jumped into Drop Zone William shortly afterwards , before turning south and adopting a defensive position on the low hills 3 kilometres ( 1 @.@ 9 mi ) south of Sukchon , where they established roadblocks across the highway and railway . Seizing their objectives by 17 : 00 , the American paratroopers killed five North Koreans and captured 42 others without loss . Preparing to attack south along the railway and highway , Munson subsequently dispersed his battalion along the high ground south of Sukchon , with Company I on the left and Company K on the right , where they set up a blocking position on the Sukchon – Pyongyang Road . US 2 / 187 RCT — under the command of Lieutenant Colonel William J. Boyle — jumped into Drop Zone Easy , 3 kilometres ( 1 @.@ 9 mi ) southwest of Sunchon at 14 : 20 and although the battalion suffered 20 men injured in the drop , it secured its objectives by nightfall almost unopposed . B Battery , US 674th Field Artillery Battalion was also dropped in support . Two companies then established roadblocks to the south and west of the town , while a third company married up with elements of the ROK 6th Division at Sunchon , which was pushing towards the Chongchon River . 
 MacArthur had flown from Japan to watch the drop from the air , and after observing the landing aboard an American bomber accompanied by a number of war correspondents , he subsequently flew to Pyongyang where he announced to the press that the operation had achieved complete surprise . Estimating that 30 @,@ 000 North Korean troops — perhaps half of those remaining in North Korea — had been caught between the US 187 RCT in the north and the US 1st Cavalry Division and ROK 1st Division to the south at Pyongyang , he predicted that they would soon be destroyed or captured by the UN advance . Yet , while the air drop itself had been a success , despite MacArthur ’ s optimistic predictions the operation came too late to intercept any significant North Korean elements and the American landings initially met little resistance . Indeed , most of the North Korean Army had succeeded in withdrawing north , and had crossed the Chongchon River , or were in the process of doing so , while the government and most important officials had moved to <unk> in the mountains 32 kilometres ( 20 mi ) southeast of <unk> on the Yalu River . Most of the American and South Korean prisoners had also been moved to more remote parts of North Korea , and were unable to be rescued . 
 In total , during the operation approximately 4 @,@ 000 men and more than 600 tons of equipment and supplies were dropped by the Americans at Sukchon and Sunchon on 20 October and the days that followed , including twelve 105 mm howitzers , 39 jeeps , 38 1 / 4 @-@ ton trailers , four 90 mm antiaircraft guns , four 3 / 4 @-@ ton trucks , as well as ammunition , fuel , water , rations , and other supplies . Although sound in concept , the operation may have had more chance of success had a complete airborne division been employed . The following morning US 1 / 187 RCT captured the high ground north of Sukchon and established a blocking position on the main highway running north . However , strong North Korean rearguard forces held the next line of hills to the north . While at Sunchon , American troops from US 2 / 187 RCT had heard reports that a number of American prisoners had been murdered nearby by their North Korean captors as the KPA retreated . It became apparent that the train carrying the prisoners north from Pyongyang had halted in a railway tunnel on the 20th to conceal itself as US 187 RCT jumped into the area , and that while there , many of the men aboard had been shot by the North Korean soldiers guarding them as they waited for their evening meal . Sixty @-@ six bodies were later recovered , as well as those of seven more who were found to have died of disease or malnutrition . Twenty @-@ three starving and emaciated American survivors were found nearby ; however , many were badly wounded and two later died . The American paratroopers were subsequently ordered to return to Pyongyang . 
 = = = North Korean 239th Regiment is encircled , 21 October 1950 = = = 
 At 09 : 00 on 21 October , US 3 / 187 RCT began to advance south to clear the Sukchon to Yongju road towards Pyongyang . The American paratroopers advanced on two fronts , with I Company moving along the railway line and K Company along the highway . At 13 : 00 I Company reached Opa @-@ ri , where it encountered a strong North Korean force estimated as a battalion , equipped with 120 mm mortars and 40 mm guns . I Company was caught in an ambush . The North Koreans subsequently attacked the paratroopers and after a battle lasting two @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half hours , they overran two American platoons . I Company was forced to withdraw west of the railway to Hill 281 having suffered 90 men missing . Despite their success , the North Koreans subsequently withdrew to their own defensive positions in the high ground around Opa @-@ ri . Amid the fighting , an American medic attached to I Company , Private First Class Richard G. Wilson , was killed while attempting to reach a wounded man who had been left behind , and he was later posthumously awarded the Medal of Honor for his actions . Wilson had repeatedly exposed himself to North Korean fire to render aid to the wounded , and later helped many to safety following the order to withdraw . On hearing that one of the Americans previously thought to be dead had been seen attempting to crawl to safety , he went back to the battlefield to search for him and had disappeared . Two days later a patrol found Wilson lying dead beside the man he had returned to rescue , having been shot while trying to shield him from further injury . 
 Meanwhile , during its advance along the highway , K Company encountered a battalion @-@ sized North Korean force , 1 @.@ 6 kilometres ( 0 @.@ 99 mi ) north of Yongju . Following a sharp fight the Americans forced the North Koreans to withdraw to defensive positions on the high ground to the south and east of the town , as K Company continued into Yongju , where they established a position on Hill 163 , immediately to the north , digging @-@ in . The distance separating the highway and the railway which ran north either side of Yongju was larger at that point than anywhere else between Pyongyang and Sukchon . The American companies now occupied positions roughly opposite each other — at Yongju on the highway and Opa @-@ ri on the railway — yet these positions were now almost 5 kilometres ( 3 @.@ 1 mi ) apart and they were unable to mutually support each other . Elsewhere , elements of the 1st and 2nd Battalions , US 187 RCT successfully linked up at Sunchon that afternoon . 
 The North Korean 239th Regiment had subsequently established defensive positions on a line of hills extending southwest to northeast across the highway at Yongju and the railway at Opa @-@ ri , on ground which offered the best defensive terrain between capital and the Chongchon River . The last North Korean unit to leave Pyongyang , the Regiment had been tasked with fighting a delaying action against UN troops as they advanced north . Yet as a result of the unexpected American airborne assault , the North Korean 239th Regiment was subsequently encircled and found itself unexpectedly attacked from the rear . Already under threat from the UN advance north from Pyongyang , the North Koreans subsequently reacted vigorously to the Americans as US 3 / 187 RCT began to move south , and heavy fighting ensued 3 kilometres ( 1 @.@ 9 mi ) north of Yongju . The American paratroopers subsequently requested assistance from the US 24th Infantry Division , to which it was temporarily attached . Meanwhile , as the fighting at Yongju continued , US 2 / 187 RCT had remained out of contact at its drop zone at Sunchon as the ROK 6th Division completed the clearance of the town and its surrounds of North Korean stragglers . 
 = = = British and Australians advance to Yongju , 21 – 22 October 1950 = = = 
 In the days prior , US I Corps had continued its movement northward as part of the general advance of the US Eighth Army . Following the capture of Pyongyang , the corps commander , Major General Frank W. Milburn , ordered the advance to continue to the MacArthur Line , running approximately 35 kilometres ( 22 mi ) south of the Yalu River . The US 24th Division , to which the 27th British Commonwealth Brigade was then attached , was ordered to lead this attack . On the division 's right flank three South Korean divisions — the ROK 1st Division , under US I Corps , and the ROK 6th and 8th Divisions under the control of ROK II Corps — were deployed to the east and would also be committed to the attack northwards . The British and Australians had covered 122 kilometres ( 76 mi ) in the previous two days , advancing rapidly until slowed by rain . A Company , 3 RAR was subsequently engaged by snipers from a nearby village without suffering casualties . The Sherman tanks proceeded to heavily engage the North Korean positions in the village , which was then cleared by the Australian infantry who killed five North Koreans and took three prisoners . As the rain ceased a North Korean T @-@ 34 tank , which had remained concealed during the earlier fighting , engaged D Company , 3 RAR and was subsequently knocked out by the American tanks . An unmanned SU @-@ 76 self @-@ propelled gun was also located nearby , and neither it or the tank were found to have any petrol . Meanwhile , US 187 RCT 's request for reinforcement had been received by the headquarters of the US 24th Infantry Division in Pyongyang . Yet , with the American division still well to the rear , the 27th British Commonwealth Brigade was the closest formation , and it was subsequently ordered forward to assist the American paratroopers . 
 Now the vanguard of the US Eighth Army , the British and Australians crossed the Taedong River using a sand @-@ bag bridge at Pyongyang at noon on 21 October , moving north on the main highway to Sukchon with the task of reaching the Chongchon River . Meanwhile , elements of US 3 / 187 RCT occupied Yongju . Under the command of Lieutenant Colonel George Nielson , 1 ASHR subsequently pushed up the road until fired upon by North Korean forces in the hills to the south of the town , with snipers engaging the column as it turned west out of the river valley around 16 : 00 . Encountering only light resistance from a small North Korean force of approximately 75 men which was then scattered by tank fire , the Argylls successfully cleared the foothills by last light on 21 October . Approaching Yongju , Coad decided to halt for the night . The Argylls subsequently sent a patrol into the town , establishing initial contact with US 3 / 187 RCT , marrying up with K Company which was established in a number of houses on the northern edge of Yongju and on Hill 163 immediately above their position . A strong North Korean force was believed to be nearby , however , with at least 300 men thought to remain in the town . 
 = = = North Koreans attempt to break @-@ out , 21 / 22 October 1950 = = = 
 Cut @-@ off , about midnight the North Korean 239th Regiment attempted to break out to the north , launching a number of attacks against the Americans . During the first attack a small group of North Koreans succeeded in infiltrating the K Company command post at Yongju . In the close @-@ quarter fighting that ensured Captain Claude K. Josey , the American company commander , tackled a North Korean machine @-@ gunner , and despite being wounded twice he succeeded in disarming him before collapsing from his injuries . Josey was later awarded the Distinguished Service Cross for his actions . As the fighting continued the K Company executive officer was also wounded , yet the Americans eventually drove off the North Koreans , many of whom were subsequently killed . Nearby , the British and Australians could hear the sounds of heavy fighting between the Americans and North Koreans 1 to 2 miles ( 1 @.@ 6 to 3 @.@ 2 km ) to the north . Half an hour later a small group of North Koreans attacked A Company , 1 ASHR with grenades , killing two men and wounding two more before being repulsed having suffered one killed and one wounded . A large concentration of around 300 North Koreans were subsequently observed assembling in Yongju by the K Company forward observer , however the American artillery had relocated during the fighting and was unable to engage the target . Two guns from C Battery , US 674th Artillery Battalion were ordered to reposition south Sukchon to support US 3 / 187 RCT . Following two more North Korean attacks the Americans near Hill 163 were forced to abandon the roadblock after running out of ammunition . Detecting the withdrawal , the North Koreans attacked again at 04 : 00 . Meanwhile , after forcing their way through heavy North Korean machine @-@ gun and rifle fire the two American howitzers were successfully redeployed , coming into action at 04 : 15 . To the south , the British and Australians could hear the sounds of renewed fighting , and they began to fear that the Americans had been overrun . 
 The North Korean attacks drove K Company from Yongju that night , forcing them back towards the battalion 's main defensive position 3 @.@ 2 kilometres ( 2 @.@ 0 mi ) to the north . Yet the paratroopers managed to reform into a tight perimeter on the northern edge of Yongju . Renewing their attack at 05 : 45 , the North Koreans then assaulted the command post of US 3 / 187 RCT and the L Company perimeter , but suffered heavy casualties from American enfilade and direct fire . During this action a column of North Koreans had moved towards L Company just before daybreak , singing as they approached . Dug @-@ in on the forward slopes facing the road , the 3 Platoon position gave the Americans a good field of fire overlooking the rice paddies and they began to engage the North Koreans with machine @-@ guns . Meanwhile , 1 Platoon and Company Headquarters also began to fire in support . Yet in the darkness the attackers claimed to be South Koreans and the Americans subsequently held their fire until the light became sufficient to confirm their identity . An American 57 mm recoilless rifle subsequently destroyed a North Korean truck at the head of another column as it moved up the road . The North Koreans then attempted to move a machine @-@ gun forward , but were thwarted as the Americans killed a number of men as took over the weapon . Under heavy fire the North Korean attack was broken up , with many of the survivors attempting to take cover behind the raised road . Meanwhile , the howitzers had continued to support the paratroopers , and by 05 : 50 the two guns had fired 145 rounds . During a single fire mission 54 North Koreans were killed , while by the time US 3 / 187 RCT was finally relieved later that day C Battery , 674th Artillery Battalion had accounted for more than 200 North Koreans . 
 In spite of these losses the North Koreans assaulted the American positions again , with a force of 300 men falling on L Company and a further 450 men assaulting Headquarters Company . At the bottom of the slope the North Koreans knocked out an American machine @-@ gun , hitting three of the crew in quick succession . The Americans responded with .50 calibre heavy machine @-@ guns , while a 3 @.@ 5 @-@ inch bazooka engaged the North Koreans in a culvert as they attempted to overrun the L Company position . Master Sergeant Willard W. <unk> subsequently moved forward down the hill under heavy fire to man the now silenced machine @-@ gun , and proceeded to engage the attackers . For his actions he was later awarded the US Silver Star . Hard @-@ pressed , the beleaguered Americans again requested assistance . Overnight Coad had ordered 3 RAR to take the lead the following morning and Green subsequently decided to send a company through Yongju to advance north as rapidly as possible , intending to push through the Argylls which were tasked with clearing the town . By dawn , the North Koreans and Americans had fought each other to a standstill after heavy fighting overnight and the previous day ; the North Korean 239th Regiment was almost exhausted , yet , in danger of being destroyed , it prepared for a final attempt to break out . 
 At first light on 22 October , A and C Company , 1 ASHR advanced into Yongju , before the Australians passed through them . Elsewhere , the Middlesex took up defensive positions to the north of Yongju . The Argylls then moved through the town , using high explosive and white phosphorus grenades to winkle out the remaining North Korean snipers , setting fire to many of the buildings . As planned , at 07 : 00 , 3 RAR was ordered to move through Yongju towards Sukchon to link up with US 187 RCT and close the gap between the two forces . C Company , 3 RAR under Captain Archer Denness subsequently passed through the burning town mounted on M4 Sherman tanks from D Company , US 89th Tank Battalion . Now leading the brigade , at 09 : 00 the Australians came under small arms and light mortar fire from a North Korean rearguard position in an apple orchard on their right flank , having moved just 1 @.@ 5 kilometres ( 0 @.@ 93 mi ) . The Australians had driven into the rear of the North Korean 239th Regiment as it was forming up for a final assault on US 3 / 187 RCT . The strong North Korean force of approximately 1 @,@ 000 men subsequently allowed C Company , 3 RAR and the battalion 's tactical headquarters group to pass before engaging them . The North Korean @-@ held features lay between the advancing Australians and the American paratroopers , blocking any relief attempt . Yet rather than preparing a deliberate attack and potentially allowing the North Koreans time to organise their defences , Green chose to force his leading company through at once in order to seize the initiative and continue the pursuit . An encounter battle developed as 3 RAR carried out an aggressive quick attack from the road , with American tanks in support . 
 = = = Fighting in the apple orchard , 22 October 1950 = = = 
 Preparing for the assault , Green informed brigade headquarters of his plans and was advised that US 187 RCT was believed to be about 1 @,@ 500 metres ( 1 @,@ 600 yd ) further north ; however , as the exact location of the Americans was unclear the indirect fire available to support the attack would be limited . The American tanks were also initially under orders not to fire for fear of hitting their own men . With mortars and artillery unavailable the Australians proceeded to attack regardless , with the tanks carrying C Company turning east towards the North Korean positions in the apple orchard . 7 and 8 Platoons were subsequently committed to the attack , while 9 Platoon — commanded by Lieutenant David Butler — was left near the road to protect the Australian flank . Supported by 18 Sherman tanks , the Australians dismounted close to their objective , charging the position with bayonets , Bren light machine @-@ guns , Owen guns , rifles and grenades as the tanks opened up with their main armament and machine @-@ guns . In the face of this determined attack many of the North Koreans left their pits in an attempt to move to safety , only to suffer heavy casualties after exposing themselves to the fire of the two assaulting platoons and the American tanks and flanking platoon in support . The speed and ferocity of the attack surprised the defenders , and the Australians quickly overcame the North Korean outposts despite the lack of indirect fires . The North Koreans , many of whom were recently trained conscripts , were then forced to withdraw for the loss of only four Australians wounded . For his leadership in co @-@ ordinating the assault Denness was later awarded the Military Cross , while Private Charles McMurray received the Military Medal for bravery . 
 More than 70 North Koreans were killed in the initial attack , while a further eight or nine were killed as the Australians cleared the position , setting fire to the North Korean dug @-@ outs and forcing the remaining defenders to flee . As the North Koreans broke , Green pushed A and B Company onto the higher ground to the right of C Company with the intention of clearing the ridge overlooking the highway , while D Company moved forward on the left of the road towards 9 Platoon . Meanwhile , the battalion tactical headquarters , which had followed closely behind C Company as they assaulted , came under attack in the apple orchard east of the road and was forced to fight off a group of North Koreans , with the regimental police and the battalion signallers fighting back @-@ to @-@ back to defend themselves . <unk> the attack , the Australians eventually killed 34 North Koreans for the loss of three men wounded . Yet despite becoming personally involved in the heavy fighting , Green continued to skilfully control the battle throughout . D Company was subsequently ordered to clear the North Koreans threatening battalion headquarters , as well as sending a platoon forward to re @-@ establish contact with the Americans . Running low on ammunition , US 3 / 187 RCT had been in contact throughout the morning and continued to suffer casualties . However , having been forced off the high ground , the North Koreans were now caught between the advancing Australians and the American paratroopers to the north . 
 Unable to move north , the North Koreans attempted to breakout across the open rice fields to the west , through the gap between the 27th British Commonwealth Brigade and US 187 RCT . The North Koreans again suffered heavy casualties , with many cut down by tank and rifle fire from C Company , 3 RAR . Some of the survivors took refuge among a number of haystacks and rice <unk> in front of 9 Platoon , from where they engaged the Australians with sniper fire . Others fled east , escaping to the higher ground where they dispersed . D Company , 3 RAR was subsequently ordered to clear pockets of resistance remaining within the battalion position . Meanwhile , the Middlesex battalion passed through the Australians and , with the tanks , linked up with US 187 RCT at 11 : 00 . Following three hours of fighting the battle was largely over by midday ; however , many of the North Koreans that had been unable to escape continued to refuse to surrender , hiding or feigning death until individually flushed out . After clearing their objectives 7 and 8 Platoon had moved forward towards 9 Platoon , which then clashed with a number of North Korean stragglers in the paddy fields . C Company , 3 RAR subsequently deployed in an extended line and a substantial action soon developed . In a scene Coad later likened to driving snipe , the Australians subsequently proceeded to sweep the area , kicking over stacks of straw and shooting the North Korean soldiers they found hiding in them as they attempted to flee . For his leadership Butler was subsequently awarded the US Silver Star , while Private John Cousins received the US Bronze Star for his role in the action . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 = = = Casualties = = = 
 Despite the uncertain situation and the lack of indirect support , Green 's tactical handling of the Australian battalion had been bold , and his decision to move quickly through Yongju and to attack off the line of march proved decisive . Preoccupied with fighting the Americans to their north , the North Koreans were unprepared for the Australians to attack from the rear . Caught between the American paratroopers and the 27th British Commonwealth Brigade , the North Korean 239th Regiment was practically destroyed . North Korean casualties in the apple orchard were 150 killed , 239 wounded and 200 captured , while Australian casualties numbered just seven men wounded . Including those engaged by the Argylls , total North Korean losses during the fighting with the 27th British Commonwealth Brigade exceeded 200 killed and 500 captured . The survivors subsequently fled westwards . In their first major battle in Korea the Australians had distinguished themselves , and the battalion was later praised for its performance . The action became known as the " Battle of the Apple Orchard " , while the Royal Australian Regiment was later granted the battle honour " Yongju " . Boosting their confidence , the success prepared the Australians for the battles which they were to face in the months that followed . Meanwhile , US 3 / 187 RCT reported killing 805 North Koreans and capturing 681 in the fighting around Yongju . Altogether , American casualties during the Sukchon @-@ Sunchon operation were 48 killed in action and 80 wounded , and a further one killed and 56 injured in the jump . US 3 / 187 RCT and the 2nd Section , Antitank Gun Platoon , Support Company were both awarded the US Distinguished Unit Citation . 
 That afternoon US 3 / 187 RCT returned to Sukchon . The Middlesex battalion was subsequently ordered to push on to Sukchon , and after successfully relieving the Americans in place by nightfall , the battalion occupied a defensive position 1 @.@ 6 kilometres ( 0 @.@ 99 mi ) north . US 187 RCT returned to Pyongyang by road on 23 October , moving through Sunchon . Shortly after they went back into theatre reserve . Meanwhile , the 27th British Commonwealth Brigade and US 24th Division continued their advance up the highway . Intending to defeat the North Koreans and bring the war to a close , the UN forces pushed towards the Yalu River , on the Chinese border . However , resistance continued to be met as the 27th British Commonwealth Brigade crossed the Chongchon River , and they now moved towards Pakchon . On 24 October , MacArthur had removed all restrictions on the movement of his forces south of the Yalu River and prepared for the final phase of the UN advance , defying a directive of the US Joint Chiefs of Staff and risking Chinese intervention on behalf of North Korea . An intense period of fighting followed and the Australians were involved in a number of major battles over the coming days . 
 = = = Subsequent operations = = = 
 On the afternoon of 25 October a platoon from 3 RAR was fired on by two companies of North Koreans as they crossed the Taeryong River to conduct a reconnaissance of the west bank , and although they were subsequently forced to withdraw , the Australians took 10 prisoners with them . Acting as the forward elements of the brigade , that evening Green sent two companies across the river to establish defensive positions , and they subsequently broke up a frontal assault on their positions with mortars while the North Koreans were in the process of forming up . Sixty North Koreans supported by a T @-@ 34 tank then attacked the forward Australian companies at Kujin early the following morning , resulting in Australian losses of eight killed and 22 wounded . However , the North Koreans suffered heavy casualties including over 100 killed and 350 captured , and the Australians subsequently succeeded in defending the bridgehead after the North Koreans withdrew . Intelligence indicated that the British and Australians were facing the North Korean 17th Tank Brigade , which was preparing a last line of defence at Chongju , 70 kilometres ( 43 mi ) away . With the war considered all but over the 27th British Commonwealth Brigade continued to pursue the North Koreans towards Chongju ; however , the advance increasingly encountered strong resistance as they approached the Manchurian border . 
 3 RAR took over as lead battalion of the brigade on 29 October , 6 kilometres ( 3 @.@ 7 mi ) from Chongju . That morning a spotter aircraft reported a large North Korean formation consisting of a battalion @-@ sized force of 500 – 600 infantry supported by several tanks and at least two self @-@ propelled guns , positioned on a thickly wooded ridgeline around Chongju . The Battle of Chongju ensued as the Australians dislodged the strong North Korean armoured force and then defended their positions against North Korean counter @-@ attacks during the evening . The following day the Australians advanced to the high ground overlooking Chongju , killing and capturing a number of North Koreans in skirmishes . That afternoon the town itself was cleared by the remaining elements of the 27th British Commonwealth Brigade without opposition . The fighting around Chongju was the heaviest undertaken by the Australians since entering the war . North Korean casualties included 162 killed and 10 captured , while Australian losses were nine killed and 30 wounded , including Green , who was wounded in the stomach by artillery fire after the battle , dying two days later on 1 November after succumbing to his wounds . 
 Following the capture of Chongju the US 21st Infantry Regiment had set off rapidly along the road to Sonchon to the west . Encountering only one strong North Korean position which they quickly turned , by noon on 1 November the lead battalion had reached Chonggodong , just 30 kilometres ( 19 mi ) from the Yalu River where the Americans clashed with another North Korean armoured force . To the north meanwhile , the US 5th and 9th Infantry Regiments of the US 24th Infantry Division secured Taechon and Kusong , before advancing to within 40 kilometres ( 25 mi ) of the Manchurian border . However , during the last weeks of October the Chinese had moved 18 divisions of the People 's Volunteer Army across the Yalu River under the overall command of Marshal Peng Dehuai in order to reinforce the remnants of the KPA . Undetected by US and South Korean intelligence , the 13th Army Group crossed the border on 16 October and penetrated up to 100 kilometres ( 62 mi ) into North Korea , and were reinforced in early November by 12 divisions from the 9th Army Group ; in total 30 divisions composed of 380 @,@ 000 men . The Chinese subsequently ambushed MacArthur 's forces which were now widely dispersed , decimating ROK II Corps at Onjong and encircling and overrunning the US 8th Cavalry Regiment at Unsan . With the US 24th Infantry Division ordered back to the Chongchon River as a result , the 27th British Commonwealth Brigade also began moving south as part of the UN general withdrawal in the face of the Chinese First Phase Offensive . 
 = Lambeosaurus = 
 Lambeosaurus ( / <unk> / LAM @-@ bee @-@ o @-@ SAWR @-@ əs ; meaning " Lambe 's lizard " ) is a genus of hadrosaurid dinosaur that lived about 75 million years ago , in the Late Cretaceous period ( Campanian ) of North America . This bipedal / quadrupedal , herbivorous dinosaur is known for its distinctive hollow cranial crest , which in the best @-@ known species resembled a hatchet . Several possible species have been named , from Canada , the United States , and Mexico , but only the two Canadian species are currently recognized as valid . 
 Lambeosaurus was belatedly described in 1923 by William Parks , over twenty years after the first material was studied by Lawrence Lambe . The genus has a complicated taxonomic history , in part because small @-@ bodied crested hadrosaurids now recognized as juveniles were once thought to belong to their own genera and species . Currently , the various skulls assigned to the type species L. lambei are interpreted as showing age differences and sexual dimorphism . Lambeosaurus was closely related to the better known Corythosaurus , which is found in slightly older rocks , as well as the less well @-@ known genera Hypacrosaurus and Olorotitan . All had unusual crests , which are now generally assumed to have served social functions like noisemaking and recognition . 
 = = Description = = 
 Lambeosaurus , best known through L. lambei , was quite similar to Corythosaurus in everything but the form of the head adornment . Compared to Corythosaurus , the crest of Lambeosaurus was shifted forward , and the hollow nasal passages within were at the front of the crest and stacked vertically . It also can be differentiated from Corythosaurus by its lack of forking nasal processes making up part of the sides of the crest , which is the only way to tell juveniles of the two genera apart , as the crests took on their distinctive forms as the animals aged . 
 Lambeosaurus was like other hadrosaurids , and could move on both two legs and all fours , as shown by footprints of related animals . It had a long tail stiffened by ossified tendons that prevented it from drooping . The hands had four fingers , lacking the innermost finger of the generalized five @-@ fingered tetrapod hand , while the second , third , and fourth fingers were bunched together and bore hooves , suggesting the animal could have used the hands for support . The fifth finger was free and could be used to manipulate objects . Each foot had only the three central toes . 
 The most distinctive feature , the crest , was different in the two well @-@ known species . In L. lambei , it had a hatchet @-@ like shape when the dinosaur was full @-@ grown , and was somewhat shorter and more rounded in specimens interpreted as females . The " hatchet blade " projected in front of the eyes , and the " handle " was a solid bony rod that jutted out over the back of the skull . The " hatchet blade " had two sections : the uppermost portion was a thin bony " coxcomb " that grew out relatively late in life , when an individual neared adulthood ; and the lower portion held hollow spaces that were continuations of the nasal passages . In L. magnicristatus , the " handle " was greatly reduced , and the " blade " expanded , forming a tall , exaggerated pompadour @-@ like crest . This crest is damaged in the best overall specimen , and only the front half remains . 
 The Canadian species of Lambeosaurus appear to have been similar in size to Corythosaurus , and thus around 9 @.@ 4 m ( 31 ft ) long . Impressions of the scales are known for several specimens ; a specimen now assigned to L. lambei had a thin skin with uniform , polygonal scutes distributed in no particular order on the neck , torso , and tail . Similar scalation is known from the neck , forelimb , and foot of a specimen of L. magnicristatus . 
 = = Classification = = 
 Lambeosaurus is the type genus of the Lambeosaurinae , the subfamily of hadrosaurids that had hollow skull crests . Among the lambeosaurines , it is closely related to similar dinosaurs such as Corythosaurus and Hypacrosaurus , with little separating them but crest form . The relationships among these dinosaur genera are difficult to pick out . Some early classifications placed these genera in the tribe <unk> , which was found by David Evans and Robert Reisz to include Lambeosaurus as the sister taxon to a clade made up of Corythosaurus , Hypacrosaurus , and the Russian genus Olorotitan ; these lambeosaurines , with Nipponosaurus . However , later researchers pointed out that due to the rules of priority set forth by the ICZN , any tribe containing Lambeosaurus is properly named Lambeosaurini , and that therefore the name " <unk> " is a junior synonym . The following cladogram illustrating the relationships of Lambeosaurus and its close relatives was recovered in a 2012 phylogenetic analysis by Albert Prieto @-@ Márquez , Luis M. Chiappe and Shantanu H. Joshi . 
 = = Discovery and history = = 
 Lambeosaurus has a complicated taxonomic history , beginning in 1902 with Lawrence Lambe 's naming of hadrosaurid limb material and other bones ( originally GSC 419 ) from Alberta as Trachodon marginatus . Paleontologists began finding better remains of hadrosaurids from the same rocks in the 1910s , in what is now known as the late Campanian @-@ age ( Upper Cretaceous ) Dinosaur Park Formation . Lambe assigned two new skulls to T. marginatus , and based on the new information , coined the genus Stephanosaurus for the species in 1914 . Unfortunately , there was very little to associate the skulls with the scrappy earlier marginatus material , so in 1923 William Parks proposed a new genus and species for the skulls , with both generic and specific names honoring Lambe : Lambeosaurus lambei ( type specimen NMC <unk> , originally GSC <unk> ) . 
 = = = New species and <unk> = = = 
 Although the early workers in Alberta did not recognize it at the time , they were finding the remains of juvenile Lambeosaurus as well . These fossils of small @-@ bodied crested duckbills were interpreted as adults of a distinct lineage of hadrosaurids , the subfamily <unk> . The first such animal to be named was Trachodon altidens , a left upper jaw ( GSC 1092 ) from the Dinosaur Park Formation described by Lawrence Lambe in 1902 . In the same volume , Henry Fairfield Osborn suggested T. altidens could belong to a new genus , which he labelled Didanodon without further discussion . In 2006 , Lund and Gates stated that Didanodon altidens was a nomen nudum , without further discussion . 
 In 1920 , William Diller Matthew used the name Procheneosaurus ( no species name ) in a caption for a photograph of a skeleton at the American Museum of Natural History , from the Dinosaur Park Formation ( AMNH <unk> ) . Parks believed that the procedure and description were inadequate for the name to be considered valid , and to address the situation , he coined the genus Tetragonosaurus . Into this genus he placed the type species T. praeceps ( based on ROM <unk> ) and a second species T. erectofrons ( based on ROM <unk> ) for small skulls from the Dinosaur Park Formation , and assigned Matthew 's Procheneosaurus skeleton to T. praeceps . Charles M. Sternberg followed in 1935 by adding the slightly larger T. cranibrevis , based on GSC ( now NMC ) <unk> . The use of Tetragonosaurus was rejected by Richard Swann Lull in favor of Procheneosaurus . Lull requested that the name Tetragonosaurus be suppressed in favor of Procheneosaurus , which was granted , and Procheneosaurus received official approval from the ICZN as a conserved name . In 1942 he and Wright transferred the Tetragonosaurus species and , tentatively , Trachodon altidens , to Procheneosaurus , with P. praeceps serving as the type species . This usage was generally followed until 1975 , when Peter Dodson showed that the " <unk> " were actually juveniles of other dinosaurs . Procheneosaurus praeceps and altidens are considered probable synonyms of Lambeosaurus lambei . 
 P. cranibrevis , from the Dinosaur Park Formation and named as a species of Tetragonosaurus in 1935 by Charles M. Sternberg , was slightly larger than the other species , and was interpreted by Dodson as a juvenile Corythosaurus . Further study has shown that the type specimen is a Lambeosaurus juvenile , based on how the skull bones articulate , and that several other specimens assigned to it are Corythosaurus . P. erectofrons , named by Parks as a species of Tetragonosaurus , is based on a skull from the Dinosaur Park Formation . Dodson found it to be a juvenile Corythosaurus casuarius , although one distinct skeleton from the late Campanian @-@ age Upper Cretaceous Two Medicine Formation of Montana , USA , appears to belong to a young Hypacrosaurus stebingeri . 
 " P. " <unk> , from the Late Cretaceous of Kazakhstan , is known from a nearly complete skeleton missing only the snout and end of the tail . It was named by A. K. Rozhdestvensky in 1968 . It has at times been considered synonymous with <unk> <unk> , or deserving of its own genus . Bell and Brink ( 2013 ) made " P. " <unk> the type species of the new genus <unk> . 
 The " <unk> " weren 't the only crested duckbills being studied and named in the early 1900s . It was then the accepted practice to name genera and species for what is now seen as more likely individual variation , variation due to age or sex , or distortion from fossilization . Three more species were named during this period that relate to Lambeosaurus , all in 1935 . Sternberg , in the same paper as T. cranibrevis , named a skull and partial skeleton ( GSC — now NMC — <unk> ) L. <unk> ( corrected to magnicristatus ) , and a smaller skull ( GSC — now NMC — <unk> ) L. clavinitialis , with a less prominent crest and reduced spine pointing from the back . Parks contributed Corythosaurus frontalis , based on skull GSC <unk> ( now ROM 869 ) , which differed from the well @-@ known tall , straight , rounded crest of other specimens of Corythosaurus by having a low crest cocked forward . 
 = = = Reconsideration and consolidation = = = 
 New specimens were not described for many years following the activity of the early 1900s . In 1964 John Ostrom noted that an old species named by Othniel Charles Marsh , Hadrosaurus paucidens , based on USNM <unk> , a partial maxilla and squamosal from the Judith River Formation of Fergus County , Montana , was probably a specimen of Lambeosaurus . 
 In 1975 , Peter Dodson , examining why there should be so many species and genera of lambeosaurine duckbills within such a short geological time frame and small area , published the results of a morphometric study in which he measured dozens of skulls . He found that many of the species had been based on remains that were better interpreted as juveniles or different sexes . For Lambeosaurus , he found that L. clavinitialis was probably the female of L. lambei , and Corythosaurus frontalis and Procheneosaurus praeceps were probably its juveniles . L. magnicristatus was different enough to warrant its own species . He interpreted Procheneosaurus cranibrevis and P. erectofrons as juvenile <unk> . However , restudy of the Procheneosaurus / Tetragonosaurus remains indicates that within species , assignments had become confused , and the type specimen of P. cranibrevis was a Lambeosaurus juvenile , whereas others were Corythosaurus , based on the distinctive form of the contact of the nasal bone with the premaxilla . 
 Also during the 1970s , Bill Morris was studying giant lambeosaurine remains from Baja California . He named them ? L. <unk> in 1981 ( type specimen LACM <unk> ) . Morris used a question mark in his work because no complete crest had been found for his species , and without it a definitive assignment could not be made . From what was known of the skull , he considered it to be most like Lambeosaurus . He interpreted this species as water @-@ bound , due to features like its size , its tall and narrow tail ( interpreted as a swimming adaptation ) , and weak hip articulations , as well as a healed broken thigh bone that he thought would have been too much of a handicap for a terrestrial animal to have survived long enough to heal . This species was later ( 2012 ) assigned to the new genus <unk> . 
 = = Species = = 
 Two species of Lambeosaurus are currently confirmed valid , with a third sometimes accepted . L. lambei ( Parks , 1923 ) is known from at least 17 individuals , with seven skulls and partial skeletons and around ten isolated skulls . L. clavinitialis ( C.M. Sternberg , 1935 ) , Corythosaurus frontalis ( Parks , 1935 ) , and Procheneosaurus praeceps ( Parks , 1931 ) are all regarded as synonyms of L. lambei in the most recent review . It is possible that L. clavinitialis skulls without the backward spine may represent L. magnicristatus individuals instead , although this was rejected in the 2007 redescription of L. magnicristatus . L. magnicristatus ( C.M. Sternberg , 1935 ) is only definitely known from two specimens , both with skulls . Unfortunately , the majority of the articulated skeleton of the type specimen has been lost . Many of the bones were extensively damaged by water while in storage and were discarded before description ; other portions of this skeleton have also been lost . Its remains come from slightly younger rocks than L. lambei . The specific name is derived from the Latin magnus " large " and cristatus " crested " , referring to its bony crest . Additionally , Jack Horner has identified fragmentary lambeosaurine jaws from the Bearpaw Formation of Montana as possibly belonging to L. magnicristatus ; these represent the first lambeosaurine remains from marine rocks . As noted above , the large " L. " <unk> ( Morris , 1981 ) was assigned to <unk> . 
 L. paucidens ( Marsh , 1889 ) is regarded as a dubious name and is listed as Hadrosaurus paucidens in the latest review , although at least one author , Donald F. Glut , accepts it as a species of Lambeosaurus . In this case , the specific epithet is derived from the Latin <unk> " few " and dens " tooth " . The irregularities of Procheneosaurus cranibrevis , and the identity of the type as a juvenile <unk> , were recognized in 2005 , and thus have not yet entered wide circulation . Finally , Didanodon altidens has been assigned without comment to Lambeosaurus in two 21st Century reviews . 
 = = Paleoecology = = 
 Lambeosaurus lambei and L. magnicristatus , from the Dinosaur Park Formation , were members of a diverse and well @-@ documented fauna of prehistoric animals that included such well @-@ known dinosaurs as the horned Centrosaurus , Styracosaurus , and Chasmosaurus , fellow duckbills Prosaurolophus , Gryposaurus , Corythosaurus , and Parasaurolophus , tyrannosaurid Gorgosaurus , and armored Edmontonia and Euoplocephalus . The Dinosaur Park Formation is interpreted as a low @-@ relief setting of rivers and floodplains that became more swampy and influenced by marine conditions over time as the Western Interior Seaway transgressed westward . The climate was warmer than present @-@ day Alberta , without frost , but with wetter and drier seasons . Conifers were apparently the dominant canopy plants , with an understory of ferns , tree ferns , and angiosperms . The anatomically similar L. lambei , L. magnicristatus , and Corythosaurus were separated by time within the formation , based on stratigraphy . Corythosaurus fossils are known from the lower two @-@ thirds of the Formation , L. lambei fossils are present in the upper third , and L. magnicristatus remains are rare and present only at the very top , where the marine influence was greater . 
 = = Paleobiology = = 
 = = = Feeding = = = 
 As a hadrosaurid , Lambeosaurus was a large bipedal / quadrupedal herbivore , eating plants with a sophisticated skull that permitted a grinding motion analogous to mammalian chewing . Its teeth were continually replaced and were packed into dental batteries that each contained over 100 teeth , only a relative handful of which were in use at any time . It used its beak to crop plant material , which was held in the jaws by a cheek @-@ like organ . Feeding would have been from the ground up to around 4 meters ( 13 feet ) above . As noted by Bob Bakker , lambeosaurines have narrower beaks than hadrosaurines , implying that Lambeosaurus and its relatives could feed more selectively than their broad @-@ beaked , crestless counterparts . 
 = = = Cranial crest = = = 
 Like other lambeosaurines such as Parasaurolophus and Corythosaurus , Lambeosaurus had a distinctive crest on the top of its head . Its nasal cavity ran back through this crest , making it mostly hollow . Many suggestions have been made for the function or functions of the crest , including housing salt glands , improving the sense of smell , use as a snorkel or air trap , acting as a resonating chamber for making sounds , or being a method for different species or different sexes of the same species to recognize each other . Social functions such as noisemaking and recognition have become the most widely accepted of the various hypotheses . 
 The large size of hadrosaurid eye sockets and the presence of sclerotic rings in the eyes imply acute vision and diurnal habits , evidence that sight was important to these animals . The hadrosaurid sense of hearing also appears to be strong . There is at least one example , in the related Corythosaurus , of a slender stapes ( reptilian ear bone ) in place , which combined with a large space for an eardrum implies a sensitive middle ear , and the hadrosaurid lagena is elongate like a crocodilian 's . This indicates that the auditory portion of the inner ear was well @-@ developed . If used as a noisemaker , the crest could also have provided recognizable differences for different species or sexes , because the differing layouts of the nasal passages corresponding to the different crest shapes would have produced intrinsically different sounds . 
 = The Beacon Street Collection = 
 The Beacon Street Collection is the second studio album by American rock band No Doubt , released in March 1993 . It was released independently by the band under their own record label , Beacon Street Records . It was produced by No Doubt themselves and recorded in a homemade recording studio in the garage of their house on Beacon Avenue in Anaheim , California , from which the album takes its name . Additional recording and mixing were done at Clear Lake Audio in North Hollywood , California with engineer Colin " Dog " Mitchell . 
 The album was released during a time in which the band were receiving little attention from their record label , Interscope Records , and were not getting a chance to record a second album . Interscope were disillusioned with the band after the commercial failure of their first album , No Doubt . No Doubt had written large numbers of songs and knew that they would not make it onto any Interscope album , so they built their own studio and recorded the album there . Two singles were released from it : " Squeal " and " Doghouse " on 7 @-@ inch vinyl . 
 The album sold over 100 @,@ 000 copies in 1993 , over three times as many as their first album sold . This success ensured that Interscope financed the band 's third album , Tragic Kingdom , which was a massive success , selling 16 million copies worldwide and attracting extensive interest in the band . The Beacon Street Collection was re @-@ released in 1997 as part of the band 's back catalog . 
 = = Background = = 
 No Doubt released their self @-@ titled debut album in 1992 , a year after being signed to Interscope . The group 's blend of upbeat brass @-@ dominated songs and funk @-@ style bass riffs came at a time when most of the United States was in the thrall of grunge music , a genre whose angst @-@ ridden lyrics and dirty sound could not have contrasted more with the atmosphere of most of the songs on No Doubt 's pop @-@ oriented album . Not surprisingly , the band lost out to the now @-@ ubiquitous grunge music and the album was a commercial failure , with only 30 @,@ 000 copies sold . In the words of the program director of KROQ , a Los Angeles radio station on which it was one of the band 's driving ambitions to be played : " It would take an act of God for this band to get on the radio . " 
 The band started to work on its second album in 1993 but Interscope , having lost faith in the band , rejected most of its material and so it was paired with producer Matthew Wilder . Kanal then ended his seven @-@ year relationship with Gwen , saying that he needed " space " . 
 = = Music = = 
 A large number of songs on The Beacon Street Collection were written by Eric Stefani , who left the group before their third album was recorded . This gave the album a similar sound to their first album , No Doubt , in which Eric Stefani had collaborated in the writing of all the songs . Because the lyrics in Tragic Kingdom were written mainly by Gwen Stefani about her experiences in life , the style of music changed from what No Doubt had previously produced . Tom Dumont explained the change in sound in an interview for Backstage Online : 
 " Well , there is a reason that the sound of our music has changed and it 's not because we 've sold out , easy for me to say . Eric , our keyboard player used to write most of our songs . He was the main creative force in the band for many years . And at a certain point after that first album came out , he had this personal thing , like he didn 't like touring , he didn 't like all that stuff . He just liked to sit down and write songs . That 's him . He 's the artistic side , the total Mr. Creative . 
 Well what happened is when Eric decided to leave the band it left the song writing to us , me , Gwen , Tony , the rest of us and it 's a really natural thing for our song writing style to be different than Eric 's . Just we 're different people . I mean we 've learned a lot from him and he taught us a lot of things about song writing , but we write simpler music . We have a simpler style . We 're not quite Genius like him I think . This album was our first <unk> it was Gwen 's first time really writing all the lyrics herself so to me , it went the <unk> from selling out we have done something that is even more personal . In the past , Eric was writing songs about his life and having Gwen sing them . Now we have Gwen singing and writing about her own experiences . " 
 = = = Production = = = 
 No Doubt became frustrated at the lack of progress they were making with Interscope , who were proving unreliable in their support of the band . Instead , they built their own studio in their garage on Beacon Avenue in Anaheim , California Although the band had knowledge that they didn 't want any songs to be released in an Interscope @-@ distributed album , they recorded The Beacon Street Collection in their studio and Clear Lake Audio in one long weekend . Their independence shocked their company representative , Tony Ferguson , who had assumed they were recording a third single . 
 = = = Singles = = = 
 In 1994 , before recording of the album had even begun , No Doubt released two seven @-@ inch singles for their fans . The first was " Squeal " , a song written by Eric Stefani , detailing a criminal 's reaction to her partner 's betrayal to the police . They had agreed to be " in this together " but , after he " squeals " , she resolves to " kill the narc who wrote it and said it [ that she was guilty of a crime ] " . The single 's B @-@ side was " My Room Is Still Clean " , written by Tony Kanal and recorded live at the Icehouse in Fullerton , California on February 13 , 1993 . 
 The second single was " Doghouse " , written by Eric Stefani . It is about a man who is bullied and dominated by his girlfriend and is unwilling to force the situation to change . The song uses the metaphor of a dog and its master to illustrate the nature of the relationship , saying that she had got him " by the reins " and he has been " conditioned " by her . The single 's B @-@ side was " You Can 't Teach an Ol ' Dog New Tricks " , written by Eric Stefani . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Significance = = = 
 On its original release in March 1995 , The Beacon Street Collection was only available in local record stores in Orange County , California and at No Doubt 's shows . Its rawer sound proved popular with the band 's fans and the band 's first batch of one thousand copies sold out within only a few months after its release . Interscope realized the band 's potential and allowed them to record their third album , Tragic Kingdom in various Los Angeles studios , " wherever they could get a deal on a studio " . During a recording session , the band was introduced to Paul Palmer , who was interested in mixing the new album . He owned his own record label Trauma Records , which was associated with Interscope . Interscope willingly <unk> the project to Trauma Records in 1995 and Tragic Kingdom got the personal focus that comes from a small company . 
 By the end of the year , 100 @,@ 000 copies of The Beacon Street Collection had been sold , over three times as many as their first album , No Doubt . These sales were mostly due to the release of Tragic Kingdom , which was released seven months after The Beacon Street Collection in October 1995 . Tragic Kingdom was a massive commercial success , reaching sales of over 10 million in the United States and 16 million worldwide , peaking at number one on several charts and being certified " diamond " ( 10 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 units = Diamond album ) in the US and Canada and " platinum " in the UK and Australia . This success created an extensive interest in the band 's back catalog so , in October 1997 , The Beacon Street Collection was re @-@ released on Interscope . 
 In an interview with <unk> Magazine in April 1996 , Gwen Stefani described the release of The Beacon Street Collection as " one of the best things [ they ] ever did because [ they ] were able to take some songs that would have probably gotten lost and document them " . 
 = = = Critical = = = 
 Allmusic called the album " finer than the [ band 's ] debut " , and described it as containing more of a " raw sound inspired [ ... ] by punk " than the style of No Doubt 's first album , which was heavily " synth and new wave " . Entertainment Weekly , in 1997 , called it " more focused than Tragic Kingdom " with " reggae frat @-@ house grooves and perky horns " , and complimented " Gwen 's feisty <unk> @-@ doll wail " and the " swaying ballads " , attributing it to " the band 's willing spirit " . Rock on the Net retrospectively called the album " a raw expression of their sound " and describing it as " 80s punk with 90s grunge . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = = Credits = = 
 = = = Personnel = = = 
 Gwen Stefani - vocals 
 Tom Dumont - guitar 
 Tony Kanal - bass 
 Adrian Young - percussion , drums 
 Eric Stefani - keyboard 
 Phil Jordan - trumpet 
 Eric Carpenter - saxophone 
 Additional personnel 
 Bradley Nowell - vocals 
 Gabrial McNair - percussion , trombone 
 Gerard <unk> baritone , tenor , soprano saxophones 
 = = = Production = = = 
 Producer : No Doubt 
 Engineers : Ray Blair , Tom Dumont , Colin " Dog " Mitchell 
 Mixing : Tom Dumont , Nicholas <unk> , Colin " Dog " Mitchell , No Doubt , Scott Ralston , Adrian Young 
 Mixing assistants : Nick <unk> , Scott Ralston , Adrian Young 
 Mastering : Robert <unk> 
 Advisor : <unk> <unk> 
 Design : Gwen Stefani 
 Layout design : Matt Wignall 
 Liner notes : No Doubt 
 = = Release history = = 
 All information is from the Allmusic page and No Doubt 's official website discography . 
 = George Armitage Miller = 
 George Armitage Miller ( February 3 , 1920 – July 22 , 2012 ) was one of the founders of the cognitive psychology field . He also contributed to the birth of psycholinguistics and cognitive science in general . Miller wrote several books and directed the development of WordNet , an online word @-@ linkage database usable by computer programs . He authored the paper , " The Magical Number Seven , Plus or Minus Two , " in which he insightfully observed that many different experimental findings considered together reveal the presence of an average limit of seven for human short @-@ term memory capacity . This paper is frequently cited in both psychology and the wider culture . He also won awards , such as the National Medal of Science . 
 Miller started his education focusing on speech and language and published papers on these topics , focusing on mathematical , computational and psychological aspects of the field . He started his career at a time when the reigning theory in psychology was behaviorism , which eschewed any attempt to study mental processes and focused only on observable behavior . Working mostly at Harvard University , MIT and Princeton University , Miller introduced experimental techniques to study the psychology of mental processes . He went on to be one of the founders of psycholinguistics and was then one of the key figures in founding the broader new field of cognitive science , circa 1978 .. He collaborated and co @-@ authored work with other figures in cognitive science and psycholinguistics , such as Noam Chomsky . For moving psychology into the realm of mental processes and for aligning that move with information theory , computation theory , and linguistics , Miller is considered one of the great twentieth @-@ century psychologists . A Review of General Psychology survey , published in 2002 , ranked Miller as the 20th most cited psychologist of that era . 
 = = Biography = = 
 Miller was born on February 3 , 1920 , in Charleston , West Virginia , the son of an executive at a steel company , George E. Miller , and Florence ( Armitage ) Miller . Soon after , his parents divorced . He grew up with only his mother during the Great Depression , attended public school , and graduated from Charleston High School in 1937 . He relocated with his mother and stepfather to Washington D.C. , and was at George Washington University for a year . His family practiced Christian Science , which required turning to prayer , rather than medical science , for healing . After his stepfather was transferred to Birmingham , Alabama , Miller transferred to the University of Alabama . 
 He received his bachelor 's degree in history and speech in 1940 , and a master 's in speech in 1941 from the University of Alabama . He had taken courses in phonetics , voice science , and speech pathology . Membership in the Drama club fostered his interest in courses in the Speech Department . He was also influenced by Professor Donald <unk> , who introduced him both to psychology , and , indirectly through a seminar , to his future wife Katherine James . They married on November 29 , 1939 . Katherine died in January , 1996 . He married Margaret Ferguson Skutch Page in 2008 . 
 Miller taught the course " Introduction to Psychology " at Alabama for two years . He enrolled in the Ph.D. program in psychology at Harvard University in 1943 , after coming to the university in 1942 . He received his doctorate in 1946 from Harvard 's Psycho @-@ Acoustic Laboratory , under the supervision of Stanley Smith Stevens , researching military voice communications for the Army Signal Corps during World War II . His doctorate thesis , " The Optimal Design of Jamming Signals , " was classified top secret by the US Army . 
 = = = Career = = = 
 After receiving his doctorate , Miller stayed as a research fellow at Harvard , to continue his research on speech and hearing . He was appointed assistant professor of psychology in 1948 . The course he developed on language and communication would eventually lead to his first major book , Language and communication ( 1951 ) . He took a sabbatical in 1950 , and spent a year as a visiting fellow at the Institute for Advanced Study , Princeton , to pursue his interest in mathematics . Miller befriended J. Robert Oppenheimer , with whom he played squash . In 1951 , Miller joined MIT as an associate professor of psychology . He led the psychology group at MIT Lincoln Lab . He worked on voice communication and human engineering , whereupon he identified the minimal voice features of speech required for it to be intelligible . Based on this work , in 1955 , he was invited to a talk at the Eastern Psychological Association . That presentation , " The magical number seven , plus or minus two " , was later published as a paper which went on to be a legendary one in cognitive psychology . 
 Miller moved back to Harvard as a tenured associate professor in 1955 and became a full professor in 1958 , expanding his research into how language affects human cognition . At the university he met a young Noam Chomsky , another of the founders of cognitive science . They spent a summer together at Stanford training the faculty , and their two families shared a house . In 1958 – 59 , Miller took leave to join the Center for Advanced Study in the Behavioral Sciences at Palo Alto , California , ( now at Stanford University ) . There he collaborated with Eugene Galanter and Karl Pribram on the book Plans and the Structure of Behavior . In 1960 , along with Jerome S. Bruner , he co @-@ founded the Center for Cognitive Studies at Harvard . The cognitive term was a break from the then @-@ dominant school of behaviorism , which insisted cognition was not fit for scientific study . The center attracted such notable visitors as Jean Piaget , Alexander Luria and Chomsky . Miller then became the chair of the psychology department . Miller was instrumental at the time for recruiting Timothy Leary to teach at Harvard . Miller knew Leary from the University of Alabama , where Miller was teaching psychology and Leary graduated with an undergraduate degree from the department . 
 In 1967 , Miller taught at Rockefeller University for a year , as a visiting professor , From 1968 to 1979 , he was Professor at the Rockefeller University and continued as Adjunct Professor there from 1979 @-@ 1982 . A new president 's selection at Rockefeller made him leave . 
 He moved to Princeton University in 1979 as the James S. McDonnell Distinguished University Professor of Psychology . 
 In 1986 , he helped in founding the Cognitive Science Laboratory at Princeton . Eventually he became a professor emeritus and senior research psychologist at Princeton . He also directed the McDonnell @-@ Pew Program in Cognitive Science . 
 Miller had honorary doctorates from the University of Sussex ( 1984 ) , Columbia University ( 1980 ) , Yale University ( 1979 ) , Catholic University of Louvain ( 1978 ) , Carnegie Mellon University ( in humane letters , 2003 ) , and an honorary DSC from Williams College ( 2000 ) . He was elected to the American Academy of Arts and Sciences in 1957 , the National Academy of Sciences in 1962 , the presidency of the Eastern Psychological Association in 1962 , the presidency of the American Psychological Association in 1969 , and to the Royal Netherlands Academy of Arts and Sciences in 1985 . Miller was the keynote speaker at the first convention of the Association for Psychological Science in 1989 . He was a Fulbright research fellow at Oxford University in 1964 – 65 , and in 1991 , received the National Medal of Science . 
 = = = Death = = = 
 In his later years , Miller enjoyed playing golf . He died in 2012 at his home in Plainsboro , New Jersey of complications of pneumonia and dementia . At the time of his death , he was survived by his wife Margaret ; the children from his first marriage : son <unk> James and daughter Nancy Saunders ; two stepsons , David Skutch and Christopher Skutch ; and three grandchildren : Gavin Murray @-@ Miller , Morgan Murray @-@ Miller and Nathaniel James Miller . 
 = = Major contributions = = 
 Miller 's career started during the reign of behaviorism in psychology . <unk> questioned whether mental thought processes were fit for scientific study , not being observable . They focused on working with responses to stimuli , particularly among other animals . Miller disagreed . He , Jerome Bruner , and Noam Chomsky are considered the founders of the field of Cognitive Psychology that replaced behaviorism as the framework for analyzing the mind . 
 = = = Working memory = = = 
 From the days of William James , psychologists had the idea memory consisted of short @-@ term and long @-@ term memory . While short @-@ term memory was expected to be limited , its exact limits were not known . In 1956 , Miller would quantify its capacity limit in the paper " The magical number seven , plus or minus two " . He tested immediate memory via tasks such as asking a person to repeat a set of digits presented ; absolute judgment by presenting a stimulus and a label , and asking them to recall the label later ; and span of attention by asking them to count things in a group of more than a few items quickly . For all three cases , Miller found the average limit to be seven items . He had mixed feelings about the focus on his work on the exact number seven for quantifying short @-@ term memory , and felt it had been misquoted often . He stated , introducing the paper on the research for the first time , that he was being persecuted by an integer . Miller invented the term chunk to characterize the highly variable units to which the limit on memory applied . A chunk might be a single letter or a familiar word or even a larger familiar unit . Miller himself saw no relationship among the disparate tasks of immediate memory and absolute judgment , but lumped them to fill a one @-@ hour presentation . The results influenced the budding field of cognitive psychology . 
 = = = WordNet = = = 
 For many years starting from 1986 , Miller directed the development of WordNet , a large computer @-@ readable electronic reference usable in applications such as search engines . Wordnet is a large lexical database representing human semantic memory in English . Its fundamental building block is a <unk> , which is a collection of synonyms representing a concept or idea . Words can be in multiple <unk> . The entire class of <unk> is grouped into nouns , verbs , adjectives and adverbs separately , with links existing only within these four major groups but not between them . Going beyond a thesaurus , WordNet also includes inter @-@ word relationships such as part / whole relationships and hierarchies of <unk> not intended to be a dictionary , Wordnet did have many short definitions added to it as time went on . Miller and colleagues had planned the tool to test psycholinguistic theories on how humans use and understand words . Miller also later worked closely with the developers at <unk> Inc . , on a meaning @-@ based keyword search engine based on WordNet . Wordnet has proved to be extremely influential on an international scale . It has now been emulated by <unk> in many different languages . 
 = = = Language psychology and computation = = = 
 Miller is considered one of the founders of psycholinguistics , which links language and cognition in psychology , to analyze how people use and create language . His 1951 book Language and Communication is considered seminal in the field . His later book , The Science of Words ( 1991 ) also focused on language psychology . He published papers along with Noam Chomsky on the mathematics and computational aspects of language and its syntax , two new areas of study . Miller also researched how people understood words and sentences , the same problem faced by artificial speech @-@ recognition technology . The book Plans and the Structure of Behavior ( 1960 ) , written with Eugene Galanter and Karl H. Pribram , explored how humans plan and act , trying to extrapolate this to how a robot could be programmed to plan and do things . Miller is also known for coining Miller 's Law : " In order to understand what another person is saying , you must assume it is true and try to imagine what it could be true of " . 
 = = Books = = 
 Miller authored several books , many considered the first major works in their respective fields . 
 = = = Language and Communication , 1951 = = = 
 Miller 's Language and Communication was one of the first significant texts in the study of language behavior . The book was a scientific study of language , emphasizing quantitative data , and was based on the mathematical model of Claude Shannon 's information theory . It used a probabilistic model imposed on a learning @-@ by @-@ association scheme borrowed from behaviorism , with Miller not yet attached to a pure cognitive perspective . The first part of the book reviewed information theory , the physiology and acoustics of phonetics , speech recognition and comprehension , and statistical techniques to analyze language . The focus was more on speech generation than recognition . The second part had the psychology : idiosyncratic differences across people in language use ; developmental linguistics ; the structure of word associations in people ; use of symbolism in language ; and social aspects of language use . 
 Reviewing the book , Charles E. Osgood classified the book as a graduate @-@ level text based more on objective facts than on theoretical constructs . He thought the book was verbose on some topics and too brief on others not directly related to the author 's expertise area . He was also critical of Miller 's use of simple , <unk> single @-@ stage stimulus @-@ response learning to explain human language acquisition and use . This approach , per Osgood , made it impossible to analyze the concept of meaning , and the idea of language consisting of representational signs . He did find the book objective in its emphasis on facts over theory , and depicting clearly application of information theory to psychology . 
 = = = Plans and the Structure of Behavior , 1960 = = = 
 In Plans and the Structure of Behavior , Miller and his co @-@ authors tried to explain through an artificial @-@ intelligence computational perspective how animals plan and act . This was a radical break from behaviorism which explained behavior as a set or sequence of stimulus @-@ response actions . The authors introduced a planning element controlling such actions . They saw all plans as being executed based on input using a stored or inherited information of the environment ( called the image ) , and using a strategy called test @-@ operate @-@ test @-@ exit ( TOTE ) . The image was essentially a stored memory of all past context , akin to Tolman 's cognitive map . The TOTE strategy , in its initial test phase , compared the input against the image ; if there was incongruity the operate function attempted to reduce it . This cycle would be repeated till the incongruity vanished , and then the exit function would be invoked , passing control to another TOTE unit in a hierarchically arranged scheme . 
 Peter Milner , in a review in the Canadian Journal of Psychology , noted the book was short on concrete details on implementing the TOTE strategy . He also critically viewed the book as not being able to tie its model to details from neurophysiology at a molecular level . Per him , the book covered only the brain at the gross level of lesion studies , showing that some of its regions could possibly implement some TOTE strategies , without giving a reader an indication as to how the region could implement the strategy . 
 = = = The Psychology of Communication , 1967 = = = 
 Miller 's 1967 work , The Psychology of Communication , was a collection of seven previously published articles . The first " Information and Memory " dealt with <unk> , presenting the idea of separating physical length ( the number of items presented to be learned ) and psychological length ( the number of ideas the recipient manages to categorize and summarize the items with ) . Capacity of short @-@ term memory was measured in units of psychological length , arguing against a pure behaviorist interpretation since meaning of items , beyond reinforcement and punishment , was central to psychological length . 
 The second essay was the paper on magical number seven . The third , ' The human link in communication systems , ' used information theory and its idea of channel capacity to analyze human perception bandwidth . The essay concluded how much of what impinges on us we can absorb as knowledge was limited , for each property of the stimulus , to a handful of items . The paper on " <unk> " described how effort in both speaking or understanding a sentence was related to how much of self @-@ reference to similar @-@ structures @-@ present @-@ inside was there when the sentence was broken down into clauses and phrases . The book , in general , used the <unk> view of seeing language rules of grammar as having a biological basis — disproving the simple behaviorist idea that language performance improved with reinforcement — and using the tools of information and computation to place hypotheses on a sound theoretical framework and to analyze data practically and efficiently . Miller specifically addressed experimental data refuting the behaviorist framework at concept level in the field of language and cognition . He noted this only qualified behaviorism at the level of cognition , and did not overthrow it in other spheres of psychology . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 The Cognitive Neuroscience Society established a George A. Miller Prize in 1995 for contributions to the field . The American Psychological Association established a George A. Miller Award in 1995 for an outstanding article on general psychology . From 1987 the department of psychology at Princeton University has presented the George A. Miller prize annually to the best interdisciplinary senior thesis in cognitive science . The paper on the magical number seven continues to be cited by both the popular press to explain the liking for seven @-@ digit phone numbers and to argue against nine @-@ digit zip codes , and by academia , especially modern psychology , to highlight its break with the behaviorist paradigm . 
 Miller was considered the 20th most eminent psychologist of the 20th century in a list republished by , among others , the American Psychological Association . 
 = = Awards = = 
 Distinguished Scientific Contribution award from the American Psychological Association ( APA ) in 1963 . 
 Distinguished Service award from the American Speech and Hearing Association , 1976 . 
 Award in Behavioral Sciences from the New York Academy of Sciences , 1982 . 
 Guggenheim fellow in 1986 . 
 William James fellow of the American Psychological Society , 1989 . 
 Hermann von Helmholtz award from the Cognitive <unk> Institute , 1989 . 
 Gold Medal from the American Psychological Foundation in 1990 . 
 National Medal of Science from The White House , 1991 . 
 Louis E. Levy medal from the Franklin Institute , 1991 . 
 International Prize from the <unk> Foundation , 1992 . 
 William James Book award from the APA Division of General Psychology , 1993 . 
 John P. McGovern award from the American Association for the Advancement of Science , 2000 . 
 Outstanding Lifetime Contribution to Psychology award from the APA in 2003 . 
 Antonio <unk> Prize from the European Languages Research Association , 2006 . 
 = = List of Miller 's books = = 
 — ( 1963 ) . Language and Communication . McGraw Hill . ASIN <unk> . 
 — ( 1965 ) . Mathematics and Psychology ( Perspectives in Psychology ) . John Wiley & Sons . ISBN <unk> . 
 Frank Smith & George A. Miller , eds . ( 1966 ) . The genesis of language ; a psycholinguistic approach ; proceedings of a conference on language development in children . The MIT Press . 
 Frank Smith ; George A Miller ( 1968 ) . The Genesis of Language : A <unk> Approach . The MIT Press . ISBN 978 @-@ <unk> . 
 George A. Miller , ed . ( 1973 ) . Communication , Language and Meaning ( Perspectives in Psychology ) . Basic Books . ISBN <unk> . 
 — ( 1974 ) . Linguistic Communication : Perspectives for Research . International Reading Association . ISBN 978 @-@ <unk> . 
 — ( 1975 ) . The Psychology of Communication . Harper <unk> @-@ 1975 . ISBN 978 @-@ <unk> . 
 George A. Miller ; Philip N Johnson @-@ Laird ( 1976 ) . Language and Perception . Harvard University Press . ISBN 978 @-@ <unk> . 
 Morris Halle , Joan Bresnan , & George A. Miller , eds . ( 1978 ) . Linguistic theory and psychological reality . The MIT Press . ISBN <unk> . 
 George A. Miller & Elizabeth Lenneberg , eds . ( 1978 ) . Psychology and biology of language and thought : essays in honor of Eric Lenneberg . Academic Press . ISBN <unk> . 
 Oscar <unk> & George A. Miller , eds . ( 1981 ) . Sociology of Organizations ( 2 ed . ) . Free Press . ISBN <unk> . 
 Ned Joel Block , Jerrold J. Katz , George A. Miller , eds . ( 1981 ) . Readings in Philosophy of Psychology , Volume II . Harvard University Press . ISBN <unk> . 
 George A. Miller ; Eugene Galanter ; Karl H. Pribram ( 1986 ) . Plans and the Structure of Behavior . Adams Bannister Cox Pubs . ISBN <unk> . 
 — ( 1987 ) . Spontaneous Apprentices : Children and Language ( Tree of Life ) . Seabury Press . ISBN 978 @-@ <unk> . 
 — ( 1987 ) . Language and Speech . W H Freeman & Co ( sd ) . ISBN 978 @-@ <unk> . 
 — ( 1991 ) . Psychology : The Science of Mental Life . Penguin Books Ltd . ISBN <unk> . 
 — ( 1991 ) . The Science of Words . W H Freeman & Co . ISBN 978 @-@ <unk> . 
 = = = Chapters in books = = = 
 Miller , George A. ; Galanter , Eugene ( 1960 ) , " Some comments on Stochastic models and psychological theories " , in Arrow , Kenneth J. ; Karlin , Samuel ; <unk> , Patrick , Mathematical models in the social sciences , 1959 : Proceedings of the first Stanford symposium , Stanford mathematical studies in the social sciences , IV , Stanford , California : Stanford University Press , pp. 277 – 297 , ISBN <unk> . 
 = Tiger shark = 
 The tiger shark ( Galeocerdo cuvier ) is a species of requiem shark and the only extant member of the genus Galeocerdo . Commonly known as the " Sea Tiger " , the tiger shark is a relatively large <unk> , capable of attaining a length over 5 m ( 16 ft 5 in ) . It is found in many tropical and temperate waters , and it is especially common around central Pacific islands . Its name derives from the dark stripes down its body which resemble a tiger 's pattern , which fade as the shark matures . 
 The tiger shark is a solitary , mostly nocturnal hunter and is notable for having the widest food spectrum of all sharks , consuming a variety of prey ranging from crustaceans , fish , seals , birds , squid , turtles and sea snakes to dolphins and even other smaller sharks . The tiger shark has been known to eat inedible manmade objects that linger in its stomach , and it has a reputation as a " garbage eater " . While the tiger shark sits atop the food chain as an apex predator , killer whales have been known on occasion to prey on them . The tiger shark is considered a near threatened species due to finning and fishing by humans . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 The shark was first described by Peron and Lesueur in 1822 , and was given the name Squalus cuvier . Müller and Henle in 1837 renamed it Galeocerdo tigrinus . The genus , Galeocerdo , is derived from the Greek <unk> , which means shark , and the Latin <unk> , the word for the hard hairs of pigs . It is often colloquially called the man @-@ eater shark . 
 The tiger shark is a member of the order Carcharhiniformes , the most species @-@ rich order of sharks , with more than 270 species also including the small catsharks and hammerhead sharks . Members of this order are characterized by the presence of a nictitating membrane over the eyes , two dorsal fins , an anal fin , and five gill slits . It is the largest member of the Carcharhinidae family , commonly referred to as requiem sharks . This family consists of mostly slender but powerful mid- to large @-@ sized sharks and includes some other well @-@ known sharks , such as the blue shark ( Prionace glauca ) , lemon shark ( Negaprion brevirostris ) , and bull shark ( Carcharhinus leucas ) . 
 = = Description = = 
 The tiger shark commonly attains a length of 3 @.@ 25 – 4 @.@ 25 m ( 10 ft 8 in – 13 ft 11 in ) and weighs around 385 – 635 kg ( 849 – 1 @,@ 400 lb ) . Sometimes , an exceptionally large male tiger shark can grow up to 4 m ( 13 ft 1 in ) . Females are larger , and exceptionally big ones can reportedly measure over 5 m ( 16 ft 5 in ) . One female specimen caught off Australia reportedly measured 5 @.@ 5 m ( 18 ft 1 in ) long and weighed an exceptional 1 @,@ 524 kg ( 3 @,@ 360 lb ) , although her weight is thought to have been bolstered by her pregnant state at the time . Even larger specimens have been reported , but are unconfirmed . 
 Among the largest extant sharks , the tiger shark ranks in average size only behind the whale shark ( Rhincodon typus ) , the basking shark ( Cetorhinus maximus ) and the great white shark ( Carcharodon carcharias ) . Some other species such as megamouth sharks ( <unk> <unk> ) , Pacific sleeper sharks ( Somniosus pacificus ) , Greenland sharks ( Somniosus microcephalus ) and bluntnose sixgill sharks ( Hexanchus griseus ) broadly overlap in size with the tiger shark , but as these species are comparatively poorly studied , it is unclear whether their typical mature size matches that of the tiger shark . The great hammerhead ( Sphyrna mokarran ) , a member of the same taxonomic order as the tiger shark , has a similar or even greater average body length but is lighter and less bulky , with a maximum known weight of 580 kg ( 1 @,@ 280 lb ) . 
 Its teeth are specialized to slice through flesh , bone , and other tough substances such as turtle shells . Like most sharks , its teeth are continually replaced by rows of new teeth . 
 = = = Skin = = = 
 The skin of a tiger shark can typically range from blue to light green with a white or light @-@ yellow underbelly . The advantage of this is that when it is hunting for its prey , when prey looks at the shark from above , the shark will be camouflaged since the water below is darker . And when prey is below the shark and looks up , of course because of the sun , it is lighter so that the light underbelly will also camouflage the shark . This is known as countershading . Dark spots and stripes are most visible in young sharks and fade as the shark matures . Its head is somewhat wedge @-@ shaped , which makes it easy to turn quickly to one side . They have small pits on the snout which hold electroreceptors called the ampullae of Lorenzini , which enable them to detect electric fields , including the weak electrical impulses generated by prey , which helps them to hunt . Tiger sharks also have a sensory organ called a lateral line which extends on their flanks down most of the length of their sides . The primary role of this structure is to detect minute vibrations in the water . These adaptations allow the tiger shark to hunt in darkness and detect hidden prey . 
 = = = Vision = = = 
 A reflective layer behind the tiger shark 's retina , called the tapetum lucidum , allows light @-@ sensing cells a second chance to capture photons of visible light , enhancing vision in low light conditions . A tiger shark generally has long fins to provide lift as the shark maneuvers through water , while the long upper tail provides bursts of speed . Tiger sharks normally swim using small body movements . Its high back and dorsal fin act as a pivot , allowing it to spin quickly on its axis , though the shark 's dorsal fins are distinctively close to its tail . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 The tiger shark is often found close to the coast , mainly in tropical and subtropical waters throughout the world . Its behavior is primarily nomadic , but is guided by warmer currents , and it stays closer to the equator throughout the colder months . It tends to stay in deep waters that line reefs , but it does move into channels to pursue prey in shallower waters . In the western Pacific Ocean , the shark has been found as far north as Japan and as far south as New Zealand . A tiger shark tagged in the Caribbean has been tracked migrating to Cape Cod ; although they are a tropical species , the warm Gulf Stream brings the coast of Cape Cod to within the extreme north of its range during the summer . 
 Tiger sharks can be seen in the Gulf of Mexico , North American beaches , and parts of South America . It is also commonly known in the Caribbean Sea . Other locations where tiger sharks are seen include off Africa , China , Hong Kong , India , Australia , and Indonesia . 
 Certain tiger sharks have been recorded at depths just shy of 900 m ( 3 @,@ 000 ft ) , but some sources claim they move into shallow water normally thought to be too shallow for a species of its size . A recent study showed the average tiger shark would be recorded at 350 m ( 1 @,@ 100 ft ) , making it uncommon to see tiger sharks in shallow water . However , tiger sharks in Hawaii have been observed in depths as shallow as 3 m ( 10 ft ) and regularly observed in coastal waters at depths of 6 to 12 m ( 20 to 40 ft ) . 
 = = Feeding = = 
 The tiger shark is an apex predator and has a reputation for eating anything . Young tiger sharks are found to prey largely on small fish , as well as various small jellyfish , cephalopods , and other mollusks . Around the time they attain 2 @.@ 3 m ( 7 @.@ 5 ft ) , or near sexual maturity , their prey selection expands considerably , and much larger animals become regular prey . Numerous fish , crustaceans , sea birds , sea snakes , marine mammals ( e.g. bottlenose dolphins ( Tursiops ) , common dolphins ( Delphinus ) , spotted dolphins ( Stenella ) , dugongs ( Dugong dugon ) , seals and sea lions ) , and sea turtles ( including the three largest species : the leatherback ( Dermochelys coriacea ) , the loggerhead ( Caretta caretta ) and the green sea turtles ( Chelonia mydas ) , ) are regularly eaten by adult tiger sharks . The tiger shark also eats other sharks ( including adult sandbar sharks ( Carcharhinus plumbeus ) ) , as well as rays , and will sometimes even eat other tiger sharks . 
 Due to high risk of predatory attacks , dolphins often avoid regions inhabited by tiger sharks . Tiger sharks may also attack injured or ailing whales and prey upon them . A group was documented attacking and killing an ailing humpback whale ( Megaptera novaeangliae ) in 2006 near Hawaii . The tiger shark also scavenges on dead whales . In one such documented incident , they were observed scavenging on a whale carcass alongside great white sharks . 
 Evidence of dugong predation was identified in one study that found dugong tissue in 15 of 85 tiger sharks caught off the Australian coast . Additionally , examination of adult dugongs has shown scars from failed shark attacks . Finally , dugong microhabitats shift similarly to those of known tiger shark prey when the sharks are abundant . 
 The broad , heavily calcified jaws and nearly terminal mouth , combined with robust , serrated teeth , enable the tiger shark to take on these large prey . In addition , excellent eyesight and acute sense of smell enable it to react to faint traces of blood and follow them to the source . The ability to pick up low @-@ frequency pressure waves enables the shark to advance towards an animal with confidence , even in murky water . The shark circles its prey and studies it by prodding it with its snout . When attacking , the shark often eats its prey whole , although larger prey are often eaten in gradual large bites and finished over time . 
 Notably , terrestrial mammals , including horses ( Equus ferus caballus ) , goats ( Capra aegagrus hircus ) , sheep ( Ovis aries ) , dogs ( Canis lupus familiaris ) , cats ( Felis catus ) , brown rats ( Rattus norvegicus ) , are fairly common in the stomach contents of tiger sharks around the coasts of Hawaii . In one case , remains of two flying @-@ foxes were found in stomach of this shark . Because of its aggressive and indiscriminate feeding style , it often mistakenly eats inedible objects , such as automobile license plates , oil cans , tires , and baseballs . 
 = = = Swimming efficiency and stealth = = = 
 All tiger sharks generally swim slowly , which , combined with cryptic coloration , may make them difficult for prey to detect them in some habitats . They are especially well camouflaged against dark backgrounds . Despite their sluggish appearance , tiger sharks are one of the strongest swimmers of the carcharhinid sharks . Once the shark has come close , a speed burst allows it to reach the intended prey before it can escape . 
 = = Reproduction = = 
 Males reach sexual maturity at 2 @.@ 3 to 2 @.@ 9 m ( 7 @.@ 5 to 9 @.@ 5 ft ) and females at 2 @.@ 5 to 3 @.@ 5 m ( 8 @.@ 2 to 11 @.@ 5 ft ) . Females mate once every three years . They breed by internal fertilization . The male inserts one of his claspers into the female 's genital opening ( cloaca ) , acting as a guide for the sperm . The male uses his teeth to hold the female still during the procedure , often causing the female considerable discomfort . Mating in the Northern Hemisphere generally takes place between March and May , with birth between April and June the following year . In the Southern Hemisphere , mating takes place in November , December , or early January . The tiger shark is the only species in its family that is ovoviviparous ; its eggs hatch internally and the young are born live when fully developed . 
 The young develop inside the mother 's body for up to 16 months . Litters range from 10 to 80 pups . A newborn is generally 51 to 76 cm ( 20 to 30 in ) long . This shark typically reaches maturity at lengths of 2 to 3 m ( 6 @.@ 6 to 9 @.@ 8 ft ) . It is unknown how long tiger sharks live , but they can live longer than 12 years . 
 = = Conservation = = 
 The tiger shark is captured and killed for its fins , flesh , and liver . It is caught regularly in target and nontarget fisheries . Several populations have declined where they have been heavily fished . Continued demand for fins may result in further declines in the future . Tiger sharks are considered a near threatened species due to excessive finning and fishing by humans according to International Union for Conservation of Nature . 
 While shark fin has very few nutrients , shark liver has a high concentration of vitamin A which is used in the production of vitamin oils . In addition , the tiger shark is captured and killed for its distinct skin , as well as by big @-@ game fishers . 
 In 2010 , Greenpeace International added the tiger shark to its seafood red list , which is a list of fish commonly sold around the world , and which have a very high risk of being sourced from unsustainable fisheries . 
 = = Relationship with humans = = 
 Although it is very rare for sharks to bite humans , the tiger shark is reported to be responsible for a large percentage of fatal shark attacks , and is sometimes regarded as one of the most dangerous shark species . They often visit shallow reefs , harbors , and canals , creating the potential for encounter with humans . The tiger shark also dwells in river mouths and other runoff @-@ rich water . While the tiger shark is considered to be one of the sharks most dangerous to humans , its bite rate is low . The tiger is second on the list of number of recorded bites on humans , with the great white shark being first . On average , three to four shark bites occur per year in Hawaii , but they are rarely fatal . This bite rate is very low considering thousands of people swim , surf , and dive in Hawaiian waters every day . Human interactions with tiger sharks in Hawaiian waters have been shown to increase between September and November , when tiger shark females are believed to migrate to the islands to give birth . 
 Between 1959 and 2000 , 4 @,@ 668 tiger sharks were culled in an effort to protect the tourism industry . These efforts , despite damaging the shark population , were shown to be ineffective in decreasing the number of interactions between humans and tiger sharks . It is illegal to feed sharks in Hawaii ( except for traditional Hawaiian cultural or religious practices ) , and interaction with them , such as cage diving , is discouraged . South African shark behaviorist and shark diver Mark Addison demonstrated divers could interact and dive with them outside of a shark cage in a 2007 Discovery Channel special , and underwater photographer Fiona Ayerst swam with them in the Bahamas . 
 = = Mythology = = 
 The tiger shark is considered to be sacred na <unk> ( ancestor spirits ) by some native Hawaiians who think their eyeballs have special powers of visual perception . This aligns with the general known facts about sharks and their highly developed senses . 
 = Hugh John Casey = 
 Hugh John " Pat " Casey ( 24 July 1898 – 30 August 1981 ) was a major general in the United States Army . A 1918 graduate of the U.S. Military Academy at West Point , Casey served in Germany during the Occupation of the Rhineland . He later returned to Germany to attend the Technische Hochschule in Berlin , earning a Doctor of Engineering degree . 
 As an engineer , Casey prepared a voluminous report on flood control for the Pittsburgh District . He was involved with the design and construction of the Deadman Island Lock and Dam on the Ohio River , and was chief of the Engineering Division at the Passamaquoddy Tidal Power Project , a New Deal public works project . He went to the Philippines in 1937 to advise the government there on hydropower and flood control . In the early part of World War II , he became involved with the enormous wartime construction program . Perhaps his most notable and lasting achievement was his involvement with the design of The Pentagon , the largest office building in the world . 
 Casey served as General of the Army Douglas MacArthur 's chief engineer during the Battle of Bataan , in the jungles and mountains of New Guinea and the Philippines , and during the occupation of Japan . In the Battle of Leyte , he commanded the Army Support Command ( ASCOM ) , which was responsible for all construction and logistics activities in the forward area . He hoped to become Chief of Engineers , but President Harry S. Truman passed him over . Later , Casey worked for Schenley Industries from 1951 until his retirement in 1965 , and was chairman of the New York City Transit Authority from 1953 to 1955 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Hugh John Casey was born in Brooklyn , New York on 7 June 1898 , the son of John J. Casey , a plumbing and heating contractor , and Margaret L. Casey . John 's grandparents were immigrants from Ireland and England . His grandfather served on the Union side in the American Civil War and was killed in the Battle of Shiloh . Margaret ’ s parents were Irish immigrants who settled in Pennsylvania . 
 Hugh Casey was educated at Manual Training High School from 1910 to 1914 , graduating at the age of 15 . He won a New York State scholarship and entered Brooklyn Polytechnic Institute , where he studied civil engineering . After a year there , he took a competitive examination for the U.S. Military Academy at West Point held by Congressman Daniel J. Griffin , the chairman of the House Committee on Military Affairs , ranking first out of 62 applicants for the appointment . To enter , Casey claimed to be slightly older , adopting his brother 's 7 June birthday . 
 Casey entered West Point in 1915 , where his best friend and roommate was Lucius D. Clay . At West Point , Casey played football as a halfback , substituting for Elmer Oliphant . One of Casey 's duties was tutoring Oliphant in mathematics . Casey decided that winning games was more important than playing , and he helped keep Oliphant proficient at math . Unlike most appointees to West Point , a grateful Casey wrote frequently to Griffin about his progress and sent him football tickets . When Casey 's younger brother Martin Charles Casey wanted to enter West Point , Griffin directly appointed him to the class of 1920 without having to pass the examination . Martin served with the coastal artillery for eleven years before being medically discharged due to migraine headaches on 30 November 1931 . Martin later became a successful lawyer . Both brothers acquired the nickname " Pat " at West Point . 
 = = World War I = = 
 Because of the United States ' entry into World War I , Casey 's class graduated early on 12 June 1918 . Casey was ranked third in the class and was commissioned as a captain in the United States Army Corps of Engineers . He was stationed at Camp A. A. Humphreys , Virginia , first as an instructor and then starting in September 1918 as a company commander with the 219th Engineers , part of the 19th Division . The 219th Engineers moved to Camp Dodge , Iowa in November 1918 . Casey returned to the Engineer School at Camp Humphreys as a student in September 1919 . 
 He served with the US Occupation forces in the Rhineland from June 1920 to May 1922 . While there , Casey improved on his high school German to become fluent enough in the language to write his doctoral thesis in the language . He also married Dorothy Ruth Miller , the daughter of Colonel R. B. Miller , the chief surgeon of the American forces stationed in Koblenz , on 22 May 1922 . On their honeymoon they traveled through south Germany , Austria , and Switzerland . The couple had three children : two sons , Hugh Boyd and Keith Miles , and a daughter , Patricia . 
 = = Between the wars = = 
 From 1922 to 1926 , Casey was the officer in charge of the Engineer Unit of the Reserve Officers Training Corps ( ROTC ) at the University of Kansas in Lawrence , Kansas , reverting to his substantive rank of first lieutenant on 27 November 1922 . He again returned to Camp <unk> in 1926 to attend the Company Officers Course . In 1927 , Casey received his first civil works assignment , as assistant District Engineer at the Pittsburgh District . Casey took over the task of preparing a voluminous report on flood control . The Corps of Engineers was criticized by the Pittsburgh Flood Control Commission for over @-@ engineering , in planning for a " flood that had never happened and never would happen " , and the report was shelved . However , in 1936 the flood did happen . The report was then dusted off and its recommendations were adopted . The Flood Control Act of 1936 assigned responsibility for flood control to the Corps of Engineers and other Federal agencies . Casey was also responsible for construction at Deadman Island Lock and Dam ( now called the <unk> Lock and Dam ) on the Ohio River . 
 In September 1929 Casey was assigned to the Rivers and Harbors Section of the Office of the Chief of Engineers in Washington , DC . This job involved reviewing the project studies , plans and specifications of all river and harbor projects throughout the United States , including flood control and hydroelectric power projects . He also had responsibility for correspondence with U.S. senators and congressmen . During this time he co @-@ designed and patented the Kingman @-@ Casey Floating Mooring Bit for navigation locks . He was promoted to the substantive rank of captain on 1 May 1933 . 
 Casey won a John R. Freeman fellowship from the American Society of Mechanical Engineers in 1933 to study hydraulics and civil engineering in Germany . For the next two years , he attended the Technische Hochschule in Berlin , earning a Doctorate in Engineering . His thesis , written in German , was on <unk> Bewegung , the <unk> movement in streams . Returning to the United States in June 1935 , Casey was posted to Eastport , Maine as chief of the Engineering Division at the Passamaquoddy Tidal Power Project , a New Deal public works project . There , he established a concrete testing laboratory under Charles E. <unk> which is now part of the Structures Laboratory at the Waterways Experiment Station at Vicksburg , Mississippi . Due to political forces , the project came to nothing and was allowed to die . After the Passamaquoddy project fell through , Casey served with the Boston Engineer District on flood control surveys of the Connecticut River Valley . 
 Along with Lucius Clay , Casey was sent to the Philippines in 1937 to advise the government there on hydropower and flood control . They worked with Meralco and other power companies in the Philippines , and conducted a series of surveys , including a detailed one of the Agno River . After Clay returned to the United States , Casey developed plans for the <unk> Dam , a 40 @,@ 000 horsepower ( 30 @,@ 000 kW ) hydroelectric project with an estimated cost of $ 5 million . Along with Lieutenant Colonel Dwight D. Eisenhower , the chief of staff to Major General Douglas MacArthur , the Military Advisor to the Commonwealth Government of the Philippines , and Mr. Rodriquez of the National Power Corporation , Casey presented the project to President Manuel Quezon , who approved it . After over twenty years as a captain , Casey was promoted to major on 1 February 1940 . 
 = = World War II = = 
 = = = Construction Division = = = 
 Casey returned to Washington , D.C. in October 1940 to become chief of the Design and Engineering Section in the Construction Division of the Office of the Quartermaster General , under Brigadier General Brehon B. Somervell . An enormous construction program was underway to meet the needs of World War II . Working with a staff that included George Bergstrom , a former president of the American Institute of Architects , Casey set about revising the standard designs for barracks . A number of new features were added to improve comfort , safety , and durability . Substitutions were made for scarce materials . It was discovered that the standard 63 @-@ man barracks was now too small . Of the 81 companies in the new triangular division , 51 fitted more easily into 74 @-@ man barracks . By slightly increasing the barracks size , substantial savings were made by reducing the overall number of buildings that needed to be constructed , the size of the cantonment areas required , and the length of required roads and utility lines . Casey was promoted to lieutenant colonel on 8 April 1941 . 
 On the afternoon of Thursday , 17 July 1941 , Somervell summoned Casey and Bergstrom and gave them a new special project : the design of an enormous office complex to house the War Department 's 40 @,@ 000 @-@ person staff together in one building . Somervell gave them until 09 : 00 on Monday morning to design the building , which he envisaged as a modern , four @-@ story structure with no elevators , on the site of the old Washington Hoover Airport . This would ultimately become The Pentagon , the largest office building in the world . Over that " very busy weekend " , Casey , Bergstrom and their staff roughed out the design for a four @-@ story , five @-@ sided structure with a floor area of 5 @,@ 100 @,@ 000 square feet ( 470 @,@ 000 m2 ) — twice that of the Empire State Building . The estimated cost was $ 35 million . President Roosevelt subsequently moved the site of the building , over Somervell 's objections , away from Arlington National Cemetery . 
 = = = Southwest Pacific = = = 
 In September 1941 , General Douglas MacArthur requested Casey 's services as his chief engineer . Casey arrived in Manila in October , shortly before the outbreak of war between the United States and Japan . He acquired construction equipment from the National Power Corporation that was being used on the <unk> project . Casey supervised demolitions as MacArthur 's troops retreated to Bataan , for which he was awarded the Distinguished Service Cross . Unlike the rest of MacArthur 's headquarters , Casey , who was promoted to colonel on 19 December 1941 and brigadier general on 25 January 1942 , did not relocate to Corregidor but remained on Bataan with a small staff of five officers . However , he joined MacArthur and sixteen other members of his staff in their escape from Corregidor by PT boat in March 1942 . For his service in the 1942 campaign in the Philippines , he was awarded the Army Distinguished Service Medal . 
 In Australia , Casey became Chief Engineer at MacArthur 's General Headquarters ( GHQ ) , Southwest Pacific Area ( SWPA ) . He faced enormous engineering challenges . Most of New Guinea consisted of mountains and jungle , with very few airstrips , ports or roads . All of these had to be developed to support operations . To provide additional expertise in construction , Casey had Leif Sverdrup assigned to his staff as chief of the Construction Section , with the rank of colonel . As U.S. Army engineers were few , Casey worked closely with his Australian Army counterpart at General Sir Thomas Blamey 's Allied Land Forces headquarters , Major General Clive Steele . Construction activities in Australia were also undertaken by civilians of the Allied Works Council . Casey attempted to coordinate the activities of the various agencies . He had to fend off attempts by the U.S. Army Air Forces to gain control of his aviation engineer battalions . The Royal Australian Air Force organized its own airbase construction squadrons and only with difficulty was Casey able to control their activities . 
 Casey 's initial need was for engineer units to accomplish the daunting construction program , but soon stocks of engineer supplies and equipment began to run low . This was exacerbated by incoming units arriving without their equipment , or with it stowed on numerous ships , which often arrived at various ports in a theater where ports were hundred or thousands of miles apart . Critical shortages developed of tractors , graders , concrete mixers and welding equipment . In the absence of a proper stock control system , an overall coordinating agency , and adequate numbers of engineer depot units , the allocation and distribution of the meager supplies on hand were difficult tasks . The worst problem was spare parts . Equipment was operated around the clock under harsh conditions and soon wore out or broke . A large proportion of equipment became unserviceable for lack of spare parts . <unk> sent to the United States took months to arrive , so recourse was made to the limited sources of supply in Australia . 
 In September 1942 , MacArthur decided to outflank Japanese troops on the Kokoda Trail by sending an American regimental combat team over the Owen Stanley Range . Two alternate means of crossing the mountains seemed possible . One , the Kapa Kapa Trail was known to climb to elevations above 9 @,@ 000 feet ( 2 @,@ 700 m ) and present formidable obstacles . Casey and Sverdrup took charge of investigating the Abau Trail . They reached Abau on 18 September . Casey explored the harbor , taking depth soundings from a native canoe . Sverdrup set out for Jaure with a party of one American , two Australians from the Australian New Guinea Administrative Unit , ten native police from the Royal Papuan Constabulary and 26 native carriers . After eight days on the trail , scaling heights of 5 @,@ 000 feet ( 1 @,@ 500 m ) , Sverdrup concluded that it would not be practical for troops to traverse the route and turned back . Meanwhile , Casey had concluded that the harbor was too shallow even for lighters . However , the trip was not a total loss , for Sverdrup had sighted a plateau north of the Owen Stanley Range suitable for airstrips , allowing troops to be flown across the Owen Stanley Range . Casey was awarded the Silver Star . 
 In New Guinea , logistics and construction activities were coordinated by task force engineer staffs . These were often hastily assembled and had not always been able to meet the demands imposed by base development in such a challenging theater of operations . The scale of operations in the Philippines was much greater , so for this purpose the Army Service Command ( ASCOM ) was formed in Brisbane on 23 July 1944 . Casey was appointed to command ASCOM . In his absence , Sverdrup became MacArthur 's chief engineer . Although part of USASOS , ASCOM operated under the control of Sixth Army , moving as far forward as combat operations allowed , developed new bases , and operated them until USASOS was ready to take over , at which point the units under ASCOM simply reverted to USASOS , allowing a seamless transfer of command . For the Battle of Leyte Casey 's ASCOM had 43 @,@ 000 men , of whom 21 @,@ 000 were engineers . 
 Casey and some members of his staff came ashore on A @-@ Day ; the advance echelon of his ASCOM headquarters arrived two days later . Work began immediately on the airfield at Tacloban , and commenced on airfields in central Leyte soon after they were captured . Heavy seasonal rains thwarted attempts to develop the airbases in central Leyte and it was decided to abandon their development and construct a new airbase on the coast at a site occupied by Sixth Army headquarters . The need to get aircraft based on Leyte to stop the Japanese from reinforcing the island was so pressing that Lieutenant General Walter Krueger agreed to move his headquarters . 
 Casey had intended to come ashore on the first day of the landing at Lingayen Gulf in January 1945 but was delayed a day because the destroyer he was traveling on had to escort a crippled transport . Despite enormous difficulties ASCOM was able to finish numerous projects on time and some ahead of schedule . On 13 February 1945 , ASCOM was transferred to USASOS and redesignated the Luzon Base Section ( <unk> ) . Casey then resumed his old post , now renamed Chief Engineer , US Army Forces Pacific . For his services as commander of ASCOM , he was awarded the Legion of Merit . He was subsequently awarded a bronze oak leaf cluster to his Distinguished Service Medal for his services as Chief Engineer , US Army Forces Pacific . 
 Casey hoped to become Chief of Engineers when Lieutenant General Raymond A. Wheeler retired in 1948 , but President Harry S. Truman passed him over in favor of the Missouri River Division Engineer , Major General Lewis A. Pick . Instead , Casey remained in Japan as MacArthur 's Chief Engineer until Casey 's retirement on 31 December 1949 . He edited Engineers of the Southwest Pacific , a seven @-@ volume series about their wartime service . He received a number of foreign awards for his service , including the Distinguished Service Star from the Philippines , the Commander of the Order of the British Empire from Australia , the Commander of the Order of Orange @-@ Nassau from the Netherlands , and the Officer of Légion d 'honneur from France . 
 = = Later life = = 
 Casey was Chairman of the New York City Transit Authority from 1953 to 1955 , and served in various positions with Schenley Industries from 1951 until his retirement in 1965 . He was a member of a number of professional societies , and civic organizations . He died of a heart attack on 30 August 1981 at the Veterans Administration Hospital at White River Junction , Vermont , survived by his wife Dorothy and his son Keith . His other son , Hugh , had been killed in an air crash during the Korean War . Father and son were buried adjacent to each other in Arlington National Cemetery . His daughter Patricia , who married Major General Frank Butner Clay , the son of Lucius Clay , had died on 1 January 1973 , and is also buried in Arlington National Cemetery . In August 1982 , a new building at the Humphreys Engineer Center at Fort Belvoir was dedicated in his honor by Dorothy and the Chief of Engineers , Lieutenant General Joseph K. Bratton . 
 = Three Men and a Comic Book = 
 " Three Men and a Comic Book " is the twenty @-@ first episode of The Simpsons ' second season . It originally aired on the Fox network in the United States on May 9 , 1991 . In the episode , Bart catches a glimpse of the original issue of Radioactive Man for sale at a comic book convention , so he , Martin , and Milhouse combine their money to buy the valuable comic book , only to lose it due to their selfishness and inability to share . 
 The episode was written by Jeff Martin and directed by Wes Archer . It features cultural references to comic book characters such as Casper the Friendly Ghost and Richie Rich . Several new characters make their first appearance on the show in the episode , including Comic Book Guy , Radioactive Man , and Mrs. Glick . Since airing , the episode has received generally positive reviews from television critics for its use of parodies and cultural references . It acquired a Nielsen rating of 12 @.@ 9 , and was the highest @-@ rated show on the Fox network the week it aired . 
 = = Plot = = 
 When Bart attends a comic book convention dressed as his superhero alter ego Bartman , he finds the first issue of Radioactive Man for $ 100 at Comic Book Guy 's Android 's Dungeon . However , he does not have enough money to buy it , and Homer refuses to give him extra money , so he decides to get a job . Bart turns to Mrs. Glick , who gives him fifty cents for his hard work . Bart then goes to the Android 's Dungeon , with only a few cents extra , where he runs into Milhouse Van Houten and Martin . He talks them into pooling their money and buying the comic book . Since none of them want to let the comic book out of their sights , they decide to spend the night together in Bart 's treehouse . The three get progressively more paranoid and Bart becomes convinced that the other two are conspiring against him . 
 Eventually , the tension is at a breaking point . When Martin gets up in the middle of the night to use the bathroom , Bart thinks he plans on stealing the comic and subsequently ties him up . Meanwhile , a thunderstorm approaches . Milhouse tries to alert Marge that Bart has gone crazy , but Bart thinks he is making a move for the comic and tackles him . Milhouse rolls over the side of the treehouse , but Bart catches him precariously by his sleeve . When a gale of wind takes hold of the comic so that it flies towards the treehouse 's entrance , Bart is forced to decide between it and Milhouse . After mulling over his options , Bart chooses Milhouse and pulls him up into the treehouse . The comic flies out the entrance and is shredded by Santa 's Little Helper on the ground , hit by lightning , and completely destroyed . The next morning , the three boys reflect on how their inability to share led to the destruction of the comic , although Bart , has forgotten the experience . 
 = = Production = = 
 The episode was written by Jeff Martin and directed by Wes Archer . Characters making their first appearance on the show in the episode are Comic Book Guy , Mrs. Glick , Radioactive Man , Fallout Boy , and Bartman . Although many suggestions state that Comic Book Guy was inspired by the show 's creator Matt Groening , Comic Book Guy was partly inspired by a clerk at the Los Angeles Amok book shop who , according to Simpsons writer George Meyer , often " [ sat ] on the high stool , kind of <unk> over the store with that supercilious attitude and eating behind the counter a big Styrofoam container full of fried clams with a lot of tartar sauce . " Matt Groening noted : " I can 't tell you how many times people have come up to me and said , ' I know who you based that comic book guy on . It 's that comic @-@ book guy right down the block . ' And I have to tell them , ' No , it 's every comic @-@ bookstore guy in America . ' " Cast member Hank Azaria based Comic Book Guy 's voice on a student who went by the name " F " and lived in the room next door at his college . Mrs. Glick was based on an old lady Martin and his brother used to do chores for when they were kids . Martin said they got to " pull weeds until [ their ] hands would bleed " , and yet they were only paid two quarters for several hours of work . American actress Cloris Leachman provided the voice of Mrs. Glick in the episode . 
 The episode features a parody of The Wonder Years , in which Bart stares into the distance after realizing that he has to get his first job , and an older version of Bart 's voice is heard saying " I didn 't realize it at the time , but a little piece of my childhood had slipped away forever . " Daniel Stern guest starred as the voice of the adult Bart , just like he did for the adult voice of the character Kevin in the television show The Wonder Years ( he had also featured with Yeardley Smith in the movie City Slickers around the time this episode was produced ) . According to Simpsons writer Mike Reiss , Stern was a " pleasure " to work with and it only took him a few minutes to record his lines . Stern 's younger brother David M. Stern worked as a writer on both The Simpsons and The Wonder Years , so he helped the writers get the idioms and the wording of the parody right . When it originally aired , the song played during this sequence was " Turn , Turn , Turn " by The Byrds . This was replaced in the DVD release with <unk> music , likely to avoid paying royalties for using the song . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 At the beginning of the episode , Lisa reveals that she collects Casper the Friendly Ghost and Richie Rich comics , and Homer makes reference to Wonder Woman . Radioactive Man 's origin is nearly identical to the Marvel Comics character The Incredible Hulk , as they both gained their superpowers from absorbing massive amounts of radiation during an experimental detonation of a gamma bomb . The warning from the convention MC not to ask questions about the death of Radioactive Man 's actor Dirk Richter is a reference to the mysterious death of Superman 's actor George Reeves , although the addition of bordello could also be a reference to the unsolved 1978 murder of Bob Crane . When Bart asks Homer for money to buy the comic book , Homer replies : " One hundred bucks ? For a comic book ? ! Who drew it , Micha @-@ ma @-@ <unk> ? " This is a reference to the Italian painter and sculptor Michelangelo , whose name Homer cannot pronounce . 
 Milhouse initially goes into the comic store to buy a 1973 Topps card of the former Boston Red Sox player , Carl Yastrzemski , " when he had the big sideburns " . When the boys first unwrap the comic book , Martin describes it as " [ T ] he stuff dreams are made of " , which is how Bogart 's character describes the Maltese Falcon at the end of the movie , The Maltese Falcon . 
 The Radioactive Man commercial for Laramie cigarettes that Bart and Lisa watch at the convention is a takeoff of The Flintstones starring in Winston cigarette television commercials which aired during the 1960s . When Bart begs Mrs. Glick not to apply iodine to his wounded arm , she grabs his arm and the scene shifts to their silhouettes as Bart screams , mirroring a scene in the 1939 film Gone with the Wind . The accusation and suspicion that grows between the boys is similar to the plot of the film The Treasure of the Sierra Madre . When Martin makes a squealing noise while falling in the treehouse , Bart calls him " Piggy " and threatens to stuff an apple into his mouth , resembling a similar quote from the 1954 book The Lord of the Flies by William Golding . Bart trying to save Milhouse from falling from the treehouse is a reference to a scene in the 1942 Alfred Hitchcock film Saboteur . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In its original broadcast , " Three Men and a Comic Book " finished twenty @-@ third in the ratings for the week of May 6 – 12 , 1991 , with a Nielsen rating of 12 @.@ 9 , equivalent to twelve million viewing households . The episode was the highest @-@ rated show on the Fox network that week . It was the first time The Simpsons beat The Cosby Show in the ratings . Since airing , the episode has received mostly positive reviews from television critics . DVD Movie Guide 's Colin Jacobson lauded it for its use of new characters , commenting that " of all season two ’ s Bart @-@ focused episodes , only ' Bart the Daredevil ' offers competition with ' Comic ' as the best of the bunch . It ’ s a tough call , but I ’ ll take ' Comic ' in a squeaker . The show melds the series ’ deft satirical tone with exceptional character development . Bart seems to grow especially strongly , and his psychological meltdown in the third act is hilarious . " " Three Men and a Comic Book " was named the best episode of the season by IGN . The authors of the book I Can 't Believe It 's a Bigger and Better Updated Unofficial Simpsons Guide , Warren Martyn and Adrian Wood , commented that unless you have a " passing understanding of comic books and their buyers ' behaviour , some of the jokes will pass you by . " Doug Pratt , a DVD reviewer and Rolling Stone contributor , criticized the episode for not being inspired enough , and added that the Wonder Years parody " seems pointless " . 
 " Three Men and a Comic Book " is Bryce Wilson of Cinema Blend 's favorite episode of the season . Wilson praised the episode for its cultural references , calling them " true greatness " . Surrey Now 's Michael <unk> praised the Treasure of the Sierra Madre parody , saying that it is " one of the more clever film parodies hidden within a typical Simpsons plot . " Colin Kennedy of Empire called the Treasure of the Sierra Madre parody the ninth best film parody of the show , commenting that " Bart turns [ into ] a perfect Bogart – grizzled , paranoid and sleep @-@ deprived . With lighting and camera angles half @-@ inched from Huston , this priceless gag is joyfully pitched over the heads of 90 percent of the audience . " The episode 's reference to Saboteur was named the 25th greatest film reference in the history of the show by Total Film 's Nathan Ditum . 
 = Caroline Lacroix = 
 Blanche <unk> Joséphine Delacroix , better known as Caroline Lacroix ( 13 May 1883 – 12 February 1948 ) was the most prominent and notorious of Leopold II of Belgium 's mistresses . 
 Delacroix , who was of French origin , met the king in Paris as a young girl , when she was only 16 and he was 65 . At that time , she earned her living as a prostitute . They soon embarked upon a relationship that was to last until his death in 1909 . Leopold lavished upon her large sums of money , estates , gifts , and a noble title , Baroness Vaughan . Because of these presents , Caroline was deeply unpopular both among the Belgian people and internationally , as Leopold became increasingly criticized for his greed @-@ induced actions in the Congo Free State , his own personal colony . As Caroline largely profited off the income from the colony , she became known as La reine du Congo ( “ the Queen of Congo ” ) . 
 She and Leopold married in a religious ceremony five days before his death , though their failure to perform a civil ceremony rendered the marriage illegitimate under Belgian law . After the king 's death , it was soon discovered that he had left Caroline numerous properties , items of high material value , Congolese bonds , and other valuable sources of income – all of which turned her into a multimillionaire . For years the Belgian government and Leopold 's three estranged daughters attempted to seize some of this wealth , with their success varying depending on the case . Caroline died on 12 February 1948 in Cambo @-@ les @-@ Bains , France . 
 = = Early life = = 
 There remains a small degree of mystery concerning Caroline 's early life . One account states that her father , Jules Delacroix , was a janitor of the French Legation at Bucharest . Another states that her father lived in Bucharest to seek his fortune , and she was born there as the thirteenth child of her parents . In her youth , Caroline worked as a barmaid . 
 Various sources assert that Caroline was a prostitute living in Paris . As a young woman , she was the mistress of Antoine @-@ Emmanuel Durrieux , a former officer in the French army . According to Adam Hochschild , Durrieux liked to support the two of them by betting on horse races ; when his luck soured , he became a form of pimp , prostituting Caroline to well @-@ born clients . They undertook their schemes at the Élysée Palace , but frequently left debts unpaid . One day in 1900 , while residing in Paris , Leopold II of Belgium heard of her " attractions " and felt interested in her modest beginnings . A woman sent by Leopold informed Caroline , " Madame , I am sent to you by a gentleman who has noticed you . He is a very high personage , but his exalted position obliges me to withhold his name " . 
 A meeting was arranged for the following day ; Caroline went to a secluded room , where Leopold arrived with two aides . As Leopold II was unknown to her , Caroline was so flustered with the encounter that she mixed up Belgium and Sweden in the king 's presence , referring to him as His Majesty Oscar , to his surprise and amusement . The two aides ' purpose soon became clear : one sat on each side of her and began asking questions that required her to " turn my head first to the right , then to the left ... their only aim , as I learned later , being to show off my two profiles to the mute personage " , according to her memoirs . Leopold confessed himself pleased and invited Caroline to Austria with him ; a large sum of money duly arrived the next day , along with some empty trunks , as Leopold was aware that she loved to buy clothes . 
 = = Relationship with Leopold II = = 
 = = = Reaction in the press = = = 
 As a mere sixteen @-@ year @-@ old ( compared with Leopold 's age of 65 ) , Caroline 's relationship with the old king quickly became public knowledge , causing Leopold to be labeled lecherous and besotted . Though Leopold had previously embarked upon affairs with other mistresses ( earning him the nickname le roi des <unk> et des Belles ) , his affair with Caroline was unique , and the Belgian press in particular enjoyed publishing their affair for countless years . Her habit of accompanying Leopold to fashionable spas in Europe provoked further disbelief and outrage , with some speculating that she perversely <unk> the old king with the use of strategically placed mirrors and " special " equipment . The young mistress became known as la reine du Congo because the great wealth she accumulated from Leopold came from his colony . She became his companion for the last years of his life , as his estranged wife Queen Marie Henriette died in 1902 . Their relationship coincided with Leopold 's worsening international reputation , which was the result of his actions and orders concerning the Congo Free State . Hochschild writes that their affair ironically lost Leopold more popularity in Belgium than any of his crimes in the Congo ; consequently , few of his former allies were willing to defend him once he became the target of the international protest movement led by the Congo Reform Association . Belgian socialists in particular used the affair to prove that because Leopold was in his " dotage " and under the control of a " rapacious and ambitious woman " , he was unfit to govern . 
 = = = A wealthy mistress = = = 
 After Marie Henriette 's death , Leopold 's relationship with Caroline became flagrantly open , and he placed her across from his Laeken mansion , in the Villa <unk> , even building a pedestrian bridge so he could see her at will . The bridge reveals the king 's jealousy , although this may have been justified , as her former love Durrieux had been caught with her on several occasions . Caroline tried to pass him off as her brother when Leopold caught the two together ; one publication reported that she and Durrieux had placed secret electric bells in all her residences so that servants could warn her when the king was approaching . 
 Leopold spent vast sums of money on gifts and estates for his young mistress , presenting for instance the Villa <unk> to Caroline in 1902 . She frequently traveled to Paris to visit her <unk> and hat @-@ maker , once bragging that she spent three million francs on dresses at a single store on one occasion . Caroline once complained to Leopold that the evening express train back to Brussels gave her little time to shop , causing Leopold to arrange it so that the train would leave an hour later . When pregnant with their first child , the king and the French government even split the cost of constructing a new road close to her villa so that her ride would not be uncomfortable . Taking Caroline with him everywhere , the king spent much of his time outside Belgium on his various properties throughout Western Europe , and was much resented by the Belgian people as a result . Much of this time was spent with Caroline and their two sons at his estate at Cap <unk> in southern France . Caroline also stayed at Chateau de <unk> , which Leopold had rented for her ; he acquired the French Chateau de <unk> as well as a villa in Brussels , where Caroline had no scruples in appearing in public . Though typically traveling incognito , she accompanied Leopold to the funeral of Queen Victoria in 1901 , causing a great scandal . Her unpopularity in Belgium increased dramatically once it began to be realized that all of Leopold 's riches from the Congo were not benefiting his country , but rather himself and his young mistress . 
 As the years went by and the king became increasingly prone to outbursts of anger , breaking with all his old relationships , it was said that only in Caroline and their sons ' company did Leopold " recapture some of his vitality and Germanic humour " . Caroline was described as having been above average in height , " plump but graceful , with a beautiful complexion and skin " , with masses of chestnut hair ; in character , she was " haughty , sharp , irritable " and ill @-@ educated , and insisted on being treated with respect or else one would have to face the king 's displeasure . She was also said to be in possession of " vivid conversational powers " and " dazzling youthfulness " . Caroline was well @-@ used to Leopold 's " quirks " , such as his extreme hypochondria ; for instance , when she needed free time for herself , she coughed and pretended to have a cold ; she used this " weapon " to keep scheming female rivals from gaining favor with the king as well , telling Leopold that they had colds . Rather than ignore their age difference , Caroline and Leopold seemed to enjoy it , she calling him Tres Vieux and he calling her Tres Belle . 
 = = = Marriage = = = 
 The king became ill from an " intestinal blockage " at his home at Laeken , and his mistress and two sons rushed to his side . Five days before his death , on 12 December 1909 , King Leopold married Caroline in a religious ceremony performed by his personal chaplain . The marriage had no legal authority under Belgian law , as it was performed religiously , not civilly . It was recognized by the Vatican , as their wedding was solemnized in accordance with the Catholic Church 's religious rites . The marriage caused a great scandal in Belgium , as its citizens were shocked that the Church had not only sanctioned it , but also allowed Caroline to remain at his bedside , even when the priest was present . Despite their marriage , Caroline had to hide out of sight whenever a visitor arrived to see the king , though she stayed by his side otherwise . 
 Leopold died in the presence of Caroline and two nurses ; his youngest legitimate child Princess Clémentine , who had been barred from entering his palace before , was still not allowed to go into his room despite his weakening condition . Princesses Louise and Stéphanie also traveled to Brussels for a hoped @-@ for reconciliation with their father and changes to the king 's will , but Leopold turned them away . Caroline claimed that right before his passing , Leopold turned to his aide Baron Auguste <unk> and said " I present you my widow . I place her under your protection during the few days she 'll spend in Belgium after my death " . Hochschild speculates that it is likely the king said this or something similar , as he was well @-@ aware how much his daughters and the public loathed her , particularly when they discovered just how much he had left her and their sons . 
 = = = Issue = = = 
 Caroline and Leopold had two sons together : 
 Lucien Philippe Marie Antoine ( 9 February 1906 – 1984 ) , Duke of Tervuren ; he married Lucie <unk> <unk> on 1 March 1927 . 
 Philippe Henri Marie François ( 16 October 1907 – 21 August 1914 ) , Count of Ravenstein ; died young . 
 Like Caroline herself ( who was created Baroness Vaughan upon the birth of their first son ) , the two boys were granted courtesy titles , but no official royal decrees were ever issued by Leopold , the Belgian government , or any other foreign state , causing them to be merely honorary . Because of their parents ' legally invalid marriage , their two sons were still deemed illegitimate . Upon each of their births , they had been registered in France under Caroline 's name ; no mention of Leopold or another potential father was made . Despite these facts , there were fears in Belgium that Leopold would recognize his eldest son as heir to the throne . Had Leopold married in a legal civil ceremony , the boy could have indeed inherited the throne , because all classes were equal under the Belgian constitution , and thus their marriage would not have been considered morganatic . In 1910 , the two boys were adopted by Antoine Durrieux , whom Caroline married soon after Leopold 's death . 
 Leopold was devoted to his sons , and much of the wealth Caroline inherited went to the two ; she once reportedly boasted that because she was able to marry the king , her sons were in better standings than Charles Beauclerk , 1st Duke of St Albans , the illegitimate son of Nell Gwyn and Charles II of England . Because of these gifts , Caroline was loathed by the Belgian public ; on one occasion , her carriage was stoned on the streets of Brussels . 
 Their second son was born with a deformed hand , leading a cartoon to depict Leopold holding the child surrounded by Congolese corpses with their hands sliced off : the caption said Vengeance from on high . 
 = = Later years = = 
 Leopold gave his mistress vast sums of money by investing large sums in her name or confiding in trustees for her benefit . He also arranged for his two sons to be well provided for after his death . Under Belgian law , his three remaining legitimate children were entitled to a considerable portion of his estate , regardless of the contents of his will . However , this applied only in Belgium and not abroad ; consequently , much of the wealth he distributed for safekeeping was in foreign investments or in the shape of paintings , bric @-@ a @-@ brac , and art treasures that could be easily converted into cash . Leopold transferred Caroline a fortune in Congo securities , which were added to the already vast sum of six million francs he had previously presented her . Princess Louise soon went after these securities , but with the help of men loyal to the king , Caroline was able to safely spirit away the majority of her wealth to Paris ; two of her estates ( in Brussels and in France ) were boarded up however , disallowing her from entering them . 
 The exact degree of Caroline 's wealth was always problematic to trace , as the king had placed so much of it in different sources often difficult to locate and measure both during his lifetime and after his death . One 1912 source for instance reported that out of the king 's estimated estate of $ 65 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 , Caroline received $ 7 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 , while others stressed still higher numbers , and that the majority of it came from Congo shares . 
 = = = Legal suits = = = 
 The old king 's estrangement from his three daughters from his first marriage ( Princesses Louise , Stéphanie , and Clémentine ) spurred Leopold to keep or give as much wealth away as possible in order to disinherit the girls . An Austrian newspaper claimed that right before he died , Leopold personally gave Caroline his large collection of personal letters as well as documents detailing information about various European royal figures , which greatly worried his eldest daughter . After his death , the three princesses sued his estate for several million francs , although this was only a very small portion compared with the fortune he accumulated . The fortune was so large that the princesses were still attempting to recover some of Caroline 's wealth four years after their father 's death , claiming that Caroline and Durrieux had speedily ransacked one of Leopold 's properties in Paris and seized important financial documents before the Belgian envoy to France appeared . A trust of $ 10 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 the king had placed in Caroline and their two sons ' names became a target of the princesses ; they and the Belgian government argued that the trust formed part of Leopold 's private estate , and thus all three girls and the government had a right to their share , as its funds had derived from the Congo Free State . The Belgian government 's lawsuit succeeded , allowing them to collect the entire trust , but it also diminished the share the princesses received ( as each collected a comparatively meager $ 1 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 ) . Belgian statesman Emile Vandervelde later charged in an open letter that Leopold had given Caroline $ 6 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 worth of Congo bonds which had been found to be previously missing when Belgium annexed the colony . 
 = = = Second marriage , divorce and death = = = 
 An extremely rich widow ( Leopold 's gifts left her a multimillionaire ) , Caroline continued to appear in newspapers long after Leopold 's death . She married Antoine Durrieux , her former love and longtime friend , in 1910 , seven months after the king 's death . He was formerly a non @-@ commissioned officer in the French army , and served as her chief agent at the time of Leopold 's death , helping her collect the necessary papers to secure her inherited fortune . Because of Durrieux 's earlier role in prostituting Caroline off for money , Adam Hochschild speculates that if she had shared some of her riches with him , their arrangement was " surely one of the most successful feats of <unk> of all time " . Though Durrieux recognized her two sons as his own offspring , giving them his surname , he disliked how Caroline insisted he acknowledge their noble ranks when in their presence . 
 Caroline and her second husband divorced soon after , and she was able to keep the bulk of her wealth intact ( though she settled on Durrieux a sum of one million dollars in order to retain custody of her two sons ) . Various suitors often in her entourage , such as Count Boni de Castellane and Gaston <unk> , were reported to be engaged or interested in her , particularly after her divorce . She never remarried . Caroline 's younger son died in 1914 , but the elder lived a long , quiet life on his inherited wealth , dying in 1984 . 
 In 1937 , Caroline published her memoirs , A commoner married a king : As told by Baroness de Vaughan to Paul Faure ; in it , she stated she had loved and was faithful to the king , and that he had loved her and their two sons . Caroline died on 12 February 1948 at Cambo , Pyrénées @-@ Atlantiques in France . 
 = The Vote That Counted = 
 The Vote That Counted is a 1911 American silent short drama film produced by the Thanhouser Company . The film focuses on a state senator who disappears from a train and detective Violet Gray investigates the case . Gray manages to find that he was kidnapped and that it was done because he opposed a powerful lobby . She manages to free the state senator in time for him to cast the deciding vote to defeat the lobby . The film was released on January 13 , 1911 , it was the second of four films in the " Violet Gray , Detective " series . The film received favorable reviews from Billboard and The New York Dramatic Mirror . The film is presumed lost . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The Moving Picture World synopsis states , " State Senator Jack Dare , one of the reform members of the legislature , starts to the state capitol to attend an important session of that body . That he took the midnight train from his home city is clearly proven , for his aged mother was a passenger on it , and besides the conductor and porter are certain that he retired for the night . In the morning , however , his berth is empty , although some of his garments are found there . The case puzzles the railroad officials and the police , and Violet Gray is given a chance to distinguish herself . She learns from the conductor and porter , who had happened to spend the night awake at opposite ends of the car , that the senator did not go by them . Consequently this leaves only the window as his means of egress , and she knows that he must have gone that way . Violet discovers that Dare is a hearty supporter of a bill that a powerful lobby is trying to defeat . The fight is so close that his is the deciding vote . Dare cannot be bribed , so his opponents spirited him away in a novel fashion . But the girl finds where he is hidden and brings him back , although he is much injured . He reaches his seat in time to cast the needed vote , and to astound and defeat the lobby . " 
 = = Cast and production = = 
 The only known credit in the cast is Julia M. Taylor as Violet Gray . Film historian Q. David Bowers does not cite any scenario or directorial credits . At this time the Thanhouser company operated out of their studio in New Rochelle , New York . In October 1910 , an article in The Moving Picture World described the improvements to the studio as having permanently installed a lighting arrangement that was previously experimental in nature . The studio had amassed a collection of props for the productions and dressing rooms had been constructed for the actors . The studio had installed new equipment in the laboratories to improve the quality of the films . By 1911 , the Thanhouser company was recognized as one of leading Independent film makers , but Carl Laemmle 's Independent Moving Picture Company ( IMP ) captured most of the publicity . Two production companies were maintained by the company , the first under Barry O 'Neil and the second under Lucius J. Henderson and John Noble , an assistant director to Henderson . Though the company had at least two Bianchi cameras from Columbia Phonograph Company , it is believed that imported cameras were also used . The Bianchi cameras were unreliable and inferior to competitors , but it was believed to be a non @-@ infringing camera , though with " rare fortune " it could shoot up to 200 feet of film before requiring repairs . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 The single reel drama , approximately 1 @,@ 000 feet long , was released on January 13 , 1911 . This would be billed as the second in the series following the successful Love And Law film . The two later releases would be The Norwood Necklace and The Court 's Decree would conclude the " Violet Gray , Detective " series . Apparently the film series made an impact because the Lubin Manufacturing Company released a film under the title Violet Dare , Detective in June 1913 . The film received a positive review from The Billboard for its interest plot , good acting and photography . The New York Dramatic Mirror found the film to be a good melodrama , but found fault in that a woman detective was used to resolve the case when the part would have had more dignity and realism if the case was resolved by a man . The film would be shown in Pennsylvania and be advertised by theaters even a year after its release . 
 = M.I.A. ( rapper ) = 
 Mathangi " Maya " Arulpragasam ( born 18 July 1975 ) , better known by her stage name M.I.A. , is an English hip hop recording artist , director , visual artist , activist , record producer , photographer , fashion designer and model . " M.I.A. " is a play on her own name and a reference to the acronym of Missing in Action . Her compositions combine elements of alternative , dance , electronic , hip hop and world music . M.I.A. began her career in 2000 as a visual artist , filmmaker and designer in west London before beginning her recording career in 2002 . Since rising to prominence in early 2004 for her singles " Sunshowers " and " Galang " , charting in Canada and the UK and reaching number 11 on the Billboard Hot Dance Singles Sales in the US , she has been nominated for an Academy Award , three Grammy Awards and the Mercury Prize . 
 She released her debut album Arular in 2005 and second album Kala in 2007 both to universal critical acclaim . Arular charted in Norway , Belgium , Sweden , Japan and the US , where it reached number 16 on the Billboard Independent Albums chart and number three on the Dance / Electronic Albums chart . Kala was certified silver in the UK and gold in Canada and the US , where it topped the Dance / Electronic Albums chart . It also charted in several countries across Europe , in Japan and Australia . The album 's first single " Boyz " reached the Top 10 in Canada and on the Billboard Hot Dance Singles Sales in 2007 , becoming her first Top 10 charting single . The single " Paper Planes " peaked in the Top 20 worldwide and reached number four on the Billboard Hot 100 . " Paper Planes " was certified gold in New Zealand and three times platinum in Canada and the US where , as of November 2011 , it is ranked the seventh best @-@ selling song by a British artist in the digital era . It has become XL Recordings ' second best @-@ selling single to date . M.I.A. ' s third album Maya was released in 2010 soon after the controversial song @-@ film short " Born Free " . This became her highest @-@ charting album in the UK and the US , reaching number nine on the Billboard 200 , topping the Dance / Electronic Albums chart and debuting in the Top 10 in Finland , Norway , Greece and Canada . The single " XXXO " reached the Top 40 in Belgium , Spain and the UK . M.I.A. has embarked on five global headlining tours and is the founder of her own multimedia label , <unk> .. Her fourth studio album , Matangi , was released in 2013 . 
 Arulpragasam 's early compositions relied heavily on the Roland MC @-@ 505 music sequencer and drum machine . Her later work marked an evolution in her sound with rare instruments , electronics and unusual sound samples . Critics have acclaimed a distinctive style to her music . Lyrically incorporating a range of political , social , philosophical and cultural references that have defied existing pop music conventions , Arulpragasam was one of the first acts to come to public attention through the internet . She posted many of her songs and videos from 2002 onwards on platforms such as MySpace . 
 In 2001 , she received an " Alternative " Turner Prize nomination for her visual art . In 2005 and 2008 , M.I.A. was artist of the year by Spin and URB and Arulpragasam is named as one of the defining artists of the 2000s decade by Rolling Stone in its " Best of the Decade " list in December 2009 . Time magazine named her one of the world 's 100 most influential people in 2009 . Esquire magazine ranked M.I.A. on its list of the 75 most influential people of the 21st century in January 2010 . 
 = = Life and career = = 
 = = = 1975 – 1999 : Early life and education = = = 
 Arulpragasam was born on 18 July 1975 , in Hounslow , West London , to Arul Pragasam , an engineer , writer and activist , and his wife , Kala , a seamstress . When Maya was six months old , her family moved to Jaffna , the cultural , political , and economic capital of the predominantly Tamil northern Sri Lanka , where her brother Sugu was born . There , her father adopted the name Arular and became a political activist and founding member of the Eelam Revolutionary Organisation of Students ( EROS ) , a political Tamil group affiliated with the LTTE . The first eleven years of Arulpragasam 's life were marked by displacement caused by the Sri Lankan Civil War . Her family went into hiding from the Sri Lankan army , and Arulpragasam had little contact with her father during this period . She has described her family as living in " big @-@ time " poverty during her childhood but also recalls some of her happiest memories from growing up in Jaffna . Maya attended Catholic convent schools such as the Holy Family Convent , Jaffna where she developed her art skills – painting in particular – to work her way up her class . During the civil war , soldiers would put guns through holes in the windows and shoot at the school , what she notes as " bullying exploitation . " Her classmates were trained to dive under the table or run next door to English @-@ language schools that , according to her , " wouldn ’ t get shot . " Arulpragasam lived on a road alongside much of her extended family and played inside temples and churches in the town . 
 Due to safety concerns , Arulpragasam 's mother , Kala , relocated herself and her children to Madras in Tamil Nadu , India , where they lived in a derelict house and received sporadic visits from their father , Arular , who was introduced to the children as their " uncle " in order to protect them . The family minus Arular then resettled in Jaffna temporarily , only to see the war escalate further in the northeast . During this time 9 @-@ year @-@ old Arulpragasam 's primary school was destroyed in a government raid . Kala then moved with her children back to London in 1986 a week before Arulpragasam 's eleventh birthday where they were housed as refugees . Arular remained on the island and became an independent peace mediator between the two sides of the civil war in the late 1980s – 2010 . Arulpragasam spent the rest of her childhood and teenage years living on the Phipps Bridge Estate in the Mitcham district of southwest London , where she learned to speak English , whilst Kala brought the children up on a modest income . Arulpragasam entered the final year of primary school in the autumn of 1986 and quickly mastered the English language . Despite being the only Sri Lankan family in the area , the family were made welcome and faced no racial abuse during their time on the estate . 
 While living in the United Kingdom and raising her children , her mother became a practising Christian in 1990 and worked as a commissioned seamstress for the Royal Family for much of her career . She worked from her home in Tooting , which is at the south of London . Arulpragasam has had a difficult relationship with her father , due to his political activities in the 1980s and complete absence during much of her life . Prior to the release of the first album , which Arulpragasam had named after her father , Arular emailed her : " This is Dad . Change the title of your album . I 'm really proud . Just read about you in the Sri Lanka Times . Dad . " Maya chose not to change the album title . Arulpragasam attended the <unk> Lodge High School in Wimbledon . After leaving school , she completed a degree in fine art , film , and video in June 2000 from London 's Central Saint Martins College of Art and Design . Her initial application to the school was rejected , but she was finally admitted and received a scholarship , being told that she " had chutzpah " . 
 = = = 2000 – 02 : Visual art and film = = = 
 While attending Central St Martins College , Arulpragasam wanted to make films and art depicting realism that would be accessible to everyone , something that she felt was missing from her classmates ' ethics and the course criteria . At college , she found the fashion courses " disposable " and more current than the film texts that she studied . Maya told Arthur magazine " [ Students there were ] exploring apathy , dressing up in some pigeon outfit , or running around conceptualising ... It missed the whole point of art representing society . Social reality didn ’ t really exist there ; it just stopped at theory . " She cited " radical cinema " including Harmony Korine , Dogme 95 and Spike Jonze as some of her cinematic inspirations during film school . As a student , she was approached by director John Singleton to work on a film in Los Angeles after he had read a script she had written , though she decided not to take up the offer . For her degree , M.I.A. prepared her departmental honours thesis on the film CB4 . 
 Arulpragasam befriended students in the college 's fashion , advertising and graphics departments . She met Justine Frischmann , front woman of the British band Elastica , through her friend Damon Albarn at an Air concert in 1999 , and Frischmann commissioned <unk> to create the cover art for the band 's 2000 album , The Menace , and video document their American tour . Arulpragasam returned to Jaffna in 2001 to film a documentary on Tamil youth , but was unable to complete the project because she encountered harassment . In 2001 , Arulpragasam 's first public exhibition of paintings after graduating took place at the Euphoria Shop on London 's Portobello Road . It featured graffiti art and spray @-@ paint canvasses mixing Tamil political street art with images of London life and consumerist culture . The show was nominated for an Alternative Turner Prize and a monograph book of the collection was published in 2002 , [ 9 ] titled M.I.A .. Actor Jude Law was among early buyers of her art . 
 = = = 2003 – 05 : Musical beginnings and Arular = = = 
 Arulpragasam cites the radio broadcasts she heard emanating from her neighbours ' flats in the late 1980s as some of her first exposures to her earliest musical influences . From there , she developed an interest in hip @-@ hop and dancehall , identifying with " the starkness of the sound " in records by Public Enemy , MC Shan and Ultramagnetic MCs ; and the " weird , distinct style " of acts such as Silver Bullet and London Posse . In college she developed an affinity for punk and the emerging sounds of Britpop and electroclash . M.I.A. cites The Slits , Malcolm McLaren and The Clash as major influences . 
 By 2001 , Arulpragasam designed the cover for Elastica 's last single " The Bitch Don 't Work " , and went on the road with the band to video document their tour . The tour 's supporting act , electroclash artist Peaches , introduced Arulpragasam to the Roland MC @-@ 505 and encouraged her to make music , a medium in which Arulpragasam lacked confidence . While holidaying together in Bequia in the Caribbean , Arulpragasam began experimenting with Frischmann 's MC @-@ 505 . She adopted her stage name , " M.I.A. " , standing for " Missing In Acton " during this time . In her 2012 book Arulpragasam writes , " M.I.A. came to be because of my missing cousin . I wanted to make a film about where he was since he was M.I.A. ( Missing in Action ) in Sri Lanka . We were the same age , went to the same schools growing up . I was also living in Acton at the time . So I was living in Acton looking for my cousin missing in action . " Of her time in Bequia , she told " I started going out to this chicken shed with a sound system . You buy rum through a hatch and dance in the street . They convinced me to come to church where people sing so amazingly . But I couldn ’ t clap along to hallelujah . I was out of rhythm . Someone said , ‘ What happened to Jesus ? I saw you dancing last night and you were totally fine . ’ They stopped the service and taught me to clap in time . It was embarrassing " . Returning to West London , where she shared an apartment with Frischmann , she began working with a simple set @-@ up ( a second @-@ hand 4 @-@ track tape machine , the MC @-@ 505 , and a radio microphone ) , composing and recording a six song demo tape that included " Lady Killa " , " M.I.A. " , and " Galang " . 
 In 2003 , the independent label Showbiz Records pressed 500 vinyl singles of " Galang " , a mix of dancehall , electro , jungle , and world music , with Seattle Weekly praising its a cappella coda as a " lift @-@ up @-@ and @-@ over moment " evoking " clear skies beyond the council flats . " File sharing , college radio airplay , and the rise in popularity of " Galang " and " Sunshowers " in dance clubs and fashion shows made M.I.A. an underground sensation . M.I.A. has been heralded as one of the first artists to build a large fanbase exclusively via these channels and as someone who could be studied to reexamine the internet 's impact on how listeners are exposed to new music . She began uploading her music onto her MySpace account in June 2004 . Major record labels caught on to the popularity of the second song she has written , " Galang " , and M.I.A. was eventually signed to XL Recordings in mid @-@ 2004 . Her debut album , to be titled Arular was finalized by borrowing studio time . 
 M.I.A. ' s next single , " Sunshowers " , released on 5 July 2004 , and its B @-@ side ( " Fire Fire " ) described guerrilla warfare and asylum seeking , merging ambiguous references to violence and religious persecution with black and white forms of dissidence . These themes inspired her treatment for the music video , the first she wrote . It was filmed in the jungles of South India , which she has described as her favourite . " Galang " was re @-@ released in 2004 . In September 2004 , M.I.A was first featured on the cover of the publication The <unk> , in its 24th issue . The music video for " Galang " made in November of that year showed multiple <unk> against a backdrop of militaristic animated graffiti , and depicted scenes of urban Britain and war that influenced her art direction for it . Both singles appeared on international publications ' " Best of the Year " lists and subsequently " Best of the Decade " lists . The songs " Pull Up the People " , " Bucky Done Gun " and " " were released as 12 @-@ inch singles and CDs by XL Recordings , which along with the non @-@ label mashup mixtape of Arular tracks , Piracy Funds Terrorism , were distributed in 2004 to positive critical acclaim . 
 M.I.A. made her North American live debut in February 2005 in Toronto where concertgoers already knew many of her songs . In March 2005 , M.I.A. ' s debut album Arular was released worldwide to critical acclaim after several months delay . The album title is the nom de guerre that M.I.A. ' s father took when he joined the Tamil independence movement , and many of the songs acknowledge her and her father 's experiences in Jaffna . While making Arular in her bedroom in west London , she built tracks off her demos , using beats she programmed on the Roland MC @-@ 505 . The album experiments with bold , jarring and ambient sounds , and its lyrics address the Iraq War and daily life in London as well as M.I.A. ' s past . 
 " Galang " , " Sunshowers " , " Hombre " and the funk carioca @-@ inspired co @-@ composition " Bucky Done Gun " were released as singles from Arular . The release of the latter marked the first time that a funk carioca @-@ inspired song was played on mainstream radio and music television in Brazil , its country of origin . M.I.A. worked with one of her musical influences Missy Elliott , contributing to the track " Bad Man " on her 2005 album The Cookbook . Despite initial fears that her dyslexia might pose problems while touring , M.I.A. supported the album through a series of festival and club shows , including the <unk> Festival in Buenos Aires , a free headlining show at Central Park <unk> , the Summer Sonic Fest and the Coachella Valley Music and Arts Festival , where she played an encore in response to crowd enthusiasm , a rare occurrence for the festival generally and the first encore following a tent performance at Coachella . She also toured with Roots Manuva and LCD Soundsystem , and ended 2005 briefly touring with Gwen Stefani and performing at the Big Day Out festival . On 19 July 2005 , M.I.A. was shortlisted for the Mercury Music Prize for Arular . According to the music review aggregation Metacritic , it garnered an average score of 88 out of 100 , described as " universal acclaim " . They reported in 2010 that Arular was the seventh best reviewed album of 2005 and the ninth Best @-@ Reviewed Electronic / Dance Album on Metacritic of the 2000 – 09 decade . Arular became the second most featured album in music critics ’ Year @-@ End Top 10 lists for 2005 and was named best of the year by publications such as Blender , Stylus and <unk> . 
 = = = 2006 – 08 : Kala and world recognition = = = 
 In 2006 , M.I.A. recorded her second studio album Kala , this time named after her mother . Due to censorship and visa complications in the United States , the album was recorded in a variety of locations — India , Trinidad , Liberia , Jamaica , Australia , Japan , and the UK . Eventually the album was completed in the US . 
 Kala featured live instrumentation and layers of traditional dance and folk styles such as soca and the urumee drum of <unk> , rave music and bootleg soundtracks of Tamil film music , incorporating new styles into her avant @-@ garde electronic dance music . The songs , artwork and fashion of Kala have been characterized as simultaneously celebratory and infused with raw , " darker , outsider " themes , such as immigration politics , personal relationships and war . In February 2007 , the first track from the album to be made available to the public was " Bird Flu " , which was posted with an accompanying music video to her MySpace . Later that year , M.I.A. featured in the song " Come Around " , a bonus track on Timbaland 's 2007 album Shock Value and a track on Kala . The album 's first official single " Boyz " was released in June 2007 , accompanied by a music video co @-@ directed by Jay Will and M.I.A. , becoming M.I.A. ' s first top ten charting song . The single " Jimmy " , written about an invitation to tour genocide @-@ affected regions in Rwanda that the singer received from a journalist while staying in Liberia , was released next . The single " Paper Planes " , described a " satire on immigrant stereotypes " , and the EP Paper Planes - Homeland Security Remixes EP were released digitally in February 2008 , the single eventually selling three times platinum in the US and Canada , certified Gold in New Zealand , and becoming the 29th most downloaded song in the digital era in the US and earning a Grammy nomination for Record of the Year . " Paper Planes " is to date XL Recordings ' second best selling single , and by November 2011 it had sold 3 @.@ 6 million copies in the US , currently the seventh best @-@ selling song by a British artist in the digital era . In 2007 , M.I.A. also released the How Many Votes Fix Mix EP which included a remix of " Boyz " featuring Jay @-@ Z. " Paper Planes " is one of M.I.A. ' s most popular songs . On this song she collaborated with Florida @-@ based DJ Diplo . Their work on this song landed him a Grammy nomination for Record of the year and got number three in the U.S. <unk> also worked together on her first album " Arular " Like its predecessor , universal acclaim met Kala 's release in August 2007 and the album earned a normalised rating of 87 out of 100 on the review aggregator <unk> . Kala was a greater commercial success than Arular . To support Kala , M.I.A. performed at a series of music festivals on the Kala Tour featuring performances in Europe , America and Asia . She performed three dates opening for Björk in the US and France . In 2008 , M.I.A. provided guest vocals on <unk> Som Sistema 's <unk> song " Sound of Kuduro " , recorded in Angola with an accompanying video . The same year , M.I.A. and director Spike Jonze filmed a documentary in Woolwich , South London , in which they both appeared with Afrikan Boy , a Nigerian immigrant rapper and she disclosed plans to launch her own record label , Zig @-@ Zag . She ended the year with concerts in the United Kingdom . By year end , Kala was named the best album of 2007 by publications including Rolling Stone and Blender . <unk> reported in 2010 that Kala was the tenth Best @-@ Reviewed Electronic / Dance Album on Metacritic of the 2000 – 09 decade , one position below her debut album Arular . M.I.A. performed on the People vs. Money Tour during the first half of 2008 . She cancelled the final leg of her tour in Europe through June and July after revealing her intentions to take a career break and work on other art projects , go back to college and make a film . 
 In 2008 , M.I.A. started her independent record label N.E.E.T. Recordings . The first artist signed to the label was Baltimore rapper Rye Rye , who performed with M.I.A. at the Diesel XXX party at Pier 3 in Brooklyn in October 2008 where it was revealed that M.I.A. was pregnant with her first child . M.I.A. contributed songs for A. R. Rahman 's score of the film Slumdog Millionaire , which included the collaboration " O … Saya " ; she was nominated for an Academy Award for Best Original Song and a World Soundtrack Award for Best Original Song Written Directly for a Film for the song . M.I.A. was due to perform at the Oscars ceremony two weeks after her Grammy Award performance , but could not as she had just given birth to her son . M.I.A. is the first person of Asian descent to be nominated for an Oscar and Grammy award in the same year . 
 = = = 2009 – 11 : Maya = = = 
 At the 2009 BRIT Awards in February , M.I.A. was a nominee for Best British Female Artist . Seeking to promote new , underground music with N.E.E.T. , M.I.A. signed more bands including Baltimore musician Blaqstarr , indie rock band Sleigh Bells and visual artist Jaime Martinez by late 2009 . 3D photographic images of M.I.A. by Martinez were commissioned in April of that year . In August 2009 , M.I.A. began composing and recording her third studio album in a home studio section in her Los Angeles house . In January 2010 , M.I.A. posted her video for the song " Space " . While composing it , she helped write a song with Christina Aguilera called " Elastic Love " for Aguilera 's album Bionic . By April 2010 , the song and music video / short film " Born Free " were leaked online . The video @-@ film short was directed by Romain Gavras and written by M.I.A. , depicting genocide against red @-@ haired adolescents being forced to run across a minefield and caused controversy due to its graphically violent content . The video was removed from YouTube the same day it was released , then reinstated with an age restriction , then removed once more . Although not an official single , the song charted in Sweden and the United Kingdom . M.I.A. ' s third album , Maya — stylised as / \ / \ / \ Y / \ — was released on 23 June 2010 in Japan with bonus tracks before its release in other countries . Maya became M.I.A. ' s highest charting album globally . Its release in the US was delayed by two weeks . The album garnered a generally favourable , although divided , reception from critics . A more internet @-@ inspired album illustrating how a multimedia artist worked within the music industry , elements of industrial music were incorporated into M.I.A. ' s sound for the first time . She described the album in an interview with Dazed & Confused as a mix of " babies , death , destruction and powerlessness " . 
 On 11 May 2010 , the first official single from Maya , " XXXO " , was released and reached the top forty in Belgium , Spain and the UK . " Steppin ' Up " , " Teqkilla " , and " Tell Me Why " were also released as promotional singles exclusively on iTunes in the days leading to the release of Maya , with " Teqkilla " reaching the top 100 in Canada on digital downloads alone . 
 The video for " XXXO " was released online in August . M.I.A. hinted in an interview to Blitz that a music video is being made with director Spike Jonze for the single " Teqkilla . " She completed her live tour dates on the Maya Tour in summer of 2011 . 
 From 2000 until 2010 , she directed the video for Elastica single " Mad Dog God Dam " and videos for her songs " Bird Flu " , " Boyz " , " <unk> ( Save Ur Soul ) " , " Space " and " XXXO " as well as personally choosing the directors for the videos of her songs Galang , Sunshowers , which she described in 2005 and again in 2011 as being her favorite video experience and favorite video adaptation of a song of hers , in her words as of 2011 , " If you watch only one of my videos , please try Sunshowers " , " Jimmy , " " Born Free , " and " Bad Girls . " , a video inspired by YouTube videos of car stunts and photographs , including one of an Arab female trucker , from the Middle East , which she described as her second favorite music video . She directed a video for Rye Rye 's " Bang " . She judged in the Music Video category at the inaugural Vimeo Festival & Awards in New York in October 2010 . 
 M.I.A. released her second mixtape , Vicki Leekx , on 31 December 2010 , and followed this with Internet Connection : The Remixes , an EP to a bonus track from Maya in January 2011 . M.I.A. performed on the song " <unk> " on <unk> 's album Total . On 21 April 2011 , it was reported that M.I.A. had been in the studio with Chris Brown , the Cataracs , Swizz Beatz and Polow da Don . 
 = = = 2012 – 14 : Matangi = = = 
 M.I.A. co @-@ wrote the song " Give Me All Your Luvin ' " with Madonna and Nicki Minaj for the album MDNA and performed it at the Super Bowl XLVI Halftime Show . Controversially , instead of singing the lyric " shit " in the song , M.I.A. extended the middle finger to the camera . The <unk> responded by filing a lawsuit suing M.I.A. for million in damages and demanding a public apology from M.I.A. Maya and her legal team also responded by saying that the league 's claim of " wholesomeness " in the lawsuit is hypocritical since the <unk> itself has had multiple situations of their own players and coaches behaving badly as well as health problems within the league , particularly concussions . In September 2013 Maya released a video statement regarding the lawsuit . In her statement Arulpragasam said , " They 're basically [ saying ] it 's OK for me to promote being sexually exploited as a female , than to display empowerment , female empowerment , through being punk rock . That 's what it boils down to , and I 'm being sued for it . " The lawsuit was settled in August 2014 ; the terms of the settlement remain private . 
 She 's also featured in " B @-@ Day Song " , another song included on MDNA . 
 The first buzz track of her fourth album , " Bad Girls " , taken from her Vicki Leekx mixtape , premiered on 30 January 2012 , was released globally the day after , and was followed by a music video directed by Romain Gavras on 3 February 2012 . This received nominations for Video of the Year at the 2012 MTV Video Music Awards and at the 55th Grammy Awards . The song become one of M.I.A. ' s most successful singles , charting in the United Kingdom , Australia , France , Canada , United States , Switzerland , South Korea and Belgium . On 29 April 2012 she posted a preview of a new song to YouTube , titled " Come Walk With Me " . The full version of Come Walk With Me was shared one and a half year later , on September 2013 . 
 M.I.A. officially signed to Jay @-@ Z 's Roc Nation management in May 2012 . Rihanna welcomed her to the family , tweeting , " welcome home MIA . " She guested during Jay @-@ Z 's set at the Radio 1 Festival in Hackney on 23 June 2012 . 
 In October 2012 , M.I.A. released an autobiographical book titled M.I.A. documenting " the five years of M.I.A. art that spans across three LPs : Arular , Kala , and Maya . " The book contains artwork as well as a foreword by frequent collaborator Steve Loveridge and various essays by M.I.A. On 3 March 2013 , she released an 8 @-@ minute mix recording as part of a Kenzo fashion show in Paris . 
 Matangi , was recorded across the world with different collaborators . In relation to her previous albums , she described her fourth as " basically all of them together " , akin to an anthology . The album was released on Interscope and M.I.A. ' s label N.E.E.T. Recordings . Release dates of 31 January 2013 and later , 15 April 2013 were announced , but the album remained unreleased . M.I.A. later revealed that the original project for Matangi was not accepted by Interscope , which claimed that the record was " too positive " . " Bring the Noize " , produced by French producer <unk> and Switch , was announced as the second single and was released on 17 June 2013 . Soon after the single was released , the official video for " Bring the Noize " premiered on 25 June via Noisey . On 9 August 2013 , the album received an official release date of 5 November 2013 after M.I.A. threatened to leak the album due to the numerous delays by Interscope . 
 Matangi received generally positive reviews from music critics . In its first week of release , the album sold 15 @,@ 000 copies and peaked at number 23 on the Billboard 200 , falling to number 90 in its second week . Overall , Matangi is M.I.A. ' s lowest charting album worldwide . 
 On 31 December 2013 M.I.A. announced that she 's leaving Roc Nation . 
 = = = 2015 – present : A.I.M. = = = 
 On 13 July 2015 , M.I.A. released a five @-@ minute video titled " <unk> Scroll 01 Broader Than a Border " which features two of her tracks : Matangi 's " Warrior " and a new track " Swords " . The video was filmed in India and West Africa and shows different forms of dancing in those regions . On 27 November 2015 , M.I.A. released " Borders " as her new single on iTunes , prior to that her new single was announced via her Instagram account . The track mocks first world problems and touches on some serious issues happening in the world . She introduced a music video with it which was also socially and politically motivated . In January 2016 , the French football club Paris Saint @-@ Germain sued M.I.A. for wearing a modified version of their club ’ s T @-@ shirt in her Borders video and changing the words " Fly Emirates " to " Fly Pirates " on it . 
 In late February 2016 , she released " Boom ADD " , an expanded version of the " Boom Skit " , which appeared on M.I.A. ' s fourth studio album Matangi ; it is a diss @-@ track to the NFL 's lawsuit of her performance at the 2012 Superbowl . 
 On June 1 , 2016 , she released " <unk> That Still A <unk> " , a lyrical mix of songs on her upcoming album . 
 On 12 July , 2016 , she announced the title of her upcoming fifth studio album was A.I.M. , and on July 15 , 2016 , she released " Go Off " as the first single . The song was produced by Skrillex and Blaqstarr . 
 = = Artistry = = 
 = = = Musical style and influences = = = 
 M.I.A. ' s music features styles such as electro , reggae , rhythm and blues , alternative rock , hip hop , grime , rap ballads and Asian folk and references to her musical influences such as Missy Elliott , Tamil film music , Lou Reed , Pixies , Timbaland , Beastie Boys and London Posse . She was a childhood fan of Boney M , composer A. R. Rahman and pop artists Michael Jackson and Madonna , also she has cited Björk as an inspiration and has been influenced by The Slits , Public Enemy , Malcolm McLaren and The Clash . Noting her early inspirations , she said " When I would go to bed , I ’ d listen to the radio and dream about dancing and Paula Abdul and Whitney Houston , and that ’ s how I fell asleep . When my radio was burgled , I started listening to hip hop " . She has revealed her ideal karaoke song would be " Germ @-@ Free Adolescents " by X @-@ Ray Spex . M.I.A. describes her music as dance music or club music for the " other " , and has been described as an " anti @-@ popstar " for refusing to conform to certain recording industry expectations of solo artists . M.I.A. possesses the vocal range of a mezzo @-@ soprano , spanning one octave in the western music scale , from the lower note of F3 to the higher note of F4 . M.I.A. ' s early compositions relied heavily on the Roland MC @-@ 505 , while later M.I.A. experimented further with her established sound and drew from a range of genres , creating layered textures of instruments , electronics and sounds outside the traditional studio environment . Artists including Nas , Chuck D and Krist Novoselic of Nirvana have praised her work . 
 She has also stated she is a fan of Beyoncé Knowles , stating " she 's like harder , faster , stronger . In our lifetime , she will be a classic , like how people talk about Aretha Franklin . " 
 Jimmy Iovine , the chairman of M.I.A. ' s American distribution label Interscope , compares M.I.A. to Reed and punk rock songwriter Patti Smith , and recalled , " She 's gonna do what she 's gonna do , I can 't tell her shit . " " The really left @-@ of @-@ center artists , you really wonder about them . Can the world catch up ? Can the culture meet them in the middle ? That ’ s what the adventure is . It doesn ’ t always happen , but it should and it could . " Richard Russell , head of XL Recordings , states , " You 've got to bend culture around to suit you , and I think M.I.A has done that " adding that M.I.A. ' s composition and production skills were a major attraction for him . As a vocalist , M.I.A. is recognisable by her distinctive whooping , chanting voice , which has been described as having an " indelible , nursery @-@ rhyme swing . " She has adopted different singing styles on her songs , from aggressive raps , to semi @-@ spoken and melodic vocals . She has said of the sometimes " unaffected " vocals and delivery of her lyrics , " It is what it is . Most people would just put it down to me being lazy . But at the same time , I don ’ t want [ that perfection ] , " saying some of the " raw and difficult " vocal styles she used reflected what was happening to her during recording . 
 = = = Image and stage = = = 
 Sasha Frere @-@ Jones , critic of The New Yorker praised the self made " unpretentious , stuck together with Scotch tape " style that M.I.A. achieves with her Roland MC @-@ 505 drum machine and keyboard unit , noting that many people had tried to copy the style since . Her considerable influence on American hip hop music as an international artist is described by Adam Bradley and Andrew DuBois in The Anthology of Rap as making her an " unlikely hip hop " celebrity , given that the genre was one of several influences behind M.I.A. ' s " eccentric and energizing " music and that the musician 's unclassifiable sound was one example of how hip hop was changing as it came into contact with other cultures . Similarly , Jeffrey H. <unk> writes in The Black experience in America : from civil rights to the present that no single artist may have personified hip hop in the 21st century better than M.I.A. , in her " politically radical lyrics drawing from widely diverse sources around the world " . The Guardian critic Hattie Collins commented of M.I.A. ' s influence , " A new raver before it was old . A baile funk / pop pioneer before CSS and Bonde do <unk> emerged . A quirky female singer / rapper before the Mini Allens had worked out how to log on to MySpace . Missing In Action ( or Acton , as she sometimes calls herself ) has always been several miles ahead of the pack . " The twisting of western modalities in her music style using multilingual , multiethnic soundscapes to make electroclash @-@ pop albums is noted by Derek <unk> in Global beat fusion : the history of the future of music ( 2005 ) to defy world music categorization . In the book <unk> Music ( 2007 ) , Linda <unk> notes the various aspects of peer @-@ to @-@ peer file sharing of music in the rise in popularity of M.I.A. , including the advantages and disadvantages of the internet and platforms such as MySpace in the launch of her career . Andy Bennett and Jon Stratton highlight in Britpop and the English Music Tradition ( 2010 ) how M.I.A. alongside musicians such as Sway and Dizzee Rascal created music that explored new soundscapes with new technologies , with lyrics expressing anger at Britain 's " racialized subordination of minority groups " and that the innovation that generates new musical forms like grime and dubstep are , inevitably , politically engaged . The chart success of grime @-@ influenced artists like M.I.A. is heralded as a signal in the way that white Britons adapted to a new multicultural and plural musical mix in contrast to bands of the Britpop genre . Furthermore , her work being used as a global resource for the articulation of differently located themes and its connections to many music traditions is noted by Brian Longhurst in Popular music and society ( 2007 ) to illustrate such processes of interracial dialogue . Gary <unk> writing in GQ notes that " M.I.A. is perhaps the preeminent global musical artist of the 2000s , a truly kick @-@ ass singer and New York @-@ <unk> fashion icon , not to mention a vocal supporter of Sri Lanka 's embattled Tamil minority , of which she 's a member . " 
 M.I.A. ' s stage performances are described as " highly energetic " and multimedia showcases , often with scenes of what Rolling Stone critic Rob Sheffield describes as " jovial chaos , with dancers and toasters and random characters roaming the stage , " bringing various crowds with interests in art , music and fashion . Camille <unk> , writing in The Village Voice opined that M.I.A. " works hard to manifest the chaos of her music in an actual environment , and , more than that , to actively create discomfort , energy , and anger through sensory overload . " Her role as an artist in and voice lender to the subaltern is appreciated by theorists as having brought such ideas to first world view . USA Today included her on its list of the 100 Most Interesting People of 2007 and she was named one of Time Out ' s 40th Birthday London Heroes in 2008 . The same year , Esquire listed M.I.A. as one of the 75 Most Influential People of the 21st century , describing her as the first and only major artist in world music , and in 2009 she was cited in Time magazine 's Time 100 as one of the world 's most influential people for her global influence across many genres . In December 2010 , USA Today listed M.I.A. at number 63 on its list of the " 100 People of 2010 " . M.I.A. placed number 14 on Rolling Stone 's Decade @-@ End Readers ' Poll of " Top Artists Of The Decade . " Rolling Stone named her one of eight artists who defined the 2000s decade . 
 = = = Themes and artwork = = = 
 M.I.A. has become known for integrating her imagery of political violence into her music videos and her cover art . Her politically inspired art became recognized while she exhibited and published several of her brightly coloured stencils and paintings portraying the tiger , a symbol of Tamil nationalism , ethnic conflict in Sri Lanka and urban Britain in the early 2000s . Lyrics on Arular regarding her experiences of identity politics , poverty , revolution , gender and sexual stereotypes , war , and the conditions of working class in London were hailed as new and unorthodox , setting her apart from previous artists . The album references the Palestine Liberation Organization and the Tamil independence movements and features culture jamming , multi @-@ lingual slang , strident and subtle imagery . Her albums ' social commentary and storytelling have incited debate on the " invigoratingly complex " politics of the issues she highlighted in the album , breaking taboos while the West was engaged in the 2003 Iraq War in the Middle East during the Presidency of George W. Bush . Government visits to her official website following her debut album 's release in 2005 , and a US refusal to grant M.I.A. a travel visa coupled with her brief presence on the US Homeland Security Risk List in 2006 due to her politically charged lyrics led to her second album Kala being recorded in a variety of locations around the world . The American Civil Liberties Union described the actions as part of a trend of ideological exclusion by the state which was detrimental to democracy by " censoring and manipulating debate " . 
 On Kala , M.I.A. ' s songs explored immigration politics and her personal relationships . Many related her experiences during recording sessions in Madras , Angola , Trinidad shantytowns , Liberia and London , and were well acclaimed . The album 's artwork was inspired by African art , " from dictator fashion to old stickers on the back of cars , " which like her clothing range , she hoped would capture " a 3 @-@ D sense , the shapes , the prints , the sound , film , technology , politics , economics " of a certain time . I @-@ D magazine described the " bleeding <unk> of graphics " on her website during this time as evoking the " noisy amateurism " of the early web , but also embodying a rejection of today 's " glossy , professional site design " which was felt to " efface the medium rather than celebrate it . " Jeff Chang , writing for The Nation , described a " Kala for the Nation " and the album 's music , lyrics and imagery as encompassing " everywhere – or , to be specific , everywhere but the First World 's self @-@ regarding ' here ' , " stating that against a media flow that suppresses the " ugliness " of reality and fixes beauty to consumption , M.I.A. forces a conversation about how the majority live , closing the distance " between ' here ' and everywhere else " . He felt that Kala explored poverty , violence and globalization through the eyes of " children left behind . " 
 Her third album , Maya , tackled information politics in the digital age , loaded with technological references and love songs , and deemed by Kitty Empire writing in The Observer to be her most melancholic and mainstream effort . Her genocide @-@ depicting 2010 video for the single " Born Free " was deemed by Ann Powers writing in the Los Angeles Times to be " concentrating fully " on the physical horror of gun butts and bullets hitting flesh , with the scenes giving added poignancy to the lyrical themes of the song . Interpreted as a comment on the Arizona immigration law , America 's military might and desensitised attitudes towards violence , others found that the video stressed that genocide still exists and violent repression remains commonplace . Some critics described the film as " sensationalist " . Neda <unk> of NPR described the video as intended for " shock value " in the service of nudging people into considering real issues that can be hard to talk about . M.I.A. revealed that she felt " disconnected " during the writing process , and spoke of the Internet inspiration and themes of information politics that could be found in the songs and the artwork . 
 M.I.A. views her work as reflective , pieced together in one piece " so you can acquire it and hear it . " She states , " All that information floats around where we are – the images , the opinions , the discussions , the feelings – they all exist , and I felt someone had to do something about it because I can 't live in this world where we pretend nothing really matters . " On the political nature of her songs she has said , " Nobody wants to be dancing to political songs . Every bit of music out there that ’ s making it into the mainstream is really about nothing . I wanted to see if I could write songs about something important and make it sound like nothing . And it kind of worked . " Censorship on MTV of " Sunshowers " proved controversial and was again criticised following Kala release " Paper Planes " . YouTube 's block and subsequent age gating / obscuring of the video for " Born Free " from Maya due to its graphic violence / political subtext was criticized by M.I.A. as hypocritical , citing the Internet channel 's streaming of real @-@ life killings . She went on to state , " It 's just fake blood and ketchup and people are more offended by that than the execution videos " , referring to clips of Sri Lankan troops extrajudicially shooting unarmed , blindfolded , naked men that she had previously tweeted . Despite the block , the video remained on her website and Vimeo , and has been viewed 30 million times on the internet . Lisa Weems writes in the book Postcolonial challenges in education how M.I.A. pointed out in her music how immigrants , refugees and persons of the third world can and do resist through economic , political and cultural discursive practices . In light of her influence in modern culture and the historical and political significance embedded in both the instrumental music and lyrics of her songs , J. Gentry of Brown University instructs a course from summer 2012 titled " Music & Politics : From Mozart to M.I.A. " , with the objective of academically exploring and examining the political messages and contexts of music and the way " music has consistently participated in and reflected the political debates of its time " . 
 = = = Fashion and style = = = 
 M.I.A. cites guerrilla art and fashion as major influences . Her mother works as a seamstress in London . An early interest in fashion and textiles – designing confections of " bright fluorescent fishnet fabrics " — was a hallmark of her time at Central Saint Martins College . M.I.A. was a roommate of fashion designer Luella Bartley and is a long @-@ time friend of designer <unk> Mundane . Clothes from her limited @-@ edition " Okley Run " line — Mexican and Afrika line jackets and leggings , Islamic @-@ inspired and water melon @-@ print hoodies , and tour @-@ inspired designs – were sold in 2008 during New York fashion week . She commented , " I wanted to tie all my work together . When I make an album , I make a number of artworks that go with it , and now I make some clothes that go with it too . So this Okley run was an extension of my Kala album and artwork . " Spin described her designs as " 1000 watt Malcolm McLaren @-@ meets @-@ Basquiat " , that complimented her personal style that could " run from futurist aerobic instructor to new wave pirate to queenly candy raver " . 
 Contrary to her present style , M.I.A. ' s Arular era style has been described as " tattered hand me downs and patched T @-@ shirts of indigents " , embodying the " uniform of the refugee " but modified with cuts , alterations and colours to fashion a distinctly new style and apparel line . M.I.A. built on this during the Kala era with a " playful " combination of baggy T @-@ shirts , leggings and short @-@ shorts . She incorporated eccentric accessories in bold patterns , sparkle and " over @-@ saturated " neon colour to fashion her signature style which inspired flocks of " garishly @-@ clothed all @-@ too @-@ sassy " new @-@ rave girls with bright red tights , cheetah @-@ skin smock and faded 1980s T- shirts . Her <unk> and performance of this refugee image has been noted to " reposition " perceptions of it in the wider public . Hailed as presenting a challenge to the mainstream with her ironic style , M.I.A. has been praised for dictating such a subcultural trend worldwide , combining " adolescent " frustrations of race and class with a strong desire to dance . Eddy Lawrence of Time Out commented how her multi genre style contributed to her being beloved of the broadsheet fashionistas yet simultaneously patron saint and pin @-@ up for the Day @-@ Glo nu @-@ rave kids . Similarly , Mary Beth Ray , in the book Rock Brands : Selling Sound in a Media Saturated Culture writes that M.I.A. ' s hybrid style addressed a number of social and political issues including power , violence , identity and survival in a globalized world , while using avenues that challenged " traditional " definitions of what it meant to be a contemporary pop artist . 
 M.I.A. was once denied entry into a Marc Jacobs party , but subsequently DJed at the designer 's 2008 fashion show afterparty , and modelled for " Marc by Marc Jacobs " in Spring / Summer 2008 . M.I.A. ' s fashion and style landed her on Vogue 's 10 Best Dressed of 2008 . She turned down her inclusion on People magazine 's list of the " 50 Most Beautiful People in the World " the same year . M.I.A. ' s status as a style icon , trendsetter and trailblazer is globally affirmed , with her distinct identity , style , and music illuminating social issues of gender , the third world , and popular music . Critics point out that such facets of her public persona underline the importance of authenticity , challenging the globalized popular music market , and demonstrating music 's strive to be political . Her albums have been met with acclaim , often heralded as " eclectic " for possessing a genre all their own , " packaging inherent politics in the form of pleasurable dance music . " M.I.A. ' s artistic efforts to connect this " extreme eclecticism " with issues of exile , war , violence and terrorism are both commended and criticized . Commentators laud M.I.A. ' s use and subversion of her refugee and migrant experiences , through the weaving of musical creativity , artwork and fashion with her personal life as having dispelled stereotypical notions of the immigrant experience . This gives her a unique place in popular music , while demanding new responses within popular music , media and fashion culture . M.I.A. has been the muse of designers Donatella Versace and Bartley and photographers Rankin and David Bailey , whose spread documents the British musicians who defined the sound and style of rock ' n ' roll . On 1 July 2012 Maya attended the Atelier Versace Show in Paris , wearing clothing inspired from the designer 's 1992 collection . In 2013 she released her own Versace Collection . 
 = = Accolades = = 
 M.I.A. ' s albums have generated widespread acclaim . PopMatters writer Rob Wheaton felt M.I.A. subverted the " abstract , organized , refined " distilling of violence in Western popular music and imagination and made her work represent much of the developing world 's decades @-@ long experiences of " arbitrary , unannounced , and spectacular " slaughter , deeming her work an " assault " with realism . Some detractors criticized M.I.A. early in her music career for " using radical chic " and for her attendance of an art school . Critic Simon Reynolds , writing in The Village Voice in 2005 saw this as a lack of authenticity and felt M.I.A. was " a veritable vortex of discourse , around most likely irresolvable questions concerning authenticity , postcolonialism , and dilettantism " . He continued that while swayed by her chutzpah and ability to deliver live , he " was also turned off by the stencil @-@ sprayed projection imagery of grenades , tanks , and so forth ( redolent of the Clash with their strife @-@ torn Belfast stage backdrops and Sandinista cred by association ) " while the " 99 percent white audience punched the air " , admonishing what he perceived as a " lack of local character " to her debut album . 
 Critic Robert Christgau described Reynolds ' argument as " cheap tack " in another article written in the publication , stating M.I.A 's experiences connected her to world poverty in a way " few Western whites can grasp " . He questioned why M.I.A. ' s 2001 Alternative Turner Prize nominated images of pastel @-@ washed tigers , soldiers , guns , armored vehicles , and fleeing civilians that <unk> M.I.A. ' s albums and videos were now assumed or analyzed as being incendiary propaganda , suggesting that unlike art buyers , rock and roll fans were " assumed to be stupid " . Reynolds later argued that M.I.A. was the " Artist of the Decade " in a 2009 issue of The Guardian . Music culture writer Michael Meyer opined that M.I.A. ' s record imagery , lyrical booklets , homepages and videos supported the " image of provocation yet also avoidance of , or inability to use consistent images and messages . " Instead of catering to stereotypes , he felt that M.I.A. " played with them " creating an <unk> and hence unsettling result . Critic Zach Baron felt that it had been shown in her career that M.I.A. had " always been adept at using a larger force against itself . " M.I.A. has been hailed as demonstrating dislocation to be a " productive site of departure " and praised for her ability to transform such a " disadvantage " into a creative form of expression . 
 = = Social causes = = 
 = = = Activism = = = 
 M.I.A. ' s commentary on the oppression of Sri Lankan Tamils , Palestinians and African Americans has drawn praise and criticism . The United States has restricted her access into and out of the country during her career since the release of her debut album . M.I.A. notes that the <unk> she felt as a child dictated her role as a refugee advocate and voice lender to civilians in war during her career . 
 M.I.A. attributes much of her success to the " homeless , rootlessness " of her early life . Due to her and her family being displaced from Sri Lanka because of the Civil War , M.I.A. has become a refugee icon . The EMP Museum 's 2008 Pop Conference featured paper submissions and discussions on M.I.A. presented on the theme of " Shake , Rattle : Music , Conflict , and Change . " She has used networking sites such as Twitter and MySpace to discuss and highlight the human rights abuses and war crimes that Sri Lanka is accused of perpetrating against Tamils , citing news articles , human rights group reports , government reports , her own experiences as a child and on her return to the island in 2001 to support calls for a ceasefire . M.I.A. has also used a great deal of tiger print and imagery , a symbol for the Tamil Tigers in both album artwork and music videos , such as seen in " Galang " . Being the only Tamil widely known in Western media , M.I.A. has discussed how she feels a responsibility to represent the Tamil minority . M.I.A. has spoken of discussions with witnesses during and after the war as reinforcing the need for international intervention to protect and provide justice to Tamil people . As the 2009 Tamil diaspora protests gathered pace , she joined other activists in condemning the actions of the Sri Lankan government against the Tamil populace as a slow " systematic " genocide . Telling TIME that she didn 't see anything wrong in sticking up for 300 @,@ 000 trapped and dying people , M.I.A. stated that international governments were privy to Sri Lanka 's use of widespread censorship and propaganda on the rebellion during the island 's civil war to aid its impunity in numerous atrocities on civilians , but had no will to end it . Sri Lanka 's Foreign Secretary denied that his country perpetrated genocide , responding that he felt M.I.A. was " misinformed " and that " it 's best she stays with what she 's good at , which is music , not politics . " She has also appeared on Real Time with Bill Maher , as well as other television networks , to discuss the issues in Sri Lanka and critique the Sri Lankan government and their censorship of the media . 
 Consequently , she has been accused of being a " terrorist sympathiser " and " LTTE supporter " by the Sri Lankan government , even by public figures such as Oprah Winfrey , as was stated in a Rolling Stone magazine article , where the singer recalled their exchange : " She shut me down . She took that photo of me , but she was just like , ‘ I can ’ t talk to you because you ’ re crazy and you ’ re a terrorist . And I ’ m like , ‘ I ’ m not . I ’ m a Tamil and there are people dying in my country and you have to like look at it because you ’ re fucking Oprah and every American told me you ’ re going to save the world . " 
 Two weeks before his death , the Tigers ' Political Head B. <unk> told Indian magazine , The Week , that he felt that M.I.A. ' s humanitarianism had been a source of strength to Eelam Tamils and fearless , knowingly amidst the " all @-@ powerful Sri Lankan propaganda machinery that <unk> any one who speaks for the Tamils . " Miranda Sawyer of The Observer highlighted that M.I.A. was emotional and that this could be limiting her , stating that while she was well informed , " you 're not meant to get involved when giving information out about war " , and that the difficulty for M.I.A. was that the world " doesn 't really care . " 
 Hate mail , including death threats directed at M.I.A. and her son , has followed her activism , which she also cited as an influence on the songs on her album Maya . 
 In 2008 , M.I.A. filmed from her Bed <unk> apartment window and posted on YouTube an incident involving a black man being apprehended by white policemen , which in light of the Sean Bell shooting incident , elicited commentary debating the force used for the arrest . She has spoken of the combined effects that news corporations and search engine Google have on news and data collection , while stressing the need for alternative news sources that she felt her son 's generation would need in order to ascertain truth . She told Nylon magazine that social networking site Facebook and Google 's development " by the CIA " was harmful to internet freedom . Some criticized the claim as lacking detail . 
 In 2010 , M.I.A. voiced her fears of the influence of video game violence on her son and his generation , saying , " I don 't know which is worse . The fact that I saw it in my life has maybe given me lots of issues , but there 's a whole generation of American kids seeing violence on their computer screens and then getting shipped off to Afghanistan . They feel like they know the violence when they don 't . Not having a proper understanding of violence , especially what it 's like on the receiving end of it , just makes you interpret it wrong and makes inflicting violence easier . " 
 On 20 November 2013 M.I.A. appeared on The Colbert Report and was asked by host Stephen Colbert what she thought of America . Trying to be gentle , Maya ultimately responded with , " Well you know , in my mind , there 's no countries , you know it 's like ; we 're all one , we all live on this planet . " 
 On 2 December 2013 Time asked M.I.A. who she would pick for its " Person of the Year " and she said her pick would be <unk> whistleblower Edward Snowden . On 8 July 2016 Maya tweeted a YouTube video of an episode of Edward Snowden on the HBO show " <unk> " entitled " State of Surveillance " which discusses abilities of governments to hack into cellular phones . <unk> ( 8 July 2016 ) . " ' State of Surveillance ' with Edward Snowden " ( Tweet ) . 
 M.I.A. has also been outspoken about the police killings of citizens in the United States . On 12 July 2016 she posted an article to Twitter showing that more US citizens have been killed by police than military personnel since September 11 , 2001 . <unk> ( 12 July 2016 ) . " " Shock Report : More Americans Killed by Police Since 9 / 11 than Soldiers Killed in War " " ( Tweet ) . 
 = = = Politics = = = 
 M.I.A. endorsed candidate Jan <unk> at the 2009 European Parliament election , a last @-@ minute candidate standing on a platform of anti @-@ genocide , civil liberties , financial transparency , the environment and women 's rights , who became one of the most successful independent election candidates ever despite her loss in the general election . In 2010 , she condemned the Chinese Government 's role in supporting and supplying arms to the Sri Lankan government during the conflict in an interview with music magazine <unk> , stating that China 's influence within the UN was preventing prosecutions of war crimes committed during the conflict . In October 2009 , she stated that the President of the United States Barack Obama should give back his 2009 Nobel Peace Prize " like John Lennon sent back his MBE . " She said in one interview , playing on the famous Lennon phrase " Give Peace a Chance " - " I 'm a bit beyond being an artist who says , ' Give peace a chance . ' Part of me is like , ' Give war a chance , ' just to stir it up , you know what I mean ? " . Following the 2011 United Kingdom anti @-@ austerity protests and the 2011 London riots , during which her cousin 's jewellery shop in Croydon was attacked and looted , M.I.A. criticised the UK Government 's response to the rioters as failing to address the root causes of them . She recalled the importance of a council funded youth worker she had in her school years and the use of tax money to incentivise a new business job creation program amongst the working class . She stated that the top forty companies in Britain who banked offshore should be made to pay taxes in the UK and " cut the poor people some slack . " 
 M.I.A. has been a supporter of WikiLeaks and Julian Assange . In her own book , M.I.A. wrote regarding Wikileaks , " So obviously I love Wikileaks because , after I ’ d gone through the whole backlash , they were the first news information site to confirm any news on the Sri Lankan war in the truest form ; they were the first to release information stating the truth about what had happened to the Tamils as I knew it and to reveal that the United Nations was aware that the Sri Lankan government was lying — war crimes had been committed but their hands were tied because any time anyone tried to impose sanctions , governments would walk out . I support Wikileaks because of that . " She composed the theme to Assange 's television show The World Tomorrow and later stood by Assange 's side as he held a press conference at the Ecuadorian Embassy in London where Assange was successfully granted political asylum by Ecuador in August 2012 . " I ask President Obama to do the right thing . The United States must renounce its witch hunt against WikiLeaks , " Assange said at the press conference . She posted a photo of Assange from within the embassy , and later tweeted , " <unk> after this day <unk> have 2 happen ..... , either 500 cops turn up outside every rape case reported even if it 's without <unk> or we get raped by the <unk> that be and we deal <unk> . " The tweets were in reference to an arrest warrant the Swedish Prosecutor 's Office issued in August 2010 for Assange on two charges : rape and molestation . Earlier in 2012 Britain 's Supreme Court denied an appeal by Assange to avoid extradition to Sweden to face these charges . In November 2013 , Assange appeared via Skype to open M.I.A. ' s New York City concert . Also , on 18 September 2014 Maya tweeted a link to a documentary on YouTube entitled " The Internet 's Own Boy : Aaron Swartz " . The documentary is about the life of Aaron Swartz , who was a computer programmer , writer , political organizer and Internet hacktivist . In the same tweet Maya included a link and invitation to RSVP to a party to launch Julian Assange 's new book " When Google Met WikiLeaks " . 
 Ann Powers , in conversation with Billboard revealed that in trying to handle political issues and creating art , the musician did not want to compromise or keep silent . She notes that this method worked for The Clash , but that this was at a certain time and a certain place , that they benefitted from being a band , and that audiences were more used to seeing men being confrontational . Conversely , Denise Sullivan writing in Keep on Pushing : Black Power Music from Blues to Hip @-@ Hop ( 2011 ) , noted that in contrast to other rock musicians , M.I.A. furthered the legacy of The Clash , " creating a controversy while doing so " . Critic Jon Dolan of Spin noted M.I.A. may be a " confused revolutionary ? brilliant provocateur ? " and one of the most polarising yet thrilling figures in pop music today . <unk> , writing in <unk> magazine cited composer Igor Stravinsky in describing M.I.A. ' s role as an artist who challenged the audience into breaking their mind from a conservative cycle of familiarity . Baron writing in the Village Voice felt that although M.I.A. ' s bloodline , politics and grievance meant that she was more informed than most and gave her " every right to be a partisan and were reason for caution , " he praised her efforts for leading thousands of American writers including himself to know of the situation in Sri Lanka as " brilliant " , noting her mainly humanitarian angle in her protesting of civilian casualties that had been vastly and disproportionately inflicted on Sri Lanka 's Tamil minority and her courage in " putting her success and fame on the line to use every opportunity and avenue possible to remind Americans and people around the globe of this conflict " is pretty much the most admirable thing going in pop music . 
 = = = Media = = = 
 M.I.A. ' s relationship with some media outlets has been controversial . M.I.A. confronted <unk> in 2007 , citing sexism and racist mechanisms as possible reasons for misattribution of some of her work in her career . In 2010 , M.I.A. tweeted " Fuck the New York Times , " after The New York Times published a critical article by Lynn Hirschberg about M.I.A. and the conflict that portrayed the musician as politically naive and hypocritical . Both M.I.A. and several pop culture media outlets were highly critical of Hirschberg 's article and reporting . Hirschberg later published a correction , apologizing for reporting quotes made by the artist out of order . Rob Horning , writing for PopMatters , believed that Hirschberg 's incorrect quotes were a deliberate effort to defame the artist . M.I.A. responded on her Twitter account , posting of a telephone number and asking followers to call in and give feedback on the piece , and the revelatory content of the conversations , which she secretly taped . In 2010 , she expressed disappointment that Wikileaks distributed their documents to other news publications – including the New York Times — to gain wider coverage , as she stated their " way of reporting " did not work . 
 = = = Philanthropy = = = 
 M.I.A. supports a number of charities , both publicly and privately . She funded Youth Action International to help youth break out of cycles of violence and poverty in war torn African communities and set up school @-@ building projects in Liberia in 2006 . She supports the Unstoppable Foundation , <unk> the establishment of the Becky Primary School in Liberia . During her visit to Liberia she met the then President of Liberia and rehabilitated ex @-@ child soldiers . She also appeared as part of a humanitarian mission there , hosting a " <unk> " TV @-@ series documentary on the post @-@ war situation in the country with activist Kimmie Weeks . Following her performance at the 2008 MTV Movie Awards afterparty , she donated her performance fee to building more schools in the country , telling the crowd , " It costs to build a school for 1 @,@ 000 . " Winning the 2008 Official <unk> Championships ( iPod Battle ) with her " M.I.A. and Friends " team , 20 % of the following year 's championship ticket sales were donated to her Liberian school building projects . 
 M.I.A. has also donated to The <unk> Foundation to fund paediatric cancer research , aid cancer families , and improve the quality of life for children living with cancer through creative arts programmes . In 2009 , she supported the " Mercy Mission to Vanni " aid ship , destined to send civilian aid from Britain to Vanni and controversially blocked from reaching its destination . The country 's navy announced that it would fire on any ship that entered its waters , and M.I.A. was singled out on the Sri Lankan army 's official website after the singer announced her support for the campaign . In 2011 , following her performance at the Roskilde Festival , she donated from the Roskilde Festival Charity Society to help bring justice to Tamil victims of war crimes and genocide and to aid advocacy and ensure legal rights for refugees and witnesses . 
 = = Personal life = = 
