 After M.I.A. approached American DJ Diplo at the Fabric Club in London , the two were romantically involved for five years . 
 From 2006 to 2008 , M.I.A. lived in the Bedford @-@ Stuyvesant neighborhood of Brooklyn , New York , where she met Benjamin Bronfman ( a.k.a. Benjamin Brewer ) , an environmentalist , founder of Green Owl , musician and member of the Bronfman family and Lehman family . They became engaged and she gave birth to their son , <unk> Edgar Arular Bronfman , on 13 February 2009 , just three days after performing at the Grammy Awards . In February 2012 , it was announced that she and Bronfman had split . In a 2013 interview with Ferrari Sheppard , M.I.A. commented on her relationship with Bronfman and his family 's wealth : " I think it ’ s weird . It ’ s not that I got with Ben and then suddenly I was a billionaire . You know ? I got with Ben , and I realised that we do come from different worlds , but it ’ s interesting that it is more about the concepts of , again , elitism and power . Who Ben is on paper sounds way more powerful than who I am because of where he comes from . " 
 = = Discography = = 
 Arular ( 2005 ) 
 Kala ( 2007 ) 
 Maya ( 2010 ) 
 Matangi ( 2013 ) 
 A.I.M. ( 2016 ) 
 = = Tours = = 
 Arular Tour ( 2005 ) 
 Kala Tour ( 2007 ) 
 People vs. Money Tour ( 2008 ) 
 Maya Tour ( 2010 ) 
 Matangi Tour ( 2013 @-@ 2014 ) 
 = = Awards and nominations = = 
 = Tewkesbury Medieval Festival = 
 The Tewkesbury Medieval Festival is a medieval fair held over the second weekend of every July near the town of Tewkesbury , United Kingdom . Its main feature is the re @-@ enactment of the Battle of Tewkesbury , which was fought in 1471 . Located on parts of the ground where the original battle was fought , the festival also features a medieval camp , in which traders ply their wares and visitors are entertained by musicians and acrobats . The largest medieval fair in the United Kingdom , the Tewkesbury Medieval Festival was listed in Footprint England as one of the " ten most bizarre festivals " in the country . 
 = = Background = = 
 The Tewkesbury Medieval Festival started in 1984 as a simple fair with 10 stalls , a beer tent , and a small @-@ scale re @-@ enactment of the Battle of Tewkesbury , which was originally fought in 1471 near the town of Tewkesbury , United Kingdom . The festival became a regular celebration held over the second weekend of every July on parts of the original battlefield . In 2005 , the organisers — a group of local re @-@ enactors named the Companions of the Black Bear — registered the event as a company to facilitate the application of grants and their protection . Besides the re @-@ enactment and the camp , the festival offers guided walks of the battlefield . Since its start , the event has expanded to become the largest medieval fair in the United Kingdom . Attendance of the festival is open to all , but participation as a re @-@ enactor is by invitation only . The sight of hundreds of men dressed as medieval soldiers and fighting in a battle led Footprint England to list the event as one of the " ten most bizarre festivals " in the country . 
 = = Re @-@ enactment of the Battle of Tewkesbury = = 
 The festival 's main feature is its re @-@ enactment of the Battle of Tewkesbury , which was fought on 4 May 1471 between the Houses of York and Lancaster . The engagement was a decisive victory for the Yorkists and their leader , King Edward IV . The forces of the House of Lancaster were decimated , and their leaders killed or captured , leaving Edward as the unchallenged ruler of England . Several Lancastrians fled the battlefield and sought sanctuary at Tewkesbury Abbey . The Yorkists stormed the abbey , captured their foes , and executed them . 
 The re @-@ enactment at the first festival was a simple affair compared to later years : approximately 100 local enthusiasts , kitted out in crude imitations of medieval gear , fought each other on the fields of Tewkesbury . They wore woollen chainmail or armour made of fibreglass . Their swords and pole arms were made from wood ; arrows were rolled @-@ up wallpaper . As the festival became more popular over the years , the scale and quality of the re @-@ enactment changed . Re @-@ enactors from other parts of the United Kingdom joined the event , as well as those from Poland , Germany and other European countries . The armour and weapons used in the later years were faithful steel reproductions that could cost thousands of pounds sterling ( £ ) . By 2002 , the Battle of Tewkesbury was re @-@ enacted by approximately 2 @,@ 000 men and women , and the British Broadcasting Corporation called the next year 's re @-@ enactment the largest in Europe . Aside from the battle , the storming of Tewkesbury Abbey is also re @-@ enacted during the festival . The subsequent trial and execution of the prisoners are acted out in a mock fashion . 
 = = Medieval camp = = 
 Since 2002 , the festival has been more than a small setup of stalls . It has grown to be a camp of up to 120 stalls , where life in medieval times is enacted by participants of the battle and their families . The beer tent is a regular fixture , and the stalls peddle herbs , sweets , and food . Entertainers , such as acrobats , fire @-@ eaters , and jugglers , wander the area , performing their arts . Musicians and dancers also entertain visitors . Re @-@ enactors demonstrate pottery , yarn spinning , and other medieval craft . These enthusiasts come from foreign countries , such as Belarus and Hungary . The German <unk> rock band <unk> has performed several times at the festival . Short bouts of simulated duels are performed in the camp and a jousting tournament was also featured . The festival has attracted visitors from as far as New Zealand and the west coast of the United States ; the local tabloid quoted an estimate of 25 @,@ 000 visitors to the festival in 2003 . 
 = = Town of Tewkesbury = = 
 Although the town council of Tewkesbury plays no part in organising the festival , it has supported the event by giving it grants ( the amount for 2005 and 2008 was £ 1 @,@ 000 each ) . Most of the money for organising the festival is recouped from " tithes paid by the [ stall holders ] " , which at times proved insufficient to cover the expenses ; the event was operating in the red for 2002 – 2004 . Under encouragement from the Companions of the Black Bear and the Chamber of Commerce , the town 's traders support the event by decorating their shops and dressing up in medieval @-@ period costumes . The pubs and restaurants serve medieval @-@ style fare as well . A free bus service connects the town and the festival . 
 = Pasty = 
 A pasty ( / <unk> / , Cornish : Pasti ) is a baked pastry , a traditional variety of which is particularly associated with Cornwall , in the United Kingdom . It is made by placing an uncooked filling , typically meat and vegetables , on one half of a flat shortcrust pastry circle , folding the pastry in half to wrap the filling in a semicircle and crimping the curved edge to form a seal before baking . 
 The traditional Cornish pasty , which since 2011 has Protected Geographical Indication ( PGI ) status in Europe , is filled with beef , sliced or diced potato , swede ( also known as yellow turnip or <unk> – referred to in Cornwall as turnip ) and onion , seasoned with salt and pepper , and is baked . Today , the pasty is the food most associated with Cornwall . It is regarded as the national dish and accounts for 6 % of the Cornish food economy . Pasties with many different fillings are made and some shops specialise in selling all sorts of pasties . 
 The origins of the pasty are unclear , though there are many references to them throughout historical documents and fiction . The pasty is now popular world @-@ wide due to the spread of Cornish miners , and variations can be found in Australia , the United States , Argentina , Mexico , Ulster and elsewhere . 
 = = History = = 
 Despite the modern pasty 's strong association with Cornwall , its exact origins are unclear . The English word " pasty " derives from Medieval French ( <unk> paste from <unk> pasta ) for a pie , filled with venison , salmon or other meat , vegetables or cheese , baked without a dish . Pasties have been mentioned in cookbooks throughout the ages . For example , the earliest version of Le Viandier ( Old French ) has been dated to around 1300 and contains several pasty recipes . In 1393 , Le <unk> de Paris contains recipes for <unk> with venison , veal , beef , or mutton . 
 Other early references to pasties include a 13th @-@ century charter that was granted by Henry III ( 1207 – 1272 ) to the town of Great Yarmouth . The town is bound to send to the sheriffs of Norwich every year one hundred herrings , baked in twenty four pasties , which the sheriffs are to deliver to the lord of the manor of East Carlton who is then to convey them to the King . Around the same time , 13th @-@ century chronicler Matthew Paris wrote of the monks of St Albans Abbey " according to their custom , lived upon pasties of flesh @-@ meat " . A total of 5 @,@ 500 venison pasties were served at the installation feast of George Neville , archbishop of York and chancellor of England in 1465 . They were even eaten by royalty , as a letter from a baker to Henry VIII 's third wife , Jane Seymour ( 1508 – 1537 ) confirms : " ... hope this pasty reaches you in better condition than the last one ... " In his diaries written in the mid @-@ 17th century , Samuel Pepys makes several references to his consumption of pasties , for instance " dined at Sir W. Pen ’ s ... on a damned venison pasty , that stunk like a devil . " , but after this period the use of the word outside Cornwall declined . 
 In contrast to its earlier place amongst the wealthy , during the 17th and 18th centuries , the pasty became popular with working people in Cornwall , where tin miners and others adopted it due to its unique shape , forming a complete meal that could be carried easily and eaten without cutlery . In a mine , the pasty 's dense , folded pastry could stay warm for several hours , and if it did get cold , it could easily be warmed on a shovel over a candle . 
 Side @-@ crimped pasties gave rise to the suggestion that the miner might have eaten the pasty holding the thick edge of pastry , which was later discarded , thereby ensuring that his dirty fingers ( possibly including traces of arsenic ) did not touch food or his mouth . However , many old photographs show that pasties were wrapped in bags made of paper or muslin and were eaten from end @-@ to @-@ end ; according to the earliest Cornish recipe book , published in 1929 , this is " the true Cornish way " to eat a pasty . Another theory suggests that pasties were marked at one end with an initial and then eaten from the other end so that if not finished in one go , they could easily be reclaimed by their owners . 
 In 2006 , a researcher in Devon discovered a list of ingredients for a pasty tucked inside an audit book and dated 1510 , calculating the cost of making a venison pasty . This replaced the previous oldest recipe , dated 1746 , held by the Cornwall Records Office in Truro , Cornwall . The dish at the time was cooked with venison , in this case from the Mount <unk> estate , as the pasty was then considered a luxury meal . Alongside the ledger , which included the price of the pasty in Plymouth , Devon , in 1509 , the discovery sparked a controversy between the neighbouring counties of Devon and Cornwall as to the origin of the dish . However , the term pasty appears in much earlier written records from other parts of the country , as mentioned above . 
 = = Cornish pasty = = 
 The pasty is regarded as the national dish of Cornwall , and the term " Cornish pasty " has been in use since at least the early 1860s : 
 The Cornish pasty , which so admirably comprises a dinner in itself — meat , potatoes , and other good things well cooked and made up into so portable a form — was a subject of much admiration , and reminded me of the old coaching days , when I secured a pasty at Bodmin in order to take it home to my cook , that it might be dissected and serve as a pattern for Cornish pasties in quite another part of the country . 
 Cornish pasties are very popular with the <unk> in this neighbourhood , and have lately been successfully introduced into some parts of Devonshire . They are made of small pieces of beef , and thin slices of potatoe , highly peppered , and enclosed in wrappers of paste . 
 By the late 19th century , national cookery schools began to teach their pupils to create their own version of a " Cornish pasty " that was smaller , and was to be eaten as an " economical savoury nibble for polite middle @-@ class Victorians " . 
 On 20 July 2011 , after a nine @-@ year campaign by the Cornish Pasty Association – the trade organisation of about 50 pasty makers based in Cornwall – the name " Cornish pasty " was awarded Protected Geographical Indication ( PGI ) status by the European Commission . According to the PGI status , a Cornish pasty should be shaped like a ‘ D ’ and crimped on one side , not on the top . Its ingredients should include beef , swede ( called turnip in Cornwall ) , potato and onion , with a light seasoning of salt and pepper , keeping a chunky texture . The pastry should be golden and retain its shape when cooked and cooled . The PGI status also means that Cornish pasties must be prepared in Cornwall . They do not have to be baked in Cornwall , nor do the ingredients have to come from the county , though the Cornish Pasty Association ( CPA ) noted that there are strong links between pasty production and local suppliers of the ingredients . Packaging for pasties that conform to the requirements include an authentication stamp , the use of which is policed by the CPA . 
 Producers outside Cornwall objected to the PGI award , with one saying " [ EU bureaucrats could ] go to hell " , and another that it was " protectionism for some big pasty companies to churn out a pastiche of the real iconic product " . Major UK supermarkets Asda and Morrisons both stated they would be affected by the change , as did nationwide bakery chain Greggs , though Greggs was one of seven companies allowed to continue to use the name " Cornish pasty " during a three @-@ year transitional period . 
 Members of the CPA made about 87 million pasties in 2008 , amounting to sales of £ 60 million ( about 6 % of the food economy of Cornwall ) . In 2011 , over 1 @,@ 800 permanent staff were employed by members of the CPA and some 13 @,@ 000 other jobs benefited from the trade . Surveys by the South West tourism board have shown that one of the top three reasons people visit Cornwall is the food and that the Cornish pasty is the food most associated with Cornwall . 
 Michael Ball , a Cornish @-@ born businessman who is chief executive of WMC Retail Partners , Oxfordshire , is planning to establish a Cornish pasty museum at Cornish Market World near St Austell . He hopes to collect pasty @-@ making artifacts and memorabilia for the museum . 
 = = Recipes and ingredients = = 
 The recipe for a Cornish pasty , as defined by its protected status , includes diced or minced beef , onion , potato and swede in rough chunks along with some " light peppery " seasoning . The cut of beef used is generally skirt steak . Swede is sometimes called turnip in Cornwall , but the recipe requires use of actual swede , not turnip . Pasty ingredients are usually seasoned with salt and pepper , depending on individual taste . The use of carrot in a traditional Cornish pasty is frowned upon , though it does appear regularly in recipes . 
 The type of pastry used is not defined , as long as it is golden in colour and will not crack during the cooking or cooling , although modern pasties almost always use a shortcrust pastry . There is a humorous belief that the pastry on a good pasty should be strong enough to withstand a drop down a mine shaft , and indeed the barley flour that was usually used does make hard dense pastry . 
 = = = Variations = = = 
 Although the officially protected Cornish pasty has a specific ingredients list , old Cornish cookery books show that pasties were generally made from whatever food was available . Indeed , the earliest recorded pasty recipes include venison , not beef . " Pasty " has always been a generic name for the shape and can contain a variety of fillings , including <unk> , vegetarian and even chicken tikka . Pork and apple pasties are readily available in shops throughout Cornwall and Devon , with the ingredients including an apple flavoured sauce , mixed together throughout the pasty , as well as sweet pasties with ingredients such as apple and fig or chocolate and banana , which are common in some areas of Cornwall . 
 A part @-@ savoury , part @-@ sweet pasty ( similar to the Bedfordshire <unk> ) was eaten by miners in the 19th century , in the copper mines on Parys Mountain , Anglesey . The technician who did the research and discovered the recipe claimed that the recipe was probably taken to Anglesey by Cornish miners travelling to the area looking for work . No two @-@ course pasties are commercially produced in Cornwall today , but are usually the product of amateur cooks . They are , however , commercially available in the British supermarket chain Morrisons ( under the name ' Tin Miner Pasty ' ) . Other traditional fillings have included a wide variety of locally available meats including pork , bacon , egg , rabbit , chicken , mackerel and sweet fillings such as dates , apples , jam and sweetened rice - leading to the oft @-@ quoted joke that ' the Devil <unk> was <unk> to cross over into Cornwall for fear that ee 'd end up in a pasty ' . 
 A pasty is known as a " <unk> oggy " when steak is replaced with an extra potato , " <unk> " meaning potato and " oggy " meaning pasty and was eaten when times were hard and expensive meat could not be afforded . Another traditional meatless recipe is ' herby pie ' with parsley , freshly gathered wild green herbs and chives , ramsons or leeks and a spoonful of clotted cream . 
 = = = Shape = = = 
 Whilst the PGI rules state that a Cornish pasty must be a " D " shape , with crimping along the curve ( i.e. , side @-@ crimped ) , crimping is variable within Cornwall , with some advocating a side crimp while others maintain that a top crimp is more authentic . 
 Some sources state that the difference between a Devon and Cornish pasty is that a Devon pasty has a top @-@ crimp and is oval in shape , whereas the Cornish pasty is semicircular and side @-@ crimped along the curve . However , pasties with a top crimp have been made in Cornwall for generations , yet those Cornish bakers who favour this method now find that they cannot legally call their pasties " Cornish " . 
 = = In other regions = = 
 Migrating Cornish miners and their families ( colloquially known as Cousin Jacks and Cousin <unk> ) helped to spread pasties into the rest of the world during the 19th century . As tin mining in Cornwall began to decline , miners took their expertise and traditions to new mining regions around the world . As a result , pasties can be found in many regions , including : 
 Many parts of Australia , including the Yorke Peninsula , which has been the site of an annual pasty festival ( claimed to be the world 's largest ) since 1973 . A clarification of the Protected Geographical Status ruling has confirmed that pasties made in Australia are still allowed to be called " Cornish Pasties " . 
 The Upper Peninsula of Michigan . In some areas , pasties are a significant tourist attraction , including an annual Pasty Fest in Calumet , Michigan in late June . Pasties in the Upper Peninsula of Michigan have a particularly unusual history . Many ethnic groups adopted the pasty for use in the Copper Country copper mines ; the Finnish immigrants to the region mistook it for the traditional <unk> and <unk> pastries . The pasty has become strongly associated with all cultures in this area , and in the similar Iron Range in northern Minnesota . 
 Mineral Point , Wisconsin , was the site of the first mineral rush in the USA during the 1830s . After lead was discovered in Mineral Point , many of the early miners migrated from Cornwall to this south @-@ western Wisconsin area . Those Cornish miners brought their skills working in the deep underground tin mines of Cornwall . They also brought their recipe and appetite for the pasty . 
 A similar local history about the arrival of the pasty in the area with an influx of Welsh and Cornish miners to the area 's copper mines , and its preservation as a local delicacy , is found in Butte , Montana , " The Richest Hill On Earth " . 
 The Anthracite regions of northeastern Pennsylvania , including the cities of Wilkes @-@ Barre , Scranton , and Hazleton , had an influx of miners to the area in the 1800s and brought the pasty with them . To this day , pasties are still a local favourite . In 1981 , a Pennsylvania entrepreneur started marketing pasties under the brand name Mr. <unk> . 
 The Mexican state of Hidalgo , and the twin silver mining cities of Pachuca and Real del Monte ( Mineral del Monte ) , have notable Cornish influences from the Cornish miners who settled there , with pasties being considered typical local cuisine . In Mexican Spanish , they are referred to as pastes . The town of Real del Monte in Mexico is the site of a museum of pasties . 
 They are also popular in South Africa , New Zealand and Ulster . 
 = = Culture = = 
 = = = Literature = = = 
 Pasties have been mentioned in multiple literary works since the 12th century Arthurian romance Erec and Enide , written by Chrétien de Troyes , in which they are eaten by characters from the area now known as Cornwall . There is a mention in <unk> the Dane , another romance written at the end of the thirteenth century ; in the 14th century Robin Hood tales ; in Chaucer 's The Canterbury Tales ; and in three plays by William Shakespeare . 
 Pasties appear in many novels , used to draw parallels or represent Cornwall . In American Gods by Neil Gaiman , main character Shadow discovers pasties at Mabel 's restaurant in the fictional town of Lakeside . The food is mentioned as being popularised in America by Cornishmen , as a parallel to how gods are " brought over " to America in the rest of the story . Another literature reference takes place in The Cat Who ... series by Lilian Jackson Braun . Pasties are referred to as a cultural part of the north country , and Jim <unk> often eats at The Nasty Pasty , a popular restaurant in fictional Moose County , famous for its tradition of being a mining settlement . Reference to pasties is made in Brian Jacques ' popular Redwall series of novels , where it is a staple favourite on the menu to the mice and hares of Redwall Abbey . Pasties also appear in the <unk> series of historical novels of Cornwall , by Winston Graham , as well as the BBC television series adapted from these works . 
 = = = Superstitions , rhymes and chants = = = 
 In the tin mines of Devon and Cornwall , pasties were associated with " knockers " , spirits said to create a knocking sound that was either supposed to indicate the location of rich veins of ore , or to warn of an impending tunnel collapse . To encourage the good will of the knockers , miners would leave a small part of the pasty within the mine for them to eat . Sailors and fisherman would likewise discard a crust to appease the spirits of dead mariners , though fishermen believed that it was bad luck to take a pasty aboard ship . 
 A Cornish proverb , recounted in 1861 , emphasised the great variety of ingredients that were used in pasties by saying that the devil would not come into Cornwall for fear of ending up as a filling in one . A West Country schoolboy playground @-@ rhyme current in the 1940s concerning the pasty went : 
 Matthew , Mark , Luke and John , ate a pasty five feet long , 
 Bit it once , Bit it twice , Oh my Lord , it 's full of mice . 
 In 1959 the English singer @-@ songwriter Cyril Tawney wrote a nostalgic song called " The <unk> Man " . The song tells of the pasty @-@ seller with his characteristic vendor 's call who was always outside Plymouth 's Devonport Naval Dockyard gates late at night when the sailors were returning , and his replacement by hot dog sellers after World War II . 
 The word " oggy " in the internationally popular chant " Oggy Oggy Oggy , Oi Oi Oi " is thought to stem from Cornish dialect " <unk> " , deriving from " <unk> " the Cornish word for pasty . When the pasties were ready for eating , the bal maidens at the mines would supposedly shout down the shaft " Oggy Oggy Oggy " and the miners would reply " Oi Oi Oi " . 
 = = = Giant pasties = = = 
 As the national dish of Cornwall , several oversized versions of the pasty have been created in the county . For example , a giant pasty is paraded from Polruan to Fowey through the streets during regatta week . Similarly , a giant pasty is paraded around the ground of the Cornish Pirates rugby team on St Piran 's Day before it is passed over the goal posts . 
 The world 's largest Cornish pasty was made in August 2010 , measuring 4 @.@ 6 metres ( 15 ft ) and weighing 860 kilograms ( 1 @,@ 900 lb ) . It was created by " Proper Cornish " bakers , using 165 kg ( 364 lb ) of beef , 180 lb ( 82 kg ) of swede , 100 lb ( 45 kg ) of potatoes and 75 lb ( 34 kg ) of onions . The pasty was estimated to cost £ 7 @,@ 000 and contain 1 @.@ 75 million calories . 
 = = Gallery = = 
 = She Has a Name = 
 She Has a Name is a play about human trafficking written by Andrew Kooman in 2009 as a single act and expanded to full length in 2010 . It is about the trafficking of children into sexual slavery and was inspired by the deaths of 54 people in the <unk> human @-@ trafficking incident . Kooman had previously published literature , but this was his first full @-@ length play . The stage premiere of She Has a Name was directed by Stephen Waldschmidt in Calgary , Alberta in February 2011 . From May to October 2012 , She Has a Name toured across Canada . In conjunction with the tour , A Better World raised money to help women and children who had been trafficked in Thailand as part of the country 's prostitution industry . The first performances of She Has a Name in the United States took place in Folsom , California in 2014 under the direction of Emma Eldridge , who was a 23 @-@ year @-@ old college student at the time . 
 The script calls for five actors to portray ten characters . The two main characters are Jason , a young Canadian lawyer ; and Number 18 , a young female prostitute who claims to be fifteen years old and has been a prostitute for six years . The drama centers on Jason 's infiltration of a brothel ring that is trafficking girls into Bangkok . Jason comes to believe that Number 18 could be a key witness to a human trafficking incident and tries to gain her trust and persuade her to testify against the ring . The victimized child in the play is known only by the number 18 to reflect that traffickers often dehumanize their victims by giving them a new name or simply a number , which in some cases is branded onto the victim 's body . Waldschmidt said he hoped that She Has a Name will educate Canadians about human trafficking and motivate them to act on what they learn , thereby turning them into anti @-@ sexual slavery activists . 
 She Has a Name received strong endorsement from Canadian activists , including MP Joy Smith , Ratanak International 's Brian McConaghy , and IJM Canada 's Jamie McIntosh . The play 's premiere and initial run were critically acclaimed . In the 2012 tour across Canada , She Has a Name was performed in several fringe theatre festivals , at which critics representing the Montreal Gazette , the Winnipeg Free Press , and <unk> @-@ FM said it stood out for its quality and moral content . 
 = = Background = = 
 She Has a Name was the first full @-@ length play by Andrew Kooman , a playwright and author from Alberta in western Canada . He began work on it in 2008 and finished a one @-@ act version by 2009 , writing under the guidance of a dramaturge at a Scripts At Work workshop at Red Deer College . He drew on his experiences working with a Canadian film crew in Thailand in 2006 . He intended to extend the script into a full @-@ length play eventually . Kooman had previously written other literary works , including the young @-@ adult novel Ten Silver Coins : The <unk> of <unk> , and two plays , Shelter and Joseph , that had been selected for development at Scripts At Work workshops . 
 Kooman first became aware of human trafficking while he was working for the nonprofit organization Youth With A Mission ( <unk> ) in southeast Malaysia , where he met children who had been trafficked . Kooman later realized that people are also trafficked in Canada . Kooman wrote She Has a Name with the intention of bringing attention to this issue , specifically in connection with sexual exploitation . 
 To ground the play in reality , Kooman researched human trafficking and met with survivors . He read about the <unk> human @-@ trafficking incident , in which 121 people were trafficked from Burma to Thailand and left in a locked water tank , which was then abandoned by its drivers and discovered only after 54 of the people had died from suffocation or hyperthermia . The truck carrying the water tank had been abandoned because it ran out of fuel . When the truck was discovered in April 2008 , it contained men , women , and children . Knowing that many of the impoverished girls who are smuggled in this manner become enslaved in brothels as child prostitutes , Kooman used the incident in the backstory of the play . 
 In January 2010 , there was a full reading of the one @-@ act version of the play . Despite an unfinished script and a performance by amateur actors , it evoked a strong response from the audience . Later that year , Stephen Waldschmidt , an artistic associate of Burnt Thicket Theatre , asked to read the script of She Has a Name , and later said he could not put it down . He was initially reluctant to attach himself to the play because of the immensity and ugliness of the issues therein , but he ultimately worked with Kooman to expand it into a full @-@ length play with an extra hour of material by the end of 2010 . The result is a play that can be performed in 90 minutes but may last up to two hours . Burnt Thicket Theatre served as the play 's initial production company . 
 = = Characters = = 
 There are ten characters in She Has a Name , but the script calls for only five actors , four female and one male . The main characters are Jason and Number 18 . Jason is a young , Canadian lawyer with experience in corporate law . He found this work unsatisfying , so he started working in international human rights law for the United Nations and a non @-@ governmental organization ( NGO ) that opposes sex trafficking . Number 18 — the play 's heroine — is a young , female prostitute who claims to be fifteen years old and has been a prostitute for six years . Ali is Jason 's wife , and they have two young daughters . Marta is Jason 's employer , who has become very tough from years of fighting for justice and who is now driven and stressed . The other characters are a pimp , who is unnamed , and his assistant , a cruel brothel keeper called Mama . 
 The script calls for one actor to play both male characters — Jason and the pimp . Jason and Number 18 are haunted by four voices . As poetic and prophetic voices , these characters serve much the same purpose as a chorus in Greek tragedies , according to reviewer Lana Michelin of the Red Deer Advocate . Variously considered angels or ghosts , the voices are written in the script to be played by the female actors who portray Number 18 , Marta , Ali , and Mama . While these voices sometimes emphasize the horrors of the sex industry , at other times , they offer comfort to Number 18 . It is only revealed at the play 's conclusion that the chorus is made up of dead child prostitutes . 
 = = Plot summary = = 
 A pimp rapes Number 18 in a bar , then enslaves her sexually . Number 18 's father died when she was young and her family struggled to support her thereafter . Strangers took her from her home in Cambodia as a child , replaced her name with a number , and prostituted her in various countries . Number 18 ends up in the Thai child prostitution industry . Most of her clients are rich men , many of them foreign tourists . In a brothel and bar called The Pearl , Number 18 is kept in a dark room containing only a table and a dilapidated bed . Whenever she fails to follow the orders of Mama , the brothel @-@ keeper , Mama shouts at her and beats her . Number 18 prays for a man to come and save her from these ordeals . At the same time she becomes the most elegant and highly sought @-@ after prostitute at The Pearl and her pimp 's favourite . She becomes very proficient in pleasing men sexually but also remains childlike — she dries her face with her skirt and plays with its hem . 
 Jason starts work with an NGO in Thailand , having left his wife and children in Canada and abandoned a lucrative job at his father @-@ in @-@ law 's legal firm . He communicates with his wife Ali over Skype . Jason 's first task is to find witnesses to or survivors from a human @-@ trafficking incident and then to shut down the brothels into which they have been trafficked ; his boss Marta sends him into the brothels as she cannot enter herself . His specific focus is an Asia @-@ wide brothel ring 's trafficking of girls into Bangkok for prostitution as part of the child sex tourism industry . An abandoned storage truck has been discovered containing the bodies of dead sex workers . Attempting to build a legal case against the brothel ring , Jason pays to see prostitutes in the hope that one of them witnessed the incident . The first prostitute he sees is Number 18 , whose attempts to seduce him make him uneasy . Thinking Number 18 could be a key witness , he tries to persuade her to testify . The other prostitutes Jason encounters are too afraid to give evidence . Number 18 answers some of Jason 's questions about where she is from , where she has worked , and how long she has been working , but only on the condition that Jason pay 100 baht for each response . She reveals that she has been prostituted in Thailand and Malaysia . 
 It is revealed that Number 18 was one of the girls in the storage truck , but that she escaped and ended up at The Pearl . Traumatized , she does not understand what Jason wants . She knows that every girl who has talked about the storage truck incident has been killed and is therefore reluctant to testify . One night Number 18 is injured in a party at the brothel and can barely walk when Jason visits . When he tells Ali about his experiences , she begs him to come home , but Jason believes he is in Bangkok by divine providence . Number 18 comes to understand that Jason is not like the other men who frequent The Pearl , and agrees to trust him and testify against the brothel ring if he can rescue her . 
 Jason pays Number 18 's pimp enough money to take her out of the brothel for a weekend . Before he arrives to take her away , however , Mama finds and confiscates the money Jason has previously paid Number 18 , and correctly guesses that he does not intend to bring her back . When Jason arrives to collect Number 18 , Mama tells him she is dead and offers a refund . Believing Number 18 is still alive , Jason becomes violent . Mama mocks him , saying the Western culture he is part of is hedonistic and responsible for people in the Third World being sexually trafficked . Jason stops short of hurting Mama and leaves to report to Marta . Through her connections , Marta discovers that Number 18 is alive . Marta tries to save Number 18 , posing as a lawyer protecting Number 18 's rights . The pimp forces Marta off with a gun . When Jason makes another attempt to rescue Number 18 , the pimp kills her . Number 18 joins the chorus of dead child prostitutes who have been watching over and commenting on events throughout the play . 
 = = Productions = = 
 = = = Initial run = = = 
 The stage premiere of She Has a Name was directed by Waldschmidt , who was also the scenic designer . Aaron Krogman was selected to portray Jason and the unnamed pimp , Sienna Howell @-@ Holden to portray Mama , Glenda Warkentin to portray Marta , Denise Wong to portray Number 18 , and Cari Russell to portray Ali . Waldschmidt suggested that Warkentin audition for the play after seeing her perform at Rosebud Theatre in Rosebud , Alberta . Wong , Krogman , and Kooman spoke highly of Waldschmidt 's directing , and Kooman praised Waldschmidt 's work as scenic designer . Waldschmidt praised the cast 's acting . He said he found the play 's opening scene , in which a rape occurs , the most difficult to stage , despite having previously performed a similar rape scene as an actor . The premiere of She Has a Name was produced by Burnt Thicket Theatre in partnership with Raise Their Voice . The office of Joy Smith , MP for Kildonan — St. Paul , released a statement advertising the premiere of She Has a Name . 
 The premiere took place at the EPCOR Centre for the Performing Arts in Calgary in February 2011 . Performances were scheduled to run on the centre 's Motel stage between February 23 and March 5 . Tickets quickly sold out . Four days after the premiere , Burnt Thicket Theatre moved the play to the Scott Block Theatre in Red Deer , where the play was scheduled to be performed until March 12 . All the performances in Red Deer were sold out . The play drew emotional reactions from the audience . Kooman learned that some audience members at the initial performances later responded to the play by talking with others about human trafficking , writing letters to their Members of Parliament , and doing other creative things on the subject . They also contacted Waldschmidt , sometimes up to a year later , with stories about how the play had continued to affect their lives . In conjunction with the initial run of She Has a Name , Burnt Thicket Theatre provided the names of organizations that assist human @-@ trafficking victims . There was also a panel discussion about human trafficking after the matinée on February 26 . 
 = = = Pre @-@ tour revisions and readings = = = 
 After the play 's initial run , Kooman revised the script , making prominent changes in the scenes involving Jason and Marta . In the version performed at the premiere , the two characters debate issues of human rights on a solely philosophical level , while in the new version , Marta makes real demands of Jason , making their interactions more dynamic . Kooman made Jason 's wife Ali more patient and understanding in dealing with Jason 's lengthy absences from home and removed the intermission . According to reviewer Lana Michelin of the Red Deer Advocate , Kooman 's changes strengthened the emotional pull of the play . Because of the amount of interest in She Has a Name in 2011 , not enough tickets were available for the initial run , and a second run was planned for the end of 2011 . To finance a tour of the play , Burnt Thicket Theatre raised money through fundraisers , which included the 2011 Calgary Ride for Refuge . 
 In August 2011 , extracts from She Has a Name were read at a conference in Strathmore called Justice Tapestry . A reading of the play took place during an event at Mount Royal University on February 16 , 2012 , which also included a speech by Yvon Dandurand on the subject of human trafficking , and a book signing by John <unk> for his book Human Trafficking : Exploring the International Nature , Concerns , and <unk> . 
 = = = 2012 tour = = = 
 The 2012 tour of She Has a Name was a fringe theatre tour across Canada . The performances were co @-@ produced by Burnt Thicket Theatre and Raise Their Voice and were directed by Waldschmidt . Carl Kennedy portrayed Jason , Evelyn Chew portrayed Number 18 , Alysa van <unk> portrayed Ali , and Warkentin and Howell @-@ Holden returned as Marta and Mama . To avoid giving the impression that human trafficking is limited to Asia , the producers deliberately cast actors who were not of Asian descent . 
 The tour started on May 23 in Lethbridge and went on to the other Canadian cities of Saskatoon , Ottawa , Montreal , Halifax , London , Winnipeg , Calgary , Victoria , Vancouver , Kelowna , Edmonton , and Red Deer . London was added mid @-@ tour because of popular demand . The London performances were hosted by Men Against Sexual Trafficking and the London Anti @-@ Human Trafficking Committee . The final performances of the tour were conducted at the Scott Block Theatre in Red Deer from October 2 to 6 . After the Saturday matinée in each city , a panel discussion was held with both the audience and anyone else who wanted to attend , the purpose being to raise awareness about human trafficking in Canada and elsewhere . The final talkback panel in Red Deer was attended by about 70 people . 
 A Better World partnered with Raise Their Voice to raise funds throughout the tour to help women and children who had been trafficked in Thailand as part of the country 's prostitution industry . Kooman stated that he had " a ' pinch me ' sort of feeling that [ the 2012 tour ] has happened , and that there is interest beyond this tour " . Cynthia Foster , who attended one of the performances during the tour , went on to produce and direct the first school production , with students at Strathcona Christian Academy Secondary School acting in two performances at La <unk> in Edmonton in November 2014 . Kooman was scheduled to facilitate a discussion about sex trafficking with the audience after each performance . 
 = = = Performances in the United States = = = 
 The first performances of She Has a Name in the United States were produced by FreeFall Stage in a rented space at Victory Life Church in Folsom , California in 2014 under the direction of Emma Eldridge , who was a 23 @-@ year @-@ old college student at the time . She and her sister had become passionate about the issue of human trafficking as a result of their involvement with the organization Run for Courage , and the two sisters considered writing a play about human trafficking in the United States . Because they were both college students , they did not find the time to write a play , so in 2013 , their mother , Deedee Eldridge , began looking for a human @-@ trafficking @-@ related play that had already been written and she discovered She Has a Name . It was the only play she was able to find on the subject of human trafficking . Emma Eldridge later said of She Has a Name , " I 've never read something and been so compelled to do it . " The family decided to stage the play , and Deedee Eldridge served as producer and executive director . To have the rights to produce the play , FreeFall Stage made a special arrangement with the Playwrights Guild of Canada . 
 For these initial performances in 2014 , the characters of Jason and the pimp were portrayed by different actors ; Chris Quandt portrayed Jason and Arturo Gonzalez portrayed the pimp . The role of Number 18 was taken on by <unk> " Jazz " Sunpanich , who was born in Thailand . Emma Eldridge attested to crying at the first rehearsal as a result of being moved by the intensity of Sunpanich 's performance . In these performances , Ali was portrayed by Brianna Flynn and <unk> Kingsley , Marta by <unk> Moore and Janine Romney , and Mama by Sara Matsui @-@ Colby . The voices were separately portrayed by Caitlyn Wardell , Bonnie <unk> , and Jeannette <unk> . These performances were staged in partnership with Run for Courage , which had representatives at each performance . Performances were scheduled to run from May 2 to June 22 . 
 FreeFall Stage discouraged people under the age of fifteen from attending because of the subject matter of the play , but encouraged older teenagers to attend because teenagers are at the greatest risk of being trafficked . Several human trafficking survivors attended the performances , and other survivors sent the <unk> messages about their personal experiences with human trafficking . Quandt said that he encountered many audience members who , because of watching the play , became determined to do something to combat human trafficking . 
 = = = Film = = = 
 By February 2012 , Kooman was working on a screenplay version of She Has a Name . The idea of a stage @-@ to @-@ film adaptation of She Has a Name was also independently suggested by Pat Donnelly of the Montreal Gazette . In 2014 , Kooman and his younger brothers , Daniel and Matthew , scouted locations in Cambodia in preparation for the film . 
 = = Themes = = 
 Kooman made justice the focus of She Has a Name ; the social issues that interest him include poverty , the HIV / AIDS epidemic , and the effects of war . The central issues in She Has a Name are gender @-@ based . The general topic of the play is human trafficking — specifically the trafficking of children into sexual slavery . Kooman has stated that She Has a Name " suggests that justice can only be realized if real people know , care and take informed and decisive action . " The victimized child in the play is known only by the number 18 to reflect that traffickers often dehumanize their victims by giving them a new name or simply a number , which in some cases is branded onto the victim 's body . After his rape of Number 18 , the pimp leaves the situation without adverse effect , but Number 18 is left bleeding from her crotch and mouth . The play invites viewers to feel sympathetic towards Number 18 , and , although the world of human trafficking is depicted as horrific and ugly , both the victims and perpetrators of human trafficking are portrayed as relatable characters , suggesting that every individual has inherent value and dignity . In an interview with The Calgary Journal prior to the 2012 tour , Waldschmidt said that the sympathetic portrayal of the perpetrators prevents the play from becoming a simplistic story of good and evil . According to Liz Nicholls of the Edmonton Journal , Number 18 is a nuanced character , better @-@ developed than the stock damsel in distress . 
 Kooman said that the massive proportions of human trafficking often prevent people from dealing with it ; he therefore chose to portray a single trafficked victim in the play so that audiences could approach the subject on a more workable level . He hoped that audiences would avoid getting stuck in the statistics of human trafficking and would connect with a personal story . The two questions that propel the story are : " Can [ Jason ] convince [ Number 18 ] to risk her life to testify for the sake of justice ? " and " Can he save her from the unthinkable circumstances ? " Jason is weary and , although he never falls into self @-@ pity , he comes to hate himself for his inability to save Number 18 from her slavery because he lacks the evidence he requires for his case to be successful in court . 
 Much of the play is concerned with demonstrating the immensity of the difficulties that face Jason in trying to rescue Number 18 . For example , he finds it difficult to be away from his wife , and struggles with the decision of whether to continue his work or return to Canada . To depict this tension , Jason and Ali communicate via Skype , represented on stage by two laptop computers placed back @-@ to @-@ back with Jason and Ali standing on either side facing one another . The two argue , but their interactions demonstrate the kind of love that Number 18 can only dream of . In the 2012 cross @-@ Canada tour , a torn picture of Number 18 's family remained on stage as scenery to emphasize what the character has lost . This picture took the form of a painted curtain held over a geometric floor pattern and depicted the family as tired , poor , and living in a shack . Lana Michelin of the Red Deer Advocate said the most emotionally gripping scene was the one in which the voices cause Number 18 to recall the face of her dead father . Anna <unk> of the St. Albert Gazette called the play a story of " fallible people who find strength in each other under the worst conditions . " 
 Denise Wong , the Calgarian actor who portrayed Number 18 in the premiere , said that the play was about the human condition . Evelyn Chew , the <unk> actor who took over the role for the 2012 tour , said that the play is intense because it unabashedly deals with human trafficking , and that builds in intensity to its climax . Sienna Howell @-@ Holden , who played Mama in the premiere and the 2012 tour , said that many audience members had not been previously familiar with 21st @-@ century human trafficking . The character of Mama calls attention to the fact that poverty in the Third World fuels sex trafficking . Stephen Waldschmidt said he hoped that the play will educate Canadians about human trafficking and motivate them to act on what they learn , thereby turning them into anti @-@ sexual slavery activists . He also said he hoped that the play will put a face on the million women and children sold into sexual slavery each year worldwide . Because of the play 's heavy themes , producers of the first performances issued an advisory for parents . Waldschmidt also stressed the amount of action in the play and said that , if the play was a film , it would receive a PG @-@ 13 rating and would be billed a thriller . He also said it was difficult to stage a play that is inherently sexual and extremely violent in nature without making it feel pornographic . Waldschmidt said that he wanted to stage She Has a Name partially to show how horrible human trafficking is and partially because the play is so theatrically gripping . 
 The Country Sunrise News stated that the drama has a fast pace . Mallory Clarkson of the London Community News reported that , while She Has a Name is an emotional play , there are lighter moments where audience members can laugh . Similarly , Lana Michelin of the Red Deer Advocate asserted that the play 's sporadic humorous points maintain the audience 's engagement with the story so they do not become numb to the play 's emotional pulls . Kooman stated that he tried to write the play in a way that would shock audiences without disturbing them to the point that they would not recommend it to friends . 
 Marlo Campbell , a writer for Uptown , said that the play critiques masculine egotism and Western heroism through the character of Jason . Lana Michelin of the Red Deer Advocate disagreed , stating that Jason never lapses into self @-@ importance . Aaron Krogman , who portrayed Jason and the pimp in the play 's premiere , said , " there is a thin line between Jason and the pimp ... both characters are struggling with power and how they use it . " Waldschmidt stated that the doubling of this role is intended to remind audiences that there are Canadians who are perpetrators of human trafficking and that it " is not just somebody else 's problem over there ... but that it 's us , and it 's in our country and in our backyard and in our suburbs " . Jason has in this way been considered an everyman . Chris Quandt , who portrayed Jason at the United States premiere , said that he and his fellow cast members greatly appreciated the fact that Kooman incorporated into the play the facts that taking down one brothel often leaves space for another brothel to be established soon afterwards , and that child sex tourism exists because there is a demand for it . 
 One Canadian critic said that the play 's Bangkok setting allows Canadians to easily dissociate from the issue . Liz Nicholls of the Edmonton Journal wrote that the pimp character " represents the ruthless spirit of pure human greed . " Stephen Pederson of The Chronicle Herald called the play a combination of idealism , realism , and lyricism . Dustin Wiebe of the Mennonite Brethren Herald wrote that the play shows " the darker side of man 's desire for control " by presenting Number 18 as having been stripped of her humanity . The disaster that concludes the play is foreshadowed throughout . The play both starts and ends with a depiction of the reality of contemporary slavery . 
 = = Critical response = = 
 Critical response to She Has a Name began with initial readings of the play at the 2009 Scripts At Work workshop , where the script was given the Scripts At Work / Alberta Playwrights Network Award . The play has since become very successful and was endorsed by Canadian activists including MP Joy Smith , Ratanak International 's Brian McConaghy , and IJM Canada 's Jamie McIntosh . Lara Quarterman , director of the Calgary chapter of ACT Alberta , said she was concerned that She Has a Name suggests that human trafficking is limited to the sex trafficking of women and children in Thailand , but there is sexual @-@ slavery @-@ related human trafficking in Canada , and there is also human trafficking for the purposes of unfree labour . The chorus of dead human @-@ trafficking victims has generally received negative reviews ; one critic called it " the play 's least successful device " . Adrian Chamberlain of the Victoria Times Colonist criticised some of the script , charging that there were " implausible plot twists " and other " fundamental flaws " , but concluded that it was well @-@ intentioned and ambitious and " has its heart in the right place . " 
 The play 's premiere and initial run were mostly critically acclaimed . The religious community 's reviews of the initial run were also positive . After the first performances in 2011 , Louis Hobson of the Calgary Sun said the character of Marta was an unrealistic caricature and didn 't " ring true " because of how she was written . The character underwent a series of rewrites to make her more well @-@ rounded and kind before the 2012 cross @-@ Canada tour . In the 2012 tour , the play was performed in several fringe theatre festivals , at which critics representing the Montreal Gazette , the Winnipeg Free Press , and <unk> @-@ FM said it stood out for its quality and moral content . The writing was praised by one critic from the Victoria News , who wrote that the play demonstrates that Kooman has a " gift for creating powerful , believable dialogue that can draw an audience in " , but criticised by Chamberlain of the Times Colonist , who attested to " melodramatic — and just plain bad — cop @-@ show dialogue " . Liz Nicholls of the Edmonton Journal called the performances compelling . Karen Nelson , also of the Edmonton Journal , called the play " sobering " in such a way that she was caused " to wonder what [ she ] could do about this global epidemic of abuse of children , women and the disenfranchised . " 
 During the 2012 tour , Kooman was awarded the Outstanding Alumnus Provincial Award Celebrating Excellence by the Alberta Association of Colleges & Technical Institutes and the Alberta Ministry of Enterprise . At the St @-@ Ambroise Montreal Fringe Festival , She Has a Name was nominated for the 2012 Centaur Theatre Award for Best Anglophone Production . At the Victoria Fringe Theatre Festival , She Has a Name was selected for a " Pick of the Fringe " award . Later in the 2012 tour , Sienna Howell @-@ Holden won a Spirit of the Fringe Award at the Vancouver Fringe Festival for her portrayal of Mama . 
 When the play was staged in California in 2014 , Gerry Camp of The Folsom Telegraph said that he had " never been more emotionally drained than ... after seeing the riveting opening night performance . " He praised all of the actors ' performances , and particularly those of Quandt and Sunpanich . " If you truly love theater , you must see this play , " he concluded . " And I promise you , it is a play you will carry with you long after the lights have gone up . " 
 = Miles Straume = 
 Miles Straume is a fictional character played by Ken Leung on the ABC television series Lost . Miles is introduced early in the fourth season as a hotheaded and sarcastic medium as a crew member aboard the freighter called the Kahana that is offshore the island where most of Lost takes place . Miles arrives on the island and is eventually taken captive by John Locke ( played by Terry O 'Quinn ) , who suspects that those on the freighter are there to harm his fellow crash survivors of Oceanic Airlines Flight 815 and expose the island to the general public . Miles is on a mission to obtain Ben Linus ( Michael Emerson ) ; instead , he tries to cut a deal with Ben to lie to Miles 's employer Charles Widmore ( Alan Dale ) that Ben is dead . 
 The writers created the role of Miles specifically for Leung after seeing him guest star on The Sopranos . Leung was the only actor to read for the part . They chose his name because it resembles " maelstrom " , another word for a powerful whirlpool . Reaction to the character has been positive . 
 = = Arc = = 
 Miles was born in March 1977 . As a child , he lives with his mother Lara Chang ( Leslie Ishii ) in Encino , California . Miles does not know his father , only being told by his mother that he is dead and did not care about them when he was alive , forcing them to leave him when Miles is a baby . Miles resents his father for never having been around and also has disdain for other fathers who mistreat their children . At seven years old , Miles discovers that he can hear the thoughts from before their death of those who are dead . He becomes a professional spiritualist and develops his ability so that he can access specific information from the deceased . In early December 2004 , when he is twenty @-@ seven years old , Miles is hired for $ 1 @.@ 6 million by Charles Widmore to go on a freighter called the Kahana to an uncharted island to retrieve a mass murderer named Ben Linus , as Widmore believes that Miles will be able to communicate with those whom he had killed and gain information regarding his location . Before he leaves , Miles is briefly abducted by Bram ( Brad William Henke ) and his team . Bram claims to know about Miles 's father and the source of his superpower and he warns Miles not to go on this mission , instead trying to convince Miles to join him . 
 = = = Season 4 = = = 
 Miles is flown via helicopter from the freighter to the island on December 21 as part of a science team . The next day on the island , Miles encounters the survivors of the September 22 Oceanic Airlines Flight 815 , who are believed to be dead by the world at large . Hostile and distrustful of the survivors for killing his colleague Naomi Dorrit ( Marsha Thomason ) , Miles is taken prisoner by 815 survivor John Locke ( Terry O 'Quinn ) and kept in a boathouse near a Barracks on the island . The next day , Miles temporarily escapes and bargains with Ben , who has also been taken prisoner : Miles will tell Widmore that Ben is dead in exchange for $ 3 @.@ 2 million , double what Widmore was paying him . The Barracks are ransacked on December 27 by a mercenary team from the freighter , who murder six people . Miles leaves with Sawyer , Claire and Aaron for their beach camp . On the way , Miles stumbles upon the dead bodies of Karl and Danielle Rosseau . Later that night Claire disappears into the jungle and Sawyer initially blames Miles . Miles arrives on December 30 , shortly before eight are rescued not far from the island , the freighter explodes and the mercenary team is killed by the Others , the island 's indigenous people under Ben 's leadership . Also that day , Ben moves the island through spacetime by turning a large frozen donkey wheel underground . 
 = = = Season 5 = = = 
 The group on the beach begin flashing through time , landing in fourteen different times throughout the Island 's past and future in the span of about a week before the wheel is turned again ; however , according to fellow freighter science team member physicist Daniel Faraday ( Jeremy Davies ) , none of the past is changed because their suddenly appearing in various times is what had always happened . The survivors settle in 1974 , by which point only Miles , Faraday , former Other Juliet Burke ( Elizabeth Mitchell ) and 815 passengers James " Sawyer " Ford ( Josh Holloway ) and Jin Kwon ( Daniel Dae Kim ) remain ; Rose Henderson ( L. Scott Caldwell ) , Bernard Nadler ( Sam Anderson ) and Vincent the dog ( Pono ) also survive , but they are physically separated and do not meet any of them again for three years until July 1977 . Miles and his group move into the Barracks and pseudonymously join the DHARMA Initiative , an organization conducting scientific research while living there that would eventually be purged in 1992 by Ben and the Others . Despite the option to board the DHARMA submarine and " go back to the real world " , the survivors from 2004 stay on the island together in the hope that they can somehow return to the time that they knew . Miles becomes a security officer and ends up becoming friends with Sawyer . He discovers that his mother and father Dr. Pierre Chang live on the island as part of DHARMA and his father is even the man in the organization 's station @-@ specific orientation films ; however , Miles does not approach or befriend his father , continuing to harbor resentment for his absence from much of Miles 's life . 
 In July 1977 , both thirty @-@ year @-@ old security officer Miles and three @-@ month @-@ old infant Miles are living on the island . Four survivors , Jack , Kate , Hurley , and Sayid from Flight 815 who had been rescued nearly three years earlier on December 30 , 2004 arrive on the island in 1977 after flying near the island in late 2007 and also join DHARMA , Sayid being a prisoner on suspicion of being an Other . Miles still stays distant from his father , but , after talking to Hurley during a late @-@ night chore , witnesses a peaceful moment between his younger self and his father . Three days later , the groups from the future are exposed as liars . The next morning , Faraday comes clean to Chang that they are from the future and warns of a catastrophic " incident " that is due to occur at the building site for the Swan , DHARMA 's planned island station dedicated to electromagnetism . He instructs Chang to evacuate the island of non @-@ essential personnel , which he does , ordering his wife and baby Miles to leave him , shortly after finding out that adult Miles is his son and confronting him about it . Here , Miles realizes that he himself caused his father to order his mother and his three @-@ month @-@ old self to leave . Faraday theorizes that if " Jughead " – a hydrogen bomb that is buried on the island – is detonated at the Swan site by the underground electromagnetic pocket of energy , the timeline will be altered , preventing any of the group from the future from ever having come to the island in 2004 , saving everyone who had died after they arrived . The plan proceeds as planned , even though Miles expresses skepticism . The antagonistic DHARMA members engage in a gunfight with Jack , believing him to be an Other , and Miles , Sawyer , Juliet , and Kate come to his aid . When the Swan site goes haywire , Chang 's arm is caught in the debris and Miles rushes to his side , saving him and calling him " Dad " . After he tells his father to run as far as possible from the site , the bomb is detonated and everything goes to white , leaving Miles 's status uncertain . 
 = = = Season 6 = = = 
 In the first episode of Season 6 , Miles is revealed to have been returned to the future along with the other survivors . When Kate , Jack , Hurley and Jin go to the temple to save Sayid , Sawyer asks Miles to remain behind to help bury the now @-@ deceased Juliet and to use his power to find out what she was trying to tell him before she died . He reluctantly agrees , and after a few seconds , tells Sawyer " it worked . " 
 He and Sawyer are captured shortly after by the Others and taken to the Temple , where he stays with Hurley , Jack , and Sayid , while Kate , Jin , and Sawyer escape . A few days later , after Jack and Hurley too escape , Miles is left behind with the " infected " Sayid and the Others when Claire Littleton , also " infected , " shows up to talk to the Others ' spokesperson , Dogen ( Hiroyuki Sanada ) . Kate meanwhile returns , hoping to find Claire . Miles tells her Claire is held hostage . Later that night , the Smoke Monster ravages the Temple , killing anyone in its path . Miles and Kate flee but get separated ; Miles shuts himself in a room , until Ilana , Frank Lapidus , Sun @-@ Hwa Kwon , and Ben burst in to help him . They go through a secret passageway safely just as the Smoke Monster enters the room . 
 Miles uses his gift to discover how Jacob died , and reveals to Ilana that Ben killed him . They take shelter at the Oceanic Flight 815 survivors ' beach camp . When confronting Ben later , Miles refuses the offered $ 3 @.@ 2 million in exchange for freeing Ben from Ilana . Ben is spared , however , and Miles then digs up Nikki and Paulo 's diamonds where they had been buried with them to compensate for his lack of money on the Island . 
 When Hurley , Jack , and Richard join their group , Miles is particularly happy to greet Hurley . A few days later , Richard decides their mission is to stop the Man in Black from escaping ; they are to destroy the Ajira Airways Flight 316 on the other Island , dubbed " Hydra Island , " so that the Man in Black stays trapped in the area . However , Hurley destroys the remaining dynamite from an old ship shipwrecked on the Island , thinking it will save everyone . The disagreement between Richard and Hurley splits the group into two : Hurley 's party will go talk to the Man in Black , while Richard 's party will search for more explosives . Miles decides to follow Richard and Ben , telling Hurley that he has seen " that thing in action , " and that it doesn 't want to talk . 
 Miles , Richard , and Ben go back to the barracks to get some C4 that Ben secretly kept in his closet behind the bookcase . When they get there Miles hears the screams of Ben 's daughter Alex , buried there . They get the C4 but when they come out they are confronted by Widmore and his geologist Zoe . Widmore says he needs a hiding place because the monster was coming . Ben reluctantly says he can hide in his secret room . When The Man in Black comes Richard says he can talk to it , claiming all he wants is for Richard to join him . Ben goes with him but Miles ; saying he is sticking to surviving , decides to leave them and run back into the jungle . 
 He then finds Richard Alpert in the jungle and calls Ben on a walkie talkie that he gave him . When Richard gets up he says to Miles that they need to get back to Hydra Island and destroy the plane with the C4 that they still have ; saying they have to finish what they started . 
 Miles and Richard get to the boat they left at the dock . As they are undocking the boat he reveals to Richard that he is starting to age . When they are rowing to Hydra Island they spot Frank Lapidus drifting in the water in life vests . When they get him on the boat Frank proposes they leave the island on the plane before the Man in Black comes . Richard and Miles agree . Miles then radios Ben again , saying they have made it to Hydra Island and about his plan about the plane . As he is talking , Claire comes out from the bushes and fires two warning shots to tell them not to come closer . Richard manages to calm her down but she refuses to go on the plane with them . Miles radios a third time . Kate picks up . He says to her they are patching up the plane and getting ready to take off . He tells Kate about Claire not wanting to come with them . Kate then smashes the radio she has . Miles asks Frank how the plane was doing . Frank says he has to check the electrical outlet before they take off . Miles and Richard repair the hydraulics with duct tape , then rejoin Frank in the cockpit . 
 With Richard and Miles in the cockpit Frank tries a third time to turn the plane on , and this time succeeds . Miles heads to the back to watch out for Sawyer and the others who want to come . Miles announces they are clear for takeoff , and closes the door . Frank then tells Richard and Miles to open the door back up again when he sees Kate and Sawyer . Miles opens the door and lets in Kate , Sawyer and Claire . After that Miles sits in the back with the others . Miles and the others smile at the sight of the island getting smaller and smaller in the distance . 
 = = = Afterlife = = = 
 Oceanic Flight 815 does not crash on the Island , resulting in a different background for Miles . Instead of a professional medium , he is an officer of the LAPD along with his partner , James Ford . A comment by Miles indicates that his father is still alive in this reality , working at a museum with Charlotte , who Miles sets up on a blind date with Ford . Although working well with James , Miles feels he lacks trust from him . He later gains access to James ' credit card account and learns his partner did not go to Palm Springs like he said , instead going to Australia . Angrily demanding answers , Miles make James eventually informing him of Anthony Cooper 's con . Miles objects to James ' intention to kill Cooper , until a car crashes into theirs . The two cops pursue the hit @-@ and @-@ run driver , who is revealed to be Kate . 
 After receiving a surveillance tape showing Sayid Jarrah leaving the scene of a crime , Miles informs James of this and together they go to the home of Sayid 's sister @-@ in @-@ law , Nadia . While Miles blocks the front door , James catches Sayid and arrests him at the back . 
 = = Personality = = 
 Miles is hotheaded and initially hostile toward the survivors , after one of them kills his colleague Naomi Dorrit ( Marsha Thomason ) . But he , too , is disrespectful of Naomi after she dies , telling Kate , " Sure I 'm affected [ by Naomi 's death ] . She was hot and I dug her accent . " Upon learning that Miles has been captured by Locke , Frank informs Sayid that " that guy 's nothing but a pain in my ass . " 
 Miles sarcastically nicknames his acquaintances , prompting critics , fans and characters to compare him to the character Sawyer and give him a nickname of his own : " mini @-@ Sawyer " . Ken Leung claims that he is often approached by people who like the character and he assumes that it is because of Miles 's " sardonic wit " and " devil @-@ may @-@ care sort of attitude . " Leung surmised that " Usually when people are like that , just … kind of throwing off quick [ and ] quirky remarks … they 're hiding something , so he 's definitely hiding something . " Asked if Miles is much like him , Leung responded with " I don 't think I 'm that similar . Um , I don 't know — I guess I have moments . " Leung said that " Miles doesn 't know how to be social , which is great , because I don 't know how to be social . " He has also stated that Miles " trust [ s ] the dead more than the living " and is intrigued as to whom Miles grieves for . Leung stated that " He seems haunted by something , that — that 's for sure … one of the first thoughts I had [ was that his ] communication with the dead … can 't be a great thing … it 's not a happy skill to have . " 
 Both Miles and Hurley can speak to the dead — a similarity noted by Hurley ; however , their manners of communication vary . While Miles is able to access a person 's mind as it was before death , Hurley physically interacts with apparitions of the deceased . Executive producer / writer Edward Kitsis has commented that " they both have unique abilities , and that very question of how they differ may be explored by the end of the series . " 
 = = Development = = 
 The day after the April 22 , 2007 episode of The Sopranos titled " Remember When " aired , Lost 's co @-@ creator Damon Lindelof met with fellow executive producer / writer / show runner Carlton Cuse and said that " there 's an actor on th [ e ] show [ last night ] — I 'm not going to tell you who he is — and I wonder if he has the same impression on you that he had on me " . Cuse correctly guessed Ken Leung , who had guest starred as one @-@ time character Carter Chong , a young and angry mental patient . In mid @-@ May , they contacted Leung 's agent and were informed in July that he was available and interested in working on Lost . To limit the leak of spoilers , Lindelof and Cuse auditioned Leung with a character and scene created specifically for the audition that would not be used in the show but was " analogous to the role [ that they ] really want [ ed ] . " Leung believed that he was auditioning for the role of Russell , a " brilliant mathematician " in his late thirties with immense knowledge across various scientific fields , limited social skills and broken personal relationships . Leung was the only actor who tried out for this part , as writers had written the role of Miles for him ; had he not accepted the job , the character would have been completely rewritten . The name Miles Straume was simply chosen because the writers thought that " it would be cool if his name sounded like ' maelstrom ' " . 
 Leung relocated from New York to where the show is filmed in Oahu , Hawaii , which Leung described as " so dreamy " . He was initially contracted as a guest star with " potential regular status in [ the ] future " , which came to fruition . At first , Leung struggled with the show 's secrecy , not knowing much about his character 's background or motivations , but he found some understanding with his character 's clothing . Costume designer Roland Sanchez based Miles 's wardrobe choice after that of The Rolling Stones member Keith Richards ; specifically a picture in which he wore a sleeveless vest . Sanchez believed that Miles fit the haggard look and bought an Armani Exchange jacket , cropped the sleeves and added a hood . 
 The writers planned for the ninth or tenth episode of the fourth season to focus on Miles 's backstory ; however , this was pushed back to the thirteenth episode of the fifth season as a result of the Writers Guild of America strike . The revelation that Miles is Chang 's son was not confirmed until Miles 's flashback episode ; however , this plot point had been speculated by the Internet fan community as early as Miles 's first appearance on the show . Further speculation occurred following the broadcast of the fifth season premiere , in which Chang was seen tending to a baby boy . This influenced the way that it was revealed in the show , as the writers looked for a way to present the information in a way that would both be interesting to those who had not guessed it and not insulting to viewers who had been predicting it . What resulted was Miles and Hurley discussing Chang with Miles plainly saying , " That douche is my dad " before a cut to a commercial break . 
 = = Reception = = 
 After four appearances , Leung was nominated for the J. C. Penney Asian Excellence Award in the Supporting Television Actor category , but he lost to Rex Lee , who plays Lloyd on HBO 's Entourage . According to Jon Lachonis of UGO , Miles and the other new characters have been well received by fans . Maureen Ryan of The Chicago Tribune said that Leung is " terrifically intense " in his portrayal . Paige Albiniak of the New York Post praised the cast addition . Diane Werts of Newsday thought that " Ken Leung and Michael Emerson may be the two current most interesting actors in this mix " . Alan Sepinwall of The Star @-@ Ledger commented that " Miles the <unk> <unk> is easily my favorite [ of the characters introduced in ' Confirmed Dead ' ] … why not throw in a medium [ among the show 's science fiction <unk> ] … I love the sarcastic energy he brings . Sawyer and Ben can 't be the only ones getting the good one @-@ liners " . After Miles ' introduction in the second episode of the fourth season , Jeff Jensen of Entertainment Weekly wrote that Leung made " a strong impression " and was well cast . Chris Carabott of IGN stated that " Leung does an adequate job of getting Miles ' arrogant brand of confidence across . " 
 = Brodie Croyle = 
 John Brodie Croyle ( / <unk> / ; born February 6 , 1983 ) is a former American football quarterback . He was drafted by the Kansas City Chiefs of the National Football League ( NFL ) in the third round of the 2006 NFL Draft . He played college football for the University of Alabama from 2002 to 2005 . 
 Despite being hindered by knee injuries in his senior season in high school , Croyle was a highly recruited prospect by Louisiana State University , Florida State University and the University of Alabama . On the night Croyle was ready to announce his decision to attend Florida State , he changed his mind and chose Alabama , his father 's alma mater , instead . In Croyle 's four years playing for the Alabama Crimson Tide football team , he set numerous school records , and was a finalist for the Johnny Unitas Golden Arm Award . Croyle led the Crimson Tide to the 2006 Cotton Bowl Classic and was named the game 's offensive MVP . 
 Though he saw little playing time in his rookie season in the NFL , Croyle shared the starting position with Damon Huard in 2007 . On November 18 , Croyle started his first game as the Chiefs ' starting quarterback against the Indianapolis Colts . 
 Croyle remained the Chiefs ' starting quarterback for the remainder of the season despite losing all six games that he started . He was the incumbent starter heading into the 2008 regular season , but suffered a shoulder injury in the Chiefs ' first game . Croyle returned in Week 7 but suffered a torn MCL and was ruled out for the remainder of the season . Croyle began the 2009 season once again as the Chiefs ' starting quarterback , filling in for an injured Matt Cassel . Croyle was released by the Chiefs in 2011 and later signed with the Arizona Cardinals . On May 21 , 2012 , he announced his immediate retirement from professional football . 
 = = Early years = = 
 The son of John Croyle , a former defensive end for the University of Alabama , Croyle was born on February 6 , 1983 . He attended high school at Westbrook Christian School in Rainbow City , Alabama and became a Super @-@ Prep All @-@ American selection in football . In his sophomore season , Croyle passed for 3 @,@ 787 yards and 44 touchdowns . That same season he passed for 528 yards and 7 touchdowns in one game . Croyle had an equally successful junior year passing for 2 @,@ 838 yards and 38 touchdowns . Croyle led his team to the state championship that year , but the team lost by a field goal . 
 Entering his senior year , many scouts had Croyle ranked as high as the # 2 quarterback in the country behind Joe Mauer . However , Croyle 's high school career ended abruptly in the first game of his senior season against Glencoe High School after a hit by an opposing player tore Croyle 's anterior cruciate ligament , causing him to miss the remainder of his final year . When he graduated , he held the Alabama state records for career passing yards with 9 @,@ 323 , and career touchdowns with 105 . He set marks for most passing yards in a single season , passing yards in a single game , touchdown passes in a season , and touchdown passes in a game . 
 = = College career = = 
 Despite the knee injury , Croyle received interest from members the Southeastern Conference and the Atlantic Coast Conference , including Louisiana State and Florida State . Croyle showed interest in playing for Florida State due in part because of the team 's offensive coordinator , Mark Richt . Croyle initially showed little interest in playing for Alabama after their head coach , Mike DuBose had recently been fired , but once Richt took the head coaching job with the Georgia Bulldogs , Croyle followed in his father 's footsteps . On the night before he was to announce his college decision to play for Florida State , Croyle announced that he would instead play for the Alabama Crimson Tide . Interestingly enough , the Crimson Tide were not fazed by Croyle ’ s rather serious ligament tear , for they felt he would heal well enough that his talent still warranted a spot on the roster . Croyle graduated early from high school and enrolled at the University of Alabama in January 2001 . After red @-@ shirting his freshman year at Alabama , Croyle earned a spot as the top backup in his second season behind senior starter Tyler Watts . Croyle 's coaches voted for him as the Ozzie Newsome Most Improved Freshman after starting two games in 2002 . After the 2002 season , Alabama head coach Dennis Franchione resigned to take the same position at Texas A & M. Washington State head coach Mike Price was hired to replace Franchione in January 2003 . 
 Coach Price mentored Croyle throughout the 2003 spring drills and practice but was dismissed from the head coach position in May 2003 for his conduct off the field . Soon after , Mike Shula , quarterback coach for the Miami Dolphins and former quarterback of the Crimson Tide , was named head coach at Alabama . Croyle , now with his third head coach in as many years , had only a few weeks to prepare and practice under coach Shula 's system . Despite starting all 11 games in 2003 as a sophomore , Croyle suffered a separated shoulder before half time of the fifth game . Croyle would start the next game against Georgia only to re @-@ aggravate the injury , but still only sat out one game that season , and did not reveal to the public he had suffered from two cracked ribs . The Crimson Tide 's 2003 season ended with a record of 4 – 9 . He was subsequently named the Dixie Memorial Award winner as the club ’ s MVP and won the Derrick Thomas Community Award . His 341 pass attempts on the season were the highest seasonal total in Crimson Tide history while his 16 touchdown passes tied the single @-@ season mark . 
 Croyle started the 2004 season hoping to help his team improve on their last record of 4 – 9 . Croyle started three games , completing 44 of 66 passes for 534 yards with six touchdowns . But during the third game of the season against Western Carolina University , Croyle tore his anterior cruciate ligament in his other knee . Croyle was forced to sit out the rest of the season , and the team finished with a 6 @-@ 6 record . 
 Undaunted , he fully recovered from the injury in 2005 and started all 12 games as a senior ; completing 202 of 339 passes for 2 @,@ 499 yards with 14 touchdowns and four interceptions and one rushing touchdown . Croyle led the Crimson Tide to a # 8 national ranking , a 10 – 2 record , and a 13 – 10 victory over Texas Tech in the Cotton Bowl Classic , where he shared the game 's Most Valuable Player honors with teammate <unk> Ryans . In his final season at Alabama , Croyle attempted a then @-@ school @-@ record 190 passes without an interception and a finalist for the Johnny Unitas Golden Arm Award as the nation ’ s most outstanding senior quarterback . He became the first Alabama quarterback to start every game in a season since 1996 . 
 His 2 @,@ 499 passing yards in 2005 were the highest single @-@ season total in Alabama 's school history . His total 202 completions and 339 passing attempts rank as the second @-@ best seasonal marks in school annals . His 2 @,@ 311 yards of total offense were the third @-@ best seasonal mark in the history of the school , and his 1 @.@ 18 interception percentage was the lowest single @-@ season mark in school history as well . 
 = = Professional career = = 
 On April 29 , 2006 , the Kansas City Chiefs drafted Croyle in the third round of the 2006 NFL Draft as the 85th overall selection , and he signed a four @-@ year contract on July 28 . Croyle 's reputation for being injury prone caused him to drop into the third round of the draft . 
 ( * represents NFL Combine ) 
 = = = Kansas City Chiefs = = = 
 = = = = 2006 season = = = = 
 Croyle saw few snaps his rookie season and played in only 2 games . He completed 3 of 7 passes for 23 yards including 2 interceptions . One of those interceptions was returned by Pittsburgh Steelers safety Rian Wallace for a touchdown . Croyle originally was assigned the number four as his jersey number but later switched back to his collegiate number twelve after the release of wide receiver <unk> Thorpe . 
 = = = = 2007 season = = = = 
 In April 2007 , nearly a year after Croyle was drafted , Chiefs starting quarterback Trent Green was traded to the Miami Dolphins . In the months prior to the trade agreement , Green had stated that he was being treated unfairly on and off the field and that the pre @-@ season quarterback competition was " weighted " towards Croyle . Head coach Herman Edwards , who was emphasizing a " youth movement " on the team 's roster at the time , voiced his displeasure with Green 's outspoken comments and simply said that he was " trying to create competition . " Edwards indicated throughout the off @-@ season that the Chiefs ' starting quarterback position was up for grabs . 
 Throughout the offseason , Croyle was given every opportunity to win the starting job over Damon Huard . Against the New Orleans Saints while Huard sat out with a calf injury , Croyle completed only 5 of 17 passes for 45 yards as the Chiefs lost 30 – 7 and dropped to 0 – 3 in <unk> but poor play in the pre @-@ season led to Huard being named the Chiefs ' starting quarterback for the season opener against the Houston Texans . 
 On October 7 , in a regular season home game against the Jacksonville Jaguars , Huard was injured in the fourth quarter . Croyle threw six completions in thirteen attempts over the remainder of the game and threw his first NFL touchdown pass on the final play of regulation to <unk> Parker in the 17 – 7 loss . The touchdown helped Kansas City avoid its first shut @-@ out loss at home since 1994 . Croyle 's last minute drive made him 6 @-@ for @-@ 13 for 83 yards and one touchdown . 
 On November 11 , Croyle again substituted for an injured Huard in the final half of a 27 – 11 loss to the Denver Broncos . Croyle finished the game 17 @-@ for @-@ 30 for 162 yards , with one interception , in the loss that dropped Kansas City to 4 – 5 on the year . The following day , Croyle was named the starting quarterback for the Chiefs ' upcoming game against the Indianapolis Colts , and made his first start on November 18 at the RCA Dome in a 13 – 10 loss . Croyle was the first quarterback drafted by Kansas City to start a game for the Chiefs since Todd Blackledge started a game in 1984 . Croyle was 19 @-@ of @-@ 27 for 169 yards with one touchdown , but he lost a fumble that set up Adam Vinatieri 's game @-@ winning field goal . 
 Croyle started his first home game at Arrowhead Stadium on November 25 against the Oakland Raiders , but injured his back in the 20 – 17 loss . The injury sidelined Croyle for the following week 's game against the San Diego Chargers , and Damon Huard started in Croyle 's place . The injured quarterbacks continued to rotate playing time , and Croyle was again declared the starter for Kansas City 's game against the Denver Broncos on December 9 . The plan , barring injury , was for Croyle to start the remaining games of the 2007 season , so that coach Herm Edwards and his staff could better evaluate him moving forward into 2008 . However , Croyle bruised his hand while trying to stop a defender from running an interception in for a touchdown and Damon Huard , who was the only active quarterback on the Chiefs ' roster besides Croyle , filled in for the remainder of the game . 
 In the final game of the season , Croyle led the Chiefs to a 10 – 10 tie with the Jets with just three minutes remaining . However , the Chiefs lost 13 – 10 with a Jets field goal in overtime . Croyle would finish the game 20 @-@ of @-@ 43 for 195 yards . 
 Croyle lost all six games that he started for the Chiefs in 2007 . Despite his poor performance as a starter , Croyle 's statistics were considered to be hard to evaluate . With a lack of pass protection and the absence of a stable starting running back in Larry Johnson , the Chiefs may not have seen Croyle at his best in 2007 . 
 = = = = 2008 season = = = = 
 Croyle entered the 2008 season as the Chiefs ' starting quarterback . During the season opener against the New England Patriots on September 7 , Croyle left the game in the third quarter with a bruised shoulder after being sacked by linebacker <unk> Thomas . Prior to the injury , Croyle completed 11 out of 19 with no touchdowns or interceptions . Two days after the game , the Chiefs signed quarterback Ingle Martin off the Tennessee Titans ' practice squad to back up Damon Huard and Tyler Thigpen in Croyle 's absence . In Croyle 's absence , Damon Huard started the Chiefs ' game against the Oakland Raiders the following week . Huard suffered a neck injury , so Tyler Thigpen became the third Chiefs starting quarterback in as many games . 
 After missing four games , Croyle returned to start against the Tennessee Titans in Week 7 . He was injured on Kansas City 's 14th play when he was sandwiched between two rushing defenders while throwing a pass early in the second quarter . He limped off the field . He slammed his helmet to the turf once he reached the sideline , then hobbled down a tunnel . After the game , Chiefs head coach Herman Edwards announced that Croyle would miss the remainder of the 2008 season . 
 = = = = 2009 season = = = = 
 After the Chiefs acquired quarterback Matt Cassel from the New England Patriots , Croyle entered training camp competing against Tyler Thigpen for a roster spot as backup quarterback . The first depth chart in training camp listed Croyle as the second quarterback ahead of Thigpen . Croyle entered the Chiefs ' first preseason game of 2009 ( against the Houston Texans ) as the second quarterback and finished as the team 's leading passer ( 12 @-@ of @-@ 18 for 145 yards ) and looked poised throughout the evening to post a 91 @.@ 2 quarterback rating . The Chiefs would go on to lose the game 16 – 10 . After quarterback Matt Cassel was injured on August 29 against the Seattle Seahawks , Croyle started the final game of the preseason against the St. Louis Rams . 
 Croyle played the entire game at quarterback for the Chiefs ' regular season opener against the Baltimore Ravens when Cassel was still unable to play . Despite completing 16 @-@ of @-@ 24 passes for 177 yards and two touchdowns , the Chiefs lost to the Ravens 38 – 24 . However solid play during week 1 was not enough , Cassel returned to practice and started against the Oakland Raiders in Week 2 . 
 = = = Arizona Cardinals = = = 
 = = = = 2011 season = = = = 
 After leaving the Chiefs as a free agent , Croyle signed with the Arizona Cardinals on August 23 , 2011 . Croyle was waived on September 2 , 2011 . 
 = = = = 2012 season = = = = 
 On January 8 , 2012 , Croyle was signed by the Arizona Cardinals to replace quarterback Max Hall , who was waived . 
 = = = Retirement = = = 
 On May 21 , 2012 Croyle announced his retirement from the NFL . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Croyle volunteers at the Big Oak Ranch , a Christian home and school founded by his father for children from troubled and abusive situations , and at the <unk> Farm in Independence , Missouri , a facility that provides foster children with a safe and stable home . Croyle serves as a spokesperson for Johnson County Court Appointed Special Advocate . On July 14 , 2007 Croyle married Kelli Schutz , the 2005 winner of the America 's Junior Miss competition . The couple met in Mobile , Alabama in 2006 , while Croyle was preparing for the Senior Bowl . 
 = = Career statistics = = 
 = = = College = = = 
 = = = NFL = = = 
 = Perry Como = 
 <unk> Ronald " Perry " Como ( May 18 , 1912 – May 12 , 2001 ) was an American singer and television personality . During a career spanning more than half a century , he recorded exclusively for RCA Victor for 44 years after signing with the label in 1943 . " Mr. C. " , as he was nicknamed , sold millions of records for RCA and pioneered a musical variety television show . Como was seen weekly on television from 1949 to 1963 , then continued hosting the Kraft Music Hall variety program monthly until 1967 . His television shows and seasonal specials were broadcast throughout the world . Also a popular recording artist , Perry Como released numerous hit records from the 1940s thru the 1970s . Como 's appeal spanned generations and he was universally respected for both his professional standards and the conduct in his personal life . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 = = = Early years = = = 
 Como was born in Canonsburg , Pennsylvania . He was the seventh of ten children and the first American @-@ born child of Pietro Como and Lucia <unk> , who both immigrated to the US in 1910 from the <unk> town of Palena , Italy . He did not begin speaking English until he entered school , since the Comos spoke Italian at home . The family had a second @-@ hand organ his father had bought for $ 3 ; as soon as Como was able to <unk> , he would head to the instrument , pump the bellows , and play music he had heard by ear . Pietro , a mill hand and an amateur baritone , had all his children attend music lessons even if he could barely afford them . In a rare 1957 interview , Como 's mother , Lucia , described how her young son also took on other jobs to pay for more music lessons ; Como learned to play many different instruments , but never had a voice lesson . He showed more musical talent in his teenage years as a trombone player in the town 's brass band , playing guitar , singing at weddings , and as an organist at church . Como was a member of the Canonsburg Italian Band along with the father of singer Bobby Vinton , bandleader Stan Vinton , who was often a customer at his barber shop . 
 Young Como started helping his family at age 10 , working before and after school in Steve Fragapane 's barber shop for 50 ¢ a week . By age 13 , he had graduated to having his own chair in the Fragapane barber shop , although he stood on a box to tend to his customers . It was also around this time that young Como lost his week 's wages in a dice game . Filled with shame , he locked himself in his room and did not come out until hunger got the better of him . He managed to tell his father what had happened to the money his family depended on . His father told him he was entitled to make a mistake and that he hoped his son would never do anything worse than this . When Perry was 14 , his father became unable to work because of a severe heart condition . Como and his brothers became the support of the household . 
 Despite his musical ability , Como 's primary ambition was to become the best barber in Canonsburg . Practicing on his father , young Como mastered the skills well enough to have his own shop at age 14 . One of Como 's regular customers at the barber shop owned a Greek coffee house that included a barber shop area , and asked the young barber whether he would like to take over that portion of his shop . Como had so much work after moving to the coffee house , he had to hire two barbers to help with it . His customers worked mainly at the nearby steel mills . They were well @-@ paid , did not mind spending money on themselves and enjoyed Como 's song renditions . Perry did especially well when one of his customers would marry . The groom and his men would avail themselves of every treatment Como and his assistants had to offer . Como sang romantic songs while busying himself with the groom as the other two barbers worked with the rest of the groom 's party . During the wedding preparation , the groom 's friends and relatives would come into the shop with gifts of money for Como . He became so popular as a " wedding barber " in the Greek community that he was asked to provide his services in Pittsburgh and throughout Ohio . 
 = = = Marriage and family = = = 
 In 1929 , the 17 @-@ year @-@ old Como met Roselle <unk> at a picnic on <unk> Creek that attracted many young people from the Canonsburg area . Como , who attended the cookout with another girl , did not spot Roselle until everyone was around the campfire singing and the gathering was coming to a close . When it came Como 's turn to sing , he chose More Than You Know , with his eyes on Roselle for the entire song . The teenage sweethearts were married July 31 , 1933 . They raised three children , Ronnie , David , and Terri , with traditional , non @-@ show @-@ business values . Because Perry Como believed his professional life and his personal life should be kept separate , he declined repeated interview requests from Edward R. Murrow 's Person to Person . 
 In 1958 , the Comos celebrated their silver wedding anniversary with a family trip to Italy . On the itinerary was an audience with Pope Pius XII . Como , who sat in a side wing of the Long Island church where he attended Sunday Mass in an effort to avoid attracting attention , was both puzzled and upset on returning home that photos from the visit made the newspapers throughout the world . A thorough check of both the Como and NBC publicity offices found that neither was responsible for the release of the photos to the media ; it was done by the Vatican 's press department . When Perry and Roselle became Knight Commander and Lady Commander of the Equestrian Order of the Order of the Holy Sepulchre in 1952 , it was a news item only after Archbishop Fulton J. Sheen , who had been honored at the same ceremony , mentioned it some time later . 
 Como suffered a debilitating fall from a stage platform in 1971 while taping Perry Como 's Winter Show in Hollywood . X @-@ rays showed no serious injury to his knee , but by the next morning , it was twice its normal size . The ailing Como chartered a jet back to his home and doctors in Florida , where a second exam showed it had been seriously broken . His knee was re @-@ set and placed in a cast with a recuperation time of eight months . In 1993 , he was successfully treated for bladder cancer . When Roselle died suddenly on August 12 , 1998 , at the age of 84 , the couple had been married for 65 years . Como was reportedly devastated by her loss . 
 Bing Crosby once described Como as " the man who invented casual . " His preference for casual clothing did not keep him from being named one of the Best Dressed Men beginning in 1946 , and continuing long after Como stopped appearing on weekly television . Como also had his own line of sports / casual men 's clothing made by Bucknell c. early 1950s . 
 = = = Personal characteristics = = = 
 One of the many factors in his success was Como 's insistence on his principles of good taste ; if he considered something to be in bad or questionable taste , it was not in the show or broadcast . When a remark made by Julius La Rosa about television personality Arthur Godfrey on The Perry Como Show was misconstrued , Como offered an on @-@ air apology at the beginning of his next show , against the advice of his staff . 
 While his performance of " Ave Maria " was a tradition of his holiday television programs , Como refused to sing it at live performances , saying , " It 's not the time or place to do it , " even though it was the number @-@ one request of his audiences . Another was his naturalness ; the man that viewers saw on television every week was the same person who could be encountered behind a supermarket shopping cart , at a bowling alley , or in a kitchen making breakfast . From his first Chesterfield Supper Club television show , if scripts were written at all , they were based on Como 's everyday manner of speaking . Though Como was widely known for his amiability , laid @-@ back and easygoing style , he was not devoid of a temper , and it could be seen at times as a result of the frustrations of daily life . Mitchell Ayres , his musical director from 1948 to 1963 said , " Perry has a temper like everyone else . And he loses his temper at the normal things everyone else does . When we 're driving , for instance , and somebody cuts him off , he really lets the offender have it . " 
 Perry was an avid and accomplished golfer ; there was always time to try getting in a game of golf . " Perry Como <unk> " were sold by MacGregor , each stamped with a Como facsimile autograph . His colleagues held an annual Perry Como Golf Tournament to honor him and his love for the game . Como 's guests on the October 3 , 1962 , broadcast were Jack Nicklaus , Arnold Palmer , and Gary Player . The four golfers played 18 holes for the cameras at Sands Point , New York , where the Comos made their home in the television years . Como also enjoyed fishing and he could be found out on his boat almost daily after the family moved to Florida . Perry 's catches would usually turn out to be the Como family 's dinners . Como also used his boat as a rehearsal hall with pre @-@ recorded instrumental tapes sent to him by RCA Victor . Perry would work on material while he was waiting for the fish to bite . Having enjoyed golfing and fishing in the North Carolina mountains for several years , Como built a vacation home in Saluda , North Carolina , in 1980 . He discouraged photos of his home , as it was his private place to get away from the celebrity life . 
 = = Como 's career as a professional singer = = 
 = = = Freddy Carlone and Ted Weems = = = 
 In 1932 , Como left Canonsburg , moving about 100 miles away to Meadville , Pennsylvania , where his uncle had a barber shop in the Hotel <unk> . Around 80 miles from Cleveland , it was a popular stop on the itinerary for dance bands who worked up and down the Ohio Valley . Como , Roselle , and their friends had gone to nearby Cleveland ; their good times took them to the Silver Slipper Ballroom where Freddy Carlone and his orchestra were playing . Carlone invited anyone who thought he might have talent to come up and sing with his band . Young Como was terrified , but his friends urged him and pushed him onto the stage . Carlone was so impressed with Como 's performance that he immediately offered him a job . 
 The young man was not certain if he should accept the offer Freddy Carlone had made , so he returned to Canonsburg to talk the matter over with his father . Perry expected he would tell him to stay in the barber business , but to his surprise , the senior Como told him if he did not take the opportunity , he might never know whether or not he could be a professional singer . The decision was also made with an eye on finances ; Como earned around $ 125 per week from his barber shop while the job with Carlone paid $ 28 per week . Roselle was willing to travel with her husband and the band , but the salary was not enough to support two people on the road . Perry and Roselle were married in Meadville on July 31 , 1933 ; four days later , Como joined Freddy Carlone 's band and began working with them . Roselle returned home to Canonsburg ; her new husband would be on the road for the next 18 months . 
 Three years after joining the Carlone band , Como moved to Ted Weems 's Orchestra and his first recording dates . Como and Weems met in 1936 while the Carlone orchestra was playing in Warren , Ohio . Perry initially did not take the offer to join Weems 's orchestra . Apparently realizing it was the best move for his young vocalist , Freddy Carlone urged him to sign with Weems . Art Jarrett had just left the Weems organization to start his own band . Weems was in need of a vocalist ; Como got a raise , as Weems paid him $ 50 per week , and his first chance for nationwide exposure . Ted Weems and his orchestra were based in Chicago , and were regulars on radio shows such as The Jack Benny Program and Fibber McGee and Molly . The Weems band also had its own weekly radio program on the Mutual Broadcasting System from 1936 – 1937 . 
 It was here where the young Como acquired polish and his own unique style , with the help of Ted Weems . Mutual 's Chicago affiliate WGN radio threatened to stop carrying the Weems broadcasts from Chicago 's Palmer House if Weems 's new singer did not improve . Weems had recordings of some previous radio programs ; one evening he and Como listened to them after the show . From listening to them , Como was shocked to realize that no one could make out the words to the songs he was singing . Weems told Como there was no need for him to resort to vocal tricks ; what was necessary was to sing from the heart . 
 Como 's first recording with the Weems band was a novelty tune called " You Can 't Pull the Wool Over My Eyes " , recorded for the Decca Records label in May , 1936 . During one of Como 's early Decca recording sessions with the Weems orchestra , Weems was told to get rid of " that kid " ( Como ) because he sounded too much like Bing Crosby , who also recorded for Decca . Before Como could reply , Ted Weems spoke up , saying that Como was part of the session or it was over . By the time Como had been with Ted Weems about a year , he was mentioned in a 1937 Life magazine NBC Radio ad for Fibber McGee and Molly as " causing cardiac flutters with his crooning . " The weekly radio show , Beat the Band , which ran on NBC from 1940 – 1944 , was a " stump the band " type musical quiz show where Weems and his orchestra were the featured band from 1940 – 1941 . 
 = = = RCA Victor and radio = = = 
 The Comos ' first child , Ronnie , was born in 1940 while the Weems band was working in Chicago . Como left the performance to be at his wife 's side even though he was threatened with dismissal if he did so . Though Perry was now making $ 250 a week and travel expenses for the family were no problem , young Ronnie could not become used to a normal routine when they were able to stay in one place for a period of time . The radio program Beat the Band did not always originate from Chicago , but was often done from locations such as Milwaukee , Denver and St. Louis , as the band continued to play road engagements while part of the radio show cast . The Comos decided road life was no place to try raising a child , and Roselle and the baby went back to Canonsburg . 
 In late 1942 , Como made the decision to quit the Weems band , even if it meant giving up singing . He returned to Canonsburg , his family , and his trade , tired of life on the road without his wife and young son . Como received an offer to become a Frank Sinatra imitator , but chose to keep his own style . While Perry was negotiating for a store lease to re @-@ open a barber shop , he received a call from Tommy Rockwell at General Artists Corporation , who also represented Ted Weems . Como fielded many other calls that also brought offers ; what was different was that he liked and trusted Rockwell , who was offering him his own sustaining ( non @-@ sponsored ) Columbia Broadcasting System ( CBS ) radio show and to get him a recording contract . The offers were also appealing because it meant staying in New York with no more road tours . As Perry pondered the job offer , Roselle told him , " You can always get another barber shop if it doesn 't work out ! " Until the radio show and recording contract offers , he did not really view singing as his career , believing the years with Carlone and Weems had been enjoyable , but now it was time to get back to work . Como said in an 1983 interview , " I thought I 'd have my fun and I 'd go home to work . " 
 Perry went on the air for CBS on March 12 , 1943 . Rockwell 's next move was to book Como into the renowned Copacabana Night Club for two weeks beginning on June 10 , 1943 . One week later he signed his first RCA Victor contract and three days after that cut his first record for the company , " Goodbye , Sue " . It was the beginning of a 44 @-@ year professional relationship . He became a very successful performer in theater and night club engagements ; Como 's initial two weeks at the Copacabana in June stretched into August . There were times when Frank Sinatra would ask Como to fill in for him at his Paramount Theater performances . The crooning craze was at its height during this time and the " bobby soxer " and " <unk> " teenage girls who were wild about Sinatra added Como to their list , a " <unk> " club voting him " <unk> of the Year " in 1943 . The line for a Perry Como Paramount performance was three deep and wound around the city block . Como 's popularity also extended to a more mature audience when he played the Versailles and returned to the Copacabana , where the management placed " <unk> @-@ <unk> Ruled Out " cards on their tables . 
 Doug Storer , who was an advertising manager with the Blackman Company at the time , became convinced of Como 's abilities after hearing him on his non @-@ sponsored CBS Radio show . Storer produced a demo radio program recording with Como and the Mitchell Ayres Orchestra which he brought to the advertising agency that handled the Chesterfield Cigarettes account . Initially , the agency liked the format of the show , but wanted someone else as the star , asking Storer to obtain the release of the singer they preferred , so he would be free for their new program . Storer decided to do nothing about getting the singer released from his contract . When he was contacted by the agency some weeks later , saying they were ready to put the program on the air on NBC , Storer bluntly told them the man for their show was the man they had heard on the demo recording . The program was scheduled to make its debut in about a week ; the only option was to hire Como for the show . Storer then arranged for Como 's release from his CBS contract . On December 11 , 1944 , he moved from CBS to NBC for a new radio program , Chesterfield Supper Club . 
 The April 5 , 1946 , broadcasts of the Chesterfield Supper Club took place 20 @,@ 000 feet in the air ; these were the first known instances of a complete radio show being presented from an airplane . Como , Jo Stafford , the Lloyd Shaffer Orchestra and the entire " Supper Club " crew made the flights for the shows . There were two " Supper Club " broadcast flights that evening : at 6 PM and again at 10 PM for the West Coast broadcast of the show . A total of three flights were made ; there was an earlier rehearsal flight for reception purposes . In addition to the instruments for the band , the plane also carried a small piano . Because the stand @-@ held microphones were not very useful on the plane , hand @-@ held mikes were then used , but due to the cabin pressure , they became extremely heavy to hold after a few minutes . This mid @-@ air performance caused the American Federation of Musicians to consider this a new type of engagement and issue a special set of rates for it . 
 = = = Como in concert = = = 
 Como had not made a night club appearance in 26 years when he accepted an engagement at the International Hotel in Las Vegas in June 1970 , which also resulted in his first " live " album , Perry Como in Person at the International Hotel , Las Vegas . Ray Charles , whose Ray Charles Singers were heard with Como for over 35 years , formed a special edition of the vocal group for his Las Vegas opening . Prior to this he had last appeared at New York 's Copacabana in 1944 . Como continued to do periodic engagements in Las Vegas and Lake Tahoe , limiting his night club appearances to Nevada . 
 Performing live again brought Como a new sense of enjoyment . In May 1974 , he embarked on his first concert appearance outside of the United States , a show at the London Palladium for the Variety Club of Great Britain to aid children 's charities . It was here where he discovered what he had been missing when the audience cheered for ten minutes after he walked onstage . At the show 's end , Como sat in a chair , delightedly chatting back and forth with his equally delighted fans . Perry returned to the United Kingdom ( UK ) in November for a Royal Variety Performance to benefit the Entertainment Artistes ' Benevolent Fund with the Queen Mother in attendance . Como was invited to visit Buckingham Palace the day after the show . At first , the invitation did not extend to his associates traveling and working with him , and Como politely declined . When word reached the Palace regarding the reason for Perry 's turning down the invitation , it was then extended to include all in the Como party and Como accepted this invitation . Soon after , he announced his first concert tour that began in the UK in the spring of 1975 . 
 In 1982 , Como and Frank Sinatra were invited to entertain Italian President Sandro Pertini at a White House State dinner when he made an official visit . President Pertini enjoyed their performance enough to join them in singing " Santa Lucia " . The pair reprised this routine the next year in California as part of the entertainment for Queen Elizabeth 's Royal visit . Perry was on the program by special request of the Queen . 
 The year 1984 found Como traveling the US with his 50th Anniversary tour . Having spent most of his professional life in radio or recording studios and on television soundstages , he was enjoying doing live performances . Even after his 80th birthday , Perry continued the concert tours . Gone , however , were the cardigan sweaters which had been a staple of his weekly television shows , and which he had actually hated having to wear . Como now performed in a tuxedo , saying , " It shows respect for the audience . " The return to live appearances also provided Como with an opportunity to have a little fun with his " Mister Nice Guy " image in a song Ray Charles and Nick Perito his closest collaborator since 1963 , wrote and composed for him : 
 It doesn 't take a guy equipped with ESP , to see what 's <unk> ' with your curiosity ! 
 Is " Mister Nice Guy " just a press agent 's pitch ? his dearest friends say he 's a ... 
 You never thought you 'd see me in Las Vegas ' live ' I haven 't played a " club " since 1885 ! 
 It 's spelled out in dollar signs ( you better believe it ! ) I can almost read your minds ! 
 – Nick Perito and Ray Charles , " If I Could Almost Read Your Mind " 
 = = = Vocal characteristics = = = 
 Perry Como credited Bing Crosby for influencing his voice and style . Perry Como 's voice is widely known for its good @-@ natured vocal acrobatics as portrayed in his highly popular novelty songs such as " Hot Diggity ( Dog <unk> Boom ) " , but there was another side to Perry Como . Music critic Gene Lees describes it in his sleeve note to Como 's 1968 album Look To Your Heart : 
 Despite his immense popularity , Como is rarely given credit for what , once you stop and think of it , he so clearly is : one of the great singers and one of the great artists of our time . 
 Perhaps the reason people rarely talk about his formidable attributes as a singer is that he makes so little fuss about them . That celebrated ease of his has been too little understood . Ease in any art is the result of mastery over the details of the craft . You get them together to the point where you can forget about how you do things and concentrate on what you are doing . Como got them together so completely that the muscles don 't even show . It seems effortless , but a good deal of effort has gone into making it seem so . Como is known to be meticulous about rehearsal of the material for an album . He tries things out in different keys , gives the song thought , makes suggestions , tries it again , and again , until he is satisfied . The hidden work makes him look like Mr. Casual , and too many people are taken in by it — but happily so . 
 – Gene Lees @-@ sleeve note , Look To Your Heart 
 From 1989 until his death in 2001 , Como co @-@ hosted a weekly syndicated radio show with John Knox , called Weekend With Perry . 
 = = Films = = 
 Como 's Hollywood type good looks earned him a seven @-@ year contract with 20th Century @-@ Fox in 1943 . He made four films for Fox , Something for the Boys ( 1944 ) , March of Time ( 1945 ) , Doll Face ( 1945 ) , and If I 'm Lucky ( 1946 ) , plus Words and Music for Metro @-@ Goldwyn @-@ Mayer ( 1948 ) . He never appeared to be truly comfortable in films , feeling the roles assigned him did not match his personality . 
 Some misguided Hollywood press agent sought to alter Como 's life story by changing his previous occupation from barber to coal miner , claiming it would make for better press . Fred Othman , a Hollywood columnist , publicly stated he believed Como the barber was just a publicity gimmick . Perry gave him a shave and haircut at the Fox Studios barber shop to prove him wrong . In 1985 , Como related the story of his first film role experience in Something for the Boys . He sat ready to work in his dressing room for two weeks without being called . Perry spent the next two weeks playing golf , still not missed by the studio . It was five weeks before he was actually called to the set , despite the studio 's initial urgent report for work notice . When Como finally appeared , the director had no idea who he was . 
 At the time Como was signed , movie musicals were on the wane and he became a studio contract player , where the actors or actresses worked only when the studio needed to fill out a schedule . Though his last movie , Words and Music , was made for prestigious Metro @-@ Goldwyn @-@ Mayer , Como fared no better . Less than two weeks before the film 's release , Walter Winchell wrote in his syndicated column , " Someone at MGM must have been dozing when they wrote the script for Words and Music . In most of the film Perry Como is called Eddie Anders and toward the end ( for no reason ) they start calling him Perry Como . " Como asked for and received a release from the remainder of his movie contract in the same year . Quoting Como , " I was wasting their time and they were wasting mine . " 
 Como 's comments during a 1949 interview were prophetic , as far as his success was concerned . At the time he was doing the Chesterfield Supper Club on both radio and television , " Television is going to do me a lot more personal good than the movies ever have ... The reason should be obvious . On television , I 'm allowed to be myself ; in pictures , I was always some other guy . I come over like just another bum in a tuxedo . " Como was offered some movie roles that interested him after he began appearing on the weekly TV shows , but there was just never enough time to pursue any film work . 
 = = Television = = 
 = = = Early years : 1948 – 1955 = = = 
 Perry Como made the move to television when NBC initially televised the Chesterfield Supper Club radio program on December 24 , 1948 . A very special guest on that first television show was Como 's eight @-@ year @-@ old son , Ronnie , as part of a boys ' choir singing " Silent Night " with his father . The show was the usual Friday night Chesterfield Supper Club with an important exception — it was also being broadcast on television . The experimental simulcast was to continue for three Friday " Supper Club " shows , but had gone so well , NBC decided to extend the televised version through August 1949 . Years later , Como admitted to being scared and feeling awkward initially , but somehow managed to just be himself . Said Como , " You can 't act on TV . With me , what you see is what you get . " While still in its experimental phase , Como and the television show survived an on location broadcast in Durham , North Carolina , on April 15 , 1949 . 
 On September 8 , 1949 , it became a weekly half @-@ hour offering on Sunday nights , directly opposite Ed Sullivan 's Toast of the Town . In 1950 , Perry moved to CBS and the show 's title was changed to The Perry Como Chesterfield Show , again sponsored by Liggett & Myers ' Chesterfield cigarettes . Como hosted this informal 15 minute musical variety series on Monday , Wednesday and Friday , immediately following the CBS Television News . The Faye Emerson Show was initially broadcast in the same time slot on Tuesday and Thursday . By 1952 , it was evident that television would replace radio as the major entertainment medium . Gary Giddins , the biographer of Bing Crosby , said in 2001 , " He ( Como ) came from this whole generation of <unk> and Sinatra , but he was the only one of them who figured out TV . " Como 's 15 @-@ minute television show was also simulcast on radio via the Mutual Broadcasting System beginning on August 24 , 1953 ; while the Chesterfield Supper Club broadcasts were simulcast on radio and television , this was the first instance of a simulcast between two networks . 
 Como 's CBS contract was to expire on July 1 , 1955 . The year before , he had been asked to be the master of ceremonies and narrator of the NBC Radio 35th anniversary special . That April , Perry Como signed a 12 @-@ year " unbreakable " contract with NBC . On his last CBS show , June 24 , 1955 , Como was in high spirits , bringing all those who worked off camera on the air for introductions . Perry tried his hand at camera work , getting a picture on the air but one that was upside @-@ down . In appreciation for the 11 @-@ year association , his sponsor , Chesterfield , presented him with all the musical arrangements used during this time as a parting gift . 
 = = = Sing to me , Mr. C. : 1955 – 1959 = = = 
 He moved back to NBC with a weekly hour @-@ long variety show featuring additional musical and production numbers , comedy sketches and guest stars called The Perry Como Show , premiering Saturday , September 17 , 1955 . This version of his show was also so popular that in the 1956 – 1957 television season , it reached ninth in the Nielsen ratings , the only show on NBC that season to land in the top ten . 
 Como 's " Dream Along With Me " became the show 's opening theme song , " Mr. C. " received the first of many " stacks and stacks of letters " requesting him to sing a specific song . It was also here where he began wearing his trademark cardigan sweaters . The " Sing to me , Mr. C. " segment of the Como shows with Perry seated on a stool singing viewer requested songs had its roots in the first television broadcasts of Chesterfield Supper Club . When cameras entered the " Supper Club " radio studio , they found Como and his guests sitting on stools behind music stands . The show 's closing theme was , " You Are Never Far Away From Me " . 
 Perry 's announcer on the broadcasts , Frank Gallop , became a foil for Como 's jokes . When the television show began , there was not enough room for Gallop to appear on stage ; he was an invisible " voice from the clouds " until the show 's 1958 – 1959 season . There was as much fun at rehearsals as on the show itself . Como 's relaxed and fun @-@ loving manner at rehearsals put many nervous guests at ease . It was common for Como to leave the Saturday afternoon rehearsal for about a half @-@ hour to go to confession . He managed to save some time by asking his music publisher , Mickey Glass , to wait in line for him at the confessional . Glass , who was Jewish , was most agreeable to this , but wondered what to do if his turn came before Como arrived . 
 Perry thoroughly enjoyed what he was doing , saying in a 1989 interview , " I got a kick out of live television . The spontaneity was the fun of it . " Spontaneity and the ability to be himself came in handy for swimmer / actress Esther Williams ' guest appearance of March 16 , 1957 . A wardrobe malfunction meant that viewers were seeing more of Esther than 1950s television considered to be in good taste ; more live show mishaps followed . At the show 's end , Williams was swimming in a pool specially constructed on the set for her appearance . Como simply said , " Goodnight , folks , " and leaped , fully clothed , into the swimming pool . 
 On December 17 , 1955 , viewers were able to see first @-@ hand what Perry did for a living before he was a professional singer . Actor Kirk Douglas was one of Como 's television guests ; Douglas had grown a beard for his Vincent van Gogh role in Lust For Life , which finished filming that week . Como shaved Douglas ' movie beard live on national television . On September 15 , 1956 , the season premiere of The Perry Como Show was broadcast from NBC 's new color television studios at the New York Ziegfeld Theatre , making it one of the first weekly color TV shows . In addition to this season premiere as a color television show , there was also a royal visit from Prince Rainier of Monaco and his bride of six months , Grace Kelly . 
 Como competed with Jackie Gleason in what was billed as the " Battle of the Giants " and won . This is now rarely mentioned , in part because Como commonly downplayed his own achievements , and also because the two men were friends . The weekly ratings winner would phone the loser for some mock gloating . At the height of this television competition , Como asked Gleason a favor : to visit his home when his mother @-@ in @-@ law , a big Gleason fan , was there . Though Mrs. <unk> spoke no English and Gleason no Italian , Roselle 's mother was thrilled . Como 's words to Gleason after the visit , " Anything you want , you got it . In fact , I 'll even do one of your shows so the ratings will be better . " Como was among those who filled in for Gleason on The Jackie Gleason Show in 1954 when the entertainer suffered a broken ankle and leg in an on @-@ air fall . 
 An example of Como 's popularity came in 1956 , when Life conducted a poll of young women , asking them which man in public life most fit the concept of their ideal husband : it was Perry Como . A 1958 nationwide poll of U.S. teenagers found Perry Como to be the most popular male singer , beating Elvis Presley , who was the winner of the previous year 's poll . At one point , his television show was broadcast in at least 12 other countries . 
 Another way to judge the value of the Como show to the network can be found in the following : during sound checks at rehearsals , it was often difficult to hear Como 's soft voice without having a large microphone ruin a camera shot . NBC had RCA design a microphone for the show , which was known as the " Como mike " ; the microphone was able to pick up Como 's voice properly and was small enough not to interfere with camera shots . 
 = = = Kraft Music Hall : 1959 – 1967 = = = 
 In 1959 , Como moved to Wednesday nights , hosting Perry Como 's Kraft Music Hall weekly for the next eight years ; the last four seasons from 1963 to 1967 were done as monthly specials alternating with Kraft Suspense Theatre , The Andy Williams Show , and finally The Road West . Como became the highest @-@ paid performer in the history of television to that date , earning mention in the Guinness Book of World Records . Como himself took part in none of this ; his production company , <unk> , named for son Ronnie Como , handled the transaction along with all other Como business matters . Como also had control of the show which would replace his during the summer television hiatus . While " Mr. C. " was having a holiday , viewers would see Perry Presents , beginning in 1959 . 
 In late 1962 , after the Cuban Missile Crisis had settled well enough to permit the evacuated servicemen 's families to return to Guantanamo Bay Naval Base in Cuba , Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara was eager to do more for morale there . He asked Perry Como to bring his television show to the Naval base . Perry and his cast and crew were at Guantanamo when the loved ones began their return . The first entertainers to visit the base since the crisis , the Como show filmed there for eight days . Some highlights of the program , which was seen in the US on December 12 , 1962 , included Como 's shaving a serviceman with a Castro @-@ like beard and the enthusiastic participation when Perry asked for volunteers to come on stage to do the Twist with the lovely ladies who were part of the visiting dance troupe . 
 Filming for the Kraft Music Hall Christmas show that was aired on December 17 , 1964 began at the Vatican November 7 . By special permission of Pope Paul VI , Como and his crew were able to shoot segments in the Vatican gardens and other areas where cameras had never been permitted previously . The show featured the first television appearance of the Sistine Chapel Choir , and also the first time a non @-@ choir member ( Como ) sang with them . The choir performed a Christmas hymn in Latin written by their director , Domenico <unk> , called " Christ Is Born " , as part of their presentation . Como asked his associate , Ray Charles , to write English lyrics for the song , using it many times on both television shows and his Christmas albums . The Carpenters also recorded the song on their first Christmas album , Christmas Portrait . 
 = = = Specials = = = 
 Beginning in 1967 , Como began reducing his TV appearances , gradually becoming limited to seasonal and holiday specials with the emphasis being on Christmas . Como had numerous Christmas television specials , beginning on Christmas Eve 1948 , and continuing to 1994 , when his final Christmas special was recorded in Ireland . They were recorded in many countries , including the Holy Land , Mexico , and Canada , as well as many locations throughout the United States . The 1987 Christmas special was cancelled at the behest of an angry Como ; The American Broadcasting Company ( ABC ) was willing to offer him only a Saturday 10 PM time slot for it three weeks before the holiday . Perry filled the yearly gap for his fans with live Christmas concerts in various locations . 
 Como 's final Christmas special was filmed in January 1994 in Dublin 's Point Theatre before an audience of 4 @,@ 500 people , including Irish President Mary Robinson and Como 's friend , the actress Maureen O 'Hara . Perry Como 's Irish Christmas was a Public Broadcasting Service ( PBS ) production , made by an Irish independent production company in association with RTÉ . Como , appearing aged and unwell , had the flu during the show which took four hours to record . At the show 's conclusion , Como apologized to his Dublin audience for a performance he felt was not up to his usual standards . 
 During his visit to Dublin , Como visited a barber shop called " The Como " on Thomas Street . The owners , lifelong fans who named their business in his honor , had sent photographs of the shop and letters to Como inviting him to visit . Photos of Como with the barbers were framed in the shop . " The Como " closed in 2002 but it remains a household name in The Liberties . 
 = = Death = = 
 Como died in his sleep on May 12 , 2001 , at his home in Jupiter Inlet Colony , Florida , six days before his eighty @-@ ninth birthday . He was reported to have suffered from symptoms of Alzheimer 's disease . Como 's older son , Ronnie , and his daughter , Terri , could not agree on their interpretations of Como 's 1999 living will and it became a matter for the courts in the year before his death . His funeral Mass took place at St. Edward 's Catholic Church in Palm Beach , Florida . Como and his wife , Roselle are buried at Riverside Memorial Park , Tequesta ( Palm Beach County ) , Florida . 
 = = Honors and tributes = = 
 = = = Awards = = = 
 Como received the 1959 Grammy Award for Best Vocal Performance , Male ; five Emmys from 1955 to 1959 ; a Christopher Award ( 1956 ) and shared a Peabody Award with good friend Jackie Gleason in 1956 . He was inducted into the Academy of Television Arts & Sciences Hall of Fame in 1990 and received a Kennedy Center Honor in 1987 . Posthumously , Como received the Grammy Lifetime Achievement Award in 2002 ; he was inducted into the Long Island Music Hall of Fame in 2006 . Como has the distinction of having three stars on the Hollywood Walk of Fame for his work in radio , television , and music . 
 = = = Tributes = = = 
 In the official RCA Records Billboard magazine memorial , his life was summed up in these words : " 50 years of music and a life well lived . An example to all . " Composer Ervin Drake said of him , " ... [ o ] <unk> someone like Perry comes along and won 't ' go with the flow ' and still prevails in spite of all the bankrupt others who surround him and <unk> him to yield to their values . Only occasionally . " 
 = = = Hometown honors = = = 
 Canonsburg has always been very proud to be the birthplace of Perry Como ; the local newspaper of the time , Canonsburg Daily Notes , seems to have been the first to write an article about him . Their edition of July 19 , 1934 , featured a photo and the following : " A young Canonsburg boy threatens to snatch the crown from Bing Crosby 's head . Perry Como , son of Mr. and Mrs. Pietro Como of 530 Franklin street is said to have one of the grandest baritone voices in the country . " The borough honored him three times over the course of his life . The first of these events took place September 14 , 1946 , when Third Street , where Perry worked in the barber shop of Steve Fragapane , was renamed " Perry Como Avenue " . Perry , Roselle , and Como 's mother , Lucy , attended the ceremonies and banquet held at the State Armory . 
 A second ceremony marking Perry Como Day took place August 24 , 1977 , but the most ambitious project began in 1997 – a statue of the singer . The planned statue had the blessing of Como 's wife , Roselle , who died the year before it was unveiled on May 15 , 1999 . As part of the festivities , Como 's stool and music stand from The Perry Como Show and the equipment he used at Steve Fragapane 's barber shop were donated to the borough . Como was not present at the unveiling because of poor health . The inscription on the base , " To This Place God Has Brought Me " , was a favorite saying of Como 's ; the musical feature was added in 2002 . 
 The Como celebration crossed the Atlantic in August 2002 . Palena , Italy , the birthplace of Como 's parents , had a long @-@ standing week @-@ long festival in honor of the singer . A smaller version of the statue was taken to Palena by the mayor of Canonsburg , Anthony <unk> . Perry 's son , David , and his wife were also in attendance when the town of Palena renamed a street for Como . There is a marble plaque on a Palena town wall stating that Pietro and Lucia Como , parents of Perry Como , emigrated from this village to the United States which dates from these ceremonies . 
 Perry Como never forgot Canonsburg either . One of the things he did to give a helping hand to his home town was to convince RCA to open a record @-@ pressing plant there . Those who needed to raise funds for local projects like Boys ' and Girls ' Clubs found him always ready to do whatever was needed . 
 In 2007 , the local McDonald 's was totally rebuilt . The new building decor features memorabilia of Como along with that of fellow singer and Canonsburg native , Bobby Vinton . A children 's playground in Canonsburg on Giffin Avenue is also named for Como . In downtown Canonsburg , all of the tree grates are marked with information about the records that sold a million copies and the town clock hourly plays one of the hits of Como ( 141 ) , Vinton ( 44 ) , or the Four Coins ( 7 ) , also from Canonsburg . 
 = Storm Prediction Center = 
 The Storm Prediction Center ( SPC ) is a government agency that is part of the National Centers for Environmental Prediction ( NCEP ) , operating under the control of the National Weather Service ( NWS ) , which in turn is part of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration ( NOAA ) of the United States Department of Commerce ( <unk> ) . 
 Headquartered at the National Weather Center in Norman , Oklahoma , the Storm Prediction Center is tasked with forecasting the risk of severe thunderstorms and tornadoes in the contiguous United States . It issues convective outlooks , mesoscale discussions , and watches as a part of this process . Convective outlooks are issued for the following eight days ( issued separately for Day 1 , Day 2 , Day 3 , and Days 4 – 8 ) , and detail the risk of severe thunderstorms and tornadoes during the given forecast period , although tornado , hail and wind details are only available for Day 1 . Days 2 and 3 , as well as 4 – 8 use a probabilistic scale , determining the probability for a severe weather event in percentage categories . 
 Mesoscale discussions are issued to provide information on certain individual regions where severe weather is becoming a threat and states whether a watch is likely and details thereof , particularly concerning conditions conducive for the development of severe thunderstorms in the short term , as well as situations of isolated severe weather when watches are not necessary . Watches are issued when forecasters are confident that severe weather will occur , and usually precede the onset of severe weather by one hour , although this sometimes varies depending on certain atmospheric conditions that may inhibit or accelerate convective development . 
 The agency is also responsible for forecasting fire weather ( indicating conditions that are favorable for wildfires ) in the contiguous U.S. , issuing fire weather outlooks for Days 1 , 2 , and 3 – 8 , which detail areas with critical or extremely critical fire conditions . 
 = = History = = 
 The Storm Prediction Center began in 1952 as <unk> ( Severe Local Storms Unit ) , a special unit of forecasters at the U.S. Weather Bureau in Washington , D.C. In 1954 , the unit moved its forecast operations to Kansas City , Missouri . <unk> began issuing convective outlooks for predicted thunderstorm activity in 1955 , and began issuing radar summaries in three @-@ hour intervals in 1960 ; with the increased duties of compiling and disseminating radar summaries , this unit became the National Severe Storms Forecast Center ( <unk> ) in 1966 , remaining headquartered in Kansas City . 
 In 1968 , the National Severe Storms Forecast Center began issuing status reports on weather watches ; the agency then made its first computerized data transmission in 1971 . On April 2 , 1982 , the agency issued the first " Particularly Dangerous Situation " watch , which indicates the imminent threat of a major severe weather event over the watches ' timespan . In 1986 , the <unk> introduced two new forecast products : the Day 2 Convective Outlook ( which include probabilistic forecasts for outlined areas of thunderstorm risk for the following day ) and the Mesoscale Discussion ( a short @-@ term forecast outlining specific areas under threat for severe thunderstorm development ) . 
 In October 1995 , the National Severe Storms Forecast Center relocated its operations to Norman , Oklahoma , and was rechristened the Storm Prediction Center . At that time , the guidance center was housed at Max Westheimer Airport ( now the University of Oklahoma Westheimer Airport ) , co @-@ located in the same building as the National Severe Storms Laboratory and the local National Weather Service Weather Forecast Office ( the latter of which , in addition to disseminating forecasts , oversees the issuance of weather warnings and advisories for the western two @-@ thirds of Oklahoma and western portions of North Texas , and issues outline and status updates for SPC @-@ issued severe thunderstorm and tornado watches that include areas served by the Norman office ) . In 1998 , the Center began issuing the National Fire Weather Outlook to provide forecasts for areas potentially susceptible to the development and spread of wildfires based on certain meteorological factors . The Day 3 Convective Outlook ( which is similar in format to the Day 2 forecast ) was first issued on an experimental basis in 2000 , and was made an official product in 2001 . 
 In 2006 , the Storm Prediction Center , National Severe Storms Laboratory and National Weather Service Norman Forecast Office moved their respective operations into the newly constructed National Weather Center , near Westheimer Airport . Since the agency 's relocation to Norman , the 557th Weather Wing at Offutt Air Force Base would assume control of issuing the Storm Prediction Center 's severe weather products in the event that the SPC is no longer able to issue them in the event of an outage ( such as a computer system failure or building @-@ wide power disruption ) or emergency ( such as an approaching strong tornadic circulation or tornado on the ground ) affecting the Norman campus ; on April 1 , 2009 , the SPC reassigned responsibilities for issuing the center 's products in such situations to the 15th Operational Weather Squadron based out of Scott Air Force Base . 
 = = Overview = = 
 The Storm Prediction Center is responsible for forecasting the risk of severe weather caused by severe thunderstorms , specifically those producing tornadoes , hail of one inch ( 2 @.@ 5 cm ) in diameter or larger , and / or winds of 58 miles per hour ( 93 km / h ) or greater . The agency also forecasts hazardous winter and fire weather conditions . It does so primarily by issuing convective outlooks , severe thunderstorm watches , tornado watches and mesoscale discussions . 
 There is a three @-@ stage process in which the area , time period , and details of a severe weather forecast are refined from a broad @-@ scale forecast of potential hazards to a more specific and detailed forecast of what hazards are expected , and where and in what time frame they are expected to occur . If warranted , forecasts will also increase in severity through this three @-@ stage process . 
 The Storm Prediction Center employs a total of 43 personnel , including five lead forecasters , ten mesoscale / outlook forecasters , and seven assistant mesoscale forecasters . Many SPC forecasters and support staff are heavily involved in scientific research into severe and hazardous weather . This involves conducting applied research and writing technical papers , developing training materials , giving seminars and other presentations locally and nationwide , attending scientific conferences , and participating in weather experiments . 
 = = Convective outlooks = = 
 The Storm Prediction Center issues convective outlooks ( AC ) , consisting of categorical and probabilistic forecasts describing the general threat of severe convective storms over the contiguous United States for the next six to 192 hours ( Day 1 through Day 8 ) . These outlooks are labeled and issued by day , and are issued up to five times per day . 
 The categorical risks are <unk> ( for Thunder Storm : light green shaded area – rendered as a brown line prior to April 2011 – indicating a risk for general thunderstorms ) , " <unk> " ( for Marginal : darker green shaded area , indicating a very low but present risk of severe weather ) ; " <unk> " ( for Slight : yellow shaded area – previously rendered as a green line – indicating a slight risk of severe weather ) ; " <unk> " ( for Enhanced : orange shaded area , which replaced the upper end of the <unk> category on October 22 , 2014 ) ; " MDT " ( for Moderate : red shaded area – previously rendered as a red line – indicating a moderate risk of severe weather ) ; and " HIGH " ( pink shaded area – previously a rendered as a fuchsia line – indicating a high risk of severe weather ) . Significant severe areas ( referred to as " hatched areas " because of their representation on outlook maps ) refer to a threat of increased storm intensity that is of " significant severe " levels ( F2 / EF2 or stronger tornado , 2 inches ( 5 @.@ 1 cm ) or larger hail , or 75 miles per hour ( 121 km / h ) winds or greater ) . 
 In April 2011 , the SPC introduced a new graphical format for its categorical and probability outlooks , which included the shading of risk areas ( with the colors corresponding to each category , as mentioned above , being changed as well ) and population , county / parish / borough and interstate overlays . The new shaded maps also incorporated a revised color palette for the shaded probability categories in each outlook . 
 In 2013 , the SPC incorporated a small table under the Convective Outlook 's risk category map that indicates the total coverage area by square miles , the total estimated population affected and major cities included within a severe weather risk area . 
 Public severe weather outlooks ( PWO ) are issued when a significant or widespread outbreak is expected , especially for tornadoes . From November to March , it can also be issued for any threat of significant tornadoes in the nighttime hours , noting the lower awareness and greater danger of tornadoes at that time of year . 
 = = = Categories = = = 
 A marginal risk day indicates storms of only limited organization , longevity , coverage and / or intensity , typically isolated severe or near @-@ severe storms with limited wind damage , large hail and perhaps a tornado . Wind gusts of at least 60 miles per hour ( 97 km / h ) and hailstones of around 1 inch ( 2 @.@ 5 cm ) in diameter are common storm threats within a marginal risk ; depending on the sufficient wind shear , a tornado – usually of weak ( EF0 to EF1 ) intensity and short duration – may be possible . This category replaced the " SEE TEXT " category on October 22 , 2014 . 
 A slight risk day typically will indicate that the threat exists for scattered severe weather , including scattered wind damage ( produced by straight @-@ line sustained winds and / or gusts of 60 to 70 mph ) , scattered severe hail ( varying in size from .25 inches ( 0 @.@ 64 cm ) to 1 @.@ 75 inches ( 4 @.@ 4 cm ) ) and / or isolated tornadoes ( often of shorter duration and varying weak to moderate intensity , depending on the available wind shear and other sufficient atmospheric parameters ) . During the peak severe weather season , most days will have a slight risk somewhere in the United States . Isolated significant severe events are possible in some circumstances , but are generally not widespread . 
 An enhanced risk day indicates that there is a greater threat for severe weather than that which would be indicated by a slight risk , but conditions are not adequate for the development of widespread significant severe weather to necessitate a moderate category . Severe storms are expected to be more concentrated and of varying intensities . This risk category replaced the upper end of " slight " on October 22 , 2014 , although a few situations that previously warranted a moderate risk were reclassified as enhanced ( i.e. 45 % wind or 15 % tornado with no significant area ) . 
 A moderate risk day indicates that more widespread and / or more dangerous severe weather is possible ( sometimes with major hurricanes ) , with significant severe weather often more likely . Numerous tornadoes ( some of which may be strong and potentially long @-@ track ) , more widespread or severe wind damage and / or very large / destructive hail ( up to or exceeding 2 inches ( 5 @.@ 1 cm ) in diameter ) could occur . Major events , such as large tornado outbreaks or widespread straight @-@ line wind events , are sometimes also possible on moderate risk days , but with greater uncertainty . Moderate risk days are not uncommon , and typically occur several times a month during the peak of the severe weather season , and occasionally at other times of the year . Slight and enhanced risk areas typically surround areas under a moderate risk , where the threat is lower . 
 A high risk day indicates a considerable likelihood of significant to extreme severe weather , generally a major tornado outbreak or ( much less often ) an extreme derecho event . On these days , the potential exists for extremely severe and life @-@ threatening weather , including widespread strong or violent tornadoes – some of which may be on the ground for a half @-@ hour or longer – and / or very destructive straight @-@ line winds ( hail cannot verify or produce a high risk on its own , although such a day usually involves a threat for widespread very large and damaging hail as well ) . Many of the most prolific severe weather days were high risk days . Such days are quite rare ; a high risk is typically issued only a few times each year ( see List of SPC High Risk days ) . High risk areas are usually surrounded by a larger moderate risk area , where uncertainty is greater or the threat is somewhat lower . 
 The Storm Prediction Center began asking for public comment on proposed categorical additions to the Day 1 @-@ 3 Convective Outlooks on April 21 , 2014 , for a two @-@ month period . The Storm Prediction Center broadened this system beginning on October 22 , 2014 by adding two new risk categories to the three used originally . The new categories that were added are a " marginal risk " ( replacing the " SEE TEXT " contours , see below ) and an " enhanced risk " ( which is used to delineate areas where severe weather will occur that would fall under the previous probability criteria of an upper @-@ end slight risk , but do not warrant the issuance of a moderate risk ) . In order from least to greatest threat , these categories are ranked as : marginal , slight , enhanced , moderate and high . 
 = = = Issuance and usage = = = 
 Convective outlooks are issued by the Storm Prediction Center in Zulu time ( also known as Universal Coordinated Time or UTC ) . 
 The categories at right refer to the risk levels for the specific severe weather event occurring within 25 miles ( 40 km ) of any point in the delineated region , as described in the previous section . The Day 1 Convective Outlook , issued five times per day at <unk> ( valid from 1200Z of the current day until 1200Z the following day ) , <unk> and <unk> ( the " morning updates , " valid until 1200Z the following day ) , <unk> ( the " afternoon update , " valid until 1200Z the following day ) , and the <unk> ( the " evening update , " valid until 1200Z the following day ) , provides a textual forecast , map of categories and probabilities , and chart of probabilities . The Day 1 is currently the only outlook to issue specific probabilities for tornadoes , hail or wind . It is the most descriptive and highest accuracy outlook , and typically has the highest probability levels . 
 Day 2 outlooks , issued twice daily at <unk> and <unk> , refer to predicted risks of convective weather for the following day ( 1200Z to 1200Z of the next calendar day ; for example , a Day 2 outlook issued on April 12 , 2100 would be valid from 1200Z on April 13 , 2100 through 1200Z on April 14 , 2100 ) and include only a categorical outline , textual description , and a probability graph for severe convective storms generally . Day 2 moderate risks are fairly uncommon , and a Day 2 high risk has only been issued twice ( for April 7 , 2006 and for April 14 , 2012 ) . 
 Day 3 outlooks refer to the day after tomorrow , and include the same products ( categorical outline , text description , and probability graph ) as the Day 2 outlook . As of June 2012 , the SPC forecasts general thunderstorm risk areas . Higher probability forecasts are less and less likely as the forecast period increases due to lessening forecast ability farther in advance . Day 3 moderate risks are quite rare ; these have been issued only fourteen times since the product became operational ( most recently for May 9 , 2015 ) . Day 3 high risks are never issued and the operational standards do not allow for such . This is most likely because it would require both a very high degree of certainty ( 60 % ) for an event which was still at least 48 hours away and a reasonable level of confidence that said severe thunderstorm outbreak would include significant severe weather ( EF2 + tornadoes , hurricane @-@ force winds , and / or egg @-@ sized hail ) . 
 Day 4 – 8 outlooks are the longest @-@ term official SPC Forecast Product , and often change significantly from day to day . This extended forecast for severe weather was an experimental product until March 22 , 2007 , when the Storm Prediction Center incorporated it as an official product . Areas are delineated in this forecast that have least a 15 % or 30 % chance of severe weather in the Day 4 – 8 period ( equivalent to a slight risk and an enhanced risk , respectively ) ; as forecaster confidence is not fully resolute on how severe weather will evolve more than three days out , the Day 4 – 8 outlook only outlines the areas in which severe thunderstorms are forecast to occur during the period at the 15 % and 30 % likelihood , and does not utilize other categorical risk areas or outline where general ( non @-@ severe ) thunderstorm activity will occur . 
 Local forecast offices of the National Weather Service , radio and television stations , and emergency planners often use the forecasts to gauge the potential severe weather threats to their areas . Even after the marginal and enhanced risk categories were added in October 2014 , some television stations have continued to use the original three @-@ category system to outline forecasted severe weather risks ( though stations that do this may utilize in @-@ house severe weather outlooks that vary to some degree from the SPC convective outlooks ) , while certain others that have switched to the current system have chosen not to outline marginal risk areas . 
 Generally , the convective outlook boundaries or lines – general thunderstorms ( light green ) , marginal ( dark green ) , slight ( yellow ) , enhanced ( orange ) , moderate ( red ) and high ( purple ) – will be continued as an arrow or line not filled with color if the risk area enters another country ( Canada or Mexico ) or across waters beyond the United States coastline . This indicates that the risk for severe weather is also valid in that general area of the other side of the border or oceanic boundary . 
 = = Mesoscale discussions = = 
 SPC mesoscale discussions ( MDs ) once covered convection ( mesoscale convective discussions [ MCDs ] ) and precipitation ( mesoscale precipitation discussions [ <unk> ] ) ; <unk> are now issued by the Weather Prediction Center ( WPC ) . MCDs generally precede the issuance of a tornado or severe thunderstorm watch , by one to three hours when possible . Mesoscale discussions are designed to give local forecasters an update on a region where a severe weather threat is emerging and an indication of whether a watch is likely and details thereof , as well as situations of isolated severe weather when watches are not necessary . MCDs contain meteorological information on what is happening and what is expected to occur in the next few hours , and forecast reasoning in regard to weather watches . Mesoscale discussions are often issued to update information on watches already in effect , and sometimes when one is to be canceled . Mesoscale discussions are occasionally used as advance notice of a categorical upgrade of a scheduled convective outlook . 
 = = = Example = = = 
 = = Weather watches = = 
 Watches ( <unk> ) issued by the SPC are generally less than 20 @,@ 000 – 50 @,@ 000 square miles ( 52 @,@ 000 – 129 @,@ 000 km2 ) in area and are normally preceded by a mesoscale discussion . Watches are intended to be issued preceding the arrival of severe weather by one to six hours . They indicate that conditions are favorable for thunderstorms capable of producing various modes of severe weather , including large hail , damaging straight @-@ line winds and / or tornadoes . In the case of severe thunderstorm watches organized severe thunderstorms are expected but conditions are not thought to be especially favorable for tornadoes ( although they can occur in such areas where one is in effect , and some severe thunderstorm watch statements issued by the SPC may note a threat of isolated tornadic activity if conditions are of modest favorability for storm rotation capable of inducing them ) , whereas for tornado watches conditions are thought to be favorable for severe thunderstorms to produce tornadoes . 
 In situations where a forecaster expects a significant threat of extremely severe and life @-@ threatening weather , a watch with special enhanced wording , " Particularly Dangerous Situation " ( PDS ) , is subjectively issued . It is occasionally issued with tornado watches , normally for the potential of major tornado outbreaks , especially those with a significant threat of multiple tornadoes capable of producing F4 / EF4 and F5 / EF5 damage and / or staying on the ground for long @-@ duration – sometimes uninterrupted – paths . A PDS severe thunderstorm watch is very rare and is typically reserved for derecho events impacting densely populated areas . 
 Watches are not " warnings " , where there is an immediate severe weather threat to life and property . Although severe thunderstorm and tornado warnings are ideally the next step after watches , watches cover a threat of organized severe thunderstorms over a larger area and may not always precede a warning ; watch " busts " do sometimes occur should thunderstorm activity not occur at all or that which does develop never reaches the originally forecast level of severity . Warnings are issued by local National Weather Service offices , not the Storm Prediction Center , which is a national guidance center . 
 The process of issuing a convective watch begins with a conference call from SPC to local NWS offices . If after collaboration a watch is deemed necessary , the Storm Prediction Center will issue a watch approximation product which is followed by the local NWS office issuing a specific county @-@ based watch product . The latter product is responsible for triggering public alert messages via television , radio stations and NOAA Weather Radio . The watch approximation product outlines specific regions covered by the watch ( including the approximate outlined area in statute miles ) and its time of expiration ( based on the local time zone ( s ) of the areas under the watch ) , associated potential threats , a meteorological synopsis of atmospheric conditions favorable for severe thunderstorm development , forecasted aviation conditions , and a pre @-@ determined message informing the public of the meaning behind the watch and to be vigilant of any warnings or weather statements that may be issued by their local National Weather Service office . 
 Watch outline products provide a visual map depiction of the issued watch ; the SPC typically delineates watches within this product in the form of " boxes , " which technically are represented as either squares , rectangles ( horizontal or vertical ) or parallelograms depending on the area it covers . Jurisdictions outlined by the county @-@ based watch product as being included in the watch area may differ from the actual watch box ; as such , certain counties , parishes or boroughs not covered by the fringes of the watch box may actually be included in the watch and vice versa . Watches can be expanded , contracted ( by removing jurisdictions where SPC and NWS forecasters no longer consider there to be a viable threat of severe weather ) or canceled before their set time of expiration by local NWS offices . 
 = = = Example = = = 
 = = Fire weather products = = 
 The Storm Prediction Center also is responsible for issuing fire weather outlooks ( FWD ) for the continental United States . These outlooks are a guidance product for local , state and federal government agencies , including local National Weather Service offices , in forecasting the potential for wildfires . The outlooks issued are for Day 1 , Day 2 , and Days 3 – 8 . The Day 1 product is issued at 4 : 00 a.m. Central Time and is updated at <unk> , and is valid from 1200Z to 1200Z the following day . The Day 2 outlook is issued at <unk> and is updated at <unk> for the forecast period of 1200Z to 1200Z the following day . The Day 3 – 8 outlook is issued at <unk> , and is valid from 1200Z two days after the current calendar date to 1200Z seven days after the current calendar date . 
 There are four types of Fire Weather Outlook areas : " See Text " , a " Critical Fire Weather Area for Wind and Relative Humidity " , an " Extremely Critical Fire Weather Area for Extreme Conditions of Wind and Relative Humidity " , and a " Critical Fire Weather Area for Dry Thunderstorms " . The outlook type depends on the forecast weather conditions , severity of the predicted threat , and local climatology of a forecast region . " See Text " is a map label used for outlining areas where fire potential is great enough to pose a limited threat , but not enough to warrant a critical area , similar to areas using the same notation title that were formerly outlined in convective outlooks . Critical Fire Weather Areas for Wind and Relative Humidity are typically issued when strong winds ( > 20 mph ( 32 km / h ) ) and low relative humidity ( usually < 20 % ) are expected to occur where dried fuels exist , similar to a slight or moderate risk of severe weather . Critical Fire Weather Areas for Dry Thunderstorms are typically issued when widespread or numerous thunderstorms producing rainfall of little accumulation to provide sufficient ground wetting ( < 0 @.@ 10 inches ( 2 @.@ 5 mm ) ) are expected to occur where dried fuels exist . Extremely Critical Fire Weather Areas for Wind and Relative Humidity are issued when very strong winds and very low humidity are expected to occur with very dry fuels . Extremely Critical areas are rarely issued , similar to the very low frequency of high risk areas in convective outlooks ( see List of SPC extremely critical fire days ) . 
 = Battle of the Trench = 
 The Battle of the Trench ( Arabic : غزوة <unk> , translit . <unk> al @-@ <unk> ) also known as the Battle of the Confederates ( Arabic : غزوة الاحزاب , translit . <unk> al @-@ Ahzab ) , was a 27 @-@ day long siege of Yathrib ( now Medina ) by Arab and Jewish tribes . The strength of the confederate armies is estimated around 10 @,@ 000 men with six hundred horses and some camels , while the Medinan defenders numbered 3 @,@ 000 . The battle coincided with harsh winter weather of January / February AD 627 . 
 The largely outnumbered defenders of Medina , mainly Muslims led by Islamic prophet Muhammad , dug a trench on the suggestion of Salman Farsi , which together with Medina 's natural fortifications , rendered the confederate cavalry ( consisting of horses and camels ) useless , locking the two sides in a stalemate . Hoping to make several attacks at once , the confederates persuaded the Muslim @-@ allied Medinan Jews , Banu Qurayza , to attack the city from the south . However , Muhammad 's diplomacy derailed the negotiations , and broke up the confederacy against him . The well @-@ organised defenders , the sinking of confederate morale , and poor weather conditions caused the siege to end in a fiasco . 
 The siege was a " battle of wits " , in which the Muslims tactically overcame their opponents while suffering very few casualties . Efforts to defeat the Muslims failed , and Islam became influential in the region . As a consequence , the Muslim army besieged the area of the Banu Qurayza tribe , leading to their surrender . 
 The defeat caused the Meccans to lose their trade and much of their prestige . 
 = = Name = = 
 The battle is named after " trench " , or <unk> , that was dug by Muslims in preparation for the battle . The word <unk> ( <unk> ) is the <unk> form of the Persian word <unk> ( meaning " that which has been dug " ) . Salman the Persian advised Muhammad to dig a trench around the city . The battle is also referred to as the Battle of Confederates ( غزوة الاحزاب ) . The Qur 'an uses the term confederates ( الاحزاب ) in sura Al @-@ Ahzab [ Quran 33 : 9 – 32 ] to denote the confederacy of non @-@ believers and Jews against Islam . 
 = = Background = = 
 After their expulsion from Mecca , the Muslims fought the Meccan Quraysh at the Battle of Badr in 624 , and at the Battle of Uhud in 625 . Although the Muslims neither won nor were defeated at the Battle of Uhud , their military strength was gradually growing . In April 626 Muhammad raised a force of 300 men and 10 horses to meet the Quraysh army of 1 @,@ 000 at Badr for the second time . Although no fighting occurred , the coastal tribes were impressed with Muslim power . Muhammad also tried , with limited success , to break up many alliances against the Muslim expansion . Nevertheless , he was unable to prevent the Meccan one . 
 As they had in the battles of Badr and Uhud , the Muslim army again used strategic methods against their opponents ( at Badr , the Muslims surrounded the wells , but did not deprive their opponents of water since Ali did not want to follow the footsteps of the Meccan army ; at the Battle of Uhud , Muslims made strategic use of the hills ) . In this battle they dug a trench to render the enemy cavalry ineffective . 
 = = = Reason for battle = = = 
 The reason for this battle was to defend Medina from attack , after Banu Nadir and Banu Qaynuqa tribes formed an alliance with the Quraysh to attack him as revenge for expelling them from Medina during the Invasion of Banu Qaynuqa and Invasion of Banu Nadir . The Muslim scholar Ibn Kathir states : " The reason why the Confederates came was that a group of the leaders of the Banu Nadir , whom the Messenger of Allah had expelled from Al @-@ Madinah to Khaybar , including Sallam bin Abu Al @-@ <unk> , Sallam bin <unk> and <unk> bin Ar @-@ <unk> , went to Makkah where they met with the leaders of Quraysh and incited them to make war against the Prophet " 
 = = The Confederates = = 
 Early in 627 , the Banu Nadir met with the Quraysh of Makkah . Huyayy ibn Akhtab , along with other leaders from Khaybar , travelled to swear allegiance with Safwan ibn Umayya at Makkah . 
 The bulk of the Confederate armies were gathered by the Quraysh of Makkah , led by Abu Sufyan , who fielded 4 @,@ 000 foot soldiers , 300 horsemen , and 1 @,@ 000 – 1 @,@ 500 men on camels . 
 The Banu Nadir began rousing the nomads of Najd . The Nadir enlisted the Banu Ghatafan by paying them half of their harvest . This contingent , the second largest , added a strength of about 2 @,@ 000 men and 300 horsemen led by <unk> bin Hasan <unk> . The Bani Assad also agreed to join , led by <unk> <unk> . From the Banu Sulaym , the Nadir secured 700 men , though this force would likely have been much larger had not some of its leaders been sympathetic towards Islam . The Bani Amir , who had a pact with Muhammad , refused to join . 
 Other tribes included the Banu Murra , with 400 men led by <unk> ibn Auf Murri , and the Banu Shuja , with 700 men led by Sufyan ibn Abd Shams . In total , the strength of the Confederate armies , though not agreed upon by scholars , is estimated to have included around 10 @,@ 000 men and six hundred horsemen . In January 627 the army , which was led by Abu Sufyan , marched on Medina . 
 In accordance with the plan the armies began marching towards Medina , Meccans from the south ( along the coast ) and the others from the east . At the same time horsemen from the Banu Khuza 'a left to warn Medina of the invading army . 
 = = Muslim defence = = 
 The men from Banu Khuza 'a reached Muhammad in four days , warning him of the Confederate armies that were to arrive in a week . Muhammad gathered the Medinans to discuss the best strategy of overcoming the enemy . Meeting the enemy in the open ( which led to victory at Badr ) , and waiting for them inside the city ( a lesson learnt from the defeat at Uhud ) were both suggested . Ultimately , the outnumbered Muslims opted to engage in a defensive battle by digging deep trenches to act as a barrier along the northern front . The tactic of a defensive trench was introduced by Salman the Persian . Every capable Muslim in Medina including Muhammad contributed to digging the massive trench in six days . The ditch was dug on the northern side only , as the rest of Medina was surrounded by rocky mountains and trees , impenetrable to large armies ( especially cavalry ) . The digging of the ditch coincided with a near @-@ famine in Medina . Women and children were moved to the inner city . The Medinans harvested all their crops early , so the Confederate armies would have to rely on their own food reserves . 
 Muhammad established his military headquarters at the hillock of Sala ' and the army was arrayed there ; this position would give the Muslims an advantage if the enemy crossed the trench . 
 The final army that would defend the city from the invasion consisted of 3 @,@ 000 men , and included all inhabitants of Medina over the age of 15 , except the Banu Qurayza ( the Qurayza did supply the Muslims with some instruments for digging the trench ) . 
 = = Siege of Medina = = 
 The siege of Medina began in January 627 and lasted for 27 days . Since sieges were uncommon in Arabian warfare , the arriving confederates were unprepared to deal with the trenches dug by the Muslims . The Confederates tried to attack with horsemen in hopes of forcing a passage , but the Medinans were rigidly entrenched , preventing such a crossing . Both of the armies gathered on either side of the trench and spent two or three weeks exchanging insults in prose and verse , backed up with arrows fired from a comfortable distance . According to Rodinson , there were three dead among the attackers and five among the defenders . On the other hand , the harvest had been gathered and the besiegers had some trouble finding food for their horses , which proved of no use to them in the attack . 
 The Quraysh veterans grew impatient with the deadlock . A group of militants led by ‘ Amr ibn ‘ Abd <unk> ( who was thought to be equal to a thousand men in fighting ) and Ikrimah ibn Abi Jahl attempted to thrust through the trench and managed to effect a crossing , occupying a marshy area near the hillock of Sala . ' Amr challenged the Muslims to a duel . In response , Ali ibn Abi Talib accepted the challenge , and was sent by Muhammad to fight . Both the fighters got lost in the dust as the duel became intense . Finally , the soldiers heard scream ( s ) which hinted decisive blows , but it was unclear which of the two was successful . The slogan , ' Allahu Akbar ' ( God is the greatest ) from the dust confirmed Ali 's victory . The confederates were forced to withdraw in a state of panic and confusion . Although the Confederates lost only three men during the encounter , they failed to accomplish anything important . 
 The Confederate army made several other attempts to cross the trench during the night but repeatedly failed . Although the confederates could have deployed their infantry over the whole length of the trench , they were unwilling to engage the Muslims at close quarter as the former regarded the latter as superior in hand @-@ to @-@ hand fighting . As the Muslim army was well dug in behind the embankment made from the earth which had been taken from the ditch and prepared to bombard attackers with stones and arrows , any attack could cause great casualties . 
 = = = Banu Qurayza = = = 
 The Confederates then attempted several simultaneous attacks , in particular by trying to persuade the Banu Qurayza to attack the Muslims from the south . From the Confederates , Huyayy ibn Akhtab , a <unk> , the leader of the exiled tribe Banu Nadir , returned to Medina seeking their support against the Muslims . 
 So far the Banu Qurayza had tried their best to remain neutral , and were very hesitant about joining the Confederates since they had earlier made a pact with Muhammad . When Akhtab approached them , their leader refused to allow him entry . 
 Akhtab eventually managed to enter and persuade them that the Muslims would surely be overwhelmed . The sight of the vast Confederate armies , surging over the land with soldiers and horses as far as the eye could see , swung the Qurayza opinion in the favour of the Confederacy . 
 News of the <unk> 's supposed renunciation of the pact with Muhammad leaked out , and Umar promptly informed Muhammad . Such suspicions were reinforced by the movement of enemy troops towards the strongholds of the Qurayza . Muhammad became anxious about their conduct , and realised the grave potential danger the Qurayza posed . Because of his pact with the Qurayza , he had not bothered to make defensive preparations along the Muslims ' border with the tribe . The Qurayza also possessed weaponry : 1 @,@ 500 swords , 2 @,@ 000 lances , 300 suits of armour , and 500 shields . 
 Muhammad sent three leading Muslims to bring him details of the recent developments . He advised the men to openly declare their findings , should they find the Banu Qurayza to be loyal , so as to increase the morale of the Muslim fighters . However , he warned against spreading the news of a possible breach of the pact on the Qurayza 's part , so as to avoid any panic within Muslim ranks . 
 The leaders found that the pact indeed had been renounced and tried in vain to convince the Qurayza to revert by reminding them of the fate of the Banu Nadir and Banu Qaynuqa at the hands of Muhammad . The findings of the leaders were signalled to Muhammad in a metaphor : " Adal and <unk> " . Because the people of Adal and <unk> had betrayed the Muslims and killed them at the opportune moment , <unk> believes the metaphor means the Qurayza were thought to be about to do the same . 
 = = = Crisis in Medina = = = 
 Muhammad attempted to hide his knowledge of the activities of Banu Qurayza ; however , rumours soon spread of a massive assault on the city of Medina from Qurayza 's side which severely demoralised the Medinans . 
 The Muslims found themselves in greater difficulties by day . Food was running short , and nights were colder . The lack of sleep made matters worse . So tense was the situation that , for the first time , the canonical daily prayers were neglected by the Muslim community . Only at night , when the attacks stopped due to darkness , could they resume their regular worship . According to Ibn Ishaq , the situation became serious and fear was everywhere . 
 Quran describes the situation in <unk> Al @-@ Ahzab : 
 = = = Muslim response = = = 
 Immediately after hearing the rumours about the Qurayza , Muhammad had sent 100 men to the inner city for its protection . Later he sent 300 horsemen ( cavalry was not needed at the trench ) as well to protect the city . The loud voices , in which the troops prayed every night , created the illusion of a large force . 
 The crisis showed Muhammad that many of his men had reached the limits of their endurance . He sent word to Ghatafan , trying to pay for their defection and offering them a third of Medina 's date harvest if they withdrew . Although the Ghatafan demanded half , they eventually agreed to negotiating with Muhammad on those terms . Before Muhammad began the order of drafting the agreement , he consulted the Medinan leaders . They sharply rejected the terms of the agreement , protesting Medina had never sunk to such levels of ignominy . The negotiations were broken off . While the Ghatafan did not retreat they had compromised themselves by entering into negotiations with Medina , and the Confederacy 's internal dissension had thereby been increased . 
 At about that point , Muhammad received a visit from Nuaym ibn Masud , an Arab leader who was well respected by the entire confederacy , but who had , unknown to them , secretly converted to Islam . Muhammad asked him to end the siege by creating discord amongst Confederates . 
 Nuaym then came up with an efficient stratagem . He first went to the Banu Qurayza and warned them about the intentions of the rest of the Confederacy . If the siege fails , he said , the Confederacy will not be afraid to abandon the Jews , leaving them at the mercy of Muhammad . The Qurayza should thus demand Confederate leaders as hostages in return for cooperation . This advice touched upon the fears the Qurayza had already harboured . 
 Next Nuaym went to Abu Sufyan , the Confederate leader , warning him that the Qurayza had defected to Muhammad . He stated that the tribe intended to ask the Confederacy for hostages , ostensibly in return for cooperation , but really to hand over to Muhammad . Thus the Confederacy should not give a single man as hostage . Nuaym repeated the same message to other tribes in the Confederacy . 
 = = = Collapse of the Confederacy = = = 
 Nuaym 's stratagem worked . After consulting , the Confederate leaders sent Ikrimah to the Qurayza , signalling a united invasion of Medina . The Qurayza , however , demanded hostages as a guarantee that the Confederacy would not desert them . The Confederacy , considering that the Qurayza might give the hostage to Muhammad , refused . Messages were repeatedly sent back and forth between the parties , but each held to its position stubbornly . 
 Abu Sufyan summoned Huyayy ibn Akhtab , informing him of Qurayza 's response . Huyayy was taken aback , and Abu Sufyan branded him as a " traitor " . Fearing for his life , Huyayy fled to the Qurayza 's strongholds . 
 The Bedouins , the Ghatafan and other Confederates from Najd had already been compromised by Muhammad 's negotiations . They had taken part in the expedition in hopes of plunder , rather than any particular prejudice against Islam . They lost hope as chances of success dwindled , uninterested in continuing the siege . The two confederate armies were marked by recriminations and mutual distrust . 
 The provisions of the Confederate armies were running out . Horses and camels were dying out of hunger and wounds . For days the weather had been exceptionally cold and wet . Violent winds blew out the camp fires , taking away from the Confederate army their source of heat . The Muslim camp , however , was sheltered from such winds . The enemy ’ s tents were torn up , their fires were extinguished , the sand and rain beat in their faces , and they were terrified by the portents against them . They had already well nigh fallen out among themselves . During the night the Confederate armies withdrew , and by morning the ground was cleared of all enemy forces . 
 = = Aftermath : Siege and demise of the Banu Qurayza = = 
 Following the retreat of the Confederate army , the Banu Qurayza neighbourhoods were besieged by the Muslims , in revenge for their treachery . After a 25 @-@ day siege of their neighbourhood the Banu Qurayza unconditionally surrendered . When the Banu Qurayza tribe surrendered , the Muslim army seized their stronghold and their possessions . On the request of the Banu Aus , who were allied to the Qurayza , Muhammad chose one of them , Sa 'ad ibn Mu 'adh , as an arbitrator to pronounce judgment upon them . Sa 'ad , who would later die of his wounds from the battle , decreed the sentence according to the Torah , in which the men shall be killed and women and children enslaved . Deuteronomy 20 : 10 – 14 says : 
 When you march up to attack a city , make its people an offer of peace . If they accept and open their gates , all the people in it shall be subject to forced labor and shall work for you . If they refuse to make peace and they engage you in battle , lay siege to that city . When the Lord your God delivers it into your hand , put to the sword all the men in it . As for the women , the children , the livestock and everything else in the city , you may take these as plunder for yourselves . And you may use the plunder the Lord your God gives you from your enemies . 
 Muhammad approved of this decision , and the next day the sentence was carried out . 
 The men – numbering between 400 and 900 – were bound and placed under the custody of Muhammad ibn Maslamah , while the women and children were placed under Abdullah ibn Salam , a former rabbi who had converted to Islam . 
 Ibn Ishaq describes the killing of the Banu Qurayza men as follows : 
 Several accounts note Muhammad 's companions as executioners , Umar and Al @-@ Zubayr in particular , and that each clan of the <unk> was also charged with killing a group of Qurayza men . 
 According to Ibn Ishaq 's biography of Muhammad , one woman who had thrown a millstone from the battlements during the siege and killed one of the Muslim besiegers , was also beheaded along with the men . Ibn Asakir writes in his History of Damascus that the Banu Kilab , a clan of Arab clients of the Banu Qurayza , were also killed . 
 The spoils of battle , including the enslaved women and children of the tribe , were divided up among the Muslims that had participated in the siege and among the <unk> from Mecca ( who had hitherto depended on the help of the Muslims native to Medina . 
 As part of his share of the spoils , Muhammad selected one of the women , <unk> , for himself and took her as part of his booty . Muhammad offered to free and marry her and according to some sources she accepted his proposal , while according to others she rejected it and remained Muhammad 's slave . She is said to have later become a Muslim . 
 Scholars argue that Muhammad had already decided upon this judgment before the Qurayza 's surrender , and that Sa 'ad was putting his allegiance to the Muslim community above that to his tribe . One reason cited by some for such punishment is that Muhammad 's previous clemency towards defeated foes was in contradiction to Arab and Jewish laws of the time , and was seen as a sign of weakness . Others see the punishment as a response to what was perceived as an act of treason by the Qurayza since they betrayed their joint defence pact with Muhammad by giving aid and comfort to the enemies of the Muslims . 
 = = Implications = = 
 The failure of the siege marked the beginning of Muhammad 's undoubted political ascendancy in the city of Medina . The Meccans had exerted their utmost strength to dislodge Muhammad from Medina , and this defeat caused them to lose their trade with Syria and much of their prestige with it . Watt conjectures that the Meccans at this point began to contemplate that conversion to Islam would be the most prudent option . 
 = = Islamic primary sources = = 
 = = = Quran = = = 
 The main contemporary source of the battle is the 33rd Surah of the Quran . The most trustworthy source for the reconstruction of the life of the historical Muhammad is the Quran . 
 The Sunni Muslim Mufassir Ibn Kathir mentions that [ Quran 33 : 10 – 22 ( Translated by Yusuf Ali ) ] is about this incident in his book Tafsir ibn Kathir , and his commentary on this verse mentions the reason and event of the Battle , his commentary is as follows : 
 = = = Hadith = = = 
 The event is referenced in the Sunni , Hadith collection Sahih al @-@ Bukhari , it mentions the death of Sa 'd ibn Mu 'adh , as follows : 
 The Sahih al @-@ Bukhari collection also mentions that after the battle , Muslims were to carry out offensive attacks against their enemies : 
 The event is also mentioned in the Sahih Muslim Hadith collection as follows : 
 = = = Biographical literature = = = 
 The incident also is mentioned in the historical works by writers of the third and fourth century of the Muslim era . These include the traditional Muslim biographies of Muhammad , and quotes attributed to him ( the sira and hadith literature ) , which provide further information on Muhammad 's life . The earliest surviving written sira ( biographies of Muhammad and quotes attributed to him ) is Ibn Ishaq 's Life of God 's Messenger written some 120 to 130 years after Muhammad 's death . Although the original work is lost , portions of it survive in the recensions of Ibn Hisham and Al @-@ Tabari . Another early source is the history of Muhammad 's campaigns by al @-@ Waqidi ( d . 823 ) . 
 = Tropical Storm Claudette ( 2009 ) = 
 Tropical Storm Claudette was the third named storm of the 2009 Atlantic hurricane season and the first tropical cyclone of 2009 to affect the United States . Forming out of a tropical wave and an upper @-@ level low pressure system on August 16 , Claudette quickly intensified into a tropical storm offshore south of Tallahassee , Florida . By the afternoon , the storm had attained winds of 60 mph ( 95 km / h ) and steadily tracked towards the Florida Panhandle . Early on August 17 , the center of Claudette made landfall on Santa Rosa Island . Several hours after landfall , the storm weakened to a tropical depression and the Hydrometeorological Prediction Center took over primary responsibility of the storm . Later on August 17 , the final public advisory was issued on the system as it dissipated over Alabama . 
 The National Hurricane Center issued tropical storm warnings for the coastline and residents in some counties were advised to evacuate storm @-@ surge @-@ prone areas . One fatality resulted from rough seas off the coast of Panama City , Florida . Later that day , another man drowned after falling off his ship near Bay County . An EF @-@ 0 tornado spawned by the storm in Cape Coral , Florida damaged 11 homes , leaving $ 103 @,@ 000 ( 2009 USD ) in damages . Additional damages to coastal property and beaches amounted to $ 125 @,@ 000 ( 2009 USD ) as a result of Claudette . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 Tropical Storm Claudette originated from a tropical wave that moved off the west coast of Africa on August 7 . On August 11 , the National Hurricane Center ( NHC ) began monitoring the wave when it was located roughly 600 mi ( 965 km ) east of the Lesser Antilles . Disorganized shower and thunderstorm activity was associated with the westward moving wave ; however , the NHC did not anticipate further development of the system . By the afternoon of August 12 , little convective activity remained with the wave . Strong upper @-@ level wind shear created an unfavorable environment for the system to re @-@ organize as it tracked through the eastern Caribbean Sea . 
 By August 15 , convection began to consolidate around the center of the system as it passed over the Florida Keys . Early on August 16 , the system rapidly organized , with a low @-@ level circulation developing roughly 80 mi ( 130 km ) southwest of Tampa , Florida . Favorable environmental conditions led to the NHC anticipating the system to develop into a tropical depression later that day . Several hours later , the first advisory was issued on Tropical Depression Four . Low wind shear provided an environment that promoted quick development of the cyclone and the storm was forecast to attain tropical storm status within 12 hours . The depression tracked northwest around the periphery of a subtropical ridge to the east . Around 11 : 00 am EDT , the NHC upgraded the depression to a tropical storm and gave it the name Claudette in light of information from the NEXRAD Doppler weather radar in Tallahassee , Florida that found winds of 40 mph ( 65 km / h ) around the center of circulation . 
 During the afternoon of August 16 , a brief increase in wind shear due to a trough over the southeastern United States , caused the center to become exposed . Despite this , Claudette attained its peak winds of 60 mph ( 95 km / h ) around this time . Around 1 : 10 am EDT ( <unk> UTC ) on August 17 , the storm made landfall near the eastern end of Santa Rosa Island with winds of 45 mph ( 85 km / h ) . Shortly thereafter , the barometric pressure decreased to 1005 mbar ( hPa ; 29 @.@ 68 inHg ) , the lowest pressure recorded in associated with the storm . Several hours after landfall , convection associated with the storm quickly decreased and by 8 : 00 am EDT , the NHC issued their final advisory on Claudette as it weakened to a tropical depression . At this time , the Hydrometeorological Prediction Center ( HPC ) began issuing advisories on the system . The HPC issued their final advisory late on August 17 as the remnants of Claudette began to dissipate over Alabama . The remnants persisted for several more hours before becoming indistinguishable over Mississippi , on August 18 . 
 = = Preparations = = 
 Upon being classified a tropical depression , the National Hurricane Center issued a tropical storm warning for areas between the Alabama @-@ Florida border and the mouth of the Suwanee River . Residents in these areas were urged to quickly prepare for the storm by ensuring their hurricane kit was fully stocked and ready . East of the center of Claudette , along western Florida , residents were warned about possible heavy rainfall that could cause flooding . Storm surge near where the storm was forecast to make landfall was expected to reach 3 to 5 ft ( 0 @.@ 91 to 1 @.@ 52 m ) . Residents in areas of Wakulla County prone to storm surge were urged to evacuate before the arrival of the storm by the Wakulla County Emergency Management Office . Shortly after 3 : 00 pm EDT , the National Weather Service in Mobile , Alabama issued a tropical storm wind warning for areas between Destin , Florida and Pascagoula , Mississippi . A flood watch was also issued for most of the Florida Panhandle , as rainfall from Claudette was anticipated to exceed 7 in ( 180 mm ) . An inland tropical storm warning was also issued for most of southeastern Alabama . 
 During the afternoon of August 16 , officials issued a mandatory evacuation order for residents in St. Joseph Peninsula State Park and Stone State Park on Cape San Blas in Gulf County , Florida . Two shelters were opened in Bay County , one at the Dean Bozeman High School and the other at Bozeman Learning Center . Voluntary evacuation orders were also given to residents living in low @-@ lying areas along the coastline . Although no plans were put in place to open shelters , the Emergency Operations Center in Washington County raised their activation level to stage two . In Franklin County , the Emergency Operations Center was placed at stage three and voluntary evacuation orders were issued for Alligator Point . After an afternoon briefing , officials in Walton County declared a State of Emergency based on available information on the storm . In Wakulla County , the American Red Cross opened a shelter in Crawfordville at a local church . 
 = = Impact = = 
 = = = Florida = = = 
 By the evening of August 16 , upwards of 1 @.@ 71 in ( 43 mm ) of rain had fallen in parts of Franklin County . In Apalachicola , a daily record of 3 @.@ 57 in ( 91 mm ) of rain fell on August 16 , surpassing the previous record set in 1931 . However , with an exception of a tree falling across U.S. Route 98 , no damage was caused to Apalachicola . By the dissipation of the storm , a maximum of 5 @.@ 62 in ( 143 mm ) of rain fell in Big <unk> Key . 
 A tornado was reported near Cape Coral and multiple tornado warnings were issued for Florida in association with rain bands from the storm . Twenty @-@ three homes were damaged by the tornado in Cape Coral . Damages to 11 out of 23 of the homes from the tornado amounted to roughly $ 103 @,@ 000 . Florida Governor Charlie Crist briefly toured the damage from the tornado . The tornado was later rated EF @-@ 0 on the Enhanced Fujita Scale with winds between 70 and 80 mph ( 110 and 120 km / h ) . The National Weather Service also stated that the tornado was on the ground for 0 @.@ 35 mi ( 0 @.@ 56 km ) between 4 : 42 pm and 4 : 45 pm EDT . 
 One drowning was reported off Panama City , Florida . By the early evening , officials closed down a 1 mi ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) segment of Highway 20 due to a fallen tree and power line . In Leon County , a total of 440 residences lost power . By 9 : 40 pm EDT , the highway was reopened and power to all 440 homes was restored . Other power outages were reported near Parker and in downtown Panama City . Roughly 500 residences were left without power in Walton County . 
 In Okaloosa County , up to 1 @,@ 267 residents lost power during the storm . Most of the residents had their power restored within a few hours ; however , due to continuing wind damage , scattered power outages , affecting up to 500 homes at a time , occurred throughout the county . Throughout the county , roughly $ 25 @,@ 000 was sustained in flood losses . A second fatality occurred after a man was knocked off his ship near the coast of Bay County . Rescuers managed to reach him but during the rescue , he fell off the life raft and was lost . The search was later called off as he was presumed dead . 
 Along the coastline , waves produced by Claudette resulted in the loss of 30 to 40 ft ( 9 @.@ 1 to 12 @.@ 2 m ) of sand in coastal areas of Bay , Walton , Franklin and Gulf counties . An estimated $ 100 @,@ 000 worth of sand was lost in all four counties . A maximum storm surge of 2 @.@ 3 ft ( 0 @.@ 70 m ) was recorded in Destin as the storm made landfall . In all , two people were killed throughout the state and damages amounted to $ 228 @,@ 000 . 
 = = = Elsewhere = = = 
 Upon making landfall , flash flood watches were issued for parts of southern Alabama due to the threat of heavy rainfall . In the state , Claudette produced widespread moderate rainfall , peaking at 2 @.@ 11 in ( 54 mm ) in Bradley . Some areas received up to 2 in ( 51 mm ) in a two @-@ hour span , prompting the National Weather Service to issue flash flood warnings . Flash flood watches were also issued for Hale , Sumter and Perry counties . The remnants of Claudette created a very moist atmosphere in parts of Alabama , resulting in several days of afternoon thunderstorms . Some of these thunderstorms produced gusty winds , recorded up to 45 mph ( 75 km / h ) in Jefferson County . In Rainbow City , lightning struck an apartment building , sparking a fire and leading to the evacuation of two units of the building . Damage from the fire was estimated at $ 20 @,@ 000 . In Georgia , outer bands of the storm also a maximum of 2 @.@ 37 in ( 60 mm ) at Fort Benning . 
 = Revanta = 
 Revanta or <unk> ( Sanskrit : <unk> ् त , lit . " brilliant " ) is a minor Hindu deity . According to the Rig @-@ Veda , Revanta is the youngest son of the sun @-@ god Surya , and his wife Sanjna ( Saranya ) . Revanta is chief of the Guhyakas ( <unk> ् <unk> ) , semi @-@ divine and demonic class entities – like the Yakshas – who are believed to live as forest dwellers in the Himalayas . Images and sculptures of Revanta often show him as a huntsman on a horse , with a bow and arrow . 
 = = Origins = = 
 Revanta is the brother of the <unk> the God of healing and son of the Sun God . 
 = = Legends = = 
 The tale of Revanta 's birth is narrated in scriptures like Vishnu Purana and Markandeya Purana . Once , Sanjna , the daughter of celestial architect <unk> and wife of Surya , unable to take the fervour of the Sun @-@ god , repaired to the forests to engage in devout austerities in the form of a mare . She placed her shadow Chhaya , who looked just like Sanjna in her position as Surya 's wife . When Surya realised that Chhaya was not the real Sanjna , he searched for Sanjna and finally found her in the forests of Uttar Kuru . There , Surya approached Sanjna disguised as a horse . Their union produced the twin @-@ <unk> and Revanta . In Kurma Purana and Matsya Purana , the mother of Revanta is named Rajni , another wife of Surya . While in another chapter of Markandeya Purana , he is son of Chhaya and his brothers are the Saturn @-@ god Shani and <unk> Manu . 
 Markandeya Purna further adds he was assigned the duty as chief of Guhyakas by Surya and to protect mortals " amid the terrors of forests and other lonely places , of great conflagration , of enemies and robbers . " Sometimes , Revanta is depicted as combating robbers in reliefs . 
 Another tale from the Devi Bhagavata Purana has a passing reference to Revanta . Once when Revanta – riding on the seven headed horse <unk> – went to Vishnu 's abode , Vishnu 's wife goddess Lakshmi was mesmerized with the horse and ignored a question asked by the Lord . Thus , she was cursed by her husband to become a mare . 
 = = Iconography = = 
 Markandeya Purana describes Revanta as " holding a sword and bow , clad in an armour , riding on horseback , and carrying arrows and a quiver " . Kalika Purana describes him carrying a sword in right hand and a whip in his left , seated on a white horse . Thus he is called Haya @-@ <unk> , one who rides a horse . <unk> describes him as accompanied by attendants for hunting . 
 In sculpture , Revanta is often depicted with the Guhyakas , whose chief he is , in scenes of hunting . Apart from the attributes described in texts like the sword , bow ; he sometimes also carries a cup of wine in his hand . Revanta is often depicted wearing long boots reaching up to the calves , unlike other Hindu divinities – except Surya – who are depicted barefoot . Revanta is depicted seated on a horse and accompanied by a hunting dog . Revanta 's attendants are depicted with various hunting weapons like lances and swords . Some of them are shown blowing a conch or beaming drums or holding an umbrella over the head of their lord , the umbrella being the symbol of royalty . Also , some of them are depicted as flying or holding wine or water jars . Sometimes , an attendant carries a dead boar in his shoulder or the dog chasing a boar . 
 = = Worship = = 
 Revanta was worshipped as guardian deity of warriors and horses , protector from the dangers of forests and the patron god of hunting . The worship of Revanta is closely associated with Saura , cult of Surya . Often , scriptures like Vishnudharmottara Purana and Kalika Purana recommend worship of Revanta alongside Surya or according to the rituals of Sun worship . <unk> @-@ kalpa @-@ <unk> records Revanta 's worship after Surya 's , in the Hindu month of Ashvin by warriors . <unk> , the fourth Pandava , is believed to have written <unk> on horses . He suggests worship of <unk> to protect horses from ghosts . 
 The worship of Revanta was popular in the early @-@ mediaeval period , particularly in Rajasthan . Revanta is mostly depicted in Vaishnava and Surya temples . There is a stone inscription that talks about a temple to Revanta , as the principal deity , in <unk> ( modern <unk> , Madhya Pradesh ) built by the Kalachuri king <unk> II . 
 = James D. Ramage = 
 James D. " Jig Dog " Ramage ( 19 July 1916 – 21 July 2012 ) was a naval aviator in World War II and a major factor in putting nuclear @-@ capable aircraft aboard aircraft carriers . Before retirement he attained the rank of rear admiral . 
 A graduate of the United States Naval Academy class of 1939 , he served on the aircraft carrier USS Enterprise before being sent to the Naval Air Station Pensacola for flight training . He rejoined the Enterprise in 1943 , and became executive officer , and later commanding officer of Bombing Squadron Ten ( VB @-@ 10 ) , flying the SBD Dauntless dive bomber . He saw his first combat in the Battle of Kwajalein in January 1944 , and participated in the attack on Truk in February and landings at Hollandia in April . During the Battle of the Philippine Sea in June 1944 , he led 12 Dauntlesses and 17 other aircraft from Enterprise in a maximum @-@ range twilight attack against the Japanese fleet , and was personally credited with crippling a Japanese aircraft carrier , probably the Ryūhō . He later commanded Bombing Squadron Ninety @-@ Eight ( VB @-@ 98 ) , a California @-@ based training unit . 
 After the war , Ramage attended the first postwar class at the Naval War College , where he wrote a thesis on nuclear weapons and carrier aviation . He became the navigator of the escort carrier USS Bairoko , and participated in Operation Sandstone at Enewetak Atoll in April and May 1948 . In March 1950 , Ramage went to Sandia Base , where he was assigned to the Armed Forces Special Weapons Project ( AFSWP ) , writing and reviewing nuclear war plans . After becoming jet qualified in F9F Panther , he assumed command of Carrier Air Group 19 , which embarked for Korea on the USS Oriskany . He then assumed command of VC @-@ 3 , a large composite squadron that acted as a transitional training unit . He became chief of the Sea Base Striking Forces Planning Unit ( OP @-@ 05W ) in the Office of the Chief of Naval Operations in Washington , DC in June 1955 , and then entered the National War College in July 1957 . After graduating a year later , he assumed command of Heavy Attack Wing One , and then of the seaplane tender , USS Salisbury Sound . He returned to the Office of the Chief of Naval Operations as head of Special Weapons Plans in 1961 , and in 1963 , received command of an aircraft carrier , the USS Independence . 
 As a flag officer , he was Commander Fleet Air NAS Whidbey Island , Commander Carrier Division Seven during the Vietnam War , Commander Naval Air Reserve , and Commander Tenth Naval District / Caribbean Sea Frontier / Commander Fleet Air Caribbean from 1973 to 1975 . He retired from active duty in 1975 . He was involved in the ultimately successful campaign to rename Waterloo 's <unk> Civic Center as the Five Sullivan Brothers Convention Center , in honor of the Sullivan brothers , and appeared in The History Channel series Battle 360 , in which he recounted many of his experiences as a member of VB @-@ 10 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 James David Ramage was born in Waterloo , Iowa , on 19 July 1916 , the son of David S. and Flora <unk> Ramage . He had an older half @-@ sister Mary from his mother 's first marriage , and a younger sister , Betty . His father was a machinist by trade , who arrived in Waterloo as a salesman . He became a farmer , but lost the farm during the Great Depression . He then worked at the Waterloo Trust and Savings Bank until it failed , and then ran a Maxwell and Chalmers car dealership . Ramage was educated in Waterloo at Francis Grout , McKinley School and finally East Waterloo High . In 1934 , he entered Iowa State Teachers College in Cedar Falls , Iowa . That year , he was nominated for the United States Naval Academy at Annapolis , Maryland , by the local U.S. Representative , John W. Gwynne , as an alternative candidate . The 1934 Vinson @-@ Trammell Act created additional vacancies at the Academy , and Ramage was appointed . 
 At the Academy , he acquired the nickname " Jig Dog " from the phonetic alphabet for his initials . He graduated from the Academy and was commissioned as an ensign on 1 June 1939 . At his request , was posted to the aircraft carrier USS Enterprise , which was then based in Hawaii , as a deck officer . Through some crewmates , he met Orville Tyler , the Vice President of Bishop Bank . Ramage married his daughter , <unk> Tyler , on 4 September 1941 , before leaving for flight training at the Naval Air Station Pensacola in Florida . 
 = = World War II = = 
 The United States entered World War II while Ramage was in training at Pensacola , learning to fly on <unk> , <unk> and finally <unk> . On graduation in May 1942 , he was posted to VS @-@ 3 , a scouting squadron . He was promoted to lieutenant ( junior grade ) on 1 June 1942 , and lieutenant on 1 August 1942 . He returned to Hawaii , where he was assigned to the cruiser USS Salt Lake City in November . After some effort , he managed to get himself reassigned to the Enterprise . 
 Ramage reported to the Enterprise in Noumea in February 1943 . After qualifying to land on a carrier in Noumea in April 1943 , he was assigned to Bombing Squadron Ten ( VB @-@ 10 ) , one of the carrier 's two dive bomber squadrons flying the Douglas SBD Dauntless as its executive officer . Shortly afterwards , the Enterprise returned to Pearl Harbor for overhaul , and Ramage returned to the United States with his wife . The squadrons of Carrier Air Group 10 , of which VB @-@ 10 was a part , were reequipped with new aircraft , with VB @-@ 10 receiving new SBD @-@ 5s to replace its older SBD @-@ 3 models . Air Group 10 returned to Hawaii in November 1943 , and the whole group qualified for night operation , making two night landings on the Enterprise in January 1944 . Ramage saw his first combat in the Battle of Kwajalein in January 1944 , and participated in the attack on Truk in February and landings at Hollandia in April . He became commander of VB @-@ 10 in March . 
 On the evening of June 20 , 1944 , during the Battle of the Philippine Sea , Ramage led 12 Dauntlesses , 12 Grumman F6F Hellcats and 5 Grumman TBF Avenger torpedo bombers from Enterprise in the maximum @-@ range attack against the Japanese fleet . He later recalled : 
 Shortly , our strike group was picked up by the Japanese combat air patrol . Cawley informed me that there were several Zeros on our port quarter , high . Each time they would commence a run on the base element , our Air Group Commander , " Killer " Kane , would nose into them with his <unk> . The Japanese would break off the attack . They had decided to wait until our most vulnerable time , the point of roll into the attack . At that time the bomber and torpedo formation integrity would be broken as each pilot made his dive . Bombing Squadron Ten did not dive from an echelon . Rather , during the high speed run @-@ in , the wingman gradually drifted back until the division leader rolled in . This preserved the " V " formation for as long as possible , permitting the gunners to concentrate on an attack from the rear from either side . It was standard procedure for the low fighter cover to strafe ahead of the base element , and the high cover to strafe behind . The fighters would proceed to the rendezvous point to provide cover for the aircraft of the base element as they rejoined and formed a defensive formation . 
 The Japanese fleet was easy to locate ; there were black AA puffs over a wide area – also some colored detonations . Soon , I could make out two carriers below and to port . It was just as we had been briefed . I took the closest carrier and Bangs ' division took the second carrier in the middle task group . Eason 's torpedo planes split between the two . The TBFs carried four 500 @-@ lb general purpose bombs , while the SBDs each carried one 1000 @-@ lb bomb : half general purpose and half semi armor piercing . 
 As I rolled in , I had a fine view of the carrier . I split my dive brakes at about 10 @,@ 000 feet . Shortly thereafter I could hear Cawley 's twin thirties chattering ; then I looked over to the right and within five feet of me , passing below , was a Zero . The dive brakes had thrown him off aim . My dive was a good , standard 70 ° attack . At about 5000 feet I opened up with my two 50 @-@ caliber machine guns . The tracers were going directly into the forward elevator . The carrier was steaming into the wind . Allowing for the wind and target motion , I moved the <unk> to just ahead of the bow of the carrier , and released at 1800 feet . 
 My First Division plus Van Eason 's five TBMs dove on <unk> . Bang 's six plane division , upon sighting a third carrier , split into two sections with Bang 's diving on Hiyo and <unk> ' section attacking Junyo . There is still doubt about which section hit which carrier . All three carriers in <unk> Two were covered . None returned to battle during the war . Hiyo was sunk , and the damaged Junyo and <unk> were broken up two years after the war in a Japanese shipyard . You will note that other U.S. squadrons registered hits on Carrier Division 2 as well . 
 I pulled out , easing down to about 300 feet and was immediately taken under fire by all sorts of ships – battleships , cruisers , and destroyers . Cawley yelled into his mike , " Skipper , look back . She 's burning from asshole to appetite ! " About that time there was so much stuff being thrown up at us that I just couldn 't look back . Cawley then began telling me to climb or descend , depending on where the AA was aimed . We pulled out to the eastward . As soon as I was clear of the Japanese outer screen , I started a gentle turn to the left . It was about 1930 and beginning to get dark . I shortly had six of my birds , then three more . Several Zeros were about to make a run on us , but Kane 's fighters shot down four or five . After three orbits , I knew that we 'd have to start back to the task force . As I gave the hand signal indicating that we were squared away on our return course , we began to pick up all sorts of stragglers . As soon as they picked up our heading they added throttle and left us . They weren 't going to get stuck with the SBD 's 150 @-@ knot cruise speed . 
 He was personally credited with crippling a Japanese aircraft carrier , which naval historian Barrett Tillman believes was the Ryūhō . Ramage made a slow and deliberate return to the Enterprise in order to conserve fuel , but on reaching it found that its deck was obstructed by a crashed aircraft , and he had to land on the USS Yorktown instead . Only one Enterprise plane was lost in combat , although five more were lost operationally through accidents , crash landings or <unk> at sea . Only one of these was an SBD . For his part in the battle , Ramage was awarded the Navy 's second highest honor , the Navy Cross . His citation read : 
 for extraordinary heroism in operations against the enemy while serving as Pilot of a carrier @-@ based Navy Dive Bomber and Flight Leader in Bombing Squadron Ten ( VB @-@ 10 ) , attached to the USS Enterprise ( CV @-@ 6 ) , in action against enemy Japanese forces in the vicinity of the Marianas Islands from June 12 to 20 June 1944 . An aggressive combat pilot , Lieutenant Commander Ramage led his squadron with consistent skill and daring on numerous bombing missions in the Marianas and , striking repeatedly against strongly defended military objectives , inflicted costly and excessive damage upon the enemy 's defenses and ground installations . Acting as air coordinator on June 15 and 16 , he directed brilliant attacks of all squadrons in support of the landings of our ground forces in their initial advance against the enemy . Taking off with three divisions of his squadron on 20 June he led a fierce attack against enemy carriers , personally diving upon a medium @-@ sized carrier and scoring a hit on the stern of the enemy vessel . By his expert airmanship , exceptional daring and courageous initiative , Lieutenant Commander Ramage contributed essentially to the success of our operations in this strategic area , and his great personal valor in the face of grave peril was in keeping with the highest traditions of the United States Naval Service . 
 The superior performance of the Lexington and Enterprise squadrons that were still equipped with the old SBD compared with those equipped with the new Curtiss SB2C Helldiver caused great concern , and serious consideration was given to going back to the old aircraft . For this tour of duty , in addition to the Navy Cross , Ramage was awarded the Distinguished Flying Cross twice and the Air Medal six times . In September 1944 , Ramage received his last wartime assignment , as commanding officer of Bombing Squadron Ninety Eight VB @-@ 98 , a California @-@ based training unit . He remained with VB @-@ 98 until July 1946 . 
 = = Post @-@ war = = 
 After the war , Ramage applied for the first postwar class at the Naval War College . He wrote two theses , one on the possibility of future conflict with the Soviet Union , and the other on nuclear weapons and carrier aviation . This would eventually lead to new prospects , but on graduation Ramage could not obtain another flying assignment , and instead was posted to the escort carrier USS Bairoko as its navigator . In this capacity , he participated in Operation Sandstone at Enewetak Atoll in April and May 1948 . In July , he was assigned to <unk> as a personnel officer . 
 In March 1950 , Ramage went to Sandia Base , where he attended an indoctrination course on nuclear weapons . In June was assigned to the Armed Forces Special Weapons Project ( AFSWP ) , and was promoted to commander in July . While waiting for his Q clearance , he was put in charge of a board investigating a crash of an AJ Savage , then the Navy 's frontline nuclear bomber , an aircraft that did not impress Ramage . After his clearance came through , he worked in the AFSWP 's Operations Division , writing and reviewing war plans . 
 After becoming jet qualified in F9F Panthers at the Fleet Air Gunnery Unit ( <unk> ) , Ramage assumed command of Carrier Air Group 19 in December 1952 . His squadrons carrier qualified on the USS Yorktown in June 1953 before embarking on the USS Oriskany . The ship sailed for Korea , where a ceasefire had been in effect since July 1953 . Alan Shepard flew as his wing man . At the end of this cruise in June 1954 , he assumed command of VC @-@ 3 , a large composite squadron that acted as a transitional training unit at Naval Air Station Miramar in California . He became chief of the Sea Base Striking Forces Planning Unit ( OP @-@ 05W ) in the Office of the Chief of Naval Operations in Washington , DC in June 1955 , and then entered the National War College in July 1957 , where he was promoted to captain on 1 August . Once again he produced a dissertation on nuclear weapons . 
 On graduating a year later , Ramage once again expressed a preference for a flying job , so he received command of Heavy Attack Wing One , which was based at the Naval Air Station Sanford . This wing consisted of the nuclear attack squadrons flying the A3D Skywarrior , detachments from which were posted to the aircraft carriers . The post was a senior one for a captain ; Robert <unk> had held the post while he was a rear admiral . Ramage had never flown the A3D before , so he started by becoming carrier qualified on it , which required eight carrier landings . To his surprise , he found that the aircraft was easy to fly , and he was successful at lifting the training level of the entire wing . 
 Still too junior to be considered for command of an aircraft carrier , he received command of a seaplane tender , USS Salisbury Sound . He then returned to the Office of the Chief of Naval Operations as head of Special Weapons Plans ( OP @-@ 604 ) in July 1961 . He was awarded a Master of Arts degree from George Washington University in 1963 . In July 1963 , he received command of an aircraft carrier , the USS Independence . Despite having limited experience with ships , Ramage had no trouble adjusting to commanding one . He never felt though , that commanding a ship was an enjoyable as flying an aircraft . The ship won the Arleigh Burke award for most improved crew . Around this time , his marriage broke up , and he became divorced . He was remarried in Rome on 14 August 1964 , to Virginia ( Ginger ) <unk> Cordes . She had two children , Randy and Karen Cordes . 
 Returning to shore duty in Washington , he was assigned to Joint Task Force 2 , which was charged by Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara with investigating whether it was necessary to have aircraft that could fly at low altitude at supersonic speeds . This was the subject of considerable debate between the Navy and the Air Force at the time . Tests were carried out at Sandia Base with the OV @-@ 1 Mohawk , A @-@ 1 Skyraider , A @-@ 4 Skyhawk , A @-@ 6 Intruder , F @-@ 4 Phantom , F @-@ 105 Thunderchief , B @-@ 52 and B @-@ 58 Hustler aircraft . 
 In January 1966 , he became chief of staff of Carrier Division Seven , which was commanded by Rear Admiral James R. Reedy , flying his flag from the aircraft carrier USS Kitty Hawk . This formed part of Task Force 77 , which was cruising off the North Vietnamese coast at Yankee Station during the Vietnam War . North Vietnam was divided into Route Packages , which allotted certain areas to the Navy , and Ramage 's role was to coordinate the Navy 's part in Operation Rolling Thunder . For this he was awarded the Legion of Merit . He also spent a brief time as commander of the aircraft carrier USS Franklin D. Roosevelt after its skipper had a heart attack . 
 Ramage was promoted to rear admiral on 1 July 1967 . As a flag officer , became Commander Fleet Air NAS Whidbey Island , another training command , this time specializing on the A @-@ 6 Intruder . His tenure was short , for in April he was assigned to the staff of the Commander @-@ in @-@ Chief , U.S. Pacific Command ( CINCPAC ) , Admiral U. S. Grant Sharp , Jr . , which was responsible for the overall direction of the war in Vietnam . For his service at CINCPAC , Ramage was awarded the Navy Distinguished Service Medal . In 1970 , he assumed command of Carrier Division Seven , which was still off the coast of Vietnam . For this , he was awarded a second and third Legion of Merit . 
 In April 1972 , Ramage became Commander Naval Air Reserve , based at Naval Air Station Glenview in Illinois , for which he received a fourth Legion of Merit . His final assignment was as Commander Tenth Naval District , Caribbean Sea Frontier and Commander Fleet Air Caribbean from 12 June 1973 to 23 August 1975 . He retired from active duty in January 1976 . 
 = = Later life = = 
 Ramage was a member of the Carrier Aviation Hall of Fame , and in 2006 , was inducted into the American Combat Airman Hall of Fame in Midland , Texas . In May 2008 he was inducted into the Hall of Honor at the National Naval Museum in Pensacola , Florida . He was involved in the ultimately successful campaign to rename Waterloo 's <unk> Civic Center as the Five Sullivan Brothers Convention Center , in honor of the Sullivan brothers , five brothers from Waterloo who died when the USS Juneau was lost during World War II . In 2008 , Ramage appeared in The History Channel series Battle 360 and recounted many of his experiences as a member of VB @-@ 10 . 
 On 21 July 2012 , he died at his Coronado , California , home of congenital heart failure , and was buried at Fort Rosecrans National Cemetery in San Diego . He was survived by his daughters Jamie and <unk> , and his step daughter Karen . He had four grandchildren and four great grandchildren . A scholarship was established by the Tailhook Educational Foundation in his honor . 
 = = Jig Dog Ramage Award = = 
 In 2001 , the Tailhook Association established the annual " Jig Dog " Ramage Award to recognize the air wing @-@ aircraft carrier team with the best performance as an integrated unit and excellence in Navy carrier operations . 
 = Selenium = 
 Selenium is a chemical element with symbol Se and atomic number 34 . It is a nonmetal with properties that are intermediate between the elements above and below in the periodic table , sulfur and tellurium . It rarely occurs in its elemental state or as pure ore compounds in the Earth 's crust . Selenium ( Greek <unk> selene meaning " Moon " ) was discovered in 1817 by Jöns Jacob Berzelius , who noted the similarity of the new element to the previously discovered tellurium ( named for the Earth ) . 
 Selenium is found in metal sulfide ores , where it partially replaces the sulfur . Commercially , selenium is produced as a byproduct in the refining of these ores , most often during production . Minerals that are pure selenide or selenate compounds are known but rare . The chief commercial uses for selenium today are glassmaking and pigments . Selenium is a semiconductor and is used in photocells . Applications in electronics , once important , have been mostly supplanted by silicon semiconductor devices . Selenium is still used in a few types of DC power surge protectors and one type of fluorescent quantum dot . 
 Selenium salts are toxic in large amounts , but trace amounts are necessary for cellular function in many organisms , including all animals . Selenium is an ingredient in many <unk> and other dietary supplements , including infant formula . It is a component of the antioxidant enzymes glutathione peroxidase and thioredoxin reductase ( which indirectly reduce certain oxidized molecules in animals and some plants ) . It is also found in three deiodinase enzymes , which convert one thyroid hormone to another . Selenium requirements in plants differ by species , with some plants requiring relatively large amounts and others apparently requiring none . 
 = = Characteristics = = 
 = = = Physical properties = = = 
 Selenium forms several allotropes that <unk> with temperature changes , depending somewhat on the rate of temperature change . When prepared in chemical reactions , selenium is usually an amorphous , brick @-@ red powder . When rapidly melted , it forms the black , vitreous form , usually sold commercially as beads . The structure of black selenium is irregular and complex and consists of polymeric rings with up to 1000 atoms per ring . Black Se is a brittle , lustrous solid that is slightly soluble in CS2 . Upon heating , it softens at 50 ° C and converts to gray selenium at 180 ° C ; the transformation temperature is reduced by presence of halogens and amines . 
 The red α , β , and γ forms are produced from solutions of black selenium by varying the evaporation rate of the solvent ( usually CS2 ) . They all have relatively low , monoclinic crystal symmetries and contain nearly identical puckered Se8 rings with different arrangements , as in sulfur . The packing is most dense in the α form . In the Se8 rings , the Se @-@ Se distance is 233 @.@ 5 pm and Se @-@ Se @-@ Se angle is 105 @.@ 7 ° . Other selenium allotropes may contain <unk> or <unk> rings . 
 The most stable and dense form of selenium is gray and has a hexagonal crystal lattice consisting of helical polymeric chains , where the Se @-@ Se distance is 237 @.@ 3 pm and Se @-@ Se @-@ Se angle is 130 @.@ 1 ° . The minimum distance between chains is 343 @.@ 6 pm . Gray Se is formed by mild heating of other allotropes , by slow cooling of molten Se , or by condensing Se vapor just below the melting point . Whereas other Se forms are insulators , gray Se is a semiconductor showing appreciable <unk> . Unlike the other allotropes , it is insoluble in CS2 . It resists oxidation by air and is not attacked by <unk> acids . With strong reducing agents , it forms polyselenides . Selenium does not exhibit the changes in viscosity that sulfur undergoes when gradually heated . 
 = = = Isotopes = = = 
 Selenium has six naturally occurring isotopes . Synthetic isotope <unk> and 23 others have been identified : 
 <unk> is stable , for all practical purposes . See also Selenium @-@ 79 for recent changes in the measured half @-@ life of <unk> , which are important for the dose calculations in the geological disposal of long @-@ lived radioactive waste . 
 = = Chemical compounds = = 
 Selenium compounds commonly exist in the oxidation states − 2 , + 2 , + 4 , and + 6 . 
 = = = Chalcogen compounds = = = 
 Selenium forms two oxides : selenium dioxide ( SeO2 ) and selenium trioxide ( SeO3 ) . Selenium dioxide is formed by the reaction of elemental selenium with oxygen : 
 Se8 + 8 O2 → 8 SeO2 
 It is a polymeric solid that forms monomeric SeO2 molecules in the gas phase . It dissolves in water to form selenous acid , H2SeO3 . <unk> acid can also be made directly by oxidizing elemental selenium with nitric acid : 
 3 Se + 4 HNO3 + H2O → 3 H2SeO3 + 4 NO 
 Unlike sulfur , which forms a stable trioxide , selenium trioxide is thermodynamically unstable and decomposes to the dioxide above 185 ° C : 
 2 SeO3 → 2 SeO2 + O2 ( ΔH = − 54 kJ / mol ) 
 Selenium trioxide is produced in the laboratory by the reaction of anhydrous potassium selenate ( <unk> ) and sulfur trioxide ( SO3 ) . 
 Salts of selenous acid are called selenites . These include silver selenite ( <unk> ) and sodium selenite ( <unk> ) . 
 Hydrogen sulfide reacts with aqueous selenous acid to produce selenium disulfide : 
 H2SeO3 + 2 H2S → SeS2 + 3 H2O 
 Selenium disulfide consists of 8 @-@ membered rings . It has an approximate composition of SeS2 , with individual rings varying in composition , such as <unk> and <unk> . Selenium disulfide has been used in shampoo as an <unk> agent , an inhibitor in polymer chemistry , a glass dye , and a reducing agent in fireworks . 
 Selenium trioxide may be synthesized by dehydrating selenic acid , <unk> , which is itself produced by the oxidation of selenium dioxide with hydrogen peroxide : 
 SeO2 + H2O2 → <unk> 
 Hot , concentrated selenic acid can react with gold to form gold ( III ) selenate . 
 = = = Halogen compounds = = = 
 <unk> of selenium are not well known . The only stable chloride is selenium <unk> ( <unk> ) , which might be better known as selenium ( I ) chloride ; the corresponding bromide is also known . These species are structurally analogous to the corresponding <unk> dichloride . Selenium dichloride is an important reagent in the preparation of selenium compounds ( e.g. the preparation of <unk> ) . It is prepared by treating selenium with sulfuryl chloride ( <unk> ) . Selenium reacts with fluorine to form selenium hexafluoride : 
 Se8 + 24 F2 → 8 <unk> 
 In comparison with its sulfur counterpart ( sulfur hexafluoride ) , selenium hexafluoride ( <unk> ) is more reactive and is a toxic pulmonary irritant . Some of the selenium oxyhalides , such as selenium oxyfluoride ( <unk> ) and selenium oxychloride ( <unk> ) have been used as specialty solvents . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 Analogous to the behavior of other chalcogens , selenium forms hydrogen selenide , H2Se . It is a strongly <unk> , toxic , and colorless gas . It is more acidic than H2S . In solution it ionizes to <unk> − . The selenide <unk> Se2 − forms a variety of compounds , including the minerals from which selenium is obtained commercially . Illustrative selenides include mercury selenide ( <unk> ) , lead selenide ( <unk> ) , zinc selenide ( ZnSe ) , and copper indium gallium <unk> ( Cu ( Ga , In ) Se2 ) . These materials are semiconductors . With highly electropositive metals , such as aluminium , these selenides are prone to hydrolysis : 
 <unk> + 6 H2O → Al2O3 + 6 H2Se 
 Alkali metal selenides react with selenium to form polyselenides , Se2 − 
 n , which exist as chains . 
 = = = Other compounds = = = 
 <unk> tetranitride , <unk> , is an explosive orange compound analogous to <unk> tetranitride ( <unk> ) . It can be synthesized by the reaction of selenium tetrachloride ( <unk> ) with [ ( ( CH 
 3 ) 
 3Si ) 
 2N ] 
 <unk> . 
 Selenium reacts with <unk> to yield <unk> : 
 8 KCN + Se8 → 8 <unk> 
 = = = <unk> compounds = = = 
 Selenium , especially in the II oxidation state , forms stable bonds to carbon , which are structurally analogous to the corresponding <unk> compounds . Especially common are selenides ( <unk> , analogues of thioethers ) , diselenides ( <unk> , analogues of <unk> ) , and selenols ( <unk> , analogues of thiols ) . Representatives of selenides , diselenides , and selenols include respectively selenomethionine , <unk> , and <unk> . The sulfoxide in sulfur chemistry is represented in selenium chemistry by the <unk> ( formula <unk> ( O ) R ) , which are intermediates in organic synthesis , as illustrated by the <unk> elimination reaction . Consistent with trends indicated by the double bond rule , selenoketones , R ( C = Se ) R , and <unk> , R ( C = Se ) H , are rarely observed . 
 = = History = = 
 Selenium ( Greek <unk> selene meaning " Moon " ) was discovered in 1817 by Jöns Jakob Berzelius and Johan Gottlieb Gahn . Both chemists owned a chemistry plant near <unk> , Sweden , producing sulfuric acid by the lead chamber process . The pyrite from the Falun mine created a red precipitate in the lead chambers which was presumed to be an arsenic compound , so the pyrite 's use to make acid was discontinued . Berzelius and Gahn wanted to use the pyrite and they also observed that the red precipitate gave off a smell like horseradish when burned . This smell was not typical of arsenic , but a similar odor was known from tellurium compounds . Hence , Berzelius 's first letter to Alexander Marcet stated that this was a tellurium compound . However , the lack of tellurium compounds in the Falun mine minerals eventually led Berzelius to <unk> the red precipitate , and in 1818 he wrote a second letter to Marcet describing a newly found element similar to sulfur and tellurium . Because of its similarity to tellurium , named for the Earth , Berzelius named the new element after the Moon . 
 In 1873 , Willoughby Smith found that the electrical resistance of grey selenium was dependent on the ambient light . This led to its use as a cell for sensing light . The first commercial products using selenium were developed by Werner Siemens in the mid @-@ 1870s . The selenium cell was used in the <unk> developed by Alexander Graham Bell in 1879 . Selenium transmits an electric current proportional to the amount of light falling on its surface . This phenomenon was used in the design of light meters and similar devices . Selenium 's semiconductor properties found numerous other applications in electronics . The development of selenium rectifiers began during the early 1930s , and these replaced copper oxide rectifiers because they were more efficient . These lasted in commercial applications until the 1970s , following which they were replaced with less expensive and even more efficient silicon rectifiers . 
 Selenium came to medical notice later because of its toxicity to human beings working in industries . Selenium was also recognized as an important veterinary toxin , which is seen in animals that have eaten high @-@ selenium plants . In 1954 , the first hints of specific biological functions of selenium were discovered in microorganisms . It was discovered to be essential for mammalian life 1957 . In the 1970s , it was shown to be present in two independent sets of enzymes . This was followed by the discovery of selenocysteine in proteins . During the 1980s , selenocysteine was shown to be encoded by the codon UGA . The recoding mechanism was worked out first in bacteria and then in mammals ( see SECIS element ) . 
 = = Occurrence = = 
 Native ( i.e. , elemental ) selenium is a rare mineral , which does not usually form good crystals , but , when it does , they are steep <unk> or tiny acicular ( hair @-@ like ) crystals . Isolation of selenium is often complicated by the presence of other compounds and elements . 
 Selenium occurs naturally in a number of inorganic forms , including selenide , selenate , and selenite , but these minerals are rare . The common mineral selenite is not a selenium mineral , and contains no selenite ion , but is rather a type of gypsum ( calcium sulfate hydrate ) named like selenium for the moon well before the discovery of selenium . Selenium is most commonly found as an impurity , replacing a small part of the sulfur in sulfide ores of many metals . 
 In living systems , selenium is found in the amino acids selenomethionine , selenocysteine , and <unk> . In these compounds , selenium plays a role analogous to that of sulfur . Another naturally occurring <unk> compound is dimethyl selenide . 
 Certain solids are selenium @-@ rich , and selenium can be <unk> by some plants . In soils , selenium most often occurs in soluble forms such as selenate ( analogous to sulfate ) , which are leached into rivers very easily by runoff . Ocean water contains significant amounts of selenium . 
 Anthropogenic sources of selenium include coal burning , and the mining and smelting of sulfide ores . 
 = = Production = = 
 Selenium is most commonly produced from selenide in many sulfide ores , such as those of copper , nickel , or lead . <unk> metal refining is particularly productive of selenium as a byproduct , obtained from the anode mud of copper refineries . Another source was the mud from the lead chambers of sulfuric acid plants , a process that is no longer used . Selenium can be refined from these muds by a number of methods . However , most elemental selenium comes as a byproduct of refining copper or producing sulfuric acid . Since its invention , solvent extraction and electrowinning ( SX / EW ) production of copper produces an increasing share of the worldwide copper supply . This changes the availability of selenium because only a comparably small part of the selenium in the ore is leached with the copper . 
 Industrial production of selenium usually involves the extraction of selenium dioxide from residues obtained during the purification of copper . Common production from the residue then begins by oxidation with sodium carbonate to produce selenium dioxide , which is mixed with water and acidified to form selenous acid ( oxidation step ) . <unk> acid is bubbled with sulfur dioxide ( reduction step ) to give elemental selenium . 
 About 2 @,@ 000 tonnes of selenium were produced in 2011 worldwide , mostly in Germany ( 650 t ) , Japan ( 630 t ) , Belgium ( 200 t ) , and Russia ( 140 t ) , and the total reserves were estimated at 93 @,@ 000 tonnes . These data exclude two major producers , the United States and China . A previous sharp increase was observed in 2004 from 4 – 5 to $ 27 / lb . The price was relatively stable during 2004 – 2010 at about US $ 30 per pound ( in 100 @-@ pound lots ) but increased to $ 65 / lb in 2011 . The consumption in 2010 was divided as follows : metallurgy – 30 % , glass manufacturing – 30 % , agriculture – 10 % , chemicals and pigments – 10 % , and electronics – 10 % . China is the dominant consumer of selenium at 1 @,@ 500 – 2 @,@ 000 tonnes / year . 
 = = Applications = = 
 = = = Manganese electrolysis = = = 
 During the electro winning of manganese , the addition of selenium dioxide decreases the power necessary to operate the electrolysis cells . China is the largest consumer of selenium dioxide for this purpose . For every tonne of manganese , an average 2 kg selenium oxide is used . 
 = = = Glass production = = = 
 The largest commercial use of Se , accounting for about 50 % of consumption , is for the production of glass . Se compounds confer a red color to glass . This color cancels out the green or yellow tints that arise from iron impurities typical for most glass . For this purpose , various selenite and selenate salts are added . For other applications , a red color may be desired , produced by mixtures of <unk> and CdS . 
 = = = Alloys = = = 
 Selenium is used with bismuth in brasses to replace more toxic lead . The regulation of lead in drinking water applications with the Safe Drinking Water Act of 1974 made a reduction of lead in brass necessary . The new brass is marketed under the name <unk> . Like lead and sulfur , selenium improves the machinability of steel at concentrations around 0 @.@ 15 % . Selenium produces the same machinability improvement in copper alloys . 
 = = = = Solar cells = = = = 
 Copper indium gallium selenide is a material used in solar cells . 
 = = = Other uses = = = 
 Small amounts of <unk> compounds are used to modify the vulcanization catalysts for the production of rubber . 
 The demand for selenium by the electronics industry is declining , despite a number of continuing applications . Its photovoltaic and <unk> properties are still useful in photocopying , photocells , light meters and solar cells . Its use as a photoconductor in plain @-@ paper copiers once was a leading application , but in the 1980s , the photoconductor application declined ( although it was still a large end @-@ use ) as more and more copiers switched to organic <unk> . Though once widely used , selenium rectifiers have mostly been replaced ( or are being replaced ) by silicon @-@ based devices . The most notable exception is in power DC surge protection , where the superior energy capabilities of selenium suppressors make them more desirable than metal oxide varistors . 
 Zinc selenide was the first material for blue LEDs , but gallium nitride is dominating the market now . Cadmium selenide was an important component in quantum dots . Sheets of amorphous selenium convert X @-@ ray images to patterns of charge in <unk> and in solid @-@ state , flat @-@ panel X @-@ ray cameras . 
 Selenium is a catalyst in some chemical reactions , but it is not widely used because of issues with toxicity . In X @-@ ray crystallography , incorporation of one or more selenium atoms in place of sulfur helps with multiple @-@ wavelength anomalous dispersion and single wavelength anomalous dispersion phasing . 
 Selenium is used in the toning of photographic prints , and it is sold as a toner by numerous photographic manufacturers . Selenium intensifies and extends the tonal range of black @-@ and @-@ white photographic images and improves the permanence of prints . 
 <unk> is used as a gamma source in industrial radiography . 
 = = Biological role = = 
 Although it is toxic in large doses , selenium is an essential micronutrient for animals . In plants , it occurs as a bystander mineral , sometimes in toxic proportions in forage ( some plants may accumulate selenium as a defense against being eaten by animals , but other plants , such as <unk> , require selenium , and their growth indicates the presence of selenium in soil ) . See more on plant nutrition below . 
 Selenium is a component of the unusual amino acids selenocysteine and selenomethionine . In humans , selenium is a trace element nutrient that functions as cofactor for reduction of antioxidant enzymes , such as glutathione peroxidases and certain forms of thioredoxin reductase found in animals and some plants ( this enzyme occurs in all living organisms , but not all forms of it in plants require selenium ) . 
 The glutathione peroxidase family of enzymes ( GSH @-@ Px ) catalyze certain reactions that remove reactive oxygen species such as hydrogen peroxide and organic hydroperoxides : 
 2 GSH + <unk> @-@ Px → <unk> + 2 H2O 
 The thyroid gland and every cell that uses thyroid hormone use selenium , which is a cofactor for the three of the four known types of thyroid hormone deiodinases , which activate and then deactivate various thyroid hormones and their metabolites ; the <unk> deiodinases are the subfamily of deiodinase enzymes that use selenium as the otherwise rare amino acid selenocysteine . ( Only the deiodinase , <unk> deiodinase , which works on the last breakdown products of thyroid hormone , does not use selenium . ) 
 Selenium may inhibit Hashimoto 's disease , in which the body 's own thyroid cells are attacked as alien . A reduction of 21 % on TPO antibodies is reported with the dietary intake of 0 @.@ 2 mg of selenium . 
 Increased dietary selenium reduces the effects of mercury toxicity , although it is effective only at low to modest doses of mercury . Evidence suggests that the molecular mechanisms of mercury toxicity includes the irreversible inhibition of selenoenzymes that are required to prevent and reverse oxidative damage in brain and endocrine tissues . 
 = = = Evolution in biology = = = 
 From about three billion years ago , prokaryotic selenoprotein families drive the evolution of selenocysteine , an amino acid . Selenium is incorporated into several prokaryotic selenoprotein families in bacteria , archaea , and eukaryotes as selenocysteine , where selenoprotein peroxiredoxins protect bacterial and eukaryotic cells against oxidative damage . <unk> families of GSH @-@ Px and the deiodinases of eukaryotic cells seem to have a bacterial phylogenetic origin . The selenocysteine @-@ containing form occurs in species as diverse as green algae , diatoms , sea urchin , fish , and chicken . Selenium enzymes are involved in the small reducing molecules glutathione and thioredoxin . One family of selenium @-@ bearing molecules ( the glutathione peroxidases ) destroys peroxide and repairs damaged <unk> cell membranes , using glutathione . Another selenium @-@ bearing enzyme in some plants and in animals ( thioredoxin reductase ) generates reduced thioredoxin , a <unk> that serves as an electron source for peroxidases and also the important reducing enzyme ribonucleotide reductase that makes DNA precursors from RNA precursors . 
 Trace elements involved in GSH @-@ Px and superoxide dismutase enzymes activities , i.e. selenium , vanadium , magnesium , copper , and zinc , may have been lacking in some terrestrial mineral @-@ deficient areas . Marine organisms retained and sometimes expanded their <unk> , whereas the <unk> of some terrestrial organisms were reduced or completely lost . These findings suggest that , with the exception of vertebrates , aquatic life supports selenium use , whereas terrestrial habitats lead to reduced use of this trace element . Marine fishes and vertebrate thyroid glands have the highest concentration of selenium and iodine . From about 500 million years ago , freshwater and terrestrial plants slowly optimized the production of " new " endogenous antioxidants such as ascorbic acid ( vitamin C ) , polyphenols ( including flavonoids ) , tocopherols , etc . A few of these appeared more recently , in the last 50 – 200 million years , in fruits and flowers of angiosperm plants . In fact , the angiosperms ( the dominant type of plant today ) and most of their antioxidant pigments evolved during the late Jurassic period . 
 The deiodinase <unk> constitute another family of eukaryotic selenoproteins with identified enzyme function . <unk> are able to extract electrons from iodides , and iodides from <unk> . They are , thus , involved in thyroid @-@ hormone regulation , participating in the protection of <unk> from damage by H2O2 produced for thyroid @-@ hormone biosynthesis . About 200 million years ago , new selenoproteins were developed as mammalian GSH @-@ Px enzymes . 
 = = = Nutritional sources of selenium = = = 
 Dietary selenium comes from nuts , cereals and mushrooms . Brazil nuts are the richest dietary source ( though this is soil @-@ dependent , since the Brazil nut does not require high levels of the element for its own needs ) . 
 Recommended Dietary Allowance ~ 55 µg / day . Selenium as a dietary supplement is available in many forms , including multi @-@ vitamins / mineral supplements - typically 20 µg / day . Selenium @-@ specific supplements may have -200 µg / day . 
 In June 2015 the U.S. Food and Drug Administration ( FDA ) published its final rule establishing the requirement of minimum and maximum levels of selenium in infant formula . 
 The selenium content in the human body is believed to be in the 13 – 20 milligram range . 
 = = = Indicator plant species = = = 
 Certain species of plants are considered indicators of high selenium content of the soil <unk> they require high levels of selenium to thrive . The main selenium indicator plants are Astragalus species ( including some <unk> ) , prince 's plume ( <unk> sp . ) , woody asters ( <unk> sp . ) , and false <unk> ( <unk> sp . ) 
 = = = Medical use = = = 
 The substance loosely called selenium sulfide ( approximate formula , SeS2 ) is the active ingredient in some anti @-@ dandruff shampoos . The selenium compound kills the scalp fungus Malassezia , which causes shedding of dry skin fragments . The ingredient is also used in body lotions to treat <unk> versicolor due to infection by a different species of Malassezia fungus . 
 = = = Detection in biological fluids = = = 
 Selenium may be measured in blood , plasma , serum , or urine to monitor excessive environmental or occupational exposure , to confirm a diagnosis of poisoning in hospitalized victims , or investigate a suspected case of fatal overdose . Some analytical techniques are capable of distinguishing organic from inorganic forms of the element . Both organic and inorganic forms of selenium are largely converted to monosaccharide conjugates ( <unk> ) in the body prior elimination in the urine . Cancer patients receiving daily oral doses of <unk> may achieve very high plasma and urine selenium concentrations . 
 = = = Toxicity = = = 
 Although selenium is an essential trace element , it is toxic if taken in excess . Exceeding the Tolerable Upper Intake Level of 400 micrograms per day can lead to selenosis . This 400 µg Tolerable Upper Intake Level is based primarily on a 1986 study of five Chinese patients who exhibited overt signs of selenosis and a follow up study on the same five people in 1992 . The 1992 study actually found the maximum safe dietary Se intake to be approximately 800 micrograms per day ( 15 micrograms per kilogram body weight ) , but suggested 400 micrograms per day to avoid creating an imbalance of nutrients in the diet and to accord with data from other countries . In China , people who ingested corn grown in extremely selenium @-@ rich stony coal ( carbonaceous shale ) have suffered from selenium toxicity . This coal was shown to have selenium content as high as 9 @.@ 1 % , the highest concentration in coal ever recorded . 
 Signs and symptoms of selenosis include a garlic odor on the breath , gastrointestinal disorders , hair loss , sloughing of nails , fatigue , irritability , and neurological damage . Extreme cases of selenosis can exhibit cirrhosis of the liver , pulmonary edema , or death . Elemental selenium and most metallic selenides have relatively low toxicities because of low bioavailability . By contrast , selenates and selenites have an oxidant mode of action similar to that of arsenic trioxide and are very toxic . The chronic toxic dose of selenite for humans is about 2400 to 3000 micrograms of selenium per day . Hydrogen selenide is an extremely toxic , corrosive gas . Selenium also occurs in organic compounds , such as dimethyl selenide , selenomethionine , selenocysteine and <unk> , all of which have high bioavailability and are toxic in large doses . 
 On 19 April 2009 , 21 polo ponies died shortly before a match in the United States Polo Open . Three days later , a pharmacy released a statement explaining that the horses had received an incorrect dose of one of the ingredients used in a vitamin / mineral supplement compound that had been incorrectly compounded by a compounding pharmacy . Analysis of blood levels of inorganic compounds in the supplement indicated the selenium concentrations were ten to fifteen times higher than normal in the blood samples , and 15 to 20 times higher than normal in the liver samples . Selenium was later confirmed to be the toxic factor . 
 Selenium poisoning of water systems may result whenever new agricultural runoff courses through normally dry , undeveloped lands . This process leaches natural soluble selenium compounds ( such as selenates ) into the water , which may then be concentrated in new " wetlands " as the water evaporates . Selenium pollution of waterways also occurs when selenium is leached from coal flue ash , mining and metal smelting , crude oil processing , and landfill . The resultant high selenium levels in waterways were found to cause congenital disorders in oviparous species , including wetland birds and fish . Elevated dietary methylmercury levels can amplify the harm of selenium toxicity in oviparous species . 
 In fish and other wildlife , selenium is necessary for life , but toxic in high doses . For salmon , the optimal concentration of selenium is about 1 microgram selenium per gram of whole body weight . Much below that level , young salmon die from deficiency ; much above , they die from toxic excess . 
 The Occupational Safety and Health Administration ( OSHA ) has set the legal limit ( Permissible exposure limit ) for selenium in the workplace at 0 @.@ 2 mg / m3 over an 8 @-@ hour workday . The National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health ( NIOSH ) has set a Recommended exposure limit ( REL ) of 0 @.@ 2 mg / m3 over an 8 @-@ hour workday . At levels of 1 mg / m3 , selenium is immediately dangerous to life and health . 
 = = = Deficiency = = = 
 Selenium deficiency is rare in otherwise healthy , well @-@ nourished individuals . It can occur in patients with severely compromised intestinal function , those undergoing total parenteral nutrition , and in those of advanced age ( over 90 ) . Also , people dependent on food grown from selenium @-@ deficient soil are at risk . Although New Zealand soil has low levels of selenium , adverse health effects have not been detected in the residents . 
 Selenium deficiency , defined by low ( < 60 % of normal ) <unk> activity levels in brain and endocrine tissues , occurs only when a low selenium level is linked with an additional stress , such as high exposures to mercury or increased oxidant stress from vitamin E deficiency . 
 Selenium interacts with other nutrients , such as iodine and vitamin E. The effect of selenium deficiency on health remains uncertain , particularly in relation to Kashin @-@ Beck disease . Also , selenium interacts with other minerals , such as zinc and copper . High doses of Se supplements in pregnant animals might disturb the Zn : Cu ratio and lead to Zn reduction ; in such treatment cases , Zn levels should be monitored . Further studies are needed to <unk> these interactions . 
 In the regions ( e.g. various regions within North America ) where low selenium soil levels lead to low concentrations in the plants , some animal species may be deficient unless selenium is supplemented with diet or injection . Ruminants are particularly susceptible . In general , absorption of dietary selenium is lower in ruminants than other animals , and is lower from forages than from grain . Ruminants grazing certain forages , e.g. , some white clover varieties containing cyanogenic glycosides , may have higher selenium requirements , presumably because cyanide is released from the <unk> by glucosidase activity in the rumen and glutathione peroxidases is deactivated by the cyanide acting on the glutathione moiety . <unk> ruminants at risk of WMD ( white muscle disease ) may be administered both selenium and vitamin E by injection ; some of the WMD myopathies respond only to selenium , some only to vitamin E , and some to either . 
 = = = Controversial health effects = = = 
 A number of correlative epidemiological studies have implicated selenium deficiency ( measured by blood levels ) in a number of serious or chronic diseases , such as cancer , diabetes , HIV / AIDS , and tuberculosis . In addition , selenium supplementation has been found to be a <unk> for some types of cancer in some types of rodents . However , in randomized , blinded , controlled prospective trials in humans , selenium supplementation has not succeeded in reducing the incidence of any disease , nor has a meta @-@ analysis of such selenium supplementation studies detected a decrease in overall mortality . 
 = Amak Volcano = 
 Amak Volcano is a basaltic andesite stratovolcano in the Aleutian Islands of Alaska , USA , 618 miles ( 995 km ) from Anchorage . It is located on the eponymous island , 31 miles ( 50 km ) from Frosty Volcano and near the edge of the Alaskan Peninsula 's western flank . Only boats are allowed to access the island with a certain permit . 
 <unk> ( dotted with flat blocks of minerals and crystals ) lava flows stream from its summit to its flanks . Three historical eruptions have taken place – two within the 18th century , the first from 1700 – 1710 , and the latter in 1796 . The earliest prehistoric eruption was believed to have taken place between 3050 and 2050 BCE . 
 = = Accessibility = = 
 Cold Bay , the city nearest Amak , is easily accessible by plane . Amak is accessible only by boat ; airplanes are not permitted to land on the island . Private boat rides to Amak are available in Cold Bay , but for access to the Aleutian Islands , a permit is required from the United States Fish and Wildlife Service . 
 = = Geography and geology = = 
 Amak Island lies in the Bering Sea , north of the main archipelago of the Aleutians . It is one of two islands ( along with <unk> Island ) that are 31 miles ( 50 km ) north of the main range . 
 The United States has the most active volcanoes in the world , many of them geologically young . In Alaska , at least 50 volcanoes , including those in the Aleutian archipelago , have erupted in historical time . The state accounts for ~ 80 % of the United States ' volcanoes , excluding the seamounts in the area , ~ 8 % of world volcanoes , and most of these are located among the Aleutian Islands . The Aleutian Islands arc serves as the northern boundary of the Pacific Ring of Fire , where tectonic activity generates earthquakes and volcanic eruptions in masses . 
 The volcano is basaltic @-@ andesitic in composition . It is a modest stratovolcano , rising no more than 1 @,@ 683 feet ( 513 m ) above sea level . The volcanic crater is distinct , and has erupted in historical times , only " blocky " lava flows . Charles Wood and Jürgen <unk> , volcanologists , propose that earlier activity , 4 @,@ 000 – 5 @,@ 000 years ago , consisted primarily of lavas of ethereal ( fine ) platy and thick andesite . Amak Volcano is unique in that its andesitic lavas , while composed the same as the other Aleutians , contain an abundance of potash . They also could contain more sodium carbonate and rare earth element deposits than the Aleutian norm . Between <unk> , the other Aleutian island north of the main arc , and Amak , Amak 's lavas are more alkalic and silicic . 
 Glaciation took place around the volcano roughly 6700 years BP , carving out U @-@ shaped valleys . At the southwest flank of the island , a crater , likely a <unk> , can be found amid an alluvial plain . 
 = = = Eruptive history = = = 
 The Amak Volcano has erupted three times in historical times : circa <unk> BC , from 1700 – 1710 , and in 1796 ; the first of these events was identified with tephrochronology . Each eruption has been characterized by lava flows , and the two most recent eruptions included a crater eruption . 
 = Dwarf planet = 
 A dwarf planet is a planetary @-@ mass object that is neither a planet nor a natural satellite . That is , it is in direct orbit of the Sun , and is massive enough for its gravity to crush itself into a hydrostatic equilibrium shape ( usually a spheroid ) , but has not cleared the neighborhood of other material around its orbit . 
 The term dwarf planet was adopted in 2006 as part of a three @-@ way categorization of bodies orbiting the Sun , brought about by an increase in discoveries of objects farther away from the Sun than Neptune that rivaled Pluto in size , and finally precipitated by the discovery of an even more massive object , Eris . The exclusion of dwarf planets from the roster of planets by the IAU has been both praised and criticized ; it was said to be the " right decision " by astronomer Mike Brown , who discovered Eris and other new dwarf planets , but has been rejected by Alan Stern , who had coined the term dwarf planet in April 1991 . 
 The International Astronomical Union ( IAU ) currently recognizes five dwarf planets : Ceres , Pluto , Haumea , Makemake , and Eris . Brown criticizes this official recognition : " A reasonable person might think that this means that there are five known objects in the solar system which fit the IAU definition of dwarf planet , but this reasonable person would be nowhere close to correct . " 
 It is suspected that another hundred or so known objects in the Solar System are dwarf planets . Estimates are that up to 200 dwarf planets may be found when the entire region known as the Kuiper belt is explored , and that the number may exceed 10 @,@ 000 when objects scattered outside the Kuiper belt are considered . Individual astronomers recognize several of these , and in August 2011 Mike Brown published a list of 390 candidate objects , ranging from " nearly certain " to " possible " dwarf planets . Brown currently identifies eleven known objects — the five accepted by the IAU plus 2007 OR10 , Quaoar , Sedna , Orcus , ( <unk> ) 2002 <unk> and <unk> — as " virtually certain " , with another dozen highly likely . Stern states that there are more than a dozen known dwarf planets . 
 However , only two of these bodies , Ceres and Pluto , have been observed in enough detail to demonstrate that they actually fit the IAU 's definition . The IAU accepted Eris as a dwarf planet because it is more massive than Pluto . They subsequently decided that unnamed trans @-@ Neptunian objects with an absolute magnitude brighter than + 1 ( and hence a diameter of ≥ 838 km assuming a geometric albedo of ≤ 1 ) are to be named under the assumption that they are dwarf planets . The only two such objects known at the time , Makemake and Haumea , went through this naming procedure and were declared to be dwarf planets . The question of whether other likely objects are dwarf planets has never been addressed by the IAU . 
 The classification of bodies in other planetary systems with the characteristics of dwarf planets has not been addressed . 
 = = History of the concept = = 
 Starting in 1801 , astronomers discovered Ceres and other bodies between Mars and Jupiter which were for some decades considered to be planets . Between then and around 1851 , when the number of planets had reached 23 , astronomers started using the word asteroid for the smaller bodies and then stopped naming or classifying them as planets . 
 With the discovery of Pluto in 1930 , most astronomers considered the Solar System to have nine planets , along with thousands of significantly smaller bodies ( asteroids and comets ) . For almost 50 years Pluto was thought to be larger than Mercury , but with the discovery in 1978 of Pluto 's moon Charon , it became possible to measure Pluto 's mass accurately and to determine that it was much smaller than in initial estimates . It was roughly one @-@ twentieth the mass of Mercury , which made Pluto by far the smallest planet . Although it was still more than ten times as massive as the largest object in the asteroid belt , Ceres , it was one @-@ fifth that of Earth 's Moon . Furthermore , having some unusual characteristics , such as large orbital eccentricity and a high orbital inclination , it became evident it was a completely different kind of body from any of the other planets . 
 In the 1990s , astronomers began to find objects in the same region of space as Pluto ( now known as the Kuiper belt ) , and some even farther away . Many of these shared several of Pluto 's key orbital characteristics , and Pluto started being seen as the largest member of a new class of objects , plutinos . This led some astronomers to stop referring to Pluto as a planet . Several terms , including <unk> and planetoid , started to be used for the bodies now known as dwarf planets . By 2005 , three trans @-@ Neptunian objects comparable in size to Pluto ( Quaoar , Sedna , and Eris ) had been reported . It became clear that either they would also have to be classified as planets , or Pluto would have to be reclassified . Astronomers were also confident that more objects as large as Pluto would be discovered , and the number of planets would start growing quickly if Pluto were to remain a planet . 
 Eris ( then known as 2003 UB313 ) was discovered in January 2005 , which was thought to be slightly larger than Pluto , and some reports informally referred to it as the tenth planet . As a consequence , the issue became a matter of intense debate during the IAU General Assembly in August 2006 . The IAU 's initial draft proposal included Charon , Eris , and Ceres in the list of planets . After many astronomers objected to this proposal , an alternative was drawn up by Uruguayan astronomer Julio Ángel Fernández , in which he created a median classification for objects large enough to be round but that had not cleared their orbits of planetesimals . Dropping Charon from the list , the new proposal also removed Pluto , Ceres , and Eris , because they have not cleared their orbits . 
 The IAU 's final Resolution 5A preserved this three @-@ category system for the celestial bodies orbiting the Sun . It reads : 
 The IAU ... resolves that planets and other bodies , except satellites , in our Solar System be defined into three distinct categories in the following way : 
 ( 1 ) A <unk> is a celestial body that ( a ) is in orbit around the Sun , ( b ) has sufficient mass for its self @-@ gravity to overcome rigid body forces so that it assumes a hydrostatic equilibrium ( nearly round ) shape , and ( c ) has cleared the neighbourhood around its orbit . 
 ( 2 ) A " dwarf planet " is a celestial body that ( a ) is in orbit around the Sun , ( b ) has sufficient mass for its self @-@ gravity to overcome rigid body forces so that it assumes a hydrostatic equilibrium ( nearly round ) shape , 2 ( c ) has not cleared the neighbourhood around its orbit , and ( d ) is not a satellite . 
 ( 3 ) All other objects , 3 except satellites , orbiting the Sun shall be referred to collectively as " Small Solar System Bodies . " 
 Footnotes : 
 1 The eight planets are : Mercury , Venus , Earth , Mars , Jupiter , Saturn , Uranus , and Neptune . 
 2 An IAU process will be established to assign borderline objects either dwarf planet or other status . 
 3 These currently include most of the Solar System asteroids , most Trans @-@ Neptunian Objects ( TNOs ) , comets , and other small bodies . 
 Although concerns were raised about the classification of planets orbiting other stars , the issue was not resolved ; it was proposed instead to decide this only when such objects start being observed . 
 = = Name = = 
 The term dwarf planet has itself been somewhat controversial , as it implies that these bodies are planets , much as dwarf stars are stars . This is the conception of the Solar System that Stern promoted when he coined the phrase . The older word planetoid ( " having the form of a planet " ) has no such connotation , and is also used by astronomers for bodies that fit the IAU definition . Brown states that planetoid is " a perfectly good word " that has been used for these bodies for years , and that the use of the term dwarf planet for a non @-@ planet is " dumb " , but that it was motivated by an attempt by the IAU division III plenary session to reinstate Pluto as a planet in a second resolution . Indeed , the draft of Resolution 5A had called these median bodies planetoids , but the plenary session voted unanimously to change the name to dwarf planet . The second resolution , 5B , defined dwarf planets as a subtype of planet , as Stern had originally intended , distinguished from the other eight that were to be called " classical planets " . Under this arrangement , the twelve planets of the rejected proposal were to be preserved in a distinction between eight classical planets and four dwarf planets . However , Resolution 5B was defeated in the same session that 5A was passed . Because of the semantic inconsistency of a dwarf planet not being a planet due to the failure of Resolution 5B , alternative terms such as <unk> and <unk> were discussed , but there was no consensus among the CSBN to change it . 
 In most languages equivalent terms have been created by translating dwarf planet more @-@ or @-@ less literally : French <unk> <unk> , Spanish planeta <unk> , German <unk> , Russian <unk> planeta ( <unk> <unk> ) , Arabic <unk> <unk> ( <unk> <unk> ) , Chinese <unk> ( <unk> ) , Korean <unk> ( <unk> ; <unk> ) , but Japanese and Latin are exceptions : In Japanese they are called <unk> ( <unk> ) meaning " <unk> " or " almost @-@ planets " , and the modern Latin name , <unk> ( or <unk> following the Greek ) , is a diminutive derivation of planeta , hence also meaning something less than a planet . 
 IAU Resolution 6a of 2006 recognizes Pluto as " the prototype of a new category of trans @-@ Neptunian objects " . The name and precise nature of this category were not specified but left for the IAU to establish at a later date ; in the debate leading up to the resolution , the members of the category were variously referred to as plutons and plutonian objects but neither name was carried forward , perhaps due to objections from geologists that this would create confusion with their pluton . On June 11 , 2008 , the IAU Executive Committee announced a name , plutoid , and a definition : all trans @-@ Neptunian dwarf planets are plutoids , though " in part because of an email miscommunication , the WG @-@ PSN [ Working Group for Planetary System Nomenclature ] was not involved in choosing the word plutoid . ... In fact , a vote taken by the WG @-@ PSN subsequent to the Executive Committee meeting has rejected the use of that <unk> term " , and it has not come into common use among astronomers . 
 = = Characteristics = = 
 = = = Orbital dominance = = = 
 Alan Stern and Harold F. Levison introduced a parameter Λ ( lambda ) , expressing the likelihood of an encounter resulting in a given deflection of orbit . The value of this parameter in Stern 's model is proportional to the square of the mass and inversely proportional to the period . This value can be used to estimate the capacity of a body to clear the neighbourhood of its orbit , where Λ > 1 will eventually clear it . A gap of five orders of magnitude in Λ was found between the smallest terrestrial planets and the largest asteroids and Kuiper belt objects . 
 Using this parameter , Steven Soter and other astronomers argued for a distinction between planets and dwarf planets based on the inability of the latter to " clear the neighbourhood around their orbits " : planets are able to remove smaller bodies near their orbits by collision , capture , or gravitational disturbance ( or establish orbital resonances that prevent collisions ) , whereas dwarf planets lack the mass to do so . Soter went on to propose a parameter he called the planetary discriminant , designated with the symbol µ ( mu ) , that represents an experimental measure of the actual degree of cleanliness of the orbital zone ( where µ is calculated by dividing the mass of the candidate body by the total mass of the other objects that share its orbital zone ) , where µ > 100 is deemed to be cleared . There are several other schemes that try to differentiate between planets and dwarf planets , but the 2006 definition uses this concept . 
 = = = Hydrostatic equilibrium = = = 
 Sufficient internal pressure , caused by the body 's gravitation , will turn a body plastic , and sufficient plasticity will allow high elevations to sink and hollows to fill in , a process known as gravitational relaxation . Bodies smaller than a few kilometers are dominated by non @-@ gravitational forces and tend to have an irregular shape . Larger objects , where gravitation is significant but not dominant , are " potato " shaped ; the more massive the body is , the higher its internal pressure and the more rounded its shape , until the pressure is sufficient to overcome its internal compressive strength and it achieves hydrostatic equilibrium . At this point a body is as round as it is possible to be , given its rotation and tidal effects , and is an ellipsoid in shape . This is the defining limit of a dwarf planet . 
 When an object is in hydrostatic equilibrium , a global layer of liquid covering its surface would form a liquid surface of the same shape as the body , apart from small @-@ scale surface features such as craters and fissures . If the body does not rotate , it will be a sphere , but the faster it does rotate , the more oblate or even scalene it becomes . However , if such a rotating body were to be heated until it melted , its overall shape would not change when liquid . The extreme example of a non @-@ spherical body in hydrostatic equilibrium is Haumea , which is twice as long along its major axis as it is at the poles . If the body has a massive nearby companion , then tidal forces come into effect as well , distorting it into a prolate spheroid . An example of this is Jupiter 's moon Io , which is the most volcanically active body in the Solar System due to effects of tidal heating . Tidal forces also cause a body 's rotation to gradually become tidally locked , such that it always presents the same face to its companion . An extreme example of this is the Pluto – Charon system , where both bodies are tidally locked to each other . Earth 's Moon is also tidally locked , as are many satellites of the gas giants . 
 The upper and lower size and mass limits of dwarf planets have not been specified by the IAU . There is no defined upper limit , and an object larger or more massive than Mercury that has not " cleared the neighbourhood around its orbit " would be classified as a dwarf planet . The lower limit is determined by the requirements of achieving a hydrostatic equilibrium shape , but the size or mass at which an object attains this shape depends on its composition and thermal history . The original draft of the 2006 IAU resolution redefined hydrostatic equilibrium shape as applying " to objects with mass above 5 × 1020 kg and diameter greater than 800 km " , but this was not retained in the final draft . 
 Empirical observations suggest that the lower limit will vary according to the composition and thermal history of the object . For a body made of rigid silicates , such as the stony asteroids , the transition to hydrostatic equilibrium should occur at a diameter of approximately 600 km and a mass of some 3 @.@ 4 × 1020 kg . For a body made of less rigid water ice , the limit should be about 320 km and 1019 kg . In the asteroid belt , Ceres is the only body that clearly surpasses the silicaceous limit ( though it is actually a rocky – icy body ) , and its shape is an equilibrium spheroid . 2 Pallas and 4 Vesta , however , are rocky and are just below the limit . Pallas , at 525 – 560 km and 1 @.@ 85 – 2 @.@ 4 × 1020 kg , is " nearly round " but still somewhat irregular . Vesta , at 530 km and 2 @.@ 6 × 1020 kg , deviates from an ellipsoid shape primarily due to a large impact basin at its pole . 
 = = Dwarf planets and possible dwarf planets = = 
 Many trans @-@ Neptunian objects ( TNOs ) are thought to have icy cores and therefore would require a diameter of perhaps 400 km ( 250 mi ) — only about 3 % of that of Earth — to relax into gravitational equilibrium . As of January 2015 , about 150 known TNOs are thought to be probably dwarf planets , although only rough estimates of the diameters of most of these objects are available . A team is investigating thirty of these , and think that the number will eventually prove to be around 200 in the Kuiper belt , with thousands more beyond . 
 The IAU has recognized five bodies as dwarf planets since 2008 : Ceres , Pluto , Eris , Haumea , and Makemake . Ceres and Pluto are known to be dwarf planets through direct observation . Eris is recognized as a dwarf planet because it is more massive than Pluto ( measurements by New Horizons indicate that Pluto 's diameter is larger than that of Eris ) , whereas Haumea and Makemake qualify based on their absolute magnitudes . In relative distance from the Sun , the five are : 
 Ceres <unk> – discovered on January 1 , 1801 , 45 years before Neptune . Considered a planet for half a century before reclassification as an asteroid . Accepted as a dwarf planet by the IAU on September 13 , 2006 . 
 Pluto <unk> – discovered on February 18 , 1930 . Classified as a planet for 76 years . Reclassified as a dwarf planet by the IAU on August 24 , 2006 . 
 Haumea – discovered on December 28 , 2004 . Accepted by the IAU as a dwarf planet on September 17 , 2008 . 
 Makemake – discovered on March 31 , 2005 . Accepted by the IAU as a dwarf planet on July 11 , 2008 . 
 Eris – discovered on January 5 , 2005 . Called the " tenth planet " in media reports . Accepted by the IAU as a dwarf planet on September 13 , 2006 . 
 Mike Brown considers an additional six trans @-@ Neptunian objects to be " nearly certainly " dwarf planets with diameters at or above 900 kilometers . These objects are : 
 Orcus – discovered on February 17 , 2004 
 2002 <unk> – discovered on 18 June 2002 
 <unk> – discovered on September 22 , 2004 
 Quaoar – discovered on June 5 , 2002 
 2007 OR10 – discovered on July 17 , 2007 
 Sedna – discovered on November 14 , 2003 
 Tancredi et al. advised the IAU to officially accept Orcus , Sedna and Quaoar . In addition , Gonzalo Tancredi considers the five TNOs Varuna , Ixion , 2003 <unk> , 2004 <unk> , and 2002 <unk> to be dwarf planets as well . These objects are also recognized by Mike Brown and classified as " highly likely " . An extensive table compares the dwarf planet candidates of the two planetary astronomers in detail . 
 Vesta , the next @-@ most @-@ massive body in the asteroid belt after Ceres , is roughly spherical , deviating mainly because of massive impacts that formed Rheasilvia and Veneneia crater after it solidified . Furthermore , its triaxial dimensions are not consistent with hydrostatic equilibrium . Triton is thought to be a captured dwarf planet . Phoebe is a captured body that , like Vesta , is no longer in hydrostatic equilibrium , but is thought to have been so early in its history . 
 = = Exploration = = 
 On March 6 , 2015 , the Dawn spacecraft began to orbit Ceres , becoming the first spacecraft to orbit a dwarf planet . On 14 July 2015 , the New Horizons space probe flew by Pluto and its five moons . Dawn has also explored the former dwarf planet , Vesta . Phoebe has been explored by Cassini ( most recently ) and Voyager 2 , which also explored Triton . These three are thought to be former dwarf planets and therefore their exploration helps in the study of the evolution of dwarf planets . 
