 The first season of Fringe was released on DVD and Blu @-@ ray Disc on September 8 , 2009 in region 1 . In addition to all the episodes that had been aired , extras include three commentary tracks , unaired scenes , gag reels and behind the scenes features . A " Fringe Pattern Analysis " feature is included on the Blu @-@ ray version as an exclusive . The sets were released on September 28 , 2009 in region 2 and on September 30 , 2009 in region 4 . 
 The second season features four commentary tracks , a gag reel , deleted scenes , behind the scenes videos , and the episode " Unearthed " , an episode , produced for the first season , which aired out of schedule during the second season . It was released on DVD and Blu @-@ ray on September 14 , 2010 in region 1 , on September 27 , 2010 in region 2 , and on November 10 , 2010 in region 4 . 
 The third season features two commentary tracks , a gag reel , behind the scenes videos , and two features exclusive to the Blu @-@ ray version . It was released on DVD and Blu @-@ ray on September 6 , 2011 in region 1 , on September 26 , 2011 in region 2 , and on October 26 , 2011 in region 4 . 
 The fourth season includes several special features , including " The Culture of Fringe " , a roundtable discussion with series writers and university professors regarding the science featured in the series ; features on how the disappearance of Peter affects the timeline , and the role of the Observers ; two features covering the Fringe comic series ; and a gag reel . It was released on DVD and Blu @-@ ray on September 4 , 2011 in region 1 , on September 24 , 2012 in region 2 , and on October 31 , 2012 in region 4 . 
 The fifth season includes featurettes titled " A Farewell to Fringe " and " Fringe Panel at Comic @-@ Con 2012 " , as well audio commentaries and a gag reel . It was released on Blu @-@ ray and DVD on May 7 , 2013 in region 1 and on May 13 , 2013 in region 2 . A complete series box set was also released on the same dates of the fifth season release in the respective regions . 
 = = = Games = = = 
 An alternate reality game , centered on the fictional Massive Dynamic corporation , was introduced during the pilot and featured " strange symbols paired with glowing dots " appearing throughout the episode and an " advertisement " for the company shown at the end with a web address for the game . 
 = = = Books and comics = = = 
 On August 27 , 2008 , a prequel comic book ( leading right up to the moment in the pilot where Olivia ' first ' meets Walter ) written by Zack Whedon was released by DC Comics under its WildStorm imprint . This was to be the first issue of a monthly 6 @-@ issue limited series but the others were delayed until January 2009 , when monthly publication resumed , with the sixth and final issue scheduled for release on June 17 . The Vice President of WildStorm , Hank <unk> , explained the publication hiatus : " The writers of the show want to make sure the comic book is integrated into the mythology of the Fringe world , so we have decided to refocus the direction of the comic book . Unfortunately , this means that we will have some delays , but will be back in January . " 
 On June 23 , 2010 , the first issue of Tales From the Fringe , the second six @-@ part monthly series , was released , while the final issue was released on November 24 , 2010 . 
 Additionally , in September 2011 , DC released the first issue of Beyond the Fringe comic series . With the first story written by Joshua Jackson titled " Peter and the Machine " . The comic issues will alternate with an ' A ' story and a ' B ' story each . For example , " Peter and the Machine " will take place in issues one , three , and so on until the story is finished and a new ' A ' story starts up . 
 An encyclopedia guide , September 's Notebook — The Bishop Paradox , written by Tara Bennett and Paul Terry who had previously written the Lost Encyclopedia for Lost , was released in March 2013 . A three @-@ part series of prequel novels written by Christa Faust was released throughout 2013 and 2014 . Each novel deals with a member of the Fringe team 's past . The first is titled The Zodiac Paradox and is about Walter and his discovery of Cortexiphan . The second in the series is titled The Burning Man and is based on Olivia and how she was first exposed to Cortexiphan . The third is titled Sins of the Father and is about Peter 's life in 2008 just before the point of time when the series starts . 
 = = = Possible film = = = 
 At San Diego Comic @-@ Con 2012 , actor John Noble mentioned that a film could be made further down the line . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Early reception through the first season was generally lukewarm . The pilot episode was watched by 9 @.@ 13 million viewers , garnering 3 @.@ 2 / 9 Nielsen ratings among adults 18 – 49 , with ratings improving over the course of the episode . Ratings improved greatly for the second episode , " The Same Old Story " which 13 @.@ 27 million people watched , making it the fifth most watched show of the week . As of October 2008 , the show had achieved the first place in the 18 – 49 demographic among new shows . As a whole , the series was well received by the critics . 
 Barry Garron at Hollywood Reporter found it promising because " it is reminiscent of battle @-@ of @-@ the @-@ sexes charm . " Robert Bianco , of USA Today , said , " What Abrams brings to Fringe is a director 's eye for plot and pace , a fan 's love of sci @-@ fi excitement , and a story @-@ teller 's gift for investing absurd events with real emotions and relatable characters . " Travis Fickett of IGN gave it 7 @.@ 6 out of 10 , calling it " a lackluster pilot that promises to be a pretty good series " . While Tim Goodman of the San Francisco Chronicle remarked that it was " boundlessly ambitious " , Chicago Sun @-@ Times 's Misha Davenport called it an " update of The X @-@ Files with the addition of terrorism and the office of Homeland Security " . In a 2016 retrospective of the series , A.V. Club writer Joshua Alston noted that the similarities to The X @-@ Files , including the " monster of the week " approach and tepid romance between two of the series ' lead characters , as well as the relatively @-@ recent release of The X @-@ Files : I Want to Believe , had turned audiences off the show since it was retreading what The X @-@ Files had already done . 
 In its 2008 Year in Review , Television Without Pity declared Fringe one of the year 's biggest TV disappointments , commenting that the show is " entertaining " and " the cast is largely strong " but the character development is insufficient . The show 's main character , Olivia Dunham , was considered " wooden and distant , and after half a season , we still haven 't gotten to know her . " The untrustworthy Nina Sharp is well acted but " one @-@ note and lazily written " , and Lance Reddick 's character is also " underdeveloped " . 
 The Daily Herald commented that Fringe is promising and " it may yet develop into a worthwhile program " but has " largely been spinning its wheels " . Meanwhile , in other articles recounting the best and worst of 2008 , The New York Times stated that Fringe " is the best of a rash of new series that toy with the paranormal " . The author goes on to praise the cast saying that " Much credit belongs to Anna Torv who stars as an F.B.I. agent investigating bizarre murders that all appear to be linked to a powerful and mysterious multinational corporation " , and " Ms. Torv is backed up ably by John Noble as a crazy but brilliant fringe scientist and his level @-@ headed but skeptical son , played by Joshua Jackson " . 
 Changes in the approach and storytelling of the show in the second and subsequent seasons led to more positive critical reception and made it a media favorite . Entertainment Weekly stated , " The best new show of the year took a few weeks to grow on me , but now it 's a full @-@ blown addiction . " The Los Angeles Times called Walter Bishop one of the best characters of 2008 , noting , " the role of the modern @-@ day mad scientist could so easily have been a disaster , but the ' Fringe ' writers and the masterful John Noble have conspired to create a character that seems , as trite as it sounds , more Shakespearean than sci @-@ fi . " 
 Chicago Tribune stated that some episodes are " distressingly predictable and formulaic " but adds that there have also been some excellent episodes . The New York Times named Fringe one of the top 10 television shows in 2010 @.@ while Television Without Pity , previously dismissive of the show , listed it amongst their 2010 " Most Memorable TV Moments " , stating " there were so many great Fringe moments this year " and " we were treated to some of the best sci @-@ fi on television this past fall " . 
 The A.V. Club named Fringe the 15th best show of 2010 , stated that the episode " Peter " gave " the series ' overarching storyline a devastating emotional core " , making the series a " rare blend of inventive ideas , wild ambition , and unexpected soulfulness " . IGN named Fringe the 18th best science fiction show of all time in a 2011 listing , stating that since the middle of the first season , " it 's been nothing but a series of satisfyingly jaw @-@ dropping ' holy eff ! ' moments layered with wonderful , nuanced performances from Anna Torv , Joshua Jackson and John Noble " . 
 In 2012 , Entertainment Weekly listed the show at # 17 in the " 25 Best Cult TV Shows from the Past 25 Years " , saying , " Fringe was conceived as a mass @-@ appeal genre procedural , with a background mythology that wouldn 't detract from monster @-@ of @-@ the @-@ week episodes . ... But the mythology overtook the monsters following the revelation of a parallel universe . By its third season , Fringe was overpopulated by multiple versions of every character . Unfortunately , that increasing narrative complexity has steadily pigeonholed it as a niche show . " 
 In 2015 , Bustle declared " White Tulip " as " one of the greatest hours in television history " . He wrote , " ' White Tulip ' is an hour of television that shouldn 't work , that technically doesn 't even exist ... but thank god it does , because it 's one of the most powerful episodes ever created — and it showcases why Fringe is one of the most criminally underrated series of our time . " 
 = = = U.S. Nielsen ratings and series renewal = = = 
 The following is a table of seasonal U.S. rankings ( based on total viewers per episode including reruns ) of Fringe on Fox . 
 Fringe premiered in the 2008 United States television season at a regular timeslot of 9 : 00 p.m. Eastern on Tuesdays . During Season 1 , Fringe was part of a Fox initiative known as " Remote @-@ Free TV " . Episodes of Fringe were longer than standard dramas on current network television . The show ran with half the commercials , adding about six minutes to the show 's runtime . When the show went to a commercial , a short bumper aired informing the viewer of roughly how much time commercials would consume before the program resumed . The pilot episode was leaked via BitTorrent , three months before the series premiere ; similar to leaked fellow Fox series Terminator : The Sarah Connor Chronicles . The series was renewed for a second season on May 4 , 2009 , and moved to 9 : 00 p.m. on Thursday . 
 It was renewed for a third season on March 6 , 2010 . As part of a reorganization of its 2010 midseason line up to capture more market for American Idol , the Fox network shifted Fringe to 9 : 00 p.m. on Fridays . This timeslot , commonly considered the " Friday night death slot " for several previous Fox shows due to cancellation shortly following the move to that slot , left critics considering the show 's fate . While The X @-@ Files originally premiered during this slot and would continue to be a highly successful series , critics were unsure if Fringe could duplicate this performance . In this slot , the show competed with Supernatural , a series that attracts similar types of viewers . Fox 's Entertainment President Kevin Reilly , in response to these concerns , stated that 45 % of Fringe 's viewership is from time shifting recording through digital video receivers , and does not expect the viewership numbers to change significantly with the change to Friday . Reilly further postulated that " If it does anywhere near what it did on Thursdays , we can glue that show to the schedule because it can be a big win for us " . Further promoted by the critical reaction to the rescheduling , the Fox network created a self @-@ deprecating promotional advertisement acknowledging the reputation of the time slot , including quotes from other media outlets concerned about the move , but asserted that the move would " re @-@ animate " the show . The network also created a music video , set to " Echoes " by the band Klaxons as a means of summarizing the third season to date prior to the first Friday broadcast . Joshua Jackson , who plays Peter Bishop on the show , cautioned that time @-@ shifted viewership may not be enough to save the show : " It 's not that not enough people are watching Fringe , it 's that not enough people are watching Fringe during the hour that it 's on the air , which is key for the network . " 
 Producers Pinkner and Wyman also were excited about the move to Fridays , considering the slot as " open territory that can be conquered " and that they " can actually deliver like The X @-@ Files did " . Series creator Abrams was less optimistic of the move to Friday nights , aware that the show 's likelihood to be renewed for a fourth season would be highly dependent on the number of niche viewers that continue to watch the show . Abrams did affirm that moving to Friday nights allows them to take more creative freedoms to maintain viewership in the new timeslot , but feels that if the show was not renewed for another season , they would be " hard pressed " to resolve the story by the end of the third season . 
 The show 's first episode at the Friday 9 : 00 p.m. timeslot ( " The Firefly " ) scored a 1 @.@ 9 in the key 18 – 49 demographic which was an increase of 12 % over its last Thursday @-@ aired episode ( " Marionette " ) which scored a 1 @.@ 7 , and maintained similar numbers in the second week for " Reciprocity " . Though viewership slipped in further weeks , the show was renewed for a fourth season in March 2011 . The move was unexpected based on these ratings , given the past performance of shows with similar viewership numbers in the Friday night slot , but several critics attribute it to the strong fanbase that the show has garnered , which contributes in part to consistently higher time @-@ shifted viewership . Fox 's Reilly stated that : 
 Fringe has truly hit a creative stride and has distinguished itself as one of television 's most original programs . The series ' ingenious producers , amazingly talented cast and crew , as well as some of the most passionate and loyal fans on the planet , made this fourth @-@ season pickup possible . When we moved the show to Fridays , we asked the fans to follow and they did . We 're thrilled to bring it back for another full season and keep it part of the Fox family . 
 Reilly further added that the renewal was also prompted by the high risk of trying to replace Fringe with another show with unknown viewership metrics ; he commented that they " have a far better shot of sticking with a show that has an audience that [ they ] think [ they ] can grow " . Prior to the onset of the fourth season , Reilly reiterated that they do not expect any significant growth in Fringe 's viewership within that season : " It ’ s a pretty complex show . If Fringe can do exactly what Fringe did last year , we ’ re going to be very happy . They ’ re right in the pocket creatively once again . " Wyman stated in an interview with the Hollywood Reporter that the Fox network had been " supportive throughout this process " , and though the show 's viewership " wasn 't exactly what they would 've hoped for " , aspects such as a loyal fan base and supportive critics were enough to take the show forward for another season . Pinkner commented that " there were no creative conditions " on the show 's renewal , nor any cuts in the show 's budget , though was unsure if the show will be moved to a different time slot . Noble , at the 2011 Comic @-@ Con Fringe panel , reiterated that the fans were responsible for the livelihood of the show , stated , " Seriously , without your efforts , your rabid support , we wouldn ’ t be here right now . You are the best fans that ever existed " . The fourth season premiered on September 23 , 2011 . 
 Before the renewal of the fifth season , Abrams stated some skepticism for a renewal opportunity , but hoped that if it was cancelled , that it may be picked up by another network . On the other hand , Abrams considered that if Fox did pick up the show for a fifth season , " the next year would be the great ending for the show " . Similarly , Fox 's Reilly remained cautious about a renewal , noting that while the show is one of the top shows in the Friday night slot , " it 's an expensive show . We lose a lot of money on the show . " Reilly further reiterated the dedication of the fans of the show for helping it to its fourth season and continued success . When asked about whether the writers would have enough notice to write the fourth season finale as a series finale if necessary , Reilly stated , " That 's a Peter Roth issue " ( chief executive of Warner Bros. Television ) . To which Roth responded , " We have no plans to give viewers closure this season because we expect the series to continue " . In late January 2012 , Fox and Warner Bros. Television were working on negotiating a lower licensing cost for the show to allow a fifth season to occur ; this would not only help Fox reduce its losses on the show , but would also bring the total number of episodes above 100 , giving Warner Bros. a better opportunity to syndicate reruns of the show . Before the announcement of the fifth season , Wyman and Pinkner stated that they would have created a series finale for the end of the fourth season should the show be cancelled ; Wyman stated " We want to take care of the fans . We want them to see where it would have gone , but we also know the show has been a commitment and we want everyone to be satisfied with it . " 
 The show was officially renewed for a fifth and final season for the 2012 – 2013 television season , consisting of a shortened set of 13 episodes , on April 26 , 2012 , with its premiere on September 28 , 2012 . Reilly , in announcing the renewal , stated that " Fringe is a remarkably creative series that has set the bar as one of television 's most imaginative dramas . Bringing it back for a final 13 allows us to provide the climactic conclusion that its passionate and loyal fans deserve " . The writing team crafted an idea for a cohesive story @-@ driven set of thirteen episodes as a means to complete the series , and to " honor the audience that had served us so well was to say a proper farewell " , according to Roth . Noble called it " the season for the fans " , with the story revisiting many of the elements from the show 's past . 
 = = = International broadcasts = = = 
 Fringe premiered in Canada on CTV simultaneous to its U.S. premiere and was the most watched program in Canada that week . The show would fluctuate between airing on CTV and A during its first two seasons . Beginning with the third season , Fringe was broadcast on City in Canada . 
 A version of the show ( edited for time ) premiered on the Nine Network in Australia on September 17 , 2008 . In the season one episode " In Which We Meet Mr. Jones " , the opening scene where doctors discover a parasite on Detective Loeb 's heart was cut , going straight to the opening credits . Nine Network later dropped the show from its primetime schedule . This was temporary as the show returned during the December to January non @-@ ratings period . The series later moved to Nine 's digital multi @-@ channel , GO ! , where the last few seasons were played out . 
 The series premiered in the United Kingdom on Sky1 on October 5 , 2008 . 
 = = = Syndication = = = 
 With 13 episodes in its final season , Fringe has a total of 100 episodes , a critical number for syndication deals for Warner Bros. , and considered part of the reason for the show 's final renewal . The show premiered in syndication on the Science Network on November 20 , 2012 . 
 = = = Awards and nominations = = = 
 Fringe and its cast and crew have been nominated and won several awards including Emmys , Saturn Awards , Golden Reel Awards , Satellite Awards , and Writers Guild of America Awards . 
 = Hurricane Lester ( 1998 ) = 
 Hurricane Lester was the fifteenth tropical cyclone , twelfth named storm and eighth hurricane of the 1998 Pacific hurricane season . Lester originated from a tropical wave that emerged off the coast of Africa on September 29 . Under favorable conditions , the storm was classified as a tropical depression on October 15 . The depression was upgraded to a tropical storm later that day and a hurricane on October 16 . After undergoing fluctuations in intensity , Lester reached peak winds of 115 mph ( 185 km / h ) , a Category 3 hurricane on the Saffir @-@ Simpson Hurricane Scale . After several days , it degenerated into a tropical storm on October 26 , and dissipated shortly after . The hurricane made its closest approach to land on October 18 , producing moderate winds and heavy rainfall . A mudslide triggered by the precipitation killed two children , although damage is unknown . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 A tropical wave moved off the coast of Africa on September 29 , 1998 and on October 5 , an area of convection along the wave developed into Atlantic Hurricane Lisa . The wave axis continued westward , and after crossing Central America a low @-@ level circulation developed on October 13 , about 170 miles ( 275 km ) south of the border between El Salvador and Guatemala . The system drifted northwestward , and as convection increased around the center a banding featured began to develop . At 0000 UTC on October 15 , the National Hurricane Center designated it as Tropical Depression Fourteen @-@ E. The depression contained a large envelope of convective activity , and under favorable conditions including warm water , low vertical wind shear and good outflow , it gradually began to intensify . Initially , the exact direction of forward movement was somewhat uncertain , although a northwestward track was predicted . On the morning of October 15 , visible satellite imagery suggested that the center of circulation was located northeast of the previous estimates . Thunderstorm activity organized close to the center by 1400 UTC , and by 1800 UTC the depression was upgraded to Tropical Storm Lester . 
 Shortly thereafter , the storm took a slight jog to the west , and at the same time outflow became restricted to the southwest of the circulation . At 1400 UTC on October 16 , data from a Reconnaissance Aircraft confirmed that the storm had attained hurricane intensity with a minimum central pressure of 992 mb . The first signs of an eye began to appear embedded within a ring of deep convection by early on October 17 , while moving west @-@ northwest at about 6 mph ( 9 @.@ 7 km / h ) . Shortly after , the hurricane became nearly stationary due to a shortwave which passed north of the system , shortly before reaching Category 2 status on the Saffir @-@ Simpson Hurricane Scale . Early on October 18 , the eye began to wobble slightly and the ring of cold cloud tops were showing signs of disorganization , slowing further intensification for several hours . At 1400 UTC , Lester 's winds increased to 100 mph ( 160 km / h ) and the storm made its closest approach to land on October 18 , about 70 miles ( 110 km ) south of Puerto Angel , Oaxaca . Later that day , it weakened to Category 1 status , although quickly re @-@ intensified . 
 Vertical wind shear associated with a mid @-@ to @-@ upper @-@ level low pressure system developed and began to affect the storm 's circulation on October 19 , thus weakening it slightly . However , early on October 20 the hurricane regained organization and once again intensified . Lester strengthened to reach a peak intensity of 115 mph ( 185 km / h ) on October 22 , about 355 miles ( 570 km ) southwest of Manzanillo , Colima . Coinciding with its peak intensity , a short @-@ wave trough caused Lester to stall before turning to the southwest and weakening . At 0200 UTC on October 23 Lester rapidly lost deep convection , and weakened to Category 1 status . Later that morning , the storm was downgraded to a tropical storm while tracking southwest . By October 24 , the low @-@ level center of circulation became exposed from the cloud structure , and at 0000 UTC on October 16 , Lester had degenerated into a tropical depression , about 500 miles ( 805 km ) southwest of the southern tip of Baja California Peninsula , shortly before dissipating . 
 = = Preparations and impact = = 
 In anticipation of the storm , the government of Mexico issued a hurricane warning from Puerto Arista to Punta Maldonaldo and later from Salina Cruz to Acapulco . A tropical storm warning was also issued from Sipacate , Guatemala to Puerto Arista , Mexico . The threat of the hurricane prompted officials to order the evacuation of 3 @,@ 000 people along the southern coast of Mexico to 500 emergency shelters . 
 The storm dropped heavy rainfall across southwestern Guatemala . Up to 9 inches ( 228 mm ) of rainfall was reported in localized areas along the Pacific coast of the country . Moisture brought around the northeast periphery of the Sierra Madre Occidental led to a narrow band of heavy rainfall along the upslope side of the mountain range , with a local precipitation maximum exceeding 14 inches ( 360 mm ) . It is reported that tropical @-@ storm @-@ force winds occurred along coastal areas of southern Mexico . The rainfall destroyed some houses and killed numerous livestock , and triggered a mudslide which killed two children . In Honduras , rainfall from the Lester destroyed a bridge which affected transportation for about 1 @,@ 000 people . Heavy rainfall was reported in Chiapas , causing moderate river flooding though no reported damage . 
 = Rock Band ( video game ) = 
 Rock Band is a music video game developed by Harmonix , published by MTV Games and Electronic Arts . It is the first title in the Rock Band series . The Xbox 360 and PlayStation 3 versions were released in the North America on November 20 , 2007 , while the PlayStation 2 version was released on December 18 , 2007 with the Wii version being released on June 22 , 2008 . The Xbox 360 version was released in Europe on May 23 , 2008 while the PlayStation 3 , PlayStation 2 , and Wii versions were released on September 12 , 2008 . All four ports of the game were released in Australia on November 7 , 2008 . The game was to be released in Japan and to be developed by Q Entertainment but it was canceled . 
 Rock Band allows up to four players to simulate the performance of popular rock music songs by playing with controllers modeled after musical instruments . Players can play the lead guitar , bass guitar , and drums parts to songs with " instrument controllers " , as well as sing through a USB microphone . Players are scored on their ability to match scrolling musical " notes " while playing instruments , or by their ability to match the singer 's pitch on vocals . Players with the Xbox 360 and PlayStation 3 versions can interact with players on the same platform through both online and offline multiplayer capabilities . In addition to the 58 core songs included on the game disc , over 2 @,@ 000 downloadable songs were released for the Xbox 360 and PlayStation 3 versions . 
 At launch , the game software was made available in a bundle that packaged it together with the instrument peripherals , as well as for purchase separately . Individual instrument peripherals were released at a later date . The game has received widespread critical acclaim , with sales of four million units and global revenues of $ 600 million . Players have made over 100 million downloadable song purchases since Rock Band 's release . The game 's success prompted the release of six sequels : Rock Band 2 , The Beatles : Rock Band , Lego Rock Band , Green Day : Rock Band , Rock Band 3 and Rock Band 4 . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Reusing many gameplay elements from the Guitar Hero series , Rock Band players use peripherals modeled after musical instruments to simulate the performance of rock music . Players use these instruments by playing scrolling musical " notes " on @-@ screen in time with the music . Rock Band expands upon the Guitar Hero series , in that it offers gameplay for drums and vocals , in addition to lead and bass guitar . 
 Rock Band 's gameplay and on @-@ screen interface uses a combination of elements from Guitar Hero and Karaoke Revolution . Rock Band has up to three tracks of vertically scrolling colored music notes , one section each for lead guitar , drums , and bass . The colored notes on @-@ screen correspond to buttons on the guitar and drum peripherals . For lead and bass guitar , players play their notes by holding down colored fret buttons on the guitar peripheral and pushing the controller 's strum bar ; for drums , players must strike the matching colored drumhead , or step on the pedal to simulate playing bass drum notes . Along the top of the screen is the vocals display , which scrolls horizontally , similar to Karaoke Revolution . The lyrics display beneath green bars , which represent the pitch of the individual vocal elements . When singing vocals , the player must sing in relative pitch to the original vocals . A pitch indicator displays the singer 's accuracy relative to the original pitch . The remainder of the screen is used to display the band 's virtual characters as they perform in concert . 
 During cooperative play as a band , all players earn points towards a common score , though score multipliers and " Overdrive " are tracked separately for each player . Overdrive is collected during select portions of a song by successfully playing all white notes within that section ( or by using the guitar controller 's whammy bar during white sustained notes ) . Once the Energy Meter is filled halfway , players can deploy their Overdrive , resulting in the " Band Meter " ( which tracks how well each player is doing ) changing more dramatically . This allows players to strategically use Overdrive to raise the Band Meter and pass portions of a song they otherwise might have failed . Overdrive can be used to activate score multipliers , which vary based on a player 's note streak . Players can deploy Overdrive independently of each other , as well as collect additional Overdrive while it is deployed and draining . 
 Each band member can choose the difficulty at which they play ( spanning Easy , Medium , Hard , and Expert ) . If a player does not play well enough and falls to the bottom of the Band Meter , they will fail out of the song and their instrument will be muted from the audio mix . However , any active player can activate their Overdrive to bring failed players back into the song , " saving " the band member . However , a band member can only be saved twice ; after the third failure , they cannot be brought back for that song . Failed players continuously drag the band 's Band Meter down until they are saved . If the player is not saved before the Band Meter reaches the bottom , the band fails the song . Players can earn Overdrive bonuses from " Unison Phrases " and extra points from a " Big Rock Ending . " 
 Unlike the PlayStation 2 and Wii version , players with the Xbox 360 or PlayStation 3 versions can create and customize their own in @-@ game character , complete with adjustable hair , body physique , clothing , tattoos , onstage movements , and instruments . Each character is permanently locked into a specific instrument . Using cash earned within the game , the player may purchase items at the in @-@ game " Rock Shop , " with which they can customize their rock star . The game features an art maker where players can combine different clip art elements to create custom face paint , tattoos , clothing designs , instrument artwork , and band logos . 
 = = = Instrument peripherals = = = 
 The game features special Rock Band @-@ branded guitar controllers modeled after the Fender Stratocaster to be used for the lead and bass guitar gameplay . These are similar to the Guitar Hero controllers , as they feature five colored fret buttons on the neck , a strum bar , and a whammy bar . The Stratocaster controller has five additional fret buttons of smaller size located closer to the guitar 's main body . These buttons can be used to play notes in guitar solos ( denoted by the note track turning blue ) as hammer @-@ ons and pull @-@ offs , without the need to strum . Additionally , the controller features an effects pickup switch that can toggle between five different effects , which are applied in solos and when Overdrive is activated . Overdrive for guitarists can be deployed by holding the controller in a vertical position or pressing the " Select / Back " button . The controller is offered in both wired and wireless versions . Harmonix confirmed most Guitar Hero guitar controllers and additional third @-@ party controllers are compatible with the game . The Stratocaster controller is not compatible with Guitar Hero II or III . 
 The drum controller features four rubber drum pads and a kick pedal . The pads have colored rings around the edges that correspond to the notes on @-@ screen , representing the snare drum ( red ) , hi @-@ hat ( yellow ) , tom @-@ tom ( blue ) , and crash cymbal ( green ) . The kick pedal simulates the bass drum , with on @-@ screen notes represented as orange horizontal lines . A pair of authentic drum sticks are included with the controller . Drummers can improvise in special " freestyle drum fill " sections of songs , indicated by the columns for each note turning a solid color . Overdrive for drummers can be deployed by hitting the crash cymbal ( green note for right @-@ handed configuration ) that appears directly after a freestyle drum fill . Harmonix representatives have suggested , " If you can play the drum parts on hard , you can pretty much play the drums [ in reality ] . " 
 Rock Band 's USB microphone instrument is similar to the model used in the Harmonix @-@ developed Karaoke Revolution games . For the most part , singers are judged on how closely they match the relative pitch of the song 's vocalist . During " talking parts " that do not judge pitch , a phoneme detector will pick up individual vowels and consonants of the spoken lyrics . Some sections without vocals will display circle notes , allowing for the microphone to be used as a tambourine and cowbell by tapping it or making vocal cues . Overdrive for singers can be deployed by singing in freestyle vocal sections of songs , denoted by yellow artwork in the background of the vocals interface . 
 = = = Band World Tour mode = = = 
 " Band World Tour " is the game 's primary multiplayer mode . It allows any combination of 2 @-@ 4 local players to create a virtual band , play gigs , and tour a virtual representation of the world . Although online play is not supported for Band World Tour , players can use the " Band Quickplay " mode to play together as a band online . For the Xbox 360 and PlayStation 3 versions of the game , Band World Tour mode lets bands play in 41 different venues spanning 17 cities , including Los Angeles , Seattle , Boston , New York , London , Sydney , Stockholm , and Rome . After creating their band , characters , and logo , the players can begin playing concerts in small venues in their hometown until they unlock vans , tour buses and private jets , which unlock other cities and continents . Successful performances also earn the band fans , stars , and in @-@ game cash . Most cities and larger venues require the band to achieve a certain number of fans and stars before they are unlocked . In @-@ game venues are inspired by real @-@ life venues and often display local art styles from each of the represented cities . 
 For the Xbox 360 and PlayStation 3 versions , rather than complete predetermined lists of songs ( like in previous Guitar Hero games ) , players complete unique sets of activities at each venue . Performances consist of single songs , multiple song sets , " make your own " setlists , and mystery setlists . Players are also faced with decisions that Harmonix refers to as " risk @-@ versus @-@ reward . " For certain performances , bands are faced with an optional challenge that requires the band to average a certain amount of stars for their gig in order to reap the rewards . Bands can also choose to perform a benefit concert ( earning no in @-@ game money but gaining more fans ) or " sell @-@ out " ( earning more in @-@ game money but losing fans ) . Additionally , for certain gigs , bands can compete for band personnel , as well as a recording deal with a record label . The " Endless Setlist " provides players with all @-@ day concert experience , as the setlist requires playing the entire game disc 's setlist from start to finish . 
 The PlayStation 2 and Wii versions of Rock Band contain a more stripped @-@ down version of the Band World Tour mode , as 2 – 4 local players will only be able to play by completing predetermined tiers of songs ordered by difficulty . Players cannot create their own characters , nor can they choose a city , venue , or a setlist to play . 
 = = = Solo Tour modes = = = 
 " Solo Tour " is a single @-@ player mode offered for the lead guitar , drum , and microphone peripherals ( there is no support for bass ) . Rather than feature the open @-@ ended gameplay and features of the next @-@ generation versions of Band World Tour mode , Solo Tour is structured much in the same vein as the career mode in Guitar Hero games . Players choose / create their character ( on the Xbox 360 and PlayStation 3 versions only ) and complete predetermined sets of songs ordered by difficulty , with each instrument 's setlist ordered differently . By completing these sets of songs , additional songs are unlocked for play across all game modes . For the PlayStation 3 and Xbox 360 versions , players can use money earned for each performance to purchase merchandise at the " Rock Shop " . The character 's cash carries over into Band World Tour mode , and vice versa . 
 = = = Other modes = = = 
 Players can quickly play any song on any instrument individually in " Solo Quickplay " . For a competitive experience , players can individually compete against each other for each instrument type in the " Tug of War " ( much like Guitar Hero 's " Face @-@ off " , in which players trade playing sections of a song to move a meter in their favor ) and " Score Duel " ( much like Guitar Hero II 's " Pro Face @-@ off " , in which each player plays the song in its entirety on the same difficulty level to earn points ) . These head @-@ to @-@ head modes are available both online ( for the Xbox 360 and PlayStation 3 versions ) and locally . " Band Quickplay " mode allows bands to quickly play any song ; the Xbox 360 and PlayStation 3 versions allow any combination of 2 – 4 local or online players to play as a band , while the PlayStation 2 and Wii versions only supports 2 – 4 local players . Also included in Rock Band are " Tutorial Mode " , which allows players to learn how to play each instrument , and " Practice Mode " , which allows players to practice songs for each instrument . 
 = = Soundtrack = = 
 All versions of Rock Band feature the same core 58 playable tracks on the game disc ; 45 of these are featured tracks in the main setlist , while the other 13 tracks are " bonus songs " by independent or lesser @-@ known bands , as well as bands made up of Harmonix employees . In total , 51 of the 58 songs are master recordings . The Wii version of the game features 5 additional songs . Featured tracks include " Dani California " by Red Hot Chili Peppers , " ( Don 't Fear ) The Reaper " by Blue Öyster Cult , " Enter Sandman " by Metallica , " Here It Goes Again " by OK Go , " Highway Star " by Deep Purple , " Learn to Fly " by Foo Fighters , " Suffragette City " by David Bowie , " Wanted Dead or Alive " by Bon Jovi , and " Won 't Get Fooled Again " by The Who . All but three songs on the Rock Band disc can be transferred to the user 's hard drive on the Xbox 360 or PlayStation 3 to be used for Rock Band 2 . Furthermore , an extra two songs from Rock Band cannot be carried over into Rock Band 3 . 
 Harmonix co @-@ founder Alex Rigopulos commented that the game 's soundtrack would be " covering a great breadth , from metal to classic rock to Southern rock to everything in between . " Five record labels agreed to supply most of the master recordings by their artists for use in the game , including EMI Music , Hollywood Records , Sony BMG Music Entertainment , Universal Music Group 's Universal Music Enterprises , and Warner Music Group 's Rhino Entertainment . 
 = = = Downloadable songs and Track Packs = = = 
 The PlayStation 3 and Xbox 360 versions of the game support downloadable songs . Users can download songs on a track @-@ by @-@ track basis , with many of the tracks digitally bundled together in " song packs " or complete albums at a discounted rate . Harmonix has likened the Rock Band game to a new platform for future music releases , and the company built the library of downloadable content up to hundreds of songs within the first year of the game 's release by releasing new content on a weekly basis . Fifteen songs were made available at the game 's launch date . To date , over 1 @,@ 480 downloadable songs are available and over 100 million song purchases have been made by players . Downloadable songs are playable within every game mode , including the Band World Tour career mode . All downloadable songs released before Rock Band 3 came out are cross @-@ compatible between Rock Band and Rock Band 2 . Downloadable albums have been a major selling point for the game , with nine albums having been released to date . Currently , most song packs containing three songs are priced at $ 5 @.@ 49 / 440 Microsoft Points , while most individual songs are available for the standard price of $ 1 @.@ 99 / 160 MSP . Occasionally , certain songs are initially priced at $ 0 @.@ 99 / 80 MSP for a limited time . The prices for albums differ , depending on the amount of songs the album contains . 
 As both the PlayStation 2 and Wii version lack downloadable content , Harmonix released a series of " Track Pack " standalone games that are sold in retail stores . Each volume contains several of the tracks available as downloadable content for Xbox 360 and PlayStation 3 . Track Pack Vol . 2 saw an expanded release on the Xbox 360 and PlayStation 3 , as well . One Track Pack , exclusively featuring the songs of AC / DC 's 1991 Live at Donington concert , was released in November 2008 . 
 = = Development = = 
 Harmonix Music Systems was previously responsible for making the Guitar Hero series , while RedOctane manufactured the peripherals and owned the rights to the series . However , in June 2006 , RedOctane was bought by Activision , while in September 2006 , Harmonix was purchased by MTV Networks . As a result of the two purchases , Harmonix would no longer be able to develop future Guitar Hero games . Instead , Neversoft , a subsidiary of Activision , would take over development ; the company released Guitar Hero III : Legends of Rock on October 28 , 2007 . According to " The Business " , Rock Band cost $ 200 million to develop . Harmonix 's Vice President of Product Development , Greg LoPiccolo , stated that the game took about 20 months to develop , already having envisioned the possibility of different instruments before they were completed with the Guitar Hero series . 
 In selecting the soundtrack for Rock Band , the developers recognized that they needed to select songs that were recognizable , particularly on vocals ; in contrast , when they were selecting songs for Guitar Hero , they were able to pick songs that played better even if they were less recognizable . They also consider songs that would help players come together socially , such as in The Who 's " Won 't Get Fooled Again " , where they retained the long synthesizer solo such that the band members would all start playing again after it for a big finish . The team were able to introduce songs from smaller artists that they felt were good additions , such as " Maps " by the Yeah Yeah Yeahs and " Electric Version " by the New Pornographers to help also introduce players to those classes of music . For about half the songs , they hired a studio to sing along to the lyrics as a crowd would at a stadium , such that during the game , when players are performing well , the additional crowd sing @-@ alongs would add to the performance experience . 
 Current Harmonix parent company MTV provided financial support to the development process , taking advantage of its stature to facilitate deals with record companies for licensing rights to songs . Several record companies pledged their support by offering master recordings . Pressed for office space , Harmonix was forced to move its offices in the middle of Rock Band 's beta period in order to support the company 's 130 @-@ person staff . However , they continued to bring on more developers in order to complete the title on time . This led to several problems in bringing the newer coders on board without any technical plan , requiring the team to redesign several parts of the game , such as online matchmaking , several times to correct . Although the Xbox 360 and PlayStation 3 versions of the game were developed in @-@ house , Harmonix outsourced development of the PlayStation 2 version to Pi Studios , as it omits certain features . 
 Harmonix faced difficulty in making the Xbox 360 guitar wireless , as developers are charged a licensing fee to use Microsoft 's wireless technology . Had Harmonix chosen to pay the fee , the Xbox 360 and PlayStation 3 bundles of Rock Band would have sold at different price points . Instead , Harmonix chose a wired technology for the Xbox 360 bundle 's guitar . 
 Rock Band was first announced on April 1 , 2007 . Harmonix CEO Alex Rigopulos said in the announcement that Rock Band " takes the core premise of Guitar Hero and expands it tenfold . It lets you create a complete collaborative band . " Rock Band was a featured game at the 2007 E3 convention and provided one of the exhibition 's highlights ; Harmonix employees and Microsoft executive Peter Moore played the game on @-@ stage , performing The Hives ' " Main Offender " . Moore paused the game twice when he accidentally hit the guitar 's Xbox Guide button . 
 A software update was released on March 21 , 2008 , which added new features to the game . The update included an in @-@ game music store with preview and sorting options , revised microphone performance , and faster downloadable content loading . 
 = = = Online community = = = 
 On October 25 , 2007 , Harmonix and MTV announced <unk> would be transformed into an extensive community website at the game 's launch , and that it would extend the features of the game . The community website was absent at the game 's launch in order to fix bugs and complete features , but was launched on December 19 , 2007 . The site offered leaderboards , customizable band profile pages with stats , a classified area for bands to find additional members , band blogs , online forums , and other sharing features . Many originally announced features , such as the ability for players to pose their avatars , take photo shoots and order T @-@ shirts , bumper stickers , and figurines , were eventually made available on the website for Rock Band 2 . 
 = = Release = = 
 = = = Promotion = = = 
 MTV and Harmonix promoted Rock Band heavily in the months leading up to the game 's release . The game made a nationwide promotional tour of the United States . Several tour buses made stops at major American cities to set up demo stations and showcase playable versions of the game for fans . Many of the locations included college campuses . Additionally , fan @-@ created " bands " were able to audition on @-@ stage by playing the game ; their performances were recorded and sent to MTV casting directors , who selected two bands to appear on Total Request Live in a " battle of the bands . " The promotional tour commenced with a featured showcase at the MTV Video Music Awards in Las Vegas on September 9 , 2007 . 
 MTV invested in additional promotions that totaled about $ 30 million . The game was set up within the homes of The Real World participants , allowing for on @-@ air visibility . VH1 also produced a brief spoof documentary in the style of Behind the Music titled " Rock Band Cometh : The Rock Band Band Story , " documenting a fictional band that plays the game . 
 The game appeared in demo kiosks at Best Buy , Wal @-@ Mart , and Sam 's Club stores . The demo contained 15 songs and supports gameplay for all 4 instruments ( although the actual in @-@ store setup varied ) . The demo 's drum set lacked a bass pedal , with the game automatically playing bass drum notes . 
 Other companies helped to promote Rock Band through free and reduced cost downloadable content . Best Buy offered two free downloadable tracks by the band Disturbed for customers that pre @-@ ordered their Indestructible album online ; these tracks were made available to all users in June 2008 for $ 0 @.@ 99 / <unk> . McDonald 's sponsored a month @-@ long program that reduced the cost of two selected downloadable tracks to $ 1 ( approximately half the standard cost ) for each week during the month of May 2008 as part of their Dollar Menu promotion . 
 The United Kingdom release of the game took place in London , where a number of bands including The Automatic , The Whip , and The Courteeners performed short sets . 
 = = = Editions = = = 
 The " Special Edition " bundle includes the game software , as well as guitar , drum , and microphone peripherals . The PlayStation 2 , PlayStation 3 , and Wii bundles include a wireless guitar , whereas the Xbox 360 bundle contains a wired guitar ( a separate wireless guitar is currently available for the Xbox 360 ) . Initially , a USB hub was only included in the Xbox 360 , Wii , and PlayStation 2 bundles , in order to increase the number of available USB ports on the console . The more recent PlayStation 3 bundles now include a USB hub , with a sticker on the box indicating so . MTV originally announced Rock Band would be released for the Xbox 360 and PlayStation 3 on November 23 , 2007 , Black Friday , one of the busiest shopping days in the United States . However , the release date was eventually moved to November 20 , 2007 . 
 The game software was made available for purchase individually at the game 's launch , allowing players with a USB microphone or a compatible guitar controller to take advantage of the vocals , lead guitar , and bass guitar gameplay . Individual Rock Band @-@ branded instruments became available in retail stores later , starting with the drum kit on February 12 , 2008 . An individual wireless guitar became available on April 8 , 2008 . 
 On April 8 , 2008 , EA announced a timed Xbox 360 exclusive for a partial European launch , with other versions to follow later in the summer . 
 = = = Technical issues and guitar incompatibility = = = 
 Upon release , many players reported hardware issues with Rock Band peripherals . Many complaints stemmed from the bass drum pedal snapping in two , the Stratocaster controller 's strum bar being unresponsive , and it occasionally lagging when tilted to activate Overdrive . In response to these issues , Harmonix admitted the guitars bundled with initial shipment of the game bundles were subject to manufacturing issues and stated that they would replace all faulty peripherals . Players affected by faulty peripherals were able to take advantage of the 60 day warranty on the peripherals and obtain replacements from EA . However , a class action lawsuit was issued against Harmonix , MTV Games , Viacom , and Electronic Arts over the failures of the bass drum pedal , claiming the companies conspired to force consumers to pay for repairs or upgrade to the Rock Band 2 drum kit . Attempts were made to settle the lawsuit in 2008 , but were unsuccessful . In September 2009 , the original plaintiff dropped the lawsuit . 
 Other players discovered at the game 's launch that the Gibson Les Paul guitar controller bundled with the PlayStation 3 version of Guitar Hero III : Legends of Rock was initially not compatible with the PlayStation 3 version of Rock Band , despite Harmonix stating that any controllers that followed the open @-@ controller standard would work . While this incompatibility could have been resolved through technical solutions , both Harmonix and Activision cited the other party as being at fault for failing to correct the incompatibility . Harmonix developed a patch to fix the issue , but it was blocked by Activision . Activision stated that MTV Games was unwilling to reach an agreement to pay Activision to use the Guitar Hero III technology in Rock Band . This incompatibility also applies to the Wii 's Les Paul peripheral . However , a patch for the PlayStation 3 version of Rock Band was eventually released on September 11 , 2008 , allowing the Guitar Hero III Les Paul controller to work with Rock Band . Nyko has released a PlayStation 3 version of their " Frontman " guitar controller that is compatible with both Guitar Hero III and Rock Band . 
 At a press conference at the 2008 E3 convention , Activision confirmed that the Xbox 360 version of Guitar Hero World Tour will be able to use Rock Band 's instruments , adapting the note tracks to account for the smaller number of drum pads , and that this compatibility was patched into Guitar Hero : Aerosmith as a result of additional arrangements . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Prior to release , EA CEO John <unk> remarked that the company would not be able to meet the high demand for Rock Band in the 2007 holiday season , stating , " We 're not going to be able to put enough inventory to meet demand in North America or Europe this calendar year or this fiscal [ year ] . " This prompted many retailers to limit the number of preorders they sold before the game was released . 
 Official Xbox Magazine published the first review of Rock Band , scoring the Xbox 360 version a 9 @.@ 5 / 10 and calling it " gaming 's most intensely rewarding co @-@ op experience . " OXM also commented that the game 's " payoff isn 't visceral or technical ; it 's emotional . " IGN awarded the game a 9 @.@ 4 / 10 score and an Editor 's Choice Award for the Xbox 360 and PlayStation 3 versions . IGN largely praised the game , calling it " one of the must @-@ have games of the year " and suggesting it " may just be among the best party games ever released . " 1UP.com gave the next @-@ generation versions of the game an A , stating that " Rock Band unquestionably , unequivocally rocks . " GameSpot rated the next @-@ generation versions of the game a 9 @.@ 0 / 10 , calling Rock Band " one of the best party games of all time . " They also gave the game their Editor 's Choice award . The Xbox 360 version of Rock Band has an average critic score of 92 % , according to Metacritic , tying it for the 24th @-@ highest @-@ scored Xbox 360 game . Similarly , the PlayStation 3 version of Rock Band has an average critic score of 92 % on Metacritic , making it the 25th @-@ highest @-@ scored PlayStation 3 game . 
 Most critics have commended the Xbox 360 and PlayStation 3 versions of Rock Band for the game 's group gameplay , the depth of Band World Tour mode , and the introduction of a drum peripheral . Common complaints about the game focus on the different feel of the packaged Fender Stratocaster controller , as well as the game 's Solo Tour modes not being as enjoyable as the multiplayer offerings . IGN 's video review lamented the lack of a single player Band World Tour mode . 
 The PlayStation 2 version of the game was well received , but was subject to criticism for the omission of the character customization features , as well as the stripped @-@ down Band World Tour mode . GameSpot rated it an 8 @.@ 0 / 10 , stating that " Rock Band is still a lot of fun on the PS2 — it 's just nowhere near the ideal version of the experience . " IGN.com rated it an 8 @.@ 4 / 10 , noting that the removed features made the game feel like a " lessened " version , but that the game still " succeeds because it 's infinitely fun to play with your friends . " 
 Reviews for the Wii version of Rock Band also criticize the lack of features compared to the PlayStation 3 and Xbox 360 versions . The Wii version is basically the same as its PlayStation 2 counterpart , but IGN criticized it for its late release and their effort in completing a full game . However , IGN noted that the drum controller is an improvement over the original version , stating , " The pads are quieter and the kick pedal will withstand more abuse . " 
 = = = Sales = = = 
 By October 9 , 2008 , the game sold four million units and generated global revenues of $ 600 million . The sales of Rock Band helped Viacom to become the fifth @-@ largest video game publisher in the United States , although analysts estimated that Viacom was only breaking even on sales of the game . In a March 2011 list , the NPD Group listed Rock Band as the fifth @-@ highest @-@ grossing video game in the United States since 1995 , earning $ 670 @.@ 7 million in revenue . 
 By December 2008 , over 100 million downloadable songs purchases had been made from the Rock Band music store . Viacom estimated that it is averaging the sale of 1 million downloadable songs every 9 days . Sales of songs were in favor of hard rock bands ; Mötley Crüe 's single " Saints of Los Angeles " , debuting as a Rock Band track at the same time as the release of the album of the same name , saw 48 @,@ 000 Rock Band downloads and 14 @,@ 000 iTunes downloads during its first week of release . The popularity of some tracks also led to groups considering releasing more material for the game . Rush 's alternate version of " Working Man " released only for Rock Band was met with so much praise from players of Rock Band that the group released the song for download through iTunes , as well as considered making full albums available , which they went on to do for their 1981 album Moving Pictures , released for the game two months later . 
 = = = Awards = = = 
 Prior to the game 's release , Rock Band was featured at the 2007 E3 convention , garnering attention and several awards , including the Game Critics ' " Best of E3 2007 " awards for " Best of Show , " " Best Hardware / Peripheral , " and " Best Social / Casual / Puzzle , " 1UP.com 's " Best of E3 , " and GameSpot 's " Best Stage Demo " and " Best Xbox 360 Game . " 
 After its release , Rock Band won dozens of awards covering game releases from 2007 . The game won seven awards from IGN 's " Best of 2007 , " receiving honors for " Best Music Game " for the Xbox 360 and PlayStation 3 , " Best Local Multiplayer Game " for the Xbox 360 and PlayStation 3 , " Best Downloadable Content " for the PlayStation 3 , and " Best Console Peripheral , " as well as overall awards for " Best Music Game , " " Best Licensed Soundtrack , " and " Best Local Multiplayer Game . " GameSpot awarded Rock Band five awards in its " Best of 2007 , " recognizing the game for " Best Rhythm / Music Game , " " Best New Gaming Hardware , " " Best Downloadable Content , " " Best Sound Design , " and " Best Multiplayer Game . " Wired , Official Xbox Magazine , and Ars Technica all named Rock Band the " Game of the Year , " while Next Generation Magazine named it the second @-@ best game of 2007 . GamePro honored Rock Band with the " Innovation Award " for four @-@ person cooperative play , as well as the selection of " Best Party Game " of 2007 . GameSpy also recognized the game as the " Music Game of the Year " on the Xbox 360 and PlayStation 3 . Additionally , Rock Band was awarded " Best Multiplayer Experience ( console ) " by 1UP.com. The game won two awards at the 2007 Spike Video Game Awards , receiving honors for " Best Rhythm Game " and " Best Soundtrack , " while the game 's developer , Harmonix , won " Studio of the Year . " The game also won an award for " Best Multiplayer Game " in the X @-@ Play Best of 2007 Awards . The Academy of Interactive Arts and Sciences awarded Rock Band with honors for three of the eight categories in which it was nominated ; the game won awards for " Family Game of the Year " , " Outstanding Achievement in Soundtrack " , and " Outstanding Innovation in Gaming " . Rock Band was named " Best Party Game " of the year from Game Informer Magazine . The game has also been called the best rhythm game of all time by GameTap . 
 = = = Cultural impact = = = 
 Like the Guitar Hero series , Rock Band has had a significant impact on culture . Alex Rigopulos and Eran <unk> , the founders of Harmonix , were together named in Time Magazine 's list of the 100 most influential people of 2008 for their creation of Rock Band . In the article , guitarist Steven Van Zandt claims , " in the history of rock ' n ' roll , Rock Band may just turn out to be up there with the rise of FM radio , CDs , or MTV . " 
 = = = Sequel = = = 
 Rock Band 2 was officially announced on June 30 , 2008 , and was released on September 14 , 2008 on the Xbox 360 , with other platform releases following later in the year . Original instruments from Rock Band are compatible with Rock Band 2 , which features new instruments that been described as quieter and more reliable . Furthermore , both existing and any forthcoming downloadable content will be cross @-@ compatible between Rock Band and Rock Band 2 . Rock Band 2 saw enhancements to the existing Band World Tour mode , as well as inclusions of new " Drum Trainer " and " Battle of the Bands " modes . 55 of the 58 Rock Band songs can be exported for use in Rock Band 2 , with the purchase of a $ 5 export key . 
 = = = Patent litigation = = = 
 On March 21 , 2008 , EA , MTV , and Harmonix were sued by the Gibson Guitar Corporation for violation of the 1999 U.S. Patent 5 @,@ 990 @,@ 405 , which Gibson claims covers technology that simulates a concert performance via pre @-@ recorded audio and a musical instrument ; this follows similar action that Gibson has taken against the Guitar Hero series , which was later settled out of court . The Gibson @-@ Harmonix case was put on hold shortly after its filing to allow the United States Patent and Trademark Office to open a re @-@ examination of the 405 patent . On subsequent review , the 405 patent was modified to more exactly define the type of musical instrument that the patent covers , as the original language had conflicted with U.S. Patent 5 @,@ 488 @,@ 196 . Due to the change in language , Harmonix sought to have the case go forward and requested a summary judgement , believing that the new language of the 405 patent did not include the Rock Band controllers . In mid 2010 , the case was settled between all parties under non @-@ disclosed terms . 
 On July 10 , 2008 , Konami filed a separate lawsuit against Harmonix , Viacom , and MTV attempting to block the sale of Rock Band , over infringement of their patents on a " musical @-@ rhythm matching game " issued in 2002 and 2003 , including U.S. Patent 6 @,@ 390 @,@ 923 . An MTV spokesperson expressed that the lawsuit was " extremely surprising " and that they intend to defend themselves against the suit . On December 2 , 2008 , Viacom issued a countersuit against Konami , claiming that Rock Band significantly improves on Konami 's original patent , and that their Rock Revolution game uses controllers that are similar to Rock Band . Both suits were settled for undisclosed terms in September 2010 . 
 = Made in the Dark = 
 Made in the Dark is the third studio album by English indietronica band Hot Chip . The album , comprising 13 songs , was released on 4 February 2008 on the EMI label . It peaked at number four on the UK Album Chart , number 25 on the Australian album charts , and entered at number 109 on the U.S. Billboard 200 . Several singles have been released from the album , including " Shake a Fist " , " Ready for the Floor " , which reached number six on the UK Singles Chart , and " One Pure Thought " . 
 A defining feature of the album is the strong presence of romantic ballads . The ballad " Made in the Dark " was described as " sublime " by one critic , although not all the ballads received universal praise . Alexis Taylor , the main contributor to the lyrics , stated that he was proud of the album lyrically and felt that feelings of love and happiness , partly the result of his recent marriage , had contributed to the album 's romantic tone . 
 Critics stated that songs such as " Ready for the Floor " and " Bendable Poseable " were reminiscent of their previous release , The Warning . The style of the album was not considered as big a leap forward as the changes evident between Coming on Strong ( 2004 ) to The Warning ( 2006 ) . It was said that Hot Chip had honed their music by using quirks of their musical style to make more accomplished music , however , some critics felt that the album lacked focus , containing too many varied elements ; it was described as " loveable but flawed " . 
 = = Production = = 
 Hot Chip often record their music in a bedroom . However , the band took a different approach in recording Made in the Dark to make it sound " not quite so homemade " . Recording took place in a variety of locations , including in @-@ studio and live venues , to make " different acoustic spaces to be obvious to the listener " . Lead vocalist Alexis Taylor said there was tension between the band 's members , as the band did not want to continue creating music in the same way , but also did not want to " throw away a songwriting and production partnership that has worked before . " Taylor and vocalist Joe Goddard worked on some of the songs together . Several songs were overdubbed with parts of the rest of the band playing . 
 In regards to editing , Taylor said that Hot Chip have " never really been too good at bothering to get rid of little imperfections in the music " ; he felt they added personality and said that " it 's good not to be too dogmatic about it if that 's what suits the song " . Hot Chip used a variety of vocal structures , including layered vocals , where two takes of the same vocals were added together , changed by idiosyncrasies from the way it had been sung , and the doubling of a single performance , shifted out of beat . 
 Drummer Felix Martin said Made in the Dark was a " true group effort " . The process began with Taylor and Goddard creating lyrics , then Goddard would produce parts of tracks , which Alexis would then add " lyrical content and melodies and so on that he 's thought of while he 's on the bus or in the bath or wherever he happened to be " . The other three members of Hot Chip , Owen Clarke , Al Doyle , and Felix Martin would then " have some influence on the way the songs are put together . " 
 Some equipment used to create the album remained the same as previous albums — Goddard used Steinberg Cubase <unk> on his laptop and Doyle and Martin worked on songs using Apple Logic in their studio . To create the chorus for " Ready for the Floor " , Goddard used plug @-@ ins from <unk> , such as Moog Modular . He used two sound channels to control noise and melody , and placed the noise channel in Cubase and had it follow the melody , to make it " punchier " . With " Bendable Poseable " , Goddard recorded live percussion parts with a Shure Beta <unk> mic going directly into Cubase and " fashioned them into a jittery , three @-@ minute loop " . This was emailed to Taylor , who then recorded the main vocals for the song . To create the beat in " Shake a Fist " Martin used the Elektron <unk> . 
 Hot Chip enjoy being a live band and have said it is " something [ they 've ] always tried to do " . As the group contains " a lot of different types of musicianship " , the band " have to be spontaneous whenever [ they ] can . " Doyle , the guitarist , stated that Hot Chip change the original recordings when playing their music live . At the London @-@ based studio called the Strongroom , " One Pure Thought " , " Hold On " and " Shake a Fist " were recorded live , instead of on multitrack , and were subsequently pieced together . This was the first occasion that Hot Chip had recorded music in a studio environment . 
 Taylor described Made in the Dark as " a real mix of different things " and said that Hot Chip was " learning how to be a different kind of band " while making the album : 
 Everyone around us would write songs whilst touring , then go into a studio and record [ songs ] at the end of a year 's touring . We were the opposite . We would make the songs in a short time and then would have to learn how to play them live . 
 = = = Album title = = = 
 Several titles were considered during production , including " Shot Down in Flames " and " IV " . The former was rejected because Martin thought it sounded like a title The Beta Band would use . Taylor supported the name " IV " because he liked " giving people the wrong impression all the time " , and defended his opinion , saying " if [ people ] give us any time , they would see that we 're very serious about comedy ... and serious things as well " . The album was called " Made in the Dark " because it was a title the band agreed on . Taylor considered the eponymous track to be one of his favourite songs , and thought it was nice to name the album after a thoughtful song , in contrast to Coming on Strong and The Warning , which he described as being " big , slightly jokey , macho phrases " . 
 = = = Artwork = = = 
 Darren Wall ( <unk> ) and Owen Clarke designed the artwork after several graphical experiments . After the initial experimentation , Wall wanted to create a cover that was " more brooding and conservative " and formed a list of ideas that the band had responded positively to . The list included dual colour illustrations , circles , and verdigris — the green coating formed on copper during oxygenation . Wall amalgamated the ideas to create the image used on the album 's cover , which was named " The Artifact " . The image was embossed on metallic copper card to give a " tactile feel " that would imply the album was " an object rather than illustration @-@ based design . " 
 = = Musical style = = 
 In an interview with Pitchfork Media in October 2007 , Taylor said there would be an equal proportion of electronic elements to live material , as the band doesn 't " do things by adding one thing and taking something else away " . The album contained maximalist and minimalist songs ; several tracks on the album were influenced by rock and heavy metal music , and the track " Wrestlers " started taking a new direction because the band was " wrestling with the idea of making an R. Kelly kind of slick R and B number " and ultimately " [ sounded ] more like Randy Newman 's " Short People " . He said , " if the press release says it 's faster and rockier it doesn 't account for the fact that there are more ballads on this record than any other record . " Taylor said that feelings of happiness and love influenced the album 's romantic feel . 
 Goddard considered varying styles and influences a key factor in the band 's music . He explained to The Sun that creating music could be difficult because a member could introduce a different influence . Goddard and Doyle said that clashes and restlessness during recording led to " unpleasant " periods of silence , but ultimately thought the clashes created " something more interesting because you have these different voices and not one person dictating " . 
 Martin told The Georgia Straight that the group are " afflicted with something akin to musical attention @-@ deficit disorder " and said that the group " get bored quite easily [ ... ] with [ their ] own records at times " . He elaborated by saying that the group aren 't " really interested in reproducing the same sound " because they don 't find it exciting . 
 Taylor stated Hot Chip " didn 't set out to make something with one mood " and that he thought the band 's style of " jump [ ing ] all over the place stylistically " made sense as a record . In an interview with The Georgia Straight , Martin expressed that Hot Chip didn 't want to create a " ' classic ' record that would have a particular sound " as they wanted to make music that was " quite experimental and out @-@ there " . Made in the Dark was intended to represent the " whole live sound of the band " and they are " a band as much as originally having been a duo " . 
 = = = Influences = = = 
 The album is influenced by music Goddard and Taylor listened to during their childhood and adolescence , such as Prince 's Sign o ' the Times and The Beatles ' White Album . Taylor explained why Hot Chip 's albums " go from one mood to another so readily " , by saying " Eclectic music has been our first musical background " and that he and Goddard had different musical interests when they were younger . Made in the Dark is influenced by contemporary artists such as Black Dice and Will Oldham . Taylor appreciated Oldham for his minimalism of " just acoustic guitar and harmonium and voice for the whole record " and wanted Hot Chip to emulate him . 
 = = Lyrics = = 
 Taylor stated in an interview with The Sun that he was " so proud of [ the album ] lyrically " and thought the song " Made in the Dark " contained the best lyrics he had ever written . Taylor explained that it was " very easy " for him to focus on the " more serious lyrics , like a love song very dear to [ his ] heart " but stated that " Wrestlers " was " equally as important and feels like a very different style of music than we have ever got down on record before . " He discussed " Wrestlers " in the band 's interview with The Sun , explaining that the song is " musically and lyrically quite direct " because " it doesn 't have thousands of layers " , in contrast to the song " Bendable Poseable " . The concept of the song " Wrestlers " , originates from a text message from James Murphy of LCD Soundsystem . After Doyle toured with Murphy , Murphy sent a text message that said , " Sorry you can 't have Al back , I 'll wrestle you for him . And I 'll beat you because I 'm bigger and stronger than you . " Goddard explained that " the words in that song are about wrestling " , and the band " have no doubt " that Murphy would defeat them in a wrestling fight . 
 The song " Ready for the Floor " contains an allusion to the 1989 film , Batman , with the line , " You 're my number one guy " . In an interview with The Fader magazine , Taylor said the reference was a result of thinking about the Batman film , which has many things that Taylor is fond of , such as the Prince soundtrack . He commented that sometimes those items " seep into what we 're writing about " and said that he likes to reference " in an oblique way " . He conjectured that he had included the line to say something to " everyone in the band , particularly to Joe [ Goddard ] , ' You 're my number one guy , why is there any problems between any of us ? ' " 
 " Shake a Fist " was written by Taylor after Goddard took a legal herbal substance during the Glastonbury Festival which produced feelings akin to teleportation . Goddard said , " it was a brilliant time " and told Alexis to write down words to go with his experience . The song features a voice sample from Todd Rundgren . 
 " Out at the Pictures " is an oblique homage to inexpensive British pub chain Wetherspoons , who are thanked in the album inlay . 
 = = Featured collaborators = = 
 In March 2008 , Hot Chip re @-@ recorded several songs from Made in the Dark , with one of their " all @-@ time heroes " , Robert Wyatt . Doyle said the band had wanted it to happen " for ages " and that people would see it as a surprise collaboration . Taylor said , " I crave confusion and quite like people to be surprised . I try to do that in the words and music and try to be what people don 't think we are . Robert is someone we have liked for much longer than people realise . We feel closer to people in a different field , age or era . " The album features Emma Smith , who had previously joined with Hot Chip to play violin and saxophone on their first two albums . 
 = = = Kylie Minogue = = = 
 In October 2007 , MTV reported that Hot Chip was planning to give " Ready for the Floor " to Kylie Minogue . Other reports incorrectly suggested that Hot Chip had written Made in the Dark 's second single , " Ready for the Floor " specifically for Minogue . Taylor explained that it was a misunderstanding ; " It started because someone asked me if we would ever write for Kylie . I said that we 'd been asked to write for her but we 'd never got round to it . And I said if we had to give her one of our songs , " Ready for the Floor " would probably be the most suitable . From that , I got misquoted . We didn 't write " Ready for the Floor " for Kylie , didn 't send it to her and she never heard it . " 
 After the first rumour circulated , Joe Goddard created a reverse rumour , saying that Minogue had written a track for Hot Chip . He told NME , " Kylie wrote a song for us , She sent it through our management to us – it was totally bizarre . It was the beginnings of a track – I think she wrote it and just thought , ' This would be perfect for Hot Chip ' , or possibly for a collaboration . It 's a crazy song . It 's industrial and clanging and even has farmyard animal noises on it . It 's the kind of music you 'd never normally associate with Kylie . When I 'm allowed to send it around it 's going to change a few people 's ideas about her . Maybe it 's one for our next album , after Made in the Dark . " Taylor later admitted that it was a joke created to fool people because the band were tired of people phoning them up to ask why Minogue had apparently rejected a song she did not hear . Goddard said , " We 've been telling lots of lies and rumours about it because we found it quite funny . " 
 In January 2010 , Goddard stated that " at the beginning there was some contact . As I recall , we were going to do a session with one of her writers " but both Hot Chip and Minogue were too busy at the time . He added " there was a grain of truth in the beginning , but then it all snowballed into some big silly thing " . When asked , in 2010 , about giving a song to Minogue , he stated that it would be " amazing " . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 Made in the Dark charted for 23 weeks in over 10 different charts , entering the UK Album Chart at number four , the Billboard Top Heatseekers chart at number one and the Billboard Top Electronic Albums chart at number two . The album , according to Nielsen SoundScan data reported by Billboard , has sold 47 @,@ 000 copies and has been certified Gold for UK sales . 
 " Shake a Fist " , the first single to be released from the album , was released on 12 " vinyl single at the beginning of October 2007 but did not chart . The second single released , " Ready for the Floor " , charted for 24 weeks in five different charts , peaking at number six on the UK Singles Top 75 . 
 = = = Promotion = = = 
 In January 2008 , in order to promote Made in the Dark , Hot Chip " locked [ themselves ] away " to practice in anticipation of an American tour , where material from their new album would be played . The band are not accustomed to such an intensive rehearsal regime , as they " usually just rehearse for two days and then go on tour " . 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 The critical reception to the album was generally favourable . Based on 40 reviews , review aggregate website Metacritic reported a rating of 78 out of 100 . There were mixed comments about the ballads ; two reviewers noted a disparity between the energy of the ballads to different songs . Drowned in Sound commented that , " ballads remain a strong suit , particularly the easy grace of the title track , but more often than not sit awkwardly next to the more toothsome numbers and feel under @-@ produced by comparison " with similar comments from AllMusic who said , " Made in the Dark 's main weakness might be its ballads , but that may just be in comparison to its many energetic moments , which are so addictive that it feels like a forced come @-@ down whenever the band slows things down . " However , The Observer gave a positive evaluation of the ballads ; " Hot Chip have had a happy way with a subliminal power ballad . And Made in the Dark can boast four of the best . " Pitchfork Media rated the album as 7 / 10 with a mixed review , describing it as a " patchy , turbulent record " due to the use of many different individual components and also said that it was a " good record but not a great one " . Martin responded to the criticism made by Pitchfork Media : 
 I think the fact that we 've managed to be successful , in getting good chart positions in the U.K. and at the same time making a record that is actually quite weird and confusing to even a site like Pitchfork — the guy doesn 't seem to actually get what we 're trying to do — it 's kind of cool to me . 
 Pitchfork Media , despite their initial rating , went on to list the album number 23 on their list of the fifty best albums of 2008 , and would later state that " its bold charms have lent it a fond longevity . " Another element that caused mixed reception was the use of a Todd Rundgren sample in " Shake a Fist " , which musicOMH.com called " delightful " but The Guardian described it as <unk> musicOMH.com , whose description of the album was positive , said that tracks " Ready for the Floor " and " Bendable Poseable " had elements reminiscent of previous album The Warning . The Times said that although the execution was " novel " and the song " Made in the Dark " was " exquisite " , that much of Made in the Dark " seems to spring from sticky relationship issues " . Comparisons were also made to Paul McCartney 's McCartney II album with songs like " Wrestlers " , " Bendable Poseable " , " Whistle for Will " and " We 're Looking for a Lot of Love " , which were described as having the " airless proto @-@ electronica " of McCartney II . 
 In regards to lyrics , Allmusic said the album " boasts some of Hot Chip 's most kinetic music , with rhythms and melodies that are just as hyper @-@ articulate as the word play . " Rolling Stone summarised the album as having " catchy tunes , monster grooves , and lyrics resolving the heartfelt and the smartass " . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All songs written by Hot Chip , except where noted . 
 " Out at the Pictures " – 4 : 26 
 " Shake a Fist " ( Hot Chip , Todd Rundgren ) – 5 : 11 
 " Ready for the Floor " – 3 : 52 
 " Bendable Poseable " – 3 : 46 
 " We 're Looking for a Lot of Love " – 4 : 43 
 " Touch Too Much " – 4 : 05 
 " Made in the Dark " – 3 : 00 
 " One Pure Thought " – 4 : 53 
 " Hold On " – 6 : 20 
 " Wrestlers " – 3 : 45 
 " Don 't Dance " – 4 : 42 
 " Whistle for Will " – 2 : 23 
 " In the Privacy of Our Love " – 2 : 52 
 iTunes bonus tracks 
 " So Deep " – 2 : 34 
 " With Each New Day " – 2 : 58 
 iTunes deluxe version bonus tracks 
 " Touch Too Much " ( Fake Blood Remix ) – 5 : 52 
 " Hold On " ( Switch LDN Remix ) – 4 : 01 
 " Touch Too Much " ( Ewan Pearson Remix ) – 9 : 32 
 " Wrestlers " ( Video ) – 3 : 59 
 West Coast Tour Documentary – 17 : 25 
 Japanese bonus tracks 
 " Bubbles They Bounce " – 5 : 53 
 " My Brother Is Watching Me " – 3 : 49 
 Special edition bonus DVD 
 " Shake a Fist " ( Live at Melt ! ) 
 " And I Was a Boy from School " ( Live at Melt ! ) 
 " Hold On " ( Live at the Electric Ballroom ) 
 " One Pure Thought " ( Live at Glastonbury Festival ) 
 " Over and Over " ( Live at Glastonbury Festival ) 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Dan Carey – mixing 
 Owen Clarke – design 
 Jonathan Digby – engineer 
 Ian Dowling – engineer ( assistant ) 
 Matt Edwards – A & R 
 Joe Goddard – mix control 
 James Shaw – engineer ( assistant ) 
 Darren Simpson – engineer ( assistant ) 
 Alexis Smith – mixing ( assistant ) 
 Emma Smith – violin , saxophone 
 <unk> – design 
 Alexis Taylor – vocals , synthesizer , guitar , percussion , piano 
 Joe Goddard – vocals , synthesizer , percussion 
 Owen Clarke – guitar , bass 
 Al Doyle – guitar , synthesizer , percussion , backing vocals 
 Felix Martin – drum machines 
 = = Chart positions = = 
 = = = Album = = = 
 = = = Singles = = = 
 " — " denotes releases that did not chart . 
 = Acra ( fortress ) = 
 The Acra ( or <unk> , Hebrew : <unk> or <unk> , Greek : <unk> ) was a fortified compound in Jerusalem built by Antiochus Epiphanes , ruler of the Seleucid Empire , following his sack of the city in 168 BCE . The fortress played a significant role in the events surrounding the Maccabean Revolt and the formation of the Hasmonean Kingdom . It was destroyed by Simon Maccabeus during this struggle . 
 The exact location of the Acra , critical to understanding Hellenistic Jerusalem , had been a matter of lengthy discussions . Historians and archaeologists had proposed various sites around Jerusalem , relying mainly on conclusions drawn from literary evidence . This approach began to change in the light of excavations which commenced in the late 1960s . New discoveries had prompted reassessments of the ancient literary sources , Jerusalem 's geography and previously discovered artifacts . Yoram Tsafrir had interpreted a masonry joint in the southeastern corner of the Temple Mount platform as a clue to the Acra 's possible position . During Benjamin Mazar 's 1968 and 1978 excavations adjacent to the south wall of the Mount , features were uncovered which may have been connected with the Acra , including barrack @-@ like rooms and a huge cistern . In November 2015 the Israel Antiquities Authority announced the likely discovery of the Acra in a different location , south @-@ west of the Temple Mount and north @-@ west of the City of David . 
 The ancient Greek term acra was used to describe other fortified structures during the Hellenistic period . The Acra is often called the Seleucid Acra to distinguish it from references to the Ptolemaic Baris as an acra and from the later quarter in Jerusalem which inherited the name Acra . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 Following Alexander the Great 's death in 323 BCE , Judea was contested between the Ptolemaic Kingdom in Egypt , and the Seleucid Empire based in Syria and Mesopotamia . Seleucid emperor Antiochus III 's victory over Egypt in the Battle of Panium brought Judea under Seleucid control . The Jewish population of Jerusalem had aided Antiochus during his siege of the Baris , the fortified base of Jerusalem 's Egyptian garrison . Their support was rewarded with a charter affirming Jewish religious autonomy , including barring foreigners and impure animals from the Temple 's precincts , and an allocation of official funds for the maintenance of certain religious rituals in the Temple . Despite being allowed religious freedom , many Jews were enticed by and adopted elements of the prestigious and influential Greek lifestyle . The imperial culture offered a route to political and material advancement , and this led to the formation of Hellenistic elites among the Jewish population . Hellenization produced tensions between observant Jews and their brethren who had assimilated Greek culture . 
 Antiochus IV Epiphanes ascended the Seleucid throne in 175 BCE . Shortly afterward , Epiphanes was petitioned by Jason for appointment to the position of High Priest of Israel — an office occupied by his brother <unk> III . Jason , himself thoroughly Hellenized , furthermore promised to increase the tribute paid by the city and to establish within it the infrastructure of a Greek Polis , including a gymnasium and an <unk> . Jason 's petition was granted , yet after a 42 @-@ month rule he was ousted by Antiochus and forced to flee to Ammon . In the meantime , Antiochus IV had launched two invasions of Egypt , in 170 BCE and again in 169 BCE , and routed the Ptolemaic armies . Antiochus ' victories were short @-@ lived . His intent to unify the Seleucid and Ptolemaic kingdoms alarmed the rapidly expanding Roman state , which demanded that he withdraw his forces from Egypt . With Antiochus engaged in Egypt , a false rumor spread in Jerusalem that he had been killed . In the ensuing uncertainty , Jason gathered a force of 1 @,@ 000 followers and attempted to take Jerusalem by storm . Although the attack was repulsed , when word of the fighting reached Antiochus in Egypt , he suspected his Judean subjects of exploiting his setback as an opportunity to revolt . In 168 BCE , Antiochus IV Epiphanes marched on and sacked Jerusalem , looting the temple treasury and killing thousands of its residents . Reversing his father 's policy , Antiochus IV issued decrees outlawing traditional Jewish rites and persecuting observant Jews . Temple rituals were discontinued , Jewish observance of Sabbath prohibited , and circumcision outlawed . 
 = = = Construction = = = 
 To consolidate his hold on the city , monitor events on the Temple Mount and safeguard the Hellenized faction in Jerusalem , Antiochus stationed a Seleucid garrison in the city : 
 And they built the city of David with a great and strong wall , and with strong towers , and made it a fortress [ Greek : Acra ] for them : And they placed there a sinful nation , wicked men , and they fortified themselves therein : and they stored up armour , and victuals , and gathered together the spoils of Jerusalem ; And laid them up there : and they became a great snare . And this was a place to lie in wait against the sanctuary , and an evil devil in Israel . 
 The name Acra derived from the Greek acropolis and signified a lofty fortified place overlooking a town . In Jerusalem , the word came to symbolize anti @-@ Jewish paganism : a fortress of the " impious and wicked " . Dominating both the city and the surrounding countryside , it was occupied not only by a Greek garrison but by their Jewish confederates as well . 
 The Seleucid suppression of Jewish religious life met with considerable resistance among the native population . While Antiochus was occupied in the east during 167 BCE , a rural priest , Mattathias of <unk> , raised a rebellion against the empire . Both the Seleucid administration and the local Hellenized faction failed to grasp the magnitude of the revolt . In 164 BCE Judas Maccabaeus liberated Jerusalem and reconsecrated the Temple . Although the surrounding city had fallen , the Acra and its inhabitants held out . Maccabaeus besieged the fortress , whose inhabitants sent an appeal to the Seleucid king ( now Antiochus V ) for assistance . A Seleucid army was dispatched to put down the revolt . When it laid siege to Beth @-@ Zur , Maccabaeus was forced to abandon his siege of the Acra and face Antiochus in battle . In the subsequent Battle of Beth @-@ Zechariah , the Seleucids won their first victory over the Maccabees , and Maccabaeus was forced to withdraw . <unk> from capitulation , the Acra persisted as a Seleucid stronghold for 20 more years during which it weathered several Hasmonean attempts to oust the Greek garrison . 
 = = = Destruction = = = 
 Judas was killed in 160 BCE and succeeded by his brother Jonathan , who attempted to build a barrier to cut off the Acra 's supply line . Jonathan had already assembled the manpower required for the task when he was forced to confront the invading army of Seleucid general Diodotus Tryphon at Beth Shan ( Scythopolis ) . Having invited Jonathan to a friendly conference , Tryphon had him seized and murdered . Jonathan was succeeded by another brother , Simon , who besieged and finally captured the Acra in 141 BCE . 
 Two sources provide information about the ultimate fate of the Acra , although their accounts are contradictory in places . According to Josephus , Simon razed the Acra after ousting its inhabitants , and then quarried the hill on which it had stood to render it lower than the temple , purge the city of its evil memory and deny it to any future occupier of Jerusalem . The account appearing in 1 Maccabees paints a different picture : 
 And Simon decreed that every year they should celebrate this day with rejoicing . He strengthened the fortifications of the temple hill alongside the citadel [ Greek : Acra ] , and he and his men dwelt there . 
 Thus in this version , Simon did not immediately demolish the Acra , but instead had it occupied and may even have resided within it himself . 1 Maccabees does not mention its ultimate fate . The fortress had been built as an internal checkpoint to monitor and control Jerusalem and its population . If situated in the City of David as most scholars agree , its location would have added very little to Jerusalem 's defenses against external threats . It may have fallen out of use and been dismantled around the end of the 2nd century BCE following the construction of the Hasmonean Baris and Hasmonean Palace in Jerusalem 's upper city . 
 Bezalel Bar @-@ <unk> offers a different theory : The Acra was still standing in 139 BCE when Antiochus VII Sidetes demanded it back from Simon , along with Jaffa and Gezer , two Hellenized cities Simon had captured . Simon was willing to discuss the two cities but made no mention of the Acra . It was at this point that he must have sealed its fate , as a way to deny the Seleucids any future claim or hold on Jerusalem . Thus , when Antiochus VII subdued the city during Hyrcanus I 's reign , each and every one of his demands were met — except the one demanding the stationing of a Seleucid garrison in the city . Hyrcanus may have been able to reject , and Antiochus to drop , this demand because there was nowhere to billet the garrison , as the Acra would no longer have been standing . This explanation places the razing of the Acra somewhere in the 130s BCE . 
 = = Location = = 
 The location of the Acra is important for understanding how events unfolded in Jerusalem during the struggle between Maccabean and Seleucid forces . This has been the subject of debate among modern scholars . The most detailed ancient description of the nature and location of the Acra is found in Josephus ' Antiquities of the Jews , where it is described as residing in the Lower City , upon a hill overlooking the Temple enclosure : 
 ... and when he had overthrown the city walls , he built a citadel [ Greek : Acra ] in the lower part of the city , for the place was high , and overlooked the temple ; on which account he fortified it with high walls and towers , and put into it a garrison of Macedonians . However , in that citadel dwelt the impious and wicked part of the multitude , from whom it proved that the citizens suffered many and sore calamities . 
 The location of the " lower part of the city " , elsewhere referred to as the " Lower City " , at the time of Josephus ( 1st century CE ) is accepted to be Jerusalem 's south @-@ eastern hill , the original urban center traditionally known as the City of David . Lying to the south of the Temple Mount , however , the area exposed today is significantly lower than the Mount itself . The top of the Mount is approximately 30 metres ( 98 ft ) above the ground level at the southern retaining wall of the later Herodian @-@ era expansion of the Temple enclosure . The elevation decreases to the south of this point . Josephus , a native of Jerusalem , would have been well aware of this discrepancy , yet is nevertheless able to explain it away by describing how Simon had razed both the Acra and the hill on which it had stood . Archaeological research south of the Temple Mount , however , has failed to locate any evidence for such large scale quarrying . On the contrary , excavations in the region have uncovered substantial evidence of habitation from the beginning of the first millennium BCE down to Roman times , casting doubt on the suggestion that during Hellenistic times the area was significantly higher than it was at the time of Josephus or that a large hill had been cleared away . This had led many researchers to disregard Josephus ' account and his placing of the Acra , and suggest several alternate locations . Since 1841 , when Edward Robinson proposed the area near the Church of the Holy Sepulchre as the site of the Acra , at least nine different locations in and around the Old City of Jerusalem have been put forward . 
 = = = Western hill = = = 
 Several researchers have attempted to place the Acra in the Upper City on Jerusalem 's western hill , within the area currently occupied by the Old City 's Jewish Quarter . These propositions seek to locate the Acra within Antiochia , the Hellenistic polis established in Jerusalem according to 2 Maccabees . This conjectural new city would have been <unk> in plan and therefore would have required a flat expanse of land which only the western hill could have provided . Furthermore , the eastern edge of the hill is adjacent to the Temple Mount and higher in altitude — two characteristics attributed to the Seleucid citadel . 
 Opponents of this proposed location point out that there is very little archaeological or historical evidence supporting the establishment of a Hellenistic polis within Jerusalem , let alone sited on the western hill which appears to have been only sparsely populated during the Hellenistic period . Excavations in today 's Jewish Quarter display evidence of habitation from the First Temple Period , as well as renewed Hasmonean and Herodian settlement , but scant evidence of Hellenistic occupation . Research into the dispersal of stamped Rhodian amphorae handles has revealed that over 95 % of these handles found in Jerusalem were excavated from the City of David , indicating the city had not yet expanded to the western hill during Seleucid rule . Furthermore , the western hill is separated from the Temple Mount and the City of David by the steep Tyropoeon Valley — a distinct tactical disadvantage for any force that may have been required to intervene in events within the temple precincts or heavily populated eastern sectors of Jerusalem . 
 = = = North of the Temple = = = 
 The Acra was not the first Hellenistic stronghold in Jerusalem . Sources indicate that an earlier citadel , the Ptolemaic Baris , had also occupied a location overlooking the Temple 's precincts . Although the exact location of the Baris is still debated , it is generally accepted to have stood north of the Temple Mount on the site later occupied by the Antonia Fortress . The Baris fell to Antiochus III at the turn of the 2nd century BCE and is absent from all accounts of the Maccabean Revolt . Despite the narratives which have the Acra constructed within a very short time @-@ span , it was nevertheless formidable enough to weather long periods of siege . These factors , coupled with references in which the Baris was itself called an acra , have led some to suggest that the Baris and the Acra were in fact the same structure . Although both 1 Maccabees and Josephus seem to describe the Acra as a new construction , this may not have been the case . Antiquities of the Jews 12 : 253 may be translated to give the sense that the " impious or wicked " had " remained " rather than " dwelt " in the citadel , which could be taken to mean that the Acra had been standing before the revolt and that only the Macedonian garrison was new . 
 Koen <unk> proposes that Josephus wrote of " a citadel in the lower part of the city " to an audience that would have been familiar with the Jerusalem of the 1st century CE — a city that did feature two citadels : the Antonia Fortress and the Herodian palace . As Josephus ' Roman Jerusalem had already expanded to the higher western hill , " a citadel in the lower city " could have referred to anything located east of the Tyropoeon Valley , including the Antonia which stood north of the Temple and did indeed rise above and dominate it . In his view , this is the place Josephus must have had in mind when he wrote of the Acra . 
 Opponents of a northern location counter that this site is not supported by the historical sources , and that this would place the Acra away from Jerusalem 's population center . Unlike its predecessor and successor citadels , it was not meant as a defence against external threat , but rather to oversee the inhabited Jewish parts of the city , a role incompatible with a proposed northern location . 
 = = = A fortified compound in the City of David = = = 
 The available sources do indicate the Acra stood south of the temple , and because 1 Maccabees is a contemporaneous account of the Maccabean revolt , its account of the Acra ( 1 : 35 – 38 ) is considered the most reliable . Josephus provides an unlikely account of the razing of a hill on which the Acra had stood , yet his description of the end of the Great Revolt ( 70 CE ) provides additional evidence for it being located south of the Temple Mount : 
 ... but on the next day they set fire to the repository of the archives , to Acra , to the council @-@ house , and to the place called <unk> ; at which time the fire proceeded as far as the palace of queen Helena , which was in the middle of Acra ; 
 As the other buildings mentioned in the account all stood to the south in the Lower City , this also places the Acra there . This account attests to the persistence of the name " Acra " in this part of Jerusalem many years after Hellenistic rule ended and its citadels had been overthrown , and it can also be seen as referring not to a distinct building but rather to an entire region of the city . Indeed , several clauses in 1 Maccabees may be read as making a similar point : 
 However , two further excerpts from Flavius Josephus " The Wars of the Jews " seem to cloud the issue . 
 .... AND now the seditious rushed into the royal palace , into which many had put their effects , because it was so strong , and drove the Romans away from it . They also slew all the people that had crowded into it , who were in number about eight thousand four hundred , and plundered them of what they had " . 
 Flavius Josephus | The Wars of the Jews 7 : 1 
 The foundations of that royal palace have been tentatively identified in the City of David as the Stepped Stone Structure , by Eilat Mazar . 
 .... On the next day the Romans drove the robbers out of the lower city , and set all on fire as far as Siloam . These soldiers were indeed glad to see the city destroyed . But they missed the plunder , because the seditious had carried off all their effects , and were retired into the upper city ; for they did not yet at all repent of the mischiefs they had done , but were insolent , as if they had done well ; for , as they saw the city on fire , they appeared cheerful , and put on joyful countenances , in expectation , as they said , of death to end their miseries . Accordingly , as the people were now slain , the holy house was burnt down , and the city was on fire , there was nothing further left for the enemy to do . " . 
 Flavius Josephus | The Wars of the Jews 7 : 2 
 Reading Josephus with the benefit of knowledge gained from recent archaeological discoveries enables an alternative interpretation of his writings : " but on the next day the Romans set fire to the repository of the archives ( Benjamin Mazar noted that his excavations of Robinson 's Arch between 1968 & 1977 revealed that the same supporting pier was also the eastern external wall of a monumental building , which Mazar suggested held the archives of Jerusalem mentioned by Josephus ) , to Acra , to the council @-@ house ? and to the place called Ophel ; the fire proceeded as far as the palace of Queen Helena , which was built in the middle of & also upon the ruins of the <unk> Acra . At which time , the Jews rushed into the royal palace , into which many had put their effects , because it was so strong and drove the Romans troops away from it . They also slew all the people that had crowded into it , who were in number about eight thousand four hundred , and plundered them of what they had . 
 On the next day the Romans drove these robbers out of the lower city , and set all on fire as far as Siloam . ( No further mention of Acra being an entire Hellenistic quarter ) . These soldiers were indeed glad to see the city destroyed . But the Romans missed out on the plunder , because the robbers had escaped to the upper city with their booty & did not yet at all repent of the mischiefs they had done , but were insolent & cheerful ; they were thinking they had done well considering that as the City of David was on fire , the holy house was burnt down & most of the people were now slain , there was nothing further left for the Romans to do to them " . 
 The Israeli Antiquities Authority have not rescinded their report about identifying the remains of the Seleucid Acra underneath the palace of Queen Helena that they also identified with remains excavated in 2007 in the Gi <unk> Parking Lot digs . They are presently convinced that the ruins are separate from any part of other fortifications of the City of David in the Hellenistic period ( c . 300- 141 BC ) . 
 About five hundred men of the army of Nicanor fell , and the rest fled into the city of David . 
 And in his days things prospered in his hands , so that the Gentiles were put out of the country , as were also the men in the city of David in Jerusalem , who had built themselves a citadel [ Greek : Acra ] from which they used to sally forth and defile the environs of the sanctuary and do great damage to its purity . 
 These suggest that , after the sacking of Jerusalem by Antiochus IV in 168 BCE , at least part of the City of David to the south of the Temple Mount was rebuilt as a fortified Hellenistic quarter of Jerusalem . More than a citadel , it was a Macedonian colony where Jewish renegades and supporters of the new regime lived . This is also supported by archaeological evidence , including Rhodian amphorae handles and 18 box graves found on the eastern slope of the City of David . The latter are dated to the early 2nd century CE , and are uncharacteristic of Second Temple era Jewish burial practices , yet similar to other known Hellenistic graveyards such as the one in Acre ( Ptolemais ) . 
 = = = A citadel nevertheless = = = 
 Even if the name " Acra " were applied to an entire Hellenistic quarter rather than to just a fortress , it is likely that a citadel would have stood within that compound to billet the Macedonian garrison which occupied it . It was normal for a Hellenistic city to have a fortified stronghold at or near the highest point of its walled area . Thus , whether a part of a larger enclave or independent of its surroundings , a citadel probably did stand at the northern tip of the City of David just south of the Temple Mount . Archaeologists have tried to use finds from excavations conducted in the area to pinpoint this citadel 's precise location . 
 Yoram Tsafrir has attempted to place the Acra underneath the southeastern corner of the Temple Mount enclosure . Tsafrir points to a straight vertical seam in the enclosure 's eastern masonry wall as evidence of different periods of construction . North of the seam is an early section of the wall built of large ashlar blocks . These blocks have faces with drafted margins around a prominent boss and are laid in homogeneous header and stretcher courses , one above the other . This style of construction is Hellenistic and distinct from the Herodian construction apparent south of the seam . Although the exact dating of this construction in uncertain , Tsafrir believes it is a remnant of the Acra 's foundations which were later incorporated into Herod the Great 's extension of the Temple platform . As further proof , <unk> also points to significant similarity between construction methods evident north of the seam , including the use of trapezoid @-@ shaped stones , with the methods employed in the Seleucid city of Perga in Asia Minor . 1 <unk> 1 : 30 attributes construction of the Acra to Apollonius , Antiochus III 's " chief collector " ( Hebrew : <unk> @-@ <unk> , Sar <unk> ) , which appears to be an ancient mistranslation or his original title as chief ( Hebrew : <unk> , Sar ) of the <unk> , a people of Asia Minor . 
 Meir Ben @-@ Dov believed that the Acra stood just south of the Huldah Gates of the southern wall of the Herodian Temple Mount platform . Benjamin Mazar 's excavations of the Ophel , the area adjoining the southern portion of the platform , have unearthed the foundations of a massive structure and a large cistern , both possibly dating to the Hellenistic period . These have been tentatively identified as remnants of the Acra , with the structure , featuring rows of small interconnected rooms , believed to be the remains of a barracks . These had been demolished and built over during the Hasmonean period , matching the descriptions in Josephus . The Hasmonean constructions were , in turn , flattened to create a public square fronting the main gates to the Temple platform during the Herodian renovations . 
 Several cisterns under the Temple Mount itself have also been proposed as possible remnants of the Seleucid citadel . These include a 700 @,@ 000 imperial gallons ( 3 @,@ 200 @,@ 000 l ; 840 @,@ 000 US gal ) cistern shaped like an E , the northern edge of which is adjacent to the proposed southern line of the Temple Mount precinct before its Herodian expansion . This has been identified as the " be 'er <unk> " or " bor <unk> " mentioned in the Mishnah , <unk> Tract 10 @.@ 14 , and commonly translated , perhaps incorrectly , as the " cold well " . 
 Additional evidence for the existence of the Acra may come from the chance discovery , published by Shimon Appelbaum , of a fragmentary Greek inscription in the Old City of Jerusalem . The inscription is part of a fragment from the top of a sandstone stele and contains what may be an oath taken by soldiers stationed in the Acra , although the reading of the name " Acra " in the text has been contested . 
 = = 2015 discovery = = 
 In November 2015 the Israel Antiquities Authority announced the probable discovery of the Acra . According to archaeologists Doron Ben @-@ Ami , Yana <unk> and Salome Cohen , excavating the Givati parking lot adjacent to the City of David , they had unearthed a complex of rooms and fortified walls they identified as the Acra . This places it slightly south of previous suggested locations on the Ophel . Finds include fortification walls , a watchtower measuring 4 by 20 meters , and a glacis . Bronze arrowheads , lead sling @-@ stones and ballista stones were unearthed at the site , stamped with a trident , the emblem of Antiochus Epiphanes . These are indicative of the military nature of the site and the efforts to take it . The excavation also yielded coins from the reigns of Antiochus IV through Antiochus VII , as well as a multitude of stamped Rhodian amphorae handles . 
 The Givati location has been questioned due to its being too low on the hill to overlook the Temple Mount , as described in literary sources . 
 = Kinetoscope = 
 The Kinetoscope is an early motion picture exhibition device . The Kinetoscope was designed for films to be viewed by one individual at a time through a peephole viewer window at the top of the device . The Kinetoscope was not a movie projector but introduced the basic approach that would become the standard for all cinematic projection before the advent of video , by creating the illusion of movement by conveying a strip of perforated film bearing sequential images over a light source with a high @-@ speed shutter . A process using roll film first described in a patent application submitted in France and the U.S. by French inventor Louis Le Prince , the concept was copied by U.S. inventor Thomas Edison in 1889 , and subsequently developed by his employee William Kennedy Laurie Dickson between 1889 and 1892 . Dickson and his team at the Edison lab also devised the Kinetograph , an innovative motion picture camera with rapid intermittent , or stop @-@ and @-@ go , film movement , to photograph movies for in @-@ house experiments and , eventually , commercial Kinetoscope presentations . 
 A prototype for the Kinetoscope was shown to a convention of the National Federation of Women 's Clubs on May 20 , 1891 . The first public demonstration of the Kinetoscope was held at the Brooklyn Institute of Arts and Sciences on May 9 , 1893 . Instrumental to the birth of American movie culture , the Kinetoscope also had a major impact in Europe ; its influence abroad was magnified by Edison 's decision not to seek international patents on the device , facilitating numerous imitations of and improvements on the technology . In 1895 , Edison introduced the Kinetophone , which joined the Kinetoscope with a cylinder phonograph . Film projection , which Edison initially disdained as financially nonviable , soon superseded the Kinetoscope 's individual exhibition model . Many of the projection systems developed by Edison 's firm in later years would use the Kinetoscope name . 
 = = Development = = 
 An encounter with the work and ideas of photographic pioneer Eadweard Muybridge appears to have spurred Edison to pursue the development of a motion picture system . On February 25 , 1888 , in Orange , New Jersey , Muybridge gave a lecture that may have included a demonstration of his zoopraxiscope , a device that projected sequential images drawn around the edge of a glass disc , producing the illusion of motion . The Edison facility was very close by , and the lecture was possibly attended by both Edison and his company 's official photographer , William Dickson . Two days later , Muybridge and Edison met at Edison 's laboratory in West Orange ; Muybridge later described how he proposed a collaboration to join his device with the Edison phonograph — a combination system that would play sound and images concurrently . No such collaboration was undertaken , but in October 1888 , Edison filed a preliminary claim , known as a caveat , with the U.S. Patent Office announcing his plans to create a device that would do " for the Eye what the phonograph does for the Ear " . It is clear that it was intended as part of a complete audiovisual system : " we may see & hear a whole Opera as perfectly as if actually present " . In March 1889 , a second caveat was filed , in which the proposed motion picture device was given a name , Kinetoscope , derived from the Greek roots <unk> ( " movement " ) and <unk> ( " to view " ) . 
 Edison assigned Dickson , one of his most talented employees , to the job of making the Kinetoscope a reality . Edison would take full credit for the invention , but the historiographical consensus is that the title of creator can hardly go to one man : 
 While Edison seems to have conceived the idea and initiated the experiments , Dickson apparently performed the bulk of the experimentation , leading most modern scholars to assign Dickson with the major credit for turning the concept into a practical reality . The Edison laboratory , though , worked as a collaborative organization . Laboratory assistants were assigned to work on many projects while Edison supervised and involved himself and participated to varying degrees . 
 Dickson and his then lead assistant , Charles Brown , made halting progress at first . Edison 's original idea involved recording pinpoint photographs , 1 / 32 of an inch wide , directly on to a cylinder ( also referred to as a " drum " ) ; the cylinder , made of an opaque material for positive images or of glass for negatives , was coated in collodion to provide a photographic base . An audio cylinder would provide synchronized sound , while the rotating images , hardly operatic in scale , were viewed through a microscope @-@ like tube . When tests were made with images expanded to a mere 1 / 8 of an inch in width , the coarseness of the silver bromide emulsion used on the cylinder became unacceptably apparent . Around June 1889 , the lab began working with sensitized celluloid sheets , supplied by John <unk> , that could be wrapped around the cylinder , providing a far superior base for the recording of photographs . The first film made for the Kinetoscope , and apparently the first motion picture ever produced on photographic film in the United States , may have been shot at this time ( there is an unresolved debate over whether it was made in June 1889 or November 1890 ) ; known as <unk> , No. 1 , it shows an employee of the lab in an apparently tongue @-@ in @-@ cheek display of physical dexterity . Attempts at synchronizing sound were soon left behind , while Dickson would also experiment with disc @-@ based exhibition designs . 
 The project would soon head off in more productive directions , largely impelled by a trip of Edison 's to Europe and the Exposition Universelle in Paris , for which he departed August 2 or 3 , 1889 . During his two months abroad , Edison visited with scientist @-@ photographer Étienne @-@ Jules Marey , who had devised a " <unk> gun " — the first portable motion picture camera — which used a strip of flexible film designed to capture sequential images at twelve frames per second . Upon his return to the United States , Edison filed another patent caveat , on November 2 , which described a Kinetoscope based not just on a flexible filmstrip , but one in which the film was perforated to allow for its engagement by sprockets , making its mechanical conveyance much more smooth and reliable . The first motion picture system to employ a perforated image band was apparently the Théâtre <unk> , patented by French inventor Charles @-@ Émile Reynaud in 1888 . Reynaud 's system did not use photographic film , but images painted on gelatine frames . At the Exposition Universelle , Edison would have seen both the Théâtre <unk> and the electrical <unk> of German inventor <unk> Anschütz . This disc @-@ based projection device is often referred to as an important conceptual source for the development of the Kinetoscope . Its crucial innovation was to take advantage of the persistence of vision theory by using an intermittent light source to momentarily " freeze " the projection of each image ; the goal was to facilitate the viewer 's retention of many minutely different stages of a photographed activity , thus producing a highly effective illusion of constant motion . By late 1890 , intermittent visibility would be integral to the Kinetoscope 's design . 
 The question of when the Edison lab began working on a filmstrip device is a matter of historical debate . According to Dickson , in the summer of 1889 , he began cutting the stiff celluloid sheets supplied by <unk> into strips for use in such a prototype machine ; in August , by his description , he attended a demonstration of George Eastman 's new flexible film and was given a roll by an Eastman representative , which was immediately applied to experiments with the prototype . As described by historian Marta Braun , Eastman 's product 
 was sufficiently strong , thin , and pliable to permit the intermittent movement of the film strip behind [ a camera ] lens at considerable speed and under great tension without tearing ... <unk> [ ing ] the almost immediate solution of the essential problems of cinematic invention . 
 Some scholars — in particular , Gordon Hendricks , in The Edison Motion Picture Myth ( 1961 ) — have argued that the lab began working on a filmstrip machine much later and that Dickson and Edison misrepresented the date to establish priority for reasons of both patent protection and intellectual status . In any event , though film historian David Robinson claims that " the cylinder experiments seem to have been carried on to the bitter end " ( meaning the final months of 1890 ) , as far back as September 1889 — while Edison was still in Europe , but corresponding regularly with Dickson — the lab definitely placed its first order with the Eastman company for roll film . Three more orders for roll film were placed over the next five months . 
 Only sporadic work was done on the Kinetoscope for much of 1890 as Dickson concentrated on Edison 's unsuccessful venture into ore milling — between May and November , no expenses at all were billed to the lab 's Kinetoscope account . By early 1891 , however , Dickson , his new chief assistant , William Heise , and another lab employee , Charles Kayser , had succeeded in devising a functional strip @-@ based film viewing system . In the new design , whose mechanics were housed in a wooden cabinet , a loop of horizontally configured 19 mm ( 3 / 4 inch ) film ran around a series of spindles . The film , with a single row of perforations engaged by an electrically powered sprocket wheel , was drawn continuously beneath a magnifying lens . An electric lamp shone up from beneath the film , casting its circular @-@ format images onto the lens and thence through a peephole atop the cabinet . As described by Robinson , a rapidly spinning shutter " permitted a flash of light so brief that [ each ] frame appeared to be frozen . This rapid series of apparently still frames appeared , thanks to the persistence of vision phenomenon , as a moving image . " The lab also developed a motor @-@ powered camera , the Kinetograph , capable of shooting with the new <unk> film . To govern the intermittent movement of the film in the camera , allowing the strip to stop long enough so each frame could be fully exposed and then advancing it quickly ( in about 1 / 460 of a second ) to the next frame , the sprocket wheel that engaged the strip was driven by an escapement disc mechanism — the first practical system for the high @-@ speed stop @-@ and @-@ go film movement that would be the foundation for the next century of cinematography . 
 On May 20 , 1891 , the first public demonstration of a prototype Kinetoscope was given at the laboratory for approximately 150 members of the National Federation of Women 's Clubs . The New York Sun described what the club women saw in the " small pine box " they encountered : 
 In the top of the box was a hole perhaps an inch in diameter . As they looked through the hole they saw the picture of a man . It was a most marvelous picture . It bowed and smiled and waved its hands and took off its hat with the most perfect naturalness and grace . Every motion was perfect .... 
 The man was Dickson ; the little movie , approximately three seconds long , is now referred to as Dickson Greeting . On August 24 , three detailed patent applications were filed : the first for a " <unk> Camera " , the second for the camera as well , and the third for an " Apparatus for Exhibiting Photographs of Moving Objects " . In the first Kinetograph application , Edison stated , " I have been able to take with a single camera and a tape @-@ film as many as forty @-@ six photographs per second ... but I do not wish to limit the scope of my invention to this high rate of speed ... since with some subjects a speed as low as thirty pictures per second or even lower is sufficient . " Indeed , according to the Library of Congress archive , based on data from a study by historian Charles Musser , Dickson Greeting and at least two other films made with the Kinetograph in 1891 were shot at 30 frames per second or even slower . The Kinetoscope application also included a plan for a stereoscopic film projection system that was apparently abandoned . 
 In the spring of the following year , steps began to make coin operation , via a nickel slot , part of the mechanics of the viewing system . By autumn 1892 , the design of the Kinetoscope was essentially complete . The filmstrip , based on stock manufactured first by Eastman , and then , from April 1893 onward , by New York 's Blair Camera Co . , was 35 mm ( 1 3 / 8 inches ) wide ; each vertically sequenced frame bore a rectangular image and four perforations on each side . Within a few years , this basic format would be adopted globally as the standard for motion picture film , which it remains to this day . The publication in the October 1892 Phonogram of cinematographic sequences shot in the format demonstrates that the Kinetograph had already been reconfigured to produce movies with the new film . 
 As for the Kinetoscope itself , there is a significant disagreement over the location of the shutter providing the crucial intermittent visibility effect . According to a report by inventor Herman Casler described as " authoritative " by Hendricks , who personally examined five of the six still @-@ extant first @-@ generation devices , " Just above the film , ... a shutter wheel having five spokes and a very small rectangular opening in the rim [ rotates ] directly over the film . An incandescent lamp ... is placed below the film ... and the light passes up through the film , shutter opening , and magnifying lens ... to the eye of the observer placed at the opening in the top of the case . " Robinson , on the other hand , says the shutter — which he agrees has only a single slit — is positioned lower , " between the lamp and film " . The Casler – Hendricks description is supported by the diagrams of the Kinetoscope that accompany the 1891 patent application , in particular , diagram 2 . A side view , it does not illustrate the shutter , but it shows the impossibility of it fitting between the lamp and the film without a major redesign and indicates a space that seems suitable for it between the film and the lens . Robinson 's description , however , is supported by a photograph of a Kinetoscope interior that appears in Hendricks 's own book . 
 On February 21 , 1893 , a patent was issued for the system that governed the intermittent movement of film in the Kinetograph . However , Robinson ( 1997 ) misleadingly stated that " patents for the Kinetograph camera and the Kinetoscope viewer were finally issued " in early 1893 ( p . 38 ) . As explained by Braun ( 1992 ) , " except for the device used to stop and start the moving film , which was granted a patent in 1893 , all the parts of the application describing the camera were ultimately disallowed because of previous inventors ' claims " ( p . 191 ) . Also , Hendricks ( 1961 ) described the outcome of the camera patent similarly to Braun ( pp. 136 – 137 ) . The facts in sum are : ( a ) a patent solely for the intermittent movement apparatus was issued in February 1893 ; ( b ) all the other elements of the original Kinetograph patent applications were successfully challenged ; and ( c ) a patent , number 589 @,@ 168 , for a complete Kinetograph camera , one substantially different from that described in the original applications , was issued on August 31 , 1897 . 
 The escapement @-@ based mechanism would be superseded within a few years by competing systems , in particular those based on the so @-@ called Geneva drive or " Maltese cross " that would become the norm for both movie cameras and projectors . The exhibition device itself — which , despite erroneous accounts to the contrary , never employed intermittent film movement , only intermittent lighting or viewing — was finally awarded its patent , number 493 @,@ 426 , on March 14 . The Kinetoscope was ready to be unveiled . 
 = = Going public = = 
 The premiere of the completed Kinetoscope was held not at the Chicago World 's Fair , as originally scheduled , but at the Brooklyn Institute of Arts and Sciences on May 9 , 1893 . The first film publicly shown on the system was Blacksmith Scene ( aka Blacksmiths ) ; directed by Dickson and shot by Heise , it was produced at the new Edison moviemaking studio , known as the Black Maria . Despite extensive promotion , a major display of the Kinetoscope , involving as many as twenty @-@ five machines , never took place at the Chicago exposition . Kinetoscope production had been delayed in part because of Dickson 's absence of more than eleven weeks early in the year with a nervous breakdown . Robinson argues that " [ s ] peculation that a single Kinetoscope reached the Fair seems to be conclusively dismissed by an 1894 leaflet issued for the launching of the invention in London , " which states , " the Kinetoscope was not perfected in time for the great Fair . " Hendricks , in contrast , refers to accounts in the Scientific American of July 21 and October 21 , 1893 , that constitute evidence no less " conclusive " that one Kinetoscope did make it to the fair . The weight of evidence supports Hendricks ; as fair historian Stanley Appelbaum states , " Doubt has been cast on the reports of [ the Kinetoscope 's ] actual presence at the fair , but these reports are numerous and circumstantial " ( Appelbaum does err in claiming that the device was " first shown at the Exposition " ) . 
 Work proceeded , though slowly , on the Kinetoscope project . On October 6 , a U.S. copyright was issued for a " publication " received by the Library of Congress consisting of " Edison <unk> Records . " It remains unclear what film was awarded this , the first motion picture copyright in North America . By the turn of the year , the Kinetoscope project would be reenergized . During the first week of January 1894 , a five @-@ second film starring an Edison technician was shot at the Black Maria ; Fred Ott 's Sneeze , as it is now widely known , was made expressly to produce a sequence of images for an article in Harper 's magazine . Never intended for exhibition , it would become one of the most famous Edison films and the first identifiable motion picture to receive a U.S. copyright . Three months later , the Kinetoscope 's epochal moment arrived . 
 On April 14 , 1894 , a public Kinetoscope parlor was opened by the Holland Bros. in New York City at 1155 Broadway , on the corner of 27th Street — the first commercial motion picture house . The venue had ten machines , set up in parallel rows of five , each showing a different movie . For 25 cents a viewer could see all the films in either row ; half a dollar gave access to the entire bill . The machines were purchased from the new Kinetoscope Company , which had contracted with Edison for their production ; the firm , headed by Norman C. Raff and Frank R. Gammon , included among its investors Andrew M. Holland , one of the entrepreneurial siblings , and Edison 's former business chief , Alfred O. Tate . The ten films that comprise the first commercial movie program , all shot at the Black Maria , were descriptively titled : Barber Shop , Bertoldi ( mouth support ) ( Ena Bertoldi , a British vaudeville contortionist ) , Bertoldi ( table contortion ) , Blacksmiths , Roosters ( some manner of cock fight ) , Highland Dance , Horse <unk> , Sandow ( Eugen Sandow , a German strongman managed by Florenz Ziegfeld ) , Trapeze , and Wrestling . As historian Charles Musser describes , a " profound transformation of American life and performance culture " had begun . 
 Twenty @-@ five cents for no more than a few minutes of entertainment was hardly cheap diversion . For the same amount , one could purchase a ticket to a major vaudeville theater ; when America 's first amusement park opened in Coney Island the following year , a 25 @-@ cent entrance fee covered admission to three rides , a performing sea lion show , and a dance hall . The Kinetoscope was an immediate success , however , and by June 1 , the Hollands were also operating venues in Chicago and San Francisco . Entrepreneurs ( including Raff and Gammon , with their own International Novelty Co . ) were soon running Kinetoscope parlors and temporary exhibition venues around the United States . New firms joined the Kinetoscope Company in commissioning and marketing the machines . The Kinetoscope exhibition spaces were largely , though not uniformly , profitable . After fifty weeks in operation , the Hollands ' New York parlor had generated approximately $ 1 @,@ 400 in monthly receipts against an estimated $ 515 in monthly operating costs ; receipts from the Chicago venue ( located in a Masonic temple ) were substantially lower , about $ 700 a month , though presumably operating costs were lower as well . For each machine , Edison 's business at first generally charged $ 250 to the Kinetoscope Company and other distributors , which would use them in their own exhibition parlors or resell them to independent exhibitors ; individual films were initially priced by Edison at $ 10 . During the Kinetoscope 's first eleven months of commercialization , the sale of viewing machines , films , and auxiliary items generated a profit of more than $ 85 @,@ 000 for Edison 's company . 
 One of the new firms to enter the field was the Kinetoscope Exhibition Company ; the firm 's partners , brothers Otway and Grey Latham , Otway 's friend Enoch Rector , and their employer , Samuel J. Tilden Jr . , sought to combine the popularity of the Kinetoscope with that of prizefighting . This led to a series of significant developments in the motion picture field : The Kinetograph was then capable of shooting only a 50 @-@ foot @-@ long negative ( evidence suggests 48 feet ( 15 m ) feet was the longest length actually used ) . At 16 frames per foot , this meant a maximum running time of 20 seconds at 40 frames per second ( fps ) , the speed most frequently employed with the camera . At the rate of 30 fps that had been used as far back as 1891 , a film could run for almost 27 seconds . Hendricks identifies Sandow as having been shot at 16 fps , as does the Library of Congress in its online catalog , where its duration is listed as 40 seconds . Even at the slowest of these rates , the running time would not have been enough to accommodate a satisfactory exchange of fisticuffs ; 16 fps , as well , might have been thought to give too herky @-@ jerky a visual effect for enjoyment of the sport . The Kinetograph and Kinetoscope were modified , possibly with Rector 's assistance , so they could manage <unk> three times longer than had previously been used . 
 On June 14 , a match with abbreviated rounds was staged between boxers Michael Leonard and Jack Cushing at the Black Maria . Seven @-@ hundred @-@ and @-@ fifty feet worth of images or even more were shot at the rate of 30 fps — easily the longest motion picture to date . In August 1894 , the film premiered at the Kinetoscope Exhibition Company 's parlor at 83 Nassau Street in New York . A half @-@ dozen expanded Kinetoscope machines each showed a different round of the fight for a dime , meaning sixty cents to see the complete bout . For a planned series of follow @-@ up fights ( of which the outcome of at least the first was fixed ) , the <unk> signed famous heavyweight James J. Corbett , stipulating that his image could not be recorded by any other Kinetoscope company — the first movie star contract . 
 Just three months after the commercial debut of the motion picture came the first recorded instance of motion picture censorship . The film in question showed a performance by the Spanish dancer Carmencita , a New York music hall star since the beginning of the decade . According to one description of her live act , she " communicated an intense sexuality across the footlights that led male reporters to write long , exuberant columns about her performance " — articles that would later be reproduced in the Edison film catalog . The Kinetoscope movie of her dance , shot at the Black Maria in mid @-@ March 1894 , was playing in the New Jersey resort town Asbury Park by summer . The town 's founder , James A. Bradley , a real estate developer and leading member of the Methodist community , had recently been elected a state senator : " The Newark Evening News of 17 July 1894 reported that [ Senator ] Bradley ... was so shocked by the glimpse of Carmencita 's ankles and lace that he complained to Mayor Ten Broeck . The showman was thereupon ordered to withdraw the offending film , which he replaced with Boxing Cats . " The following month , a San Francisco exhibitor was arrested for a Kinetoscope operation " alleged to be indecent . " The group whose disgruntlement occasioned the arrest was the Pacific Society for the Suppression of Vice , whose targets included " illicit literature , obscene pictures and books , the sale of morphine , cocaine , opium , tobacco and liquors to minors , lottery tickets , etc . , " and which proudly took credit for having " caused 70 arrests and obtained 48 convictions " in a recent two @-@ month span . 
 The Kinetoscope was also gaining notice on the other side of the Atlantic . In the summer of 1894 , it was demonstrated at 20 , boulevard Poissonnière in Paris ; this was one of the primary inspirations to the Lumière brothers , who would go on to develop the first commercially successful movie projection system . On October 17 , 1894 , the first Kinetoscope parlor outside the United States opened in London . Dissemination of the system proceeded rapidly in Europe , as Edison had left his patents unprotected overseas . The most likely reason was the technology 's reliance on a variety of foreign innovations and a consequent belief that patent applications would have little chance of success . An alternative view , however , used to be popular : The 1971 edition of the Encyclopædia Britannica , for instance , claims that Edison " apparently thought so little of his invention that he failed to pay the $ 150 that would have granted him an international copyright [ sic ] . " As recently as 2004 , Andrew Rausch stated that Edison " balked at a $ 150 fee for overseas patents " and " saw little commercial value in the Kinetoscope . " Given that Edison , as much a businessman as an inventor , spent approximately $ 24 @,@ 000 on the system 's development and went so far as to build a facility expressly for moviemaking before his U.S. patent was awarded , Rausch 's interpretation is not widely shared by present @-@ day scholars . Whatever the cause , two Greek entrepreneurs , George Georgiades and George <unk> , took advantage of the opening . Already successfully operating a pair of London movie parlors with Edison <unk> , they commissioned English inventor and manufacturer Robert W. Paul to make copies of them . After fulfilling the Georgiades – <unk> contract , Paul decided to go into the movie business himself , proceeding to make dozens of additional Kinetoscope reproductions . Paul 's work would result in a series of important innovations in both camera and exhibition technology . Meanwhile , plans were advancing at the Black Maria to realize Edison 's goal of a motion picture system uniting image with sound . 
 = = Kinetophone = = 
 The Kinetophone ( aka <unk> ) was an early attempt by Edison and Dickson to create a sound @-@ film system . Reports suggest that in July 1893 , a Kinetoscope accompanied by a cylinder phonograph had been presented at the Chicago World 's Fair . The first known movie made as a test of the Kinetophone was shot at Edison 's New Jersey studio in late 1894 or early 1895 , which is now referred to as the Dickson Experimental Sound Film ; this film , along with a short film from 1913 called Nursery Favorites and a 1912 demonstration film , are the only surviving movies with live @-@ recorded sound made for the Kinetophone . In March 1895 , Edison offered the device for sale ; involving no technological innovations , it was a Kinetoscope whose modified cabinet included an accompanying cylinder phonograph . Kinetoscope owners were also offered kits with which to retrofit their equipment . The first Kinetophone exhibitions appear to have taken place in April . Though a Library of Congress educational website states , " The picture and sound were made somewhat synchronous by connecting the two with a belt , " this is incorrect . As historian David Robinson describes , " The Kinetophone ... made no attempt at synchronization . The viewer listened through tubes to a phonograph concealed in the cabinet and performing approximately appropriate music or other sound . " Historian Douglas Gomery concurs , " [ Edison ] did not try to synchronize sound and image . " Leading production sound mixer Mark <unk> writes , " [ O ] nly 45 <unk> were made . They did NOT play synchronously other than the phonograph turned on when viewing and off when stopped . " Though the surviving Dickson test involves live @-@ recorded sound , certainly most , and probably all , of the films marketed for the Kinetophone were shot as silents , predominantly march or dance subjects ; exhibitors could then choose from a variety of musical cylinders offering a rhythmic match . For example , three different cylinders with orchestral performances were proposed as accompaniments for Carmencita : " Valse Santiago " , " La Paloma " , and " Alma @-@ Danza Spagnola " . 
 Even as Edison followed his dream of securing the Kinetoscope 's popularity by adding sound to its allure , many in the field were beginning to suspect that film projection was the next step that should be pursued . When Norman Raff communicated his customers ' interest in such a system to Edison , the great inventor summarily rejected the notion : 
 No , if we make this screen machine that you are asking for , it will spoil everything . We are making these peep show machines and selling a lot of them at a good profit . If we put out a screen machine there will be a use for maybe about ten of them in the whole United States . With that many screen machines you could show the pictures to everybody in the country — and then it would be done . Let 's not kill the goose that lays the golden egg . 
 Under continuing pressure from Raff , Edison eventually conceded to investigate the possibility of developing a projection system . He seconded one of his lab 's technicians to the Kinetoscope Company to initiate the work , without informing Dickson . Dickson 's ultimate discovery of this move appears to have been one of the central factors leading to his break with Edison that occurred in spring 1895 . 
 = = Projecting <unk> = = 
 Over the course of 1895 , it became clear that the Kinetoscope was going to lose out on one end to projected motion pictures and , on the other , to a new " peep show " device , the cheap , flip @-@ book @-@ based Mutoscope . In its second year of commercialization , the Kinetoscope operation 's profits plummeted by more than 95 percent , to just over $ 4 @,@ 000 . The Latham brothers and their father , Woodville , had retained the services of former Edison employee Eugene Lauste and then , in April 1895 , Dickson himself to develop a film projection system . On May 20 , in New York City , the new <unk> was used for the first commercial screening of a motion picture : a boxing match between Young Griffo and Charles Barnett , four or eight minutes long . European inventors , most prominently the Lumières and Germany 's <unk> brothers , were moving forward with similar systems . 
 By the beginning of 1896 , Edison had turned his attention to promoting a projector technology , the Phantoscope , developed by young inventors Charles Francis Jenkins and Thomas Armat . The rights to the system had been acquired by Raff and Gammon , who redubbed it the Vitascope and arranged with Edison to present himself as its creator . With Dickson having left his employ , the Kinetophone was soon mothballed and Edison suspended work on sound cinema for an extended period . Departing the Vitascope operation after little more than a year , Edison commissioned the development of his own projection systems , the <unk> and then multiple iterations of the Projecting Kinetoscope . In 1912 , he introduced the ambitious and expensive Home Projecting Kinetoscope , which employed a unique format of three parallel columns of sequential frames on one strip of film — the middle column ran through the machine in the reverse direction from its neighbors . It was a commercial failure . Four years later , the Edison operation came out with its last substantial new film exhibition technology , a short @-@ lived theatrical system called the Super Kinetoscope . Much of the Edison company 's most creative work in the motion picture field from 1897 on involved the use of Kinetoscope @-@ related patents in threatened or actual lawsuits for the purpose of financially pressuring or blocking commercial rivals . 
 As far back as the Vitascope days , some exhibitors had screened films accompanied by phonographs playing appropriate , though very roughly timed , sound effects ; in the style of the Kinetophone described above , rhythmically matching recordings were also made available for march and dance subjects . While Edison oversaw cursory sound @-@ cinema experiments after the success of The Great Train Robbery ( 1903 ) and other Edison Manufacturing Company productions , it was not until 1908 that he returned in earnest to the combined audiovisual concept that had first led him to enter the motion picture field . Edison patented a synchronization system connecting a projector and a phonograph , located behind the screen , via an assembly of three rigid shafts — a vertical one descending from each device , joined by a third running horizontally the entire length of the theater , beneath the floor . Two years later , he supervised a press demonstration at the laboratory of a sound @-@ film system of either this or a later design . In 1913 , Edison finally introduced the new Kinetophone — like all of his sound @-@ film exhibition systems since the first in the mid @-@ 1890s , it used a cylinder phonograph , now connected to a Projecting Kinetoscope via a fishing line – type belt and a series of metal pulleys . While it met with great acclaim in the short term , poorly trained operators had trouble keeping picture in synchronization with sound and , like other sound @-@ film systems of the era , the Kinetophone had not solved the issues of insufficient amplification and unpleasant audio quality . Its drawing power as a novelty soon faded and when a fire at Edison 's West Orange complex in December 1914 destroyed all of the company 's Kinetophone image and sound masters , the system was abandoned . 
 = = = Kinetoscope films = = = 
 Edison National Historic Site : Blacksmith Scene ( 1893 ) , Sandow ( 1894 ) , Serpentine Dance ( ca . 1894 – 95 ) , Edison at Work in His Chemistry Lab ( n.d. ) . Note that The Kiss ( 1896 ) was shot not for the Kinetoscope but for Vitascope projection . 
 Library of Congress : twenty @-@ five films from 1891 through 1895 
 = Maurice Richard = 
 Joseph Henri Maurice " Rocket " Richard , PC CC OQ ( / <unk> / ; French : [ <unk> ] ; August 4 , 1921 – May 27 , 2000 ) was a Canadian professional ice hockey player who played 18 seasons in the National Hockey League ( NHL ) for the Montreal Canadiens . He was the first player in NHL history to score 50 goals in one season , accomplishing the feat in 50 games in 1944 – 45 , and the first to reach 500 career goals . Richard retired in 1960 as the league 's all @-@ time leader in goals with 544 . He won the Hart Trophy as the NHL 's most valuable player in 1947 , played in 13 All @-@ Star Games and was named to 14 post @-@ season NHL All @-@ Star Teams . 
 Richard , Elmer Lach and Toe Blake formed the " Punch line " , a high @-@ scoring forward line of the 1940s . Richard was a member of eight Stanley Cup championship teams , including five straight between 1955 and 1960 ; he was the team 's captain for the last four . The Hockey Hall of Fame waived its five @-@ year waiting period for eligibility and inducted Richard into the hall in 1961 . In 1975 he was inducted into Canada 's Sports Hall of Fame . The Canadiens retired his number , 9 , in 1960 , and in 1998 donated the Maurice " Rocket " Richard Trophy to the NHL , awarded annually to the league 's regular season leading goal @-@ scorer . 
 The eldest of eight children , Richard emerged from a poverty @-@ stricken family during the Great Depression . He was initially viewed as a fragile player . A string of injuries prevented him from joining the Canadian military during the Second World War . Outspoken and intense , he was renowned for his physical and occasionally violent style of play . Richard was involved in a vicious on @-@ ice incident late in the 1954 – 55 season during which he struck a linesman . NHL President Clarence Campbell suspended him for the remainder of the season and playoffs , which precipitated the Richard Riot in Montreal . The riot has taken on a mythical quality in the decades since and is often viewed as a precursor to Quebec 's Quiet Revolution . Richard was a cultural icon among Quebec 's francophone population ; his legend is a primary motif in Roch Carrier 's The Hockey Sweater . Richard died in 2000 and became the first non @-@ politician honoured by the province of Quebec with a state funeral . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Joseph Henri Maurice Richard was born August 4 , 1921 , in Montreal . His parents , Onésime Richard and Alice <unk> , were originally from the Gaspé region of Quebec before moving to Montreal , where they settled in the neighbourhood of Bordeaux . Maurice was the eldest of eight children ; he had three sisters : Georgette , <unk> and Marguerite ; and four brothers : René , Jacques , Henri , and Claude . Onésime was a carpenter by trade , and took a job with the Canadian Pacific Railway shortly after Maurice was born . The Richards struggled during the Great Depression ; Onésime lost his job in 1930 and the family relied on government aid until he was re @-@ hired by the railway around 1936 . 
 Richard received his first pair of ice skates when he was four , and grew up skating on local rivers and a small backyard ice surface his father created . Richard did not play organized hockey until he was 14 . Instead , he developed his skills playing shinny and " hog " – a game that required the puck carrier to keep the puck away from others for as long as possible . While he also played baseball and was a boxer , hockey was his passion . After he began playing in organized leagues , Richard joined several teams and used pseudonyms such as " Maurice Rochon " to circumvent rules that restricted players to one team . In one league , he led his team to three consecutive championships and scored 133 of his team 's 144 goals in the 1938 – 39 season . 
 At 16 , Richard dropped out of school to work with his father as a machinist . He enrolled in a technical school , intent on earning a trade certificate . At 18 , Richard joined the Verdun Juniors , though as a rookie he saw little ice time in the regular season . He scored four goals in ten regular season games , and added six goals in four playoff games as Verdun won the provincial championship . He was promoted to the Montreal Canadiens ' affiliate in the Quebec Senior Hockey League in 1940 , but suffered a broken ankle in his first game after crashing into the boards and missed the remainder of the season . The injury also aborted his hopes of joining the Canadian military : he was called to a recruitment centre in mid 1941 , but was deemed unfit for combat . 
 Off the ice , Richard was a quiet , unassuming youth who spoke little . He met his future wife Lucille when he was seventeen , and she nearly fourteen . She was the younger sister of one of his teammates at Bordeaux , and her bright , outgoing personality complemented Richard 's reserved nature . Lucille proved adept at guiding him through trials and disappointments he experienced in both hockey and life . They were engaged when he was 20 , and though her parents felt she was too young , married on September 12 , 1942 , when she was seventeen . 
 = = Playing career = = 
 = = = First Stanley Cup = = = 
 Having recovered from his broken ankle in time for the 1941 – 42 season , Richard returned to the QSHL Canadiens , with whom he played 31 games and recorded 17 points before he was again injured . He suffered a broken wrist after becoming entangled with a defenceman and crashed into the net . Richard rejoined the team for the playoffs . The skills he demonstrated in the QSHL , combined with the NHL parent club 's loss of players to the war and struggles to draw fans due to its poor record and a lack of francophone players , earned Richard a tryout with the Canadiens for the 1942 – 43 season . He signed a contract worth $ 3 @,@ 500 for the year and , wearing sweater number 15 , made his NHL debut with the team . Richard 's first goal was against the New York Rangers on November 8 , 1942 . 
 Injury again sidelined Richard as his rookie season ended after only 16 games when he suffered a broken leg . The string of broken bones so early in his career left observers wondering if Richard was too fragile to play at the highest levels . He made a second attempt to enlist with the military but was again turned down after x @-@ rays revealed that his bones had not healed properly ; Richard 's ankle was left permanently deformed , forcing him to alter his skating style . Humiliated by the rejection , he intensified his training and reported to Montreal 's training camp for the 1943 – 44 season fully healthy . The arrival of his daughter , Huguette , prompted Richard to change his uniform to number 9 to match his daughter 's birth weight of nine pounds . 
 Remaining healthy throughout the season , Richard appeared in 46 of Montreal 's 50 games . He led the Canadiens with 32 goals and tallied 54 points , third @-@ best in his team . Richard 's season not only ended the criticism about his ability to play in the league , but established him as one of the best young players in the NHL . Coach Dick Irvin shifted Richard from the left wing to right and placed him on a forward line with Toe Blake and Elmer Lach . The trio , known as the " Punch line " , formed a dominant scoring unit throughout the 1940s . The Canadiens lost only six games after October , and went on to win the franchise 's first Stanley Cup championship in 13 years . Richard led the league with 12 playoff goals , including a five @-@ goal effort against the Toronto Maple Leafs in a semi @-@ final game . He tied Newsy Lalonde 's NHL record for goals in one playoff game ( equalled by three players since ) , which resulted in his being named first , second and third star of the game . Richard was named a second team All @-@ Star following the season . It was the first of 14 consecutive years he was named a league all @-@ star . 
 = = = 50 goals in 50 games = = = 
 The 1944 – 45 NHL season was a record @-@ setting one for Richard . He first set a new mark for points in one game when he made five goals and three assists in a 9 – 1 victory over the Detroit Red Wings on December 28 , 1944 ; his eight points broke the previous record of seven held by three players , and stood for 32 years until surpassed in 1976 by Darryl Sittler . Richard achieved the feat despite arriving for the game exhausted from moving into his new home that afternoon . He continued scoring at an unprecedented rate , and by February 1945 was approaching Joe Malone 's NHL record of 44 goals in one season . Richard broke the record on February 25 , 1945 , in a 5 – 2 victory over Toronto . Malone was on hand to present Richard with the puck used to score the 45th goal . 
 As Richard approached 50 goals for the season , opposition players resorted to increasingly violent efforts to prevent him from scoring . He had to fight past slashes , hooks , and even players who draped themselves across his back . Richard went eight games without scoring and began Montreal 's final regular season game , March 18 , on the road against the Boston Bruins with 49 goals . He finally reached the milestone by scoring with 2 : 15 remaining in the game , a 4 – 2 Montreal win . He became the first to score 50 goals in 50 games , a standard that remains one of the most celebrated achievements in NHL history . Richard finished the season with 73 points , seven behind Lach and six ahead of Blake , as the Punch line finished first , second and third in league scoring . 
 Richard 's critics argued that his scoring record was the result of talent dilution brought about by the war ; when many players returned in 1945 – 46 , he won his second Stanley Cup with Montreal , but his goal output was nearly halved to 27 . Richard again reached lofty scoring totals in 1946 – 47 , leading the league with 45 goals in a 60 @-@ game season and winning the Hart Trophy as the league 's most valuable player . Opponents continued their attempts to drive Richard to anger or frustration , as they had learned he could be goaded into taking himself out of the game by violently retaliating and fighting . One such incident occurred in the 1947 Stanley Cup Final when Richard received a match penalty for striking Toronto 's Bill <unk> over the head with his stick in a game two loss . Richard was suspended for the third game of the series , which the Maple Leafs won . 
 As the reigning most valuable player , Richard sought a pay raise prior to the 1947 – 48 season . General manager Frank Selke refused , even after Richard and team captain Émile Bouchard both sat out the Canadiens ' preseason before capitulating and returning to the team when the season began . The Punch line was broken up after Blake suffered a career @-@ ending leg injury . Richard 's season also ended early as he missed the final games of the season due to a knee injury . He finished second in team scoring with 53 points in 53 games , but Montreal missed the playoffs . After recording only 38 points in 1948 – 49 , Richard posted a 65 @-@ point campaign the next season and his 43 goals led the NHL for the third time . In 1950 – 51 , Richard scored 42 goals , including his 271st career goal , making him Montreal 's all @-@ time goal leader and one of the best hockey players of all time . 
 = = = All @-@ time scoring leader = = = 
 Richard missed over 20 games of the 1951 – 52 season due to injury , but overcame another ailment in the playoffs . In the seventh and deciding game of the semi @-@ final against Boston , Richard was checked by Leo Labine and briefly knocked unconscious after he fell and struck his head on Bill Quackenbush 's knee . Though clearly dazed , Richard returned to the game late in the third period after a large cut above his eye was stitched up . Canadiens coach Dick Irvin sent Richard back onto the ice in the final minutes of the contest , despite knowing Richard had suffered a concussion . Richard scored the winning goal in a 2 – 1 victory that sent Montreal to the 1952 Stanley Cup Final . Following the game , a bloodied and still disoriented Richard was photographed shaking the hand of Boston goaltender Jim Henry , who was also showing symptoms of injuries from the series and who appeared to be bowing to Richard following the Montreal player 's " unconscious goal " . The photograph by Roger St. Jean is among the most famous images of Richard . In the final , Montreal lost to Detroit in four straight games . 
 The 1952 – 53 season began with Richard in close pursuit of Nels Stewart 's all @-@ time NHL record of 324 goals . Richard tied the record in Toronto on October 29 , 1952 , by scoring two goals against the Maple Leafs ; his achievement earned a rousing ovation from Montreal 's rival fans . He failed to score in his following three games as frenzied fans followed each contest in anticipation of the record @-@ breaking marker . In his fourth try , a November 8 game against Chicago , Richard scored his 325th goal at the 10 : 01 mark of the second period . According to the Montreal Gazette , the ovation Richard received from his fans " shook the rafters " of the Montreal Forum . He finished the season with team @-@ leading totals of 61 points and 28 goals – becoming the first player in NHL history to score at least 20 goals in his first ten full seasons . Aided by Richard 's 7 goals in 12 playoff games , the Canadiens defeated Boston in the 1953 Stanley Cup Final to capture Montreal 's first Stanley Cup championship since 1946 . 
 Richard led the league in goals for the fourth time in his career with 37 in 1953 – 54 , then for a fifth time in 1954 – 55 with 38 ( shared with Bernie Geoffrion ) . He scored his 400th career goal on December 18 , 1954 , against Chicago . 
 = = = Richard Riot = = = 
 Opposition players continued to try to stop Richard through physical intimidation , and he often retaliated with equal force . The situation led to a running feud with NHL President Clarence Campbell . Richard had been fined numerous times by Campbell for on @-@ ice incidents and at one point was forced to post a $ 1 @,@ 000 " good @-@ behaviour bond " after he criticized Campbell in a weekly column he helped author for Samedi @-@ Dimanche . Richard was among many in Quebec who believed that Campbell treated French Canadian players more harshly than their English counterparts . The simmering dispute erupted after an incident in the Canadiens ' March 13 , 1955 , game against Boston , when Hal Laycoe struck Richard in the head with his stick . Richard retaliated by slashing viciously at Laycoe 's head , then punched linesman Cliff Thompson when the official attempted to intervene . Boston police attempted to arrest Richard for assault following the incident , but Bruins officials persuaded them to withdraw on the promise that the NHL would handle the situation . 
 Following two days of deliberation , Campbell announced that he had suspended Richard – who was leading the NHL 's overall scoring race at the time – for the remainder of the regular season and the playoffs . In English Canada , Campbell was praised for doing what he could to control the erratic Richard . Unknown to most at the time , Campbell had long wanted to impose a lengthy suspension on Richard over his previous outbursts . As NHL president however , Campbell ultimately answered to the league 's owners and they were typically reluctant to see such severe discipline imposed against any of the league 's star players on account of their value in increasing game attendance . In French Quebec the suspension was viewed as an injustice , an unfair punishment given to a Francophone hero by the Anglophone establishment . Richard 's supporters reacted angrily to Campbell : he received several death threats and , upon taking his customary seat at the next Canadiens game , unruly fans pelted him with vegetables , eggs and other debris . One fan threw a tear gas bomb at Campbell , which resulted in the Forum 's evacuation and the game 's forfeiture in Detroit 's favour . Fans fleeing the arena were met by a large group of demonstrators who had massed outside prior to the game 's start . 
 The mob of over 20 @,@ 000 people developed into a riot . Windows and doors were smashed at the Forum and surrounding businesses . By the following morning , between 65 and 70 had been arrested . Over 50 stores were looted and 37 people injured . Damage was estimated at $ 100 @,@ 000 ( $ 899 @,@ 291 in 2016 dollars ) . Richard had also attended the game , but left immediately following the forfeit . Frank Selke attempted to persuade him to return to try to disperse the crowd , but Richard refused , fearing that he would instead further inflame the passions of the mob . He took to the radio the next day asking for calm : " Do no more harm . Get behind the team in the playoffs . I will take my punishment and come back next year and help the club and the younger players to win the Cup . " 
 The suspension cost Richard the points title , which he lost to teammate Geoffrion by one point . Montreal fans booed Geoffrion when he surpassed Richard on the final day of the regular season . The fans continued to jeer Geoffrion into the following season . Montreal reached the 1955 Stanley Cup Final without Richard , and lost the championship series four games to three . The defeat was a bitter loss for Richard , who struggled to control his anger . 
 = = = Captain of a dynasty = = = 
 Richard fulfilled his promise to Canadiens ' fans as he led Montreal to a Stanley Cup championship in 1955 – 56 . The season began with the arrival of his young brother Henri to the Canadiens roster . It also marked the return of his former Punch line teammate , Toe Blake , as head coach . Along with general manager Frank Selke , Blake worked with Richard on moderating his temper and responding to the provocation of his opponents by scoring goals rather than engaging in fisticuffs . Richard finished the season with 38 goals and 71 points , second on the team in both respects to Jean Béliveau 's 47 goals and 88 points . Richard added 14 points in 10 playoff games as Montreal defeated Detroit to claim the Stanley Cup . He scored the second and ultimately Cup @-@ clinching goal in the fifth and final game , a 3 – 1 victory . 
 Entering his 15th NHL season in 1956 – 57 , Richard 's teammates named him captain of the Canadiens , succeeding Émile Bouchard , who had retired prior to the season . With 33 goals and 62 points , Richard again finished second on the team to Béliveau . In the playoffs , he scored the overtime @-@ winning goal in the fifth game of the semi @-@ final to eliminate New York , then scored four goals in a 5 – 1 victory over Boston in the first game of the final en route to a five @-@ game series win and second consecutive championship for Montreal . 
 Richard reached a major scoring milestone early in the 1957 – 58 season . During the first period of a 3 – 1 victory over Chicago on October 19 , 1957 , he became the first player in NHL history to score 500 goals in his career . As Richard celebrated with his teammates , it was announced to the Montreal Forum crowd : " Canadiens ' goal , scored by Mr. Hockey himself , Maurice Richard " . He played only 28 regular season games that season , scoring 34 points , as he missed three months due to a severed Achilles tendon . Returning in time for the playoffs , Richard led Montreal with 11 goals and 15 points as the team won its third consecutive Stanley Cup . He scored the overtime winning goal in the fifth game of the final against Boston . It was the sixth playoff overtime @-@ winning goal of his career , and the third during the finals , both NHL records . 
 At 37 , Richard was the oldest player in the NHL in 1958 – 59 . He scored 38 points in 42 games , but missed six weeks due to a broken ankle . Injuries again plagued Richard during the 1959 – 60 season as he missed a month due to a broken cheekbone . Montreal nonetheless won the Stanley Cup in both seasons . Richard scored no points in four games in the 1959 Stanley Cup Final , but recorded a goal and three assists in 1960 . The titles were the seventh and eighth of Richard 's career , and Montreal 's five consecutive championships remain a record . The 1956 – 60 Canadiens rank as one of eight dynasties recognized by the NHL . 
 The playoff goal was Richard 's last , as on September 15 , 1960 , he announced his retirement as a player . Richard had reported to Montreal 's training camp that Autumn , but Selke compelled Richard to end his playing career , fearing he was risking serious injury . In Richard 's retirement speech , he said he had been contemplating leaving the game for two years , and stated that at age 39 , the game had become too fast for him . 
 = = Playing style = = 
 Richard was nicknamed " the Comet " early in his career . When teammate Ray <unk> remarked that Richard " went in like a rocket " as he approached the opposition goal , Richard was dubbed " The Rocket " by a local sportswriter ; both Baz O 'Meara from the Montreal Star and Dink Carroll of the Montreal Gazette have been credited for the appellation . The nickname described Richard 's play in terms of speed , strength , and determination . Teammate and coach Toe Blake said the moniker was fitting because " when he would take off , nothing got in his way that could stop him " . Goaltender Jacques Plante declared it one of the most appropriate nicknames given to an athlete , noting the fierce intensity that often showed in Richard 's eyes and comparing it to " the rocket 's red glare " referenced in " The Star @-@ Spangled Banner " . Glenn Hall agreed : " What I remember most about Rocket was his eyes . When he came flying toward you with the puck on his stick , his eyes were all lit up , flashing and gleaming like a pinball machine . It was terrifying . " 
 The prime of Richard 's career was the era immediately following the Second World War , where battle @-@ hardened players returned to the NHL and implemented a " gladiatorial " style that featured rugged , physical and often violent play . Richard 's own temper was infamous , as illustrated by his actions that precipitated the Richard Riot . 
 A pure goal @-@ scorer , Richard did not play with finesse , nor was he known for his passing . One of his teammates remarked that " Maurice wouldn 't even pass you the salt " . Richard led the NHL in goals five times , but never in points . He was best known for dashing toward the net from the blue line and was equally adept at scoring from his forehand or backhand . His exploits revived a Montreal Canadiens franchise that had struggled to draw fans in the 1930s . In addition to his 14 appearances on a post @-@ season all @-@ star team ( eight on the first team , six on the second ) , Richard played in 13 consecutive NHL All @-@ Star Games between 1947 and 1959 . 
 Richard was still an active player when Gordie Howe overtook his career record for points . Howe surpassed Richard 's career mark of 544 goals in 1963 , while the latter 's record of 50 goals in one season stood for 20 years until broken by Bobby Hull in 1965 . The Montreal Canadiens donated the Maurice " Rocket " Richard Trophy to the NHL in 1999 as an award presented annually to the league 's leading goal scorer . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Upon his retirement as a player , Selke offered Richard a job as a team ambassador and promised to pay him his full playing salary in the first year . After serving in the position for three years , Richard was named a vice @-@ president of the Canadiens in 1964 . He became disgruntled with a role he felt was powerless and only honorary , and resigned one year later . Richard grew estranged from the organization as his desire to be involved in the team 's operations was ignored , and the split deepened when the Canadiens forced Frank Selke to retire in 1965 . He eventually refused to allow his name to be associated with the team . 
 As Richard struggled both with the need to find a purpose to his post @-@ retirement life and the fear of being forgotten , he attached his name to numerous endeavours . He acted as a consulting editor for a magazine titled Maurice Richard 's Hockey Illustrated , owned the " 544 / 9 Tavern " ( named for his career goal total and sweater number ) in Montreal , and was a pitchman for dozens of products , including beer , hair dye , car batteries , fishing tackle and children 's toys . He continued to use his name as a promotional vehicle for over 30 years after his retirement . Richard briefly returned to hockey in 1972 as head coach for the Quebec Nordiques of the World Hockey Association . He lasted only two games , a win and a loss , before finding himself unable to handle the strain of coaching . Richard reconciled with the Canadiens in 1981 and resumed his team ambassador role . In March 1996 , prior to the last game played at the Montreal Forum , numerous team luminaries were presented including Richard who received a 16 @-@ minute standing ovation . He was overcome in tears as he experienced the adoration of a Forum crowd one last time , recalling his past triumphs at the venue . 
 Richard and his wife , Lucille , lived in Montreal where they raised seven children : Huguette , Maurice Jr . , Norman , André , Suzanne , Polo and Jean . They had 14 grandchildren . Lucille died of cancer in 1994 , two years after the Richards celebrated their 50th wedding anniversary . Richard 's companion late in his life was Sonia Raymond . It was announced in 1998 that Richard was suffering from abdominal cancer . As his health deteriorated , Richard was diagnosed with Parkinson 's disease , and doctors suspected he had Alzheimer 's disease . He died on May 27 , 2000 , of respiratory failure as a result of his cancer . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Numerous honours were bestowed upon Richard throughout and following his career : the Canadian Press named him its male athlete of the year on three occasions , and in 1957 , Richard won the Lou Marsh Trophy as Canada 's athlete of the year . The Canadiens retired his sweater number 9 in 1960 , while the Hockey Hall of Fame waived its five @-@ year waiting period after retirement and inducted him in 1961 . 
 On September 16 , 1960 , the day of Richard 's retirement , Gordie Howe , who was sorry to hear of the news , had this to say about The Rocket . " He sure was a drawing card . He brought in the crowds that helped pay our wages . Richard certainly has been one of the greatest players in the game and we will miss him . " 
 In 1962 , Maurice Richard Arena , a 4750 @-@ seat multi @-@ purpose arena was built and named in his honor . 
 In 1967 , he was made one of the inaugural members of the Order of Canada , and , in 1998 , was elevated to the Companion of the Order of Canada . Canada 's Sports Hall of Fame honoured him in 1975 , and Richard was given a star on Canada 's Walk of Fame in 1999 . He was appointed to the Queen 's Privy Council for Canada in 1992 . 
 While he was a popular player throughout Canada , Richard was an icon within Quebec . Author Roch Carrier explained the passion Richard elicited from the fans in his 1979 Canadian @-@ classic short story The Hockey Sweater . Carrier wrote of how he and his friends all emulated Richard 's style and mannerisms : " we were five Maurice Richards against five other Maurice Richards , throwing themselves on the puck . We were ten players all wearing the uniform of the Montréal Canadiens , all with the same burning enthusiasm . We all wore the famous number 9 on our backs . " The story 's publication , and subsequent adaptation into a National Film Board animated short helped entrench Richard 's image as a pan @-@ Canadian icon . Richard 's popularity persisted late into his life : when introduced as part of the ceremonies preceding the final hockey game at the Montreal Forum , Richard was brought to tears by Canadiens ' fans , who acknowledged him with an 11 @-@ minute standing ovation . Upon his death , the province of Quebec honoured Richard with a state funeral , a first in Quebec for a non @-@ politician . Over 115 @,@ 000 people paid their respects by viewing his lying in state at the Molson Centre . 
 The Richard Riot has achieved a mythical place in Canadian folklore . The riot is commonly viewed as a violent manifestation of the discontent Francophones within Quebec held with their place in largely Anglophone Canada , and some historians consider the riot to be a precursor to the 1960s Quiet Revolution . In its 40th anniversary retrospective of the Riot , Montreal newspaper La Presse opened with the following passage : " Forty years ago began one of the most dramatic episodes in the history of Quebec , and of hockey . " Richard himself publicly dismissed his role as a catalyst for cultural or political change . He added in 1974 that he played with " English boys " and was largely unaware of the situation in French Quebec at the time . 
 In an article published four days after the riot , journalist André Laurendeau was the first to suggest that it was a sign of growing nationalism in Quebec . Laurendeau suggested the riot " betrayed what lay behind the apparent indifference and long @-@ held passiveness of French Canadians " . In contrast , in his book The Rocket : A Cultural History of Maurice Richard , Benoît Melançon disputes the importance of the riot , stating its perceived importance in history grew retroactively with Richard 's myth . Melançon wrote : " According to this popular narrative , for the first time the people of Quebec stood up for themselves ; especially English Canada delights in anachronistically announcing that this was the beginning of the 1960s Quiet Revolution . " 
 = = Career statistics = = 
 = = Awards and honours = = 
 = = = General = = = 
 Career statistics : Maurice Richard playing card , National Hockey League , retrieved 2014 @-@ 03 @-@ 03 
 Cameron , Steve , ed . ( 2013 ) , Hockey Hall of Fame Book of Players , Richmond Hill , Ontario : Firefly Books , ISBN 978 @-@ 1 @-@ <unk> @-@ 224 @-@ 2 
 Carrier , Roch ( 2001 ) , Our Life With The Rocket : The Maurice Richard Story , Fischman , Sheila ( translator ) , Toronto , Ontario : Penguin Books , ISBN 0 @-@ 670 @-@ <unk> @-@ 1 
 Diamond , Dan ( 2013 ) , National Hockey League Official Guide & Record Book 2014 , Toronto , Ontario : Diamond Sports Data , Inc . , ISBN 978 @-@ 1 @-@ <unk> @-@ 26 @-@ 3 
 Foran , Charles ( 2011 ) , Maurice Richard , Toronto , Ontario : Penguin Books , ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 670 @-@ <unk> @-@ 0 
 Lavigne , Carl , ed . ( 2013 ) , 2013 – 14 Montreal Canadiens Media Guide , Montreal Canadiens Hockey Club 
 McKinley , Michael ( 2006 ) , Hockey : A People 's History , Toronto , Ontario : McClelland & Stewart , ISBN 0 @-@ 7710 @-@ <unk> @-@ 5 
 Melançon , Benoît ( 2009 ) , The Rocket : A Cultural History , Reed , Fred A. ( translator ) , Vancouver , British Columbia : Greystone Books , ISBN 978 @-@ 1 @-@ <unk> @-@ 336 @-@ 3 
 O 'Brien , Andy ( 1961 ) , Rocket Richard , Toronto , Ontario : Ryerson Press 
 O 'Brien , Andy ( 2001 ) , Rocket Richard , Toronto , Ontario : Ryerson Press , ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ <unk> @-@ 4 @-@ 9 
 Pincus , Arthur ( 2006 ) , The Official Illustrated NHL History , Montreal , Quebec : Readers Digest , ISBN 0 @-@ <unk> @-@ 800 @-@ X 
 Podnieks , Andrew ( 2003 ) , Players : The ultimate A – Z guide of everyone who has ever played in the NHL , Toronto , Ontario : Doubleday Canada , ISBN 0 @-@ 385 @-@ <unk> @-@ 9 
 = The Best Exotic Marigold Hotel = 
 The Best Exotic Marigold Hotel is a 2011 British comedy @-@ drama film , directed by John Madden . The screenplay , written by Ol Parker , is based on the 2004 novel These Foolish Things , by Deborah Moggach , and features an ensemble cast consisting of Judi Dench , Celia Imrie , Bill Nighy , Ronald Pickup , Maggie Smith , Tom Wilkinson and Penelope Wilton , as a group of British pensioners moving to a retirement hotel in India , run by the young and eager Sonny , played by Dev Patel . The movie was produced by Participant Media and Blueprint Pictures on a budget of $ 10 million . 
 Producers Graham Broadbent and Peter Czernin first saw the potential for a film in Deborah Moggach 's novel with the idea of exploring the lives of the elderly beyond what one would expect of their age group . With the assistance of screenwriter Ol Parker , they came up with a script in which they take the older characters completely out of their element and involve them in a romantic comedy . 
 Principal photography began on 10 October 2010 in India , and most of the filming took place in the Indian state of Rajasthan , including the cities of Jaipur and Udaipur . <unk> Khempur , an equestrian hotel which was originally the palace of a tribal chieftain in the village of Khempur , was chosen as the site for the film hotel . 
 The film was released in the United Kingdom on 24 February 2012 and received critical acclaim ; The Best Exotic Marigold Hotel opened to strong box @-@ office business in the United Kingdom and continued to build worldwide . It became a surprise box @-@ office hit following its international release , eventually grossing nearly $ 137 million worldwide . 
 It was ranked among the highest @-@ grossing 2012 releases in Australia , New Zealand and the United Kingdom , and as one of the highest @-@ grossing speciality releases of the year . A sequel , The Second Best Exotic Marigold Hotel , began production in India in January 2014 , and was released on 27 February 2015 . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Recently widowed housewife Evelyn ( Judi Dench ) must sell her home to cover huge debts left by her late husband . Graham ( Tom Wilkinson ) , a high @-@ court judge who had spent his first eighteen years in India , abruptly decides to retire and return there . Jean ( Penelope Wilton ) and Douglas ( Bill Nighy ) seek a retirement they can afford , having lost most of their savings through investing in their daughter 's internet business . Muriel ( Maggie Smith ) , a retired housekeeper prejudiced against Indians , needs a hip replacement operation which can be done far more quickly and inexpensively in India . Madge ( Celia Imrie ) is hunting for another husband , and Norman ( Ronald Pickup ) , an aging Lothario , is trying to recapture his youth . They each decide on a retirement hotel in India , based on pictures on its website . 
 When the group arrives at the picturesque hotel , they find an energetic young manager Sonny ( Dev Patel ) but a dilapidated facility , not yet what he had promised . Overwhelmed by the cultural changes , Jean often stays inside at the hotel , while her husband Douglas explores the sights . Graham finds that the area has greatly changed since his youth and disappears on long outings every day . Muriel , despite her xenophobia , starts to appreciate her doctor for his skill and the hotel maid for her good service . Evelyn gets a job advising the staff of a call centre on how to interact with older British customers . Sonny struggles to raise funds to renovate the hotel and sees his girlfriend Sunaina ( Tena <unk> ) , despite his mother 's disapproval . Madge joins the Viceroy Club seeking a spouse , where she is surprised to find Norman . She introduces him to Carol ( Diana Hardcastle ) . He admits he is lonely and seeking a companion , and the two begin an affair . 
 Graham confides in Evelyn that he is trying to find the Indian lover he was forced to abandon as a youth . Social @-@ climber Jean is attracted to Graham , and makes a rare excursion to follow him , but is humiliated when he explains he is gay . Graham reunites with his former lover , who is in an arranged marriage of mutual trust and respect . Reconciled , the Englishman dies of an existing heart condition . Evelyn and Douglas grow increasingly close , angering his wife , which results in an outburst from Douglas denouncing this marriage . Muriel reveals that she was once housekeeper to a family who had her train her younger replacement and now , having been forced out of the home and into retirement , she feels that she has lost any purpose in her life . 
 Sonny 's more successful brothers each own a third of the hotel and plan to demolish it . His mother ( <unk> Dubey ) agrees and wants him to return to Delhi for an arranged marriage . Jean and Douglas prepare to return to England after money is found through their daughter 's company . Jean eagerly awaits returning to England , but Douglas is more hesitant . Now that the hotel is closing against Sonny 's wishes and pleas , Madge prepares to return to England , and Norman agrees to move in with Carol . Madge , after encouragement from Carol and Muriel , decides to keep searching for another husband . 
 Sonny , encouraged by Evelyn , finally tells Sunaina that he loves her . He confronts his mother , who first forbids the match but then is persuaded by Young Wasim , who speaks no English . He explains that he once knew another man who wanted to marry a smart beautiful woman against his family 's wishes . Sonny 's mother interprets for Young Wasim , realizing he is talking about her , and she finally gives the couple her blessing . She asks Sunaina to take good care of her " favourite son " . Before the remaining guests can leave , Muriel reveals that her experience running the family 's household gave her the knowledge how to balance a budget and that the hotel can make a profit . She approaches Sonny 's investor privately and then invites him to visit the hotel to discuss matters with Sonny . The investor agrees to fund Sonny 's plans for renovation so long as Muriel stays on as an assistant manager . 
 All the guests agree to stay — except Jean and Douglas . Due to their daughter 's long @-@ awaited success , they decide to return home but on the way to the airport , their taxi gets caught in a traffic jam . A rickshaw driver says that he can take only one of them . Jean sees it as a sign that it is time to split with Douglas ; she bids him farewell and departs . He winds up at another hotel , discovering that it 's nothing more than a brothel and drug den , and spends the rest of the night wandering the streets . He returns to the hotel just as Evelyn is leaving for work , and asks when she 'll be back . A closing montage with a voiceover shows Muriel checking in customers in an elegant renovated lobby , Madge dining with a handsome older Indian man , and Norman and Carol living happily together . Sonny and Sunaina are shown riding a motorbike and passing Douglas and Evelyn on another bike . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Judi Dench as Evelyn Greenslade , a recently widowed housewife whose house must be sold to pay off her husband 's debts . Like his father , her son wants to " care " for her , without her input . At Sonny 's home for the " elderly and beautiful " , she keeps a blog of her activities . She narrates throughout the film , from bookend to bookend , from the opening sequence to the Day 51 moral " We get up in the morning , we do our best " . 
 Bill Nighy as optimist Douglas Ainslie , husband of Jean for 39 years . His loyalty has kept them together when she sees they both " deserve better " . He enjoys the food and sights , going out every day . 
 Penelope Wilton as pessimist Jean Ainslie . After Douglas invested — and seemingly lost — all their savings in their daughter 's internet business , they can afford only a " beige bungalow " installed with a panic button and hand rails " for the future " . She hates everything about India ; the perceived noise , poverty , and smells . It is for this reason that she stays indoors often , and wishes to return to the UK . 
 Maggie Smith as Muriel Donnelly , an ex @-@ nanny with a head for figures , is deemed surplus to requirements by her lifelong employers after she unwittingly trains her own replacement . She has no family of her own , having devoted her life to her employers . Although racist , she chooses not to wait six months for a hip replacement , and rather be " outsourced " to India . 
 Tom Wilkinson as Graham Dashwood , a High Court judge who has , for many years , been retiring " any day now " . During the retirement speech of a colleague , he decides that " today 's the day " . Having lived in India for his first 18 years , he returns to seek out the love of his early life , a man . 
 Ronald Pickup as Norman Cousins , an aged lothario , unable to face up to his own age and consequent undesirability by younger women ; he hopes for a new start with new possibilities in India . 
 Celia Imrie as Madge Hardcastle , who has had several unsuccessful marriages . Like Norman , she wants fun , adventure and a new mate . Tired of her daughter 's attempts to keep her as unpaid babysitter , she flees for anywhere , choosing India . 
 Dev Patel as Sonny Kapoor , manager of the hotel , and one @-@ third owner with his older , more favoured brothers . Sonny is a dreamer eager for a first success , but his determination makes him unwilling to ask for help until the end . 
 Tina Desai as Sunaina , call centre worker , Sonny 's " modern " girlfriend . She befriends Evelyn when Evelyn gets a job at the same call centre ( see below ) . 
 Sid <unk> as Jay , Sunaina 's brother , manager of a call centre , hires Evelyn to teach workers British culture . 
 <unk> Dubey as Mrs. Kapoor , widowed mother of Sonny . She admits that Sonny is not her favourite son , and wants him to move back with her to Delhi for an arranged marriage , not to Sunaina . 
 Diana Hardcastle as Carol , an Englishwoman but lifelong resident of Jaipur , who asks Norman to enter into cohabitation , according to his perception , <unk> . 
 Seema Azmi as <unk> , a Dalit ( lowest @-@ caste ) maid at the hotel who takes Muriel 's acknowledgement for friendship . Via an interpreter , Muriel reveals that her bitterness was caused by her employers having tossed her aside as obsolete after having devoted her life as a nanny and housekeeper , and having unwittingly prepared her replacement . 
 Paul Bhattacharjee as Dr. <unk> ; this was Bhattacharjee 's final feature film appearance before his death in 2013 . 
 Liza Tarbuck as head nurse Karen . 
 Denzil Smith as Mr <unk> , the Viceroy Club Secretary 
 Honey Chhaya as Young Wasim . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Background and script = = = 
 Producers Graham Broadbent and Peter Czernin were the ones who first saw the potential for a film in Deborah Moggach 's novel . The concept of outsourcing retirement , " taking our outsourcing of everyday tasks like banking and customer service one step further " , appealed to them , and they commissioned screenwriter Ol Parker to formulate this concept into a screenplay . 
 Parker wanted to take the older characters completely out of their element and involve them in a romantic comedy . They initially encountered difficulties finding a studio ; Working Title Films rejected their proposals , considering it unmarketable , but they eventually aligned with Participant Media , Imagination Abu Dhabi FZ , and Blueprint Pictures . 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 To helm the project , the producers Broadbent and Czernin approached John Madden , who was nominated for the Academy Award for Best Director for Shakespeare in Love in 1998 . Madden considered the characters in The Best Exotic Marigold Hotel to be of " an analogous kind of geographical suspension " , which have " entered a strange world removed from their former reality , cut off from their past , where they have to invent a new life for themselves " . Dench and fellow cast members Maggie Smith , Penelope Wilton , Celia Imrie , Bill Nighy , Ronald Pickup , Tom Wilkinson , and director John Madden jumped at the opportunity to all work together for the first time in one film . Producer Broadbent considers Dench 's character to be central to the story , and that Evelyn is much like Dench herself , being " the most wonderfully sympathetic person " . John Madden considers Maggie Smith 's character Muriel to be " instinctively xenophobic , never stepping out of her comfort zone in any way " , which is not uncommon in England . 
 The filmmakers determined early on that the role of Sonny was crucial to the outcome of the picture , and they selected Dev Patel , who at the time was still revelling in the success of Slumdog Millionaire . Dench described Patel as a " born comedian " , and Madden considered him to be a " comic natural — a sort of Jacques Tati figure , with amazing physical presence and fantastic instincts " . Patel had personal experience of watching the elderly through his mother who had been a carer , and he was " enticed by how vivid these characters are , by their sarcasm and their wisdom " , confessing that he " fell in love with the script because every character shines in his or her own different way and you believe in each of them . " <unk> Dubey was cast as Sonny 's mother , and English @-@ language debutante Tina Desai portrayed Sunaina , Sonny 's call @-@ centre @-@ operator girlfriend . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 Principal photography began on 10 October 2010 in India . Most of the filming took place in the Indian state of Rajasthan , including the cities of Jaipur and Udaipur . In Jaipur , filming took place around the City Palace , the Marigold market , and on crowded buses . Other scenes were shot in <unk> , and on the outskirts of Jaipur , footage was shot at <unk> Fort , which stood in for the Viceroy Club . The place where Sonny and Sunaina meet in the film was shot nearby at the Step Well near Amer Fort , a 10th @-@ century establishment noted for its " ten stories of pale golden stone steps . " <unk> Khempur was chosen as the site for the Best Exotic Marigold Hotel ; it is an equestrian hotel that was originally the palace of a tribal chieftain , located about an hour and a half outside of Udaipur in the village of Khempur . Madden considered the building to have a magical quality and unmistakable charm , remarking that it had " something special that could ultimately draw the characters in . It had these wonderful cool dark interiors , with glimpses of saturated light and the teeming life outside its walls . " Production designer Alan MacDonald , who won Best Art Direction in a Contemporary Film from the Art Directors Guild for his work , was brought in to embellish the interiors , intentionally making it clash with " interesting furniture inspired by colonial India , mismatched local textiles , all mixed together with modern plastic bits and pieces , with everything distressed and weather beaten . " Footage was also shot at the Lake Palace Hotel at Lake <unk> . 
 Madden said that challenges of filming in India included the street noise , as well as the people 's curiosity and hospitality when they saw him producing a camera . The cast and crew were well received by the locals , as was the director who , along with the cast , was invited by Arvind Singh Mewar , the Maharaja of Udaipur , to attend his lavish Diwali celebrations and firework display , as well as attend a royal wedding held at the <unk> Palace Hotel in Jaipur . Chris Gill was the editor of the picture . 
 A sequel , The Second Best Exotic Marigold Hotel , began production in India in January 2014 and was released in February 2015 . Most of the cast returned , with additions including American actor Richard Gere . 
 = = Soundtrack = = 
 The soundtrack , composed by Thomas Newman , was released in the CD format in 2012 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Box office = = = 
 The film was first shown at the Italian cinema trade show Le <unk> <unk> di Cinema ( " The Professional Days of Cinema " ) in Sorrento on 30 November 2011 and at the Glasgow Film Festival on 17 February 2012 , before being released widely in the United Kingdom and Ireland on 24 February 2012 . This was followed by release in a further 26 countries in March and April . From May to August , more and more nations saw the release of the film , before Japan 's February 2013 release capped off the film 's theatrical debut calendar . 
 In the United Kingdom , The Best Exotic Marigold Hotel came in second to The Woman in Black at the box office during its first week , earning £ 2 @.@ 2 million . It eventually topped the UK box office , with £ 2 @.@ 3 million , in its second weekend on release . By the end of its UK run , the film had grossed around US $ 31 million . Prior to its United States debut , the comedy had already grossed US $ 69 million worldwide and passed both The Queen ( 2006 ) and Calendar Girls ( 2003 ) in total international grosses . After three months of release , it was ranked the third highest @-@ grossing 2012 release in Australia and New Zealand , behind only The Avengers and The Hunger Games , and the fourth @-@ highest @-@ grossing 2012 title in the UK . 
 In the US and Canada , the film initially opened in 16 theatres in its first week . In its second week of release , it expanded from 16 to 178 screens in North America and grossed US $ 2 @.@ 7 million for the weekend , ending eighth on the week 's top hits . By the end of the month , Best Exotic Marigold Hotel had grossed US $ 100 million worldwide . The film had a worldwide gross of US $ 136 @,@ 836 @,@ 156 . It ranks among the highest @-@ grossing international films released by Fox Searchlight Pictures behind Black Swan ( 2010 ) , The Full Monty ( 1997 ) , and The Descendants ( 2011 ) , and among the highest @-@ grossing specialty releases of the year along with Moonrise Kingdom and To Rome with Love . 
 Elsewhere , The Best Exotic Marigold Hotel took in less that 58 million USD . Nations contributing sizable box office returns aside from the UK and North America included Australia ( 21 @.@ 2 million USD ) , Germany ( 6 million USD ) , New Zealand ( 4 @.@ 4 million USD ) , Spain ( 4 @.@ 3 million USD ) , France ( 1 @.@ 9 million USD ) , Sweden ( 1 @.@ 3 million USD ) , Italy ( 1 @.@ 1 million USD ) , South Africa ( 1 million USD ) , and Norway ( 797 thousand USD ) . 
 = = = Reception = = = 
 The film received positive reviews from critics . The review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes reported that 78 % of critics gave the film a positive rating , based on 148 reviews , with an average score of 6 @.@ 6 / 10 . Its consensus states " The Best Exotic Marigold Hotel isn 't groundbreaking storytelling , but it 's a sweet story about the senior set featuring a top @-@ notch cast of veteran actors . " On Metacritic , which uses a normalized rating system , the film holds a 62 / 100 rating , based on 35 reviews , indicating " generally favourable reviews " . 
 Mick LaSalle of the San Francisco Chronicle remarked that the film was " a rare reminder from movies that the grand emotions are not only for the young and the middle @-@ aged " , citing it " too well made to be dismissed and contains too much truth to be scorned . " Roger Ebert , writing for the Chicago Sun @-@ Times , gave The Best Exotic Marigold Hotel three and a half out of four stars . He declared the film " a charming , funny and heartwarming movie [ and ] a smoothly crafted entertainment that makes good use of seven superb veterans . " Claudia Puig from USA Today called it " a refreshing , mature fairy tale with a top @-@ notch ensemble cast . " While she felt the film was " about 15 minutes too long " , she summarized it as " a delightful , droll and entertaining comedy of manners with an estimable cast " and an " ideal low @-@ tech alternative to the special @-@ effects laden " film projects of 2012 . 
 Peter Travers from Rolling Stone rated the comedy three out of four stars . He found that " with a lesser cast , the movie would be a lineup of TV @-@ movie clichés . But this is a cast that never makes a false move even when the script settles for formula . " Chicago Tribune critic Michael Phillips wrote that " as two @-@ hour tours go , The Best Exotic Marigold Hotel goes smoothly . " While he felt that the film focused on " pleasantly predictable story " , he noted that the project was one of those films which " are better off concentrating on a reassuring level of <unk> craft [ than ] going easy on the surprises . " 
 Lisa Schwarzbaum of Entertainment Weekly graded the film with a ' B – ' rating , summarizing it as a " lulling , happy @-@ face story of retirement @-@ age self @-@ renewal , set in a shimmering , weltering , jewel @-@ colored India " , and that it succeeded in selling " something safe and sweet , in a vivid foreign setting , to an underserved share of the moviegoing market . " Peter Bradshaw , writing for The Guardian , was more igneous in his 2 / 5 star review , saying that the film " needs a Stannah chairlift to get it up to any level of watchability , and it is not exactly concerned to do away with condescending stereotypes about old people , or Indian people of any age . " Noting the luminous , prolific resumes of the cast he noted " nothing in this insipid story does anything like justice to the cast 's combined potential . " He went on to opine that the film appeared " oddly like an Agatha Christie thriller with all the <unk> characters , 2D backstories and foreign locale , but no murder . " In further negative reviews , critics from The Guardian and the blog Marshall and the Movies criticized the film for having a colonialist and orientalist point of view towards India . 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 At the Cinema <unk> Awards , organised on the sidelines of the 2012 Mumbai Film Festival , the film was honoured with the Best International Film accolade for showcasing Indian filming locations . The film and its cast earned five nominations from the British Independent Film Awards . 
 = Walden Galleria = 
 Walden Galleria is an enclosed shopping mall located in the town of Cheektowaga , a suburb of Buffalo , New York located east of I @-@ 90 and New York State Thruway Exit 52 off of Walden Avenue New York State Route 952Q . The Walden Galleria comprises more than 1 @,@ 600 @,@ 000 square feet ( 150 @,@ 000 m2 ) of retail space , with 250 stores on two levels , including a food court and a movie theater . The Galleria has four anchors , JCPenney , Sears , <unk> , and Lord & Taylor ; with additional major stores including Best Buy , Dick 's Sporting Goods , DSW Shoe Warehouse , Forever 21 , Old Navy , and a Regal Cinemas multiplex . The mall is owned and managed by The Pyramid Companies of Syracuse , New York , the same management firm that developed it . 
 Opened in 1989 , Walden Galleria initially featured national chains JCPenney and Sears , along with regional chain Bonwit Teller , and local chains Sibley 's , L. L. Berger , and The Sample as its major tenants ; the bankruptcies of these chains in the 1990s made way for several big @-@ box stores . Anchors Lord & Taylor and Galyan 's ( now Dick 's Sporting Goods ) were later additions to the existing mall property , opening in 1992 and 2000 , respectively . The most recent renovation to Walden Galleria comprised an extensive $ 60 million renovation between 2006 and 2008 , which added several new tenants , as well as a new theater adding 250 @,@ 000 square feet of retail . 
 = = History = = 
 Walden Galleria was developed by The Pyramid Companies , a New York @-@ based shopping center management firm . Built on a site near Exit 52 of the New York State Thruway , the mall was opened in 1989 . At the time , the mall featured six anchor stores : national chains JCPenney , and Sears , regional chain Bonwit Teller , and three Western New York chains : Sibley 's , L. L. Berger , and The Sample . Sibley 's opened in late 1988 , several months before the rest of the mall . An additional anchor space was originally built for B. Altman and Company , but it remained vacant , as the chain decided not to open the Walden Galleria store due to credit restraints . At the time , the two @-@ story mall also featured more than 150 stores , as well as a theater owned by Hoyts Cinemas . 
 In 1990 , Sibley 's parent , May Co . , merged operations with Pittsburgh , Pennsylvania @-@ based Kaufmann 's . That same year , local chain AM & A 's ( Adam , Meldrum & Anderson Company ) moved from the nearby Thruway Mall into the space originally planned for B. Altman . The owner of the Thruway Mall sued the AM & A 's chain , claiming breach of contract ; the chain would later be declared liable for damages to the Thruway Mall , which was subsequently torn down and rebuilt as a strip mall in the early 1990s . Finally , Hoyts sold the Walden Galleria theater complex to General Cinemas by the end of the year . 
 L. L. Berger declared bankruptcy in 1991 , closing all of its stores . Later that same year , three more anchor stores were added to the mall : Lechmere , Loehmann 's , and Lord & Taylor . The Sample closed in 1991 , and was soon replaced with Linens & Wares , a household goods @-@ based retailer ; also , by the end of the year , Filene 's Basement would open in the former L. L. Berger space . Both Filene 's Basement and Loehmann 's would close within three years . 
 = = = Mid @-@ late 1990s = = = 
 In 1995 , York , Pennsylvania @-@ based department store chain The Bon @-@ Ton acquired the AM & A 's chain , converting all outlets to The Bon @-@ Ton . Later that year , on December 14 , 17 @-@ year @-@ old Cynthia Wiggins of Buffalo was struck by a dump truck while trying to get to her first day of work in the mall 's food court from a NFTA Metro bus stop on Walden Avenue . The incident sparked allegations from Buffalo 's African @-@ American community that Pyramid did not want people from Buffalo 's predominantly minority East Side to have easy access to the mall . In settling a wrongful death claim against Walden Galleria and NFTA Metro and to prevent a boycott of the mall , the bus stop was soon moved to a point inside the mall , where it remains today . Bonwit Teller closed off its upper level in 1996 as part of the chain 's restructuring , with Old Navy soon opening in the store 's former upper level . By the end of the year , Bonwit Teller had closed the rest of its store as well , with the lower level becoming the area 's first Bed Bath & Beyond store in 1997 . Also in 1996 , sporting apparel retailer Finish Line opened what was then one of its largest stores , in the space vacated by Filene 's Basement two years previous . 
 Montgomery Ward , which acquired the Lechmere chain in 1994 , closed the last of the Lechmere stores nationwide in 1998 , as part of a corporate restructuring . After its closure , half of the former Lechmere was then converted to a home store for JCPenney , while the other half sat vacant until DSW Shoe Warehouse replaced it in 1999 . Linens ' n Wares , which closed at some point in the late 1990s , was converted to a home store for Kaufmann 's in 1999 as well . One year later , a Galyan 's Trading Company store was added onto the mall as well , with this store being renamed Dick 's Sporting Goods in 2004 following the acquisition of the Galyan 's chain . 
 = = = 2000s = = = 
 Starting in 2000 , the first of several renovation plans was announced for the mall . The initial plan called for the addition of a new , three @-@ story wing with an eighteen @-@ screen movie theater complex , as well as several upscale tenants . Under this proposal , the existing Sears store would have been converted to mall space , and a new Sears store built immediately behind it . These expansion plans never came to fruition . By 2002 , General Cinemas had sold the mall 's theater complex to AMC Theatres . One year later , Pyramid made a failed attempt to evict the theaters for a Best Buy store , although Best Buy opened a store at the mall next to Sears in 2006 . AMC closed the mall 's theaters in 2004 and only four days after closing , the theater complex was acquired and reopened by Regal Entertainment Group . The JCPenney Home Store closed in 2002 . Kaufmann 's was one of several former May Co. brands to be acquired and renamed by Macy 's in 2005 , and while the main Kaufmann 's store was converted to Macy 's , the Home Store was shuttered . Also in 2006 , The Bon @-@ Ton closed . 
 = = = = 2007 expansion = = = = 
 With the closure of The Bon @-@ Ton in 2006 , plans were once again announced to expand the Walden Galleria . Under these new plans , The Bon @-@ Ton 's former store was demolished for a concourse composed of more than 250 @,@ 000 square feet ( 23 @,@ 000 m2 ) of new retail space . The mall 's existing theater complex , which was located next to The Bon @-@ Ton , was also demolished for a newer , larger theater complex , which opened at the end of May 2008 . Barnes & Noble was planned for the former theater space , but never opened . Several new restaurants , including The Cheesecake Factory , <unk> Chang 's China Bistro and The Melting Pot , were also added , as were new tenants such as The Walking Company , Oakley , Urban Outfitters , Sephora and Coach . On January 14 , 2011 , two new stores were announced to join the lineup at the Walden <unk> H & M and Anthropologie , the latter of which opened up in a small location next to the former . It was announced in 2011 that Michael Kors would also open at the mall . 
 = = = Present @-@ day = = = 
 Walden Galleria is the largest mall in the Buffalo @-@ Niagara Falls area , as well as the busiest , with more than 18 million shoppers annually , from both Canada and the United States . Its anchor stores as of 2014 are Sears , JCPenney , Macy 's , and Lord & Taylor . In 2013 , new Italian Marble floors , lounge areas and lighting fixtures were installed throughout the mall . The mall also offers a valet parking service . Currently the old main entrances are being updated to reflect the newer addition to the mall . Some of the mall 's newest additions include Pole Position Raceway Indoor Go @-@ Karting , lululemon , Sperry Top Sider , and Texas De Brazil . In November 2014 , the mall was involved in a controversy regarding stores being fined for deciding not to open on Thanksgiving Day . The mall owners threatened to fine stores $ 200 an hour if they remain closed on the holiday . On November 17 , 2014 , it was announced that Dave and Buster 's will be moving into the mall from the nearby Eastern Hills Mall in the fall of 2015 , with a 30 @,@ 000 square foot addition to the mall planned to be built in between Macy 's and Lord and Taylor to accommodate the restaurant . 
 = Italian ironclad Re di Portogallo = 
 Re di Portogallo was an ironclad warship built for the Italian Regia Marina in the 1860s , the second and final member of the Re d 'Italia class . She was laid down at the William H. Webb Shipyard in New York in December 1861 , was launched in August 1863 , and was completed a year later in August 1864 ; the two Re d 'Italia @-@ class ships were the only Italian ironclads built in the United States . The ships were broadside ironclads , armed with a battery of six 72 @-@ pounder guns and thirty @-@ two 164 mm ( 6 @.@ 5 in ) guns . 
 Re di Portogallo saw action at the Battle of Lissa during the Third Italian War of Independence in 1866 . She engaged several Austrian wooden vessels in the melee , including ship of the line Kaiser , which rammed Re di Portogallo but inflicted no significant damage . The ship 's career after the war was very limited ; in 1871 , she was converted into a training ship . By 1875 , her wooden hull was found to have deteriorated badly , and so she was broken up for scrap . 
 = = Design = = 
 Re di Portogallo was 99 @.@ 61 meters ( 326 @.@ 8 ft ) long overall ; she had a beam of 16 @.@ 76 m ( 55 @.@ 0 ft ) and an average draft of 7 @.@ 18 m ( 23 @.@ 6 ft ) . She displaced 5 @,@ 610 metric tons ( 5 @,@ 520 long tons ; 6 @,@ 180 short tons ) normally and up to 6 @,@ 082 t ( 5 @,@ 986 long tons ; 6 @,@ 704 short tons ) at full load . Her hull was built from green wood . She had a crew of 552 . The ship 's propulsion system consisted of one single @-@ expansion steam engine that drove a single screw propeller , with steam supplied by four coal @-@ fired , rectangular boilers . Her engine produced a top speed of 10 @.@ 6 to 10 @.@ 8 knots ( 19 @.@ 6 to 20 @.@ 0 km / h ; 12 @.@ 2 to 12 @.@ 4 mph ) from 1 @,@ 812 to 1 @,@ 845 indicated horsepower ( 1 @,@ 351 to 1 @,@ 376 kW ) . She could steam for about 1 @,@ 800 nautical miles ( 3 @,@ 300 km ; 2 @,@ 100 mi ) at a speed of 10 @.@ 5 knots ( 19 @.@ 4 km / h ; 12 @.@ 1 mph ) . For long @-@ distance travel , Re di Portogallo was fitted with three masts and was barque @-@ rigged . 
 Re di Portogallo was a broadside ironclad , and she was armed with a main battery of six 72 @-@ pounder 8 in ( 200 mm ) guns and thirty @-@ two 164 mm ( 6 @.@ 5 in ) rifled muzzle @-@ loading guns . The ship was equipped with a spur @-@ shaped ram at the bow . The ship 's hull was sheathed with wrought iron armor that was 4 @.@ 75 in ( 121 mm ) thick . Her rudder and propellers , however , were not protected by her armor . 
 = = Service history = = 
 The keel for Re di Portogallo was laid down at the William H. Webb Shipyard in New York City in December 1861 ; she and her sister were the only Italian ironclads to be built in the United States . She was launched on 29 August 1863 and completed just under a year later , on 23 August 1864 . Re di Portogallo then crossed the Atlantic and joined the Italian fleet . In June 1866 , Italy declared war on Austria , as part of the Third Italian War of Independence , which was fought concurrently with the Austro @-@ Prussian War . The Italian fleet commander , Admiral Carlo Pellion di Persano , initially adopted a cautious course of action ; he was unwilling to risk battle with the Austrian Navy , despite the fact that the Austrian fleet was much weaker than his own . Persano claimed he was simply waiting on the ironclad ram Affondatore , en route from Britain , but his inaction weakened morale in the fleet , with many of his subordinates openly accusing him of cowardice . 
 Rear Admiral Wilhelm von Tegetthoff brought the Austrian fleet to Ancona on June 27 , in attempt to draw out the Italians . At the time , many of the Italian ships were in disarray ; several ships did not have their entire armament , and several others had problems with their engines , including Re di Portogallo , which could not get underway . Persano held a council of war aboard the ironclad Principe di Carignano to determine whether he should sortie to engage Tegetthoff , but by that time , the Austrians had withdrawn , making the decision moot . The Minister of the Navy , Agostino Depretis , urged Persano to act and suggested the island of Lissa , to restore Italian confidence after their defeat at the Battle of Custoza the previous month . On 7 July , Persano left Ancona and conducted a sweep into the Adriatic , but encountered no Austrian ships and returned on the 13th . 
 = = = Battle of Lissa = = = 
 On 16 July , Persano took the Italian fleet out of Ancona , bound for Lissa , where they arrived on the 18th . With them , they brought troop transports carrying 3 @,@ 000 soldiers ; the Italian warships began bombarding the Austrian forts on the island , with the intention of landing the soldiers once the fortresses had been silenced . In response , the Austrian Navy sent the fleet under Tegetthoff to attack the Italian ships . Re di Portogallo was at that time in the 3rd Division , along with the ironclads Terribile , Formidabile , and Regina Maria Pia , and the coastal defense ship Varese . After spending the 18th unsuccessfully bombarding the Austrian fortresses , the Italians withdrew late in the day , preparing to launch another attack the following morning . Persano sent most of his ships to bombard the town of Vis , but he was unable to effect the landing . 
 The next morning , Persano ordered another attack ; four ironclads would force the harbor defenses at Vis while Re di Portogallo and the rest of the fleet would attempt to suppress the outer fortifications . This second attack also proved to be a failure , but Persano decided to make a third attempt the next day . Re di Portogallo and the bulk of the fleet would again try to disable the outer forts in preparation for the landing . Before the Italians could begin the attack , the dispatch boat Esploratore arrived , bringing news of Tegetthoff 's approach . Persano 's fleet was in disarray ; the three ships of Admiral Giovanni Vacca 's 1st Division were three miles to the northeast from Persano 's main force , and three other ironclads were further away to the west . Persano immediately ordered his ships to form up with Vacca 's , first in line abreast formation , and then in line ahead formation . Re di Portogallo initially had trouble getting her engines running , but after repairs were quickly made , she joined the rest of the fleet . She was one of the last ships in the line . 
 Shortly before the action began , Persano decided to leave his flagship and transfer to Affondatore , though none of his subordinates on the other ships were aware of the change . They were thus left to fight as individuals without direction . More dangerously , by stopping Re d 'Italia , he allowed a significant gap to open up between Vacca 's three ships and the rest of the fleet . Tegetthoff took his fleet through the gap between Vacca 's and Persano 's ships , in an attempt to split the Italian line and initiate a melee . He failed to ram any Italian vessels on the first pass , so he turned back toward Persano 's ships , and took Re d 'Italia , San Martino , and Palestro under heavy fire . The Austrians quickly inflicted serious damage on Re d 'Italia and Palestro , eventually sinking both ships . After Palestro withdrew , the Austrian ironclads turned their attention to the 3rd Division , including Re di Portogallo . 
 Re di Portogallo initially attacked the unarmored ships Erzherzog Friedrich and Kaiserin Elizabeth before the ship of the line Kaiser rammed Re di Portogallo in an attempt to save them . Kaiser struck only a glancing blow , however , and inflicted little damage . Re di Portogallo fired her light guns into the ship in response , starting a fire , and killing or wounding a number of Austrian gunners before Kaiser could break free . By this time , Re d 'Italia had been rammed and sunk , and Palestro had been set on fire , soon to be destroyed by a magazine explosion . Persano broke off the engagement , and though his ships still outnumbered the Austrians , Persano refused to counter @-@ attack with his badly demoralized forces . In addition , the fleet was low on coal and ammunition . The Italian fleet began to withdraw , followed by the Austrians ; as night began to fall , the opposing fleets disengaged completely , heading for Ancona and Pola , respectively . Re di Portogallo emerged from the battle relatively unscathed , though many of her iron plates had been loosened in the collision with Kaiser . 
 = = = Later career = = = 
 After the battle , Vacca replaced Persano ; he was ordered to attack the main Austrian naval base at Pola , but the war ended before the operation could be carried out . The damage to Re di Portogallo was repaired after the battle , but the ship was rapidly made obsolete by the development of casemate ships and shortly thereafter turret ships . As a result , her postwar career was very limited . In 1870 , the ship 's armament was modified ; twenty of her 164 mm guns were removed and two 10 in ( 250 mm ) guns were added . The following year , she was converted into a gunnery training ship , and was again re @-@ equipped , now with twenty 8 in guns , two 4 @.@ 7 in ( 120 mm ) guns , and eight 80 mm ( 3 @.@ 1 in ) guns . The ship did not serve long in this capacity ; the ageing of the unseasoned wood used to build the ship , coupled with several flaws in the ship 's construction cut her career short . She was stricken from the naval register on 31 March 1875 and subsequently broken up for scrap . The Navy discarded Re di Portogallo and the three Principe di Carignano @-@ class ironclads between 1875 and 1880 to remove the cost of maintaining them from the naval budget , as part of an effort to reduce the financial impact of the new Caio Duilio and Italia @-@ classes then under construction . 
 = Meadowbrook State Parkway = 
 The Meadowbrook State Parkway ( also known as the Meadowbrook , the Meadowbrook Parkway or the MSP ) is a 12 @.@ 52 @-@ mile ( 20 @.@ 15 km ) parkway in Nassau County , New York , in the United States . Its southern terminus is at a full cloverleaf interchange with the Bay and Ocean parkways in Jones Beach State Park . The parkway heads north , crossing South Oyster Bay and intersecting Loop Parkway before crossing onto the mainland and connecting to the Southern State Parkway in North Merrick . It continues north to the village of Carle Place , where the Meadowbrook Parkway ends at exit 31A of the Northern State Parkway . The Meadowbrook Parkway is designated New York State Route <unk> ( NY <unk> ) , an unsigned reference route . Most of the road is limited to non @-@ commercial traffic , like most parkways in the state of New York ; however , the portion south of Merrick Road is open to commercial traffic . 
 The Meadowbrook State Parkway was first envisioned in 1924 as part of the Long Island State Park Commission ( LISPC ) and Robert Moses 's system to connect several parks in Nassau and Suffolk counties . One park included in the proposal was Jones Beach State Park , which opened along with the Ocean Parkway in 1929 . Construction of the Meadowbrook and Loop causeways began in July 1933 , and was slated for completion in January 1935 . The Reconstruction Finance Corporation loaned $ 5 @,@ 050 @,@ 000 toward the project , which was completed in October 1934 . Nassau County acquired the right @-@ of @-@ way for an extension to the Northern State Parkway in 1936 , and the highway was originally intended to be finished for the 1939 World 's Fair in Flushing Meadows , Queens . The start of construction was ultimately delayed until December 1953 , and the $ 10 million ( 1953 USD ) highway was completed in October 1956 . 
 Reconstruction projects in the later parts of the 20th century have caused local protests by entities such as the town of Hempstead and the village of Westbury . The latter was concerned about construction affecting the way of life in Westbury , and the mayor and citizens wanted confirmation that the reconstruction of Northern State Parkway exit 31 — the Meadowbrook State Parkway 's northern terminus — would not lead to environmental disruption . In August 1998 , the Meadowbrook was dedicated as the Senator Norman J. Levy Memorial Parkway in honor of Norman J. Levy , a state senator who helped sponsor the first seat belt law in the United States . 
 = = Route description = = 
 The Meadowbrook State Parkway begins at a cloverleaf interchange with the Ocean Parkway and Bay Parkway on Jones Beach Island in the town of Hempstead . The parkway briefly proceeds northwest through Jones Beach before turning northward and crossing South Oyster Bay on a six @-@ lane causeway . After crossing the bay , the Meadowbrook reaches exit M10 , a trumpet interchange with Loop Parkway . In the middle of exit M10 is a southbound @-@ only toll barrier used to charge for access to Jones Beach . After Loop Parkway , the Meadowbrook heads northwest across another water channel and becomes a divided highway with a large center median . A third bridge over a waterway soon follows , bringing the Meadowbrook Parkway onto the mainland part of Long Island near the Norman J. Levy Park and Preserve . 
 As the highway heads north from the channels surrounding the west end of South Oyster Bay , it runs along the west side of the Norman J. Levy Park and Preserve and the Merrick Road Park Golf Course , both of which are separated from the Meadowbrook by a small creek . The golf course leads to nearby exit M9 , a cloverleaf interchange with Merrick Road ( unsigned County Route 27 or CR 27 ) in the Freeport section of Hempstead . Not far to the north is exit M8 , another cloverleaf serving NY 27 ( East Sunrise Highway ) . After crossing the adjacent Babylon Branch of the Long Island Rail Road , the parkway continues north across East Meadow Park to reach exit M7 , a cloverleaf interchange with the Babylon Turnpike ( unsigned CR 7A ) . After exit M7 , the Meadowbrook makes a slight turn to the northwest as it traverses Roosevelt Preserve County Park . 
 At the northern edge of the park , the Meadowbrook enters exit M6 , a partial cloverleaf interchange with several flyover ramps connecting to the Southern State Parkway . After the Southern State interchange , the Meadowbrook continues north through a narrow park known as Barnum Woods , which separates the heavily developed neighborhoods of Uniondale to the west and East Meadow to the east . The highway passes over NY 102 ( Front Street ) with no connection before leaving Barnum Woods and bending northward near exit M5 and the northbound half of exit M4 , which serve NY 24 ( Hempstead Turnpike ) and several other local streets by way of a series of service roads in the vicinity of Eisenhower Park , Nassau Coliseum , and Mitchel Field . After another mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) , the Meadowbrook makes a turn to the west and enters exit M4 southbound and exit M3 , which connect to Stewart Avenue ( unsigned CR 177 ) via Merchants Concourse . Exit M3 also serves Nassau Community College , located just southwest of the Meadowbrook Parkway . 
 Continuing west , the Meadowbrook State Parkway enters exit M2 , a cloverleaf interchange with Zeckendorf Boulevard ( unsigned CR 260 ) adjacent to nearby Roosevelt Field Mall . Both directions of Zeckendorf Boulevard are accessible southbound , with exit <unk> using part of <unk> Drive ; the northbound direction of the parkway has only one exit , exit <unk> for Zeckendorf Boulevard westbound . Past the cloverleaf , the parkway winds back to the northwest as it approaches exit M1 , a partial cloverleaf interchange with Old Country Road ( unsigned CR 25 ) on the border between the towns of Hempstead and North Hempstead . The Meadowbrook Parkway continues northwest across Old Country Road into North Hempstead , passing under the Long Island Rail Road 's Main Line as it traverses the village of Carle Place . Just north of the community , the Meadowbrook reaches exit 31A of the Northern State Parkway , a semi @-@ directional T interchange that serves as the north end of the Meadowbrook State Parkway . 
 According to annual average daily traffic counts compiled by the New York State Department of Transportation ( NYSDOT ) in 2011 , the most @-@ traveled part of the parkway is the section north of the Southern State Parkway . This portion carries an average of 106 @,@ 800 vehicles daily , with the segment between Zeckendorf Boulevard and Old Country Road serving the most at 139 @,@ 500 vehicles per day . South of the Southern State Parkway , the Meadowbrook Parkway sees only an average of about 54 @,@ 000 vehicles daily . The busiest part in this stretch lies between the Babylon Turnpike and the Southern State Parkway , which handles 95 @,@ 600 vehicles on an average day . The section between the Ocean and Loop parkways is the least @-@ traveled part of the Meadowbrook Parkway , as only 15 @,@ 400 vehicles use the segment per day on average , although as the gateway to Jones Beach , it is busily traveled during the summer months . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Design and construction = = = 
 The Meadowbrook State Parkway was part of the original design for the Long Island Parkway System , developed by Robert Moses and LISPC in 1924 to alleviate congestion on " unattractive " local roads . The system was designed to connect several parks that were under construction at the time , including Jones Beach State Park , Bethpage State Park and Sunken Meadow State Park . In 1927 , the parkway system was linked to parkways in New York City 's boroughs of Brooklyn and Queens . Jones Beach State Park and the Ocean Parkway opened in 1929 , with access to the mainland via the Jones Beach Causeway ( now part of the Wantagh State Parkway ) . 
 Construction of the Meadowbrook Causeway began in May 1933 with a $ 5 @,@ 050 @,@ 000 loan ( 1933 USD ) given from the Reconstruction Finance Corporation to the Long Island State Park Commission in April 1933 . In order to repay this loan , the Long Island State Park Commission , working with the Jones Beach State Parkway Authority , would institute a 25 @-@ cent toll on the Meadowbrook and Jones Beach causeways . The 50 @-@ cent parking fee on Jones Beach would be reduced to 25 cents in order to keep the total charged to motorists at 50 cents . It was proposed that the loan would be repaid in 25 years . The Meadowbrook Causeway was designed as a 5 @-@ mile ( 8 @.@ 0 km ) road from the Southern State Parkway in Freeport to Jones Beach with six bridges across channels of South Oyster Bay . Three grade @-@ separating structures would be designed as well by the State of New York Department of Public Works and the LISPC . A trumpet interchange with the Lido Beach Loop Causeway ( current @-@ day Loop Parkway ) was constructed as well . Designs also included 10 @.@ 1 million cubic yards of hydraulic fill , and a new water channel for boats . Proposed completion of the project was set for January 1 , 1935 . The road was constructed by 3 @,@ 800 people and completed in October 1934 , six months ahead of schedule . 
 On October 27 , 1934 , the Meadowbrook and Lido Beach Loop causeways were opened to vehicular traffic by LISPC . A motorcade of cars was led across the new roadways by Robert Moses , then a Republican Party candidate for Governor of New York . The event was preceded by parades in Freeport and Rockville Centre . During a speech Moses cited praises to the Reconstruction Finance Corporation for donating the money and letting the LISPC and Jones Beach State Parkway Authority do the work without interference . Other speakers that afternoon praised Moses and the LISPC , and New York City Mayor Fiorello La Guardia showed up late to give his congratulations . Despite the opening ceremony , two @-@ way traffic was not permitted on the Meadowbrook between the Southern State and Merrick Road until June 1 , 1935 . Prior to that time , motorists had to use the renamed Wantagh Causeway to access Jones Beach . 
 = = = Extension to the Northern State Parkway = = = 
 Moses announced during the opening of the Bethpage State Parkway in November 1936 that the land for extending the Meadowbrook from the Southern State Parkway to the Northern State Parkway had been acquired by Nassau County and plans for the road were being designed by the State Division of Highways . Moses stated that the funds would be requested at the next session of the New York State Legislature , with a completion date of 1939 to coincide with the opening of the 1939 World 's Fair in Flushing , Queens . This would make it plausible for motorists to go from Flushing to Jones Beach State Park directly . The new extension would also alleviate congestion along several north – south highways in Nassau County and provide quicker access to Jones Beach . However , construction on the $ 10 million ( 1956 USD ) highway was delayed until December 1953 . 
 On October 13 , 1956 , Governor Averell Harriman officially opened the new extension of the Meadowbrook State Parkway with a ribbon @-@ cutting ceremony at 11 : 30 a.m. near the Jerusalem Avenue overpass . Robert Moses , Hempstead Town Supervisor Edward Larkin , and Nassau County Executive Holly Patterson also attended the event . After the ceremony , a motorcade led by Moses traveled from the Northern State Parkway south to Roosevelt Field Shopping Center . At Roosevelt Field , the board chairman for Roosevelt Field , Inc . , William Zeckendorf , honored Moses and Harriman with brand new tankards made of sterling silver . On July 5 , 1962 , the New York State Assembly announced the opening of bids on the widening of a 4 @.@ 4 @-@ mile ( 7 @.@ 1 km ) section of the Meadowbrook between Merrick Road and the Southern State Parkway . Bids were to be accepted on the project in August , with a price tag of $ 3 @.@ 851 million ( 1962 USD ) . The construction would widen the segment from four lanes to six and add a new center median . The widening was prompted by the frequency of accidents along the stretch , and efforts to develop the project were sped up as a result . Completion was set for 1964 , and the reconstruction and repaving was finished on November 18 , 1964 . 
 = = = Reconstruction concerns = = = 
 The interchange constructed between the Meadowbrook and Northern state parkways in 1956 was undergoing a new $ 61 million ( 1989 USD ) reconstruction project in the late 1980s . Although it was previously redesigned in 1968 , it was still the site of about 180 accidents per year — over six times the statewide average for accident frequency . The junction was to be rebuilt with three lanes in each direction for the Northern State in the middle of exit 31A , a direct ramp between the westbound Northern State Parkway and the southbound Meadowbrook , connections from Glen Cove Road to both parkways , and the relocation of exit and entrance ramps within the interchange . Construction began in May 1988 , and the project was expected to be completed on October 31 , 1991 . It was proceeding on schedule until the village of Westbury filed a suit against NYSDOT in February 1989 . The lawsuit claimed that NYSDOT did not follow proper environmental guidelines while designing the project because their environmental impact report failed to consider the impacts of a nearby future widening project on the Northern State Parkway . This widening project , considered a second phase of the interchange reconstruction , had no intended date of construction . 
 The Appellate Division of the New York State Supreme Court ruled that NYSDOT had to provide a new environmental report by May 12 , 1989 or face having the reconstruction shut down . The order by the court reversed a decision by the New York State Supreme Court that determined that a revised report was unnecessary . Residents of Westbury claimed that the project would bring noise concerns to the village , along with a spillover of diverted traffic to local roads . Concerns were also stated by then @-@ mayor Ernest Strada about Westbury 's water supply and potential impacts from the project . NYSDOT claimed that no disruption would be caused by the project , but Strada insisted there were still concerns . Strada also stated that the village had no interest in shutting down the project ; rather , they wanted to ensure that their community would be protected from any disruptions caused by the reconstruction . On April 24 , NYSDOT announced they had appealed the stoppage of work on the interchange , which had been suspended pending a ruling by the Court of Appeals , the highest court in the state . 
 On December 19 , 1989 , the Court of Appeals announced their decision on the case of Village of Westbury v. Department of Transportation of the State of New York , et al . , ruling in favor of Westbury . In its decision , the court stated NYSDOT should have issued a joint report for the interchange and widening projects because both projects improved the flow of traffic on the Northern State Parkway and thus were related . The ruling made by the previous court was affirmed , and NYSDOT was advised to consider the environmental impacts of projects on other nearby projects in the future . While the village of Westbury was praising Ernest Strada for taking on the state , residents of the village of Carle Place felt they were being taken hostage by his actions and that the stoppage of work was hurting their community more than Westbury . Editorials in Newsday also called the mayor " parochial and overzealous " . 
 While Carle Place was complaining about the inability to access their section of town , a January 1990 article in The New York Times mentioned that the Court 's decision put Westbury alone against the state , then @-@ Governor Mario Cuomo and regional planners , who were worried about the safety of the roughly 140 @,@ 000 drivers who used the interchange daily . Local business leaders claimed that Westbury was being selfish in opposing inconvenient construction . Even after the ruling , Strada continued to claim that they wanted to be informed on the impacts of a nearby widening project on the Northern State . NYSDOT officials worried that this would add more bureaucratic levels to getting approval for local road projects and that it could set the project back three years . Officials also went out of their way to call this a simple " not in my backyard " case . NYSDOT continued to claim that the projects were separate , and filed three years apart , despite the court 's ruling that they were similar projects . Cuomo , worried about the safety of drivers , invited Strada to come to Albany to meet with NYSDOT Commissioner Franklin White and State Senator Norman J. Levy to make an agreement . Strada , however , felt that in order to compromise , they would have to continue the original " violation " of not giving a report . 
 Westbury and NYSDOT came to a deal allowing construction to resume in February 1990 , with lane changes and other modifications being made by the end of the month . This truce , made by Governor Cuomo , allowed work to resume at a normal pace , with nearly 200 workers doing daily work on the project by April 1990 . The speed of progress on the reconstruction put the project back on track to meet the original October 1991 deadline . Mayor Strada , however , stated that he thought NYSDOT would not advance any work that would " need to be ripped up " . The interchange reconstruction project was ultimately completed in 1991 as expected . 
 = = = Recent changes = = = 
 In 1947 , the LISPC approved $ 37 @,@ 000 ( 1947 USD ) to construct a stone ornate gasoline station along the Meadowbrook in Jones Beach State Park . The gas station , one of eight constructed by Robert Moses throughout Long Island , would serve drivers , when there were fewer stations throughout the area . After 1975 , NYSDOT , who took control of the parkways from the LISPC , started demolishing some of the stations , including the Meadowbrook , which ended up being one of the first buildings to go . The stations , which were once useful , would fork from the left lane into the median . However , according to NYSDOT , with the change in traffic patterns , the entrances to these stations became dangerous . By 1997 , over two decades after demolition , the station site became a problematic place for people parking and walking up the Meadowbrook and Loop to fish on the bridges . According to the New York State Police , the site is legal for use as a repair stop or for emergencies . However , not for use of dropping people off for fishing , which is also illegal to fish from atop the bridge , except it is around and under the bridges . 
 In August 1998 , signs were installed along the Meadowbrook State Parkway dedicating the road in honor of State Senator Norman J. Levy , who died in February 1998 after brain surgery . Levy had served on the State Senate Transportation Committee since 1982 and sponsored the first seat belt law in the United States , and had also been part of the negotiations that helped work resume on the Meadowbrook – Northern State interchange . The new signs were unveiled in a ceremony in the median of the parkway just south of Merrick Road . Dignitaries at the honoring ceremony included then @-@ Governor George Pataki , Senator Charles <unk> and Levy 's widow , Joy Levy . Signs were erected at both ends of the Meadowbrook Parkway and at a point near the Babylon Turnpike interchange . 
 The Long Island Transportation Plan 2000 , a study of how to handle Long Island traffic issues in 2020 , was started in 1997 by engineers from NYSDOT . The preferred alternative in the study would widen several parkways on the island , inserting high @-@ occupancy vehicle lanes ( HOV lanes ) for buses and <unk> . The Meadowbrook would receive a new HOV lane between the Southern and Northern state parkways , while everything south of the Southern State Parkway would remain the same . The Northern State Parkway would get lanes from the Long Island Expressway to the Meadowbrook , and the Southern State would get lanes from the Meadowbrook to the Sunrise Highway . 
 In October 2008 , Nassau County Legislator David <unk> demonstrated with ten civic leaders in front of the NYSDOT building in East Meadow about the slow progress of construction on the NY 102 ( Front Street ) overpass . Construction was causing rush hour traffic to back up for miles near the Hempstead Turnpike ( NY 24 ) exit , and evidence showed no work had been done for several months . After residents and commuters started demanding answers , NYSDOT stated that a project that began as just basic bridge repair had become a larger @-@ scale project that required a redesign due to the fact that the bridge had more damage than initially realized . 
 = = Exit list = = 
 The entire route is in Nassau County . 
 = Agneepath ( 2012 film ) = 
 Agneepath ( English : The Path of Fire ) is a 2012 Indian action drama film produced by Hiroo Yash Johar and Karan Johar under the banner of Dharma Productions . It is a retelling of the 1990 film of the same name and was directed by Johar 's former assistant Karan Malhotra . The screenplay was written by Malhotra along with Ila Dutta Bedi . Johar pays tribute to his father , Yash Johar , the producer of the original , through the film . The music of the film was composed by Ajay @-@ Atul , with lyrics written by Amitabh Bhattacharya . Though publicised as a remake , the film borrows only the basic plot of the original , while making the characters and incidents completely different . The film 's title was taken from a poem of the same name by Harivansh Rai Bachchan , which forms a thematic link through the film , both literally and metaphorically . 
 Hrithik Roshan plays the lead role of Vijay Deenanath Chauhan and Sanjay Dutt plays the role of the antagonist Kancha , originally played by Amitabh Bachchan and Danny Denzongpa respectively , with Rishi Kapoor portraying the newly introduced character of Rauf Lala . The supporting cast include Om Puri as Commissioner Gaitonde , Priyanka Chopra as Kaali Gawde and Zarina Wahab as Suhasini Chauhan , with Katrina Kaif featuring in an item number . The film follows the struggle of a common man , Vijay Chauhan , as he seeks revenge from Kancha , for wrongly framing and murdering his father in the island village of Mandwa . In the process he befriends an underworld drug lord Rauf Lala and falls in love with a loquacious girl , Kaali Gawde . 
 Principal photography of Agneepath took place in Diu and Mumbai , with several accidents taking place on the sets . After several issues such as plagiarism charges and release @-@ date postponement , Agneepath released on 26 January 2012 in 2650 screens worldwide , coinciding with the Republic Day celebrations . Made on a budget of ₹ 600 million ( US $ 8 @.@ 9 million ) , the film broke the highest opening day collections record in India and became a major critical and commercial success with a worldwide gross of ₹ 1 @.@ 93 billion ( US $ 29 million ) . It has since emerged as one of the highest grossing films of all time in Bollywood . The following year Agneepath received five nominations at the annual Filmfare Awards ceremony , and won five IIFA Awards and four Zee Cine Awards . 
 = = Plot = = 
 In the island village of Mandwa , the school teacher <unk> Chauhan ( Chetan Pandit ) , highly respected by the villagers , tries to dissuade them from giving away their lands on lease to Kancha ( Sanjay Dutt ) , the son of the village head who plans to start a drug mafia . Knowing this , Kancha decides to get rid of the school teacher . He ambushes and murders a young girl inside the school , framing Chauhan for the murder . With the support of the villagers , Kancha then kills Chauhan by hanging him to death from a tree which is witnessed by young Vijay Chauhan ( Arish <unk> ) , the son of the teacher . Vijay Chauhan along with his pregnant mother Suhasini Chauhan ( Zarina Wahab ) leave the village . Destitute , they find shelter in the city of Mumbai but Vijay harbours intentions to go back to Mandwa and kill Kancha . While in Mumbai , Vijay 's mother delivers a baby girl named Shiksha . Vijay is attracted to Rauf Lala ( Rishi Kapoor ) , a local girl @-@ trafficker and importantly an enemy of Kancha and wants to get into his company . He earns his favour and joins his gang . Meanwhile , his mother along with his baby sister leave Vijay 's side as he resorts to violence . 
 A grown @-@ up Vijay ( Hrithik Roshan ) now works for Rauf Lala and finds himself as his trusted wing @-@ man . Once inspector and now commissioner , Gaitonde ( Om Puri ) acts as a silent guardian for Vijay and tries to eliminate crime in Mumbai . During the time when Rauf 's influence over the drug business in Mumbai is falling , Kancha decides to grow his influence as a drug lord in the city and sends his aid , Shantaram ( Ravi <unk> ) over to Mumbai for the process . Vijay with the help of the commissioner disrupts this plan and is lauded by Lala . He further gains the trust of Lala by taking a bullet shot which was aimed for Lala 's son , Mazhar ( Rajesh Tandon ) ; but is later revealed as a conspiracy involving Vijay and Shantaram to eliminate Mazhar . 
 After murdering both Mazhar and Shantaram , Vijay brings Mazhar 's corpse to Lala , who falls sick and is admitted into a hospital . In the meantime , Vijay takes over Lala 's empire and stops all the crimes committed by Lala 's gang . He is then contacted by Kancha and offers to go to Mandwa for a business agreement . While in Mandwa , Vijay tries to strike a deal with Kancha to hand over the drug business in Mumbai over to Kancha and in return taking Mandwa . Though Kancha initially suspects this deal , he later agrees on the condition that Gaitonde must be killed . 
 Meanwhile , back in Mumbai , Lala regains health and finds out the truth behind Mazhar 's death . He gets hold of Shiksha ( Kanika Tiwari ) and tries to sell her off . Vijay is notified of this by Kancha and he flees back to Mumbai and kills Lala . Soon after , Kancha sends a man to assassinate Gaitonde . This man identifies Vijay to be the son of the teacher killed by Kancha and reports this to Kancha . However , while he tries to assassinate Gaitonde , he is killed by Vijay . Vijay , meanwhile marries his love interest Kaali Gawde ( Priyanka Chopra ) , who is killed right after during a shooting spree by Kancha 's men . 
 Vijay leaves for Mandwa to avenge the death of his father and his wife and after an intense battle with Kancha , kills him by hanging him from the same tree in which his father was hanged . However , Vijay dies due to his severe injuries . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Hrithik Roshan as Vijay Deenanath Chauhan , a man seeking to avenge the murder of his father . 
 Rishi Kapoor as Rauf Lala , an underworld Don . He runs a meat business and simultaneously deals in drugs and prostitution . 
 Sanjay Dutt as Kancha <unk> . An unscrupulous man , often mocked for his hairless appearance ; he runs Mandwa as a concentration camp and exploits the villagers in order to deal in cheap cocaine . 
 Om Puri as Commissioner Gaitonde . He is a brutally honest cop who develops a close bond with Vijay . 
 Priyanka Chopra as Kaali Gawde , a talkative girl . She loves Vijay and provides moral support in his quest for revenge . 
 Zarina Wahab as Suhasini Chauhan , Vijay 's mother . She tries hard to dissuade Vijay against choosing a path of violence . 
 Chetan Pandit as Master Deenanath Chauhan , Vijay 's father . A morally upright man , he is wrongly framed for the rape and murder of a young girl and is subsequently killed by Kancha . 
 Sachin Khedekar as Mr. <unk> . He is the Home Secretary of Maharashtra and an aide of Kancha . 
 Rajesh Tandon as Mazhar Lala , Rauf Lala 's elder son . He is suspicious of Vijay 's loyalties . 
 Deven <unk> as Azhar Lala , a mentally challenged younger son of Rauf Lala . 
 Rajesh Vivek as Mr. Bakshi , a police inspector who doubles as Kancha 's informer . 
 <unk> Taneja as Kancha 's father . 
 Ravi <unk> as Shantaram , Kancha 's aid who conspires with Vijay . 
 Kanika Tiwari as Shiksha Deenanath Chauhan , Vijay 's sister . She lives with her mother and is unaware of Vijay 's existence . 
 Pankaj Tripathi as Surya . 
 <unk> Kala as <unk> . 
 Katrina Kaif as " Chikni Chameli " ( special appearance ) . 
 <unk> <unk> as <unk> , Kaali 's mother . 
 Arish <unk> as the younger Vijay Chauhan . 
 <unk> Sharma as a journalist . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 In an interview with The Times of India , Karan Johar explained that he harboured intentions of remaking the original Agneepath ever since the film released in 1990 . Though the film had received critical acclaim over the years , its commercial failure had devastated his father , producer Yash Johar . The idea of a possible remake materialised on the sets of Johar 's directorial My Name Is Khan , in which Karan Malhotra was an assistant director . Johar told Malhotra of his desire to remake the original film and asked him to revisit it again . On not directing the film himself , Johar commented , " I am happy directing films on love , romance and drama . That 's what I do best . I don 't think I will be good at an action film . So I am not taking the reins of the film in my hand " . However , Johar maintained that the new film would belong to a different milieu as compared to the original . He stated , " We are adapting the film from the original but ours would be a new age version that would fit in well with today 's time . We really hope that we are able to do justice to the original and make the remake exciting for today 's generation . " In an interview with Filmfare , he added that the protagonist of the film would be " more of an underdog " , while the antagonist would be " more flamboyant and menacing " than the older version . 
 Several changes were made to the story @-@ line of the original film , including the omission of certain characters and addition of new ones . The characters of Krishnan Iyer MA , played by Mithun Chakraborty and Nurse Mary Matthew , played by Madhavi were done away with and new characters such as Rauf Lala and Kaali Gawde were introduced in the screenplay . Moreover , the characterisation of Vijay Chauhan was changed , unlike the original which was inspired by Al Pacino 's role in Scarface ( 1983 ) . In an interview with The Calcutta Telegraph , director Karan Malhotra explained the adaptation by saying , " The similarity ( between the original and this film ) lies only in the fact that it is a revenge film ; a son seeking revenge for his father ’ s death . Unlike Mr. ( Amitabh ) Bachchan ’ s film , my film starts and ends in Mandwa and is primarily about the conflict between the mother and the son . It ’ s a completely new film with a lot of new characters . " He additionally termed Agneepath to be a " crazily dramatic masala Bollywood film " . 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 While media reports initially suggested that Abhishek Bachchan was being considered to portray the role of Vijay Chauhan , director Karan Malhotra approached Hrithik Roshan for the role . Roshan , however was sceptical on taking up a role earlier played by Amitabh Bachchan and agreed to star in the film only after months of deliberation . He said , " The script had so much passion that I felt very emotional and I made up my mind to do it " . On casting Hrithik , Malhotra explained , " Hrithik has the charm of a boy and the attitude of a man . Also , he has a certain vulnerability , which I was looking in my characterisation of Vijay <unk> Chauhan . " While explaining the character of Vijay Chauhan , Malhotra added , " Nobody can play Vijay the way Amitabh Bachchan did , and I would have wanted my Vijay to be subtle even if it wasn 't Hrithik . I wanted the negative characters in my film to be bigger . This made Hrithik 's victory seem bigger . " In preparation for the film , Roshan did not look up Bachchan 's performance in the original for inspiration , as he considered his role to be completely different . Roshan , however , faced several difficulties while filming . He suffered from a severe back injury , which caused him considerable pain , throughout the shooting schedule . In an interview with Filmfare he quoted , " Agneepath is the hardest I ’ ve ever worked in my life . I didn ’ t know what the film had in store for me . I ’ ve never been so tired in my life . I have exhausted my body completely . " 
 Actor Rishi Kapoor was subsequently cast as Rauf Lala , an underworld Don . Kapoor , who had never played a completely negative character in his entire career , was initially hesitant to sign the film . In an interview with Daily News and Analysis he stated that when Malhotra had offered him the role , he considered it to be a joke and thought that he would be the reason for the film 's failure . Kapoor subsequently insisted on a test look before principal photography could begin , so that he could comfortably fit into the Muslim character of Lala , who wears kohl in his eyes , a <unk> cap and is dressed in traditional kurta @-@ pajamas . While shooting for the action sequences , Kapoor suffered several bad falls and bruises , but continued shooting and was thereby praised by co @-@ star Hrithik Roshan for his professionalism . 
 For the role of Kancha , the antagonist , Sanjay Dutt was cast . According to Malhotra , the script of Agneepath demanded that the villain be more powerful than the hero , and due to Dutt 's bulky frame , he was considered perfect for the role . The character of Kancha demanded that Dutt go bald , but due to a prior commitment to the film Son of Sardar , which was being shot simultaneously , he could not do so for the sake of continuity . Therefore , Hollywood make up artist Robin Slater created a " bald " look for Dutt , with the use of prosthetics . However , due to the summer heat in Diu , the make @-@ up would eventually drip down Dutt 's face , which impelled him to finally shave his head . Director Malhotra admitted to being inspired by Marlon Brando 's bald look in the film Apocalypse Now ( 1979 ) while designing Dutt 's character . Dutt explained his look by saying , " Kancha is suffering from an ailment that leaves him hairless . I shaved my head for the role , not once but twice , and the eye @-@ brows and eye @-@ lashes have been digitally removed . " Furthermore , Dutt worked out in the gym twice a day in order to bulk up for the role . 
 During pre @-@ production , media reports suggested that several actresses including Genelia D 'Souza , Priyanka Chopra and Kareena Kapoor were being considered for the role of Kaali Gawde . However , Chopra was approached over the others , who agreed to do the film instantly . While initial reports suggested that Chopra would be playing the role of a sex worker in the film , they were later denied as rumours . In an interview with Rediff.com , she clarified that she was playing a prostitute 's daughter . On Chopra 's character , Malhotra commented , " Despite being a male dominated film , the part played by Priyanka is very prominent . It isn 't that of a simple or ordinary lover . She is there for Vijay unconditionally and without any expectations . With all the dangerous people around her , she is like this pretty flower standing there with a smile on her face . " In preparation for her role , Chopra wanted to visit a brothel , but Malhotra insisted that she doesn 't for safety reasons . 
 For the supporting roles , Zarina Wahab was cast as Suhasini Chauhan , Vijay 's mother ; a role originally played by Rohini Hattangadi . Wahab agreed to do the film , due to her close association with producer , Johar . For the role of Shiksha Chauhan , newcomer Kanika <unk> was auditioned and cast among 6500 girls . In order to feature an item number in the film , producer Johar wanted to sign Kareena Kapoor , who refused the offer and Katrina Kaif was eventually contracted . Filming for the song was demanding on Kaif , as she ended up with cuts and blisters on her feet , due to the long , stretched @-@ out schedules . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 Principal photography of Agneepath took place in the union territory of Diu , which was used to double as the village of Mandwa . Johar had to complete several formalities before shooting could begin , due to the sensitive nature of the territory . Director Malhotra , however did not shoot in the port of Mandwa itself , as it was " too congested " . While shooting for the film in Mumbai , a picture of Hrithik Roshan , filming a dahi <unk> sequence was leaked to the media . Worried over this , Johar increased the security on the sets and banned the use of cell phones . Additionally , Priyanka Chopra faced difficulties in allocating dates to shoot for the film , as she was simultaneously shooting for Anurag Basu 's Barfi ! . 
 According to Malhotra , most of the action stunts in the film were shot by Roshan and Dutt themselves , while body doubles were used to film a few scenes . Several accidents took place during the filming of Agneepath . Priyanka Chopra 's <unk> caught fire , while shooting for an elaborate Ganpati festival song . Hrithik Roshan too scalded his hands while shooting for the same scene . Roshan also suffered from an eye injury during the shoot of a song , when <unk> colours were flung into his eyes by some junior artists . In October , Roshan suffered from a major back injury while lifting a man weighing 110 kilograms , which was a part of an elaborate action sequence . Shooting was stalled for some time following the incident , while Roshan recuperated in a hospital . 
 While Ravi K. Chandran was assigned as the cinematographer of Agneepath , he opted out of the film after filming certain portions , for unknown reasons . Kiran <unk> was later contracted to replace him . Sabu Cyril was contracted as the production designer for the film , along with a team of 200 people . He explained the creation of Kancha 's den by saying that he built a haveli @-@ like structure with tantric paintings on the walls , resembling an old fort built by the Portuguese ( who had historically occupied Diu ) . Vijay 's home , on the other hand , was a " small sack @-@ like thing " on the terrace of a <unk> , which was built on an open ground with a hundred houses . Cyril added , " We wanted a tree to be at the edge of a hillside , protruding out due to erosion , with not enough soil . We made this banyan tree with fibre as we wanted it to have a particular look . " This tree forms a visual thread to represent Kancha 's atrocities in the film . The song " Chikni Chameli " featuring Katrina Kaif was shot in Film City , Mumbai , where the entire set of Dutt 's villa was recreated . 
 = = = Marketing = = = 
 The first official trailer of Agneepath was launched at a press conference in Mumbai on 29 August 2011 . Dharma Productions streamed the event live on the production house 's YouTube channel . The event was attended by the entire cast : Roshan , Kapoor , Dutt and Chopra . The trailer of the film was the third most watched trailer in India , behind the films , Don 2 and Ra.One. 
 The film associated itself with McDonald 's to provide a discount of ₹ 50 ( 74 ¢ US ) to customers buying a meal at the joint . Additionally , few winners were offered a chance to win a lunch date with Roshan . As part of the promotional campaign , Roshan , Dutt and Chopra visited Dubai on 19 January 2012 , to interact with fans at a shopping mall , followed by an invitational high tea party . The actors travelled to several places in India including New Delhi , Nagpur and other cities to promote the film . 
 = = Soundtrack = = 
 The music of Agneepath was composed by Ajay @-@ Atul , with lyrics written by Amitabh Bhattacharya . Sony Music acquired the rights to the album for ₹ 90 million ( US $ 1 @.@ 3 million ) and released its digital version on 16 December 2011 , followed by mass release on 19 December 2011 . <unk> <unk> , the marketing director of Sony Music , revealed that live instruments would be extensively used on the soundtrack . While explaining the process involved in composing the soundtrack , Ajay said that director Karan Malhotra narrated the story to them for over four hours , whilst humming the background score that he wanted . This was followed by innumerable discussions which made them " understand each other well " . He also mentioned that the song " Chikni Chameli " was a remake of their own Marathi song " <unk> <unk> " from the film Jatra ( 2006 ) . 
 In January 2012 , a plagiarism suit was filed against Sony Music and Dharma Productions by a Mumbai @-@ based engineer , for lifting and featuring the song " O <unk> " in the album . The Nagpur High Court ordered Johar to release the film , only after truncating the use of the song in it . 
 The song Chikni Chameli was extremely well received and topped the music charts . 
 = = = Track listing = = = 
 = = = Reception = = = 
 The music of Agneepath received positive reviews from critics . Joginder Tuteja praised the compositions and added that " Chikni Chameli " would be responsible for the rise in sales of the album . Sukanya Verma of Rediff.com gave the album 3 out of 5 stars and said that the film 's soundtrack was better than that of the original , while praising the composition of the songs " Deva Shree Ganesha " and " O <unk> " . A review carried by BBC UK summed up , " <unk> free of unnecessary remixes , Agneepath is a well @-@ crafted , evocative collection of songs that proves the adage that , when it comes to Indian music composers , sometimes two heads can be better than one . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 Prior to its theatrical release , the Central Board of Film Certification ( CBFC ) certified the film with a UA certificate after demanding a few cuts , due to a high proportion of violence present in the film . Explaining the certificate , Pankaja Thakur , CEO of CBFC stated , " Agneepath has a lot of bloodshed but none of us felt disturbed by it . The violence is not the type that can psychologically damage a child and the softer scenes of the film managed to offset the darker part of it " . The film 's posters subsequently featured disclaimers reading , " This film is certified U / A. We advise parental guidance due to violence in the film . " The board , consequently praised Johar for the step . 
 Initially scheduled to release on 13 January 2012 , Agneepath was postponed by a week to 26 January to coincide with the Republic Day celebrations . The film eventually released at around 2650 screens worldwide . The satellite rights of the film were sold to Zee Network for a sum of ₹ 410 million ( US $ 6 @.@ 1 million ) , a month before the theatrical release . Dharma Productions released the DVD of Agneepath on 13 March 2012 across all regions in the NTSC format , with a censor rating of PG @-@ 13 . The DVD includes special features such as the " making of the film " and " deleted scenes and songs " . It is available in Dolby Digital 5 @.@ 1 and Stereo format with English and Arabic subtitles presented in 16 : 9 anamorphic widescreen . 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 = = = = India = = = = 
 Upon release , Agneepath received mostly positive reviews from film critics in India . Taran Adarsh of Bollywood Hungama gave the film a score of 4 @.@ 5 out of 5 , and said , " Agneepath is an uncomplicated story of revenge , is hard @-@ hitting yet entertaining , dwells on strong emotions and aggressive and forceful action , yet is dissimilar from the original . It is a fitting tribute to the masterwork . " Subhash <unk> of IANS gave it 4 out of 5 stars , while commenting , " Every component of the film falls into place , with a resounding thump . Agneepath is brilliant in its brutality . It 's a riveting and hectic homage to the spirit of the cinema when revenge reigned supreme . And content was king . This new Agneepath takes us back to the era when there was no computer or cellphones . And communication with the audience was immediate and electrifying . " Kaveree Bamzai of India Today rated the film 4 out of 5 , noting , " <unk> , choir @-@ inducing sentiment , ecstatic . Agneepath is that rare mainstream movie written well . " 
 Aniruddha Guha of Daily News and Analysis gave the film 3 @.@ 5 out of 5 , reviewing , " An adaptation rather than a remake , the film assumes a life of its own once the central plot has been established . The film then charts a journey of his own . " Piyali Dasgupta of NDTV gave it 3 @.@ 5 out of 5 , stating " Watch this film because this one is unadulterated Bollywood entertainment . " Daily Bhaskar gave the film 3 @.@ 5 out of 5 stars , while adding , " On the whole , Agneepath totally rests on star power which will lure the cine @-@ goers to halls but how far will it impress them remains to be seen . " 
 Avijit Ghosh of The Times of India gave the film 3 stars out of 5 , and said , " Try to wipe out the movie 's earlier version from your mind . You might find it more enjoyable . " Sukanya Verma of Rediff gave it 3 out of 5 , while commenting , " Agneepath , less of a remake , more of a tribute . The makers of Agneepath should have just called it <unk> . " Kunal Guha of Yahoo.com gave the film 3 out of 5 stars , saying that , " The biggest dilemma of remaking a movie is how much to retain and what to retain . If the new story takes violent shifts , you lose the audience who came to revisit the original . If you photocopy scene @-@ by @-@ scene , you risk failing to connect with the audience who is accustomed to present sensibilities . The only safe bet : a ‘ <unk> ’ of the past and the present , like this one . " Mayank Shekhar of Hindustan Times gave the film 3 out of 5 stars while remarking , " This is the kind of genuine theatre experience , now getting rare , which remains most precious in the life of a film @-@ goer . Reason can take over later . I had a ball ! " Sonia Chopra of Sify gave it 3 out of 5 , and mentioned , " Debut director Karan Malhotra shows great promise in making the film visually arresting and maintaining the consistency of performances . But remaking a cult film means you have big shoes to fill . If you ’ re a loyalist of the late Mukul Anand ’ s Agneepath , you ’ re likely to have reservations with this one . But if you leave the comparisons aside and are willing to forgive the faults , Agneepath is worth a watch essentially to savor Hrithik ’ s performance . " Rajeev Masand of CNN @-@ IBN gave Agneepath 3 out of 5 and said , " It is in the end , an old @-@ fashioned revenge drama treated in that melodramatic , over @-@ the @-@ top style . You 're not likely to be bored by the intense action and the solid performances , but prepare to be exhausted by just how long this film plays on . " 
 = = = = Overseas = = = = 
 Overseas , the film received positive reviews . Russel Edwards of Variety reviewed , " Debuting <unk> Karan Malhotra stokes up a fiery revenge tale in Agneepath , an expensively pumped @-@ up , relentlessly energetic retelling of the 1990 Amitabh Bachchan cult favorite of the same name . <unk> Bollywood hunk Hrithik Roshan and veteran actor Sanjay Dutt donning the hat as the antagonist , this dynamic Hindi action extravaganza boosts its potent story with an aggressive style that will ensure audiences feel every blow . " Farah Andrews of Gulf News praised the film while saying , " Fans of the 1990 original starring Amitabh Bachchan and Danny Denzongpa as Vijay and Kancha may be wary about the remake , but take it from us , the revamped flick is well worth a watch . " <unk> A. Khan of The First Post wrote , " Director Karan Malhotra has made an impressive film under the able guidance of his mentor , Karan Johar . It scores on all directorial aspects – design , sound , edit , costumes , camera , phenomenal cast , dialogues and a very gripping screenplay . " 
 = = = Themes and analysis = = = 
 Agneepath derives its name from a poem of the same name written by Harivansh Rai Bachchan . The poem , which is recited through the film provides a metaphorical link to represent Vijay 's quest for vengeance . 
 Several critics consider Agneepath to be a homage to the era of the melodramatic , over @-@ the @-@ top action films of the 1980s and 90s . Critic Rajeev Masand analysed , " Agneepath is a throwback to those heightened action dramas of the 90s , so every dialogue is delivered as a punch @-@ line ; our hero may be battered and stabbed , yet he 'll rise like the phoenix , and the women are flung around to be raped or sold as sex slaves . " He added , " The film is enhanced by uncompromising , brutal action , and by its striking camerawork , especially those scenes framed against a monsoon sky , heavy with dark clouds . " Writing for Hindustan Times , Mayank Shekhar explained that the film , like several other Bollywood films was inspired by the Indian mythological tale of the Ramayana . He also added that " the external logic of a star driven , fantasy fed film " would " not be easy to gulp for many . " While writing a critique for Deccan Chronicle , <unk> Sharma quoted , " Agneepath is more than a remake or a homage to the original . It ’ s about a son righting a wrong and this emotion makes us connect with the film immediately . " 
 = = = Box office = = = 
 Agneepath broke the record of the highest opening day collections , with a nett of ₹ 217 @.@ 6 million ( US $ 3 @.@ 2 million ) on its opening day , surpassing the previous record held by Bodyguard . Subsequently , the film netted ₹ 621 @.@ 1 million ( US $ 9 @.@ 2 million ) over its extended four @-@ day weekend . The film 's collections sustained well on its first Monday and it netted around ₹ 75 million ( US $ 1 @.@ 1 million ) , taking its five @-@ day total to ₹ 695 million ( US $ 10 million ) nett . It netted ₹ 65 million ( US $ 970 @,@ 000 ) on Tuesday and another ₹ 50 million ( US $ 740 @,@ 000 ) nett on Wednesday . The movie brought its first @-@ week total to ₹ 858 @.@ 8 million ( US $ 13 million ) nett , thereby emerging as a major commercial success . 
 The film collected ₹ 231 @.@ 2 million ( US $ 3 @.@ 4 million ) in its second week , thus taking its two @-@ week total to ₹ 1 @.@ 09 billion ( US $ 16 million ) nett . The film collected ₹ 75 @.@ 9 million ( US $ 1 @.@ 1 million ) nett in its third week , taking its three @-@ week nett collections to ₹ 1 @.@ 17 billion ( US $ 17 million ) . It collected ₹ 26 @.@ 1 million ( US $ 390 @,@ 000 ) in its fourth week , taking its four @-@ week nett collections to ₹ 1 @.@ 19 billion ( US $ 18 million ) . Agneepath was thus declared a " superhit " . Agneepath has collected ₹ 1 @.@ 20 billion ( US $ 18 million ) in its lifetime run in India . Its final distributor share was ₹ 655 million ( US $ 9 @.@ 7 million ) . 
 After a successful opening in the domestic market , Agneepath made ₹ 165 million ( US $ 2 @.@ 5 million ) in its four @-@ day weekend , overseas . At the time of release , the film holds the record for the twelfth largest opening ever internationally . The film has grossed around $ 6 million in overseas markets . 
 = = = Awards and nominations = = = 
 = Raid on Genoa = 
 The Raid on Genoa was a minor naval engagement fought in the harbour of the Italian city of Genoa during the first year of the French Revolutionary Wars . French Republican forces in the Mediterranean , under pressure from Austrian and Spanish armies , Royalist uprisings and British blockade had suffered the loss of their principal naval base and the fleet stationed there when British forces under Lord Hood seized Toulon at the invitation of the city 's Royalist faction . The survivors of the French fleet were scattered across the Mediterranean , several sheltering in neutral Italian harbours , including the frigates Modeste at Genoa and Impérieuse at Leghorn . 
 To eliminate the threat these isolated frigates posed , Hood ordered a squadron under Rear @-@ Admiral John Gell to investigate the harbour at Genoa . The squadron arrived on 5 October and discovered Modeste and two smaller warships at anchor . Later in the day , three ships of the squadron launched their ship 's boats and instigated a boarding action against the anchored ships , in defiance of Genoese neutrality . The French crews resisted , but the British boarding parties successfully captured all three vessels without suffering any casualties . Six days later the detached HMS Captain also seized the abandoned Impérieuse , which had fled to La Spezia . The action had strategic consequences : the Republican faction in Genoa was strong and they successfully barred Austrian reinforcements from sailing to join the Allied garrison at the developing Siege of Toulon . The outnumbered defenders of the port were overwhelmed and driven into the sea by a Republican assault on 17 December . 
 = = Mediterranean in 1793 = = 
 The French Revolutionary Wars , which began in 1792 as a conflict between the new French Republic and the Austrian Empire following the French Revolution , spread in 1793 to involve a number of other European nations , including Spain and Great Britain . In addition to these external threats , political tensions within France led to a series of uprisings against the Republic in the summer of 1793 , particularly in the south of the country . One of the centres of Royalist activity was the city of Toulon , the major naval base and home port for the powerful French Mediterranean Fleet . On 28 August , after fighting between Republican forces and British troops for control of the heights overlooking the city , Toulon surrendered to Lord Hood , commander of the British Royal Navy 's Mediterranean Fleet . Hood 's forces occupied the city , seized the French fleet in harbour and called for reinforcements to defend Toulon against the inevitable Republican counterattack , receiving Spanish , Neapolitan and Sardinian contingents over the following weeks as the Siege of Toulon developed . 
 Austrian troops were also promised , to be dispatched from the Austrian Army fighting the French in Northern Italy . These troops could only reach Toulon by sea , scheduled to embark from the city port of Genoa , capital of the Italian state of the Republic of Genoa , which at this stage of the war was officially neutral . Genoa was however , in common with other Northern Italian cities , in a state of political upheaval . The French Revolution had inspired similarly @-@ minded revolutionaries in Italy to support Republican ideas , and there was a substantial Republican faction in the Genoese government which supported France 's cause . Food supplies were regularly shipped from Genoa to the Republican armies in Southern France , and the demands of Francis Drake , Ambassador to Genoa , that this trade cease went unheeded . 
 The situation at Genoa was compounded by the presence of French warships in Genoese waters . Those parts of the French fleet which had not been seized at Toulon were now deprived of a home port and so had taken refuge in neutral Italian ports , relying on Italian neutrality to protect them from attack by the more numerous enemy fleets operating in the Ligurian Sea . Two of the largest such ships were the 36 @-@ gun frigate Modeste and 40 @-@ gun Impérieuse , which had taken shelter at Genoa and Leghorn , in the Grand Duchy of Tuscany , respectively . They presented both a threat to Allied shipping and an impediment to the movement of reinforcements through the Italian ports , but despite strong protests from Drake and Lord Hervey , Ambassador to Tuscany , the Republican sympathisers in Genoa and Leghorn refused to compel the French ships to leave . In consequence , Hood resolved that the frigates be eliminated so that the Republicans in Genoa would be coerced into withdrawing their support . 
 = = Raid = = 
 To confront the French frigates , Hood diverted a powerful squadron from his fleet at Toulon . This force was led by Rear @-@ Admiral John Gell in the 98 @-@ gun ship of the line HMS St George and included the 74 @-@ gun HMS Bedford under Captain Robert Mann , and HMS Captain under Captain Samuel Reeve , as well as the French Royalist Scipion . Smaller warships accompanied the larger warships : HMS Mermaid , HMS Tartar , HMS Alerte , HMS Eclair , HMS Vulcan , HMS Conflagration , and HMS Speedy under Commander Charles Cunningham . This force was ordered to sail to Genoa and eliminate Modeste . The squadron arrived off the port on 5 October . 
 Modeste was clearly visible in the harbour , anchored at the mole near two tartanes ( small Mediterranean sailing craft here armed with four guns and carrying crews of around 70 men ) . The senior officers of the squadron held a council to determine the best course of action , and decided that since diplomatic options had failed and the Genoese appeared to support the French , the British would resort to a military solution . On the afternoon of 5 October Bedford was slowly warped into the harbour and alongside Modeste , as Reeve launched the ship 's boats from Captain and brought them close to the other side of the French frigate . 
 The British arrival was reportedly greeted with derision by the French sailors , until a boarding party clambered onto the frigate from Bedford 's deck , to be met by resistance from the French crew . Mann then ordered his ship 's Royal Marines to fire into the French sailors , killing one and wounding several more . This attack broke their resolve and the French surrendered , several leaping into the sea to escape capture , only to be collected by the boats of Captain . As Modeste was subdued , the boats of Speedy approached the tartanes . As the boat parties boarded the small French warships , the crew of one surrendered while the other resisted the British boarders . A short melee broke out on the deck of the <unk> , resulting in the captain and one other French sailor wounded and the <unk> firmly in British hands . The raid completed , the British squadron withdrew from Genoa with their prizes . One French sailor had been killed in the operation and ten wounded , while the British boarding parties had survived unscathed . 
 = = = La Spezia = = = 
 Alarmed by the raid on Genoa , the authorities in Leghorn ordered Impérieuse to leave immediately . The frigate sailed north and took shelter in a cove near the port of La Spezia . Six days after the capture of Modeste , Captain reached La Spezia , acting on reports that Impérieuse was in the bay . Reeve discovered the French ship sheltering under the guns of the Santa Maria shore battery , and the following morning , 12 October , used his ship 's boats to tow Captain alongside Impérieuse . At 08 : 00 boat parties from the ship of the line boarded the frigate , discovering that the French crew had abandoned their ship during the night and scuttled her in shallow water . The British were able to take possession of Impérieuse without opposition from the battery . Reeve instructed his carpenters to make the frigate seaworthy again , refloating the ship and completing temporary repairs on 13 October before sailing back to Toulon with his prize . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Modeste and Impérieuse were high @-@ quality modern ships and were both immediately recommissioned into the Royal Navy , Modeste with the same name and Impérieuse as HMS Unite as there was already a ship with a similar name in service . The repercussions of this operation were severe however . Gell , acting on instructions from Hood , had violated Genoese neutrality in a deliberate attempt to intimidate the pro @-@ Republican faction in the city , but their actions were readily seized upon by French propagandists such as Nicolas Ozanne , who portrayed the raid as a massacre of unarmed sailors in print form . The Genoese government broke off diplomatic relations with Britain and the 5 @,@ 000 Austrian reinforcements destined for Toulon were unable to embark . Drake and all British inhabitants of Genoa were expelled , and Gell initiated a blockade of the city , seizing neutral merchant shipping destined for the port . Three ships were stationed at Leghorn to watch the more quiescent Tuscan government , including the Royalist Scipion . On 26 November , Scipion , which was carrying 150 prisoners taken in the raid on Genoa , caught fire , possibly the result of arson , and was destroyed , although other accounts suggest that a barrel of brandy was ignited accidentally by a candle . The blaze killed 390 of the Royalist crew , many of whom were classed as unfit for duty . 
 Without the Austrian reinforcements the defenders of Toulon were outnumbered and outflanked , coming under sustained attack by French troops directed by 24 @-@ year @-@ old artillery officer Captain Napoleon Bonaparte . On 17 December , French troops seized the high ground over the city and the allies were forced into a chaotic withdrawal . As Hood 's ships removed the garrison and more than 14 @,@ 000 refugees from the city , boat parties led by Sir Sidney Smith attempted to destroy the French fleet and dockyards with fireships . These efforts were only partially successful : fifteen ships of the line and five frigates survived the conflagration to form the nucleus of the French Mediterranean Fleet in the war to come . By the evening of 18 December Toulon was firmly in Republican hands . 
 = Nasib al @-@ Bakri = 
 Nasib al @-@ Bakri ( 1888 – 1966 ) was a Syrian politician and nationalist leader in the first half of the 20th century . He played a major role in establishing al @-@ Fatat , an underground organization which sought the independence and unity of the Ottoman Empire 's Arab territories . As the chief envoy between al @-@ Fatat and the Hejaz @-@ based Hashemites , al @-@ Bakri became a close aide to Emir Faisal when the latter became King of Syria following the success of the 1916 Arab Revolt . Al @-@ Bakri opposed the establishment of the French Mandate of Syria and became one of the chief commanders of the Great Syrian Revolt , leading the rebels ' brief capture of Damascus . He escaped a death warrant in Syria in 1927 , but returned the following year after being amnestied . 
 Al @-@ Bakri served as a representative of Damascus in the Syrian Parliament between 1932 and 1946 . He was one of the main coordinators of the 1936 general strike and became Vice President of the National Bloc . He defected to join Abd al @-@ Rahman Shahbandar 's party in 1938 . During the post @-@ independence period , al @-@ Bakri was appointed Syria 's ambassador to Jordan but resigned in 1953 in protest against Adib al @-@ Shishakli 's seizure of power . The following year , he became President of the People 's Party , but retired in 1957 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Nasib was born in Damascus in 1888 to father ' Ata al @-@ Bakri . Nasib was the second oldest of five sons . ' Ata was an influential official in the city and district councils of Damascus between the 1890s and 1914 , and was one of the most prominent Arabs to serve in the imperial Ottoman court of Sultan Abdul Hamid II in Constantinople . The al @-@ Bakri family were Sunni Muslims and claimed descent from the Islamic prophet Muhammad . They were landowners , possessing lands , homes and commercial venues in their native al @-@ Shaghour quarter and in al @-@ Qabun , a village in the Ghouta countryside of Damascus . They also owned land in Jaramana , a Druze village outside of Damascus and maintained good relations with the local Druze chiefs . 
 When Abdul Hamid II was overthrown during the Young Turk Revolution in 1908 , ' Ata lost his favor from the central authorities because of his closeness with the deposed sultan and criticized the revolutionary officers . Consequently , the al @-@ Bakri family realigned itself with Arab nationalists in Syria who opposed the increased Turkish nationalist efforts in the Arabic @-@ speaking territories of the empire . ' Ata had also developed close ties with the Hashemites of the Hejaz . In 1909 he hosted the Sharif of Mecca , Hussein bin Ali , his brother Nasir , and Abdullah , Sharif Hussein 's son , in his Damascus home . 
 Nasib attended Maktab Anbar , a preparatory school in Damascus that attracted the children of the elite and produced several future Arab nationalists . In 1912 , Nasib graduated from the al @-@ <unk> School of Beirut . When Sharif Hussein 's son , Faisal , visited Syria in early 1916 , he lodged in the al @-@ <unk> ' summer house in al @-@ Qabun , outside of Damascus . Prior to this , Nasib and his brothers Fawzi and Sami had joined the budding al @-@ Fatat movement , an underground society advocating Arab independence from the Ottomans . Nasib had become the movement 's secretary . 
 = = Leader in Syrian independence movement = = 
 = = = Ally of the Hashemites = = = 
 In 1915 , Nasib hosted Faisal at his Ghouta country house and invited him join al @-@ Fatat , which he reportedly agreed to . At the same time , al @-@ Bakri organized a meeting between him , some members of al @-@ Fatat , and the Druze chiefs of the Hauran , Hussein and Sultan al @-@ Atrash with the intention of gaining Druze support for the planned Arab rebellion against the Ottomans ( the Druze had launched several uprisings against the Ottomans prior ) . The meeting concluded with the Druze offering Faisal and the nationalists their backing , though short of any military support . The meeting was the first of its kind between the Hashemites and the Druze , and afterward Faisal appointed al @-@ Bakri to be his personal secretary and his envoy to the Druze , a post he would serve until 1920 . 
 In the summer of 1916 , amid World War I , Sharif Hussein launched the Great Arab Revolt against the Ottomans from Mecca with the backing of the British military . Al @-@ Bakri joined the revolt and moved to the Hejaz where he served as a channel between al @-@ Fatat based in Damascus and the Hashemite forces leading the uprising . When the Ottomans were defeated in 1918 and Arab and British forces reached Damascus , Faisal would soon become the King of Syria and al @-@ Bakri served as one of his advisers . The next year al @-@ Bakri co @-@ founded the first legal political party in Faisal 's Syria , the pan @-@ Arabist al @-@ Istiqlal ( " Independence " ) which sought to unify all the former Ottoman @-@ held Arab territories under the leadership of the Hashemites . During this period until 1920 , al @-@ Bakri was a member of the Syrian National Congress as a representative of Damascus . 
 France invaded and began occupying Syria in 1919 and following the Battle of Maysalun in July 1920 , Faisal was exiled and the kingdom annulled . Al @-@ Bakri left for Amman in Transjordan , which was under the authority of Faisal 's brother King Abdullah . Al @-@ Bakri would later serve as Abdullah 's aide in 1921 , a position he held for about two years before returning to Syria after the French issued amnesty for political exiles . On his return , he became a member of al @-@ Shahbandar 's People 's Party and actively sought to topple the French authorities in Syria and align the country with the ruling Hashemites in Iraq , Transjordan and the Hejaz . The Hashemites were driven out of the latter in 1925 by the Saudis . 
 = = = Role in Great Syrian Revolt = = = 
 The summer of 1925 also saw the beginning of the Great Syrian Revolt , launched by Sultan Pasha al @-@ Atrash in the Jabal al @-@ Arab region in southern Syria . After Atrash 's men destroyed a French column at al @-@ Kafr , al @-@ Bakri received a letter from al @-@ Atrash on 23 July calling on the nationalists in Damascus to join the revolt ; al @-@ Bakri subsequently joined . Following the French defeat at the Battle of <unk> on 3 August , al @-@ Bakri began working with Abd al @-@ Ghaffar al @-@ Atrash , the Druze chief of al @-@ Suwayda , to advance the revolt to other parts of the country outside of Hauran . Al @-@ Bakri set up a meeting between the Damascus @-@ based nationalists and Sultan al @-@ Atrash at his home in al @-@ Qabun , after which the two sides agreed to work together to uproot the French from Syria . 
 Following the meeting , al @-@ Bakri conferred with al @-@ Shahbandar , who agreed to bring Damascus into the revolt , although this initial attempt did not materialize . As al @-@ Atrash 's men headed towards Damascus to launch their attack against French forces there , al @-@ Bakri assembled some 260 armed volunteers from various neighborhoods and villages in and around Damascus , including al @-@ Shaghour , Bab <unk> , al @-@ Midan , and Jaramana . Al @-@ Bakri maintained particularly close ties to Hasan al @-@ Kharrat , the local boss ( qabaday ) of al @-@ <unk> and a friend of the al @-@ Bakri family . In early August , upon al @-@ Bakri 's urging , al @-@ Kharrat formed a militia , which would become one of the most effective rebel bands in the country . When the French authorities were informed of nationalist rebel plans , they began a wide @-@ scale arrest campaign in the city on 27 August , detaining nearly all of Damascus 's nationalist leaders and spokesmen , although al @-@ Bakri , his brothers , and al @-@ Shahbandar managed to evade arrest . 
 He participated in attacks alongside Druze warriors against French positions and offices in the Hauran , and of all the rebel commanders from Damascus , al @-@ Bakri was the most respected among the Druze . As fighting between rebels and French forces in the Ghouta escalated , al @-@ Bakri devised an operation to wrest control of Damascus from the French by capturing the citadel and the Azm Palace . The former housed the city 's French garrison , while the latter housed the French Mandate High Commissioner Maurice Sarrail . Al @-@ Bakri requested reinforcements from al @-@ Atrash and his men , but they were occupied by fighting in the Hauran and notified al @-@ Bakri that any help would be delayed . Al @-@ Bakri decided to move ahead nonetheless . On 17 October , he assembled al @-@ Kharrat 's group and another group of rebels from al @-@ Midan and Jaramana inside Damascus . The next day al @-@ Kharrat launched the operation . 
 While al @-@ Kharrat 's men managed to capture the Azm Palace and the police station in Bab Saghir , al @-@ Bakri led a band of 200 fighters from their base in al @-@ Midan to raid an Armenian refugee camp in al @-@ Qadam , killing several Armenian refugees . The rebels accused the Armenians — who along with the Circassians were typically allied with the French authorities — of participating in the French military assaults against several Ghouta villages in the preceding weeks . After attacking al @-@ Qadam , al @-@ Bakri 's forces swept through the city , capturing the police stations at Bab al @-@ Jabiyah , Bab <unk> and <unk> . With each captured neighborhood , their forces increased in size as enthusiastic bystanders joined in the attacks . 
 Sarrail , who was not in Damascus at the time of the rebel assault , ordered aerial bombardment of the city , leading to the destruction of whole neighborhoods and the deaths of hundreds of Damascus residents . By 24 October , the rebels were routed , and al @-@ Bakri escaped . He became the target of criticism among other rebel leaders , namely Said al- ' As . Al- ' As stated that al @-@ Bakri sought personal glory when he decided to prematurely launch a mostly uncoordinated attack with small numbers of armed volunteers , instead of waiting for the arrival of al @-@ Atrash 's reinforcements , who numbered around 1 @,@ 000 . Al @-@ Bakri was the only member of the Damascus nationalist elite to directly participate in the fighting on the ground . 
 In early December , al @-@ Bakri chaired a meeting of rebel leaders in the Ghouta village of Saqba . During the meeting , he launched scathing criticism of Ramadan al @-@ Shallash , the rebel commander from Deir ez @-@ Zor , condemning him for levying heavy fines and other fees against the residents of the villages of Douma , al @-@ Qisa , Harran al @-@ Awamid and al @-@ <unk> which had been captured by the rebels . However , these taxes were almost entirely directed at the major landowners and city elites , rather than the commoners or peasants . ' As defended al @-@ Shallash as a skilled commander , criticized al @-@ Bakri 's leadership and accused him of holding " secret hatreds and ambitions " . Nonetheless , al @-@ Bakri and his ally al @-@ Kharrat managed to have al @-@ Shallash " expelled from the rebellion " during the meeting , and stripped of his arms and insignia . However , subsequent French bombardment of Saqba allowed al @-@ Shallash to escape punishment . Al @-@ Kharrat was killed in a French raid two weeks later , while al @-@ Shallash defected to the French following his expulsion . Al @-@ Bakri 's younger brother As 'ad was killed in action in 1926 . 
 = = = Politician during French Mandatory rule = = = 
 The revolt dissipated by June 1927 . Al @-@ Bakri was sentenced to death in absentia by French military tribunal . Consequently , he fled to Amman in Transjordan . In March 1928 , al @-@ Bakri , his brother Fawzi , and Fares al @-@ Khoury were amnestied by the French authorities and the al @-@ Bakri family 's properties , which had been bombed by the French during the revolt , were restored to them . According to historian Peter A. <unk> , al @-@ Bakri 's inclusion on the amnesty list was surprising for two reasons : he maintained a strong relationship with France 's chief rivals in the region , the Hashemites and their British patrons , and he held " unrivaled " influence among the bosses of " the popular quarters of Damascus " . The French sought to divide the ranks of the rebels and the nationalist politicians by pardoning some leaders and blacklisting others like al @-@ Atrash , al @-@ Shahbandar , and Shukri al @-@ Quwatli . Al @-@ Bakri 's relations with the latter two subsequently grew tense as he accused them of diverting funds for the revolt to their personal ventures . 
 He and Hashim al @-@ Atassi founded the National Bloc political party . It sought to use diplomatic means to end French rule . He was a part of the 1928 Constitutional Assembly , helping draft a constitution for the Syrian Republic . Al @-@ Atassi appointed him Vice President of the National Bloc in 1930 . Al @-@ Bakri successfully ran for parliament as a representative of Damascus on the National Bloc 's ticket in 1932 , after winning a run @-@ off vote by a large margin . 
 In January 1936 , Syrian nationalist sentiments became incensed as the French authorities suspended parliament and appointed the pro @-@ French president Taj al @-@ Din al @-@ Hasani . Following the arrest of some nationalist leaders , a general strike was declared against the French Mandate and President al @-@ Hasani . Speeches denouncing the arrests and colonialism were made at the Umayyad Mosque , after which demonstrators , including students and local youths , gathered at al @-@ Bakri 's home where they coordinated a march to the Serail ( French government headquarters ) . The protests were led by al @-@ Bakri , al @-@ Quwatli and Jamil Mardam Bey , but they were confronted by the security forces before leaving al @-@ Bakri 's street . 
 On 24 January , al @-@ Bakri led a sermon at the mosque calling for calm among the 3 @,@ 000 demonstrators in attendance . Nonetheless , some 300 left to attack French roadblocks and the police station at Souq al @-@ Hamidiyya , before withdrawing back into the mosque . One protester was killed and the following day , al @-@ Bakri led the funeral procession , which was attended by thousands of mourners . By mid @-@ February , unrest spread throughout Syria and the authorities clashed with Syrian protesters in several cities . The commander of the French Army of the Levant declared martial law and forbade public assemblies . Al @-@ Bakri was arrested and deported on 11 February . 
 He went on to win the election for his seat in 1936 , 1943 and 1947 . When al @-@ Atassi became president in 1936 , al @-@ Bakri became the chief leader of the National Bloc . The following year , he was appointed by al @-@ Atassi to serve as Governor of Jabal al @-@ Arab . In 1938 , he defected from the National Bloc to join the rival People 's Party led by his former colleague al @-@ Shahbandar . In the short @-@ lived 1939 cabinet of Prime Minister Lutfi al @-@ Haffar , Bakri was made justice minister , while in Prime Minister Khalid al @-@ Azm 's cabinet he served as national economy and agriculture minister . 
 = = Post @-@ independence career = = 
 After Syria became independent in 1946 , al @-@ Bakri joined the pro @-@ Western and Arab nationalist People 's Party . President al @-@ Atassi assigned him ambassador to Jordan , ruled by the Hashemites , after al @-@ Bakri refused the ambassadorial post to Saudi Arabia , a government that he opposed ideologically . Following Adib al @-@ Shishakli 's seizure of the presidency in 1953 , al @-@ Bakri resigned . After al @-@ Shishakli stepped down in 1954 , al @-@ Bakri became president of the People 's Party . He was unsuccessful in establishing a significant support base in Damascus and resigned from political life in April 1957 . He died in 1966 . 
 = Chemetco = 
 Chemetco was formerly one of the largest United States refiners of copper from recycled or residual sources . 
 Its maximum output of 120 @,@ 000 tons per year was approximately half of the entire U.S. copper output from so @-@ called " secondary copper refining . " The company website described Chemetco as one of the world 's largest copper refiners and reported an estimated revenue in 1999 of $ 500 m . It was listed in 2000 as the 23rd @-@ largest privately held company in the United States . 
 The company had a history of environmental problems over its entire career , along with problems managing its wastes and by @-@ products . Eventually , it was convicted of water pollution offences spanning a decade , which contravened US federal law . The company 's former site is now a Superfund site on the National Priorities List . 
 = = History = = 
 The company originated on June 9 , 1969 as an Illinois corporation , <unk> Metals Corporation . On 23 March 1970 , it became a Delaware corporation . In 1973 , the company changed its name to Chemetco . By 1980 , it employed around 200 staff . By 2000 , Chemetco was a member of the St Louis Minority Business Council . 
 On November 13 , 2001 , the company filed for Chapter 7 bankruptcy ( liquidation ) following conviction in a U.S. federal court and a fine of $ 3 @.@ 86 million . Chemetco and former CEO , Denis L. Feron were charged on four felony counts : Conspiracy to violate the Clean Water Act , violation of the Clean Water Act , and two counts of making false statements . The plant , which closed on Nov 1 , 2001 , was promptly sealed by the Environmental Protection Agency ( EPA ) and tagged for an assessment of public health hazards . 
 = = Location = = 
 The Chemetco site is in a flood plain near the Mississippi River in Madison County , Illinois . The village of Hartford , Illinois ( population approximately 1 @,@ 545 ) is approximately 1 mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) north of the site . The nearest residential area is Mitchell , a small community approximately ½ mile to the southeast . The Lewis and Clark State Memorial Park is within sight of Chemetco 's former premises . 
 The Chemetco site is above an aquifer used for domestic , agricultural and industrial water consumers in several nearby communities , including Edwardsville , Hartford , Roxana and Wood River . Parts of the wider area enclosing the Chemetco site to the south are also known as Chouteau Island . 
 Main site operations were conducted within a 41 @-@ acre ( 17 ha ) area , but Chemetco also owned hundreds of acres of farm land . The ATSDR has described how " … Over the 30 years of plant operations , some of this was acquired to settle disputes with nearby farmers . " 
 The Mississippi River and two tributaries , the Cahokia Canal and Long Lake , are within 1 mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) of the site . Some local properties are served by wells . The wetlands area to the south of the site is popular with recreational fishermen . 
 = = Operation = = 
 = = = Production = = = 
 Under Denis L. Feron , Chemetco had been a major producer of high @-@ purity copper derived from secondary sources – recycled and residual materials . 
 These were received at the plant in large quantities from wholesalers , and in smaller quantities from the corporation 's own network of warehouses that spanned the United States and Canada . These enabled material to be graded and pre @-@ sorted locally before refining at the plant . 
 Copper anodes ( 98 % Cu purity ) emerged from the furnace as an intermediate product . For a number of years , these were electrolyzed by Chemetco to produce a higher @-@ purity copper cathode ( 99 @.@ 98 % Cu purity . ) However , the company later discontinued electrolysis of its own copper and sold copper anodes , each weighing 740 lb ( 340 kg ) to <unk> . 
 = = = Refining process = = = 
 Copper @-@ bearing material was smelted to produce black copper , containing impurities such as lead , tin and zinc . Black copper was refined using oxygen , producing 98 % copper , along with a zinc oxide residue and a slag containing lead , tin , nickel and a number of heavy metals . 
 What Chemetco described as " zinc oxide " was extracted from furnace flue gases using a scrubber system . The zinc oxide , along with the slag , became a waste product . The term " zinc oxide " was something of a misnomer , as lead , cadmium and other elements were also present . 
 The Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry ( ATSDR ) has noted how the generation and management of waste by @-@ products was a long @-@ term issue for Chemetco , but also that Chemetco seemed to be unwilling to recognize its wastes as a problem : 
 " Chemetco company literature and statements have often emphasized that the facility recycled most materials and that waste streams were not generated . But the end result of this recycling activity was piled feedstock residues , smelting and solid residues , and accumulated liquids . Much of the material was stored directly on the ground , with little attempt to provide barriers or work practices to limit exposures . " 
 = = Prosecution and conviction = = 
 On 18 September 1996 , an enforcement officer for the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency ( <unk> ) discovered a hidden pipe , discharging toxic waste from the refinery into Long Lake , a tributary of the Mississippi River . 
 Investigations showed that the secret pipe had been active for ten years . A large area of wetland was contaminated with zinc oxide , lead , cadmium and other pollutants at several times the threshold for a public health hazard . Visible evidence of contamination extended five feet down into the bed of Long Lake on property owned by Chemetco . 
 During Grand Jury testimony , one witness estimated that the plant discharged waste through the pipe for 330 days out of 365 . Thirteen employees testified to using the pipe to discharge contaminated water . 
 Additionally , Chemetco discharged contaminated storm water every time it rained on the plant . A pump was automatically triggered , discharging pollutant @-@ laden storm water through the secret pipe . The prosecution calculated that this automatic process had occurred 948 times over a ten @-@ year period . It was also calculated that even if only 0 @.@ 01 inches ( 0 @.@ 25 mm ) of rain fell , 1620 gallons of water would gather into a collection basin . From there , this large volume of contaminated water would be pumped into Long Lake . 
 Chemetco hampered the investigation of its illegal activity by making materially false statements . Before sentencing , the court described Chemetco 's conduct as " willful and egregious " . 
 On 12 December 2008 , Denis L. Feron , the former president of Chemetco , was placed on the federal EPA 's ' most wanted ' list . He had fled the USA before trial . Eventually , he paid a half @-@ million dollars in restitution and all charges were dropped against him . 
 = = Air @-@ borne dioxin production = = 
 A scientific study by the Centre for the Biology of Natural Systems ( <unk> ) Queens College of the City of New York , individually names Chemetco as one of the top ten individual contributors of dioxins deposition at eight Nunavut land receptors , from a total of 44 @,@ 000 potential sources in the United States . As the report puts it : 
 " … the effort detailed in this report is a response to the evidence that Nunavut is especially vulnerable to the long @-@ range air transport of dioxin . Although there are no significant sources of dioxin in Nunavut or within 500 kilometers of its boundaries , dioxin concentrations in Inuit mothers ’ milk are twice the levels observed in southern Quebec . This is due to the elevated dioxin content of the indigenous diet — traditional foods such as caribou , fish and marine mammals . " 
 The source of the air @-@ borne dioxin produced by Chemetco 's refining process was coated wire , including PVC @-@ covered wire , plastics and computer parts . These were routinely used as part of the mix of grades of scrap copper used to charge the furnaces . Citing <unk> et al . 1997 , an EPA report notes : " The presence of chlorinated plastics in copper scraps as a feed to smelters is believed to increase the CDD / CDF formation . " ( CDD 's are dioxins and <unk> are polychlorinated <unk> ) . 
 The ATSDR describes how " Because Chemetco had accepted material from a firm known to have dioxin contamination , <unk> investigated dioxin . On April 12 , 1987 , <unk> sampled an area of the Chemetco plant which was used to manage zinc oxide collected from the venturi scrubber system . " 
 EPA testers found a dioxin concentration of 3 @.@ 4 parts per billion . As a result , their <unk> assessment unit ‘ raised concerns about dioxins and furans in Long Lake sediments and the fish population . ’ However , the ATSDR reports that these initial fears proved unfounded : 
 " In the summer of 1999 , staff from the Illinois Department of Natural Resources and Illinois EPA collected fish samples from two sections of Long Lake . Buffalo and carp were collected closest to … the northern part of the lake where the illegal pipe discharged . Buffalo and crappie were collected from the southern section through Pontoon Beach . Fillet portions were analyzed for pesticides , polychlorinated biphenyls ( PCBs ) , dioxins , and furans . No elevated levels of these chemicals were found . " 
 This finding , in conjunction with those of Commoner et al. shows that Chemetco 's dioxins were almost entirely released as smokestack emissions ( also called flue gas stack ) emissions . 
 = = Other known environmental problems = = 
 Chemetco had a long history of violations . For example , in August and September 1992 , while taking air emission readings , Chemetco was caught using semi @-@ articulated trucks and water sprinklers as a buffer in front of the air emission monitors . This was in contravention of the Clean Air Act , 42 . 
 For a period , Chemetco was the single biggest producer of atmospheric lead in the United States . 
 In 1999 , the United States made a civil claim against Chemetco under the Clean Air Act , 42 . : " … Chemetco will pay a civil penalty of $ 305 @,@ 267 … " Chemetco was also required to provide injunctive relief " … including installation of a Continuous <unk> Mass Monitor System . 
 Chemetco produced high @-@ purity cathodes using electrolysis . This electrolytic process used large amounts of sulfuric acid and according to the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry ( ATSDR ) would at times " … reportedly release a visible " acid mist " drifting onto nearby farm fields . " 
 The ATSDR also notes how the electrolytic refining process also required the management of large amounts of acidic waste capable of dissolving heavy metals : 
 " … According to a 1983 Illinois EPA memo , the strong @-@ acid electrolytic bath was believed to have been releasing material . Through the years , during many of the sampling events liquids were measured with low pH values ( acidic ) or very high pH values ( caustic ) . The high pH levels may have resulted from the company using caustic materials to attempt to neutralize standing acidic surface water . Acidic conditions typically increase the solubility of metals , and allow more mobility of the metal contaminants " . 
 Other hazardous liquids used at the site included halogenated solvents that may have been used for cleaning machine parts . 
 = = Postscript = = 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 Three and a half years after the discovery of the secret pipe , Chemetco had failed to present an <unk> plan for <unk> the contaminated area . 
 When Chemetco shut down , the site was sealed and remediation began . However , the process was to prove protracted and several years later , it had not been possible to fully complete the process . 
 When interviewed in early 2005 , the Illinois EPA inspector who discovered the secret pipe in 1996 was pessimistic about the chances of rapid remediation of the site . He suggested that the clear @-@ up could take twenty years or so . 
 In 2006 , it was reported that a Canadian firm wanted to tackle the challenge of safely extracting metallic content from the wastes on site . Under a proposed plan needing feasibility study approval , the contractor outlined a deal under which it could extract valuable metals such as copper , zinc , tin , lead and aluminium from the site . One report describes how the bidder for this work would " … design , provide and install equipment at the site for about $ 10 million and provide another $ 3 million for other cleanup while Chemetco [ Estate ] would operate the plant and pay royalties and lease payments … " 
 The <unk> spoke approvingly of this proposed scheme under which non @-@ recyclables would remain on site . If given a green light to go ahead , the work was estimated to take around ten years to complete . 
 = = = Superfund Site = = = 
 On March 4 , 2010 , the Chemetco site was added to the Superfund National Priorities List because of the lead , cadmium and zinc contamination at the site and of nearby wetlands and Long Lake . The lack of available resources at the bankrupt Chemetco or at the State of Illinois necessitated proposal of this site to the National Priorities List ( NPL ) . This will enable the use of Federal funds to build a <unk> enforcement case and ensure clean up the site . The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency will oversee the clean up of the site and affected areas . After the site was listed on the NPL , U.S. EPA , with the support of Illinois EPA , began the search for potentially responsible parties ( PRPs ) who may be liable for the clean up . In November 2011 , U.S. EPA issued a General Notice of potential liability to a group of PRPs , and is currently working with a subgroup of them . U.S. EPA plans to negotiate a settlement with PRPs for performance of the Remedial Investigation and Feasibility Study ( RI / FS ) for the site , which will define the nature and extent of contamination associated with the site and present options for the long @-@ term remediation of affected areas . Upon completion of the RI / FS Report , U.S. EPA will select a remedy for the site , with input from the community and stakeholders . 
 = = = Copper industry = = = 
 A trade magazine covering metals industry news has noted that " The closing of the Chemetco Inc. secondary smelter in Hartford , Ill . , in 2001 marked the end of large @-@ scale secondary copper smelting in the United States . " 
 Brian Taylor , writing for Recycling Today in 2007 , goes on to observe how 
 " .. in its 2006 report on National Emission Standards for Hazardous Air Pollutants ( <unk> ) to the Federal Register , the U.S. EPA notes , ' The secondary copper smelting plants that served as the basis for emissions estimates have all shut down , and no similar secondary copper smelters have been constructed . ' " 
 Taylor notes that Chemetco was one of five smelters used by the EPA to establish its standards . The others were : Cerro Copper Products in <unk> , Ill . ; Franklin Smelting in Philadelphia ; Gaston Recycling Industries in Gaston , S.C. ; and the <unk> Co. plant in Carrollton , Ca . 
 = Sultan Ali of Johor = 
