 Sultan Ali Iskandar Shah ibni Hussein Muazzam Shah was the 19th Sultan of Johor , who succeeded his father , Sultan Hussein after the latter died of natural cause in 1835 . Over the next twenty years , Sultan Ali 's claims to the office of Sultan of Johor were only recognised by some merchants and a few Malays . Like his father , Sultan Ali 's was much of a puppet monarch and played a minimal role in the administrative affairs of the state , which came under the charge of the Temenggong and the British . In 1855 , Sultan Ali ceded the sovereignty rights of Johor ( except Kesang in Muar ) to Temenggong Daing Ibrahim , in exchange for a formal recognition as the " Sultan of Johor " by the British and a monthly allowance . Following the secession of Johor , Sultan Ali was granted administrative charge over Muar until his death in 1877 , and in most administrative matters , was often styled as the " Sultan of Muar " . 
 = = Sultan of Johor = = 
 = = = Early years = = = 
 Tengku Ali succeeded his father in 1835 as the Sultan of Johor , but was not recognised as the Sultan of Johor for the first few years of his reign . A proclamation by the British colonial government in September 1840 granted him the right as the legitimate heir as his father 's successor , but not amounting to a recognition as the " Sultan of Johor " . 
 In the 1840s , Johor began to receive the first Chinese settlers ( mainly immigrants from Swatow and Chaozhou ) , the young Temenggong , Tun Daeng Ibrahim took up the administrative tasks of the state . He imposed taxes upon these settlers , which went to the Temenggong 's charge . However , unlike the Temenggong , Sultan Ali was unwilling to involve himself with the affairs of the state but at the same time complained of receiving insufficient allowance from the British . He was well known for his penchant for an extravagant lifestyle , and was chalking up considerable debts by the 1850s . 
 Meanwhile , loyalty among the local Malays in Johor to the ruling classes became increasingly divided between the royalty and the nobility . In 1852 , Thomas Church , the Resident Councillor of Singapore , sums up the situation of the Malays along the East Coast of the Malay Peninsula : 
 In this neighbourhood , there are two parties , on one side , the Sultan of Lingga , the Sultan of <unk> , and the young princes of Johore ; on the other , the Raja Bendahara of Pahang , and the Temenggong Sri Maharaja . 
 Nevertheless , there was no major hostility as a result of the division of loyalty between the royalty and the nobility . In the same year , an English merchant , W.H. Read , controlled Sultan Ali 's royal seal in exchange for a promise to liquidate his debts . Read had been an active supporter of Sultan Ali 's claims for recognition as the legitimate ruler of Johor and the states ' revenue , with the Temenggong as his vassal . As a result of economic and political pressure from these traders , the Governor did consider granting a formal recognition to Sultan Ali as the legitimate ruler of Johor , but in the process , he received a strong protest from the Temenggong and his young son , Abu Bakar . 
 By the early 1850s , Johor was effectively under the control of the Temenggong ; followers who attempted to act in Sultan Ali 's interests were quickly expelled by force by the Temenggong 's followers . 
 = = = Secession of Johor = = = 
 A series of negotiations between Sultan Ali and the Temenggong ensued with the British colonial government acting as the intermediary , after Sultan Ali had questioned the Temenggong 's rights of keeping the state revenue to himself . Initially , the Temenggong proposed to split the trade revenue of Johor on condition that Sultan Ali surrendered his claims of sovereignty over Johor . The term was declined by Sultan Ali . Both parties agreed to seek the direct intervention of the British government , among which , the British Governor of the Straits Settlement , Colonel William Butterworth , and his successor , Edmund Blundell were roped in to act as <unk> . 
 The British favoured the prospect of the Temenggong in taking over the administration of Johor from the Sultan . Sultan Ali 's claims to sovereignty were quickly refuted by the British and the Temenggong , who was quick to point out that the Sultan 's late father , Sultan Hussein had never pursued active claims to his sovereignty rights over Johor in spite of his recognition by the British in the 1824 Anglo @-@ Dutch Treaty . At that time , Johor came under the effective charge of the Temenggong 's late father , Abdul Rahman , as with Pahang , which was under the control of the Bendahara . Further documents revealed that if Johor were to be under the control of a monarch , de jure sovereignty would have been laid under the charge of the Sultan of Lingga , Sultan Mahmud Muzaffar Shah and not with Sultan Ali . 
 The Temenggong and Sultan Ali submitted their proposals to the British Governor in April 1854 . The Temenggong agreed to the Sultan 's request of his titular recognition as the Sultan of Johor , but was adamant of maintaining absolute charge over the whole of Johor . On the other hand , Sultan Ali had expressed his wish to the governor that the Kesang territory ( around Muar ) should be directly governed by him , citing reasons that some of his ancestors were buried there . The British persuaded the Temenggong to concede to Sultan Ali 's request and accepted after much consideration . 
 A treaty was concluded on 10 March 1855 , in which Sultan Ali formally ceded his sovereignty rights of Johor to the Temenggong permanently with the exception of the Kesang territory ( around Muar ) . In exchange , Sultan Ali was guaranteed the recognition the title of " Sultan " by the Temenggong and the British government and received a lump sum of $ 5000 as compensation . Sultan Ali was also promised a further incentive of a monthly allowance of $ 500 from the Temenggong , under the pressure of Governor Edmund Blundell ( the British Governor of Singapore ) , who hoped to put an end to Sultan Ali 's financial complaints and problems . 
 = = Sultan of Muar = = 
 = = = Administration in Muar = = = 
 Sultan Ali delegated the administrative affairs of Muar to the Raja Temenggung of Muar ( also known by the title of Temenggong Paduka Tuan of Muar ) and spent most of his time in Malacca . Muar was sparsely populated in 1855 and had a population of 800 and no formal structure of government was formed . In 1860 , Sultan Ali reportedly borrowed $ 53 @,@ 600 from a Chettiar money lender , Kavana Chana Shellapah . Sultan Ali signed an agreement with Shellapah to contribute a portion of his monthly allowance to repay his debt . However , Sultan Ali found himself unable to settle his debts in time , and an angry Shellapah wrote to the British government in 1866 . Pressured to liquidate his debts in time , Sultan Ali granted Shellapah the right to trade off Muar to the Temenggong of Johor as mortgage if he is unable to pay off his debts in time . 
 His relations with Temenggong Daing Ibrahim remained strained ; in 1860 , Sultan Ali allowed a Bugis adventurer , Suliwatang , the chiefs of <unk> and Sungei Ujong to settle in Muar and prepare themselves for an attack on Johor . Such bad blood between the Sultan and Temenggong Daing Ibrahim passed down to the Temenggong 's son , Abu Bakar , who succeeded his father after the former died in 1862 . Shortly after Abu Bakar became the Temenggong of Johor , he sent a letter to Sultan Ali to reassert of Johor 's sovereignty over Segamat . Continued disputes over the sovereignty of Segamat led to an outbreak of a war between the Temenggong 's men with the Sultan 's . Eleven years later in 1873 , attempts made by Suliwatang to collect custom taxes from inhabitants at the Muar estuary led to further conflict with Abu Bakar 's ( who became Maharaja in 1868 ) men . 
 During the remaining years of Sultan Ali 's reign , there was no visible economic activity in Muar . Nevertheless , he delegated the duty of collecting Muar 's revenues to Suliwatang and his agents , all of whom were later poisoned and killed by the Temenggong Paduka Tuan of Muar . In 1868 , Sultan Ali appointed Babu Ramasamy , a Tamil schoolmaster the duty collect the Muar revenues . A European miner approached Sultan Ali in 1872 , in which he was granted exclusive mining rights over the entire Kesang territory for five years . Three years later , an American trader approached the Sultan , in which he gave the American the concessionary grant of purchasing 45 square miles ( 120 km2 ) of land within the Kesang territory . 
 = = = Death and succession dispute = = = 
 Sultan Ali spent his last years in <unk> , Malacca , and supported himself with a small monthly stipend which the British East India Company had granted him . He built a palace for himself and lived with his third wife , Cik ' Sembuk until his death in June 1877 , and was buried in a Mausoleum within the confines of the <unk> mosque . Shortly before his death , Sultan Ali willed the Kesang territory to Tengku Mahmood , his 11 @-@ year @-@ old son with Cik ' Sembuk . His decision was met with considerable <unk> among the some Malays in Singapore , who felt that Tengku Alam should be the heir to the Kesang territory as he was the oldest son with Daing Siti , who was the daughter of a Bugis nobleman , while Cik ' Sembuk was a commoner . At the time of Sultan Ali 's death , custody of the Kesang territory lay in the hands of Ungku Jalil , Sultan Ali 's elder brother . Ungku Jalil handed over the custodianship of the Kesang territory to Maharaja Abu Bakar , after the British government held an election for the Temenggong Paduka Tuan of Muar and the territory 's chieftains to decide on the destiny of the Kesang territory , and voted unanimously for Maharaja Abu Bakar as their leader . The British Governor handed over administrative charge of the Kesang territory over to the Maharaja , which upset Tengku Alam and many of his supporters . Their continued claims to the Kesang territory led to the instigation of the <unk> Civil War in 1879 . 
 = John Fenn ( chemist ) = 
 John Bennett Fenn ( June 15 , 1917 – December 10 , 2010 ) was an American research professor of analytical chemistry who was awarded a share of the Nobel Prize in Chemistry in 2002 . Fenn shared half of the award with Koichi Tanaka for their work in mass spectrometry . The other half of the 2002 award went to Kurt Wüthrich . Fenn 's contributions specifically related to the development of electrospray ionization , now a commonly used technique for large molecules and routine liquid chromatography @-@ tandem mass spectrometry . Early in his career , Fenn did research in the field of jet propulsion at Project SQUID , and focused on molecular beam studies . Fenn finished his career with more than 100 publications , including one book . 
 Fenn was born in New York City , and moved to Kentucky with his family during the Great Depression . Fenn did his undergraduate work at Berea College , and received his Ph.D. from Yale . He worked in industry at Monsanto and at private research labs before moving to academic posts including Yale and Virginia Commonwealth University . 
 Fenn 's research into electrospray ionization found him at the center of a legal dispute with Yale University . He lost the lawsuit , after it was determined that he misled the university about the potential usefulness of the technology . Yale was awarded $ 500 @,@ 000 in legal fees and $ 545 @,@ 000 in damages . The decision pleased the university , but provoked mixed responses from some people affiliated with the institution , who were disappointed with the treatment of a Nobel Prize winner with such a long history at the school . 
 = = Early life and education = = 
 Fenn was born in New York City , and grew up in Hackensack , New Jersey . In the years preceding the Great Depression , Fenn 's father worked several different jobs , including briefly working as a draftsman at the Fokker Aircraft Company . During this time , Charles Lindbergh 's plane The Spirit of St. Louis was briefly stored at one of the company 's hangars . Fenn recalls sitting in the cockpit as a ten @-@ year @-@ old , pretending to pilot the famous plane . When his family 's fortunes took a turn for the worse with the advent of the Depression , they moved to Berea , Kentucky . Fenn completed his education at Berea College and Allied Schools , formally finishing his high school education at the age of 15 , but he took extra classes for another year rather than start college at such a young age . He earned his bachelor 's degree from Berea College in his new hometown , with the assistance of summer classes in organic chemistry at the University of Iowa , and physical chemistry at Purdue . 
 When Fenn was considering graduate school , he was advised to take additional mathematics courses by Henry Bent , then a chemistry professor at Harvard University . His undergraduate program in chemistry had required minimal math courses , and he had been excused from these due to high marks in his high school courses . Due to Bent 's advice , Fenn added math classes to his schedule . Despite his future success , Fenn always felt that his lack of mathematical skills were a hindrance in his career . After submitting several applications , Fenn received offers for teaching assistantships from Yale and Northwestern , and accepted the position at Yale . Fenn did his graduate studies in physical chemistry under <unk> Akerlof . He obtained his Ph.D. in chemistry from Yale in 1940 and his thesis was 45 pages long , with only three pages of prose . 
 = = Research career and academic posts = = 
 After completing graduate school , Fenn 's first job was with Monsanto , working in the Phosphate Division and producing polychlorinated biphenyls ( PCBs ) . Fenn and his colleague James Mullen became disenchanted with the direction of work at Monsanto , and they resigned together in 1943 . Fenn worked briefly at a small company named Sharples Chemicals that focused on the production of amyl chloride derivatives . In 1945 , he joined Mullen at his new startup , Experiment , Inc , focusing on research and development . Fenn 's first publication came in 1949 as a result of his work with Mullen . That this publication came ten years after he completed graduate school made Fenn somewhat of a rarity amongst academics . 
 In 1952 , Fenn moved to Princeton University as Director of Project SQUID , a program to support research related to jet propulsion that was funded by the Office of Naval Research . During this period , Fenn started his work developing supersonic atomic and molecular beam sources , which are now widely used in chemical physics research . After working with Project SQUID , Fenn returned to Yale University in 1967 . He held a joint appointment in the chemistry and engineering departments until 1987 , conducting much of his research in Mason Laboratory . In 1987 , Fenn had reached Yale 's mandatory retirement age . He became a professor emeritus , entitling him to office space at the university , but costing him most of his laboratory space and research assistants . 
 After a dispute with Yale over his forced retirement and the rights to his invention of electrospray ionization , Fenn moved to Richmond , Virginia to join Virginia Commonwealth University 's ( VCU ) Department of Chemistry as an analytical chemistry professor . VCU established an engineering department in the late 1990s , and Fenn held a joint professorship between the two departments until his death . Even in his 80s , Fenn enjoyed the opportunity to be in the lab doing research , saying , " I like to mingle and exchange with the young people . It gets me out from underfoot at home . " 
 = = Research interests = = 
 While Fenn was working with Monsanto , the company 's research was focused on the production of phosphoric acid and polychlorinated biphenyls ( PCBs ) . Fenn and his colleagues at Monsanto were largely unaware of the health hazards posed by PCBs , indeed because of their inertness , they " practically bathed in the stuff " . After spending several more years doing various industrial research , Fenn was looking to get back into the academic world . He had the opportunity to go to Princeton University , where he became the director of Project SQUID . 
 Fenn did not start his Nobel @-@ winning research until later in his career . He was semi @-@ retired when he first published his research on electrospray ionization for mass spectrometry . Fenn felt that his work in electrospray ionization received " a kick in the pants " when proteomics emerged . In 2001 , more than 1700 papers on proteomics were published , many using electrospray ionization . <unk> ionization provides a way to get accurate information about the mass of a large molecule very quickly , even when it is in a mixture of other molecules . The liquid sample is introduced into an electrospray source ( at atmospheric pressure ) and <unk> with a flow of heated nitrogen gas . This forms small droplets which evaporate in a region under vacuum , which increases the charge on the droplets . For large molecules like proteins , this often results in multiply charge species . Increasing the charge on the molecules , decreased the mass to charge ratio , which allows the mass to be more easily determined . 
 Despite getting a late start in publishing his research ( he did not publish a paper until 10 years after finishing graduate school ) , Fenn had over 100 publications at the time of his death . He also wrote a book , entitled Engines , Energy , and Entropy : A Thermodynamics Primer . The Chemical Heritage Foundation Museum in Philadelphia , PA has the instrument Fenn and his graduate students built while they were developing electrospray ionization on display , after receiving it as a gift from Fenn . 
 = = = Lawsuit = = = 
 Fenn 's work with electrospray ionization was at the center of a lawsuit pitting him against his alma mater and former employer , Yale University . His initial dispute with the university began in 1987 , when he turned 70 - Yale 's mandatory retirement age . Per university policy , Fenn was made an emeritus professor , which resulted in a reduction to his lab space . Emeritus professors at Yale are still provided with an office , but cannot conduct their own research , nor manage their own labs . In 1989 , when Yale University inquired about the progress and potential about his electrospray work , he downplayed its potential scientific and commercial value . Fenn believed he had the rights to the invention under the Bayh @-@ Dole Act . Fenn patented the technology on his own , and sold licensing rights to a company he partly owned - <unk> . In 1993 , a private company seeking to license the use of electrospray technology traced its invention to Yale , when the university discovered that Fenn held the patent . Yale 's policy regarding patents generated by faculty or students requires that a percentage of any royalties generated from the patent are used by the university to fund future research . They do not claim the rights to patents that are produced away from university facilities or not related to the researcher 's " designated activities . " Fenn claimed that he owned the technology because the work was completed after he had been forced to downsize at the university 's mandatory retirement age . 
 Yale University entered into its own licensing agreement with a private company , leading Fenn to file a lawsuit against the school in 1996 . Yale countersued , requesting damages and reassignment of the patent . The two parties did not reach an out of court settlement , despite repeated attempts at mediation . In 2005 , U.S. District Judge Christopher Droney ruled against Fenn , awarding Yale $ 545 @,@ 000 in royalties and $ 500 @,@ 000 in legal fees . Judge Droney was critical of Fenn , saying " Dr. Fenn only obtained the patent through fraud , civil theft , and breach of fiduciary duty . " Evidence presented in the case indicated that Fenn had served on panels at Yale University that reviewed the institution 's policy on intellectual property . 
 A spokesperson for Yale said , " We are pleased by the result in this case and , in particular , by the court 's vindication of the Yale patent policy . " The ruling , and Yale 's response produced a mixed reaction from some of Fenn 's colleagues and former students , who wrote a letter to the Yale Daily News stating , " " <unk> the Yale patent policy " is a poor excuse for treating a Nobel Laureate with a 68 @-@ year association with and dedicated service to the University , in such a contemptible manner . " 
 = = Awards and honors = = 
 = = = Nobel Prize = = = 
 Fenn shared the 2002 Nobel Prize in Chemistry with Koichi Tanaka and Kurt Wüthrich " for the development of methods for identification and structure analyses of biological macromolecules . " Fenn and Tanaka split half of the award for their work in developing ionization techniques for using mass spectrometry to analyze large biological molecules . Wüthrich was honored for his work in developing nuclear magnetic resonance techniques to analyze similar molecules in solution . Fenn was honoured largely for his contributions to the development of electrospray ionization , which made the analysis of large molecules by mass spectrometry feasible . Fenn 's Nobel lecture after being presented with the award was entitled " <unk> Wings for Molecular Elephants . ' He was surprised by his selection as a Nobel winner , saying " It 's like winning the lottery , I 'm still in shock . " At the time of his award , Fenn was working at Virginia Commonwealth University . 
 = = = Other awards = = = 
 Fenn received his Nobel Prize fairly late in his career . Prior to being honored by the Nobel Foundation , Fenn had received numerous other awards . Early in his career , Fenn 's research was focused on molecular beams , leading him to be named an honorary president of the Sixth International Symposium on Molecular Beams in 1977 , and the first fellow of the International Molecular Beam Symposium in 1985 . In 1982 , the Alexander von Humboldt Foundation presented him with their U.S. Senior Scientist Award . 
 Fenn 's work in mass spectrometry earned him another spate of awards later in his career . In 1992 , the American Society for Mass Spectrometry presented him with their Award for Distinguished Contributions in Mass Spectrometry . The International Society of Mass Spectrometry honored him with the Thomson Medal in 2000 , and in the same year the American Chemical Society presented him with the Award for Advancements in Chemical Instrumentation . He was awarded the Association of Biomolecular Resource Facilities Award for outstanding contributions to Biomolecular Technologies in 2002 . In 2003 , Fenn was honored by his alma mater with the Wilbur Cross Medal , the Yale Graduate School Alumni Association 's highest honor . 
 Fenn maintained numerous professional affiliations , including membership in the American Chemical Society , the American Society for Mass Spectrometry , Sigma Chi , the American Association of University Professors and the Alexander von Humboldt Association of America . In 2000 , Fenn was made a fellow of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences and in 2003 he was elected to the National Academy of Sciences . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Fenn married Margaret Wilson at the end of his second year of graduate studies . Together , they had three children - two daughters and a son . Margaret was killed in a car accident in New Zealand in 1992 . Fenn remarried , his second wife was named Frederica . He died in Richmond , Virginia on December 10 , 2010 , at the age of 93 , exactly 8 years to the day after receiving his Nobel Prize . Fenn was survived by Frederica , his three children , seven grandchildren , and seven great @-@ grandchildren . 
 = The Mikado ( Millennium ) = 
 " ' The Mikado " is the thirteenth episode of the second season of the American crime @-@ thriller television series Millennium . It premiered on the Fox network on February 6 , 1998 . The episode was written by Michael R. Perry and directed Roderick J. Pridy . " The Mikado " featured a guest appearance by Allan Zinyk as Brian Roedecker . 
 After a group of boys witness a murder via a live webcam feed , Millennium Group profiler Frank Black ( Lance Henriksen ) realizes that the culprit is an old adversary who has learned to exploit the internet to continue his killing spree while avoiding capture . 
 Perry was inspired to write the episode after considering the " dark side " of the internet , drawing influence from Jennifer Ringley 's <unk> website . Avatar , the episode 's antagonist , was based on real @-@ life murderer the Zodiac Killer . " The Mikado " was seen by over five million households in its initial broadcast , and has received positive reviews from critics . 
 = = Plot = = 
 A group of friends browse the internet for pornography , finding a live stream of a woman bound to a chair . Behind her a number is painted on the wall ; when the feed 's web counter reaches the painted number , a masked man appears and cuts the girl 's throat . The boys quickly print an image of the feed as proof of what they have seen , just before the website disappears . 
 Millennium Group member Frank Black ( Lance Henriksen ) finds that police across the United States have received calls from witnesses to the killing . The police believe it to be a hoax but Black is convinced of its authenticity . He and fellow Group members Brian Roedecker ( Allan Zinyk ) and Peter Watts ( Terry O 'Quinn ) identify the victim as Rebecca Damsen . Damsen 's email correspondence leads them to a San Jose address ; Watts finds the bodies of both the owner and Damsen in a nearby graveyard . By the bodies is another number , which they determine to be an IP address . 
 The IP address leads to another live feed similar in nature to the first one . However , the chair is empty this time . There is another number painted on the wall , which Black recognizes as a case file number from his time in the FBI — the case concerned Avatar , a serial killer who was able to evade all attempts at capture . Avatar sends Black a coded message twice , and places a woman in the chair on the feed , keeping her face hidden . Roedecker realizes that , through image differencing , the two messages contain additional information — a sound clip from The Mikado , known to be Avatar 's favourite operetta . 
 Black determines that another set of numbers visible on the feed are latitude and longitude co @-@ ordinates for San Francisco . The San Francisco Police Department are uncooperative , however . After Black , Roedecker and Watts attempt to keep the feed counter from rising by recreating the live feed and substituting it , the second girl is murdered before the feed 's counter reaches the allotted number . Avatar leaves another clue after the killing , which leads to two further video feeds — one shows a third set like the others , again with an empty chair , while the other shows the exterior of a mobile home . Police are able to locate the mobile home , but an officer is killed by a shotgun rigged to the front door , before the trailer is obliterated by a series of explosions . Black travels to San Francisco , finding an abandoned theater whose marquee is displaying The Mikado . He is shot at by a masked gunman and give chase ; however , he soon sees that the attacker is another kidnap victim , a gun tied to her arm in an attempt to trick Black into shooting her . Watts tells Black that they found a charred body in the remains of the trailer , but Black tells him it is just another victim , and Avatar will most likely fall silent again - for a while . 
 = = Production = = 
 " The Mikado " is the first episode of Millennium to have been written by Michael R. Perry , who would go on to pen a further four episodes in the third season . The episode is the final one helmed by director Roderick J. Pridy , who had also taken the reins on " Covenant " in the first season . 
 Perry was inspired to write the episode upon wondering whether the internet , about which he had only heard positive remarks , had a " dark side " . He was shown Jennifer Ringley 's <unk> website , which provided a constant webcam view of her daily life , and wondered what sort of investigations would arise if a murder were witnessed on a similar broadcast . The other main inspiration for the episode was the real @-@ life Zodiac Killer , who formed the basis for the fictional Avatar . Perry 's script was later given a " polish " by executive producer James Wong , with Perry stating that roughly ninety percent of the material is his own work . Several women in the episode , including possible murder victims investigated by Black and Roedecker , are named after Perry 's sisters . 
 After principal photography had finished for the episode , additional inserts were shot to add more variety to scenes featuring a lot of dialogue ; Perry noted that this was something he had learned about from Wong and felt the technique was put to " great use " . Filming several of the episode 's scenes , including the webcam feeds and footage Black watches of police officers investigating suspects was filmed in a deliberately low @-@ resolution manner , on handheld cameras , as Perry felt footage that was too clean and high @-@ quality would lessen the episode 's tension , citing The Blair Witch Project as an example of how this approach has later been put to use . " The Mikado " featured Allan Zinyk 's last appearance as Group member Brian Roedecker . Wong and fellow executive producer Glen Morgan wanted to sign Zinyk on for further appearances , but actor declined in order to pursue a career in the theatre in Toronto . 
 = = Broadcast and reception = = 
 " The Mikado " was first broadcast on the Fox Network on February 6 , 1998 . The episode earned a Nielsen rating of 5 @.@ 4 during its original broadcast , meaning that 5 @.@ 4 percent of households in the United States viewed the episode . This represented approximately 5 @.@ 29 million households , and left the episode the seventy @-@ eighth most @-@ viewed broadcast that week . 
 The episode received positive reviews from critics . The A.V. Club 's Todd VanDerWerff rated the episode a A − , calling it " one of the strongest episodes of the season " . VanDerWerff felt that the episode accurately depicted the general unease about the growing role of the internet in the late 1990s ; he also reflected that it follows the " serial killer of the week " formula of the series ' first season while retaining the second season 's " more mystical , supernatural bent " . Bill Gibron , writing for DVD Talk , rated the episode 4 out of 5 , calling it " very compelling " . Gibron compared the episode to the films Seven and 8mm ; he also felt that the unresolved plot helped to temper concerns about Black 's seeming infallibility . Robert Shearman and Lars Pearson , in their book Wanting to Believe : A Critical Guide to The X @-@ Files , Millennium & The Lone Gunmen , rated " The Mikado " three @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half stars out of five . Shearman felt that although the episode 's details seem dated , its verisimilitude and enthusiasm helps to overcome this ; he noted that the episode " turns us all into spectators , and turns death into performance art " . 
 = Roger Mowry Tavern = 
 The Roger Mowry Tavern , also known variously as the Roger Mowry House , Olney House and Abbott House , was a historic stone ender house , built around 1653 , in Providence , Rhode Island . Roger Mowry was a constable and operated the only tavern in the town . The tavern also served as a government meeting place , church , and jail . It was originally constructed as a one @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half story single room house with a chamber upstairs . By 1711 the house was expanded with a two @-@ story lean @-@ to by 1711 . At unknown later date , the top of the roof of the original house was raised up further . The original portion of the house was restored by Norman Isham by 1895 . The Roger Mowry Tavern was the oldest house in Providence until it was demolished in 1900 . 
 = = Roger Mowry = = 
 The first American records of Roger Mowry appear in Boston , Massachusetts . On May 18 , 1631 , a document stated Mowry 's desire to be a freeman . Mowry would move to Plymouth , Massachusetts and later Salem , Massachusetts before arriving in Providence , Rhode Island . Mowry lived in Salem between 1636 and 1649 , with his wife Mary , the eldest daughter of John Johnson of Roxbury . In 1637 , Mowry acquired 50 acres ( 0 @.@ 20 km2 ) of land some two miles from the Salem settlement and built his house on the lot which was to be the corner of Essex and Flint Street . About 1653 , Mowry constructed a house which would come to be known as the Roger Mowry Tavern . In 1655 , Mowry became a freeman in Providence and resided there until his death on January 5 , 1666 . Records show that Roger Mowry was the <unk> and constable . A family monument lists Mowry as having twelve children , with one child , Benjamin , reportedly having been found and baptized by Mowry . 
 = = Design = = 
 The original architect of the Roger Mowry Tavern is not known for certain . Robert A. <unk> 's book Historic Taverns of Rhode Island suggests it may have been the work of William Carpenter and the mason John Smith . The original house began as a one @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half story stone ender with a single 16 feet ( 4 @.@ 9 m ) by roughly 17 feet ( 5 @.@ 2 m ) fire room . Running lengthwise across the middle of the room is a large summer beam . On the right side of the fireplace was the stairs or ladder that lead to the upstairs chamber . At an unknown date , the roof of the original house was extended higher , as evidenced by the original beams ending about 3 feet ( 0 @.@ 91 m ) above the floor . By 1711 , the house had a two @-@ story lean @-@ to . By the late 19th century the house had been greatly altered , but the original structure was restored by Robert Isham . Isham found and restored the house , which still featured the original posts and beams . The large fireplace remained intact , but was concealed behind a <unk> and closet , that was itself behind a stove . The result was that stone fireplace was completely concealed prior to restoration . Less than a decade later after Isham restored the original part of the house , the whole structure was demolished . 
 = = History = = 
 Roger Mowry was licensed to operate a " house of entertainment " in May 1655 . The tavern may have been a contributing reason for the passage of a law that mandated no alcoholic drinks be served after 9 p.m. under penalty of a fine , unless a satisfactory reason was given to the constable or magistrate . 
 Roger Mowry 's Tavern was reportedly the site of civil rally to free a man taken prisoner by a Massachusetts constable . The constable , whose intention was to extradite his prisoner back to Massachusetts for prosecution was staying at the nearby Roger Pray 's tavern when concerned citizens gathered at Mowry 's tavern . The citizens summoned the town council , and a messenger was sent to the Massachusetts constable to demand by what authority he held his prisoner . The end result was the release of the prisoner . Another story surrounding the tavern was the murder of John Clawson , a Dutch carpenter , who was found dying one December morning in 1661 . A native Indian , <unk> , was charged with the crime and held at Mowry 's tavern until the matter could be resolved , but it is unknown what fate befell <unk> . According to locals , Clawson was roused and accused his neighbor , <unk> , for his murder . Clawson then cursed the family before dying . The house was also reported to have been used by the Town Council for meetings , with a record of payment in 1657 from the Town Treasurer . 
 Upon Mowry 's death , his wife retained the house until selling it to Stephen Paine on September 5 , 1671 . Paine conveyed it to Samuel Whipple who resided in the house until his death in 1711 . Upon his death the house was recorded as having a two @-@ story lean @-@ to . Whipple transferred the property to his wife and upon her death , which passed to their daughters Abigail and Hope Whipple . Hope Whipple would marry Robert Currie and upon her death , Robert Currie would marry her sister Abigail Whipple , and upon her death fell to Robert Currie 's ownership . In 1737 , Currie sold the house to William Smith , Job Whipple and John Whipple . It remained in the Whipple family until 1761 when it was sold to Captain Joseph Owen . The house would take its final name , the Abbott House , from Thomas Abbott who married Joseph Owen 's daughter and resided in the house until his death in 1826 . The Mowry Tavern was allegedly one of only five buildings not burned by the Indians during King Philip 's War . It is believed that it was spared because Roger Williams , a friend of the Indians , held Christian worship services in the building . The house was located on Abbott Street adjacent to the North Burial Ground . The entire structure was demolished in 1900 to construct a triple decker tenement house . At the time of its demolition , it was the oldest house in Providence . 
 = = Gallery = = 
 = Haven ( Star Trek : The Next Generation ) = 
 " Haven " is the 11th episode of the first season of the American science fiction television series Star Trek : The Next Generation , originally aired on November 30 , 1987 , in broadcast syndication in the United States . Directed by Richard Compton , the story was originally created by Lan O 'Kun , and developed into the final script by Tracy Tormé . 
 Set in the 24th century , the series follows the adventures of the crew of the Starfleet starship Enterprise @-@ D. In this episode , Deanna Troi ( Marina Sirtis ) deals with the commitment of an arranged marriage after the arrival of the wedding party , including her mother Lwaxana ( Majel Barrett ) . Meanwhile , the Enterprise must deal with a plague ship approaching a paradisical planet . 
 The episode marked the first appearance of several guest actors in The Next Generation , including Barrett , Carel Struycken and Armin Shimerman . Tormé disliked the final version of the episode , and the critical response to the episode was mixed , with the performance of Barrett both praised and criticised . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The Federation starship Enterprise arrives at the planet Haven , where the ship 's Betazoid Counselor Deanna Troi has been summoned by her mother Lwaxana . Troi had previously been set into a pre @-@ arranged marriage to the young human doctor , Wyatt Miller ( Robert Knepper ) , and his parents have since tracked down Lwaxana to enforce the marriage . After Lwaxana and the Millers are welcomed aboard the Enterprise , the parents argue over whose racial traditions will be honored at the ceremony . Troi and Wyatt attempt to get to know each other but find it difficult , as Troi is still in love with Commander William Riker ( Jonathan Frakes ) . Wyatt has had numerous dreams of another woman with whom he has fallen in love , and had initially believed her to be Troi communicating telepathically with him . 
 The Enterprise then learns of an unmarked vessel approaching Haven . Captain Picard ( Patrick Stewart ) recognizes it as Tarellian , a race that they had thought to be wiped out by a highly lethal and contagious virus . When they contact the ship , they find a handful of Tarellian refugees that have been travelling at sub @-@ light speeds to Haven in hopes of finding an isolated location to live out the rest of their lives in peace . Picard insists they cannot go to the planet for fear of spreading the virus , and has the Tarellian vessel placed in a tractor beam . Wyatt recognizes one of the <unk> , Ariana ( <unk> Kingsley ) , from his dreams , and she too recognizes Wyatt . Wyatt tells Dr. Crusher ( Gates McFadden ) that he will transport some medical supplies to them , but transports himself along with the supplies . When the crew discovers this , Wyatt 's parents demand Picard bring Wyatt back to the Enterprise , but Picard insists that he cannot return , as Wyatt would now carry the Tarellian virus . Wyatt promises his parents , Troi , and the rest of the crew that he knew that this would be destiny , and is happy to try to help cure the Tarellian virus . Wyatt convinces the <unk> to leave Haven and search for help elsewhere . Picard orders the tractor beam to be dropped and allows the vessel to depart the system . 
 = = Production = = 
 The episode 's plot originated from one which Lan O 'Kun submitted entitled " Love Beyond Time and Space " , although at one point , the episode was called " Eye of the Beholder " . O 'Kun 's script was on the verge of being cut from the show when it was handed to Tracy Tormé for re @-@ writes . Tormé later described it as a " no @-@ lose " situation as he felt that O 'Kun 's script was so bad anything would be an improvement . Tormé changed the script from O 'Kun 's serious outline to something more comedic , although he felt that a lot of the comedy elements were later removed before filming . He didn 't like the overall result , saying " I didn 't particularly like the episode when it first aired . It 's still one of my least favourite shows that I 've been involved with " . Because of the work on the episode , Tormé was recruited as executive story editor . 
 The episode was directed by Richard Compton , who had previously appeared as Lieutenant Washburn in The Original Series episode " The Doomsday Machine " . " Haven " began filming twenty years to the day after Compton filmed his scenes in " The Doomsday Machine " . Dennis McCarthy composed the music for " Haven " , which was so strongly disliked by executive producer Rick Berman that McCarthy thought he might be fired . " Haven " was the fifth episode to be filmed , but was broadcast as the eleventh episode . 
 " Haven " marked the first appearance of Majel Barrett as Lwaxana Troi . She had previously appeared as Number One in the first Star Trek pilot , " The Cage " , and as Christine Chapel in Star Trek : The Original Series and movies . She would go on to re @-@ appear as Lwaxana on average once per season for the rest of the run of The Next Generation . Dutch actor Carel Struycken also made his first appearance as Mr. <unk> in " Haven " , which also marked the only time during his several appearances alongside Barrett that he had a line of dialogue . Robert Ellenstein appeared as Steven Miller ; he had previously appeared as the Federation President in Star Trek IV : The Voyage Home . " Haven " also marked the first filmed appearance of another actor who would regularly appear in the Star Trek franchise . Armin Shimerman appeared as the face of the Betazoid gift box in this episode . This was his first filmed appearance , but his first broadcast appearance was as the Ferengi <unk> in " The Last Outpost " . He would later appear as the Ferengi <unk> in the season two episode " Peak Performance " before being cast once more as a Ferengi , but this time in the main cast , as Quark in Star Trek : Deep Space Nine . 
 = = Reception = = 
 " Haven " aired in broadcast syndication during the week commencing November 29 , 1987 . It received Nielsen ratings of 10 @.@ 3 , reflecting the percentage of all households watching the episode during its timeslot . This was the lowest ratings received by the series since " The Last Outpost " six episodes earlier . 
 Several reviewers re @-@ watched the episode after the end of the series . Cast member Wil Wheaton watched the episode for AOL TV in May 2007 , saying that " this could have been an absolutely dreadful ' shotgun wedding ' episode that was as predictable as it was tedious , but Tracy 's script , aided by very good guest star casting and great acting from everyone involved , made it one of the better episodes in season one . " He gave the episode a grade of B. James Hunt for the website Den of Geek , watched the episode in November 2012 . While he was mostly negative of the episode , saying that " Troi episodes tend to test the patience of even the most devoted Trek fan " , he said that " Haven " marked the first time that the series would " properly execute the idea that TNG episodes can have an A and B plot which dovetail nicely in the final act " . 
 Keith DeCandido reviewed the episode for Tor.com in June 2011 . He described the episode as " painful to watch " and one that where " all the worst sci @-@ fi TV show clichés are in evidence " . He criticised the out of date sexist values of the plot in which Troi would have been forced to leave the ship to be with Wyatt . He did praise the appearance of Majel <unk> , describing her as " ever @-@ radiant " and the " saving grace of the episode " . He gave it a score of three out of ten . Zack Handlen watched the episode for The A.V. Club in April 2010 . He described Majel Barrett as " agonizing " and the episode was " full of lazy shoulder shrugs and half @-@ finished ideas " . He gave the episode a grade of D. 
 = = Home media release = = 
 The first home media release of " Haven " was on VHS cassette , appearing on April 1 , 1992 in the United States and Canada . The episode was later included on the Star Trek : The Next Generation season one DVD box set , released in March 2002 , and then released as part of the season one Blu @-@ ray set on July 24 , 2012 . 
 = Irene ( play ) = 
 Irene is a Neoclassical tragedy written between 1726 and 1749 by Samuel Johnson . It has the distinction of being the work Johnson considered his greatest failure . Since his death , the critical consensus has been that he was right to think so . 
 Irene was Johnson 's only play , and was first performed on 6 February 1749 in a production by his friend and former pupil , David Garrick . The play was a commercial success and earned Johnson more money than anything else he had written up to that point . It was never revived during his lifetime , and there is no subsequent evidence of any other full @-@ scale productions of Irene anywhere until 1999 , making it one of the most unsuccessful plays ever written by a major author . 
 = = Background = = 
 Johnson began writing Irene around 1726 when he first began to work in his father 's bookshop . While in the bookshop he befriended Gilbert Walmesley , the Registrar of the Ecclesiastical Court of Lichfield . Johnson would discuss Irene with Walmesley , and read him some of the early drafts . At one point , Walmesley told Johnson that " he was making Irene suffer so much in the first part of the play that there would be nothing left for her to suffer in the later part " . Johnson joked that there was " enough in reserve ... I intend to put my heroine into the ecclesiastical court of Lichfield which will fill up the utmost measure of human calamity " . 
 Johnson wrote a considerable part of Irene in 1737 while teaching at Edial Hall School , the academy he had founded in 1735 . Johnson spent his evenings working on his play while ignoring his wife Elizabeth ( known as Tetty ) . This provoked David Garrick , his student , to perform a skit mocking the incidents , although the incidents he portrayed were more than likely his own fabrications . However , the play was written mostly for Mrs. Johnson ; she was fond of it and hoped it would be a success . Her belief in the play inspired Johnson to finish it and push to have it performed . When Edial Hall failed , Johnson travelled to London and brought the unfinished manuscript with him . In 1737 , Johnson tried to submit Irene to Charles Fleetwood , the owner @-@ manager of the Theatre Royal Drury Lane , but Fleetwood rejected it on the grounds that there was no patron and his theatre was catering to other types of performances . Johnson tried in 1741 to have the unperformed play printed , but this too failed . He seems to have continued to revise it over the next several years , since a manuscript notebook contains draft material made not earlier than June 1746 . 
 It was not until Garrick took over as manager of Drury Lane Theatre that the play was guaranteed a production . By this point Johnson was hard at work on his Dictionary , but he found time for further work on Irene . 
 = = Play = = 
 Johnson 's main source for the story of Irene was Richard Knolles 's Generall Historie of the <unk> ( 1603 ) , although he also made some use of George Sandys 's Relation of a Journey ... containing a Description of the Turkish Empire ( 1615 ) , <unk> 's Bibliothèque Orientale ( 1697 ) and Humphrey Prideaux 's Life of Mahomet ( 1697 ) . 
 In Knolles 's work , the Sultan Mahomet conquers Constantinople in 1453 and captures a Greek Christian named Irene . He decides to take her as his mistress , and while pursuing her romantically he ignores his duties as a monarch . Soon , the kingdom is falling apart from neglect and the subjects begin to riot , so Mahomet kills Irene to prove his dedication to his people . Johnson alters the story to emphasise the theme of Irene 's temptation . His Mahomet offers Irene a deal : if she becomes a Muslim , he will preserve her life and give her power at his court . 
 <unk> : 
 <unk> — O do not urge me to my ruin ! 
 <unk> : 
 To state and pow 'r I court thee , not to ruin : 
 Smile on my wishes , and command the globe . 
 Security shall spread her shield before thee , 
 And Love <unk> thee with his downy wings . 
 ( Irene II. vii ll . 79 – 83 ) 
 Johnson goes on to emphasise how the pursuit of worldly power tends to corrupt . After Irene has accepted the Sultan 's offer and abandoned her religious faith , she falls out with her virtuous friend Aspasia : 
 <unk> : 
 Ah ! let me rather seek the convent 's cell ; 
 There where my thoughts , at intervals of pray 'r , 
 Descend to range these mansions of misfortune , 
 Oft ' shall I dwell on our disastrous friendship , 
 And shed the pitying tear for lost Irene . 
 <unk> : 
 Go , languish on in dull obscurity ; 
 Thy dazzled soul with all its boasted greatness , 
 <unk> at th ' o <unk> 'ring gleams of regal state , 
 Stoops from the blaze like a degenerate eagle , 
 And flies for shelter to the shades of life . 
 ( Irene III. <unk> ll . 93 – 102 ) 
 As a result of her decision to become Mahomet 's queen , Irene becomes ensnared in a complex power struggle between his various advisors : the First <unk> Cali Bassa , the Aga Mustapha , and the officer Abdalla , who is suffering from unrequited love for Aspasia . Mahomet becomes convinced that Bassa , with Irene 's complicity , is plotting against him . Two of Abdalla 's captains kill Irene , but with her dying words she reveals that Bassa 's true accomplice was the Greek soldier Demetrius , Aspasia 's lover , who has safely escaped with his loved one . On learning that Irene had not been conspiring against him , Mahomet is distraught : 
 <unk> : 
 Robb 'd of the maid , with whom I wish 'd to triumph , 
 No more I burn for fame or for dominion ; 
 Success and conquest now are empty sounds , 
 Remorse and anguish seize on all my breast ; 
 Those groves , whose shades <unk> 'd the dear Irene , 
 Heard her last cries , and <unk> 'd her dying beauties , 
 Shall hide me from the tasteless world for ever . 
 ( Irene V. <unk> ll . 42 – 48 ) 
 The play is written in blank verse but , as Walter Jackson Bate claims , " reads like heroic couplets from which the rhyme has been removed , and couplets in which the poet has so much anxiety to keep a strict regularity of meter that other considerations – even of style and rhythm alone – become sacrificed . " It is evident from the scansion of the above lines that Johnson pronounced " Irene " in its Classical form with three syllables , / <unk> / eye @-@ REE @-@ nee , and not in the contemporary form / <unk> / EYE @-@ reen . 
 = = = Stage history = = = 
 David Garrick 's acceptance of Irene for production prompted Johnson to finish rewriting the play . Garrick changed the play 's title to Mahomet and Irene , and requested changes that would make the play more acceptable to his sense of theatrical style . Johnson was initially opposed to the changes and complained that Garrick " wants me to make Mahomet run mad , that he may have an opportunity of tossing his hands and kicking his heels " . Johnson 's friend John Taylor resolved the dispute and Johnson ultimately carried out Garrick 's suggestions , which included revising Irene 's death scene so that she would be strangled onstage , instead of offstage as originally written . 
 Mahomet and Irene opened on 6 February 1749 . Elizabeth Johnson was unable to attend the performance because of illness . Johnson arrived at the theatre in the kind of clothing he considered as the " distinction of dress " required of a playwright ; he wore " a scarlet waistcoat with gold lace and a gold @-@ laced hat " . The Prologue " soothed the audience , and the play went off tolerably , till it came to the conclusion " . The conclusion in question was Irene 's onstage strangulation , which upset the audience and provoked shouts of " Murder ! " . The actress quickly left the stage ; for all successive performances Garrick restored Johnson 's original ending . 
 The play was performed for nine nights , by the standards of 18th century London a very respectable run . Johnson received £ 195 <unk> for the performances . Robert Dodsley published the <unk> on 16 February 1749 and Johnson received an additional £ 100 . Perhaps ironically , in view of its later eclipse , this made Irene the most financially lucrative work Johnson had yet written : during this period of his career , only the Dictionary earned him more money . 
 = = = Cast = = = 
 Hannah Pritchard played the role of Irene and Garrick cast himself in the role of Demetrius . Other notable actors in the play 's original cast were Susannah Maria Arne ( using her professional name " Mrs. Cibber " ) as Aspasia and Spranger Barry as Mahomet . 
 The complete cast list , according to the first edition , is as follows : 
 Mahomet , Emperor of the Turks — Mr. Barry 
 Cali Bassa , First <unk> — Mr. Berry 
 Mustapha , A Turkish Aga — Mr. Sowden 
 Abdalla , An Officer — Mr. Harvard 
 Hasan , Turkish Captain — Mr. Usher 
 <unk> , Turkish Captain — Mr. Burton 
 Demetrius , Greek Nobleman — Mr. Garrick 
 Leontius , Greek Nobleman — Mr. Blakes 
 Murza , A Eunuch — unlisted 
 Aspasia , Greek Lady — Mrs. Cibber 
 Irene , Greek Lady — Mrs. Pritchard 
 Attendants on Irene — unlisted 
 = = Critical response = = 
 Irene has never been the most admired of Johnson 's works . Even James Boswell found it wanting : 
 <unk> into parts , it will furnish a rich store of noble sentiments , fine imagery , and beautiful language ; but it is deficient in pathos , in that delicate power of touching the human feelings , which is the principle end of the drama . Indeed Garrick has complained to me , that Johnson not only had not the faculty of producing the impressions of tragedy , but that he had not the sensibility to perceive them . 
 Johnson 's friend Bennet Langton recorded the author 's own later disenchantment with the piece : 
 At another time , when one was reading his tragedy Irene to a company at a house in the country , he [ Johnson ] left the room ; and somebody having asked him the reason of this , he replied , " Sir , I thought it had been better . " ' 
 The early 20th century consensus of opinion was summed up by George Sampson in 1941 : " Of his early tragedy Irene [ ... ] it is enough to say that its moral dialogues , its correctness of plan and its smoothness of verse do not suffice to give it any rank as drama . " T. S. Eliot suggested an explanation for the play 's unpopularity and neglect : 
 His verse has none of the dramatic qualities ; it is correct , but correctness in such isolation becomes itself a fault . The play would be more readable to @-@ day , if he had written it in rhyme ; the whole would be more easily declaimed , and the good things more easily remembered ; it would lose none of its excellence of structure , thought , vocabulary and figures of speech . What would be mellifluous in rhyme , is merely monotonous without it . 
 F.R. Leavis argued that Boswell 's criticisms of the play – " that [ Johnson ] has no sense of the theatre , and worse , cannot present or conceive his themes dramatically " – were " obvious " , and that Irene was a failure because Johnson 's best poetry ( such as The Vanity of Human Wishes ) was " a poetry of statement , exposition and reflection : nothing could be remoter from the Shakespearean use of language [ ... ] than the Johnsonian . " Like Eliot , Leavis suggested that the play might have been better if Johnson had not been determined to write it in blank verse : 
 He is clearly determined that his verse shall not be changed into the ' periods of a <unk> ' , and that it shall not be said that the audience cannot easily perceive ' where the lines end or begin ' ( see his remarks on blank @-@ verse in the Life of Milton ) . In couplets , of course , he couldn 't have written so dismally . With the absence of rhyme and of the movement goes the absence of wit . And without the wit he is without the Johnsonian weight . 
 Johnson biographer Walter Jackson Bate has attempted to defend Irene , arguing that the reason why it is considered so bad is that the reader cannot help being aware that " it is by one of the masters of English prose style ( who also had a powerful command of one kind of poetic style ) , and it is also by one of the supreme critics of literature in whatever language " . Bate claims that if contemporary readers were able to encounter the play without knowing who had written it , " it would not seem too bad " ; but since we cannot forget Johnson 's achievements in other fields of literature , reading Irene is an especially depressing experience : " the heart begins after a while to sink except in the most resolute Johnsonian , and sometimes even then . " 
 = Blackwall Tunnel = 
 The Blackwall Tunnel is a pair of road tunnels underneath the River Thames in east London , England linking the London Borough of Tower Hamlets with the Royal Borough of Greenwich , and part of the A102 road . The northern portal lies just south of the East India Dock Road ( A13 ) in Blackwall ; A the southern entrances are just south of The O2 on the Greenwich <unk> The road is managed by Transport for London ( TfL ) . 
 The tunnel was originally opened as a single bore in 1897 by the then Prince of Wales , as a major transport project to improve commerce and trade in London 's East End , and supported a mix of foot , cycle , horse @-@ drawn and vehicular traffic . By the 1930s , capacity was becoming inadequate , and consequently a second bore opened in 1967 , handling southbound traffic while the earlier 19th century tunnel handled northbound . 
 The northern approach takes traffic from the A12 and the southern approach takes traffic from the A2 , making the tunnel crossing a key link for both local and longer @-@ distance traffic between the north and south sides of the river . It forms part of a key route into Central London from South East London and Kent and was the easternmost all @-@ day crossing for vehicles before the opening of the Dartford Tunnel in 1963 . It remains the easternmost free fixed road crossing of the Thames , and regularly suffers congestion , to the extent that tidal flow schemes were in place from 1978 until controversially removed in 2007 . Proposals to solve the traffic problems have included building a third bore , constructing alternative crossings of the Thames such as the now cancelled Thames Gateway Bridge or the Silvertown Tunnel , and providing better traffic management , particularly for heavy goods vehicles . 
 The tunnels are no longer open to pedestrians , cyclists or other non @-@ motorised traffic , and the northbound tunnel has a 4 @.@ 0 @-@ metre ( 13 @.@ 1 ft ) height limit . London Buses route 108 runs through the tunnels . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Old tunnel = = = 
 A tunnel in the Blackwall area was originally proposed in the 1880s . According to Robert Webster , then MP for St Pancras East , a tunnel would " be very useful to the East End of London , a district representing in trade and commerce a population greater than the combined populations of Liverpool , Manchester and Birmingham . " By this time , all road bridges in London east of the ferry at Chiswick were toll @-@ free , but these were of little use to the two fifths of London 's population that lived to the east of London Bridge . The Thames Tunnel ( Blackwall ) Act was created in August 1887 , which provided the legal framework necessary to construct the tunnel . The initial proposal , made by Sir Joseph Bazalgette , called for three parallel tunnels , two for vehicular traffic and one for foot , with an expected completion date of works within seven years . It was originally commissioned by the Metropolitan Board of Works but , just before the contract was due to start , responsibility passed to the London County Council ( LCC ) when the former body was abolished in 1889 and Bazalgette 's work on the tunnel ended . 
 The original tunnel as built was designed by Sir Alexander Binnie and built by S. Pearson & Sons , between 1892 and 1897 . It was constructed using tunnelling shield and compressed air techniques and a Greathead shield ( named after its inventor , James Henry Greathead ) . It was lit by three rows of incandescent street lights . To clear the site in Greenwich , more than 600 people had to be rehoused , and a house reputedly once owned by Sir Walter Raleigh had to be demolished . The tunnel was officially opened by the Prince of Wales on 22 May 1897 . The total cost of the tunnel was £ 1 @.@ 4 M and 800 men were employed in its construction , during which seven deaths were recorded . 
 The southern entrance gateway to the tunnel , also known as Southern Tunnel House , was designed by LCC architect Thomas Blashill and was built just before the tunnel was completed . It comprises two floors with an attic . 
 Today the western bore is only used for northbound traffic and is not accessible to vehicles taller than 4 m ( 13 ft ) . The tunnel itself has several sharp bends , whose purpose was to prevent horses from bolting once they saw daylight . The tunnel carries two lanes of traffic , though higher vehicles need to keep to the left @-@ hand lane so that they do not hit the tunnel 's inner lining . 
 = = = New tunnel = = = 
 Due to the increase in motor traffic in the early 20th century , the capacity of the original tunnel was soon perceived as inadequate . In 1930 , John Mills , MP for Dartford , remarked that HGVs delivering from Essex to Kent could not practically use any crossing of the Thames downstream of the tunnel . The LCC obtained an act to construct a new tunnel in 1938 , but work did not start due to the outbreak of World War II . Construction eventually started in 1958 with preliminary work on the northern approach road . By this time , traffic had become progressively worse . In 1960 , Richard Marsh , MP for Greenwich complained that vehicles could spend 30 to 45 minutes stuck in tunnel traffic . 
 The new eastern tunnel , 8 @.@ 59 metres ( 28 ft 2 in ) in diameter , was accepted into the roads programme in March 1959 , and construction started in March 1960 . It was opened on 2 August 1967 by Desmond Plummer , Leader of the Greater London Council ( GLC ) . It was wider and usable by vehicles up to 4 @.@ 72 m ( 15 @.@ 5 ft ) . During construction , transport minister Ernest Marples clarified that unlike the Dartford Tunnel , also then under construction , tolls would not be imposed as the tunnel was already an established route . At the time of opening , the strip lighting in the tunnel was commended as " a big improvement " on the standard provided in the original tunnel . In contrast with the Victorian northbound tunnel , the eastern tunnel had no sharp bends , and emergency telephones were provided . Its distinctive ventilation towers were designed in 1964 by GLC architect Terry Farrell . 
 In the late 1960s , proposals were made to connect the tunnel with a free @-@ flow , grade @-@ separated motorway system as part of the London Ringways project . Aside from the construction of the A102 ( M ) Blackwall Tunnel approach roads , opened in 1973 , these plans were abandoned . 
 The entrance gateway to the northbound tunnel was Grade II listed in 1973 , while the ventilation towers were listed in 2000 . In April 1986 , the tunnel became part of the UK trunk road network . It was <unk> and control handed to TfL in September 1999 . 
 = = = Provisional IRA bombing = = = 
 On 18 January 1979 , an anonymous caller to the Press Association informed them that the Provisional IRA had planted a bomb in the tunnel that was scheduled to detonate at midnight . While the Metropolitan Police were searching the tunnel , the bomb detonated at 12 : 40am , causing an explosion in a gasholder near the southern exit . This resulted in a fire on another gasholder approximately an hour later . No injuries were reported . Home Secretary Merlyn Rees hoped " the House will join me in condemning these attacks and will support the Government in their determination not to be swayed by such methods . " A Belfast man was subsequently jailed for 17 years in May 1983 for his role in the bombing . 
 = = Nearest alternative crossings = = 
 The nearest alternative road crossings are the Rotherhithe Tunnel 2 mi ( 3 km ) to the west , Tower Bridge 3 mi ( 5 km ) to the west , and the Dartford Crossing 16 mi ( 26 km ) to the east . The Woolwich Free Ferry is 2 mi ( 3 km ) to the east , but is closed overnight , often reduced to one boat in operation , or completely closed at weekends . Variable message signs ( <unk> ) near the tunnel inform drivers if the ferry is available . When open , queuing for the ferry causes significant congestion around Woolwich town centre . 
 Underground railway links include the Jubilee line from North Greenwich ( TfL ) to Canning Town on the east and Canary Wharf on the west . The Docklands Light Railway also passes under the Thames between Island Gardens at the southern end of the Isle of Dogs and Cutty Sark in the centre of Greenwich . 
 Horse @-@ drawn traffic was partially banned from the tunnel during peak hours in July 1939 and completely banned in August 1947 . Pedestrians have been banned from using the Blackwall Tunnels since May 1969 , but pedestrians and cyclists may also use the foot tunnels at Greenwich ( close to Island Gardens and Cutty Sark stations ) and Woolwich ( close to the Woolwich Ferry ) . 
 The London Buses route 108 ( Stratford – Lewisham ) runs through the tunnels . On occasion in the past , the bus service has been escorted through the tunnel when it has been closed . 
 = = Traffic management = = 
 The northbound Blackwall Tunnel is a traffic bottleneck with tailbacks . A TfL study in 2009 revealed that the 1 @.@ 1 @-@ mile ( 1 @.@ 7 km ) approach to the northbound tunnel took around 19 minutes in rush hour traffic , or a delay of approximately 11 minutes per kilometre . To relieve the congestion , a tidal flow system was introduced in 1978 , allowing northbound traffic to use the eastern tunnel . The congestion is not limited to weekday rush hours . There is often congestion with tailbacks at the weekends , especially on Sunday evenings . Due to its sharp turns with restricted headroom , high @-@ sided vehicles can only use the left @-@ hand lane of the western tunnel , so it was not possible to reverse the tidal flow in the evening . On 20 April 2007 the morning tidal flow was discontinued , after reports by TfL and the Metropolitan Police ( MPS ) of an increase in dangerous motoring behaviour ; these blamed poor driving , such as overtaking , for the decrease in safety during counterflow operations . The decision to end the counterflow was controversial , particularly as TfL and the MPS had been considering it since 2005 , without properly informing affected borough councils , and an independent committee was set up to evaluate the decision . The ending of the counterflow system has brought protests from users of the tunnel and those experiencing increased congestion due to the change . 
 In November 2007 , the Mayor of London , Ken Livingstone responded to complaints from Greenwich Council about congestion in the area , with the possibility of setting up a small congestion charging zone . He clarified that this would not extend to the Blackwall Tunnel , stating " I have given that commitment right the way through my period as Mayor , and there cannot be anything that impacts on the A2 because the impact then on Lewisham is unacceptable . " In 2012 , TfL announced their intention to toll the tunnels to pay for the Silverton Link crossing , suggesting it was the " most appropriate way " . Responding to this , Paul Watters from the AA said " We ’ ve already seen the Western extension of the congestion charge dropped because it was hugely unpopular and I think tolling on the Blackwall Tunnel will be as controversial as that . " 
 In June 2013 , TfL announced they would send registration details of any broken @-@ down or over @-@ height commercial vehicle in the tunnel to the Vehicle and Operator Services Agency ( <unk> ) , and set up a new automatic recognition system to detect unsuitable heavy goods vehicles heading towards it . TfL commissioner Sir Peter Hendy said that " this partnership working will help improve traffic flow on one of the busiest routes in the capital . " 
 = = Maintenance and closures = = 
 The Blackwall Tunnel has attracted criticism in the past for its perceived lack of safety . In 2002 , a survey by major motoring organisations rated the tunnel 's safety record as " very poor " , and concluded it was one of the least safe tunnels in Europe . In 2010 , the northbound tunnel was refurbished in order to meet current safety standards . Fire detection systems have been installed in response to new European regulations in the light of recent tunnel fires . 
 In 2010 , the southbound tunnel was affected by planned closures for maintenance from 10 pm to 5 am , Thursday to Sunday inclusive , and over a number of whole weekends . The tunnel was only closed six full weekends instead of the planned ten , but it is still being regularly closed to traffic for maintenance as of March 2013 . 
 The tunnel also suffers regular problems with strikes from over @-@ height traffic , and vehicles running out of fuel . On 10 December 1996 , a man drove a Mercedes truck supporting a crane towards the southbound tunnel , ignored warnings that his vehicle was over @-@ height , and struck a gantry , breaking a steel reinforcement frame in the process . The entire tunnel was immediately closed , not only to retrieve the vehicle , but to perform additional safety checks . Because the Limehouse Link tunnel , which runs near to the north end of the Blackwall Tunnel , and the Queen Elizabeth II Bridge , part of the Dartford Crossing , were also closed on the same day , the accident caused one of the worst traffic jams in the capital . In February 2011 , TfL reported that the tunnel had been closed 1 @,@ 200 times in the previous year for a total of 157 hours , while New Civil Engineer magazine claimed it shut 1 @,@ 448 times in 2010 . To try to prevent closures of this nature , an LED <unk> was set up in the northbound approach , counting the number of breakdowns and accidents per month occurring inside the tunnel . 
 = = Future = = 
 The continual congestion and requirements for closures and refurbishments are unlikely to change , as the Blackwall Tunnel remains the only major road crossing of the Thames in east London for the short @-@ term future . The proposed Thames Gateway Bridge , a new crossing between the Woolwich Ferry and the Dartford Crossing , was cancelled by Boris Johnson when he replaced Livingstone as mayor in 2008 . 
 A third bore of the tunnel , replacing the old Victorian northbound bore , was proposed by Transport Secretary Cecil Parkinson in 1989 , but had yet to see any progress towards construction over a decade later . This option is not currently favoured by TfL due to technical problems with construction and engineering , difficulty tying in with the existing road network , and concern about increased traffic on the A12 . 
 Other schemes proposed by TfL that would allow tunnel traffic to cross the Thames elsewhere are the Silvertown Tunnel between Silvertown and the Greenwich Peninsula and the Gallions Reach Ferry between Beckton and Thamesmead . 
 = = Maps = = 
 A. ^ Blackwall Tunnel , northern end , 51 ° 30 ′ 32 @.@ 87 ″ N 000 ° 00 ′ 24 @.@ 85 ″ W 
 B. ^ Blackwall Tunnel , southern end of south tunnel , 51 ° 29 ′ 56 @.@ 17 ″ N 000 ° 00 ′ 04 @.@ 92 ″ E and the southern end of the north tunnel , 51 ° 30 ′ 01 @.@ 84 ″ N 000 ° 00 ′ 06 @.@ 7 ″ E 
 = Edwin Maxwell ( attorney general ) = 
 Edwin Maxwell ( July 16 , 1825 – February 5 , 1903 ) was an American lawyer , judge , and politician in the U.S. state of West Virginia . Maxwell served as Attorney General of West Virginia in 1866 and was an Associate Justice of the Supreme Court of Appeals of West Virginia from 1867 until 1872 . He was elected to the West Virginia Senate ( 1863 – 1866 ; 1886 – 1893 ) and the West Virginia House of Delegates ( 1893 – 1895 ; 1903 ) . 
 Maxwell was born in 1825 in Weston , Virginia ( present @-@ day West Virginia ) and raised on a farm until the age of 21 . Despite his father 's plans for him to become a carpenter , Maxwell studied jurisprudence under his uncle Lewis Maxwell , a U.S. Representative . Maxwell was admitted to the bar in 1848 , and relocated to West Union , where he served two terms as the Commonwealth 's attorney for Doddridge County . In 1857 , Maxwell moved to Clarksburg and established a law partnership with Burton Despard , which was later joined by Nathan Goff , Jr . 
 He was resolute in his support of the Union during the American Civil War and of the statehood movement for West Virginia . Following the state 's creation in 1863 , Maxwell began his political career when he was elected to serve in the inaugural session of the West Virginia Senate . He also served as chairman of the Judiciary Committee . In 1865 , Maxwell chaired a senate committee that proposed a state constitutional amendment known as the " Maxwell amendment " which aimed to remove citizenship rights from former Confederates returning to West Virginia . Governor Arthur I. Boreman appointed Maxwell as the Attorney General of West Virginia in 1866 . In the fall of 1866 , Maxwell was elected as an Associate Justice of the Supreme Court of Appeals of West Virginia , on which he served until 1872 . He ran unsuccessfully for re @-@ election to the bench in 1880 , and was an unsuccessful Greenback @-@ Labor Party gubernatorial candidate in 1884 . During his gubernatorial campaign , he was known by the moniker " Old Honesty . " 
 In 1886 , Maxwell was elected a member of the West Virginia Senate , representing the Third Senatorial District , serving until 1893 . He was subsequently twice elected to the West Virginia House of Delegates representing Harrison County in 1893 and 1903 , and served as chairman of the Judiciary Committee during both terms . Maxwell died in 1903 from pneumonia while serving in a session of the House of Delegates in Charleston . At the time of his death at the age of 77 , he was the oldest member of the West Virginia Legislature . 
 = = Early life and law career = = 
 Edwin Maxwell was born on July 16 , 1825 in Weston , Virginia ( present @-@ day West Virginia ) . He was the son of Levi Maxwell and his wife Sarah Haymond Maxwell . Through his father , he was a grandson of Thomas and Jane Lewis Maxwell and was of English and Scottish ancestry . Through his mother , he was the grandson of Col. John Haymond and Mary Wilson Haymond . Maxwell had five siblings : Angelica , John , Rufus , <unk> , and Jane . Through his brother Rufus , Maxwell was an uncle of West Virginia historian Hu Maxwell . 
 Maxwell 's father was a carpenter and a farmer , and he initially selected the carpentry trade for his son . His father regularly relied upon Maxwell 's acumen during his residential construction projects . In 1827 , his family relocated to a farm 1 mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) from Weston , and he remained there until he was 21 years old . Maxwell received his primary education in local schools . Despite his father 's initial plans for him to become a carpenter , he studied jurisprudence under his uncle Lewis Maxwell , a United States House Representative from Virginia . 
 Maxwell was admitted to the Harrison County bar on June 1 , 1848 and began to practice law soon after . During the early years of his legal career , he provided legal services in Braxton , Gilmer , Lewis , and Upshur counties . He relocated to Doddridge County in 1852 and established a law practice in West Union . While practicing in West Union , he served two terms as the Commonwealth 's attorney for Doddridge County . Maxwell was named as an authorized superintendent to receive capital stock when the assembly permitted the establishment of a bank branch in West Union on March 15 , 1856 and March 27 , 1858 . Maxwell , seeking to expand his law practice , and wanting greater opportunities for advancement , moved to Clarksburg in 1857 , where he established a law partnership with Burton Despard creating the law practice of Despard and Maxwell . Despard and Maxwell offered their legal services to clients in Doddridge , Harrison , Lewis , Ritchie , and Taylor counties . In 1865 , Nathan Goff , Jr. joined their law partnership , after which it was known as Despard , Maxwell , and Goff . Goff later became a United States Circuit Judge and served as a United States Senator from West Virginia . 
 = = Political and judicial careers = = 
 Despite his early resolution not to allow politics to impede upon his legal career , Maxwell 's resolute support of the Union during the American Civil War , and of the statehood movement for West Virginia , refocused his priorities . Maxwell 's political affiliation had been Republican , and he became actively involved in the formation of the state of West Virginia in 1863 . Just weeks prior to the state 's creation on June 20 of that year , he began his political career when he was elected to represent the Third Senatorial District in the inaugural session of the West Virginia Senate in June 1863 . During his tenure in the senate , which lasted until 1866 , Maxwell served as the chairman of the Judiciary Committee . In his position as the chairman of the Judiciary Committee , he played a prominent role in the passage of the state 's earliest legislation . 
 In 1865 , Maxwell was chairman of a senate committee that drafted a proposed amendment to the Constitution of West Virginia , known as the " Maxwell amendment , " which aimed to remove the citizenship rights of former Confederates returning to West Virginia following the war . While he favored banning former Confederates from voting , he was opposed to complete disfranchisement . The " Maxwell amendment , " as it came to be known , became notable because it uncovered the increasing tensions between moderates and radicals within West Virginia 's Unionist coalition in the West Virginia Legislature . 
 On January 1 , 1866 , Maxwell was appointed Attorney General of West Virginia by Republican West Virginia Governor Arthur I. Boreman to replace Ephraim B. Hall . He served as the state 's attorney general until December 31 of that year . On March 27 , 1866 , Boreman also appointed him to replace Hall as a circuit judge . He served in this capacity until January 1 , 1869 . 
 The law partnership of Despard , Maxwell , and Goff was in operation until the autumn of 1866 , when Maxwell was elected as an Associate Justice on the Supreme Court of Appeals of West Virginia . Maxwell and the other three justices were chosen because of their early statehood leadership , and because they could be depended upon to defend the new state from Virginia sympathies and uphold the Unionist cause . While serving on the court , the major issues that faced Maxwell and the justices primarily involved post @-@ war reconstruction and sectional <unk> across the state . He served as an associate justice of the Supreme Court from January 1 , 1867 until December 31 , 1872 . 
 In 1870 , the Democrats were swept into power . The state constitution was rewritten in 1872 and went into effect that year . The state 's new constitution meant that Maxwell 's term finished at the end of 1872 , and the Unionist court on which he served as an associate justice was short @-@ lived . In 1871 , Maxwell administered the oath of office to the state 's first Democratic Governor , John Jeremiah Jacob . During his term as an associated justice , Maxwell ruled on the state 's first cases which involved questions regarding West Virginia 's earliest statutes . Following his tenure on the state 's Supreme Court , Maxwell returned to the practice of law in 1873 . He ran unsuccessfully for election to represent the Third Senatorial District in the West Virginia Senate in 1876 . 
 At the state convention of the West Virginia Republican Party in Grafton on July 1 , 1880 , Maxwell was again nominated as a candidate for an associate supreme court justiceship . He was unsuccessful in his electoral bid . Following a vacancy on the bench of the Supreme Court of the United States in December 1880 , Maxwell was named as a possible candidate for an associate justiceship , but was not nominated . 
 In 1884 , Maxwell ran for election as the Greenback @-@ Labor Party candidate in West Virginia 's gubernatorial election against Democrat Emanuel Willis Wilson . During his gubernatorial campaign , Maxwell was dubbed " Old Honesty " by the media . Wilson defeated Maxwell by 5 @,@ 289 votes . His election results mirrored those of other Republican candidates for state office who lost by margins varying between five and six thousand votes during the 1884 election . 
 Maxwell was again elected to serve in the West Virginia Senate in 1886 , representing the Third Senatorial District comprising Calhoun , Doddridge , Gilmer , Harrison , and Ritchie counties . He received the most votes - 6 @,@ 693 , compared to his Democratic opponent with 6 @,@ 347 . Maxwell was re @-@ elected to his position in 1888 , and served in the senate from 1889 until 1893 . During his tenure in the senate , Maxwell was again elected as the chairman of the Judiciary Committee . He also served on the Roads and Navigation and Public Printing committees during this term . On December 28 , 1888 , he was selected by his former opponent Governor Wilson as one of the commissioners to represent West Virginia at the centennial celebration of the first inauguration of George Washington . 
 Maxwell was elected as a member of the West Virginia House of Delegates alongside Henry <unk> in 1892 representing Harrison County from 1893 until 1895 . While serving in the House of Delegates , Maxwell served as chairman of the Judiciary Committee . He was re @-@ elected to the House of Delegates in 1902 alongside Jasper S. Kyle and served in the house until his death in 1903 . He served on the following standing committees of the House of Delegates : Taxation and Finance , Judiciary , Human Institutions and Public Buildings , and Rules . 
 On January 19 , 1893 , Maxwell was nominated by the West Virginia Republican Party caucus to fill the short term vacancy created by the death of U.S. Senator John E. Kenna . Stephen Benton Elkins was nominated by the party to fill the long term of the vacant senate seat . Democrat Johnson N. Camden was subsequently elected to fill the remainder of <unk> 's term . 
 = = Later life and death = = 
 Following his graduation from the West Virginia University College of Law , Maxwell 's son Haymond joined him in a law practice in Clarksburg in 1901 . After a brief bout of pneumonia , Maxwell died on February 5 , 1903 at 20 : 00 local time . At the time of his death , Maxwell was in Charleston during a session of the West Virginia Legislature . He was the oldest member of the West Virginia Legislature at the age of 77 . His son Haymond Maxwell ran for election to his father 's House of Delegates seat in 1905 and served in the position until 1907 . 
 = = Personal life and family = = 
 Maxwell married on April 16 , 1872 , to Loretta M. Shuttleworth in Harrison County . Loretta was the daughter of Captain John H. Shuttleworth and his wife Louisa Shuttleworth . Following their marriage , they resided in Clarksburg . She predeceased Maxwell in 1895 . Maxwell and his wife had two sons : 
 Edwin Maxwell , Jr . , married Mary Francis <unk> on March 11 , 1896 in Harrison County 
 Haymond Maxwell ( October 24 , 1879 – December 18 , 1958 ) , married Carrie Virginia Maxwell on June 28 , 1905 in Harrison County 
 = German cruiser Admiral Hipper = 
 Admiral Hipper , the first of five ships of her class , was the lead ship of the Admiral Hipper class of heavy cruisers which served with Nazi Germany 's Kriegsmarine during World War II . The ship was laid down at the Blohm & Voss shipyard in Hamburg in July 1935 and launched February 1937 ; Admiral Hipper entered service shortly before the outbreak of war , in April 1939 . The ship was named after Admiral Franz von Hipper , commander of the German battlecruiser squadron during the Battle of Jutland in 1916 and later commander @-@ in @-@ chief of the German High Seas Fleet . 
 Admiral Hipper saw a significant amount of action during the war . She led the assault on Trondheim during Operation Weserübung ; while en route to her objective , she sank the British destroyer HMS Glowworm . In December 1940 , she broke out into the Atlantic Ocean to operate against Allied merchant shipping , though this operation ended without significant success . In February 1941 , Admiral Hipper sortied again , sinking several merchant vessels before eventually returning to Germany via the Denmark Strait . The ship was then transferred to northern Norway to participate in operations against convoys to the Soviet Union , culminating in the Battle of the Barents Sea on 31 December 1942 , where she sank the destroyer Achates and the minesweeper Bramble but was in turn damaged and forced to withdraw by the light cruisers HMS Sheffield and HMS Jamaica . 
 Disappointed by the failure to sink merchant ships in that battle , Adolf Hitler ordered the majority of the surface warships scrapped , though Admiral Karl Dönitz was able to convince Hitler to retain the surface fleet . As a result , Admiral Hipper was returned to Germany and decommissioned for repairs . The ship was never restored to operational status , however , and on 3 May 1945 , Royal Air Force bombers severely damaged her while she was in Kiel . Her crew scuttled the ship at her moorings , and in July 1945 , she was raised and towed to Heikendorfer Bay . She was ultimately broken up for scrap in 1948 – 1952 and her bell is currently on display at the Laboe Naval Memorial . 
 = = Construction = = 
 Admiral Hipper was ordered by the Kriegsmarine from the Blohm & Voss shipyard in Hamburg . Her keel was laid on 6 July 1935 , under construction number 246 . The ship was launched on 6 February 1937 , and was completed on 29 April 1939 , the day she was commissioned into the German fleet . The Commander @-@ in @-@ Chief of the Kriegsmarine , Großadmiral ( Grand Admiral ) Erich Raeder , who had been Franz von Hipper 's chief of staff during World War I , gave the christening speech and his wife Erika Raeder performed the christening . As built , the ship had a straight stem , though after her launch this was replaced with a clipper bow . A raked funnel cap was also installed . 
 Admiral Hipper was 202 @.@ 8 meters ( 665 ft ) long overall and had a beam of 21 @.@ 3 m ( 70 ft ) and a maximum draft of 7 @.@ 2 m ( 24 ft ) . After the installation of a clipper bow during fitting out , her overall length increased to 205 @.@ 9 meters ( 676 ft ) . The ship had a design displacement of 16 @,@ 170 t ( 15 @,@ 910 long tons ; 17 @,@ 820 short tons ) and a full load displacement of 18 @,@ 200 long tons ( 18 @,@ 500 t ) . Admiral Hipper was powered by three sets of geared steam turbines , which were supplied with steam by twelve ultra @-@ high pressure oil @-@ fired boilers . The ship 's top speed was 32 knots ( 59 km / h ; 37 mph ) , at 132 @,@ 000 shaft horsepower ( 98 @,@ 000 kW ) . As designed , her standard complement consisted of 42 officers and 1 @,@ 340 enlisted men . 
 Admiral Hipper 's primary armament was eight 20 @.@ 3 cm ( 8 @.@ 0 in ) SK L / 60 guns mounted in four twin gun turrets , placed in superfiring pairs forward and aft . Her anti @-@ aircraft battery was to have consisted of twelve 10 @.@ 5 cm ( 4 @.@ 1 in ) L / 65 guns , twelve 3 @.@ 7 cm ( 1 @.@ 5 in ) guns , and eight 2 cm ( 0 @.@ 79 in ) guns . The ship also would have carried a pair of triple 53 @.@ 3 cm ( 21 @.@ 0 in ) torpedo launchers abreast of the rear superstructure . The ship was to have been equipped with three Arado Ar 196 seaplanes and one catapult . Admiral Hipper 's armored belt was 70 to 80 mm ( 2 @.@ 8 to 3 @.@ 1 in ) thick ; her upper deck was 12 to 30 mm ( 0 @.@ 47 to 1 @.@ 18 in ) thick while the main armored deck was 20 to 50 mm ( 0 @.@ 79 to 1 @.@ 97 in ) thick . The main battery turrets had 105 mm ( 4 @.@ 1 in ) thick faces and 70 mm thick sides . 
 = = History = = 
 Kapitän zur See ( Captain at Sea ) Hellmuth Heye was given command of the ship at her commissioning . After her commissioning in April 1939 , Admiral Hipper steamed into the Baltic Sea to conduct training maneuvers . The ship also made port calls to various Baltic ports , including cities in Estonia and Sweden . In August , the ship conducted live fire drills in the Baltic . At the outbreak of World War II in September 1939 , the ship was still conducting gunnery trials . She was briefly used to patrol the Baltic , but she did not see combat , and was quickly returned to training exercises . In November 1939 , the ship returned to the Blohm & Voss dockyard for modifications ; these included the replacement of the straight stem with a clipper bow and the installation of the funnel cap . 
 Sea trials in the Baltic resumed in January 1940 , but severe ice restrained the ship to port . On 17 February , the Kriegsmarine pronounced the ship fully operational , and on the following day , Admiral Hipper began her first major wartime patrol . She joined the battleships Scharnhorst and Gneisenau and the destroyers Karl Galster and Wilhelm Heidkamp in a sortie into the North Sea off Bergen , Norway . A third destroyer , Wolfgang Zenker , was forced to turn back after sustaining damage from ice . The ships operated under the command of Admiral Wilhelm Marschall . The ships attempted to locate British merchant shipping , but failed and returned to port on 20 February . 
 = = = Operation Weserübung = = = 
 Following her return from the North Sea sortie , Admiral Hipper was assigned to the forces tasked with the invasion of Norway , codenamed Operation Weserübung . The ship was assigned as the flagship of Group 2 , along with the destroyers Paul Jakobi , Theodor Riedel , Friedrich Eckoldt , and Bruno Heinemann . KzS Heye was given command of Group 2 during the operation . The five ships carried a total of 1 @,@ 700 Wehrmacht mountain troops , whose objective was the port of Trondheim ; the ships loaded the troops in Cuxhaven . The ships steamed to the Schillig roadstead outside Wilhelmshaven , where they joined Group 1 , consisting of ten destroyers , and the battleships Scharnhorst and Gneisenau , which were assigned to cover Groups 1 and 2 . The ships steamed out of the roadstead at midnight on the night of 6 – 7 April . 
 While steaming off the Norwegian coast , Admiral Hipper was ordered to divert course to locate the destroyer Bernd von Arnim , which had fallen behind Group 1 . In the mist , the destroyer encountered the British destroyer HMS Glowworm ; the two destroyers engaged each other until Bernd von Arnim 's commander requested assistance from Admiral Hipper . Upon arriving on the scene , Admiral Hipper was initially misidentified by Glowworm to be a friendly vessel , which allowed the German ship to close the distance and fire first . Admiral Hipper rained fire on Glowworm , scoring several hits . Glowworm attempted to flee , but when it became apparent she could not break away from the pursuing cruiser , she turned toward Admiral Hipper and fired a spread of torpedoes , all of which missed . The British destroyer scored one hit on Admiral Hipper 's starboard bow before a rudder malfunction set the ship on a collision course with the German cruiser . 
 The collision with Glowworm tore off a 40 @-@ meter ( 130 ft ) section of Admiral Hipper 's armored belt on the starboard side , as well as the ship 's starboard torpedo launcher . Minor flooding caused a four degree list to starboard , though the ship was able to continue with the mission . Glowworm 's boilers exploded shortly after the collision , causing her to sink quickly . Forty survivors were picked up by the German ship . Admiral Hipper then resumed course toward Trondheim . The British destroyer had survived long enough to send a wireless message to the Royal Navy headquarters , which allowed the battlecruiser Renown time to move into position to engage Scharnhorst and Gneisenau , though the German battleships used their superior speed to break off contact . 
 One of Admiral Hipper 's Arado seaplanes had to make an emergency landing in Eide , Norway on 8 April . After trying to purchase fuel from locals , the aircrew were detained and handed over to the police . The Royal Norwegian Navy Air Service captured the Arado , which was painted in Norwegian colors and used by the Norwegians until 18 April when it was evacuated to Britain . 
 After arriving off Trondheim , Admiral Hipper successfully passed herself off as a British warship long enough to steam past the Norwegian coastal artillery batteries . The ship entered the harbor and docked shortly before 05 : 30 to debark the mountain troops . After the ground troops seized control of the coastal batteries , the ship left Trondheim , bound for Germany . She was escorted by Friedrich Eckoldt ; she reached Wilhelmshaven on 12 April , and went into drydock . The dockyard workers discovered the ship had been damaged more severely by the collision with Glowworm than had previously been thought . Nevertheless , repairs were completed in the span of two weeks . 
 Admiral Marschall organized a mission to seize Harstad in early June 1940 ; Admiral Hipper , the battleships Scharnhorst and Gneisenau , and four destroyers were tasked with the operation . The ships departed on 4 June , and while en route , Admiral Hipper encountered and sank the empty troopship Orama on 9 June . Before they reached Harstad , the Germans learned that the Allies had already abandoned the port . Marschall 's squadron was then tasked with intercepting an Allied convoy that was reported to be in the area . The ships failed to find the convoy , and returned to Trondheim to refuel . 
 On 13 June , the ship 's anti @-@ aircraft gunners shot down an attacking British bomber . On 25 July , Admiral Hipper steamed out on a commerce raiding patrol in the area between Spitzbergen and Tromsø ; the cruise lasted until 9 August . While on the patrol , Admiral Hipper encountered the Finnish freighter Ester <unk> , which was found to be carrying 1 @.@ 75 t ( 1 @.@ 72 long tons ; 1 @.@ 93 short tons ) of gold . The ship was seized and sent to occupied Norway with a prize crew . 
 = = = Atlantic operations = = = 
 Admiral Hipper left the Norwegian theater in September 1940 for an overhaul in Wilhelmshaven . After the routine maintenance was completed toward the end of the month , the ship attempted to break out into the Atlantic Ocean to raid merchant traffic . The engine oil feed system caught fire and was severely damaged . The fire forced the crew to shut down the ship 's propulsion system until the blaze could be brought under control ; this rendered Admiral Hipper motionless for several hours on the open sea . British reconnaissance failed to locate the ship , and after the fire was extinguished , the ship returned to Hamburg 's Blohm & Voss shipyard , where repairs lasted slightly over a week . 
 The ship made a second attempt to break out into the Atlantic on 30 November ; she successfully navigated the Denmark Strait undetected on 6 December . Admiral Hipper intercepted a convoy of 20 troopships on 24 December , some 700 nautical miles ( 1 @,@ 300 km ; 810 mi ) west of Cape Finisterre . Five of the twenty ships were allocated to Operation Excess . The convoy was protected by a powerful escort composed of the aircraft carriers Furious and Argus , the cruisers Berwick , Bonaventure , and Dunedin , and six destroyers . Admiral Hipper did not initially spot the escorting warships , and so began attacking the convoy . With her main guns she badly damaged two ships , one of which was the 13 @,@ 994 @-@ long @-@ ton ( 14 @,@ 219 t ) transport Empire Trooper , before spotting the heavy cruiser Berwick and destroyers steaming toward her . She quickly withdrew , using her main guns to keep the destroyers at bay . 
 Ten minutes later , Berwick reappeared off Admiral Hipper 's port bow ; the German cruiser fired several salvos from her forward turrets and scored hits on the British cruiser 's rear turrets , waterline , and forward superstructure . Admiral Hipper then disengaged , to prevent the British destroyers from closing to launch a torpedo attack . By now , the ship was running low on fuel , and so she put into Brest in occupied France on 27 December . While en route , Admiral Hipper encountered and sank the isolated 6 @,@ 078 @-@ long @-@ ton ( 6 @,@ 176 t ) cargo ship Jumna . Another round of routine maintenance work was effected while the ship was in Brest , readying her for another sortie into the Atlantic shipping lanes . 
 On 1 February 1941 , Admiral Hipper embarked on her second Atlantic sortie . The Kriegsmarine had initially sought to send the battleships Scharnhorst and Gneisenau to operate in concert with Admiral Hipper , but Gneisenau suffered storm damage in December that prevented the participation of the two ships . Repairs were effected quickly , however , and the two battleships broke out into the Atlantic in early February . Admiral Hipper rendezvoused with a tanker off the Azores to top up her fuel tanks . On 11 February , the ship encountered and sank an isolated transport from convoy HG 53 , which had been dispersed by U @-@ boat and Luftwaffe attacks . That evening , she picked up the unescorted convoy SLS 64 , which contained nineteen merchant ships . The following morning , Admiral Hipper closed in and sank several of the ships . The British reported only seven ships were lost , totaling 32 @,@ 806 long tons ( 33 @,@ 332 t ) , along with damage to two more . The Germans claimed Admiral Hipper had sunk thirteen of the nineteen freighters , while some survivors reported fourteen ships of the convoy were sunk . 
 Following the attack on convoy SLS 64 , Admiral Hipper 's fuel stocks were running low . She therefore returned to Brest on 15 February . British bombers were regularly attacking the port , however , and the Kriegsmarine therefore decided Admiral Hipper should return to Germany , where she could be better protected . Before the ship could leave , damage caused to the ship 's hull by wrecks in the harbor had to be repaired . On 15 March , the ship slipped out of Brest , unobserved , and passed through the Denmark Strait eight days later . While en route , Admiral Hipper stopped to refuel in Bergen . By 28 March , the cruiser was docked in Kiel , having made the entire journey without being detected by the British . Upon arrival , the ship went into the Deutsche Werke shipyard for an extensive overhaul , which lasted for seven months . After completion of the refit , Admiral Hipper conducted sea trials in the Baltic before putting into Gotenhafen on 21 December for some minor refitting . In January 1942 , the ship had her steam turbines overhauled at the Blohm & Voss shipyard ; a degaussing coil was fitted to the ship 's hull during this overhaul . By March , the ship was again fully operational . 
 = = = Deployment to Norway = = = 
 On 19 March 1942 , Admiral Hipper steamed to Trondheim , escorted by the destroyers Z24 , <unk> , and Z30 and the torpedo boats T15 , T16 , and <unk> . Several British submarines were patrolling the area , but failed to intercept the German flotilla . Admiral Hipper and her escorts reached their destination on 21 March . There , they joined the heavy cruisers Lützow and Prinz Eugen , though the latter soon returned to Germany for repairs after being torpedoed . On 3 July , Admiral Hipper joined the cruisers Lützow and Admiral Scheer and the battleship Tirpitz for Operation Rösselsprung , an attack on convoy PQ 17 . Escorting the convoy were the battleships HMS Duke of York and USS Washington and the aircraft carrier HMS Victorious . Admiral Hipper , Tirpitz , and six destroyers sortied from Trondheim , while a second task force consisting of Lützow , Admiral Scheer , and six destroyers operated out of Narvik . Lützow and three of the destroyers struck uncharted rocks while en route to the rendezvous and had to return to port . Swedish intelligence had meanwhile reported the German departures to the British Admiralty , which ordered the convoy to disperse . Aware that they had been detected , the Germans aborted the operation and turned over the attack to U @-@ boats and the Luftwaffe . The scattered vessels could no longer be protected by the convoy escorts , and the Germans sank 21 of the 34 isolated transports . 
 The British submarine Tigris unsuccessfully attempted to torpedo Admiral Hipper on 10 September , while the ship was patrolling with Admiral Scheer and the light cruiser Köln . The cruiser escorted the destroyers Z23 , Z28 , Z29 , and Z30 on 24 – 28 September to lay a minefield off the north @-@ west coast of Novaya Zemlya . The goal of the operation was to funnel merchant traffic further south , closer to the reach of German naval units in Norway . After her return to port , Admiral Hipper was transferred to Bogen Bay near Narvik for repairs to her propulsion system . On 28 – 29 October , Admiral Hipper and the destroyers Friedrich Eckoldt and Richard Beitzen were transferred further north from Narvik to the Altafjord . Starting on 5 November , Admiral Hipper and the 5th Destroyer Flotilla , composed of Z27 , Z30 , Richard Beitzen , and Friedrich Eckoldt , patrolled for Allied shipping in the Arctic . Vizeadmiral Oskar Kummetz commanded the squadron from Admiral Hipper . On 7 November , the cruiser 's Arado Ar 196 floatplane located the 7 @,@ 925 @-@ long @-@ ton ( 8 @,@ 052 t ) Soviet tanker Donbass and its escort , the auxiliary warship BO @-@ 78 . Kummetz dispatched the destroyer Z27 to sink the two Soviet ships . 
 = = = = Battle of the Barents Sea = = = = 
 In December 1942 , convoy traffic to the Soviet Union resumed . Großadmiral Raeder ordered a plan , Operation Regenbogen , to use the available surface units in Norway to launch an attack on the convoys . The first convoy of the month , JW 51A , passed to the Soviet Union without incident . However , the second , convoy JW 51B , was spotted by the submarine U @-@ 354 south of Bear Island . Raeder ordered the forces assigned to Operation Regenbogen into action . Admiral Hipper , again served as Kummetz 's flagship ; the squadron comprised Lützow and the destroyers Friederich Eckoldt , Richard Beitzen , Theodor Riedel , Z29 , Z30 , and Z31 . The force left Altafjord at 18 : 00 on 30 December , under orders to avoid confrontation with even an equal opponent . 
 Kummetz 's plan was to divide his force in half ; he would take Admiral Hipper and three destroyers north of the convoy to attack it and draw away the escorts . Lützow and the remaining three destroyers would then attack the undefended convoy from the south . At 09 : 15 on the 31st , the British destroyer Obdurate spotted the three destroyers screening for Admiral Hipper ; the Germans opened fire first . Four of the other five destroyers escorting the convoy rushed to join the fight , while Achates laid a smoke screen to cover the convoy . Admiral Hipper fired several salvos at Achates , raining shell splinters on the destroyer that severed steam lines and reduced her speed to 15 knots ( 28 km / h ; 17 mph ) . Kummetz then turned back north to draw the destroyers away . Captain Robert Sherbrooke , the British escort commander , left two destroyers to cover the convoy while he took the remaining four to pursue Admiral Hipper . 
 Rear Admiral Robert Burnett 's Force R , centered on the cruisers Sheffield and Jamaica , standing by in distant support of the Allied convoy , raced to the scene . The cruisers engaged Admiral Hipper , which had been firing to port at the destroyer Obedient . Burnett 's ships approached from Admiral Hipper 's starboard side and achieved complete surprise . In the initial series of salvos from the British cruisers , Admiral Hipper was hit three times . One of the hits damaged the ship 's propulsion system ; the No. 3 boiler filled with a mix of oil and water , which forced the crew to turn off the starboard turbine engine . This reduced her speed to 23 knots ( 43 km / h ; 26 mph ) . The other two hits started a fire in her aircraft hangar . She fired a single salvo at the cruisers before turning toward them , her escorting destroyers screening her with smoke . 
 After emerging from the smoke screen , Hipper was again engaged by Burnett 's cruisers . Owing to the uncertainty over the condition of his flagship and the ferocity of the British defense , Kummetz issued the following order at 10 : 37 : " Break off action and retire to the west . " Mistakenly identifying Sheffield as Admiral Hipper , the destroyer Friederich Eckoldt approached too closely and was sunk . Meanwhile , Lützow closed to within 3 nmi ( 5 @.@ 6 km ; 3 @.@ 5 mi ) of the convoy , but due to poor visibility , she held her fire . She then received Kummetz 's order , and turned west to rendezvous with Admiral Hipper . Lützow inadvertently came alongside Sheffield and Jamaica , and after identifying them as hostile , engaged them . The British cruisers turned toward Lützow and came under fire from both German cruisers . Admiral Hipper 's firing was more accurate and quickly straddled Sheffield , though the British cruiser escaped unscathed . Burnett quickly decided to withdraw in the face of superior German firepower ; his ships were armed with 6 in ( 150 mm ) guns , while Admiral Hipper and Lützow carried 20 @.@ 3 cm ( 8 @.@ 0 in ) and 28 cm ( 11 in ) guns , respectively . 
 Based on the order issued at the outset of the operation to avoid action with a force equal in strength to his own , poor visibility , and the damage to his flagship , Kummetz decided to abort the attack . In the course of the battle , the British destroyer Achates was sunk by the damage inflicted by Admiral Hipper . The Germans also sank the minesweeper Bramble and damaged the destroyers Onslow , Obedient , and Obdurate . In return , the British sank Friederich Eckoldt and damaged Admiral Hipper , and forced the Germans to abandon the attack on the convoy . In the aftermath of the failed operation , a furious Hitler proclaimed that the Kriegsmarine 's surface forces would be paid off and dismantled , and their guns used to reinforce the fortifications of the Atlantic Wall . Admiral Karl Dönitz , Raeder 's successor , convinced Hitler to retain the surface fleet , however . After returning to Altafjord , emergency repairs to Admiral Hipper were effected , which allowed her to return to Bogen Bay on 23 January 1943 . That day , Admiral Hipper , Köln , and the destroyer Richard Beitzen left the Altafjord to return to Germany . The three ships stopped in Narvik on 25 January , and in Trondheim from 30 January to 2 February . After resuming the voyage south , the ships searched for Norwegian blockade runners in the Skagerrak on 6 February before putting into port at Kiel on 8 February . On 28 February , the ship was decommissioned in accordance with Hitler 's decree . 
 = = = Fate = = = 
 Despite being decommissioned , repair work on the ship continued . The ship was moved in April to Pillau in the Baltic , to put Admiral Hipper out of the reach of Allied bombers . A year later , the ship was moved to Gotenhafen ; the Kriegsmarine intended to re @-@ commission the ship so she could be used in the Baltic . Over the next five months , Admiral Hipper ran a series of sea trials in the Baltic , but failed to reach operational status . As the Soviet army pushed the Germans back on the Eastern Front , her crew was drafted into construction work on the defenses of the city , further impairing Admiral Hipper 's ability to enter active service . The Royal Air Force also laid an extensive minefield around the port , which forced the ship to remain in the harbor . 
 By the end of 1944 , the ship was due for another overhaul ; work was to have lasted for three months . The Soviet Army had advanced so far , however , that it was necessary to move the ship farther away from the front , despite the fact that she had only one working turbine . On 29 January 1945 , the ship left Gotenhafen , arriving in Kiel on 2 February . She entered the Germaniawerft shipyard for refitting . On 3 May , RAF bombers attacked the harbor and severely damaged the ship . Her crew scuttled the wrecked ship at her moorings at 04 : 25 on 3 May . In July 1945 , after the end of the war , Admiral Hipper was raised and towed to Heikendorfer Bay and subsequently broken up for scrap in 1948 – 1952 . Her bell was on display at the National Maritime Museum in Greenwich . The bell has since been returned to Germany and is on display at the Laboe Naval Memorial . 
 = PHP = 
 PHP is a server @-@ side scripting language designed for web development but also used as a general @-@ purpose programming language . Originally created by Rasmus Lerdorf in 1994 , the PHP reference implementation is now produced by The PHP Group . PHP originally stood for Personal Home Page , but it now stands for the recursive backronym PHP : Hypertext <unk> . 
 PHP code may be embedded into HTML code , or it can be used in combination with various web template systems , web content management systems and web frameworks . PHP code is usually processed by a PHP interpreter implemented as a module in the web server or as a Common Gateway Interface ( CGI ) executable . The web server combines the results of the interpreted and executed PHP code , which may be any type of data , including images , with the generated web page . PHP code may also be executed with a command @-@ line interface ( CLI ) and can be used to implement standalone graphical applications . 
 The standard PHP interpreter , powered by the Zend Engine , is free software released under the PHP License . PHP has been widely ported and can be deployed on most web servers on almost every operating system and platform , free of charge . 
 The PHP language evolved without a written formal specification or standard until 2014 , leaving the canonical PHP interpreter as a de facto standard . Since 2014 work has gone on to create a formal PHP specification . 
 During the 2010s there have been increased efforts towards standardisation and code sharing in PHP applications by projects such as PHP @-@ FIG in the form of PSR @-@ initiatives as well as Composer dependency manager and the <unk> repository . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Early history = = = 
 PHP development began in 1995 when Rasmus Lerdorf wrote several Common Gateway Interface ( CGI ) programs in C , which he used to maintain his personal homepage . He extended them to work with web forms and to communicate with databases , and called this implementation " Personal Home Page / Forms Interpreter " or PHP / FI . 
 PHP / FI could be used to build simple , dynamic web applications . To accelerate bug reporting and improve the code , Lerdorf initially announced the release of PHP / FI as " Personal Home Page Tools ( PHP Tools ) version 1 @.@ 0 " on the Usenet discussion group <unk> on June 8 , 1995 . This release already had the basic functionality that PHP has as of 2013 . This included Perl @-@ like variables , form handling , and the ability to embed HTML . The syntax resembled that of Perl but was simpler , more limited and less consistent . 
 Early PHP was not intended to be a new programming language , and grew organically , with Lerdorf noting in retrospect : " I don ’ t know how to stop it , there was never any intent to write a programming language [ … ] I have absolutely no idea how to write a programming language , I just kept adding the next logical step on the way . " A development team began to form and , after months of work and beta testing , officially released PHP / FI 2 in November 1997 . 
 The fact that PHP was not originally designed but instead was developed organically has led to inconsistent naming of functions and inconsistent ordering of their parameters . In some cases , the function names were chosen to match the lower @-@ level libraries which PHP was " wrapping " , while in some very early versions of PHP the length of the function names was used internally as a hash function , so names were chosen to improve the distribution of hash values . 
 = = = PHP 3 and 4 = = = 
 Zeev Suraski and Andi Gutmans rewrote the parser in 1997 and formed the base of PHP 3 , changing the language 's name to the recursive acronym PHP : Hypertext <unk> . Afterwards , public testing of PHP 3 began , and the official launch came in June 1998 . Suraski and Gutmans then started a new rewrite of PHP 's core , producing the Zend Engine in 1999 . They also founded Zend Technologies in Ramat Gan , Israel . 
 On May 22 , 2000 , PHP 4 , powered by the Zend Engine 1 @.@ 0 , was released . As of August 2008 this branch reached version 4 @.@ 4 @.@ 9 . PHP 4 is no longer under development nor will any security updates be released . 
 = = = PHP 5 = = = 
 On July 14 , 2004 , PHP 5 was released , powered by the new Zend Engine II . PHP 5 included new features such as improved support for object @-@ oriented programming , the PHP Data Objects ( PDO ) extension ( which defines a lightweight and consistent interface for accessing databases ) , and numerous performance enhancements . In 2008 PHP 5 became the only stable version under development . Late static binding had been missing from PHP and was added in version 5 @.@ 3 . 
 Many high @-@ profile open @-@ source projects ceased to support PHP 4 in new code as of February 5 , 2008 , because of the <unk> initiative , provided by a consortium of PHP developers promoting the transition from PHP 4 to PHP 5 . 
 Over time , PHP interpreters became available on most existing 32 @-@ bit and 64 @-@ bit operating systems , either by building them from the PHP source code , or by using pre @-@ built binaries . For the PHP versions 5 @.@ 3 and 5 @.@ 4 , the only available Microsoft Windows binary distributions were 32 @-@ bit x86 builds , requiring Windows 32 @-@ bit compatibility mode while using Internet Information Services ( IIS ) on a 64 @-@ bit Windows platform . PHP version 5 @.@ 5 made the 64 @-@ bit x86 @-@ 64 builds available for Microsoft Windows . 
 = = = PHP 6 and Unicode = = = 
 PHP received mixed reviews due to lacking native Unicode support at the core language level . In 2005 , a project headed by Andrei <unk> was initiated to bring native Unicode support throughout PHP , by embedding the International Components for Unicode ( ICU ) library , and representing text strings as UTF @-@ 16 internally . Since this would cause major changes both to the internals of the language and to user code , it was planned to release this as version 6 @.@ 0 of the language , along with other major features then in development . 
 However , a shortage of developers who understood the necessary changes , and performance problems arising from conversion to and from UTF @-@ 16 , which is rarely used in a web context , led to delays in the project . As a result , a PHP 5 @.@ 3 release was created in 2009 , with many non @-@ Unicode features back @-@ ported from PHP 6 , notably namespaces . In March 2010 , the project in its current form was officially abandoned , and a PHP 5 @.@ 4 release was prepared containing most remaining non @-@ Unicode features from PHP 6 , such as traits and closure re @-@ binding . Initial hopes were that a new plan would be formed for Unicode integration , but as of 2014 none have been adopted . 
 = = = PHP 7 = = = 
 During 2014 and 2015 , a new major PHP version was developed , which was numbered PHP 7 . The numbering of this version involved some debate . While the PHP 6 Unicode experiment had never been released , several articles and book titles referenced the PHP 6 name , which might have caused confusion if a new release were to reuse the name . After a vote , the name PHP 7 was chosen . 
 The foundation of PHP 7 is a PHP branch that was originally dubbed PHP next generation ( phpng ) . It was authored by Dmitry <unk> , <unk> Hui and Nikita Popov , and aimed to optimize PHP performance by <unk> the Zend Engine while retaining near @-@ complete language compatibility . As of 14 July 2014 , WordPress @-@ based benchmarks , which served as the main benchmark suite for the phpng project , showed an almost 100 % increase in performance . Changes from phpng are also expected to make it easier to improve performance in the future , as more compact data structures and other changes are seen as better suited for a successful migration to a just @-@ in @-@ time ( JIT ) compiler . Because of the significant changes , the reworked Zend Engine is called Zend Engine 3 , succeeding Zend Engine 2 used in PHP 5 . 
 Because of major internal changes in phpng , it must receive a new major version number of PHP , rather than a minor PHP 5 release , according to PHP 's release process . Major versions of PHP are allowed to break backward @-@ compatibility of code and therefore PHP 7 presented an opportunity for other improvements beyond phpng that require backward @-@ compatibility breaks . In particular , it involved the following changes : 
 Many <unk> or recoverable @-@ level legacy PHP error mechanisms were replaced with modern object @-@ oriented exceptions 
 The syntax for variable <unk> was reworked to be internally more consistent and complete , allowing the use of the operators - > , [ ] , ( ) , { } , and : : with arbitrary meaningful left @-@ hand @-@ side expressions 
 Support for legacy PHP 4 @-@ style constructor methods was deprecated 
 The behavior of the <unk> statement was changed to be more predictable 
 Constructors for the few classes built @-@ in to PHP which returned null upon failure were changed to throw an exception instead , for consistency 
 Several unmaintained or deprecated server application programming interfaces ( SAPIs ) and extensions were removed from the PHP core , most notably the legacy <unk> extension 
 The behavior of the list ( ) operator was changed to remove support for strings 
 Support for legacy ASP @-@ style PHP code delimiters ( < % and % > , < script language = php > and < / script > ) was removed 
 An oversight allowing a switch statement to have multiple default clauses was fixed 
 Support for hexadecimal number support in some implicit conversions from strings to number types was removed 
 The left @-@ shift and right @-@ shift operators were changed to behave more consistently across platforms 
 Conversions between integers and floating point numbers were tightened and implemented more consistently across platforms 
 PHP 7 also included new language features . Most notably , it introduces return type declarations for functions , which complement the existing parameter type declarations , and support for the scalar types ( integer , float , string , and boolean ) in parameter and return type declarations . 
 = = = Release history = = = 
 Beginning on June 28 , 2011 , the PHP Group implemented a timeline for the release of new versions of PHP . Under this system , at least one release should occur every month . Once per year , a minor release should occur which may include new features . Every minor release should at least be supported for two years with security and bug fixes , followed by at least one year of only security fixes , for a total of a three @-@ year release process for every minor release . No new features , unless small and self @-@ contained , are to be introduced into a minor release during the three @-@ year release process . 
 = = Mascot = = 
 The mascot of the PHP project is the <unk> , a blue elephant with the PHP logo on its side , designed by Vincent <unk> in 1998 . The <unk> is sometimes differently colored when in plush toy form . 
 = = Syntax = = 
 The following " Hello , World ! " program is written in PHP code embedded in an HTML document : 
 However , as no requirement exists for PHP code to be embedded in HTML , the simplest version of Hello , World ! may be written like this , with the closing tag omitted as preferred in files containing pure PHP code 
 The PHP interpreter only executes PHP code within its delimiters . Anything outside its delimiters is not processed by PHP , although non @-@ PHP text is still subject to control structures described in PHP code . The most common delimiters are < ? php to open and ? > to close PHP sections . The shortened form < ? also exists . This short <unk> makes script files less portable , since support for them can be disabled in the local PHP configuration and it is therefore discouraged . However , there is no recommendation against the use of the echo short tag < ? = . Prior to PHP 5 @.@ 4 @.@ 0 , this short syntax for echo ( ) only works with the short _ open _ tag configuration setting enabled , while for PHP 5 @.@ 4 @.@ 0 and later it is always available . The purpose of all these delimiters is to separate PHP code from non @-@ PHP content , such as JavaScript code or HTML markup . 
 The first form of delimiters , < ? php and ? > , in <unk> and other XML documents , creates correctly formed XML processing instructions . This means that the resulting mixture of PHP code and other markup in the server @-@ side file is itself well @-@ formed XML . 
 <unk> are prefixed with a dollar symbol , and a type does not need to be specified in advance . PHP 5 introduced type hinting that allows functions to force their parameters to be objects of a specific class , arrays , interfaces or callback functions . However , before PHP 7 @.@ 0 , type hints could not be used with scalar types such as integer or string . 
 Unlike function and class names , variable names are case sensitive . Both double @-@ quoted ( " " ) and <unk> strings provide the ability to interpolate a variable 's value into the string . PHP treats <unk> as whitespace in the manner of a free @-@ form language , and statements are terminated by a semicolon . PHP has three types of comment syntax : / * * / marks block and inline comments ; / / as well as # are used for one @-@ line comments . The echo statement is one of several facilities PHP provides to output text , e.g. , to a web browser . 
 In terms of keywords and language syntax , PHP is similar to the C style <unk> if conditions , for and while loops , and function returns are similar in syntax to languages such as C , C + + , C # , Java and Perl . 
 = = = Data types = = = 
 PHP stores integers in a platform @-@ dependent range , either a 64 @-@ bit or 32 @-@ bit signed integer equivalent to the C @-@ language long type . Unsigned integers are converted to signed values in certain situations ; this behavior is different from that of other programming languages . Integer variables can be assigned using decimal ( positive and negative ) , <unk> , hexadecimal , and binary notations . 
 Floating point numbers are also stored in a platform @-@ specific range . They can be specified using floating point notation , or two forms of scientific notation . PHP has a native Boolean type that is similar to the native Boolean types in Java and C + + . Using the Boolean type conversion rules , non @-@ zero values are interpreted as true and zero as false , as in Perl and C + + . 
 The null data type represents a variable that has no value ; NULL is the only allowed value for this data type . 
 <unk> of the " resource " type represent references to resources from external sources . These are typically created by functions from a particular extension , and can only be processed by functions from the same extension ; examples include file , image , and database resources . 
 Arrays can contain elements of any type that PHP can handle , including resources , objects , and even other arrays . Order is preserved in lists of values and in hashes with both keys and values , and the two can be intermingled . PHP also supports strings , which can be used with single quotes , double quotes , <unk> or <unk> syntax . 
 The Standard PHP Library ( SPL ) attempts to solve standard problems and implements efficient data access interfaces and classes . 
 = = = Functions = = = 
 PHP defines a large array of functions in the core language and many are also available in various extensions ; these functions are well documented in the online PHP documentation . However , the built @-@ in library has a wide variety of naming conventions and associated inconsistencies , as described under history above . 
 Custom functions may be defined by the developer , e.g. : 
 In 2016 , the output of the above sample program is ' I am currently 35 years <unk> 
 In lieu of function pointers , functions in PHP can be referenced by a string containing their name . In this manner , normal PHP functions can be used , for example , as callbacks or within function tables . User @-@ defined functions may be created at any time without being prototyped . Functions may be defined inside code blocks , permitting a run @-@ time decision as to whether or not a function should be defined . There is a function _ exists function that determines whether a function with a given name has already been defined . Function calls must use parentheses , with the exception of zero @-@ argument class constructor functions called with the PHP operator new , in which case parentheses are optional . 
 Until PHP 5 @.@ 3 , support for anonymous functions and closures did not exist in PHP . While create _ function ( ) exists since PHP 4 @.@ 0 @.@ 1 , it is merely a thin wrapper around eval ( ) that allows normal PHP functions to be created during program execution . PHP 5 @.@ 3 added syntax to define an anonymous function or " closure " which can capture variables from the surrounding scope : 
 In the example above , <unk> ( ) function creates a closure using passed argument $ x ( the keyword use imports a variable from the lexical context ) , which takes an additional argument $ y , and returns the created closure to the caller . Such a function is a first @-@ class object , meaning that it can be stored in a variable , passed as a parameter to other functions , etc . 
 Unusually for a dynamically typed language , PHP supports type declarations on function parameters , which are enforced at runtime . This has been supported for classes and interfaces since PHP 5 @.@ 0 , for arrays since PHP 5 @.@ 1 , for " <unk> " since PHP 5 @.@ 4 , and scalar ( integer , float , string and boolean ) types since PHP 7 @.@ 0 . PHP 7 @.@ 0 also has type declarations for function return types , expressed by placing the type name after the list of parameters , preceded by a colon . For example , the <unk> function from the earlier example could be annotated with types like so in PHP 7 : 
 By default , scalar type declarations follow weak typing principles . So , for example , if a parameter 's type is int , PHP would allow not only integers , but also convertible numeric strings , floats or <unk> to be passed to that function , and would convert them . However , PHP 7 has a " strict typing " mode which , when used , disallows such conversions for function calls and returns within a file . 
 = = = Object @-@ oriented programming = = = 
 Basic object @-@ oriented programming functionality was added in PHP 3 and improved in PHP 4 . This allowed for PHP to gain further abstraction , making creative tasks easier for programmers using the language . Object handling was completely rewritten for PHP 5 , expanding the feature set and enhancing performance . In previous versions of PHP , objects were handled like value types . The drawback of this method was that code had to make heavy use of PHP 's " reference " variables if it wanted to modify an object it was passed rather than creating a copy of it . In the new approach , objects are referenced by handle , and not by value . 
 PHP 5 introduced private and protected member variables and methods , along with abstract classes , final classes , abstract methods , and final methods . It also introduced a standard way of declaring constructors and <unk> , similar to that of other object @-@ oriented languages such as C + + , and a standard exception handling model . Furthermore , PHP 5 added interfaces and allowed for multiple interfaces to be implemented . There are special interfaces that allow objects to interact with the runtime system . Objects implementing <unk> can be used with array syntax and objects implementing <unk> or <unk> can be used with the <unk> language construct . There is no virtual table feature in the engine , so static variables are bound with a name instead of a reference at compile time . 
 If the developer creates a copy of an object using the reserved word clone , the Zend engine will check whether a _ _ clone ( ) method has been defined . If not , it will call a default _ _ clone ( ) which will copy the object 's properties . If a _ _ clone ( ) method is defined , then it will be responsible for setting the necessary properties in the created object . For convenience , the engine will supply a function that imports the properties of the source object , so the programmer can start with a by @-@ value replica of the source object and only override properties that need to be changed . 
 The following is a basic example of object @-@ oriented programming in PHP : 
 The visibility of PHP properties and methods is defined using the keywords public , private , and protected . The default is public , if only var is used ; var is a synonym for public . Items declared public can be accessed <unk> protected limits access to inherited classes ( and to the class that defines the item ) . private limits visibility only to the class that defines the item . Objects of the same type have access to each other 's private and protected members even though they are not the same instance . PHP 's member visibility features have sometimes been described as " highly useful . " However , they have also sometimes been described as " at best irrelevant and at worst positively harmful . " 
 = = Implementations = = 
 The original , only complete and most widely used PHP implementation is powered by the Zend Engine and known simply as PHP . To disambiguate it from other implementations , it is sometimes unofficially referred to as " Zend PHP " . The Zend Engine compiles PHP source code on @-@ the @-@ fly into an internal format that it can execute , thus it works as an interpreter . It is also the " reference implementation " of PHP , as PHP has no formal specification , and so the semantics of Zend PHP define the semantics of PHP itself . Due to the complex and nuanced semantics of PHP , defined by how Zend works , it is difficult for competing implementations to offer complete compatibility . 
 PHP 's single @-@ request @-@ per @-@ script @-@ execution model , and the fact the Zend Engine is an interpreter , leads to inefficiency ; as a result , various products have been developed to help improve PHP performance . In order to speed up execution time and not have to compile the PHP source code every time the web page is accessed , PHP scripts can also be deployed in the PHP engine 's internal format by using an opcode cache , which works by caching the compiled form of a PHP script ( <unk> ) in shared memory to avoid the overhead of parsing and compiling the code every time the script runs . An opcode cache , Zend <unk> , is built into PHP since version 5 @.@ 5 . Another example of a widely used opcode cache is the Alternative PHP Cache ( APC ) , which is available as a PECL extension . 
 While Zend PHP is still the most popular implementation , several other implementations have been developed . Some of these are compilers or support JIT compilation , and hence offer performance benefits over Zend PHP at the expense of lacking full PHP compatibility . Alternative implementations include the following : 
 HipHop Virtual Machine ( <unk> ) – developed at Facebook and available as open source , it converts PHP code into a high @-@ level bytecode ( commonly known as an intermediate language ) , which is then translated into x86 @-@ 64 machine code dynamically at runtime by a just @-@ in @-@ time ( JIT ) compiler , resulting in up to 6 × performance improvements . 
 Parrot – a virtual machine designed to run dynamic languages efficiently ; Pipp transforms the PHP source code into the Parrot intermediate representation , which is then translated into the Parrot 's bytecode and executed by the virtual machine . 
 <unk> – compiles PHP into Common Intermediate Language ( <unk> ) bytecode 
 HipHop – developed at Facebook and available as open source , it transforms the PHP scripts into C + + code and then compiles the resulting code , reducing the server load up to 50 % . In early 2013 , Facebook deprecated it in favor of <unk> due to multiple reasons , including deployment difficulties and lack of support for the whole PHP language , including the create _ function ( ) and eval ( ) constructs . 
 = = Licensing = = 
 PHP is free software released under the PHP License , which stipulates that : 
 Products derived from this software may not be called " PHP " , nor may " PHP " appear in their name , without prior written permission from group @ <unk> You may indicate that your software works in conjunction with PHP by saying " Foo for PHP " instead of calling it " PHP Foo " or " <unk> " . 
 This restriction on use of " PHP " makes the PHP License incompatible with the General Public License ( GPL ) , while the Zend License is incompatible due to an advertising clause similar to that of the original BSD license . 
 = = Development and community = = 
 PHP includes various free and open @-@ source libraries in its source distribution , or uses them in resulting PHP binary builds . PHP is fundamentally an Internet @-@ aware system with built @-@ in modules for accessing File Transfer Protocol ( FTP ) servers and many database servers , including PostgreSQL , MySQL , Microsoft SQL Server and SQLite ( which is an embedded database ) , <unk> servers , and others . Numerous functions familiar to C programmers , such as those in the <unk> family , are available in standard PHP builds . 
 PHP allows developers to write extensions in C to add functionality to the PHP language . PHP extensions can be compiled statically into PHP or loaded dynamically at runtime . Numerous extensions have been written to add support for the Windows API , process management on Unix @-@ like operating systems , <unk> strings ( Unicode ) , <unk> , and several popular compression formats . Other PHP features made available through extensions include integration with IRC , dynamic generation of images and Adobe Flash content , PHP Data Objects ( PDO ) as an abstraction layer used for accessing databases , and even speech synthesis . Some of the language 's core functions , such as those dealing with strings and arrays , are also implemented as extensions . The PHP Extension Community Library ( PECL ) project is a repository for extensions to the PHP language . 
 Some other projects , such as <unk> , provide the ability for PHP extensions to be created in a high @-@ level language and compiled into native PHP extensions . Such an approach , instead of writing PHP extensions directly in C , simplifies the development of extensions and reduces the time required for programming and testing . 
 The PHP Group consists of ten people ( as of 2015 ) : Thies C. Arntzen , Stig Bakken , Shane <unk> , Andi Gutmans , Rasmus Lerdorf , Sam Ruby , Sascha Schumann , Zeev Suraski , Jim Winstead , Andrei <unk> . 
 Zend Technologies provides a PHP Certification based on PHP 5 @.@ 5 exam for programmers to become certified PHP developers . 
 = = Installation and configuration = = 
 There are two primary ways for adding support for PHP to a web server – as a native web server module , or as a CGI executable . PHP has a direct module interface called Server Application Programming Interface ( SAPI ) , which is supported by many web servers including Apache HTTP Server , Microsoft IIS , Netscape ( now defunct ) and <unk> . Some other web servers , such as <unk> , support the Internet Server Application Programming Interface ( <unk> ) , which is a Microsoft 's web server module interface . If PHP has no module support for a web server , it can always be used as a Common Gateway Interface ( CGI ) or FastCGI processor ; in that case , the web server is configured to use PHP 's CGI executable to process all requests to PHP files . 
 PHP @-@ FPM ( FastCGI Process Manager ) is an alternative FastCGI implementation for PHP , bundled with the official PHP distribution since version 5 @.@ 3 @.@ 3 . When compared to the older FastCGI implementation , it contains some additional features , mostly useful for heavily loaded web servers . 
 When using PHP for command @-@ line scripting , a PHP command @-@ line interface ( CLI ) executable is needed . PHP supports a CLI SAPI as of PHP 4 @.@ 3 @.@ 0 . The main focus of this SAPI is developing shell applications using PHP . There are quite a few differences between the CLI SAPI and other SAPIs , although they do share many of the same behaviors . 
 PHP has a direct module interface called SAPI for different web servers ; in case of PHP 5 and Apache 2 @.@ 0 on Windows , it is provided in form of a DLL file called <unk> , which is a module that , among other functions , provides an interface between PHP and the web server , implemented in a form that the server understands . This form is what is known as a SAPI . 
 There are different kinds of SAPIs for various web server extensions . For example , in addition to those listed above , other SAPIs for the PHP language include the Common Gateway Interface ( CGI ) and command @-@ line interface ( CLI ) . 
 PHP can also be used for writing desktop graphical user interface ( GUI ) applications , by using the PHP @-@ GTK extension . PHP @-@ GTK is not included in the official PHP distribution , and as an extension it can be used only with PHP versions 5 @.@ 1 @.@ 0 and newer . The most common way of installing PHP @-@ GTK is compiling it from the source code . 
 When PHP is installed and used in cloud environments , software development kits ( SDKs ) are provided for using cloud @-@ specific features . For example : 
 Amazon Web Services provides the AWS SDK for PHP 
 Windows Azure can be used with the Windows Azure SDK for PHP . 
 Numerous configuration options are supported , affecting both core PHP features and extensions . Configuration file <unk> is searched for in different locations , depending on the way PHP is used . The configuration file is split into various sections , while some of the configuration options can be also set within the web server configuration . 
 = = Use = = 
 PHP is a general @-@ purpose scripting language that is especially suited to server @-@ side web development , in which case PHP generally runs on a web server . Any PHP code in a requested file is executed by the PHP runtime , usually to create dynamic web page content or dynamic images used on websites or elsewhere . It can also be used for command @-@ line scripting and client @-@ side graphical user interface ( GUI ) applications . PHP can be deployed on most web servers , many operating systems and platforms , and can be used with many relational database management systems ( RDBMS ) . Most web hosting providers support PHP for use by their clients . It is available free of charge , and the PHP Group provides the complete source code for users to build , customize and extend for their own use . 
 PHP acts primarily as a filter , taking input from a file or stream containing text and / or PHP instructions and outputting another stream of data . Most commonly the output will be HTML , although it could be <unk> , XML or binary data such as image or audio formats . Since PHP 4 , the PHP parser compiles input to produce bytecode for processing by the Zend Engine , giving improved performance over its interpreter predecessor . 
 Originally designed to create dynamic web pages , PHP now focuses mainly on server @-@ side scripting , and it is similar to other server @-@ side scripting languages that provide dynamic content from a web server to a client , such as Microsoft 's <unk> , Sun Microsystems ' <unk> Pages , and mod _ perl . PHP has also attracted the development of many software frameworks that provide building blocks and a design structure to promote rapid application development ( RAD ) . Some of these include <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> Framework , <unk> and Zend Framework , offering features similar to other web frameworks . 
 The LAMP architecture has become popular in the web industry as a way of deploying web applications . PHP is commonly used as the P in this bundle alongside Linux , Apache and MySQL , although the P may also refer to Python , Perl , or some mix of the three . Similar packages , <unk> and <unk> , are also available for Windows and OS X , with the first letter standing for the respective operating system . Although both PHP and Apache are provided as part of the Mac OS X base install , users of these packages seek a simpler installation mechanism that can be more easily kept up to date . 
 As of April 2007 , over 20 million Internet domains had web services hosted on servers with PHP installed and mod _ php was recorded as the most popular Apache HTTP Server module . As of October 2010 , PHP was used as the server @-@ side programming language on 75 % of all websites whose server @-@ side programming language was known ( as of February 2014 , the percentage had reached 82 % ) , and PHP was the most @-@ used open source software within enterprises . Web content management systems written in PHP include MediaWiki , <unk> , <unk> Publish , <unk> Platform , <unk> , WordPress , <unk> , <unk> , the user @-@ facing portion of Facebook , and Digg . 
 For specific and more advanced usage scenarios , PHP offers a well defined and documented way for writing custom extensions in C or C + + . Besides extending the language itself in form of additional libraries , extensions are providing a way for improving execution speed where it is critical and there is room for improvements by using a true compiled language . PHP also offers well defined ways for embedding itself into other software projects . That way PHP can be easily used as an internal scripting language for another project , also providing tight interfacing with the project 's specific internal data structures . 
 PHP received mixed reviews due to lacking support for multithreading at the core language level , though using threads is made possible by the " <unk> " PECL extension . 
 As of January 2013 , PHP was used in more than 240 million websites ( 39 % of those sampled ) and was installed on 2 @.@ 1 million web servers . 
 = = Security = = 
 In 2013 , 9 % of all vulnerabilities listed by the National Vulnerability Database were linked to PHP ; historically , about 30 % of all vulnerabilities listed since 1996 in this database are linked to PHP . Technical security flaws of the language itself or of its core libraries are not frequent ( 22 in 2009 , about 1 % of the total although PHP applies to about 20 % of programs listed ) . Recognizing that programmers make mistakes , some languages include taint checking to automatically detect the lack of input validation which induces many issues . Such a feature is being developed for PHP , but its inclusion into a release has been rejected several times in the past . 
 There are advanced protection patches such as <unk> and Hardening @-@ Patch , especially designed for web hosting environments . 
 There are certain language features and configuration parameters ( primarily the default values for such runtime settings ) that make PHP applications prone to security issues . Among these , magic _ quotes _ <unk> and register _ <unk> configuration directives are the best known ; the latter made any URL parameters become PHP variables , opening a path for serious security vulnerabilities by allowing an attacker to set the value of any uninitialized global variable and interfere with the execution of a PHP script . Support for " magic quotes " and " register <unk> " has been deprecated as of PHP 5 @.@ 3 @.@ 0 , and removed as of PHP 5 @.@ 4 @.@ 0 . 
 Another example for the runtime settings vulnerability comes from failing to disable PHP execution ( via engine configuration directive ) for the directory where uploaded images are stored ; leaving the default settings can result in execution of malicious PHP code embedded within the uploaded images . Also , leaving enabled the dynamic loading of PHP extensions ( via enable _ dl configuration directive ) in a shared web hosting environment can lead to security issues . 
 Also , implied type conversions that result in incompatible values being treated as identical against the programmer 's intent can lead to security issues . For example , the result of the comparison <unk> = = 0 comparison is true because the first compared value is treated as scientific notation having the value ( 0 × <unk> ) , i.e. zero . This feature resulted in authentication vulnerabilities in Simple Machines Forum , <unk> and <unk> when <unk> password hashes were compared . Instead , either the function <unk> or the identity operator ( = = = ) should be used ; <unk> = = = 0 results in false . 
 In a 2013 analysis of over 170 @,@ 000 website <unk> , published by Zone @-@ H , the most frequently ( 53 % ) used technique was exploitation of file inclusion vulnerability , mostly related to insecure usage of the PHP functions include , require , and allow _ url _ <unk> . 
 = If ( magazine ) = 
 If was an American science fiction magazine launched in March 1952 by Quinn Publications , owned by James L. Quinn . 
 The magazine was moderately successful , though it was never considered to be in the first tier of science fiction magazines . It achieved its greatest success under editor Frederik Pohl , winning the Hugo Award for best professional magazine three years running from 1966 to 1968 . If published many award @-@ winning stories over its 22 years , including Robert A. Heinlein 's novel The Moon Is a Harsh Mistress , and Harlan Ellison 's short story " I Have No Mouth and I Must Scream " . Several well @-@ known writers sold their first story to If ; the most successful was Larry Niven , whose story " The Coldest Place " appeared in the December 1964 issue . 
 If was merged into Galaxy Science Fiction after the December 1974 issue , its 175th issue overall . 
 = = Publication history = = 
 Although science fiction had been published before the 1920s , it did not begin to coalesce into a separately marketed genre until the appearance in 1926 of Amazing Stories , a pulp magazine published by Hugo Gernsback . By the end of the 1930s the field was undergoing its first boom , but World War II and its attendant paper shortages led to the demise of several titles . By the late 1940s the market began to recover again . From a low of eight active magazines in 1946 , the field expanded to 20 in 1950 , and a further 22 had commenced publication by 1954 . If was launched in the middle of this second publishing boom . 
 = = = Origins and 1950s = = = 
 If 's origins can be traced to 1948 and 1949 , when Raymond Palmer founded two magazines while working at Ziff @-@ Davis in Chicago : Fate and Other Worlds . Fate published articles about occult and supernatural events , while Other Worlds was a science fiction magazine . The two were sufficiently successful to attract the notice of James L. Quinn , a New York publisher . When Ziff @-@ Davis moved to New York City in late 1950 , Paul W. Fairman , a prolific writer , went with them , and was soon in touch with Quinn , who decided to found a pair of magazines modelled after Palmer 's . One was a non @-@ fiction magazine entitled Strange ; the other was If . 
 The first issue of If was dated March 1952 , with Fairman as editor ; it featured stories by Richard Shaver , Raymond Palmer , and Howard Browne , all writers who were regulars of the Ziff @-@ Davis magazines . By the time the third issue reached the news stands , the disappointing sales figures for the first issue were in , and Quinn decided to let Fairman go . Quinn persevered with himself as editor . His first issue was dated July 1952 , and he continued as editor on the masthead for some years . Quinn brought in Ed Valigursky as the art editor ; he designed striking covers , including some wraparound artwork — an unusual feature — which helped improve circulation . Quinn began searching for a replacement editor : writer Lester del Rey turned down the job ( a decision he is reported to have later regretted ) but Quinn was able to engage Larry T. Shaw , an active science fiction fan who had sold a few stories . Shaw joined in May 1953 as associate editor and soon began writing editorials ( beginning with the September 1953 issue ) and assisting with story selection . The magazine 's quality quickly improved and soon Quinn felt able to switch to a monthly schedule , instead of bi @-@ monthly . Shaw left after only a year , and Quinn resumed full editorial responsibilities . 
 In late 1953 , Quinn decided to run a competition for short fiction from new writers . The competition was only open to college students who had not sold a story before . The first prize was $ 1 @,@ 000 , the second prize $ 500 , and there were five runner @-@ up prizes of $ 100 each . Entries came in from writers who were later to become well @-@ known , including Harlan Ellison , Roger Zelazny , and Andrew J. Offutt , whose story " And Gone Tomorrow " , about a man unexpectedly sent a hundred years into the future , won first prize and appeared in the December 1954 issue of If . The only other one of the seven announced winners who had a career as a science fiction writer was Leo P. Kelley . Quinn decided to move If to a monthly schedule with the March 1954 issue , perhaps because the competition had increased readership . It reverted to a bimonthly schedule with the June 1956 issue , as circulation dropped again . 
 In 1957 , American News Company , by far the largest magazine distributor , was liquidated . Almost all the science fiction magazines had to find a new distributor , and the smaller independent companies remaining in the market often demanded monthly publication and a larger format from the magazines they took on . Many of the magazines did not have the advertising revenue required to support these changes , and within two or three years many of them had disappeared : the number of science fiction magazines being published dropped from a high of forty @-@ six in 1953 to less than a dozen by the end of the decade . For a while If was hard to find on the news stands , but it survived . Quinn did try the slick format ( using glossy paper , unlike the cheaper paper used for pulps and digests ) for a companion magazine , Space Age , which he launched in November 1958 ; the experiment was unsuccessful , however . In an attempt to improve If 's circulation , Quinn hired writer Damon Knight , whose first issue was October 1958 . Circulation failed to increase , though this was at least partly due to the problems with distribution , and by early 1959 Quinn decided to sell the magazine . Knight 's last issue was his third , dated February 1959 . 
 = = = Early 1960s = = = 
 If 's new owner was Robert Guinn , of Galaxy Publishing . The change of ownership was abrupt and led to a delay in publication , with the first issue under new editorship not appearing until July 1959 . The editor was Horace Gold , who was also the editor of Galaxy Science Fiction ; Galaxy had gone from a monthly to a bimonthly schedule at the start of 1959 , and If and Galaxy appeared in alternate months for the next few years . In a 1975 retrospective article , Gold commented that his policy with If was to experiment , using new writers that had not yet established themselves . In the judgement of science fiction historian Mike Ashley , the effect was that If became the weaker of the two magazines , printing stories that were of lower quality than those Gold selected for Galaxy . 
 Frederik Pohl took over the editorship of both If and Galaxy in 1961 . Gold had had a car accident with sufficiently severe health consequences to prevent him from being able to continue as editor . Pohl , who had been intermittently helping Gold with editorial duties for some time prior to the car accident , is first listed as editor of If on the masthead of the November 1961 issue , and as editor of Galaxy for the December 1961 issue , but he had been acting as editor of both magazines for at least six months before the end of the year . Pohl paid one cent per word for the stories he bought for If , whereas Galaxy paid three cents per word , and like Gold he regarded Galaxy as the leading magazine of the two , whereas If was somewhere he could work with new writers , and try experiments and whims . This developed into a selling point when a letter from a reader , Clayton Hamlin , prompted Pohl to declare that he would publish a new writer in every single issue of the magazine , though he was also able to attract well @-@ known writers . When Pohl began his stint as editor , both magazines were operating at a loss ; despite If 's lower budget Pohl found it more fun to edit , and commented that apparently the readers thought so too : he was able to make If show a profit before Galaxy , adding " What was fun for me seemed to be fun for them . " 
 In April 1963 , Galaxy Publishing brought out the first issue of Worlds of Tomorrow , another science fiction magazine , also edited by Pohl . The magazine published some well @-@ received material and was profitable , but Guinn , the publisher and owner , decided in 1967 that it would be better to have Galaxy resume a monthly schedule ; both Worlds of Tomorrow and Galaxy were bimonthly at that time , while If was monthly . With the August 1967 issue Worlds of Tomorrow was merged with If , though it was another year before Galaxy actually switched to a monthly schedule . By this time If had become monthly again , starting with the July 1964 issue ( though the schedule had an initial hiccup , omitting September 1964 ) . 
 The circulation rose from 64 @,@ 000 in 1965 to 67 @,@ 000 in 1967 ; the modest 5 % increase was exceeded only by Analog among the other science fiction magazines , and If won the Hugo Award for best professional SF magazine three years running during this period . However , in March 1969 , Robert Guinn sold all four of his magazines , including Galaxy and If , to Arnold Abramson at Universal Publishing and Distribution Corporation ( UPD ) . Pohl was in Rio de Janeiro when he heard the news , and decided to resign his position as editor rather than continue under the new management . He had been considering a return to a writing career for some time and the change in ownership precipitated his decision to leave . 
 = = = Decline and merger with Galaxy = = = 
 The new editor was Ejler Jakobsson , though Pohl continued to be listed as editor emeritus on the masthead until the July – August 1970 issue . Much of the editorial work was actually done by Judy @-@ Lynn Benjamin , who was hired by Pohl in 1969 as an editorial assistant . The new regime failed to impress readers , and circulation dropped from over 67 @,@ 000 for the year ending October 1968 to under 45 @,@ 000 the following year , a drop of over 30 % . If went bimonthly in May 1970 , as Abramson attempted to juggle the frequency of publication of several of his titles to maximize profits ; the page count and price were also adjusted more than once over the next year , again increasing profitability . Abramson also began a British distribution of If , reprinted with a separate cover , priced in British currency . Circulation figures of the time show an increase of about 6 @,@ 000 copies , but it is not clear if this includes sales in the UK . 
 In May 1973 , Judy @-@ Lynn Benjamin ( Judy @-@ Lynn del Rey since her 1971 marriage to Lester del Rey ) resigned . She was briefly replaced by Albert <unk> , but within four months <unk> in turn left , and in August 1973 James Baen joined UPD . He was made managing editor of If with effect from the January 1974 issue , and full editor one issue later ; Jakobsson was listed as editor emeritus until the August 1974 issue . Baen had little opportunity to work with If , however , as financial problems at UPD combined with the increasing cost of paper ( a consequence of the rising price of oil ) led to a decision to combine If with Galaxy . Despite the fact that in 1974 If 's circulation had exceeded Galaxy 's for the first time , it was Galaxy that was retained , and If was merged with it beginning with the January 1975 issue . 
 In 1986 an attempt was made to revive If as a semi @-@ professional magazine . The only issue , dated September – October 1986 , was edited by Clifford Hong . 
 = = Contents and reception = = 
 The first issue of If , dated March 1952 , went on sale on 7 January of that year . The lead story was Howard Browne 's " Twelve Times Zero " , a murder mystery with a science @-@ fictional resolution ; other stories were from Ray Palmer , Richard Shaver , and Rog Phillips , all writers associated with the Ziff @-@ Davis magazines . Browne was the editor of Ziff @-@ Davis 's Amazing Science Fiction , a leading magazine of the time , and had given Fairman his start in the field in the late 1940s . Fairman was familiar with Ziff @-@ Davis 's stable of writers , and his preference for them was a reflection of his experience , though this did not necessarily serve the magazine well — he referred to the acquisition of Browne 's story as " the scoop of the century " and spoke in glowing terms of him in an introductory note despite the fact that Browne was reputed to detest science fiction . In addition to the fiction and the editorial by Fairman , there was a letter column , a profile of Wilson Tucker , a selection of science news , a guest editorial by Ken Slater , a well @-@ known British fan , and an approving review of the TV show Tales of Tomorrow . 
 After Quinn dismissed Fairman and engaged Larry Shaw , the magazine improved significantly , and published several well @-@ received stories , including James Blish 's " A Case of Conscience " in the September 1953 issue , later to become the first part of Blish 's Hugo Award @-@ winning novel of the same name , about a Jesuit priest on a planet of aliens who have no religion but appear free of sin . The dominant science fiction magazines of the 1950s were Astounding , Galaxy , and Fantasy and Science Fiction , but If was in the next rank in terms of quality : SF historian Frank M. Robinson , for example , describes If as the " most major of the minors " . Well @-@ known writers who appeared in If in the 1950s include Harlan Ellison and Arthur C. Clarke : the original short story version of Clarke 's novel The Songs of Distant Earth appeared in the June 1958 issue . Isaac Asimov 's widely reprinted story " The Feeling of Power " appeared in February 1958 . 
 The period under Pohl is regarded as the magazine 's heyday ; the three consecutive Hugo Awards won from 1966 to 1968 broke a long period in which the award had been monopolized by Analog ( the name to which Astounding changed in 1960 ) and Fantasy and Science Fiction . Frank Robinson commented that " Pohl was the only one who was surprised when he won three Hugos in a row for editing IF . It had been fun , and the fun had showed . " Niven 's " Neutron Star " appeared in 1967 , and Harlan Ellison 's " I Have No Mouth and I Must Scream " appeared in 1968 ; both won Hugo Awards . Pohl also managed to secure a new Skylark novel , Skylark <unk> , from E.E. Smith ; the series had been started in the 1920s and was still popular with readers . Pohl also bought A.E. van Vogt 's " The Expendables " ; the story was van Vogt 's first sale in 14 years and attracted long @-@ time readers to the magazine . Another coup was the serialization of three novels by Robert A. Heinlein , including the award @-@ winning The Moon Is a Harsh Mistress , which ran in five parts from December 1965 to April 1966 . 
 Pohl 's policy of publishing a story by a new writer in every issue led to a series called " If @-@ firsts " ; the first one , Joseph L. Green 's " Once Around Arcturus " , about the courtship between a man and woman of different planets , appeared in the September 1962 issue . Several of the writers featured in the If @-@ first series , which were published from 1962 through 1965 , became well @-@ known , including Alexei Panshin ; the most prominent was Larry Niven , whose first story , " The Coldest Place " , appeared in December 1964 . Niven later remarked that the story was immediately outdated ; the plot relied on the discovery that the dark side of Mercury was the coldest place in the universe , but space probes had recently discovered that Mercury did in fact rotate asynchronously . Gardner Dozois also made his first sale to If , with " The Empty Man " , about a man possessed by an alien , in the September 1966 issue , and Gene Wolfe 's " Mountains Like Mice " , about an abandoned group of colonists on Mars , appeared in the May 1966 issue . Technically this was not Wolfe 's first sale , as he had already had " The Dead Man " published in the October 1965 issue of Sir ! , but " Mountains Like Mice " had been written earlier . 
 If 's covers during the 1960s were typically action @-@ oriented , showing monsters and aliens ; and several of the stories Pohl published were directed at a younger audience . For example , Blish 's Welcome to Mars , serialized under the title The Hour Before Earthrise in July to September 1966 , was about a teenage genius whose antigravity device stranded him and his girlfriend on Mars . Ashley has suggested that If was attempting to acquire readership from the many new fans of science fiction who had been introduced to the genre through television , in particular via the popular 1960s shows Doctor Who and Star Trek . If also ran a friendly letter column , with more fan @-@ oriented discussions than the other magazines , and between 1966 and 1968 a column by Lin Carter introduced readers to various aspects of science fiction fandom . These features are also likely to have appealed to a younger audience . 
 = = Bibliographic details = = 
 If was a digest @-@ sized magazine throughout its life . It began at 164 pages and with only the fifth issue , November 1952 , dropped to 124 pages . The page count increased again to 134 pages with the July 1959 issue , and to 164 pages with the September 1965 issue ; it stayed at this length until the September – October 1970 issue . The page count was then increased to 180 with the June 1971 issue , and to 164 for the very last issue , December 1974 . It was priced at 35 cents to begin with , and increased to 40 cents with the March 1963 issue , to 50 cents with the December 1964 issue , to 60 cents with the August 1967 issue , and finally to 75 cents with the September – October 1970 issue . With the April 1972 issue , UPD began using card stock for the covers , rather than paper , and continued to do so until the magazine ceased publication . 
 The magazine was bimonthly until the March 1954 issue , which was followed by April 1954 , inaugurating a monthly period that ran until June 1955 . This was followed by August 1955 , resuming a bimonthly schedule that ran until July 1964 , with only one irregularity , when the February 1959 issue was followed by July 1959 . After July 1964 , If ran a monthly schedule until April 1970 , with three omissions : there were no issues dated September 1964 , June 1969 , or August 1969 . From May – June 1970 , the issues were bimonthly and bore the names of two months . This bimonthly sequence ran through the last issue at the end of 1974 . The date the magazine printed on the cover reverted to a single month with the June 1971 issue , though the contents page still used two months to identify the issue . The volume numbering began with six issues to a volume : there were three errors on the magazine contents page , with volume 8 number 1 incorrectly printed as volume 7 number 6 ; volume 9 number 3 printed as volume 8 number 6 ; and volume 10 number 1 printed as volume 10 number 6 . Volume 14 , which began in March 1964 , ran through the end of the year , with seven numbers ; the remaining volumes had 12 numbers each except for volume 19 which had 10 and volume 22 which had 8 . 
 Several British editions of If were produced . In 1953 and 1954 , Strato Publications reprinted 15 issues , numbering them from 1 to 15 ; another 18 were reprinted between 1959 and 1962 , with the issue numbers started at 1 again . Between January and November 1967 a UK edition appeared from Gold Star Publications ; these were identical to the US edition dated ten months previously . Between 1972 and 1974 , 15 of the UPD editions of If were imported , renumbered and <unk> for UK distribution . The numbering , inexplicably , ran from 1 to 9 , and then 11 , 1 , 13 , 3 , 4 and 5 . 
 The editorial succession at If was as follows : 
 Paul W. Fairman : March – September 1952 . 
 James L. Quinn : November 1952 – August 1958 . From May 1953 to March 1954 , Larry T. Shaw was Associate Editor ; he wrote editorials for at least three issues , beginning with September 1953 , and generally did most of the editorial work . 
 Damon Knight : October 1958 – February 1959 . 
 H.L. Gold : July 1959 – November 1961 . 
 Frederik Pohl , January 1962 – May 1969 . 
 Ejler Jakobsson : October 1969 – January / February 1974 
 Jim Baen : March / April – December 1974 . 
 Clifford Hong : September / November 1986 . 
 Eight selections of stories from If have been published . Two were edited by Quinn : The First World of If ( 1957 ) and The Second World of If ( 1958 ) ; four by Pohl : The Best Science Fiction from If ( 1964 ) , The If Reader of Science Fiction ( 1966 ) , The Second If Reader of Science Fiction ( 1968 ) , and Worlds of If ( 1986 ) ; and two by Jakobsson , both published as by " The Editors of If " : The Best from If ( 1973 ) and The Best from If Vol II ( 1974 ) . In addition , two anthologies drew all their contents from If without mentioning the magazine : The 6 Fingers of Time and 5 Other Science Fiction Novelets ( 1965 ) and The Frozen Planet and Other Stories ( 1966 ) . Both were edited by Samuel H Post , who was not credited . 
 = Crohn 's disease = 
 Crohn 's disease is a type of inflammatory bowel disease ( IBD ) that may affect any part of the gastrointestinal tract from mouth to anus . Signs and symptoms often include abdominal pain , diarrhea ( which may be bloody if inflammation is severe ) , fever , and weight loss . Other complications may occur outside the gastrointestinal tract and include anemia , skin rashes , arthritis , inflammation of the eye , and feeling tired . The skin rashes may be due to infections as well as <unk> <unk> or erythema nodosum . Bowel obstruction also commonly occurs and those with the disease are at greater risk of bowel cancer . 
 Crohn 's disease is caused by a combination of environmental , immune and bacterial factors in genetically susceptible individuals . It results in a chronic inflammatory disorder , in which the body 's immune system attacks the gastrointestinal tract possibly directed at microbial antigens . While Crohn 's is an immune related disease , it does not appear to be an autoimmune disease ( in that the immune system is not being triggered by the body itself ) . The exact underlying immune problem is not clear ; however , it may be an immunodeficiency state . About half of the overall risk is related to genetics with more than 70 genes found to be involved . Tobacco smokers are two times more likely to develop Crohn 's disease than nonsmokers . It also often begins after gastroenteritis . Diagnosis is based on a number of findings including biopsy and appearance of the bowel wall , medical imaging and description of the disease . Other conditions that can present similarly include irritable bowel syndrome and Behçet 's disease . 
 There are no medications or surgical procedures that can cure Crohn 's disease . Treatment options can only help with symptoms , maintain remission , and prevent relapse . In those newly diagnosed , a corticosteroid may be used for a brief period of time to quickly improve the disease with another medication such as either methotrexate or a <unk> used to prevent recurrence . An important part of treatment is the stopping of smoking among those who do . One in five people with the disease are admitted to hospital each year , and half of those with the disease will require surgery for the disease at some point over a ten @-@ year period . While surgery should be used as little as possible , it is necessary to address some abscesses , certain bowel obstructions , and cancers . Checking for bowel cancer via colonoscopy is recommended every few years , starting eight years after the disease has begun . 
 Crohn 's disease affects about 3 @.@ 2 per 1 @,@ 000 people in Europe and North America . It is less common in Asia and Africa . It has historically been more common in the developed world . Rates have , however , been increasing , particularly in the developing world , since the 1970s . Inflammatory bowel disease resulted in 35 @,@ 000 deaths in 2010 and those with Crohn 's disease have a slightly reduced life expectancy . It tends to start in the teens and twenties , although it can occur at any age . Males and females are equally affected . The disease was named after gastroenterologist Burrill Bernard Crohn , who , in 1932 , together with two other colleagues at Mount Sinai Hospital in New York , described a series of patients with inflammation of the terminal ileum of the small intestine , the area most commonly affected by the illness . 
 = = Signs and symptoms = = 
 = = = Gastrointestinal = = = 
 Many people with Crohn 's disease have symptoms for years prior to the diagnosis . The usual onset is between 15 and 30 years of age , but can occur at any age . Because of the ' patchy ' nature of the gastrointestinal disease and the depth of tissue involvement , initial symptoms can be more subtle than those of ulcerative colitis . People with Crohn 's disease experience chronic recurring periods of flare @-@ ups and remission . 
 Abdominal pain may be the initial symptom of Crohn 's disease usually in the lower right area . It is often accompanied by diarrhea , especially in those who have had surgery . The diarrhea may or may not be bloody . The nature of the diarrhea in Crohn 's disease depends on the part of the small intestine or colon involved . <unk> typically results in large @-@ volume , watery feces . Colitis may result in a smaller volume of feces of higher frequency . Fecal consistency may range from solid to watery . In severe cases , an individual may have more than 20 bowel movements per day and may need to awaken at night to defecate . Visible bleeding in the feces is less common in Crohn 's disease than in ulcerative colitis , but may be seen in the setting of Crohn 's colitis . Bloody bowel movements typically come and go , and may be bright or dark red in color . In the setting of severe Crohn 's colitis , bleeding may be copious . <unk> and bloating may also add to the intestinal discomfort . 
 Symptoms caused by intestinal stenosis are also common in Crohn 's disease . Abdominal pain is often most severe in areas of the bowel with stenoses . Persistent vomiting and nausea may indicate stenosis from small bowel obstruction or disease involving the stomach , pylorus , or duodenum . Although the association is greater in the context of ulcerative colitis , Crohn 's disease may also be associated with primary sclerosing cholangitis , a type of inflammation of the bile ducts . 
 <unk> discomfort may also be prominent in Crohn 's disease . <unk> or pain around the anus may be suggestive of inflammation , <unk> or abscess around the anal area or anal fissure . <unk> skin tags are also common in Crohn 's disease . Fecal incontinence may accompany perianal Crohn 's disease . At the opposite end of the gastrointestinal tract , the mouth may be affected by non @-@ healing sores ( aphthous ulcers ) . Rarely , the esophagus , and stomach may be involved in Crohn 's disease . These can cause symptoms including difficulty swallowing ( dysphagia ) , upper abdominal pain , and vomiting . 
 = = = Systemic = = = 
 Crohn 's disease , like many other chronic , inflammatory diseases , can cause a variety of systemic symptoms . Among children , growth failure is common . Many children are first diagnosed with Crohn 's disease based on inability to maintain growth . As it may manifest at the time of the growth spurt in puberty , up to 30 % of children with Crohn 's disease may have retardation of growth . Fever may also be present , though fevers greater than 38 @.@ 5 ° C ( 101 @.@ 3 ° F ) are uncommon unless there is a complication such as an abscess . Among older individuals , Crohn 's disease may manifest as weight loss , usually related to decreased food intake , since individuals with intestinal symptoms from Crohn 's disease often feel better when they do not eat and might lose their appetite . People with extensive small intestine disease may also have malabsorption of carbohydrates or lipids , which can further exacerbate weight loss . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 In addition to systemic and gastrointestinal involvement , Crohn 's disease can affect many other organ systems . Inflammation of the interior portion of the eye , known as uveitis , can cause blurred vision and eye pain , especially when exposed to light ( photophobia ) . Inflammation may also involve the white part of the eye ( sclera ) , a condition called <unk> . Both <unk> and uveitis can lead to loss of vision if untreated . 
 Crohn 's disease that affects the ileum may result in an increased risk for gallstones . This is due to a decrease in bile acid resorption in the ileum and the bile gets excreted in the stool . As a result , the cholesterol / bile ratio increases in the gallbladder , resulting in an increased risk for gallstones . 
 Crohn 's disease is associated with a type of <unk> disease known as seronegative <unk> . This group of diseases is characterized by inflammation of one or more joints ( arthritis ) or muscle insertions ( <unk> ) . The arthritis in Crohn 's disease can be divided into two types . The first type affects larger weight @-@ bearing joints such as the knee ( most common ) , hips , shoulders , wrists , or elbows . The second type symmetrically involves five or more of the small joints of the hands and feet . The arthritis may also involve the spine , leading to ankylosing spondylitis if the entire spine is involved or simply <unk> if only the <unk> joint is involved . The symptoms of arthritis include painful , warm , swollen , stiff joints , and loss of joint mobility or function . 
 Crohn 's disease may also involve the skin , blood , and endocrine system . The most common type of skin manifestation , erythema nodosum , presents as raised , tender red nodules usually appearing on the shins . <unk> nodosum is due to inflammation of the underlying subcutaneous tissue , and is characterized by septal <unk> . Another skin lesion , <unk> <unk> , is typically a painful <unk> nodule . Crohn 's disease also increases the risk of blood clots ; painful swelling of the lower legs can be a sign of deep venous thrombosis , while difficulty breathing may be a result of pulmonary embolism . Autoimmune hemolytic anemia , a condition in which the immune system attacks the red blood cells , is also more common in Crohn 's disease and may cause fatigue , a pale appearance , and other symptoms common in anemia . Clubbing , a deformity of the ends of the fingers , may also be a result of Crohn 's disease . Finally , Crohn 's disease increases the risk of osteoporosis , or thinning of the bones . Individuals with osteoporosis are at increased risk of bone fractures . 
 People with Crohn 's disease often have anemia due to vitamin B12 , folate , iron deficiency , or due to anemia of chronic disease . The most common is iron deficiency anemia from chronic blood loss , reduced dietary intake , and persistent inflammation leading to increased <unk> levels , restricting iron absorption in the duodenum . As Crohn 's disease most commonly affects the terminal ileum where the vitamin B12 / intrinsic factor complex is absorbed , B12 deficiency may be seen . This is particularly common after surgery to remove the ileum . Involvement of the duodenum and jejunum can impair the absorption of many other nutrients including folate . If Crohn 's disease affects the stomach , production of intrinsic factor can be reduced . 
 Crohn 's disease can also cause neurological complications ( reportedly in up to 15 % ) . The most common of these are seizures , stroke , myopathy , peripheral neuropathy , headache and depression . 
 People with Crohn 's often also have issues with small bowel bacterial overgrowth syndrome , which has similar symptoms . 
 In the oral cavity people with Crohn 's may develop <unk> <unk> and other forms of orofacial <unk> , <unk> <unk> , recurrent aphthous stomatitis , geographic tongue , and migratory stomatitis in higher prevalence than the general population . 
 = = Cause = = 
 While the exact cause is unknown , Crohn 's disease seems to be due to a combination of environmental factors and genetic predisposition . Crohn 's is the first genetically complex disease in which the relationship between genetic risk factors and the immune system is understood in considerable detail . Each individual risk mutation makes a small contribution to the overall risk of Crohn 's ( approximately 1 : 200 ) . The genetic data , and direct assessment of immunity , indicates a malfunction in the innate immune system . In this view , the chronic inflammation of Crohn 's is caused when the adaptive immune system tries to compensate for a deficient innate immune system . 
 = = = Genetics = = = 
 Crohn 's has a genetic component . Because of this , siblings of known people with Crohn 's are 30 times more likely to develop Crohn 's than the general population . 
 The first mutation found to be associated with Crohn 's was a frameshift in the <unk> gene ( also known as the <unk> gene ) , followed by the discovery of point mutations . Over thirty genes have been associated with Crohn 's ; a biological function is known for most of them . For example , one association is with mutations in the <unk> gene , which is involved in the unfolded protein response pathway of the <unk> reticulum . Other well documented genes which increase the risk of developing Crohn disease are <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , and <unk> . There is considerable overlap between susceptibility loci for IBD and <unk> infections . Recent genome @-@ wide association studies have shown that Crohn ’ s disease is genetically linked to coeliac disease . 
 = = = Immune system = = = 
 There was a prevailing view that Crohn 's disease is a primary T cell autoimmune disorder , however , a newer theory hypothesizes that Crohn 's results from an impaired innate immunity . The later hypothesis describes impaired cytokine secretion by macrophages , which contributes to impaired innate immunity and leads to a sustained microbial @-@ induced inflammatory response in the colon , where the bacterial load is high . Another theory is that the inflammation of Crohn 's was caused by an overactive Th1 and Th17 cytokine response . 
 In 2007 , the <unk> gene has been implicated in Crohn 's disease , which may induce autophagy and hinder the body 's ability to attack invasive bacteria . Another study has theorized that the human immune system traditionally evolved with the presence of parasites inside the body , and that the lack thereof due to modern hygiene standards has weakened the immune system . Test subjects were reintroduced to harmless parasites , with positive response . 
 = = = Microbes = = = 
 Current thinking is that microorganisms are taking advantage of their host 's weakened mucosal layer and inability to clear bacteria from the intestinal walls , which are both symptoms of Crohn 's . Different strains found in tissue and different outcomes to antibiotics therapy and resistance suggest Crohn 's Disease is not one disease , but an umbrella of diseases related to different pathogens . 
 A number of studies have suggested a causal role for Mycobacterium avium subspecies paratuberculosis ( MAP ) , which causes a similar disease , Johne 's disease , in cattle . 
 <unk> is a gene involved in Crohn 's genetic susceptibility . It is associated with macrophages ' diminished ability to <unk> MAP . This same gene may reduce innate and adaptive immunity in gastrointestinal tissue and impair the ability to resist infection by the MAP bacterium . Macrophages that ingest the MAP bacterium are associated with high production of TNF @-@ α . 
 Other studies have linked specific strains of <unk> E. coli to the disease . <unk> @-@ invasive Escherichia coli ( AIEC ) , are more common in people with CD , have the ability to make strong biofilms compared to non @-@ AIEC strains correlating with high adhesion and invasion indices of neutrophils and the ability to block autophagy at the <unk> step , which allows for intracellular survival of the bacteria and induction of inflammation . Inflammation drives the proliferation of AIEC and <unk> in the ileum , irrespective of genotype . AIEC strains replicate extensively into macrophages inducing the secretion of very large amounts of TNF @-@ α . 
 Mouse studies have suggested some symptoms of Crohn 's disease , ulcerative colitis , and irritable bowel syndrome have the same underlying cause . Biopsy samples taken from the colons of all three patient groups were found to produce elevated levels of a serine protease . Experimental introduction of the serine protease into mice has been found to produce widespread pain associated with irritable bowel syndrome , as well as colitis , which is associated with all three diseases . Regional and temporal variations in those illnesses follow those associated with infection with the protozoan <unk> . 
 The " cold @-@ chain " hypothesis is that <unk> bacteria such as Yersinia and Listeria species contribute to the disease . A statistical correlation was found between the advent of the use of refrigeration in the United States and various parts of Europe and the rise of the disease . 
 There is an apparent connection between Crohn 's disease , Mycobacterium , other pathogenic bacteria , and genetic markers . In many individuals , genetic factors predispose individuals to Mycobacterium avium subsp. paratuberculosis infection . This bacterium then produces <unk> , which protect both itself and various bacteria from phagocytosis , which causes a variety of secondary infections . 
 Still , this relationship between specific types of bacteria and Crohn 's disease remains unclear . 
 = = = Environmental factors = = = 
 The increased incidence of Crohn 's in the industrialized world indicates an environmental component . Crohn 's is associated with an increased intake of animal protein , milk protein and an increased ratio of omega @-@ 6 to omega @-@ 3 polyunsaturated fatty acids . Those who consume vegetable proteins appear to have a lower incidence of Crohn 's disease . Consumption of fish protein has no association . Smoking increases the risk of the return of active disease ( flares ) . The introduction of hormonal contraception in the United States in the 1960s is associated with a dramatic increase in incidence , and one hypothesis is that these drugs work on the digestive system in ways similar to smoking . <unk> is associated with Crohn 's . Although stress is sometimes claimed to exacerbate Crohn 's disease , there is no concrete evidence to support such claim . Dietary microparticles , such as those found in toothpaste , have been studied as they produce effects on immunity , but they were not consumed in greater amounts in patients with Crohn 's . 
 = = Pathophysiology = = 
 During a colonoscopy , biopsies of the colon are often taken to confirm the diagnosis . Certain characteristic features of the pathology seen point toward Crohn 's disease ; it shows a <unk> pattern of inflammation , meaning the inflammation may span the entire depth of the intestinal wall . <unk> is an outcome seen in highly active disease . There is usually an abrupt transition between unaffected tissue and the ulcer — a characteristic sign known as skip lesions . Under a microscope , biopsies of the affected colon may show mucosal inflammation , characterized by focal infiltration of neutrophils , a type of inflammatory cell , into the epithelium . This typically occurs in the area overlying lymphoid aggregates . These neutrophils , along with mononuclear cells , may infiltrate the crypts , leading to inflammation ( <unk> ) or abscess ( crypt abscess ) . <unk> , aggregates of macrophage derivatives known as giant cells , are found in 50 % of cases and are most specific for Crohn 's disease . The granulomas of Crohn 's disease do not show " <unk> " , a cheese @-@ like appearance on microscopic examination characteristic of granulomas associated with infections , such as tuberculosis . <unk> may also show chronic mucosal damage , as evidenced by blunting of the intestinal villi , atypical branching of the crypts , and a change in the tissue type ( metaplasia ) . One example of such metaplasia , Paneth cell metaplasia , involves development of Paneth cells ( typically found in the small intestine and a key regulator of intestinal microbiota ) in other parts of the gastrointestinal system . 
 = = Diagnosis = = 
 The diagnosis of Crohn 's disease can sometimes be challenging , and a number of tests are often required to assist the physician in making the diagnosis . Even with a full battery of tests , it may not be possible to diagnose Crohn 's with complete certainty ; a colonoscopy is approximately 70 % effective in diagnosing the disease , with further tests being less effective . Disease in the small bowel is particularly difficult to diagnose , as a traditional colonoscopy allows access to only the colon and lower portions of the small intestines ; introduction of the capsule endoscopy aids in endoscopic diagnosis . Multinucleated giant cells , a common finding in the lesions of Crohn 's disease , are less common in the lesions of lichen nitidus . 
 = = = Classification = = = 
 Crohn 's disease is one type of inflammatory bowel disease ( IBD ) . It typically manifests in the gastrointestinal tract and can be categorized by the specific tract region affected . A disease of both the ileum ( the last part of the small intestine that connects to the large intestine ) , and the large intestine , <unk> Crohn 's accounts for fifty percent of cases . Crohn 's ileitis , manifest in the ileum only , accounts for thirty percent of cases , while Crohn 's colitis , of the large intestine , accounts for the remaining twenty percent of cases and may be particularly difficult to distinguish from ulcerative colitis . <unk> Crohn 's disease causes inflammation in the stomach and first part of the small intestine , called the duodenum . <unk> causes spotty patches of inflammation in the top half of the small intestine , called the jejunum . The disease can attack any part of the digestive tract , from mouth to anus . However , individuals affected by the disease rarely fall outside these three classifications , with presentations in other areas . 
 Crohn 's disease may also be categorized by the behavior of disease as it progresses . These categorizations formalized in the Vienna classification of the disease . There are three categories of disease presentation in Crohn 's disease : stricturing , penetrating , and inflammatory . <unk> disease causes narrowing of the bowel that may lead to bowel obstruction or changes in the caliber of the feces . Penetrating disease creates abnormal passageways ( fistulae ) between the bowel and other structures , such as the skin . Inflammatory disease ( or <unk> , nonpenetrating disease ) causes inflammation without causing strictures or fistulae . 
 = = = Endoscopy = = = 
 A colonoscopy is the best test for making the diagnosis of Crohn 's disease , as it allows direct visualization of the colon and the terminal ileum , identifying the pattern of disease involvement . On occasion , the <unk> can travel past the terminal ileum , but it varies from person to person . During the procedure , the gastroenterologist can also perform a biopsy , taking small samples of tissue for laboratory analysis , which may help confirm a diagnosis . As 30 % of Crohn 's disease involves only the ileum , <unk> of the terminal ileum is required in making the diagnosis . Finding a patchy distribution of disease , with involvement of the colon or ileum , but not the rectum , is suggestive of Crohn 's disease , as are other endoscopic stigmata . The utility of capsule endoscopy for this , however , is still uncertain . A " cobblestone " -like appearance is seen in approximately 40 % of cases of Crohn 's disease upon colonoscopy , representing areas of ulceration separated by narrow areas of healthy tissue . 
 = = = <unk> tests = = = 
 A small bowel follow @-@ through may suggest the diagnosis of Crohn 's disease and is useful when the disease involves only the small intestine . Because colonoscopy and <unk> allow direct visualization of only the terminal ileum and beginning of the duodenum , they cannot be used to evaluate the remainder of the small intestine . As a result , a barium follow @-@ through X @-@ ray , wherein barium sulfate suspension is ingested and fluoroscopic images of the bowel are taken over time , is useful for looking for inflammation and narrowing of the small bowel . Barium enemas , in which barium is inserted into the rectum and fluoroscopy is used to image the bowel , are rarely used in the work @-@ up of Crohn 's disease due to the advent of colonoscopy . They remain useful for identifying anatomical abnormalities when strictures of the colon are too small for a <unk> to pass through , or in the detection of colonic fistulae ( in this case contrast should be performed with iodate substances ) . 
 CT and MRI scans are useful for evaluating the small bowel with <unk> protocols . They are also useful for looking for intra @-@ abdominal complications of Crohn 's disease , such as abscesses , small bowel obstructions , or fistulae . Magnetic resonance imaging ( MRI ) is another option for imaging the small bowel as well as looking for complications , though it is more expensive and less readily available . 
 = = = Blood tests = = = 
 A complete blood count may reveal anemia , which commonly is caused by blood loss leading to iron deficiency ( a <unk> anemia ) or by vitamin B12 deficiency ( a macrocytic anemia ) , usually caused by ileal disease impairing vitamin B12 absorption . Rarely autoimmune hemolysis may occur . <unk> levels help assess if iron deficiency is contributing to the anemia . <unk> sedimentation rate ( ESR ) and C @-@ reactive protein help assess the degree of inflammation , which is important as ferritin can also be raised in inflammation . Serum iron , total iron binding capacity and transferrin saturation may be more easily interpreted in inflammation . Anemia of chronic disease results in a <unk> anemia . Other causes of anemia include medication used in treatment of inflammatory bowel disease , like azathioprine , which can lead to <unk> , and <unk> , which can also result in folate deficiency . Testing for Saccharomyces cerevisiae antibodies ( ASCA ) and <unk> cytoplasmic antibodies ( <unk> ) has been evaluated to identify inflammatory diseases of the intestine and to differentiate Crohn 's disease from ulcerative colitis . Furthermore , increasing amounts and levels of serological antibodies such as ASCA , <unk> [ Glc ( <unk> ) <unk> ( β ) ; <unk> ] , <unk> [ GlcNAc ( <unk> ) GlcNAc ( β ) ; ACCA ] , <unk> [ Man ( <unk> ) Man ( α ) <unk> ] , <unk> [ ( Glc ( <unk> ) ) 3n ( Glc ( <unk> ) ) n ; anti @-@ L ] and <unk> [ GlcNAc ( <unk> ) n ; anti @-@ C ] associate with disease behavior and surgery , and may aid in the prognosis of Crohn 's disease . 
 Low serum levels of vitamin D are associated with Crohn 's disease . Further studies are required to determine the significance of this association . 
 = = = Comparison with ulcerative colitis = = = 
 The most common disease that mimics the symptoms of Crohn 's disease is ulcerative colitis , as both are inflammatory bowel diseases that can affect the colon with similar symptoms . It is important to differentiate these diseases , since the course of the diseases and treatments may be different . In some cases , however , it may not be possible to tell the difference , in which case the disease is classified as indeterminate colitis . 
 = = = Differential diagnosis = = = 
 Other conditions with similar symptoms as Crohn 's disease includes intestinal tuberculosis , Behçet ’ s disease , ulcerative colitis , nonsteroidal anti @-@ inflammatory drug enteropathy , irritable bowel syndrome and celiac disease . <unk> bowel syndrome is excluded when there are inflammatory changes . Celiac disease can 't be excluded if specific antibodies ( anti @-@ transglutaminase antibodies ) are negative , nor in absence of intestinal villi atrophy . 
 = = Management = = 
 There is no cure for Crohn 's disease and remission may not be possible or prolonged if achieved . In cases where remission is possible , relapse can be prevented and symptoms controlled with medication , lifestyle and dietary changes , changes to eating habits ( eating smaller amounts more often ) , reduction of stress , moderate activity and exercise . Surgery is generally contraindicated and has not been shown to prevent remission . <unk> controlled , Crohn 's disease may not significantly restrict daily living . Treatment for Crohn 's disease is only when symptoms are active and involve first treating the acute problem , then maintaining remission . 
 = = = Lifestyle changes = = = 
 Certain lifestyle changes can reduce symptoms , including dietary adjustments , elemental diet , proper hydration , and smoking cessation . Diets that include higher levels of fiber and fruit are associated with reduced risk , while diets rich in total fats , polyunsaturated fatty acids , meat , and omega @-@ 6 fatty acids may increase the risk of Crohn 's . Smoking may increase Crohn 's disease ; stopping is recommended . Eating small meals frequently instead of big meals may also help with a low appetite . To manage symptoms have a balanced diet with proper portion control . Fatigue can be helped with regular exercise , a healthy diet , and enough sleep . A food diary may help with identifying foods that trigger symptoms . Some people should follow a low dietary fiber diet to control symptoms especially if fibrous foods cause symptoms . Some find relief in eliminating casein ( protein found in cow 's milk ) and gluten ( protein found in wheat , rye and barley ) from their diets . They may have specific dietary intolerances ( not allergies ) . 
 = = = Medication = = = 
 Acute treatment uses medications to treat any infection ( normally antibiotics ) and to reduce inflammation ( normally <unk> anti @-@ inflammatory drugs and corticosteroids ) . When symptoms are in remission , treatment enters maintenance , with a goal of avoiding the recurrence of symptoms . Prolonged use of corticosteroids has significant side @-@ effects ; as a result , they are , in general , not used for long @-@ term treatment . Alternatives include <unk> alone , though only a minority are able to maintain the treatment , and many require immunosuppressive drugs . It has been also suggested that antibiotics change the enteric flora , and their continuous use may pose the risk of overgrowth with pathogens such as Clostridium difficile . 
 Medications used to treat the symptoms of Crohn 's disease include 5 @-@ <unk> acid ( 5 @-@ ASA ) formulations , prednisone , immunomodulators such as azathioprine ( given as the prodrug for 6 @-@ <unk> ) , methotrexate , infliximab , adalimumab , <unk> and natalizumab . <unk> should be used in severe attacks of Crohn 's disease . Biological therapies are medications used to avoid long @-@ term steroid use , decrease inflammation , and treat people who have fistulas with abscesses . 
 The gradual loss of blood from the gastrointestinal tract , as well as chronic inflammation , often leads to anemia , and professional guidelines suggest routinely monitoring for this . Adequate disease control usually improves anemia of chronic disease , but iron deficiency may require treatment with iron supplements . Guidelines vary as to how iron should be administered . Besides other , problems include a limitation in possible daily resorption and an increased growth of intestinal bacteria . Some advise parenteral iron as first line as it works faster , has fewer gastrointestinal side effects , and is unaffected by inflammation reducing <unk> absorption . 
 Other guidelines advise oral iron as first line with parenteral iron reserved for those that fail to adequately respond as oral iron is considerably cheaper . All agree that severe anemia ( hemoglobin under <unk> / dL ) should be treated with parenteral iron . Blood transfusion should be reserved for those who are <unk> unstable , due to its relatively poor safety profile , lack of long term efficacy , and cost . 
 = = = Surgery = = = 
 Crohn 's cannot be cured by surgery , as the disease eventually recurs , though it is used in the case of partial or full blockage of the intestine . Surgery may also be required for complications such as obstructions , fistulas , or abscesses , or if the disease does not respond to drugs . After the first surgery , Crohn 's usually comes back at the site where the diseased intestine was removed and the healthy ends were rejoined , however it can come back in other locations . After a resection , scar tissue builds up , which can cause strictures , which form when the intestines become too small to allow excrement to pass through easily , which can lead to a blockage . After the first resection , another resection may be necessary within five years . For patients with an obstruction due to a stricture , two options for treatment are strictureplasty and resection of that portion of bowel . There is no statistical significance between strictureplasty alone versus strictureplasty and resection in cases of duodenal involvement . In these cases , re @-@ operation rates were 31 % and 27 % , respectively , indicating that strictureplasty is a safe and effective treatment for selected people with duodenal involvement . 
 <unk> recurrence of Crohn 's disease is relatively common . Crohn 's lesions are nearly always found at the site of the resected bowel . The join ( or anastomosis ) after surgery may be inspected , usually during a colonoscopy , and disease activity graded . The " <unk> 's score " is an endoscopic scoring system for post @-@ operative disease recurrence in Crohn 's disease . Mild <unk> recurrences of Crohn 's disease are graded i1 and i2 , moderate to severe recurrences are graded i3 and <unk> . Fewer lesions result in a lower grade . Based on the score , treatment plans can be designed to give the patient the best chance of managing recurrence of the disease . 
 Short bowel syndrome ( SBS , also short gut syndrome or simply short gut ) is caused by the surgical removal of part of the small intestine . It usually develops in those patients who have had half or more of their small intestines removed . Diarrhea is the main symptom , but others may include weight loss , cramping , bloating , and heartburn . Short bowel syndrome is treated with changes in diet , intravenous feeding , vitamin and mineral supplements , and treatment with medications . In some cases of SBS , intestinal transplant surgery may be considered ; though the number of transplant centres offering this procedure is quite small and it comes with a high risk due to the chance of infection and rejection of the transplanted intestine . 
 Bile acid diarrhea is another complication following surgery for Crohn 's disease in which the terminal ileum has been removed . This leads to the development of excessive watery diarrhea . It is usually thought to be due to an inability of the ileum to reabsorb bile acids after resection of the terminal ileum and was the first type of bile acid malabsorption recognized . 
 = = = Alternative medicine = = = 
 More than half of people with Crohn 's disease have tried complementary or alternative therapy . These include diets , probiotics , fish oil and other herbal and nutritional supplements . Some scientists have suggested more research into these is needed to discriminate between effective therapies and those that have not been found to be effective . 
 Acupuncture is used to treat inflammatory bowel disease in China , and is being used more frequently in Western society . At this time , evidence is insufficient to recommend the use of acupuncture . 
 Homeopathy is frequently used in Germany as a treatment for Crohn 's disease , though no clinical trials exist that demonstrate homeopathy is effective . 
 There are contradicting studies regarding the effect of medical cannabis on inflammatory bowel disease . 
 = = Prognosis = = 
 Crohn 's disease is a chronic condition for which there is no cure . It is characterised by periods of improvement followed by episodes when symptoms flare up . With treatment , most people achieve a healthy weight , and the mortality rate for the disease is relatively low . It can vary from being benign to very severe and people with CD could experience just one episode or have continuous symptoms . It usually <unk> , although some people can remain disease free for years or decades . Most people with Crohn 's live a normal lifespan . However , Crohn 's disease is associated with a small increase in risk of small bowel and colorectal carcinoma ( bowel cancer ) . 
 = = = Complications = = = 
 Crohn 's disease can lead to several mechanical complications within the intestines , including obstruction , fistulae , and abscesses . Obstruction typically occurs from strictures or adhesions that narrow the lumen , blocking the passage of the intestinal contents . A fistulae can develop between two loops of bowel , between the bowel and bladder , between the bowel and vagina , and between the bowel and skin . <unk> are walled off concentrations of infection , which can occur in the abdomen or in the perianal area . Crohn 's is responsible for 10 % of <unk> fistulae , and is the most common cause of <unk> fistulae . 
 Crohn 's disease also increases the risk of cancer in the area of inflammation . For example , individuals with Crohn 's disease involving the small bowel are at higher risk for small intestinal cancer . Similarly , people with Crohn 's colitis have a relative risk of 5 @.@ 6 for developing colon cancer . Screening for colon cancer with colonoscopy is recommended for anyone who has had Crohn 's colitis for at least eight years . Some studies suggest there is a role for <unk> in the prevention of colorectal cancer in Crohn 's involving the colon ; two agents have been suggested , folate and <unk> preparations . 
 Individuals with Crohn 's disease are at risk of malnutrition for many reasons , including decreased food intake and malabsorption . The risk increases following resection of the small bowel . Such individuals may require oral supplements to increase their caloric intake , or in severe cases , total parenteral nutrition ( TPN ) . Most people with moderate or severe Crohn 's disease are referred to a dietitian for assistance in nutrition . 
 The major significant complications of Crohn 's disease include bowel obstruction , abscesses , free perforation and hemorrhage , which in rare cases may be fatal . 
 Crohn 's disease can be problematic during pregnancy , and some medications can cause adverse outcomes for the fetus or mother . Consultation with an obstetrician and gastroenterologist about Crohn 's disease and all medications facilitates preventative measures . In some cases , remission occurs during pregnancy . Certain medications can also lower sperm count or otherwise adversely affect a man 's fertility . 
 = = Epidemiology = = 
 The percentage of people with Crohn 's disease has been determined in Norway and the United States and is similar at 6 to 7 @.@ 1 : 100 @,@ 000 . The Crohn 's and Colitis Foundation of America cites this number as approx 149 : 100 @,@ 000 ; NIH cites 28 to 199 per 100 @,@ 000 . Crohn 's disease is more common in northern countries , and with higher rates still in the northern areas of these countries . The incidence of Crohn 's disease is thought to be similar in Europe but lower in Asia and Africa . It also has a higher incidence in Ashkenazi Jews and smokers . 
 Crohn 's disease begins most commonly in people in their teens and 20s , and people in their 50s through to their 70s . It is rarely diagnosed in early childhood . It usually affects female children more severely than males . However , only slightly more women than men have Crohn 's disease . Parents , siblings or children of people with Crohn 's disease are 3 to 20 times more likely to develop the disease . Twin studies find that if one has the disease there is a 55 % chance the other will too . 
 The incidence of Crohn 's disease is increasing in Europe . 
 = = History = = 
 Inflammatory bowel diseases were described by Giovanni Battista Morgagni ( 1682 – 1771 ) and by Scottish physician T. Kennedy Dalziel in 1913 . 
 <unk> terminalis was first described by Polish surgeon Antoni <unk> in 1904 , although it was not conclusively distinguished from intestinal tuberculosis . In Poland , it is still called <unk> @-@ Crohn 's disease ( Polish : <unk> <unk> @-@ <unk> ) . Burrill Bernard Crohn , an American gastroenterologist at New York City 's Mount Sinai Hospital , described fourteen cases in 1932 , and submitted them to the American Medical Association under the rubric of " Terminal ileitis : A new clinical entity " . Later that year , he , along with colleagues Leon Ginzburg and Gordon Oppenheimer , published the case series as " Regional ileitis : a pathologic and clinical entity " . However , due to the precedence of Crohn 's name in the alphabet , it later became known in the worldwide literature as Crohn 's disease . 
 = = Research = = 
 Some evidence supports the hypothesis that the bacterium Mycobacterium avium subspecies paratuberculosis ( MAP ) is a cause of Crohn ’ s disease ( see also Johne 's disease ) . As a result , researchers are looking at the eradication of MAP as a therapeutic option . Treating MAP using antibiotics has been examined and the results are unclear but tentatively beneficial . Vaccination against MAP is also being studied . An anti @-@ MAP vaccine appears effective in mice and cattle with MAP with no apparent side effects . Trials in human are pending . 
 Crohn 's is common in parts of the world where <unk> colonisation is rare and uncommon in those areas where most people carry worms . Infections with helminths may alter the autoimmune response that causes the disease . Trials of extracts from the worm Trichuris suis showed promising results when used in people with IBD . 
 Numerous preclinical studies demonstrate that activation of the CB1 and <unk> cannabinoid receptors exert biological functions on the gastrointestinal tract . Activation of CB1 and <unk> receptors in animals has shown a strong anti @-@ inflammatory effect . <unk> and / or modulation of the <unk> system is a novel therapeutic means for the treatment of numerous GI disorders , including inflammatory bowel diseases like Crohn 's disease . A few small trials have looked at medical cannabis but further evidence is required to determine its usefulness . 
 There is no good evidence that thalidomide or <unk> is useful to bring about or maintain remission . 
 = At Folsom Prison = 
 At Folsom Prison is a live album and 27th overall album by Johnny Cash , released on Columbia Records in May 1968 . After his 1955 song " Folsom Prison Blues " , Cash had been interested in recording a performance at a prison . His idea was put on hold until 1967 , when personnel changes at Columbia Records put Bob Johnston in charge of producing Cash 's material . Cash had recently controlled his drug abuse problems , and was looking to turn his career around after several years of limited commercial success . Backed with June Carter , Carl Perkins and the Tennessee Three , Cash performed two shows at Folsom State Prison in California on January 13 , 1968 . The resulting album consisted of fifteen tracks from the first show and two tracks from the second . 
 Despite little initial investment by Columbia , the album was a hit in the United States , reaching number one on the country charts and the top 15 of the national album chart . The lead single from the album , a live version of " Folsom Prison Blues " , was a top 40 hit , Cash 's first since 1964 's " Understand Your Man " . At Folsom Prison received good reviews upon its release and the ensuing popularity revitalized Cash 's career , leading to the release of a second prison album , At San Quentin . The album was re @-@ released with additional tracks in 1999 and as a three @-@ disc set in 2008 . It was certified three times Platinum on March 27 , 2003 by the Recording Industry Association of America for US sales exceeding three million . 
 = = Background = = 
 Johnny Cash first took interest in Folsom State Prison while serving in the United States Air Force Security Service . In 1953 , his unit watched Crane Wilbur 's film Inside the Walls of Folsom Prison . The film inspired Cash to write a song that reflected his perception of prison life . The result was " Folsom Prison Blues " , Cash 's second single on Sun Records . After its release , the song became popular among inmates , who would sometimes write to Cash , requesting him to perform at their prisons . Cash 's first prison performance was at Huntsville State Prison in 1957 . Satisfied by the favorable reception of the concert , he performed at several other prisons in the years leading up to the Folsom performance in 1968 . 
 A few years after attaining commercial success from songs such as " I Walk the Line " , " Understand Your Man " , and " Ring of Fire " , Cash 's popularity waned . This was due in no small part to his increasing dependence on drugs . In 1967 , Cash sought help for his escalating drug problems ; by the end of the year , his drug use decreased and he sought to turn his career around . Concurrently , the country portion of Columbia Records underwent major personnel changes . Frank Jones and Don Law , who had produced several of Cash 's albums , were ousted in favor of Bob Johnston , who was known for his erratic behavior and willingness to disagree with studio executives . Cash saw this as an opportunity to pitch his idea of recording a live album at a prison ; Johnston enthusiastically supported the concept . Johnston called San Quentin State Prison and Folsom , with the latter being the first to respond . 
 = = Recording = = 
 On January 10 , 1968 , Cash and June Carter checked into the El Rancho Motel in Sacramento , California . They were later accompanied by the Tennessee Three , Carl Perkins , The Statler Brothers , Johnny 's father Ray Cash , Reverend Floyd <unk> , pastor of Avenue Community Church in Ventura , California ( where Cash often attended services ) , who regularly counseled inmates at Folsom and helped facilitate the concert , and producer Johnston . The performers rehearsed for two days , an uncommon occurrence for them , sometimes with two or more songs being rehearsed concurrently by various combinations of the musicians . A fashion show taking place in an adjacent ballroom provided an unneeded distraction , and during the rehearsal sessions on January 12 , California governor Ronald Reagan , who was at the hotel for an after @-@ dinner speech , visited the band and offered his encouragement . One focus of the sessions was to learn " Greystone Chapel " , a song written by inmate Glen Sherley . Sherley recorded a version of the song , which he passed on to Rev. <unk> via the prison 's recreation director . On January 13 , the group traveled to Folsom , meeting up with Los Angeles Times writer Robert Hilburn and Columbia photographer Jim Marshall , who were paid to document the album for the liner notes . 
 Cash decided to hold two performances on January 13 , one at 9 : 40 AM and one at 12 : 40 PM , in case the first performance was unsatisfactory . After an introduction by MC Hugh Cherry , who encouraged the prisoners to " respond " to Cash 's performance , Carl Perkins took the stage . Perkins performed his hit song " Blue Suede Shoes " . Following this song , The Statler Brothers sang their hit " Flowers on the Wall " and the country standard " This Old House " . Cherry again took the stage and instructed the inmates not to cheer for Cash until he introduced himself ; they obliged . Cash opened both shows with a rendition of " Folsom Prison Blues " and the concerts contained many songs about prison , including " The Wall " , " Green , Green Grass of Home " , and the gallows humor tune " 25 Minutes to Go " . The singer also included other songs of despair , such as the Merle Travis song " Dark as a Dungeon " . Following " Orange Blossom Special " , Cash included a few " slow , ballad @-@ type songs " , including " Send a Picture of Mother " and " The Long Black Veil " , and then followed with three novelty songs from his album Everybody Loves A Nut , " Dirty Old Egg @-@ <unk> Dog " , " Flushed from the Bathroom of Your Heart " , and " Joe Bean " . June Carter joined Cash on stage to perform a pair of duets . After a seven @-@ minute version of a song from his " Blood , Sweat and Tears " album , " The Legend of John Henry 's Hammer " , Cash took a break and Carter recited a poem . Cash ended both concerts with Sherley 's " Greystone Chapel " . The second concert was not as fruitful as the first ; the musicians were fatigued from the earlier show . Only two songs from the second concert , " Give My Love to Rose " and " I Got Stripes , " made it onto the LP release . 
 = = Reception and impact = = 
 The album release of At Folsom Prison was prepared in four months . Despite the recent success of " Rosanna 's Going Wild " , a Cash single released just before the Folsom concerts that reached number two on the country charts , Columbia initially invested little in the album or its single " Folsom Prison Blues " . This was due partially to Columbia 's efforts to promote pop stars instead of country artists . Nevertheless , the single charted on the Billboard Hot 100 on May 25 , 1968 ; it also hit the country charts a week later . The single suffered a setback , however , when Sirhan Sirhan assassinated Senator Robert F. Kennedy on June 5 , 1968 . Radio stations ceased playing the single due to the macabre line : " I shot a man in Reno / Just to watch him die " . Reeling in the success prior to the assassination , Columbia demanded that Johnston remix the single with the line removed . Despite protests from Cash , the single was edited and re @-@ released . The new version became a success , hitting number one on the country charts and the top forty on the national charts . The successful single prompted the album to climb the album charts , eventually reaching number one on the Top Country Albums chart and number thirteen on the Pop Albums chart — the forerunner to the Billboard 200 . By August 1968 , Folsom had shipped over 300 @,@ 000 copies ; two months later it was certified gold by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) for shipping over 500 @,@ 000 . 
 At Folsom Prison received rave reviews upon its release . Al Aronowitz of Life stated that Cash sang the songs like " someone who has grown up believing he is one of the people that these songs are about . " For The Village Voice , Ann Fisher wrote that " every cut is special in its own way " and Richard Goldstein noted that the album was " filled with the kind of emotionalism you seldom find in rock . " Fredrick E. <unk> of Sing Out ! praised At Folsom Prison as " an album structured an aural experience for us . " 
 The success of At Folsom Prison revitalized Cash 's career ; according to Cash , " that 's where things really got started for me again " . Sun Records re @-@ dubbed Cash 's previous B @-@ side " Get Rhythm " with applause similar to Folsom 's , and it became successful enough to enter the Hot 100 . Cash returned to the prison scene in 1969 when he recorded At San Quentin at San Quentin State Prison . At San Quentin became Cash 's first album to hit number one on the Pop chart and produced the number two hit " A Boy Named Sue " . The ensuing popularity from the Folsom concert also prompted ABC to give Cash his own television show . 
 The album was re @-@ released on October 19 , 1999 with three extra tracks excluded from the original LP : " Busted " , " Joe Bean " , and " The Legend of John Henry 's Hammer " . Stephen Thomas Erlewine of Allmusic praised the new version , calling it " the ideal blend of mythmaking and gritty reality . " On May 27 , 2003 , At Folsom Prison was certified triple platinum by the RIAA for shipping over three million units . Since its release , it has been acknowledged as one of the greatest albums of all time by several sources . In 2003 , the album was ranked number 88 on Rolling Stone 's list of the 500 greatest albums of all time . Also that year , it was one of 50 recordings chosen by the Library of Congress to be added to the National Recording Registry . Country Music Television named it the third greatest album in country music in 2006 . Blender listed the album as the 63rd greatest American album of all time and as one of the " 500 CDs You Must Own " . In 2006 , Time listed it among the 100 greatest albums of all time . 
 In 2008 , Columbia and Legacy Records re @-@ issued At Folsom Prison as a two CD , one DVD set . This so @-@ called " Legacy Edition " contained both concerts uncut and remastered . The included DVD , produced by <unk> Cram and Michael <unk> of Northern Light Productions , featured pictures and interviews relevant to the concert . Pitchfork Media lauded the collection , claiming that it had " the force of empathic endeavors , as if he were doing penance for his notorious bad habits . " Christian Hoard wrote for Rolling Stone that the Legacy edition " makes for an excellent historical document , highlighting Cash 's rapport with prison folk . " 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = = = Re @-@ release ( 1999 ) = = = 
 = = = Legacy Edition ( 2008 ) = = = 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Johnny Cash – vocal , guitar , harmonica 
 June Carter – vocal 
 Marshall Grant – bass guitar 
 W.S. Holland – drums 
 Carl Perkins – electric guitar 
 Luther Perkins – electric guitar 
 The Statler Brothers ( Lew DeWitt , Don Reid , Harold Reid , Phil <unk> ) – vocals 
 Bob Johnston – producer 
 Bob <unk> , Bill Britain – engineers 
 Jim Marshall – photography 
 Credited on 1999 re @-@ issue 
 Bob Irwin – producer 
 Steven Berkowitz – producer , A & R 
 Vic <unk> – mixing 
 Howard <unk> – art direction 
 Darcy Proper – mastering 
 John Henry Jackson – product manager 
 Randall Martin – packaging manager 
 Darren <unk> , Tim Smith – A & R 
 Nick <unk> – consultant 
 = = Charts = = 
 = Only a Northern Song = 
 " Only a Northern Song " is a song by the English rock group the Beatles from their 1969 album Yellow Submarine . Written by George Harrison , it was recorded mainly in February 1967 during the sessions for Sgt. Pepper 's Lonely Hearts Club Band but the Beatles chose not to include it on that album . Instead , it was one of the four new songs that the band provided for the 1968 animated film Yellow Submarine , to meet their contractual obligations to United Artists . 
 Harrison wrote " Only a Northern Song " out of dissatisfaction with his status as a junior songwriter with the Beatles ' publishing company , Northern Songs . The lyrics and music convey his disenchantment at how the company retained the copyright for the songs it published , and at how , following its public listing in 1965 , the major shareholders profited more from his compositions than he did . The recording features Hammond organ , played by Harrison , and an overdubbed montage of assorted sounds including trumpet blasts and spoken voices , anticipating John Lennon 's 1968 sound collage " Revolution 9 " . Due to the difficulty in assembling the completed track from two tape sources , " Only a Northern Song " remained a rare song from the Beatles ' post @-@ 1963 catalogue that was unavailable in true stereo until 1999 . That year , it was remixed for inclusion on the album Yellow Submarine Songtrack . 
 The song has received a varied response from reviewers ; while Ian MacDonald dismisses the track as a " self @-@ indulgent dirge " , the website Ultimate Classic Rock identifies it as one of the Beatles ' best works in the psychedelic rock genre . A version of the song with a different vocal part , and omitting the sound collage overdubs , was issued on the Beatles ' 1996 outtakes compilation Anthology 2 . Gravenhurst and Yonder Mountain String Band are among the artists who have covered " Only a Northern Song " . 
 = = Background and inspiration = = 
 George Harrison said that the subject matter for " Only a Northern Song " related to both his city of birth , Liverpool , in Merseyside , and the fact that the copyright for the composition belonged to the Beatles ' publishing company , Northern Songs . The company was floated on the London Stock Exchange in February 1965 , as a means of saving John Lennon and Paul McCartney , the Beatles ' principal songwriters , the tax liability generated through the international success of their catalogue . Harrison had formed his own publishing company , Harrisongs , in late 1964 ; despite the financial advantages offered by his 80 per cent stake in that company , he agreed to remain with Northern Songs , to aid the flotation scheme . Among the four Beatles , Lennon and McCartney were major shareholders in Northern Songs , each owning 15 per cent of the public company 's shares , and the pair earned considerable wealth over the first year of the flotation . Harrison and Ringo Starr , as contracted songwriters , owned 0 @.@ 8 per cent each . This arrangement ensured that , in addition to the company retaining the copyright of all its published songs , Lennon and McCartney profited more from Harrison 's compositions than he did . 
 Author Brian Southall describes " Only a Northern Song " as Harrison 's " personal denunciation of the Beatles ' music publishing business " . When discussing the song in two late 1990s interviews with Billboard editor @-@ in @-@ chief Timothy White , Harrison commented that the main target of his complaints was Dick James , the managing director of Northern Songs . Having been signed by James in 1963 , at the age of twenty , Harrison said that the publisher had failed to explain that by signing the contract , he was also signing away the ownership of his compositions . Harrison added that he only understood the consequences after the 1965 flotation , when the major shareholders were " making all this money out of this catalog " . With reference to the Rutles ' 1978 parody of the Beatles ' history , All You Need Is Cash , he also told White : " I think [ the message behind ' Only a Northern Song ' ] was put better in the make @-@ believe TV documentary … where it said , ' Dick Jaws , an out @-@ of @-@ work music publisher of no fixed ability ' signed them up for the rest of their lives . " 
 In author Ian MacDonald 's estimation , " Only a Northern Song " suggests that Harrison " had yet to recover his enthusiasm for being a Beatle " after he had threatened to leave the group following their final concert tour , in August 1966 . Before the band regrouped in November that year to begin recording their album Sgt. Pepper 's Lonely Hearts Club Band , Harrison spent six weeks in India with his sitar teacher , Ravi Shankar , a visit that heightened his disinterest in the Beatles ' project . MacDonald considers that Harrison 's link with northern England in " Only a Northern Song " was influenced by the Beatles working on songs about growing up in Liverpool , which was the concept under consideration at the start of the Sgt. Pepper sessions . 
 = = Composition and musical structure = = 
 Harrison wrote " Only a Northern Song " on a Hammond organ , which became his preferred instrument for songwriting during 1967 , replacing the guitar . The song is in the key of A major , although MacDonald gives B minor as a secondary key . The opening organ part ends with a preview of the melody over which the song title appears in the song proper . After this short introduction , the composition is structured into two portions consisting of two verses and a chorus each , which are followed by a single verse , a final chorus and an outro , with some of these sections rendered as instrumental passages . 
 The composition is a meta @-@ song , in that its subject is the work itself . While commenting on the pointlessness of writing for Northern Songs , Harrison employs musical dissonance to express his dissatisfaction with the company , through the use of what musicologist Walter Everett terms " ill @-@ behaved tones " and " wrong @-@ mode " chords . 
 From the verse 's opening A major chord , the melody moves to a ii minor voicing , rendered as B minor 7 / 11 through the inclusion of a low @-@ register E note . In his lyrics , Harrison acknowledges the apparent awkwardness of such a change , singing " You may think the chords are going wrong " and , in the final verse , that the harmony might be " a little dark and out of key " . Musicologist Alan Pollack considers the song 's music and lyrical message to be " uncannily in tune " with one another , a combination that is accentuated by surprising and irregular phrase @-@ lengths in the verses . 
 Contrasting with the drawn @-@ out melody over the verses , the choruses present a fast progression of chords – specifically , E major , B minor 7 , G major , C ♯ 7 and F ♯ 7 . In the first chorus , Harrison comments that , given the inadequacy of his publishing arrangement , " It doesn 't really matter what chords I play " . Author Ian Inglis interprets this line as mirroring the singer 's complaint to Beatles biographer Hunter Davies in the late 1960s , regarding the futility of the band 's live performances when their screaming fans never listened to the music the Beatles were playing . Harrison biographer Simon Leng describes " Only a Northern Song " as the first example of its composer " pushing back at the Beatles as an organization he found wanting " , a theme Harrison returned to in 1968 with " Not Guilty " , with his comments on the group 's internal discord . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Recording = = = 
 The Beatles taped the basic track for " Only a Northern Song " at EMI 's Abbey Road Studios on 13 February 1967 , during the sessions for Sgt. Pepper 's Lonely Hearts Club Band . As was typical with his new compositions , Harrison had yet to give the song a title , so it was instead referred to as " Not Known " . The line @-@ up on the track comprised Harrison on organ , Lennon on tambourine , McCartney on bass and Starr on drums . The band recorded nine takes of the song before selecting take 3 for further work . The following day , after the studio engineers had carried out a reduction mix , Harrison added two tracks of lead vocals . 
 The song was disliked by the Beatles ' producer , George Martin , and the band elected to omit it from the album . As his sole writing contribution to Sgt. Pepper , Harrison instead offered the Indian @-@ styled " Within You Without You " , which , in Martin 's recollection , was welcomed with " a bit of a relief all round " . " Only a Northern Song " then became the first track the group provided for the soundtrack to the Yellow Submarine animated film ( 1968 ) , in line with their contractual obligation to United Artists to supply four new songs . Described by Beatles historian Mark Lewisohn as a " myth " , a story later circulated that Harrison had rush @-@ written the composition for United Artists in early 1968 , after Al <unk> , the film 's producer , approached the band for a final song . 
 = = = Overdubbing = = = 
 The group returned to " Only a Northern Song " on 20 April 1967 , within an hour of completing the final mixing on Sgt. Pepper . In addition to replacing the original bass guitar and vocal parts , the overdubs carried out that day included trumpet and piano , played by McCartney and Lennon , respectively , together with glockenspiel and percussion . A second 4 @-@ track tape recorder was used for the song , so allowing the various instrumental parts and studio effects to be spread across eight available channels . 
 The Beatles performed much of the overdubs in a seemingly haphazard manner ; MacDonald describes the result as " a consciously <unk> piece of work " . Tom Maginnis of AllMusic finds the recording " heavily steeped in the psychedelic sounds of the period , using liberal amounts of loose instrumentation " , particularly " chaotic bursts of trumpet " . In Pollack 's description , these later additions constitute a " noise track " , which further heightens the theme of discordance and is used to fill the song 's instrumental sections , becoming especially prominent during the outro . With its inclusion of reversed tape loops and spoken voices , Inglis has cited the sound collage effect as a precedent for Lennon 's 1968 avant @-@ garde track " Revolution 9 " and an early example of the electronic music genre . 
 = = = Mixing = = = 
 The Beatles completed a final mix of the song on 21 April 1967 . Due to the difficulty in getting the two 4 @-@ track machines to play at exactly the same time , only a mono mix was attempted . In October 1968 , while preparing the Yellow Submarine soundtrack album for release , EMI 's engineers created a mock @-@ stereo ( <unk> ) mix from this mono mix , instead of returning to the master tapes . For the monaural version of the album , originally available only in the UK , the engineers combined the two channels from the <unk> mix , rather than using the April 1967 mono mix . 
 = = Appearance in Yellow Submarine film = = 
 In the Yellow Submarine film , the song appears during a scene when the submarine carrying the Beatles travels through the Sea of Science , one of the seven seas around Pepperland . Referring to the psychedelic imagery in the animation , author Stephen Glynn considers that this segment " only ' makes sense ' when read as attempting an audio @-@ visual recreation of the hallucinogenic state " . Jeremiah Massengale , an academic in the field of visual communication , highlights the sequence as one of many technical innovations introduced by the 1968 film , saying : " accompanying multi @-@ colored , square portrait paintings of the Beatles during ' Only a Northern Song ' , there 's a creative use of an oscillator picking out the sound waves of the track . " Glynn cites the drug @-@ inspired imagery of this and two other song sequences as the true reason that Rank pulled Yellow Submarine from its UK cinema run , rather than the company 's official reasoning that the film had performed poorly at the box office . 
 The " Only a Northern Song " segment was the only clip shown in a feature about Yellow Submarine on the television show How It Is . Produced by Tony Palmer and including portions of the stage play based on Lennon 's book In His Own Write , the show was broadcast on BBC1 two days after the film 's world premiere in London , on 19 July 1968 . 
 = = Release = = 
 In January 1969 , " Only a Northern Song " was issued as the second track on side one of the Yellow Submarine LP , with George Martin 's orchestral score for the film occupying the whole of side two . The soundtrack was viewed as a secondary release by the Beatles , who delayed its release to allow for their 1968 self @-@ titled double album , also known as " the White Album " . Although Harrison 's contract with James had expired in March 1968 , the copyright for " Only a Northern Song " and his second contribution to the film , " It 's All Too Much " , remained with Northern Songs rather than being assigned to Harrisongs as his four White Album compositions had been . The song 's release coincided with a period of acrimony between James and the Beatles , particularly Lennon and McCartney , about whom Lewisohn writes : " If John and Paul still thought they owned their songs [ following the flotation of Northern Songs ] they were deluding themselves . " In March 1969 , wary of the disharmony within the band and the problems affecting their Apple Corps business empire , James sold his majority shareholding in Northern Songs to Lew Grade 's ATV Music , thereby selling on the ownership of the Beatles catalogue . 
 In a contemporary review of Yellow Submarine , Beat Instrumental lamented that it offered little new material by the band , but described " Only a Northern Song " and " It 's All Too Much " as " superb pieces " that " redeem " side one . Recalling the release in his 1977 book The Beatles Forever , however , Nicholas Schaffner dismissed the track as one of the " trifling baubles " the Beatles provided for a film project they had little interest in originally . While adhering to <unk> 's account of the song 's creation , NME critic Bob Woffinden found " considerable merit " in " Only a Northern Song " , and suggested that Harrison 's divergence from his usual , methodical approach to songwriting was one he should pursue more often . 
 In January 1996 , the song was issued as the B @-@ side to " It 's All Too Much " on a blue @-@ vinyl jukebox single , as part of a series of Beatles releases by Capitol Records ' CEMA Special Markets division . By 1999 , " Only a Northern Song " remained one of only two post @-@ 1963 Beatles songs not to have been made unavailable in true stereo ( the other being " You Know My Name ( Look Up the Number ) " ) . That year , a stereo version became available when the track was remixed for inclusion on the album Yellow Submarine Songtrack . 
 = = Retrospective assessment and legacy = = 
 Among more recent reviews of the Yellow Submarine album , David Gassman of PopMatters admires the song for its " mordant humor " and interprets the lyrics as a possible " dig " at Lennon and McCartney . Gassman adds , with reference to the superior " It 's All Too Much " : " as long as songs like this were being relegated to throwaway projects , George could be excused for sniping at John and Paul in ' Only a Northern Song ' . " Discussing the same two tracks , Pitchfork Media 's Mark Richardson writes that they offer little of interest aside from their " swirling " psychedelic effects , although he considers that " Only a Northern Song " " at least has a good joke going for it , simultaneously alluding to the North of England and the Beatles ' Lennon @-@ McCartney @-@ dominated publishing company " . 
 As with most of the Beatles ' post @-@ Sgt. Pepper 1967 recordings , their contributions to Yellow Submarine have traditionally been held in low regard by the band 's biographers . Lewisohn describes the group 's 20 April overdubs on " Only a Northern Song " as " a curious session " and writes that their work over this period " display [ s ] a startling lack of cohesion and enthusiasm " . Mark Hertsgaard considers that " Only a Northern Song " was " understandably … rejected as not good enough for Sgt Pepper " , while MacDonald dismisses the track as " dismal " and a " self @-@ indulgent dirge " . 
 More impressed , Alex Young of Consequence of Sound identifies the song as " lyrically the [ album 's ] quintessential track , as it perfectly defines Yellow Submarine in two verses alone , while coming out sonically like a Pink Floyd b @-@ side from the Obscured By Clouds sessions " . In a 2003 review , in Mojo , Peter Doggett said that Harrison 's two contributions " did much to rescue the album from oblivion " , and he described " Only a Northern Song " as " gloriously ironic " . Writing for Ultimate Classic Rock in 2013 , Dave Swanson ranked the track third on his list of the " Top 10 Beatles Psychedelic Songs " ( following " Tomorrow Never Knows " and " I Am the Walrus " ) and concluded : " Would ' Sgt. Pepper ' have been even greater had this mind @-@ melter been included in favor of , say , ' When I 'm Sixty Four ? ' All signs point to a positive affirmation . " In 2006 , " Only a Northern Song " was ranked 75th in Mojo 's list " The 101 Greatest Beatles Songs " , where Glenn Tilbrook described it as " a wonderfully unexpected tune " and suggested that Harrison 's " lovely and sardonic lyric … could be the inspiration for a thousand Rutles songs " . 
 While noting Yellow Submarine 's status as the Beatles ' only " inessential " album , Bruce Eder of AllMusic describes " Only a Northern Song " as " an odd piece of psychedelic ersatz , mixing <unk> and some personal comments " . Referring to the revelations offered in the song , Eder adds : " they present Harrison 's vision of how music and recording sounded , from the inside @-@ out and the outside @-@ in , during the psychedelic era – the song thus provided a rare glimpse inside the doors of perception of being a Beatle ( or , at least , one aspect of being this particular Beatle ) circa 1967 . " Writing for Billboard in 2001 , Bill Holland grouped " Only a Northern Song " with the Byrds ' " So You Want to Be a Rock ' n ' Roll Star " and early @-@ 1970s releases by the Kinks and Joni Mitchell , as songs that constitute the first wave of musical statements in which artists " accuse or indict their industry 's business policies " . Inglis views " Only a Northern Song " as the Beatles ' " first ' postmodern ' song " , due to the " deliberate ironic intent " evident in the subject matter and in the use of tape effects and scattered conversation . 
 = = Other versions = = 
 An alternative edit of the song appeared on the Beatles ' Anthology 2 out @-@ takes compilation in 1996 . Slightly sped up , and mixed in stereo , this version comprises the song 's basic track without most of the April 1967 overdubs , and with a vocal take that contains some changes to the lyrics . 
 Coinciding with the popularity of " It 's All Too Much " among acid @-@ rock bands of the early 1990s , Sun Dial released a cover of " Only a Northern Song " as the B @-@ side of their 1991 single " Fireball " . In 2009 , Greg Davis and jazz singer @-@ songwriter Chris Weisman named their psychedelic folk partnership , Northern Songs , after the Beatles track . Their 2010 album Northern Songs similarly honoured the song , as well as including a cover version of " It 's All Too Much " . 
 When Mojo released the CD Yellow Submarine Resurfaces in July 2012 , " Only a Northern Song " was covered by Gravenhurst . Yonder Mountain String Band included the song in their live performances during 2013 and 2015 . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 According to Ian MacDonald : 
 George Harrison – vocals , Hammond organ , tape effects , noises 
 John Lennon – piano , glockenspiel , tape effects , noises 
 Paul McCartney – bass guitar , trumpet , tape effects , noises 
 Ringo Starr – drums 
 = Chimes of Freedom ( song ) = 
 " Chimes of Freedom " is a song written and performed by Bob Dylan and featured on his 1964 album Another Side of Bob Dylan ( see 1964 in music ) , produced by Tom Wilson . It was written in early 1964 and was influenced by the symbolist poetry of Arthur Rimbaud . The song depicts the feelings and thoughts of the singer and his companion as they wait out a lightning storm under a doorway . The singer expresses his solidarity with people who are downtrodden or otherwise treated unjustly , and believes that the thunder is tolling in sympathy for them . Music critic Paul Williams has described the song as Dylan 's Sermon on the Mount . The song has been covered many times by different artists , including The Byrds , Jefferson Starship , Youssou N 'Dour , Bruce Springsteen and U2 . 
 = = Bob Dylan 's version = = 
 " Chimes of Freedom " was written shortly after the release of " The Times They Are a @-@ Changin ' " album in early 1964 during a road trip that Dylan took across America with musician Paul Clayton , journalist Pete Karman , and road manager Victor <unk> . It was written at about the same time as " Mr. Tambourine Man " , which is similarly influenced by the symbolism of Arthur Rimbaud . There are conflicting stories about exactly when during the trip this song was written . One story is that Dylan wrote the song on a portable typewriter in the back of a car the day after visiting civil rights activists Bernice Johnson and Cordell <unk> in Atlanta , Georgia . However , a handwritten lyric sheet from the Waldorf Astoria Hotel in Toronto , Canada that was reproduced in The Bob Dylan Scrapbook 1956 @-@ 1966 indicates that this story cannot be entirely true . Dylan was in Toronto , Canada in late January and early February , before the road trip on which the song was supposedly written . So , although parts of the song may have been written on the road trip , Dylan had started working on the song earlier . The first public performance of the song took place in early 1964 , either at the Civic Auditorium in Denver on February 15 , or at the Berkeley Community Theater in Berkeley , California , on February 22 . " Chimes of Freedom " was an important part of Dylan 's live concert repertoire throughout most of 1964 , although by the latter part of that year he had ceased performing it and would not perform it again until 1987 , when he revived the song for concerts with the Grateful Dead and with Tom Petty and the Heartbreakers . 
 The master take of the song was recorded by Dylan , with Tom Wilson producing , during the recording sessions for the Another Side of Bob Dylan album on June 9 , 1964 . It took seven takes before Dylan got the song right , even though it was one of only three songs that he recorded during the session that he had already performed in front of a concert audience . 
 Music critic Paul Williams has described the song as Dylan 's Sermon on the Mount . The song is a lyrical expression of feelings evoked while watching a lightning storm . The singer and a companion are caught in a thunderstorm in mid @-@ evening and the pair of them duck into a doorway , where they are both transfixed by one lightning flash after another . The natural phenomena of thunder and lightning appear to take on auditory and ultimately emotional aspects to the singer , with the thunder experienced as the tolling of bells and the lightning bolts appearing as chimes . Eventually , the sights and sounds in the sky become intermixed in the mind of the singer , as evidenced by the lines : 
 As majestic bells of bolts struck shadows in the sounds , 
 <unk> to be the chimes of freedom flashing . 
 Over the course of the song the sun slowly rises and the lyrics can be interpreted as a proclamation of the hope that as the sky clears after a difficult night , all the world 's people will rise together to proclaim their survival to the sound of the church bells . 
 In Chimes of Freedom : The Politics of Bob Dylan 's Art , author Mike Marqusee notes that the song marks a transition between Dylan 's earlier protest song style ( a litany of the down @-@ trodden and oppressed , in the second half of each verse ) and his later more free @-@ flowing poetic style ( the fusion of images of lightning , storm and bells in the first half ) . In this later style , which is influenced by 19th century French symbolist poet Arthur Rimbaud , the poetry is more allusive , filled with " chains of flashing images . " In this song , rather than support a specific cause as in his earlier protest songs , he finds solidarity with all people who are downtrodden or otherwise treated unjustly , including unwed mothers , the disabled , refugees , outcasts , those unfairly jailed , " the luckless , the abandoned and <unk> , " and , in the final verse , " the countless confused , accused , misused , strung out ones and worse " and " every hung @-@ up person in the whole wide universe . " By having the chimes of freedom toll for both rebels and rakes , the song is more inclusive in its sympathies than previous protest songs , such as " The Times They Are A @-@ Changin ' " , written just the prior year . After " Chimes of Freedom " , Dylan 's protest songs no longer depicted social reality in the black and white terms he renounces in " My Back Pages " but rather use satirical surrealism to make their points . 
 The assassination of U.S. President , John F. Kennedy , is one possible inspiration for Dylan starting the song . Although Dylan has denied that this is the case , he did draft a number of poems in the fall of 1963 in the aftermath of Kennedy 's death and one of those poems in particular , a short six @-@ line piece , appears to contain the genesis for " Chimes of Freedom " : 
 the colors of friday were dull 
 as the cathedral bells were gently <unk> 
 strikin for the gentle 
 strikin for the kind 
 strikin for the crippled ones 
 and strikin for the blind . 
 Kennedy was killed on a Friday , and the cathedral bells in the poem would have been the church bells heralding his death . Using a storm as a metaphor for the death of a president is similar to Shakespeare 's use of a storm in King Lear . By the time Dylan wrote the first draft of " Chimes of Freedom " the following February , it contained many of the elements of this poem , except that the crippled ones and the blind were changed to " guardians and protectors of the mind . " In addition , the cathedral bells had become the " chimes of freedom flashing " , as seen by two lovers finding shelter in a cathedral doorway . 
 Besides Rimbaud 's symbolism , the song is also influenced by the alliterative poetry of Gerard Manley Hopkins , the poetic vision of William Blake and the violent drama , mixed with compassion and romantic language , of William Shakespeare . In addition , Dylan had used rain as a symbol in earlier songs , such as " A Hard Rain 's A @-@ Gonna Fall " . In his memoir , folk musician Dave Van Ronk claimed that the song was influenced by an old sentimental ballad , " Chimes of Trinity " by Michael J. Fitzpatrick , which Dave Van Ronk had introduced to Dylan . 
 Despite the song 's appeal to cover artists , it has appeared sparingly on Dylan 's compilation and live albums . It was , however , included on the 1967 European compilation album Bob Dylan 's Greatest Hits 2 . A recording of Dylan performing the song at the 1964 Newport Folk Festival was included on the compilation album , The Bootleg Series Vol . 7 : No Direction Home : The Soundtrack . The same performance can also be seen on the 2007 DVD The Other Side of the Mirror : Live at Newport Folk Festival 1963 @-@ 1965 . A version sung by Dylan and Joan Osborne in 1999 appears on the original television soundtrack album of the film titled The 60 's . 
 As of 2009 , Dylan continues to perform " Chimes of Freedom " in concert , although he did not play the song live during the 23 years between late 1964 and 1987 . In 1993 Dylan played the song in front of the Lincoln Memorial as part of Bill Clinton 's first inauguration as U.S. president . 
 = = Cover versions = = 
 = = = The Byrds ' version = = = 
 The Byrds included a recording of " Chimes of Freedom " on their 1965 debut album , Mr. Tambourine Man . The song was the last track to be recorded for the album but the session was marred by conflict and drama . After the band had completed the song 's instrumental backing track , guitarist and harmony vocalist David Crosby announced that he wasn 't going to sing on the recording and was instead leaving the studio for the day . The precise reason for Crosby 's refusal to sing the song has never been adequately explained but the ensuing fracas between the guitarist and the band 's manager , record producer Jim Dickson , ended with Dickson sitting on Crosby 's chest , telling him " The only way you 're going to get through that door is over my dead body ... You 're going to stay in this room until you do the vocal . " According to a number of people present in the studio that day , Crosby burst into tears but eventually completed the song 's harmony part with sterling results . Dickson himself noted in later years that his altercation with Crosby was a cathartic moment in which the singer " got it all out and sang like an angel . " 
 The song went on to become a staple of The Byrds ' live concert repertoire , until their final disbandment in 1973 . The band also performed the song on the television programs Hullabaloo and Shindig ! , as well as including it in their performance at the Monterey Pop Festival . The Byrds ' performance of " Chimes of Freedom " at Monterey can be seen in the 2002 The Complete Monterey Pop Festival DVD box set . The song was also performed by a reformed line @-@ up of The Byrds featuring Roger McGuinn , David Crosby , and Chris Hillman in January 1989 . In addition to its appearance on Mr. Tambourine Man , " Chimes of Freedom " has appeared on several Byrds ' compilation albums , including The Byrds ' Greatest Hits , The Byrds Play Dylan , The Very Best of The Byrds , and The Essential Byrds . 
 = = = Other covers = = = 
 " Chimes of Freedom " has also been covered by artists as diverse as Phil Carmen , Jefferson Starship , Youssou N 'Dour , Martyn Joseph , Joan Osborne , Bruce Springsteen , Warren Zevon and The West Coast Pop Art Experimental Band . Although U2 have never released a recording of the song , they played it live in concert during the late 1980s . Bruce Springsteen 's cover version managed to reach # 16 on the Billboard Hot Mainstream Rock Tracks chart in 1988 , although it was never released as a single . It was recorded in Stockholm , Sweden , on July 3 , 1988 , when Springsteen performed it during his Tunnel of Love Express tour . Springsteen used the performance to announce before a worldwide radio audience his role in the upcoming Human Rights Now ! tour to benefit Amnesty International and mark the fortieth anniversary of the signing of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights . The song was subsequently released as the title track of the live Chimes of Freedom EP . Springsteen 's performance is rousing and fervent , transforming the song into a ringing anthem for the full E Street Band , without losing the power of the words evident in Dylan 's own solo performance . On the Human Rights Now ! tour itself , Springsteen led a group performance of " Chimes of Freedom " featuring the other artists on the tour : Tracy Chapman , Sting , Peter Gabriel , and Youssou N 'Dour , with each taking turns on the song 's verses . 
 Jefferson Starship covered the song on their 2008 release , Jefferson 's Tree of Liberty , with Paul Kantner , David Freiberg and Cathy Richardson on vocals . Additionally , the Senegalese musician Youssou N 'Dour recorded an unusual cover version of the song , in which he treated the song as an anthem for the many people in Africa struggling to survive . The melody of " Chimes of Freedom " was deliberately borrowed by Billy Bragg for the song " Ideology " , from his third album , Talking with the Taxman about Poetry , with Bragg 's chorus " above the sound of ideologies clashing " echoing Dylan 's " we gazed upon the chimes of freedom flashing " . In addition , the Bon Jovi song " Bells of Freedom " , from their Have a Nice Day album , is somewhat reminiscent of " Chimes of Freedom " in structure . Neil Young 's song " Flags of Freedom " from his Living with War album mentions Dylan by name and melodically recalls the tune and verse structure of " Chimes of Freedom " , though Young is listed as the song 's only writer . The British band Starry Eyed and Laughing took their name from the opening line of the song 's final verse . 
 " Chimes of Freedom " is one of seven Dylan songs whose lyrics were reset for soprano and piano ( or orchestra ) by John Corigliano for his song cycle Mr. Tambourine Man : Seven Poems of Bob Dylan . 
 = Constance Stokes = 
 Constance Stokes ( née Parkin , 22 February 1906 – 14 July 1991 ) was a modernist Australian painter who worked in Victoria . She trained at the National Gallery of Victoria Art School until 1929 , winning a scholarship to continue her study at London 's Royal Academy of Arts . Although Stokes painted few works in the 1930s , her paintings and drawings were exhibited from the 1940s onwards . She was one of only two women , and two Victorians , included in a major exhibition of twelve Australian artists that travelled to Canada , the United Kingdom and Italy in the early 1950s . 
 Influenced by George Bell , Stokes was part of the Melbourne Contemporary Artists , a group Bell established in 1940 . Her works continued to be well @-@ regarded for many years after the group 's formation , in contrast to those by many of her Victorian modernist colleagues , with favourable reviews from critics such as Sir Philip Hendy in the United Kingdom and Bernard William Smith in Australia . 
 Her husband 's early death in 1962 forced Stokes to return to painting as a career , resulting in a successful one @-@ woman show in 1964 , her first in thirty years . She continued to paint and exhibit through the 1970s and 1980s , and was the subject of a retrospective exhibition that toured Victorian regional galleries including Swan Hill Regional Art Gallery and Geelong Art Gallery in 1985 . She died in 1991 and is little @-@ known in comparison to some other women artists including Grace Cossington Smith and Clarice Beckett , but her fortunes were revived somewhat as a central figure in Anne Summers ' 2009 book The Lost Mother . Her art is represented in most major Australian galleries , including the National Gallery of Australia and the National Gallery of Victoria ; the Art Gallery of New South Wales is the only significant Australian collecting institution not to hold one of her works . 
 = = Early life and training = = 
 Constance Parkin was born in 1906 in the hamlet of <unk> , near Nhill in western Victoria . The family moved to Melbourne in 1920 , where she completed her schooling at <unk> convent in the suburb of Kew . Constance was short , just under five feet tall , and had dark hair . She trained between 1925 and 1929 at the National Gallery of Victoria Art School in Melbourne . Over the summer of 1925 – 1926 the Gallery held a competition for its students , who were asked to paint " holiday subjects " ; Constance won the prize for a landscape . The competition was judged by artist George Bell , who would have a continuing influence over her artistic career . 
 In 1930 , Stokes was among artists who exhibited at a Melbourne gallery , the Athenaeum . Her painting , Portrait of Mrs. W. <unk> , was one of only two to draw praise from prominent member of the Heidelberg School , Arthur Streeton , who described the work as a " rare attraction " that was " liquid and luminous " . At the end of her studies , Stokes won the National Gallery of Victoria Art School 's prestigious National Gallery Travelling Scholarship , which allowed her to continue her training at the Royal Academy of Arts in London . In addition to her education at the Royal Academy , she studied under the French cubist painter and sculptor André Lhote in Paris in 1932 . The following year she returned to Australia , where she married businessman Eric Stokes . The family settled in Collins Street , Melbourne , and Stokes had three children between 1937 and 1942 . In later years , Stokes had a studio in the family home in Toorak , a modernist house designed by architect Edward Billson . 
 = = Artistic career = = 
 = = = Early career : 1934 to 1952 = = = 
 Stokes returned from a European honeymoon in 1934 , but she produced few works in the years immediately following . Although the Collins Street apartment had become a full @-@ time studio for Stokes , only two paintings and two sketches from the period are known . The most notable is The Village ( <unk> – 1935 ) , influenced , according to Stokes ' own account , by the post @-@ impressionist and portraitist Augustus John . This work was hung in the inaugural exhibition of the Contemporary Art Society , held at the National Gallery of Victoria . It was included in a travelling exhibition that appeared in New York 's Metropolitan Museum of Art in 1941 and later in Canada . In 1946 , Stokes presented the work to the National Gallery of Victoria . 
 In the mid @-@ twentieth century , there were divisions in the Melbourne art scene , which became intertwined with the complex cultural politics of the Cold War era . In the late 1940s , there was a move against modernism in art , and <unk> came into favour . Partly as a reaction to this development , artist George Bell established an exhibiting group called the Melbourne Contemporary Artists in 1940 . Bell was a former war artist and influential member of the Victorian artistic establishment , who after World War II was appointed to teach at the National Gallery of Victoria 's painting school . Influenced by Bell , Stokes was among the artists for whom modernism was a strong influence , and who exhibited with the Melbourne Contemporary Artists . Other members of the group included Russell Drysdale and Sali Herman . 
 Stokes ' artistry endured , while that of some of her modernist colleagues did not . By 1945 , when the Melbourne Contemporary Artists held one of their exhibitions , art critic Alan McCulloch observed that the works were increasingly lacking in originality and that the former standards of the group were being maintained by only a few members . One of those was Stokes , whose work The Family he praised as " strongly designed and sensitively modelled " . The following year , though , McCulloch was more upbeat , describing the show as their best to date , while again complementing Stokes on her " rich and opulent pictures " . Six years later , when the group exhibited in 1952 , the critic for Melbourne 's Argus was as unimpressed as had been McCulloch in 1945 . Suggesting that the show demonstrated that Melbourne 's art scene lacked innovation , he nevertheless singled out a small number of works for praise . One of these was Stokes ' Christ with Simon and Andrew , which he thought showed " richness and feeling " . 
 While Stokes was being praised at home in Melbourne , one of her portraits was among six paintings owned by the National Gallery of Victoria that were loaned for an exhibition on the other side of the country , in Perth . The city 's newspaper , The West Australian , chose Stokes ' picture to illustrate its story on the exhibition . Calling it Girl Drying Her Hair , the paper described the work as " notable for its patient handling , use of bright colour and skilful blending of figure and background " . The National Gallery of Victoria refers to the work as Woman Drying Her Hair , which it had acquired in 1947 at the behest of curator and artist Daryl Lindsay . It was soon to travel a great deal further than to Perth . 
 = = = Later career : 1953 to 1989 = = = 
 In 1953 , at the request of Prime Minister Robert Menzies and the British Arts Council , an exhibition of the works of twelve Australian artists was assembled . It was shown in London , five regional British cities , and at the Venice Biennale . Of the twelve artists selected for inclusion , only two were from Victoria , the rest being from New South Wales ; Stokes was one of the Victorians . Her three works , including Woman Drying Her Hair , hung alongside those of Australia 's most prominent mid @-@ twentieth @-@ century artists , including Arthur Boyd , Russell Drysdale , William Dobell , Sidney Nolan , Lloyd Rees , Donald Friend and Frank Hinder . Despite these prominent painters being selected for inclusion , when the exhibition appeared in London , Stokes ' Girl in Red Tights drew critical attention and acclaim . Admired by the director of the National Gallery Sir Philip Hendy , the work was proclaimed by the art critic at The Times as the " best picture in London that week " . Some artists in Sydney were not so impressed . A meeting of the Royal Art Society of New South Wales urged Prime Minister Menzies to intervene , members describing the paintings as " the worst ever gathered in one place " . However , the Commonwealth Art Advisory Board member who announced the exhibition considered that it would represent the most substantial promotion Australian art would have experienced to that time . The following year , Joseph Burke , Professor of Fine Arts at the University of Melbourne , praised Stokes ' painting , making particular reference to her work that had so entranced viewers at the 1953 exhibition . " Constance Stokes " , he wrote , was a painter who " announced the pursuit of the classical ideal as [ her ] aim . [ Her ] Girl in Red Tights , with its Venetian richness of colouring , ably sustains the monumental harmony of the classical tradition . " 
 Religious subjects appear regularly in Stokes ' paintings ; one such work , The Baptism , is in the collection of the National Gallery of Victoria . Despite her recurring attention to such subjects , however , the artist entered the Blake Prize for Religious Art only once , in 1953 . Esmond George , critic at Adelaide newspaper The Mail , admired the ( unidentified ) work as having " strong art interest " . Stokes ' interest in the Prize was not so strong as to prompt her to enter again . She told an interviewer that " abstract painting took over " . 
 Eric Stokes died unexpectedly in 1962 , an experience which left Constance bereft ; a long @-@ time friend said that she never really recovered . Faced with a substantial mortgage to service , Stokes returned to work : painting . Two years later , she opened her first one @-@ woman show in over thirty years . It comprised 43 works , with the 27 paintings priced dearly , at upwards of 150 guineas . The exhibition was a success both financially and critically : Stokes earned over 4000 guineas , and the exhibition attracted praise from art historian and critic Bernard William Smith . Throughout the 1960s , 1970s and 1980s , she painted and held shows ; this later phase of her work was based on a stronger , if lighter , colour palette and reflected the influence of the art of Henri Matisse , whom Stokes admired . There was also a change in her subject matter , from " classically conceived " still lifes , groups of figures and nudes , to more decorative themes . Stokes ' works continued to be well received , having been included in the 1975 exhibition Australian women artists at the University of Melbourne , and the Regional Galleries Association of Victoria 's 1977 touring exhibition The heroic years of Australian painting , 1940 – 1965 . Stokes ' last painting was Alice Tumbling Down the Rabbit Hole , painted around 1989 ; she died in Melbourne in 1991 . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 The standard reference work , McCulloch 's Encyclopedia of Australian Art , describes Stokes as " a leading figure in the modernist movement in Victoria " . Not all critics regard Stokes ' work so favourably , however . Art historian Christopher Heathcote acknowledges the recognition of Stokes ' work by her contemporaries , but goes on to say that " strong staff support [ at Melbourne University ] for a few lesser practitioners , such as Constance Stokes ... hardly aided the appreciation of the better local work . " Though she appears in McCulloch 's guide , few other reviews of Australian art recognise Stokes . Exceptions , according to feminist writer Anne Summers , include Ursula Hoff 's Masterpieces of the National Gallery of Victoria and Janine Burke 's Australian Women Artists . One Hundred Years 1840 – 1940 , both of which refer to the well @-@ travelled painting Woman Drying Her Hair . While academic artists and art historians such as Bernard William Smith and Joseph Burke praised Stokes ' work during her lifetime , she faded into relative obscurity . There is , however , a strong market for resale of her works . 
 Stokes returned to some prominence through a book by Anne Summers , published in 2009 , called The Lost Mother , in which Stokes and her paintings are central to a narrative about Summers ' own family . Summers contrasts Stokes ' ongoing obscurity with the dramatic resurrection of the oeuvre of artists Grace Cossington Smith and Clarice Beckett , both brought to attention by well @-@ regarded gallery curators . Summers considers a number of factors to be involved in Stokes ' fate , including her association with George Bell , whose destruction of many of his early pictures , propensity to keep reworking his old pieces , and artistic conservatism , all limited his subsequent reputation . Summers also points to the lack of a high @-@ profile champion of Stokes ' work , and her Melbournian identity in a time when " Sydney was where the ideas and the experimentation were and the place where reputations were made " . Historian Helen Topliss takes a slightly different view , emphasising that Stokes was " deflected " from her career by raising a family . 
 A retrospective exhibition of Stokes ' paintings toured Victorian regional galleries including Swan Hill Regional Gallery and Geelong Art Gallery in 1985 . The next year , an exhibition of her work toured several state galleries and the S.H. Irvin gallery in Sydney . In 1992 , her works were displayed in the National Gallery of Victoria 's exhibition Classical Modernism : The George Bell Circle , while in 1993 the same gallery curated an exhibition of her paintings and drawings . 
 Most major Australian collections hold works by Stokes : The Village is one of thirteen in the collection of the National Gallery of Victoria . Closely associated with Victoria , and in particular the cultural milieu of Melbourne , Stokes is well represented in the galleries of that state . These include the Ballarat Fine Art Gallery , Benalla Art Gallery , Geelong Art Gallery , Mornington Peninsula Regional Gallery , and Swan Hill Regional Gallery . Other public galleries holding works by Stokes include the National Gallery of Australia , the Art Gallery of South Australia , the Museum and Art Gallery of the Northern Territory , and the Queensland Art Gallery . The Art Gallery of New South Wales is alone among the major Australian institutions in not holding any of her paintings or drawings . 
 = Jerusalem and Dopesmoker = 
 Jerusalem and Dopesmoker are the final albums by the American heavy metal band Sleep . The albums were released in 1999 and 2003 respectively . The music for these albums was written during a four @-@ year period when the group was working on a single song that was around an hour in length . Sleep had signed with London Records , which financed the album . When recording had finished , London Records was unhappy with the finished product and refused to release it . The album was later released in various forms by different record labels . All versions of the album received very positive reception from music critics , who described it as a high @-@ water mark in both the stoner metal and doom metal genres . 
 = = Production = = 
 After positive reviews from the heavy metal press and the release of the album Sleep 's Holy Mountain ( 1993 ) on Earache Records , Sleep 's label announced that they would release their follow @-@ up record . Sleep had been touring in Europe with Cathedral and in the United States with Hawkwind in support of Sleep 's Holy Mountain when the group felt they had to write new material . The new album was going to be an hour @-@ long song . This song was written and practiced at sound checks , motel rooms and in friends ' houses . Matt Pike said the songwriting process was long and that they were " working on [ the song ] for like four years . We also had two other songs that were working on that were really long , too — like 15 and 20 minutes . But we never recorded them . " Al Cisneros stated that smoking cannabis was important to the song 's creative process : " I was really dependent on the space I got into when I was using it , and some of the lyrics are about that ... The line , ' Drop out of life [ with bong in hand ] , ' was kind of a creed at that point . " The song was originally known and performed live under the title " Dopesmoker " . After their tour , the group began to be interested in a Middle Eastern desert theme which led to Sleep referring to the song as " Jerusalem " during later practice sessions . 
 Sleep were ready to record the album in 1995 but did not record it until 1996 as the band was still contracted with Earache . Cisneros said that there was " about a year and half of legal wrangling between their managers and lawyers at Earache " and that Earache owner Digby Pearson " waited to make the most prime conditions for himself before he let [ Sleep 's ] contract [ go ] . " Sleep were in talks with both London Records and Elektra Records to release their next album . They chose to sign to London , as they were promised complete artistic freedom and more money , and since the label did not have any metal bands , Sleep felt they would receive special treatment . The members of Sleep were poor , and used the majority of money they received from London Records to cover for the debt they were in at that time . 
 The song was recorded at Record Two Studio in <unk> , California . While recording the song , it began to develop differently from the original vision . Pike stated that the " song was getting slower and slower and then it got weird . We started tripping out and second guessing ourselves . " Recording the album was difficult . Pike recalled that " there was so much to memorize for that album , and we had to do it in like three different sections because a reel @-@ to @-@ reel only holds 22 minutes . It was really cool , but it was one of the hardest things I 've ever done in in my life . " Sleep were in the studio for one month then went home to rehearse and returned for another month . Pike noted that they ended up with two or three different versions of the song . 
 = = Release = = 
 Within a few weeks of signing with London , the A & R member who was negotiating with Sleep had been transferred and replaced . After sending the finished album to London Records , the label told Sleep that they were not going to release the album in its current format . London Records had David Sardy remix the album but the label were still confused as to what to do with the album . Sleep refused to have the album released in any edited form which led to a deadlock between London and the band . The members of Sleep have mixed feelings whether the album should have been released in general . Cisneros felt it should not have been released while Pike was content with its release , saying " We did all the work so why leave it sitting around ? " 
 By 2009 , there had been four versions of the album released : a rare London Records promotional disc , a bootleg with cover art by Arik Roper , the Rise Above / Music Cartel Records album , and a release by Tee Pee Records . The Rise Above / Music Cartel release was an unauthorized edited version , released in 1999 under the title Jerusalem . Jerusalem runs at 52 minutes and is a single composition split into six identically named tracks . The version of the album titled Dopesmoker was released on April 22 , 2003 , by Tee Pee Records on compact disc and vinyl with a 63 @-@ minute running time . Cisneros spoke most positively about the 2003 Dopesmoker release , saying " I don 't think the Dopesmoker thing is the exact version that we submitted , but that 's the closest one that 's come out of the four . If I had to pick a favorite , that would be it . " Parts of the song were used in the film Broken Flowers by Jim Jarmusch . Jarmusch stated that he was a fan of Sleep and listed them along with Earth and Sunn O ) ) ) as an influence for creating the film : " I love these kind of visual landscapes they make , and they really inspired things for me for my film The Limits of Control " . 
 = = Reissue = = 
 In March 2012 , Southern Lord Records announced plans for a deluxe reissue of the album , adding of the pending release that " The audio is clearer , louder , and at last brings a true representation of Sleep 's hour @-@ plus <unk> chronicle " . The reissue features new artwork by the band 's artist Arik Roper , a recording mastered from the original studio tapes by From Ashes Rise guitarist Brad Boatright , and a live version of the song " Holy Mountain " , recorded at the I @-@ Beam in San Francisco in 1994 . This version of the album reached number 14 on the Top Heatseekers chart . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Both Dopesmoker and early releases of the album received positive reviews from the music press . In the December 2000 issue of Spin the album was referred to as " brilliant " and as a " stoner touchstone " . CMJ New Music Monthly wrote positively about the song , saying that the " monotony rarely becomes tedious , because Al Cisneros and company are unpredictable and sensual in their drug @-@ induced pounding of early Sabbath terrain . " Online music database AllMusic gave the Jerusalem album four stars out of five stating that " Either version is worth investigating for adventurous metal enthusiasts , but Dopesmoker is clearly the final and definitive presentation of this work " . In 2006 , the extreme metal magazine Decibel included the album in their hall of fame of " extreme metal masterpieces " . 
 The album continued to receive praise after the release of Dopesmoker . Eduardo Rivadavia of online music database AllMusic gave the album four and a half stars out of five stating " Dopesmoker is [ ... ] an instant doom metal classic — some might even say a masterpiece " . The British music magazine Mojo gave the album a rating of five out of five stars proclaiming that Dopesmoker is " A benchmark by which all that dares call itself stoner rock must surely be judged . " Exclaim ! praised Dopesmoker 's production value and noted that the album was " ultimately better version of 1999 's stoner opus Jerusalem . " Stylus Magazine 's Stewart <unk> defined Dopesmoker as " a 60 @-@ minute song about the spliff , a monstrous rock ode to stinky buds " . <unk> pointed out that London Records ' refusal to " share Sleep 's affection or vision , [ led the band to ] disbanding in disgust . Matt Pike went on to form High on Fire ; Al Cisneros and Chris <unk> contemplate the universe 's navel with Om . " A New York Times critic wrote : " What seems disorienting and monochromatic at first grows richer and more rewarding upon repeated exposure . It ’ s like a Mark Rothko painting hitting you over the head with a bag of hammers . " 
 The 2012 Southern Lord Records re @-@ issue was also praised . On Metacritic , it has a score of 94 out of 100 , based on 9 reviews . Exclaim ! noted that this issue was " cleaner and more powerful , the guitars sound heavier , with a much larger presence , and the mesmerizing complexity of the track has been reinvigorated . " Pitchfork Media gave the album an 8 @.@ 5 out of 10 and listed it as one of " the best new reissues " noting that " It 's an hour of adventure and momentum , where the lumber and the repetition somehow always push ahead . " Consequence of Sound gave the album three and a half stars out of five , stating that " It 's not for everybody , certainly ; all but the biggest potheads / metalheads may burn out after so much grinding . It 's no showcase for songwriting , either , but it makes up for that with heady atmosphere . " 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All music written and composed by Sleep . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Sleep 
 Al Cisneros – vocals , bass 
 Matt Pike – guitar 
 Chris <unk> – drums 
