 Loud Tour Live at the O2 is the second live long @-@ form video by Barbadian recording artist Rihanna . It was released on December 13 , 2012 by SRP and Def Jam Recordings . The DVD and Blu @-@ ray Disc release feature her concert at The O2 Arena in London , England as part of the Loud Tour ( 2011 ) , in support of her fifth studio album Loud ( 2010 ) . Directed by Nick Wickham and produced by Ciarra Pardo and Emer Patten , it was filmed during the last three shows in London . 
 The concert consists of five sets including the encore and feature songs from Loud as well as Rihanna 's previous albums including Good Girl Gone Bad ( 2007 ) and Rated R ( 2009 ) . Loud Tour Live at the O2 debuted within the top ten on over ten national music video charts . It was most successful in France and Belgium ( Wallonia ) where the release peaked at number two . On the US Billboard Music Video Sales chart , the album peaked at number 11 . 
 = = Background = = 
 In November 2010 , Rihanna released her fifth studio album Loud . Recording sessions for the album began in February 2010 and continued for six months , overlapping with her Last Girl on Earth Tour ( 2010 — 11 ) and filming for her debut feature film Battleship ( 2012 ) . Rihanna and L.A. Reid assembled a group of songwriters and record producers at several recording studios in Los Angeles for two weeks to write songs for Rihanna ; they wrote approximately 200 songs , eleven of which were included on the album . Upon its release , Loud received generally positive reviews from most music critics and earned Rihanna a Grammy Award for Best Dance Recording for the lead single " Only Girl ( In the World ) " . It became a huge commercial success and produced seven singles that attained chart success . 
 To further promote the album , Rihanna embarked on her third worldwide and fourth overall tour entitled Loud Tour ( 2011 ) . The tour was officially announced on February 9 , 2011 , when North American dates were revealed . Critics gave the tour a positive response , with Jon Brean of the Star Tribune noting , " The Barbadian singer is more visually and vocally dynamic than she has ever been before . " During an interview with Ryan Seacrest after Rihanna performed " California King Bed " on American Idol , April 14 , 2011 , the singer spoke about the tour 's development . Rihanna addressed rumors about a special performance to be included on the setlist in order to fully incorporate her fans into the experience . When asked by Seacrest about the fan experience , she explained , " Right now , we just designed the stage . I 'm really not supposed to say this , but I want to get you excited ... We 're building two sections on the stage [ for the fans . They 'll be ] closer than they 've ever been . It 's real VIP . " 
 = = Release = = 
 Apart from North America , Rihanna also performed two legs in Europe and one in South America . Loud Tour Live at the O2 was filmed at the O2 Arena show in London . During the tour , Rihanna performed 10 shows in London 's O2 Arena . Via her official Twitter account , she announced that she was to film the final three outsold shows of the Loud Tour in London ( held from December 20 – 22 , 2011 ) for a live DVD , " Big news Navy ! You ’ ve been begging for it & Rihanna heard you ! The last three dates of the LOUD Tour at the O2 in London will be filmed for a concert DVD coming out in 2012 ! " . On November 19 , 2012 , Rihanna released her seventh studio album Unapologetic ( 2012 ) in both standard and deluxe editions . The deluxe edition of the album contains a special footage from the Loud Tour entitled First Look : Loud Tour Live at the O2 Arena . Rihanna posted the official trailer for the video album on her official YouTube channel , on December 6 , 2012 . Loud Tour Live at the O2 was released in DVD and Blu @-@ ray disc formats in Germany on December 14 , 2012 , and in Portugal and Spain on December 17 , 2012 and the following day in Canada , Italy and the United States . The video album was directed by Nick Wickham and produced by Ciarra Pardo and Emer Patten . The editor of the video was Guy Harding . 
 = = Concert synopsis = = 
 Loud Tour Live at the O2 begins with Rihanna and her team arriving with a ferryboat on a dock . Rihanna continues to walk through and explains how it 's a very sad day because the Loud Tour just finished and she is so emotional about that right now . The singer starts crying and further explains that she and her team have done very good things this year and she believes those things wouldn 't happen without the support of her fans . However , now she has to go back to Los Angeles where she doesn 't have any friends , her " very best " friends travel with her around the world . Before getting into a van , Rihanna says that the tour was one of her best experiences of her life and talks how she will miss her fans the next upcoming year . Scenes are intercut with the start of the show at The O2 Arena . After the interlude Rihanna starts the show with the opening song " Only Girl ( In the World ) " . Emerging from a purple ball , the singer performs the song while wearing a blue electric dress and is surrounded by four backup dancers . As " Disturbia " starts she removes the dress and reveals a colorful daisy duke . For the performance of " Shut Up and Drive " a car is present during the scene , to which Rihanna climbs to its top while performing . The set finishes with a rendition of " Man Down " . 
 Scenes are intercut with Rihanna heading to her show within a metro , together with her audience . As she gets into the arena , scenes are intercut and show the singer and her crew how they are preparing for the start of the show and shouting the name of the cities in which they performed . The scenes are intercut with Rihanna talking about her love towards Miami , and how she moved first in the city when she got signed to the label . Scenes of her and friends taking shots and having fun are further shown . Then , Rihanna explains how the second section of the Loud Tour is called " Le Sex Shoppe " ; the director of the tour Jamie King was inspired for creating the section , after he saw online the pictures of the singer visiting a sex shop in Australia . A scene of an early rehearsal for the tour is also shown , before seeing Rihanna performing " S & M " live on the concert . After the song , she performs " Skin " ; during the performance the singer takes two girls from the audience and performs lap dance as the set finishes with Nuno Bettencourt having a guitar solo . The scenes are intercut with Rihanna getting ready for the shoot of her We Found Love music video . Several scenes of the singer several scenes of Rihanna including getting off plane , choosing clothes , getting ready for a shoot and greeting her fans are shown . The next parts of the video show her at the studio , while recording her sixth studio album Talk That Talk ( 2011 ) . Scenes are intercut with her doing the photo session for the album . Rihanna is shown at an Armani design meeting in London . She is talking about the commercial which they are preparing to shoot for the design company . Black @-@ and @-@ white scenes of Rihanna getting ready to go on stage again are shown before she starts performing " Raining Men " . The performance of the song features her performing the song on a top of a pink tank . Then , she gets off the tank and performs " Hard " and " Breakin ' Dishes " . 
 After the performances , scenes of Rihanna and her team are shown choosing the artwork for Talk That Talk , as well as Rihanna preparing for her appearance on Ellen DeGeneres Show . She also discusses the breakdown she had during the tour . After the interlude , the singer is back on the stage wearing a yellow dress , performing " Unfaithful " on a platform . Then , she sings " Hate That I Love You " while sitting on a chair and then " California King Bed " as the last song from the set . Scenes of Rihanna having fun with her fans and making a birthday party for her manager Jay Brown is shown . Scenes of the singer in Madrid , one week before Christmas are shown ; she takes a tour in the bus with which they are traveling around Europe . Rihanna is then shown getting ready for the show before starting to perform " What 's My Name ? " in daisy duke accompanied with four female dancers . She performs " Rude Boy " and is accompanied with male dancers wearing colorful outfits . Before performing " Cheers ( Drink to That ) " she takes a shot of a drink . The set is followed with " Don 't Stop the Music " and finishes with Rihanna performing " Take a Bow " together with the audience . Before the encore starts , scenes of Rihanna preparing for the show are shown . She is arguing with the tour director how the set should arranged , because she wants to add " We Found Love " to it . She then rehearses for the choreography of the latter song alongside with her dancers and explains how she learned the whole dance for 30 minutes . Her choreographer <unk> praises and calls her " a dope " . Then , the last set starts with a man who wears glasses performing on a piano . Rihanna then emerges and sits on the top of it . At one point of the performance the piano started levitating and when the songs ends the piano is again on the background . The music then transitions to " Umbrella " ; the performance features golden drops on the LED screens . Loud Tour Live at the O2 finishes with Rihanna performing " We Found Love " as the final song ; the end of the performance features red confetti flying around . 
 = = Commercial performance = = 
 Loud Tour Live at the O2 debuted at number 12 on the Flemish Belgian Music DVD Chart for the week dated December 22 , 2012 . The next weak it climbed six places to number six . On January 19 , 2013 , the album reached its peak on the chart at number three . On the Wallonian Belgian Music DVD Chart , the album debuted at number three for the week dated December 29 , 2012 . After three weeks on the chart , it reached its peak of number two on January 19 , 2013 . The release also peaked at number three on the Swiss Music DVD Chart and number seven on the Dutch Music DVD Chart . For the last week of December 2012 , Loud Tour Live at the O2 debuted at number 12 on the Czech Music DVD Chart . The following week it stayed on the same position , while in the second week of January 2013 , it peaked at number six . In the last week of January it reached its peak of number five on the chart . The DVD debuted at peaked at number <unk> the UK Music Video Chart and number nine on the Irish Music DVDs Chart . The album was more successful in France where debuted and peaked at number two on the French Music DVD Chart . Loud Tour Live at the O2 debuted at number 11 on the US Billboard Music Video Sales chart which was also its peak . Additionally , it peaked at number eight on the Australian Music DVD Chart . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Credits adapted from the ending notes of Loud Tour Live at the O2 , Def Jam Recordings , SRP Records . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = If It 's Lovin ' that You Want = 
 " If It 's Lovin ' that You Want " is a song recorded by Barbadian recording artist Rihanna , from her debut studio album Music of the Sun ( 2005 ) . It was written by Samuel Barnes , Scott La Rock , Makeba Riddick , Jean @-@ Claude Oliver , Lawrence Parker , and produced by Poke & Tone . It was released on September 13 , 2005 , as the second and final single from the album . The lyrics revolve around " basically telling a guy , ' If it 's lovin ' that you want , you should make me your girl because I 've got what you need " . 
 The song received mixed reviews from music critics , many of whom praised and criticised Rihanna 's vocal performance ; its composition was also complimented . " If It 's Lovin ' that You Want " achieved moderate success around the world , reaching the top forty in few European countries , while reaching the top ten in Australia , Ireland and New Zealand . In the United States , the song failed to match the commercial success of Rihanna 's previous single , " Pon de Replay " , peaking at number 36 on the Billboard Hot 100 chart . It managed , however , to reach number nine on the Pop Songs chart . The song 's accompanying music video , directed by Marcus Raboy , was shot on a beach in California , and features the singer enjoying various activities , such as dancing and riding jet skis with her friends . 
 = = Background and composition = = 
 Following the release and commercial success of " Pon de Replay " , the lead single from Music of the Sun and Rihanna 's debut in the music industry , " If It 's Lovin ' that You Want " was released as the second single from the album . In an interview with MTV News , Rihanna explained the lyrical meaning behind the song , saying " The song is basically telling a guy , ' If it 's lovin ' that you want , you should make me your girl because I 've got what you need " . A sequel to the song entitled " If It 's Lovin ' That You Want – Part 2 " , which features rap vocals by Cory Gunz , was included as a bonus track on Rihanna 's sophomore album , A Girl Like Me ( 2006 ) . The song was written by Samuel Barnes , Scott <unk> , Makeba Riddick , Jean @-@ Claude Oliver , Lawrence Parker and was produced by the latter two under their production name , Poke & Tone of Trackmasters . According to the digital music sheet published at musicnotes.com , " If It 's Lovin ' that You Want " is written in the key of A @-@ flat major and is set in common time with a moderate dance <unk> with a metronome of 98 beats per minute . Rihanna 's vocal range in the song spans from the low note of F3 to the high note of G5 . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 The song was met with generally mixed reviews from music critics , who both praised and criticised Rihanna 's vocal performance . Bill Lamb of About.com wrote that although the singer provides " simple , pleasant vocals " , her voice sounds " too light " and " thin " . Lamb continued to comment about the song , writing that although the song is " pleasurable " and " summery " to listen to and is not " offensive " , it fails to re @-@ capture the " killer hook of ' Pon de Replay ' " . However , A. Vishnu of The Hindu had contrasting opinions with regard to Rihanna 's vocal performance , writing the song further " exposes her versatility and vocal range " . A reviewer for Billboard praised the song 's composition and beat , writing " [ ' If It 's Lovin ' that You Want ' ] reinforces Rihanna 's tropical reggae signature with an itchy hook that , albeit monotonous , cannot miss . " A reviewer of <unk> and Kelefa Sanneh of The New York Times were brief in their reviews of " If It 's Lovin ' that You Want " , with the former writing that the song is more " low @-@ key " compared to Rihanna 's previous release , " Pon de Replay " , and the latter simply writing that it is a " pretty good " song . 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 " If It 's Lovin ' that You Want " failed to match the commercial success of Rihanna 's previous single , " Pon de Replay " , only peaking within the top ten of three national charts . In the United States , the song debuted at ninety six on October 22 , 2005 and managed to peak at number 36 on the US Billboard Hot 100 chart on December 31 , 2005 , and number 99 on the US Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs chart on October 29 , 2005 . In Australia , the song debuted and peaked on the Australian Singles Chart at number 9 on February 6 , 2006 . The song fell one position the following week to number ten , but managed to peak at number 9 again in its third week . In total , the song spent two non @-@ consecutive weeks at number 9 and fourteen weeks on the chart . In New Zealand , the song debuted at number 12 on the New Zealand Singles Chart on December 19 , 2005 . During " If It 's Lovin ' that You Want " ' s first four weeks of charting , it fluctuated in the top twenty , but managed to peak at number 9 in its fifth week for one week . In total , the song spent 12 weeks on the chart . 
 In Europe , " If It 's Lovin ' that You Want " debuted on the Austrian Singles Chart at number 40 on December 16 , 2005 . During the song 's first five weeks on the chart , it struggled to stay inside the top forty , but in its sixth week , managed to peak at number 31 for one week , and spent a total of 11 weeks on the chart . In Switzerland , the song debuted at number 25 on December 18 , 2005 , and peaked at number 19 . The song spent a total of 12 weeks on the chart . In The Netherlands , the song debuted at number 76 on February 4 , 2006 , and peaked at number 13 the following week . The song spent a total of 7 weeks on the chart . In the Flanders region of Belgium , the song debuted at number 50 December 31 , 2005 , but dropped out of the chart the following week , but re @-@ entered the chart at number 38 on January 21 , 2006 , and peaked at number 25 the following week . The song spent a total of 10 weeks on the chart . In the United Kingdom , the song debuted and peaked on the UK Singles Chart at number 11 on December 10 , 2005 , and dropped out of the Official UK Top 40 after five weeks on the chart . 
 = = Music video = = 
 The music video for the song was shot on a stretch of beach on the coast of California in Malibu and directed by Marcus Raboy . In an interview with MTV News , Rihanna spoke about the development of the shoot for the video , saying " The water was so cold ... but oh my gosh , we had so much fun ... We were bumping each other off the Jet Skis and just had a ball " . During the interview , the singer elaborated further upon the content of the video and the meaning behind it , saying " This video is about having fun , giving off the vibe of the Caribbean ... we did some mermaid @-@ looking stuff down on the sand ... and I 'm just [ performing ] to the camera as if it were my boyfriend . Now we 're going to do [ some scenes with ] the Tiki torches . It 's going to be incredible " . The dance routines in the video were choreographed by noted choreographer Fatima Robinson . 
 The video begins with scenes of Rihanna dancing and walking along the beach and riding jet ski 's with her friends during the first chorus and continues into the first verse . Halfway through the first verse , a new scene of the singer is introduced , where she is dancing on a platform with four other female dancers , wearing a " short , flowing white skirt and a cropped tee " , with the ocean as the backdrop behind her . During the second chorus , the previous scenes are intercut with each other , and continue into the second verse , where a new scene of the singer wearing a different outfit and lying on the beach , whilst also interacting with some male extras . For the third chorus , which is repeated twice , another new scene of Rihanna is shown with four other female dancers who belly dance in the middle of a Tiki torch circle during the night . The chorus is repeated for a final time , where scenes from throughout the video are intercut with each other . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = The Dark Knight ( film ) = 
 The Dark Knight is a 2008 superhero action film directed , produced , and co @-@ written by Christopher Nolan . Featuring the DC Comics character Batman , the film is the second part of Nolan 's The Dark Knight Trilogy and a sequel to 2005 's Batman Begins , starring an ensemble cast including Christian Bale , Michael Caine , Heath Ledger , Gary Oldman , Aaron Eckhart , Maggie Gyllenhaal and Morgan Freeman . In the film , Bruce Wayne / Batman ( Bale ) , James Gordon ( Oldman ) and Harvey Dent ( Eckhart ) form an alliance to dismantle organised crime in Gotham City , but are menaced by a criminal mastermind known as the Joker ( Ledger ) who seeks to undermine Batman 's influence and create chaos . 
 Nolan 's inspiration for the film was the Joker 's comic book debut in 1940 , the 1988 graphic novel The Killing Joke , and the 1996 series The Long Halloween , which retold Two @-@ Face 's origin . The nickname " the Dark Knight " was first applied to Batman in Batman # 1 ( 1940 ) , in a story written by Bill Finger . The Dark Knight was filmed primarily in Chicago , as well as in several other locations in the United States , the United Kingdom , and Hong Kong . Nolan used IMAX 70 mm film cameras to film some sequences , including the Joker 's first appearance in the film . The film is dedicated to Heath Ledger , who died on January 22 , 2008 , some months after the completed filming and six months before the film 's release , from a toxic combination of prescription drugs , leading to intense attention from the press and movie @-@ going public . Warner Bros. initially created a viral marketing campaign for The Dark Knight , developing promotional websites and trailers highlighting screenshots of Ledger as the Joker . 
 A co @-@ production of the United States and the United Kingdom , The Dark Knight was released on July 16 , 2008 in Australia , on July 18 , 2008 in North America , and on July 24 , 2008 in the United Kingdom . Considered by film critics to be one of the best films of the 2000s and one of the best superhero films ever , the film received highly positive reviews and set numerous records during its theatrical run . The Dark Knight appeared on more critics ' top ten lists ( 287 ) than any other film of 2008 with the exception of WALL @-@ E , and more critics ( 77 ) named The Dark Knight the best film of 2008 than any other film released that year . With over $ 1 billion in revenue worldwide , it is the 25th @-@ highest @-@ grossing film of all time , unadjusted for inflation . The film received eight Academy Award nominations ; it won the award for Best Sound Editing and Ledger was posthumously awarded Best Supporting Actor . The Dark Knight Rises , the final film in the trilogy , was released on July 20 , 2012 . 
 = = Plot = = 
 A gang of criminals rob a Gotham City mob bank , double @-@ crossing and murdering each other until there is only one left : The Joker , who escapes with the money . 
 Batman , District Attorney Harvey Dent and Lieutenant Jim Gordon form an alliance to rid Gotham of organized crime . Bruce Wayne is impressed with Dent 's idealism and offers to support his career ; he believes that , with Dent as Gotham 's protector , he can give up being Batman and lead a normal life with Rachel Dawes — even though she and Dent are dating . 
 Mob bosses Sal Maroni , Gambol and the Chechen hold a videoconference with corrupt accountant Lau , who has taken their funds and fled to Hong Kong . The Joker interrupts , warns them that Batman is unhindered by the law , and offers to kill him in exchange for half of their money . Gambol puts a bounty on the Joker , but the Joker kills him instead and takes over his gang . The mob ultimately decides to take the Joker up on his offer . 
 Dent arrests the entire mob , while Batman finds Lau in Hong Kong and brings him back to Gotham to testify against them . The Joker threatens to keep killing people unless Batman reveals his identity , and starts by murdering Police Commissioner Gillian B. Loeb and the judge presiding over the mob trial . The Joker also tries to kill Mayor Anthony Garcia , but Gordon sacrifices himself to stop the assassination . Dent learns that Rachel is the next target . 
 Bruce decides to reveal his secret identity . Before he can , however , Dent announces that he is Batman . Dent is taken into protective custody , but the Joker appears and attacks the convoy . Batman comes to Dent 's rescue and Gordon , who faked his death , arrests the Joker and is promoted to Commissioner . Rachel and Dent are escorted away by policemen on the mob 's payroll . Batman interrogates the Joker , who reveals that Rachel and Dent have been trapped in separate locations rigged with explosives . Batman races to save Rachel , while Gordon goes to save Dent . Batman arrives at the building , realizing that the Joker sent him to Dent 's location instead . Both buildings explode , killing Rachel and disfiguring half of Dent 's face . The Joker escapes the jail with Lau . 
 Coleman Reese , an accountant at Wayne Enterprises , deduces that Bruce is Batman and tries to go public with the information . After observing the unpredictability of the Joker , Maroni informs the Joker 's location to commissioner Gordon . The Joker sets fire to the mob 's money , burning Lau alive in the process and kills the Chechen . He then threatens to destroy a hospital unless someone kills Reese . Gordon orders the evacuation of all the hospitals in Gotham and goes to secure Reese . The Joker finds Harvey Dent in a hospital and manipulates him into seeking revenge for Rachel 's death . The Joker destroys the hospital and escapes with a busload of hostages . Dent goes on a killing spree based on a coin flip , targeting people he holds responsible for Rachel 's death . This includes two corrupt cop @-@ detectives ( Michael Wuertz and Anna Ramirez ) who worked for Maroni in kidnapping Dent and Rachel . While in car with Maroni , Dent kills his driver , which could have supposedly killed Maroni as well . 
 The Joker rigs two ferries with explosives ; one containing civilians and the other containing prisoners . He says that he will blow them both up by midnight , but will let one live if the passengers of anyone blows up the other . Batman finds the Joker with a sonar device that spies on the entire city , with the reluctant help of Lucius Fox . The passengers refuse to kill each other , and Batman apprehends the Joker after a fight . Before the police arrive to take the Joker into custody , he gloats that Gotham 's citizens will lose hope once Dent 's rampage becomes public knowledge . 
 Gordon arrives at the building where Rachel died , where Dent judges his fate , along with his own and Batman 's , by flipping a coin . He spares himself , shoots Batman , and tries to kill Gordon 's son . Batman , who was wearing body armor , tackles Dent off the building to his death . Batman persuades Gordon to preserve Dent 's heroic image by holding Batman responsible for the killing spree . As the police launch a manhunt for Batman , Gordon destroys the Bat @-@ signal , Fox watches as the sonar device self @-@ destructs , and Alfred Pennyworth burns a letter from Rachel about her choice to marry Dent . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Christian Bale as Bruce Wayne / Batman : 
 A billionaire socialite who dedicates himself to protecting Gotham City from its criminal underworld as a bat @-@ masked vigilante hailed as its " Dark Knight " at night . Bale said he was confident in his choice to return in the role because of the positive response to his portrayal in Batman Begins . He continued training in the Keysi Fighting Method and performed many of his own stunts , but did not gain as much muscle as in the previous film because the new Batsuit allowed him to move with greater agility . Bale described Batman 's dilemma as whether " [ his crusade is ] something that has an end . Can he quit and have an ordinary life ? The kind of manic intensity someone has to have to maintain the passion and the anger that they felt as a child , takes an effort after a while , to keep doing that . At some point , you have to exorcise your demons . " He added , " Now you have not just a young man in pain attempting to find some kind of an answer , you have somebody who actually has power , who is burdened by that power , and is having to recognize the difference between attaining that power and holding on to it . " Bale felt Batman 's personality had been strongly established in the first film , so it was unlikely his character would be overshadowed by the villains , stating : " I have no problem with competing with someone else . And that 's going to make a better movie . " 
 Heath Ledger as The Joker : 
 A psychotic criminal mastermind portraying himself as an " agent of chaos " , who rises to dominant power by terrorizing Gotham and plunging it into anarchy . Before Ledger was confirmed for the role in July 2006 , Paul Bettany , <unk> Hulme , Adrien Brody , Steve Carell , and Robin Williams publicly expressed interest in it . However , Nolan had wanted to work with Ledger on a number of projects in the past ( including unsuccessfully approaching Ledger for the role of Batman in Batman Begins ) and was agreeable to Ledger 's chaotic interpretation of the character . When Ledger saw Batman Begins , he had realized a way to make the character work that was consistent with the film 's tone : he described his Joker as a " psychopathic , mass murdering , schizophrenic clown with zero empathy . " In the film , the Joker has a Glasgow smile , and his trademark chalk @-@ white skin and red lips are makeup rather than the result of chemical bleaching , as in the traditional portrayal of the character . Throughout the film , the Joker states his desire to upset social order through crime , and comes to define himself by his conflict with Batman . To prepare for the role , Ledger lived alone in a hotel room for a month , formulating the character 's posture , voice , and personality , and kept a diary , in which he recorded the Joker 's thoughts and feelings . While he initially found it difficult , Ledger eventually generated a voice unlike Jack Nicholson 's character in Tim Burton 's 1989 Batman film . He was also given Batman : The Killing Joke and Arkham Asylum : A Serious House on Serious Earth , which he " really tried to read and put it down . " Ledger also cited A Clockwork Orange and Sid Vicious as " a very early starting point for Christian [ Bale ] and I. But we kind of flew far away from that pretty quickly and into another world altogether . " " There 's a bit of everything in him . There 's nothing that consistent , " Ledger said , and added , " There are a few more surprises to him . " Ledger was allowed to shoot and mostly direct the videos the Joker sends out as warnings . Each take Ledger made was different from the last . Nolan was impressed enough with the first video shoot that he chose to not be present when Ledger shot the video with a kidnapped reporter ( Anthony Michael Hall ) . On January 22 , 2008 , after he had completed filming The Dark Knight , Ledger died of an accidental prescription drug overdose , leading to intense press attention and memorial tributes . " It was tremendously emotional , right when he passed , having to go back in and look at him every day [ during editing ] , " Nolan recalled . " But the truth is , I feel very lucky to have something productive to do , to have a performance that he was very , very proud of , and that he had entrusted to me to finish . " All of Ledger 's scenes appear as he completed them in the filming ; in editing the film , Nolan added no " digital effects " to alter Ledger 's actual performance posthumously . Nolan has dedicated the film in part to Ledger 's memory . 
 Gary Oldman as Lt. James Gordon : 
 A lieutenant in the Gotham City Police Department and one of the city 's few honest police officers , who forms a tenuous , unofficial alliance with Batman and Dent and is given the position of Police Commissioner by the city 's mayor following the recent commissioner 's assassination . Oldman described his character as " incorruptible , virtuous , strong , heroic , but understated . " Nolan explained that " The Long Halloween has a great , triangular relationship between Harvey Dent and Gordon and Batman , and that 's something we very much drew from . " Oldman added that " Gordon has a great deal of admiration for him at the end , but [ Batman ] is more than ever now the dark knight , the outsider . I 'm intrigued now to see : If there is a third one , what he 's going to do ? " On the possibility of another sequel , he said that " returning to [ the role ] is not dependent on whether the role was bigger than the one before . " 
 Aaron Eckhart as Harvey Dent : 
 Gotham 's district attorney , hailed as the city 's " White Knight " . Nolan and David S. Goyer had originally considered using Dent in Batman Begins , but they replaced him with the new character Rachel Dawes when they realized they " couldn 't do him justice . " Before Eckhart was cast in February 2007 , Liev Schreiber , Josh Lucas , and Ryan Phillippe had expressed interest in the role , while Mark Ruffalo auditioned . Matt Damon stated that he was considered for the role , but could not accept due to scheduling conflicts . Hugh Jackman was also considered for the part . Nolan chose Eckhart , whom he had considered for the lead role in Memento , citing his " extraordinary " ability as an actor , his embodiment of " that kind of chiselled , American hero quality " projected by Robert Redford , and his subtextual " edge . " Eckhart was " interested in good guys gone wrong , " and had played corrupt men in films such as The Black Dahlia , Thank You for Smoking , and In the Company of Men . Whereas Two @-@ Face is depicted as a crime boss in most characterizations , Nolan chose to portray him as a twisted vigilante to emphasize his role as Batman 's counterpart . Eckhart explained , " [ He ] is still true to himself . He 's a crime fighter , he 's not killing good people . He 's not a bad guy , not purely . " For Dent , Eckhart " kept on thinking about the Kennedys , " particularly Robert F. Kennedy , who was " idealistic , held a grudge and took on the Mob . " He had his hair lightened and styled to make him appear more dashing . Nolan told Eckhart to not make Dent 's Two @-@ Face persona " jokey with <unk> sounds or ticks . " 
 Maggie Gyllenhaal as Rachel Dawes : 
 Gotham City 's assistant district attorney and Bruce 's childhood friend , who is one of the few people to know Batman 's true identity . Gyllenhaal took over the role from Katie Holmes , who played the part in Batman Begins . In August 2005 , Holmes was reportedly planning to reprise the role , but she eventually turned it down to do Mad Money with Diane Keaton and Queen Latifah . By March 2007 , Gyllenhaal was in " final talks " for the part . Gyllenhaal has acknowledged her character is a damsel in distress to an extent , but says Nolan sought ways to empower her character , so " Rachel 's really clear about what 's important to her and unwilling to compromise her morals , which made a nice change " from the many conflicted characters whom she has previously portrayed . 
 Michael Caine as Alfred Pennyworth : 
 Bruce 's trusted butler and confidant , who supplies useful advice to Bruce and likeness as a father figure , leading him to be labeled " Batman 's batman " . 
 Morgan Freeman as Lucius Fox : 
 The recently promoted CEO of Wayne Enterprises who , now fully aware of his employer 's double life , serves more directly as Bruce 's armorer for the Batsuit in addition to his corporate duties . 
 Monique Gabriela Curnen as Detective Anna Ramirez : 
 A cop in Gordon 's unit who starts working for the mob to pay her mother 's hospital bills . She betrays Rachel Dawes to the Joker . 
 Ron Dean as Detective Michael Wuertz : 
 A corrupt cop in Gordon 's unit who betrays Dent to the Joker . 
 Nestor Carbonell as Mayor Anthony Garcia : 
 The mayor of Gotham , who appoints Gordon Police Commissioner for saving his life and arresting the Joker . 
 Chin Han as Lau : 
 A corrupt Chinese LSI Holdings accountant at Wayne Enterprises secretly operating as a Triad boss in charge of money @-@ laundering deals for the mob . 
 Eric Roberts as Sal Maroni : 
 An Italian mafia boss who takes over Carmine Falcone 's mob . Bob Hoskins and James Gandolfini auditioned for the role . 
 Ritchie Coster as the Chechen : 
 A Chechen mafia boss in charge of drug @-@ trafficking for the mob . 
 Anthony Michael Hall as Mike Engel : 
 A Gotham Cable News reporter who is kidnapped from the destroyed hospital by the Joker and used to broadcast his plan for anarchy within Gotham . 
 Keith Szarabajka as Detective Gerard Stephens : 
 An honest cop in Gordon 's unit who the Joker holds captive during his escape from the police station . 
 Joshua Harto as Coleman Reese : 
 An M & A law accountant at Wayne Enterprises who deduces Bruce 's persona of Batman from Fox and plans to reveal it to Gotham on Gotham Cable News until the Joker threatens his life . 
 Melinda McGraw as Barbara Gordon : 
 Gordon 's wife , who is worried that her husband is risking his life in his war on crime . 
 Nathan Gamble as James Gordon , Jr . : 
 Gordon 's 10 @-@ year @-@ old son , whom Dent tries to kill to punish Gordon for Rachel 's death . 
 Michael Jai White as Gambol : 
 A Nigerian mafia boss in charge of illegal gambling and extortion for the mob . He places a bounty on the Joker , who kills him instead . David Banner auditioned for the role . 
 Colin McFarlane as Commissioner Gillian Loeb : 
 The Police Commissioner of Gotham until his murder at the hands of the Joker . 
 The film 's supporting cast include Nydia Rodriguez <unk> as Judge Janet <unk> , and Tom " Tiny " Lister , Jr. as a prison inmate on one of the bomb @-@ rigged ferries . William Fichtner played the Gotham National Bank manager , and Cillian Murphy returns in a cameo as Dr. Jonathan Crane / Scarecrow , who is apprehended early on in the film by Batman . 
 Musician Dwight Yoakam was approached for the roles of either the manager or a corrupt cop , but he chose instead to focus on his album Dwight Sings Buck . United States Senator Patrick Leahy — a fan of Batman comics who was previously an extra in the 1997 film Batman & Robin and also was a guest voice actor on Batman : The Animated Series — appears as a guest at Bruce Wayne 's party . Matt Skiba , lead singer of Chicago punk band Alkaline Trio , made a small appearance in the film . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 Before the release of Batman Begins , screenwriter David S. Goyer wrote a treatment for two sequels which introduced the Joker and Harvey Dent . His original intent was for the Joker to scar Dent during the Joker 's trial in the third film , turning Dent into Two @-@ Face . Goyer , who penned the first draft of the film , cited the DC Comics 13 @-@ issue comic book limited series Batman : The Long Halloween as the major influence on his storyline . According to veteran Batman artist Neal Adams , he met with David Goyer in Los Angeles , and the story would eventually look to Adams and writer Denny O 'Neil 's 1971 story " The Joker 's Five @-@ Way Revenge " that appeared in Batman # 251 , in which O 'Neil and Adams re @-@ introduced the Joker . While initially uncertain of whether or not he would return to direct the sequel , Nolan did want to reinterpret the Joker on screen . On July 31 , 2006 , Warner Bros. officially announced initiation of production for the sequel to Batman Begins titled The Dark Knight ; it is the first live @-@ action Batman film without the word " Batman " in its title , which Bale noted as signaling that " this take on Batman of mine and Chris ' is very different from any of the others . " 
 After much research , Nolan 's brother and co @-@ writer , Jonathan , suggested the Joker 's first two appearances , published in the first issue of Batman ( 1940 ) , as the crucial influences . Christopher had Jonathan watch Fritz Lang 's 1933 crime film The Testament of Dr. Mabuse prior to writing the Joker , with the Joker resembling Mabuse 's characteristics . Christopher Nolan referred to Lang 's film as " essential research for anyone attempting to write a supervillain . " Jerry Robinson , one of the Joker 's co @-@ creators , was consulted on the character 's portrayal . Nolan decided to avoid divulging an in @-@ depth origin story for the Joker , and instead portray his rise to power so as to not diminish the threat he poses , explaining to MTV News , " the Joker we meet in The Dark Knight is fully formed ... To me , the Joker is an absolute . There are no shades of gray to him – maybe shades of purple . He 's unbelievably dark . He bursts in just as he did in the comics . " Nolan reiterated to IGN , " We never wanted to do an origin story for the Joker in this film , " because " the arc of the story is much more Harvey Dent 's ; the Joker is presented as an absolute . It 's a very thrilling element in the film , and a very important element , but we wanted to deal with the rise of the Joker , not the origin of the Joker . " Nolan suggested Batman : The Killing Joke influenced a section of the Joker 's dialogue in the film , in which he says that anyone can become like him given the right circumstances . Nolan also cited Heat as " sort of an inspiration " for his aim " to tell a very large , city story or the story of a city " : " If you want to take on Gotham , you want to give Gotham a kind of weight and breadth and depth in there . So you wind up dealing with the political figures , the media figures . That 's part of the whole fabric of how a city is bound together . " 
 According to Nolan , an important theme of the sequel is " escalation , " extending the ending of Batman Begins , noting " things having to get worse before they get better . " While indicating The Dark Knight would continue the themes of Batman Begins , including justice vs. revenge and Bruce Wayne 's issues with his father , Nolan emphasized the sequel would also portray Wayne more as a detective , an aspect of his character not fully developed in Batman Begins . Nolan described the friendly rivalry between Bruce Wayne and Harvey Dent as the " backbone " of the film . He also chose to compress the overall storyline , allowing Dent to become Two @-@ Face in The Dark Knight , thus giving the film an emotional arc the unsympathetic Joker could not offer . Nolan acknowledged the title was not only a reference to Batman , but also the fallen " white knight " Harvey Dent . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 While scouting for shooting locations in October 2006 , location manager Robin Higgs visited Liverpool , concentrating mainly along the city 's waterfront . Other candidates included Yorkshire , Glasgow , and parts of London . In August 2006 , one of the film 's producers , Charles Roven , stated that its principal photography would begin in March 2007 , but filming was pushed back to April . For its release in IMAX theaters , Nolan shot four major sequences in that format , including the Joker 's opening bank robbery and the car chase midway through the film , which marked the first time that a feature film had been even partially shot in the format . The cameras used for non @-@ IMAX 35 mm scenes were Panavision 's Panaflex Millennium XL and Platinum . 
 For fifteen years Nolan had wanted to shoot in the IMAX format , and he also used it for " quiet scenes which pictorially we thought would be interesting . " The use of IMAX cameras provided many new challenges for the filmmakers : the cameras were much larger and heavier than standard cameras , and produced noise which made recording dialogue difficult . In addition , the cameras had short film loads ranging from 30 seconds to two minutes and the cost of the film stock was much greater than standard 35mm film . Nevertheless , Nolan said that he wished that it were possible to shoot the entire film in IMAX : " if you could take an IMAX camera to Mount Everest or outer space , you could use it in a feature movie . " In addition , Nolan chose to edit some of the IMAX sequences using the original camera negative , which by eliminating generation loss , raised the film resolution of those sequences up to 18 thousand lines . 
 Warner Bros. chose to film in Chicago for 13 weeks , because Nolan had a " truly remarkable experience " filming part of Batman Begins there . Instead of using the Chicago Board of Trade Building as the location for the headquarters of Wayne Enterprises , as Batman Begins did , The Dark Knight shows Wayne Enterprises as being headquartered in the Richard J. Daley Center . While filming in Chicago , the film was given the false title Rory 's First Kiss to lower the visibility of production , but the local media eventually uncovered the ruse . Richard Roeper of the Chicago Sun @-@ Times commented on the absurdity of the technique , " Is there a Bat @-@ fan in the world that doesn 't know Rory 's First Kiss is actually The Dark Knight , which has been filming in Chicago for weeks ? " Production of The Dark Knight in Chicago generated $ 45 million in the city 's economy and created thousands of jobs . For the film 's prologue involving the Joker , the crew shot in Chicago from April 18 , 2007 to April 24 , 2007 . They returned to shoot from June 9 , 2007 to early September . Noticeably , unlike Batman Begins , less CGI was used to disguise Chicago . Many recognizable locations were used in the film , like the Sears Tower , Navy Pier , 330 North Wabash , the James R. Thompson Center , Trump International Hotel and Tower , LaSalle Street , The <unk> , Randolph Street Station , and Hotel 71 . An old Brach 's factory was used as Gotham Hospital . The defunct Van Buren Street post office doubles as Gotham National Bank for the opening bank robbery . Several sequences , including one car chase , were shot on the lower level of Wacker Drive . The Marina City towers also appear in the background throughout the movie . 
 Pinewood Studios , near London , was the primary studio space used for the production . While planning a stunt with the Batmobile in a special effects facility near Chertsey , England in September 2007 , technician Conway Wickliffe was killed when his car crashed . The film is dedicated to both Ledger and Wickliffe . The restaurant scene was filmed at the Criterion Restaurant in Piccadilly Circus , London . 
 The following month in London at the defunct Battersea Power Station , a rigged 200 @-@ foot fireball was filmed , reportedly for an opening sequence , prompting calls from local residents who feared a terrorist attack on the station . A similar incident occurred during the filming in Chicago , when an abandoned Brach 's candy factory ( which was Gotham Hospital in the film ) was demolished . 
 Filming took place in Hong Kong from November 6 to 11 , 2007 , at various locations in Central , including Hong Kong 's tallest building at the time , the International Finance Centre , for the scene where Batman captures Lau . The shoot hired helicopters and C @-@ 130 aircraft . Officials expressed concern over possible noise pollution and traffic . In response , letters sent to the city 's residents promised that the sound level would approximate noise decibels made by buses . Environmentalists also criticized the filmmakers ' request to tenants of the waterfront skyscrapers to keep their lights on all night to enhance the cinematography , describing it as a waste of energy . Cinematographer Wally Pfister found the city officials a " nightmare , " and ultimately Nolan had to create Batman 's jump from a skyscraper digitally . 
 = = = Design = = = 
 Costume designer Lindy Hemming described the Joker 's look as reflecting his personality , in that " he doesn 't care about himself at all " ; she avoided designing him as a vagrant , but still made him appear to be " scruffier , <unk> , " so that " when you see him move , he 's slightly <unk> or edgy . " Nolan noted , " We gave a Francis Bacon spin to [ his face ] . This corruption , this decay in the texture of the look itself . It 's grubby . You can almost imagine what he smells like . " In creating the " anarchical " look of the Joker , Hemming drew inspiration from such countercultural pop culture artists as Pete Doherty , Iggy Pop , and Johnny Rotten . Ledger described his " clown " mask , made up of three pieces of stamped silicone , as a " new technology , " taking less than an hour for the make @-@ up artists to apply , much faster than more @-@ conventional prosthetics usually requires . Ledger also said that he felt he was barely wearing any make @-@ up . 
 Hemming and Ledger 's Joker design has had an impact in popular and political culture in the form of the Barack Obama " Joker " poster , and has since become a meme in its own right . 
 Designers improved on the design of the Batsuit from Batman Begins , adding wide elastic banding to help bind the costume to Bale , and suggest more sophisticated technology . It was constructed from 200 individual pieces of rubber , fiberglass , metallic mesh , and nylon . The new cowl was modeled after a motorcycle helmet and separated from the neck piece , allowing Bale to turn his head left and right and nod up and down . The cowl is equipped to show white lenses over the eyes when the character turns on his sonar detection , which gives Batman the white eyed look from the comics and animation . The gauntlets have retractable razors which can be fired . Though the new costume is eight pounds heavier , Bale found it more comfortable and not as hot to wear . The depiction of Gotham City is less gritty than in Batman Begins . " I 've tried to <unk> the Gotham we created on the last film , " said production designer Nathan Crowley . " Gotham is in chaos . We keep blowing up stuff , so we can keep our images clean . " 
 = = = Effects = = = 
 The film introduces the Batpod , which is a recreation of the Batcycle . Production designer Nathan Crowley , who designed the Tumbler for Batman Begins , designed six models ( built by special effects supervisor Chris Corbould ) for use in the film 's production , because of necessary crash scenes and possible accidents . Crowley built a prototype in Nolan 's garage , before six months of safety tests were conducted . The Batpod is steered by shoulder instead of hand , and the rider 's arms are protected by sleeve @-@ like shields . The bike has 508 @-@ millimeter ( 20 @-@ inch ) front and rear tires , and is made to appear as if it is armed with grappling hooks , cannons , and machine guns . The engines are located in the hubs of the wheels , which are set 31 ⁄ 2 feet ( 1067 mm ) apart on either side of the tank . The rider lies belly down on the tank , which can move up and down to dodge any incoming gunfire that Batman may encounter . Stuntman Jean @-@ Pierre Goy doubled for Christian Bale during the riding sequences in The Dark Knight . The Batpod was highly unstable for riding , and Goy was the only stuntman who could manage to balance the bike , even commenting that he had to " nearly un @-@ learn how to ride a motorcycle " to manage riding the Batpod . Bale did insist on doing shots on the Batpod himself , but was prohibited by the team fearing his safety . 
 Nolan designed Two @-@ Face 's appearance in the film as one of the least disturbing , explaining , " When we looked at less extreme versions of it , they were too real and more horrifying . When you look at a film like Pirates of the Caribbean – something like that , there 's something about a very fanciful , very detailed visual effect , that I think is more powerful and less repulsive . " Framestore created 120 computer @-@ generated shots of Two @-@ Face 's scarred visage . Nolan felt using make @-@ up would look unrealistic , as it adds to the face , unlike real burn victims . Framestore acknowledged they rearranged the positions of bones , muscles and joints to make the character look more dramatic . For each shot , three 720 @-@ pixel HD cameras were set up at different angles on set to fully capture Aaron Eckhart 's performance . Eckhart wore markers on his face and a prosthetic skullcap , which acted as a lighting reference . A few shots of the skullcap were kept in the film . Framestore also integrated shots of Bale and Eckhart into that of the exploding building where Dent is burned . It was difficult simulating fire on Eckhart because it is inherently unrealistic for only half of something to burn . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 Batman Begins composers Hans Zimmer and James Newton Howard returned to score the sequel . Composition began before shooting , and during filming Nolan received an iPod with ten hours of recordings . Their nine @-@ minute suite for the Joker , " Why So Serious ? , " is based around two notes . Zimmer compared its style to that of Kraftwerk , a band from his native Germany , as well as bands like The Damned . When Ledger died , Zimmer felt like scrapping and composing a new theme , but decided that he could not be sentimental and compromise the " evil [ Ledger 's performance ] projects . " Howard composed Dent 's " elegant and beautiful " themes , which are brass @-@ focused . 
 = = Marketing = = 
 In May 2007 , 42 Entertainment began a viral marketing campaign utilizing the film 's " Why So Serious ? " tagline with the launch of a website featuring the fictional political campaign of Harvey Dent , with the caption , " I Believe in Harvey Dent . " The site aimed to interest fans by having them try to earn what they wanted to see and , on behalf of Warner Bros. , 42 Entertainment also established a " vandalized " version of I Believe in Harvey Dent , called " I believe in Harvey Dent too , " where e @-@ mails sent by fans slowly removed pixels , revealing the first official image of the Joker ; it was ultimately replaced with many " Haha " s and a hidden message that said " see you in December . " 
 During the 2007 San Diego Comic @-@ Con International , 42 Entertainment launched <unk> , sending fans on a scavenger hunt to unlock a teaser trailer and a new photo of the Joker . On October 31 , 2007 , the film 's website morphed into another scavenger hunt with hidden messages , instructing fans to uncover clues at certain locations in major cities throughout the United States , and to take photographs of their discoveries . The clues combined to reveal a new photograph of the Joker and an audio clip of him from the film saying " And tonight , you 're gonna break your one rule . " Completing the scavenger hunt also led to another website called Rory 's Death Kiss ( referencing the false working title of Rory 's First Kiss ) , where fans could submit photographs of themselves costumed as the Joker . Those who sent photos were mailed a copy of a fictional newspaper called The Gotham Times , whose electronic version led to the discovery of numerous other websites . 
 The Dark Knight 's opening sequence , ( showing a bank raid by the Joker ) and closing montage of other scenes from the film , was screened with selected IMAX screenings of I Am Legend , which was released on December 14 , 2007 . A theatrical teaser was also released with non @-@ IMAX showings of I Am Legend , and also on the official website . The sequence was released on the Blu @-@ ray Disc edition of Batman Begins on July 8 , 2008 . Also on July 8 , 2008 , the studio released Batman : Gotham Knight , a direct @-@ to @-@ DVD animated film , set between Batman Begins and The Dark Knight and featuring six original stories , directed by Bruce Timm , co @-@ creator and producer of Batman : The Animated Series , and starring veteran Batman voice actor Kevin Conroy . Each of these segments , written by Josh Olson , David S. Goyer , Brian Azzarello , Greg Rucka , Jordan Goldberg , and Alan Burnett , presents its own distinctive artistic style , paralleling numerous artists collaborating in the same DC Universe . 
 After the death of Heath Ledger on January 22 , 2008 , Warner Bros. adjusted its promotional focus on the Joker , revising some of its websites dedicated to promoting the film and posting a memorial tribute to Ledger on the film 's official website and overlaying a black memorial ribbon on the photo collage in <unk> On February 29 , 2008 , I Believe in Harvey Dent was updated to enable fans to send their e @-@ mail addresses and phone numbers . In March 2008 , Harvey Dent 's fictional campaign informed fans that actual campaign buses nicknamed " <unk> " would tour various cities to promote Dent 's candidacy for district attorney . 
 On May 15 , 2008 , Six Flags Great America and Six Flags Great Adventure theme parks opened The Dark Knight roller coaster , which cost US $ 7 @.@ 5 million to develop and which simulates being stalked by the Joker . Mattel produced toys and games for The Dark Knight , action figures , role play costumes , board games , puzzles , and a special @-@ edition UNO card game , which began commercial distribution in June 2008 . 
 Warner Bros. devoted six months to an anti @-@ infringement strategy that involved tracking the people who had a pre @-@ release copy of the film at any one time . Shipping and delivery schedules were also staggered and spot checks were carried out both domestically and overseas to ensure illegal copying of the film was not taking place in cinemas . An unlicensed copy was released on the web approximately 38 hours after the film 's release . BitTorrent search engine The Pirate Bay taunted the movie industry over its ability to provide the movie free , replacing its logo with a taunting message . 
 = = Release = = 
 Warner Bros. held the world premiere for The Dark Knight in New York City on July 14 , 2008 , screening in an IMAX theater with the film 's composers James Newton Howard and Hans Zimmer playing a part of the film score live . Leading up to The Dark Knight 's commercial release , the film had drawn " overwhelmingly positive early reviews and buzz on Heath Ledger 's turn as the Joker . " The Dark Knight was commercially released on July 16 , 2008 in Australia , grossing almost $ 2 @.@ 3 million in its first day . 
 In the United States and Canada , The Dark Knight was distributed to 4 @,@ 366 theaters , breaking the previous record for the highest number of theaters held by Pirates of the Caribbean : At World 's End in 2007 . The number of theaters also included 94 IMAX theaters , with the film estimated to be played on 9 @,@ 200 screens in the United States and Canada . Online , ticketing services sold enormous numbers of tickets for approximately 3 @,@ 000 midnight showtimes as well as unusually early showtimes for the film 's opening day . All IMAX theaters showing The Dark Knight were sold out for the opening weekend . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The movie was met with mostly positive reviews . Based on 314 reviews collected by Rotten Tomatoes , the film received a 94 % approval rating from critics , with an average score of 8 @.@ 6 / 10 . The site 's consensus reads , " Dark , complex and unforgettable , The Dark Knight succeeds not just as an entertaining comic book film , but as a richly thrilling crime saga . " By comparison , Metacritic , which assigns a normalized rating in the 0 – 100 range based on reviews from top mainstream critics , calculated an average score of 82 , indicating " universal acclaim " , based on 39 reviews . CinemaScore polls reported that the average grade cinemagoers gave the film was " A " on an A + to F scale , and that audiences skewed slightly male and older . 
 Roger Ebert of the Chicago Sun @-@ Times , awarding four out of four stars , described The Dark Knight as a " haunted film that leaps beyond its origins and becomes an engrossing tragedy . " He praised the performances , direction , and writing , saying the film " redefine [ s ] the possibilities of the comic @-@ book movie . " Ebert stated that the " key performance " is by Heath Ledger , and pondered whether he would become the first posthumous Academy Award @-@ winning actor since Peter Finch in 1976 . ( Ledger ultimately won the Oscar . ) Ebert named it one of his twenty favorite films of 2008 . Peter Travers of Rolling Stone writes that the film is deeper than its predecessor , with a " deft " script that refuses to scrutinize the Joker with popular psychology , instead pulling the viewer in with an examination of Bruce Wayne 's psyche . Travers has praise for all the cast , saying each brings his or her " ' A ' game " to the film . He says Bale is " electrifying , " evoking Al Pacino in The Godfather Part II , that Eckhart 's portrayal of Harvey Dent is " scarily moving " , and that Oldman " is so skilled that he makes virtue exciting as Jim Gordon " . Travers says Ledger moves the Joker away from Jack Nicholson 's interpretation into darker territory , and expresses his support for any potential campaign to have Ledger nominated for an Academy Award , Travers says that the filmmakers move the film away from comic book cinema and closer to being a genuine work of art , citing Nolan 's direction and the " gritty reality " of Wally Pfister 's cinematography as helping to create a universe that has something " raw and elemental " at work within it . In particular , he cites Nolan 's action choreography in the IMAX @-@ tailored heist sequence as rivaling that of Heat ( 1995 ) . Manohla Dargis of The New York Times wrote " Pitched at the divide between art and industry , poetry and entertainment , it goes darker and deeper than any Hollywood movie of its comic @-@ book kind . " Entertainment Weekly put it on its end @-@ of @-@ the @-@ decade , " best @-@ of " list , saying , " Every great hero needs a great villain . And in 2008 , Christian Bale 's Batman found his in Heath Ledger 's demented dervish , the Joker . " BBC critic Mark Kermode , in a positive review , said that Ledger is " very , very good " but that Oldman 's turn is " the best performance in the film , by a mile " ; Kermode felt Oldman was deserving of an Oscar nomination . 
 Emanuel Levy wrote Ledger " throws himself completely " into the role , and that the film represents Nolan 's " most accomplished and mature " work , and the most technically impressive and resonant of all the Batman films . Levy calls the action sequences some of the most impressive seen in an American film for years , and talks of the Hong Kong @-@ set portion of the film as being particularly visually impressive . Levy and Peter Travers conclude that the film is " haunting and visionary , " while Levy goes on to say that The Dark Knight is " nothing short of brilliant . " On the other hand , David Denby of The New Yorker said that the story is not coherent enough to properly flesh out the disparities . He said the film 's mood is one of " constant climax , " and that it feels rushed and far too long . Denby criticized scenes which he argued to be meaningless or are cut short just as they become interesting . Denby remarks that the central conflict is workable , but that " only half the team can act it , " saying that Bale 's " placid " Bruce Wayne and " dogged but uninteresting " Batman is constantly upstaged by Ledger 's " sinister and frightening " performance , which he says is the film 's one element of success . Denby concludes that Ledger is " mesmerising " in every scene . The vocalization of Christian Bale 's Batman ( which was partly altered during post @-@ production ) was the subject of particular criticism by some commentators , with David Edelstein from NPR describing Bale delivering his performance with " a voice that 's deeper and <unk> than ever " . Alonso Duralde at MSNBC , however , referred to Bale 's voice in The Dark Knight as an " eerie rasp " , as opposed to the voice used in the Batman Begins , which according to Duralde " sounded absurdly deep , like a 10 @-@ year @-@ old putting on an ‘ adult ’ voice to make prank phone calls " . 
 The Dark Knight was ranked the 15th greatest film in history on Empire 's 2008 list of the " 500 Greatest Movies of All Time , " based upon the weighted votes of 10 @,@ 000 readers , 150 film directors , and 50 key film critics . Heath Ledger 's interpretation of the Joker was also ranked number three on Empire 's 2008 list of the " 100 Greatest Movie Characters of All Time . " In June 2010 , the Joker was ranked number five on Entertainment Weekly 's " 100 Greatest Characters of the Last 20 Years " . Paste magazine named it one of the 50 Best Movies of the Decade ( 2000 – 2009 ) , ranking it at number 11 . In 2016 , Playboy ranked the film number five on its list of 15 Sequels That Are Way Better Than The Originals . The Dark Knight was included in American Cinematographer 's " Best @-@ Shot Film of 1998 @-@ 2008 " list , ranking in the top 10 . More than 17 @,@ 000 people around the world participated in the final vote . In March 2011 , the film was voted by BBC Radio 1 and BBC Radio 1Xtra listeners as their eight favorite film of all time . On the March 22 , 2011 television special Best in Film : The Greatest Movies of Our Time , The Dark Knight was voted the second best action film while the Joker , as portrayed by Ledger , was voted the third greatest film character . In 2012 , Total Film ranked The Dark Knight as the sixth most accomplished film of the past 15 years , writing that " Christopher Nolan 's psycho @-@ operatic crime drama was its decade 's most exciting blockbuster – and its most challenging . " In 2014 , Time Out polled several film critics , directors , actors and stunt actors to list their top action films . The Dark Knight was listed at 80th place on this list . In 2014 , The Dark Knight was ranked the 3rd greatest film ever made on Empire 's list of " The 301 Greatest Movies Of All Time " as voted by the magazine 's readers . The film was also included and ranked 57th on Hollywood 's 100 Favorite Films , a list compiled by The Hollywood Reporter , surveying " Studio chiefs , Oscar winners and TV royalty " . The Dark Knight ranked 96th on BBC 's " 100 Greatest American Films " list , voted on by film critics from around the world . 
 = = = = Commentary = = = = 
 Mystery writer Andrew Klavan , writing in The Wall Street Journal , compared the extreme measures that Batman takes to fight crime with those U.S. President George W. Bush used in the War on Terror . Klavan claims that , " at some level " The Dark Knight is " a paean of praise to the fortitude and moral courage that has been shown by George W. Bush in this time of terror and war . " Klavan supports this reading of the film by comparing Batman — like Bush , Klavan argues — " sometimes has to push the boundaries of civil rights to deal with an emergency , certain that he will re @-@ establish those boundaries when the emergency is past . " Klavan 's article has received criticism on the Internet and in mainstream media outlets , such as in The New Republic 's " The Plank . " Reviewing the film in The Sunday Times , Cosmo Landesman reached the opposite conclusion to Klavan , arguing that The Dark Knight " offers up a lot of moralistic waffle about how we must hug a terrorist – okay , I exaggerate . At its heart , however , is a long and tedious discussion about how individuals and society must never abandon the rule of law in struggling against the forces of lawlessness . In fighting monsters , we must be careful not to become monsters – that sort of thing . The film champions the anti @-@ war coalition 's claim that , in having a war on terror , you create the conditions for more terror . We are shown that innocent people died because of Batman – and he falls for it . " Benjamin Kerstein , writing in Azure , says that both Klavan and Landesman " have a point , " because " The Dark Knight is a perfect mirror of the society which is watching it : a society so divided on the issues of terror and how to fight it that , for the first time in decades , an American mainstream no longer exists . " 
 U.S. president Barack Obama has used the film to help explain how he understood the role and growth of Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant ( ISIS ) . " There 's a scene in the beginning in which the gang leaders of Gotham are meeting ... These are men who had the city divided up . They were thugs , but there was a kind of order . Everyone had his turf . And then the Joker comes in and lights the whole city on fire . ISIS is the Joker . It has the capacity to set the whole region on fire . That 's why we have to fight it . ” 
 = = = = Themes and analysis = = = = 
 According to David S. Goyer , the primary theme of The Dark Knight is escalation . Gotham City is weak and the citizens blame Batman for the city 's violence and corruption as well as the Joker 's threats , and it pushes his limits , making him feel that taking the laws into his own hands is further downgrading the city . Roger Ebert noted , " Throughout the film , [ the Joker ] devises ingenious situations that force Batman , Commissioner Gordon and District Attorney Harvey Dent to make impossible ethical decisions . By the end , the whole moral foundation of the Batman legend is threatened . " 
 Other critics have mentioned the theme of the triumph of evil over good . Harvey Dent is seen as Gotham 's " White Knight " in the beginning of the film but ends up becoming seduced to evil . The Joker , on the other hand , is seen as the representation of anarchy and chaos . He has no motive , no orders , and no desires but to cause havoc and " watch the world burn . " The terrible logic of human error is another theme as well . The ferry scene displays how humans can easily be enticed by iniquity , and how that could lead to potential disaster . 
 = = = = Awards = = = = 
 Most notable among the nominations were Heath Ledger 's almost complete sweep of over twenty awards for acting , including the Academy Award for Best Supporting Actor , Screen Actors Guild Award for Best Supporting Actor , the Golden Globe Award for Best Supporting Actor – Motion Picture , and the BAFTA Award for Best Actor in a Supporting Role . The Dark Knight also received nominations from the Writers Guild of America ( for Best Adapted Screenplay ) , the Producers Guild of America , and the Directors Guild of America , as well as a slew of other guild award nominations and wins . It was nominated for Best Film at the Critics Choice Awards and was named one of the top ten films of 2008 by the American Film Institute . 
 The Dark Knight was nominated for eight Academy Awards for the 81st Ceremony , breaking the previous record of seven held by Dick Tracy for the most nominations received by a film based on a comic book , comic strip , or graphic novel . The Dark Knight won two awards : Best Supporting Actor for Heath Ledger and Best Sound Editing . It was additionally nominated for six others , these being Best Art Direction , Best Cinematography , Best Sound Mixing , Best Visual Effects , Best Makeup , and Best Film Editing . Heath Ledger was the first posthumous winner of the Best Supporting Actor award , and only the second posthumous acting winner ever ( Peter Finch posthumously won the Best Actor award for his performance in the 1976 film Network ) . In addition , Ledger 's win marked the first win in any of the major Oscar categories ( producing , directing , acting , or writing ) for a superhero @-@ based film . Notably , Richard King 's win in the Sound Editing category blocked a complete awards sweep of the evening by the eventual Best Picture winner , Slumdog Millionaire . Although it did not receive a Best Picture nomination , the show 's opening song paid homage to The Dark Knight along with the five Best Picture nominees , including host Hugh Jackman riding on a mockup of the Batpod made out of garbage . In spite of the film 's critical success , the film was noticeably absent from the Best Picture nominee list , prompting controversy and led many to criticize the Academy Awards for " snubbing " the film . There was speculation that the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences later changed their number of Best Picture nominees to ten , instead of the traditional five , because of the film 's omission . In a question @-@ and @-@ answer session that followed the announcement , the Academy 's then president Sidney Ganis said ; " I would not be telling you the truth if I said the words Dark Knight did not come up . " 
 A British @-@ American production , the film was nominated for the 2009 Goya Award for Best European Film . It had a nomination in Japan for the 2009 Seiun Awards under the Science Fiction category with a Japan Academy Prize Award for Best Foreign Film . 
 = = = Box office = = = 
 The Dark Knight earned $ 534 @.@ 9 million in North America and $ 469 @.@ 7 million in other territories for a worldwide total of $ 1 billion . Worldwide , it is the 25th highest @-@ grossing film , the highest @-@ grossing film of 2008 , and the fourth film in history to gross more than $ 1 billion . It made $ 199 @.@ 7 million on its worldwide opening weekend , which ranks 34th on the all @-@ time chart . Box Office Mojo estimates that the film sold over 74 @.@ 26 million tickets in the US in its initial theatrical run . 
 In order to increase the film 's chances of crossing $ 1 billion in worldwide gross and of winning Oscars , Warner Bros. re @-@ released the film in traditional and IMAX theaters in the United States and other countries on January 23 , 2009 . Before the re @-@ release , the film 's gross remained at $ 997 million , but following the re @-@ release , the film crossed the $ 1 billion @-@ mark in February 2009 . 
 = = = = North America = = = = 
 The Dark Knight opened on Friday , July 18 , 2008 . It set a record for midnight showings , earning $ 18 @.@ 5 million from 3 @,@ 040 theaters ( a record first surpassed by Harry Potter and the Half @-@ Blood Prince ) . The midnight opening included $ 640 @,@ 000 from IMAX screenings . It was then shown on 9 @,@ 200 screens at a record 4 @,@ 366 theaters ( a record first surpassed by Iron Man 2 ) , also setting an opening and single @-@ day record gross , with $ 67 @.@ 2 million ( both records first surpassed by The Twilight Saga : New Moon ) , and an opening weekend record , with $ 158 @.@ 4 million ( first surpassed by Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows – Part 2 ) . The weekend per theater average of $ 36 @,@ 283 stands as the fifth @-@ largest of all time . It sold an estimated 22 @.@ 37 million tickets during its first weekend with 2008 's average admission of $ 7 @.@ 08 , meaning the film sold more tickets than Spider @-@ Man 3 , which sold 21 @.@ 96 million with the average price of $ 6 @.@ 88 in 2007 . Additionally , the film set an IMAX opening weekend record , with $ 6 @.@ 3 million ( a record first surpassed by Star Trek ) . It achieved the largest Sunday gross with $ 43 @.@ 6 million and the largest opening week from Friday to Thursday with $ 238 @.@ 6 million ( both records surpassed by Marvel 's The Avengers ) . It also achieved the largest cumulative gross through its third and fourth day of release ( both records first surpassed by Deathly Hallows – Part 2 ) and so on until its tenth day of release ( records surpassed by Marvel 's The Avengers ) . Moreover , it was the fastest film to reach $ 100 million ( a record first surpassed by New Moon ) , $ 150 million and each additional $ 50 million through $ 450 million ( records surpassed by Marvel 's The Avengers ) , and $ 500 million ( a record first surpassed by Avatar ) . Finally , it achieved the largest second @-@ weekend gross ( a record first surpassed by Avatar ) . 
 It has grossed the fourth largest Saturday gross ( $ 51 @,@ 336 @,@ 732 ) . On its first Monday , it grossed $ 24 @.@ 5 million , which stands as the largest non @-@ holiday Monday gross and the fourth largest Monday gross overall , and on its first Tuesday , it grossed another $ 20 @.@ 9 million , which stands as the largest non @-@ opening Tuesday gross and the second largest Tuesday gross overall . Notably , it topped the box office during the second biggest weekend of all time in North America ( aggregated total of $ 253 @,@ 586 @,@ 871 ) and it was the only 2008 film that remained on top of the box office charts for four consecutive weekends . 
 The Dark Knight is the highest @-@ grossing film of 2008 , the second @-@ highest @-@ grossing superhero film , the second @-@ highest @-@ grossing film based on comics , and the fourth highest @-@ grossing North American film of all time . Adjusted for ticket @-@ price inflation though , it ranks 28th . In contrast to Avatar and Titanic — both which grossed more than The Dark Knight in North America and had slow but steady earnings — The Dark Knight broke records in its opening weekend and slowed down significantly after its first few weekends . 
 = = = = Other territories = = = = 
 Overseas , The Dark Knight is the highest @-@ grossing 2008 film and the fourth @-@ highest @-@ grossing superhero film . It premiered in 20 other territories on 4 @,@ 520 screens , grossing $ 41 @.@ 3 million in its first weekend . The film came second to Hancock , which was screening in 71 territories in its third weekend . The Dark Knight 's biggest territory was Australia , where it grossed $ 13 @.@ 7 million over the weekend , setting a record for the largest superhero film opening . It topped the weekend box office outside North America three consecutive times and four in total . Citing cultural sensitivities to some elements in the film , and a reluctance to adhere to pre @-@ release conditions , Warner Bros. declined to release the film in mainland China . Its highest @-@ grossing market after North America was the UK , Ireland , and Malta , where it earned $ 89 @.@ 1 million . Also , in Australia , it earned of $ 39 @.@ 9 million , still remaining in the all @-@ time Top 10 of the country . The five highest @-@ grossing markets outside North America also include Germany ( $ 29 @.@ 7 million ) , France and the Maghreb region ( $ 27 @.@ 5 million ) and South Korea ( $ 25 @.@ 0 million ) . 
 = = = Home media = = = 
 The film was released on DVD and Blu @-@ ray Disc in North America on December 9 , 2008 . Releases include a one @-@ disc edition DVD ; a two @-@ disc Special Edition DVD ; a two @-@ disc edition BD ; and a Special Edition BD package featuring a statuette of the Bat @-@ pod . The BD / iTunes version presents the film in a variable aspect ratio , with the IMAX sequences framed in 1 @.@ 78 : 1 , while scenes filmed in 35 mm are framed in 2 @.@ 40 : 1 . The DVD versions feature the entire film framed in a uniform 2 @.@ 40 : 1 aspect ratio . Disc 2 of the two @-@ disc Special Edition DVD features the six main IMAX sequences in the original 1 @.@ 44 : 1 aspect ratio . Additional IMAX shots throughout the film that are presented in 1 @.@ 78 : 1 on the Blu @-@ ray release are not , however , included in the DVD 's special features . In addition to the standard DVD releases , some stores released their own exclusive editions of the film . 
 In the United Kingdom , the film had combined sales of 513 @,@ 000 units on its first day of release , of which 107 @,@ 730 ( 21 % ) were Blu @-@ ray Discs , the highest number of first @-@ day Blu @-@ ray Discs sold . In the United States , The Dark Knight set a sales record for most DVDs sold in one day , selling 3 million units on its first day of release – 600 @,@ 000 of which were Blu @-@ ray Discs . 
 The DVD and Blu @-@ ray Disc editions were released in Australia on December 10 , 2008 . Releases were in the form of a one @-@ disc edition on DVD ; a two @-@ disc edition on DVD ; a two @-@ disc edition including a <unk> on DVD and BD ; a two @-@ disc Batpod statuette Limited BD Edition ; a two @-@ disc BD edition ; and a four @-@ disc Batman Begins / The Dark Knight pack on DVD and BD . As of December 19 , 2008 , the DVD release is the top selling film in the Australian DVD Charts and is expected to break the Australian sales record set by Finding Nemo . 
 The movie also sold Blu @-@ ray copies worth 370 million yen ( US $ 4 @.@ 1 million ) in Japan , placing it 3rd out of 10 in the top 10 overall Blu @-@ ray category . 
 In March 2011 , Warner Bros. offered The Dark Knight for rent on Facebook , becoming the first movie ever to be released via digital distribution on a social networking site . Users in the United States were able to use Facebook Credits to view the film . 
 = Battle of Slater 's Knoll = 
 The Battle of Slater 's Knoll ( 28 March – 6 April 1945 ) was a battle during the Second World War fought between Australian and Japanese forces on Bougainville Island . Part of the Bougainville campaign , the battle occurred as a force of about 3 @,@ 300 Japanese from the Japanese 6th Division supported by a sizeable concentration of artillery launched a counterattack against the main Australian offensive which had been pushing south towards Buin , concentrating their attacks on Slater 's Knoll near the Puriata River . The Australian troops belonged to the 7th Brigade , with the 25th Infantry Battalion being the most heavily engaged , although the 9th Infantry Battalion and the 61st Infantry Battalion also took part in the fighting . 
 Against Japanese tactics that included massed attacks , the Australians utilised armour and artillery , and in the end these proved telling . Commencing in late March , after the Australian advance had been halted by wet weather , over the course of several days the Japanese launched several probing raids following by heavy attacks against the Australians The final assault on the knoll came on the night of 4 / 5 April when 129 men from ' B ' Company , 25th Infantry Battalion repulsed an attack by a force of about 1 @,@ 100 Japanese , killing 292 . This proved to be the 7th Brigade 's final involvement in the campaign as they were relieved by the 15th Brigade shortly afterwards . Overall , 620 Japanese were killed in the battle with another 1 @,@ 000 estimated to have been wounded , while the Australians suffered 189 casualties . 
 = = Background = = 
 At the beginning of 1945 , the south @-@ eastern part of Bougainville was occupied by the Japanese 6th Division , under the command of Lieutenant General Tsutomu Akinaga . Made up of the 13th and 23rd Infantry Regiments — 600 and 700 @-@ strong respectively — as well as the 6th Field Artillery Regiment , the 6th Engineer Regiment , the 6th Transport Regiment and the 4th Field Heavy Artillery Regiment , Akinaga 's division consisted of 3 @,@ 300 men . 
 The previous November , the Australian II Corps under Lieutenant General Stanley Savige had taken over responsibility of the island from the US XIV Corps , who had been transferred to fight in the Philippines . Although incorrect , at the time the Allies believed that the Japanese forces on the island numbered around 17 @,@ 500 men and while these forces were understrength , they were still considered to be capable of carrying out effective combat operations . In order to counter this , it was decided that the Australian II Corps — consisting of Militia and Australian Imperial Force troops from the 3rd Division and the 11th and 23rd Brigades — would go on the offensive and a three @-@ pronged campaign was planned in the northern , central and southern sectors of the island . 
 As a result , the Australian campaign on the island developed into three separate drives : in the north , it was planned that Japanese forces would be forced into the narrow Bonis Peninsula and contained ; in the centre , the seizure of Pearl Ridge would give the Australians control of the east – west thoroughfares and protection against further counterattacks , while also opening the way for a drive to the east coast ; and the main campaign would take place in the south , where the bulk of the Japanese forces were concentrated . Consequently , on 21 January , Savige directed the 3rd Division under Major General William Bridgeford to take " swift and vigorous action " to destroy Japanese forces in southern Bougainville . The division 's immediate task was to advance south to the Puriata , and send patrols across it . Savige considered that the Japanese division was " weak and off balance " due to casualties and disease as well as a shortage of supplies . Brigadier Raymond Monaghan 's 29th Brigade had opened the campaign in the south in mid @-@ December , crossing the Jaba River , before conducting a series of landings by barge along the coast of Empress Augusta Bay , outflanking the <unk> , Tavera , Adele and <unk> Rivers , in what became dubbed the " Battle of the Swamps " by the Australians . The fighting during this time resulted in 240 Japanese killed , and 148 Australian casualties . Monaghan was also relieved of his command . 
 In late January , the 7th Brigade , under Brigadier John Field , which had been patrolling the Jaba River to protect the 29th Brigade 's rear while they pushed south , was subsequently was tasked to " take Mosigetta , clear the enemy from the <unk> – <unk> – <unk> area , and patrol along the Puriata " . Each of the brigade 's three infantry battalions was marginally below full strength at the time , with frontages of between 600 and 700 personnel around the start of the battle . 
 = = Prelude = = 
 In late January , a company from the Australian 25th Infantry Battalion — under Lieutenant Colonel John McKinna — subsequently carried out an amphibious landing south of <unk> Point , on the Solomon Sea coast and had cleared towards <unk> . On 2 February , the battalion carried out another landing at Toko , and advanced northeast from there towards Batara , and then along the west bank of the Puriata , towards the Buin Road . Meanwhile , further to the east , the 9th Infantry Battalion was moved by truck from Torokina to the Jaba River and then moved by barge along the Empress Augusta Bay coast , landing at Mawaraka from where they advanced towards Mosigetta , and the 61st Infantry Battalion also proceeded towards there , setting off from the junction of the Jaba and <unk> Rivers while the 2 / 8th Commando Squadron provided flank security further to the east . Elements of the 1st New Guinea Infantry Battalion also conducted a landing on the coast , on the 25th Battalion 's left flank , to the north of Toko , and advanced to <unk> and then towards Mosigetta . 
 On 4 March , a company from the 25th Infantry Battalion crossed the Puriata River southward — at the point where the Buin Road crossed — on a north @-@ facing bend , later known as Galvin 's Crossing . The following day the Japanese were forced off a small knoll close to the river and the road , about 1 km ( 0 @.@ 62 mi ) south of the crossing . On 6 March , Japanese shelling of the knoll wounded an Australian , Private Carl Slater , who held his post until relieved . The only casualty during this period , the knoll was named after him as a result . Throughout March , the 25th Infantry Battalion continued to expand its perimeter , to the north and south , along the Buin Road , while the 9th moved west from Mosigetta to link up with them and the 61st skirted east around <unk> . By late march , though , heavy rain temporarily stopped the Australian advance , as the main road became impassable due to thick mud . 
 Although the Japanese sporadically shelled the knoll during March , there were no further Australian casualties . The 25th Infantry Battalion , which had established its headquarters and main defensive position around the knoll , in front of the Puriata River , sent out patrols every day , and on 9 March , one of these reported having killed 10 Japanese soldiers without loss to itself . The Japanese also began making dawn attacks , in which light machine gunners would approach by stealth , set up and fire on the Australian positions , then retire to their own lines , 250 yd ( 230 m ) away . As the advance was halted , the Australians began to expect a major attack in the area of the knoll . 
 The Japanese launched a number of attacks on the Australians between 15 and 17 March . Under fire from three sides and in danger of being enveloped , on 19 March the Australians launched an attack of their own along the Buin Road , and although they had some success in clearing the forward Japanese positions , they then encountered a system of pillboxes and trenches around the <unk> Road junction . The 25th Infantry Battalion 's commander , McKinna , ordered the two platoons led by Lieutenant Dick Jefferies to attack the pillboxes , supported by a section of machine guns , and several PIAT anti @-@ tank weapons . A two @-@ hour fire @-@ fight and a bayonet charge followed . This attack was ultimately beaten back by the defenders with the loss of eight Australians killed and 14 wounded . A second attack was launched on 22 March . Supported by heavy artillery , mortar and machine gun support , it proved successful , largely after the individual efforts of Corporal Reg Rattey , who single @-@ handedly silenced several bunkers himself . 
 As the Australians began to prepare for the next stage of the offensive , important intelligence confirmed that the Japanese were planning a large @-@ scale counterattack in the area . Believing that the Australian forces in the area surrounding the knoll were limited to just 400 men and observing that the Australians had not had time to reorganise , the Japanese XVII Army commander — Lieutenant General <unk> Kanda — ordered the 6th Division commander — Akinaga — to delay the Australian advance towards the south . Akinaga assessed that a counterattack against the Australian forces at this point with the entire weight of his division might be successful at this time and consequently he gave the order for his division to begin an attack across the Puriata . Akinaga planned to commit 2 @,@ 000 men to the assault , while 1 @,@ 300 would be held back to act as ammunition carriers . 
 According to Karl James , no detailed orders were produced for the attack and deliberate planning was hastily completed with little or no co @-@ ordination between the attacking infantry regiments . In addition , to increase the size of the infantry force , troops from the field artillery regiment were quickly re @-@ roled as riflemen . In the meantime , the Australians on Slater 's Knoll , having been alerted to the possibility of a large @-@ scale attack began adjusting their defences . The soldiers cleared fields off fire and set out clear engagement areas to the north , northwest and south of the knoll , to allow maximum effectiveness of their supporting Vickers medium machine guns and Bren light machine guns . Barbed wire was laid out , and booby traps set . 
 = = Battle = = 
 = = = Probing raids = = = 
 The main attack was planned for 1 April , but as the various Japanese units moved into position , a number of minor probes were made by elements of the Japanese 6th Engineer Regiment in the Australian rear areas and along their line of communications . The first raid came on the night of 27 / 28 March , when a force of about 100 Japanese exploited a gap between the 25th Infantry Battalion 's main defensive position and its ' B ' Echelon — which included its transport and logistics elements and was protected by a company from the 61st Infantry Battalion — fixed bayonets and then assaulted the rear of the Australian perimeter . The Australians had been alerted to their approach after the communication line between the two positions had been cut , and when the attack began the men had already been roused and the weapons pits fully manned . As a result , the attack failed and was turned back . A number of Japanese survivors managed to dig @-@ in near the perimeter and later fired upon the Australian clearing patrol that was sent out the following morning , as well as snipe at the company defending ' B ' Echelon 's position . Afterwards , the Australians counted 19 dead Japanese around their position , while they also managed to capture one of the wounded . Against this , the 25th Infantry Battalion had lost three killed and seven wounded . 
 Another probe was made early on the morning of 28 March on the positions of the Australian 5th Field Battery , whose eight guns were located east of Toko , on the west bank of the Puriata river from where they could provide defensive fires in support of the 25th Infantry Battalion 's main positions on the knoll . Shortly before dawn one of the booby traps that the Australians had set around their perimeter to provide early warning was set off and one of the sentries opened fire upon what he believed to be a Japanese probe . A short time later , a small section of Japanese stumbled into one of the forward positions and fire was exchanged . Later , as a team was sent out to disarm the remaining booby traps , this team was fired upon and sporadic fighting continued until midday . 
 That evening , around 23 : 00 , the 9th Infantry Battalion 's rear echelon at Barara , along the Toko – Mosigetta – Buin Road , came under attack . Under the command of the battalion second @-@ in @-@ command , and possessing only four Bren light machine guns for direct fire support , they were nevertheless able to hold off the initial attack . Following this , sporadic fighting continued into the early morning , when at 04 : 45 on 29 March a force of about 100 Japanese attacked the position supported by sustained machine gun and rifle fire . Rushing the Australian position with bayonets , they were beaten back by stiff defence and fell back from the position , leaving behind 23 dead but taking their wounded with them . Four Australians were wounded in this encounter . 
 Throughout 29 March , the Japanese continued the tactic of using small @-@ scale attacks to test the Australian defences and isolate the 25th Infantry Battalion 's forward companies from its headquarters and rear . Over the course of the morning and into the afternoon , one of its companies was probed , while the headquarters also came under attack . The company from the 61st Infantry Battalion protecting the 25th Infantry Battalion 's line of communications also came under attack from the 70 Japanese that were believed to be entrenched between the ' B ' Echelon and the 25th 's main positions , suffering two killed and two wounded . Later , it became clear to the Australians that the Japanese were preparing for a major attack against Slater 's Knoll , following the capture of a Japanese sergeant who confirmed that the probes were , in the words of Gavin Long , the " prelude to a full @-@ scale offensive " . 
 These probes intensified on 30 March , as one of the 25th Infantry Battalion 's companies was strongly attacked by the Japanese . The Australian position had been weakened by having about a third of its strength out on patrol at the time of the attack . Unable to return to the perimeter while the company was under fire , they were forced to link up with one of the other companies further north . Meanwhile , the company was attacked four times throughout the day . The first three attacks were repulsed before the last attack came at 13 : 00 , preceded by a heavy mortar bombardment . Twelve Japanese were killed in the attack , while one Australian was killed and two were missing in action . Nevertheless , the Australian position had been made untenable and they were forced to withdraw and link up with the company to the north . In doing so they left behind three mortars and a quantity of ammunition which the Japanese later brought into action against them . 
 Communications between the brigade and battalion headquarters and the forward company positions broke down at this stage and runners had to be despatched to pass a message asking for artillery support . Meanwhile , the supply situation for the Australians also became desperate as they had consumed all of their rations and had run out of water . The water situation was solved by digging a well within the perimeter , but it became clear that reinforcements were required . The Australian divisional commander , Bridgeford , subsequently placed a squadron of Matilda tanks under Major Kenneth Arnott from the 2 / 4th Armoured Regiment at the 7th Brigade commander 's disposal , and over the course of the day these tanks were brought up towards the 25th 's position from Toko where they had been put ashore from landing craft . Engineers were used to bridge a number of creeks and streams , while bulldozers were also employed to improve the terrain or to pull the tanks along when they were unable move under their own power . 
 This was the first time tanks had been used in the campaign and the going was slow . By 19 : 00 on 30 March they reached the ' B ' Echelon position . Early on 31 March the tanks moved up to the battalion headquarters on Slater 's Knoll where they were escorted by a platoon from the headquarters company and moved out again , once again using bulldozers to improve the ground in front of them . Just as they did , the Japanese launched an attack on one of the isolated companies . When they were 400 yd ( 370 m ) from the forward positions , the infantry deployed to the left and right of the tanks and they began their advance to contact , arriving just in time to help defeat the Japanese attack . 
 As the forward companies began to move back towards the main defensive position , jeeps were sent up to collect the wounded while McKinna led a force of two platoons and two tanks out to the perimeter at the <unk> junction . There they were able to reclaim the mortars that had earlier been abandoned and destroyed them so that they could not be used against the Australians again , but the jeeps carrying the wounded ran into a Japanese ambush in which five Australians were killed . McKinna then organised a quick counterattack , taking a force up the road along with three tanks and subsequently attacking the ambushing force , killing 11 , before forming a harbour around the tanks for the night . 
 = = = First major assault = = = 
 The next morning , 1 April , the Australians extended across the Kero Creek and advanced north to the Puriata where they established a perimeter 1 @,@ 000 yd ( 910 m ) south of Slater 's Knoll . Around 12 : 00 , the Japanese 6th Field Artillery Regiment , whose gunners had been converted to the role of infantry , set up a form @-@ up position 50 m ( 55 yd ) to the front of the Australian company holding the perimeter to the south of Slater ’ s Knoll at a location the Japanese called Pain , which lay along the Buin Road . Before the attack could be launched , the Australians detected the movement of the Japanese and began firing upon them . Shortly after 12 : 40 , the Japanese gunners launched their assault . Firing their weapons from the hip , they rushed the Australian position , forcing the defenders to withdraw , leaving a number of dead and wounded . That evening , the Australians launched a series of determined counterattacks in order to re @-@ establish contact between Slater 's Knoll and the forward companies , however , these were turned back . 
 Meanwhile , the Japanese 23rd Infantry Regiment , which had advanced on the right flank from Barara attempted to move on Slater 's Knoll from the north . Finding its way blocked by wire obstacles and lacking the equipment necessary to remove them , it was forced to halt its advance and cover the flank of Colonel <unk> Muta 's 13th Infantry Regiment , which was attempting to launch an assault across the Puriata . At this point , the river was about 100 m ( 110 yd ) across and 1 m ( 3 @.@ 3 ft ) deep , while the opposite bank was about 1 m ( 3 @.@ 3 ft ) high . The crossing began at 03 : 00 on 1 April , and the three battalions made heavy work of it . When they were halfway across , the two forward battalions were spotted by the Australians in the moonlight and engaged with machine gun and rifle fire . The Japanese quickly deployed and attempted to launch an attack ; however , in the confusion the 1st Battalion , 23rd Infantry Regiment was cut off from the rest of the assault force . As daylight came , the Australians were able to call down mortar fire on the Japanese , causing considerable casualties . Running low on ammunition and having suffered considerable losses , the 23rd Infantry were forced to withdraw . The 1st Battalion remained cut off until the evening of 1 April , when it was able to re @-@ establish contact with the other two battalions and report to the divisional commander that the attack had been unsuccessful . 
 = = = Lull in the battle and secondary attack = = = 
 On 2 April , the Japanese divisional commander , <unk> , called the 13th and 23rd Infantry Regiments back across the Puriata , to a position south @-@ west of the Pain feature . At this point , the decision was made to launch a fresh attack aimed at taking Slater 's Knoll and eliminating the Australian forces in the area surrounding the Puriata ford . The attack was scheduled for 5 April , and over the course of the following three days , contact was minimal . In this time , there were a few minor skirmishes , and small groups of Japanese were seen by the Australians around Barara , Slater 's Knoll and Mosigetta . As further intelligence reports came in , it became clear to the Australian commanders that the Japanese were about to deliver the main attack . 
 On the night of 4 / 5 April , the Japanese heavily shelled the Australian artillery battery , while communications between brigade headquarters and the 25th Infantry Battalion headquarters were severed , as were the lines from the 25th Infantry Battalion 's headquarters to its forward companies . Suspecting that the attack was about to commence , runners were sent and the men defending Slater 's Knoll , now consisting of a force of only 129 men from ' B ' Company , stood @-@ to . 
 At 05 : 00 on 5 April , the Japanese launched an attack from the north . This was followed almost simultaneously by a stronger attack from the south @-@ west . For the next 80 minutes , 900 – 1 @,@ 100 Japanese from the 13th and 23rd Infantry Regiments attacked the small Australian force in waves . They overwhelmed the Australian forward positions , but finding their way blocked by wire obstacles and lacking any equipment to deal with them the Japanese attack stalled . Quickly , the situation was turned back in favour of the Australians , and the Japanese were cut down by heavy defensive artillery fire and by well @-@ sited machine guns . A further attack was launched by a smaller force along the Buin Road and aimed at two of the forward companies positioned there . This attack was beaten back also . After regrouping , the surviving members of the 13th Infantry Regiment began preparing for a final charge , determined to fight to the last man . Their commander , Muta , in a final act of defiance wrapped his unit 's banner around his waist and armed himself with a grenade with which to blow himself up during the assault . Elsewhere , the remaining officers of the 23rd Infantry made a pact to hurl themselves against the Australians one last time in a suicidal charge . Nevertheless , Akinaga , realising that further assaults were futile finally dispatched the order to cancel the attack . At around 08 : 30 , the Australians realised that the Japanese had decided that they had had enough . Just after midday , two tanks were dispatched from the ' B ' Echelon perimeter , escorted by a company from the 61st Infantry Battalion , arriving on the knoll by 13 : 45 where they were used as fire support as the Australians began to carry out mopping up operations , flushing out small groups of survivors all around the position . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 The day after the final Japanese assault on the knoll , 292 dead Japanese were counted around ' B ' Company 's perimeter . In total , over the course of the battle , the Australians counted 620 Japanese killed , and estimated that another 1 @,@ 000 had probably been wounded . Information obtained from captured Japanese clarified that the Australians had come up against a force of at least 2 @,@ 400 troops . The commander of the 23rd Infantry Regiment , Lieutenant Colonel Kawano Koji , was among the dead , as was a senior divisional staff officer , Lieutenant Colonel Honda Matsuo . Four wounded Japanese were also taken prisoner of war . Casualties for the Australians included 10 officers and 179 other ranks killed or wounded , while there had been a further 81 Australians evacuated due to non @-@ combat related issues . Wartime Japanese casualty estimates vary from these figures , though , claiming to have killed 1 @,@ 800 Australians , while placing their own losses at 280 killed and 320 wounded . Long argues that these figures are problematic , as based upon the same report , the Japanese believed that there were only 400 Australians in the region during the battle , and yet they claimed to have killed almost five times that number . 
 The result of the battle had a profound effect on the Japanese commanders . According to James , Kanda had been " so certain of victory ... [ he ] ... had not developed any plans for ... subsequent activities " . Nevertheless , after the battle , the Japanese forces in the area pulled back to the Hongorai River , where they were reorganised due to the heavy losses , with several infantry , engineer and artillery units being amalgamated . Lacking food , suffering the effects of disease , and isolated from home , morale amongst the Japanese troops fell heavily , with many realising that the war was lost . There was an increase in desertions at this time , although the vast majority continued to fight , if only because they were under orders to do so . 
 Operationally , the battle proved to the Australian high command how effective armour could be when used in close co @-@ operation with infantry and in protecting the lines of communication . The use of machine gun carriers to carry out the wounded had also been quite effective . While the Japanese soldiers and officers on the ground fought bravely , continuing the assault even when it was clear it had failed , ultimately the battle proved to be a decisive Australian victory ; however , James notes that poor planning and unreliable communications had also contributed to the result . Long goes on to argue that if the Japanese commander had been more flexible in his tactics , the result might have been different . The Australian right flank had been vulnerable , but Akinaga did not exploit this opportunity . 
 There were tactical deficiencies as well , particularly the predictability of cutting Australian signals lines just before an attack and bunching together in tight groups during an assault , allowing the Australians to take full toll with their machine guns . The Australian commander of the 25th Infantry Battalion , McKinna , had spread his companies out effectively and went forward to direct the fighting at several points . Fields of fire had been cleared , perimeters set and patrolling had been maintained . Nevertheless , the Australians had also failed to seize opportunities as they arose , for after the battle they did not follow up their success immediately . After the failure of the final assault , the Japanese had possessed no forces in the immediate vicinity that would have been capable of resisting any follow up forces that the Australians might have been able to bring up and it is possible that an advance could have been carried all the way to the Hongorai River . As it was , however , the Australian line of supply was stretched and it was necessary for a pause before the advance could continue in earnest . 
 In the days immediately after the battle , the Australians continued to carry out patrolling operations around the knoll . On 7 April , a patrol from the 9th Infantry Battalion clashed with a Japanese force of about 30 men and in the ensuing engagement four Japanese were killed , while a patrol from the 61st Infantry Battalion on 8 April killed another five . On 13 April , the order was given that the 7th Brigade would be gradually withdrawn and relieved by the 15th . Shortly afterwards , the 58th / 59th Infantry Battalion replaced the 25th in occupation of the knoll , while the 24th Infantry Battalion resumed the advance along the Buin Road on 17 April , subsequently taking part in the fighting along the Hongorai River . The 9th Infantry Battalion , however , was not withdrawn immediately , and remained in the northern area until it handed over to the 57th / 60th Infantry Battalion in early May . The fighting on Bougainville continued throughout April as the Japanese resisted the Australian advance and went on until July when the fighting petered out due to heavy rain and flooding . 
 After the war , the battle honour of " Slater 's Knoll " was awarded to the 25th Infantry Battalion and the 2 / 4th Armoured Regiment . Neither the 9th or 61st Infantry Battalions were similarly credited , although according to Gordon Maitland there seems to be no explanation as to why . For his actions during the attack on the Japanese pillboxes on 22 March , Rattey later received the Victoria Cross . Initially , his battalion commander , McKinna , had nominated him for the lesser Distinguished Conduct Medal , but on review by the Field , the brigade commander , the nomination was elevated . It was subsequently announced in the London Gazette in July 1945 . 
 = Barthélemy Boganda = 
 Barthélemy Boganda ( 4 April 1910 – 29 March 1959 ) was the leading nationalist politician of what is now the Central African Republic . Boganda was active prior to his country 's independence , during the period when the area , part of French Equatorial Africa , was administered by France under the name of Oubangui @-@ Chari . He served as the first Prime Minister of the Central African Republic autonomous territory . 
 Boganda was born into a family of subsistence farmers , and was adopted and educated by Roman Catholic Church missionaries . In 1938 , he was ordained as the first Roman Catholic priest from Oubangui @-@ Chari . During World War II , Boganda served in a number of missions and after was persuaded by the Bishop of Bangui to enter politics . In 1946 , he became the first Oubanguian elected to the French National Assembly , where he maintained a political platform against racism and the colonial regime . He then returned to Oubangui @-@ Chari to form a grassroots movement in opposition of French colonialism . The movement led to the 1949 foundation of the Movement for the Social Evolution of Black Africa ( MESAN ) , which became popular among villagers and the working class . Boganda 's reputation was slightly damaged when he was <unk> from the priesthood after marrying Michelle Jourdain , a parliamentary secretary . Nonetheless , he continued to advocate for equal treatment and civil rights for blacks in the territory well into the 1950s . 
 In 1958 , after the French Fourth Republic began to consider granting independence to most of its African colonies , Boganda met with Prime Minister Charles de Gaulle to discuss terms for the independence of Oubangui @-@ Chari . De Gaulle accepted Boganda 's terms , and on 1 December , Boganda declared the establishment of the Central African Republic . He became the autonomous territory 's first Prime Minister and intended to serve as the first President of the independent CAR . He was killed in a mysterious plane crash on 29 March 1959 , while en route to Bangui . Experts found a trace of explosives in the plane 's wreckage , but revelation of this detail was withheld . Although those responsible for the crash were never identified , people have suspected the French secret service , and even Boganda 's wife , of being involved . Slightly more than one year later , Boganda 's dream was realized , when the Central African Republic attained formal independence from France . 
 = = Biography = = 
 = = = Early life = = = 
 Boganda was born to a family of subsistence farmers in <unk> , a large M <unk> village in the Lobaye basin located at the edge of the equatorial forest some 80 kilometres ( 50 mi ) southwest of Bangui . French commercial exploitation of Central Africa had reached an apogee around the time of Boganda 's birth , and although interrupted by World War I , activity resumed in the 1920s . The French consortia used what was essentially a form of slavery — the corvée — and one of the most notorious was the Compagnie <unk> de la Sangha @-@ Oubangui , involved in rubber gathering in the Lobaye district . 
 In the late 1920s , Boganda 's mother was beaten to death by the company 's officials while collecting rubber in the forest . His uncle , whose son Jean @-@ Bédel Bokassa would later crown himself as the Emperor of the Central African Empire , was beaten to death at the colonial police station as a result of his alleged resistance to work . Boganda 's father was a witch doctor who had engaged in cannibalistic rituals . 
 During his early years , Boganda was adopted by Catholic missionaries . As a boy he attended the school opened at <unk> ( the administrative centre for the Lobaye prefecture ) by the post 's founder , Lieutenant Mayer . From December 1921 to December 1922 , he spent two hours a day with Monsignor Jean @-@ <unk> <unk> learning how to read , while spending the rest of his time performing manual labour . On December 24 , he was received into the church under the name Barthélemy , in honour of one of the Twelve Apostles of Jesus Christ who was believed to have worked as Christian missionary in Africa . Father Gabriel <unk> sent Boganda to the Catholic School of <unk> and then to the school of the Saint Paul Mission at Bangui , where he completed his primary studies under Mgr <unk> , whom he would consider his spiritual father . The missionaries there , encouraged by his intellectual promise and pious demeanour , helped him continue secondary studies at small seminaries in Brazzaville and <unk> ( under Belgian Jesuits ) before he moved on to the great seminary at Yaoundé . On 17 March 1938 , fulfilling an ambition he had had since age twelve , he was ordained and became the first Roman Catholic priest native to Oubangui @-@ Chari , as the colony was then called . He ministered at Bangui , <unk> and Bangassou , and in 1939 , his bishop denied his request to join the French Army . He was needed at home , as many Frenchmen involved with the church had been recalled to the metropole to fight in World War II , during which he served in a number of missions . 
 = = = Beginnings in politics and marriage = = = 
 After World War II , Boganda was urged by the Bishop of Bangui , Mgr Grandin , to complement his humanitarian and social works through political action . Boganda decided to run for election to the National Assembly of France . On 10 November 1946 , he became the first Oubanguian elected to the assembly after winning almost half of the total votes cast and defeating three other candidates , including the outgoing incumbent , François Joseph <unk> , who had formerly served as the Governor @-@ General of French Equatorial Africa . Boganda arrived in Paris attired in his clerical garb and introduced himself to his fellow legislators as the son of a polygamous cannibal . From 1947 on , Boganda conducted a lively campaign against racism and the colonial regime . Soon realizing the limits of his influence in France ( he served in parliament until 1958 but gradually detached himself from its activities ) , he returned to Oubangui @-@ Chari to organise a grassroots movement of teachers , truck drivers and small producers to oppose French colonialism , although his previous attempt to set up a marketing cooperative among African planters of his own ethnicity had failed . On 28 September 1949 , at Bangui , he founded the Movement for the Social Evolution of Black Africa ( MESAN ) , a quasi @-@ religious political movement and party that sought to affirm black humanity and quickly came to dominate local politics . His political creed was summed up in the Sango phrase " zo <unk> zo " , which translated to " every human being is a person " . Effectively , he was looking for equal treatment and civil rights for blacks within the French Union rather than independence , at least for the time being . He <unk> large masses of people — women , youth , workers , poor cultivators — with the intent of unleashing the creativity of the Oubanguian people by placing them centre stage in the making of their country 's history . 
 The movement was more popular among villagers than among évolué townsmen , whom Boganda considered servile and to whom he applied the derogatory term " <unk> @-@ <unk> " ( " Black @-@ Whites " ) . Additionally , he created the <unk> Liberal <unk> ( ILO ) in 1953 , which aimed to elect an equal number of black and white politicians to the assembly , so that a united electoral college could be established . MESAN 's activities angered the French administration and the companies trading in cotton , coffee , diamonds and other commodities . The Bangui chamber of commerce was controlled by these companies , and the men who gathered at this club strongly resented the demise of forced labour and the resultant rise of black nationalism . They hated Boganda in particular , viewing him as a dangerous revolutionary demagogue and a threat to their " free enterprise " , and they resolved to get rid of him . They also set up local RPF branches to counter MESAN , and the presence of African Democratic Rally ( RDA ) in the other three territories of French Equatorial Africa posed some menace for MESAN , but by 1958 , although other parties were allowed , they had been reduced to tiny groups . On many occasions , General Charles de Gaulle expressed his sympathy for Oubangui @-@ Chari , which had supported de Gaulle 's Free French Forces as early as August 1940 , and refused to support the violent intrigues of the RPF against Boganda and his men . He received Boganda , by then head of the Grand Council of French Equatorial Africa and pushing for independence , in Paris in July 1958 and was in turn received at Brazzaville in August . The discussions there led to the General accepting Boganda 's demands for independence and the endorsement of the French Community in September throughout French Equatorial Africa . 
 Boganda 's attachment to his chosen calling weakened when he met and fell in love with a young Frenchwoman , Michelle Jourdain , who was employed as a parliamentary secretary . They were married on 13 June 1950 , for which Boganda was expelled from the priesthood and cut off from the Catholic hierarchy 's support . Boganda and Jourdain would later have two daughters and a son . The affair caused a minor scandal in Paris , but it did little to dent his popularity with his people . In the National Assembly he continued to battle , often in vain , against repressive features of the French administration in Oubangui @-@ Chari . Arbitrary arrest , low wages , compulsory cotton cultivation , and the exclusion of blacks from restaurants and cinemas were all targets of his rhetoric . 
 = = = Increasing popularity and move toward autonomy = = = 
 On 29 March 1951 , Boganda was sentenced to two months in prison following his arrest on 10 January for " endangering the peace " after intervening in a local market dispute ( the " <unk> incident " in Lobaye ) . His wife was sentenced to 15 days in prison , but neither served their terms . On 17 June , he was re @-@ elected to the National Assembly with 48 % of the vote despite the obstacles placed in his way by the administration and strong opposition by the authorities , colonists , and the missions , with two prominent French candidates seeking to oust him . At this time , he emerged as an extraordinarily popular messianic folk hero and his country 's leading nationalist ; MESAN became the majority party in the Territorial Assembly elections in March 1952 . In this period he divided his time between his coffee plantation , his emancipation work and new political positions . In April 1954 , an incident that would showcase Boganda 's talent and appeal with crowds erupted at Berbérati . A white public works agent , who had recently been reprimanded for his brutality toward Africans , announced that his cook and the cook 's wife had died . A riot broke out and the governor sent in parachutists while armoured vehicles patrolled the streets . Boganda hesitated to appear in a village that was not one of his strongholds , but did so anyway and declared before the rioters that justice would be the same for blacks and whites . Upon hearing Boganda 's words , the crowd became calm and dispersed . 
 He played a crucial role at the beginning of internal autonomy ( 1956 – 1958 ) , although the relatively conservative Boganda remained sympathetic to French interests and still did not advocate immediate independence . For Boganda , the 1956 election , in which he took 89 % of the vote against another Oubanguian , was an uncontested speaker 's platform with which the colonial administration had come to terms ; the French had realised that opposing him would be dangerous and sought to accommodate him . That year he agreed to European representation on election lists in exchange for the financial support of French business leaders , and on 18 November , was elected as the first mayor of Bangui . On 31 March 1957 , MESAN won all seats in the Territorial Assembly election ; on 18 June , Boganda was elected president of the Grand Council of French Equatorial Africa ( a forum he used to broadcast his views on African unity ) and in May was appointed vice @-@ president of the Oubangui @-@ Chari Government Council ( the French governor was still its president ) . 
 A pragmatist , Boganda spoke before the local assembly on 30 December 1957 in praise of the new Comité de Salut <unk> , which envisioned joint administration of the economy between French colonials and MESAN territorial councilors ( he called it " the union of capital and Oubanguian labour " ) , but lack of French investment and opposition by <unk> soon led him to turn away from the idea . With the numerous declarations of independence being made in much of Francophone Africa , Boganda advised that an independent Oubangui @-@ Chari would face major economic problems from the onset . Instead , he advocated the independence of all of French Equatorial Africa and its integration into a United States of Latin Africa comprising the former French , Belgian , and Portuguese colonies of Central Africa ; he intended for Oubangui @-@ Chari to become a federal unit within that structure . However , such a federation proved unrealistic , foundering on the rocks of regional jealousy and personal ambition , and Boganda came to accept a constitution covering only Oubangui @-@ Chari as the Central African Republic . Thus , after 1 December 1958 , when Boganda declared the establishment of the Central African Republic as an autonomous member of the French Community , the name was applied only to the former Oubangui @-@ Chari . On 8 December , the CAR 's first government came into being with Boganda as prime minister ; a French governor remained in the country but was now called high commissioner . The new government began by adopting a law banning nudity and <unk> , Boganda 's missionary education still showing through . Its main task , however , was to draw up a constitution , which was democratic and modelled to some extent on that of France ; this was approved by the assembly on 16 February 1959 . Formal independence came later , on 13 August 1960 . 
 = = = Death and aftermath = = = 
 Boganda was poised to become the first president of the independent CAR when he boarded a plane at Berbérati for a flight to Bangui on 29 March 1959 , just prior to legislative elections . The aircraft exploded in midair over <unk> in the sub @-@ prefecture of Boda ( about 160 kilometres ( 100 mi ) west of Bangui ) , killing all passengers and crew . No clear cause has ever been ascertained for the mysterious crash and no commission of inquiry was ever formed ; sabotage was widely suspected . The nation was shocked at the death of its revered leader , whose funeral on April 2 at the cathedral of Notre @-@ Dame de Bangui saw a great outpouring of grief from thousands of <unk> . The 7 May edition of the Paris weekly L 'Express revealed that experts had found traces of explosive in the wreckage , but the French high commissioner banned the sale of that magazine edition when it appeared in the CAR . Many suspected that expatriate businessmen from the Bangui chamber of commerce , possibly aided by the French secret service , played a role . Michelle Jourdain was also suspected of being involved : by 1959 , relations between Boganda and his wife had deteriorated , and he thought of leaving her and returning to the priesthood . She had a large insurance policy on his life , taken just days before the accident . According to Brian Titley , author of Dark Age : The Political Odyssey of Emperor Bokassa , there are good reasons for suspecting her involvement in the plane crash . 
 Abel Goumba , the vice @-@ premier and finance minister whom Titley describes as " intelligent , honest , and strongly nationalistic " , emerged as Boganda 's logical successor . However , his close confidant and cousin , interior minister David Dacko , more likely to lead a regime deferential to foreign interests , was backed by the high commissioner , Colonel Roger <unk> , with the support of the chamber of commerce and Michelle Jourdain . He thus brushed aside Goumba and by 1962 had shut down the opposition , with MESAN becoming the country 's single party . The events after Boganda 's death are strongly evocative of other French efforts to maintain economic domination by ensuring that compliant leaders came to power in its former colonies . It also robbed the country of a charismatic leader in the Houphouët @-@ Boigny or Senghor mould , whose prestige alone might have sufficed to retain civilian rule , which ended when Bokassa deposed the unpopular Dacko in 1966 . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Boganda is not only considered the hero and father of his nation but also as one of the great leaders of decolonization in Africa ; the historian Georges <unk> described him after his death as " the most prestigious and the most capable of Equatorial political men , " while political historian Gérard Prunier called him " probably the most gifted and most inventive of French Africa 's decolonization generation of politicians . " Among the places named after him are an avenue in Bangui , one of the city 's largest high schools , a Château Boganda and Barthélemy Boganda Stadium . March 29 , the anniversary of his death , is Boganda Day , a public holiday . Boganda was also the designer of the flag of the Central African Republic , originally intended for the United States of Latin Africa . 
 Boganda is one in a long line of African political leaders who , in an attempt to develop specifically national political cultures , were presented ( or presented themselves ) as the great national leader , glorified and sometimes nearly deified . They were hailed as the fathers of their nations and considered wise in the ways of understanding the best interests of their peoples . Others who became particular objects of hero @-@ worship include Léopold Sédar Senghor , Félix Houphouët @-@ Boigny , Moktar Ould <unk> , Ahmed Sékou Touré , Modibo Keïta , Léon M 'ba and Daniel Ouezzin Coulibaly . Boganda did little to discourage wide circulation of tales about his supernatural powers , putative invulnerability and even immortality . Shortly before his death , a large crowd waited on the shore of the <unk> River to see him cross by walking upon the waters . He did not show up , but apparently a good many people still believed that he could have made the miraculous crossing . More than just a charismatic political leader , he was seen as the " black Christ " , a great religious figure endowed with extraordinary powers . Along with Congo @-@ Brazzaville 's Fulbert <unk> , who remained a priest while president , Boganda was not particularly concerned with his religious mission once he entered politics , but he unabashedly used the enormous popular respect for the Church and the cloth to political advantage . He successfully manipulated religious symbols ( clerical garb , crosses , baptism , disciples , acolytes , etc . ) for political purposes . 
 Once he died , his mystique grew : he was a national martyr , and miracles were regularly attributed to him . The Boganda myth continues to exercise a strong hold on many people in the CAR , and it has frequently been used by his successors in their appeals for national unity . Those who were related to him even tenuously , such as Bokassa ( who was from the same village and minority ethnic group , was the son of his mother 's uncle , justified his coup using Boganda 's name and created a cult of Boganda as founder of the party and state ) , or Dacko ( who posed as the ideological successor of Boganda by championing for " national reconciliation " during the 1981 election ) were able to capture some of his aura and use it to their advantage . 
 = SpongeBob SquarePants ( season 5 ) = 
 The fifth season of the American animated television series SpongeBob SquarePants , created by former marine biologist and animator Stephen Hillenburg , aired on Nickelodeon from February 19 , 2007 to July 19 , 2009 , and contained 20 episodes , beginning with the special episode " Friend or Foe " . The series chronicles the exploits and adventures of the title character and his various friends in the fictional underwater city of Bikini Bottom . The season was executive produced by series creator Hillenburg and writer Paul Tibbitt , who also acted as the showrunner . 
 The show itself received several recognition , including the Kids ' Choice Awards for Favorite Cartoon in 2009 and 2010 . At the 60th Primetime Emmy Awards , the episodes " The Inmates of Summer " and " The Two Faces of Squidward " were nominated for Outstanding Animated Program ( for Programming Less Than One Hour ) , but lost to The Simpsons episode " Eternal Moonshine of the Simpson Mind " . The episode " Dear Vikings " was nominated at the 61st Primetime Emmy Awards for Outstanding Special Class - Short @-@ Format Animated Programs . The show won the 2007 BAFTA Children 's Awards for the International category . Tom Kenny was nominated at the 35th Annie Awards for Best Voice Acting in an Animated Television Production for his role as SpongeBob SquarePants in the episode " Spy Buddies " . Furthermore , Alan Smart was also nominated at the 36th Annie Awards for Direction in an Animated Television Production or Short @-@ form for the episode " Penny Foolish " . 
 Several compilation DVDs that contained episodes from the season were released . The SpongeBob SquarePants : Season 5 , Volume 1 and 2 DVDs were released in Region 1 on September 4 , 2007 and November 18 , 2008 , respectively , while the complete season set was released in Region 2 on November 3 , 2008 and Region 4 on November 7 , 2008 . On November 13 , 2012 , The Complete Fifth Season DVD was released in Region 1 . 
 = = Production = = 
 The season aired on Nickelodeon , which is owned by Viacom , and was produced by United Plankton Pictures and Nickelodeon . The season 's executive producers were series creator Stephen Hillenburg and Paul Tibbitt , who also acted as the series ' showrunner . While most episodes consisted of two shorts that were about eleven minutes long or specials that lasted the whole episode , certain episodes were made of one full eleven @-@ minute episode , and two shorts , one of which was seven minutes long and the other only four minutes long . The animation was handled overseas in South Korea at Rough Draft Studios . Throughout the series run , from 1999 to 2008 , SpongeBob SquarePants was drawn and animated using pencils . In 2008 , the crew shifted and used Wacom Cintiqs for the drawings , instead of pencils . The episode " Pest of the West " was the first episode in the series that the crew used it . Series background designer Kenny Pittenger said that " the only real difference between the way we draw now and the way we drew then is that we abandoned pencil and paper during the fifth season . " The crew began the shift while they were working on the episode . Pittenger said that " it was while we were working on ' Pest of the West ' , one of the half @-@ hour specials , that we made the switch ... did you notice ? " The shift to Wacom Cintiqs let the designers and animators draw on computer screen and make immediate changes or undo mistakes . Pittenger said " Many neo @-@ Luddites — er ... I mean , many of my cohorts — don 't like working on them , but I find them useful . There 's no substitute for the immediacy of drawing on a piece of paper , of course , but digital nautical nonsense is still pretty fun . " 
 Animation directors credited with episodes in the fifth season included Larry Leichliter , Andrew Overtoom , Alan Smart , and Tom Yasumi . Episodes were written by a team of writers , which consisted of Casey Alexander , Steven Banks , Charlie Bean , Luke Brookshier , Nate Cash , Zeus Cervas , Tim Hill , Tom King , Dani Michaeli , Greg Miller , Chris Mitchell , Mike Mitchell , Richard Pursel , Chris Reccardi , Eric Shaw , Aaron Springer , and Tuck Tucker . The season was storyboarded by Alexander , Bean , Brookshier , Cash , Cervas , King , Miller , Chris Mitchell , Mike Mitchell , Reccardi , Springer , and Tucker . 
 = = Cast = = 
 The fifth season had a cast of six main actors . Tom Kenny provided the voice of the title character SpongeBob SquarePants and his pet snail Gary . SpongeBob 's best friend , starfish named Patrick Star , was voiced by Bill Fagerbakke , while Rodger Bumpass played the voice of Squidward Tentacles , an arrogant and ill @-@ tempered octopus . Other members of the cast were Carolyn Lawrence as Sandy Cheeks , a squirrel from Texas ; Clancy Brown as Mr. Krabs , a miserly crab obsessed with money and SpongeBob 's boss at the Krusty Krab ; and Mr. Lawrence as Plankton , a small green copepod and Mr. Krabs ' business rival . The season had a number of secondary characters including Jill Talley as Plankton 's computer wife , Karen ; Mary Jo Catlett as Mrs. Puff , SpongeBob 's driving instructor ; Lori Alan as Pearl , Mr. Krabs ' daughter ; and Brian Doyle @-@ Murray as the Flying Dutchman . 
 In addition to the regular cast members , episodes feature guest voices from many ranges of professions , including actors , musicians , and artists . For instance , in the episode " The Original Fry Cook " , American comedian and actor Patton Oswalt guest starred as the voice of Jim the Fry Cook . Oswalt reflected on his voice @-@ over work for the episode , saying " The best part was that I sat next to Clancy Brown in the studio . I 'm a big Highlander fan , so to see him do Mr. Krabs was really fun . " In the episode " Night Light " , Ernest Borgnine and Tim Conway returned to reprise their roles as Mermaid Man and Barnacle Boy , respectively . It was also guest starred by Mark Hamill as the voice of The Moth . American film and book critic Gene Shalit made a vocal cameo in " The Krusty Sponge " as his " [ <unk> ] likeness " , Gene <unk> . In the special episode and television film SpongeBob 's Atlantis SquarePantis , English musician and actor David Bowie guest starred as Lord Royal Highness ( LRH ) . Bowie accepted the role when he was persuaded by his 6 @-@ year @-@ old daughter , Alexandria Zahra , who is a fan of the show . Bowie wrote in his blog that he " [ is ] hit the Holy Grail of animation gigs . We , the family , are thrilled . Nothing else need happen this year , well , this week anyway . " In " BlackJack " , Marion Ross returned to reprise her role as the voice of Grandma SquarePants . The episode was also guest starred by John DiMaggio as BlackJack SquarePants , SpongeBob 's cousin . In " The Inmates of Summer " , R. Lee Ermey appeared as the Prison Warden . In the entry " 20 @,@ 000 Patties Under the Sea " , American musician and Kiss vocalist Gene Simmons guest starred as the Sea Monster , while his wife , Shannon Tweed , voiced the Mother . American Emmy Award winning actor Ray Liotta guest starred in the episode " WhoBob WhatPants ? " as Trevor , the leader of New Kelp City 's Bubble Poppin Boys gang , and the main villain in the episode . In " Banned in Bikini Bottom " , Andrea Martin voiced the character of Ms. <unk> . English @-@ American actor and director Christopher Guest voiced Stanley S. SquarePants , SpongeBob 's cousin , in the episode of the same name . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In 2008 , Tom Kenny was nominated at the 35th Annie Awards for Best Voice Acting in an Animated Television Production for his role as SpongeBob SquarePants in the episode " Spy Buddies " . Alan Smart was also nominated at the 36th Annie Awards for Direction in an Animated Television Production or Short @-@ form for the episode " Penny Foolish " . In 2010 , the " SpongeBob vs. The Big One " DVD won the Best Home Entertainment Production category . At the 60th Primetime Emmy Awards , the episodes " The Inmates of Summer " and " The Two Faces of Squidward " were nominated for Outstanding Animated Program ( for Programming Less Than One Hour ) , but lost to The Simpsons episode " Eternal Moonshine of the Simpson Mind " . The episode " Dear Vikings " was nominated at the 61st Primetime Emmy Awards for Outstanding Special Class - Short @-@ Format Animated Programs ; however , it had no winner as the nominees neither received the necessary 50 percent support . At the BAFTA Children 's Awards , the show won the International category . At the 2008 Golden Reel Awards , the episode " <unk> " won the Best Sound Editing in Television : Animated category . The episode " Suction Cup Symphony " received a nomination at the 2009 Golden Reel Awards for Best Sound Editing : Television Animation , while the episode " SpongeBob vs. The Big One " was also nominated for the same category in 2010 . However , neither of the episodes win . The show itself received several recognition , including the Kids ' Choice Awards for Favorite Cartoon in 2009 and 2010 . The series was nominated for the award in 2008 , but lost to Avatar : The Last Airbender . The series also won the same category at the Philippines Kids ' Choice Awards and Indonesia Kids ' Choice Awards , held in 2008 and 2009 , respectively . At the 2009 ASTRA Awards , the show was nominated for the Favourite International Program category . Furthermore , the show won the Choice TV Animated Show category at the 2009 Teen Choice Awards . 
 In his review for DVD Talk , Paul Mavis " highly recommended " the Volume 1 season set , saying " [ This ] is another winner from Nickelodeon DVD , and a must @-@ have for parents who can 't get enough of the braying little yellow sponge . Oh yeah ; the kids will probably like it , too . " Mavis also praised the voice actors who contributed on the show , and wrote " As funny as the stories are , and in this collection , there are some real gems , I can 't stress enough the importance of those voice talents in conveying the unhinged , manic quality that is so integral to the success of SpongeBob SquarePants . In a separate review for the Volume 2 DVD , Mavis only " recommended " the set and wrote " SpongeBob may , and I repeat , ' may , ' be starting to level off . " He particularly criticized the later entries as " indication of that potential trend . " 
 Roy Hrab of DVD Verdict was positive on the season , but wrote " I do not think that adults will be as entertained as in previous seasons . The comedy is more targeted at the kids than in the past . " In particular , Hrab cited the episode " Rise and Shine " as " tiresome ( for adults , anyway ; kids will enjoy it ) . " In conclusion , he said " there 's nothing new here and adults will be disappointed , but the latest installment of SpongeBob SquarePants delivers a lot of silly and good @-@ natured fun for the kids and there 's nothing wrong with that . " In the Volume 2 review also for the DVD Verdict , Dennis Prince said " [ The season ] is not the series ' best work but , nevertheless , is an improvement " . He added " [ It ] delivers more of what SpongeBob fans crave . " 
 = = Episodes = = 
 Key 
 The following episodes listed in the chart are arranged according to their production order , rather than by their original air dates . 
 = = DVD release = = 
 The first 20 segment episodes of the fifth season were released on DVD by Paramount Home Entertainment in the United States and Canada on September 4 , 2007 . The " Volume 1 " DVD release features bonus material including " Bubble Burst Trivia " for " Friend or Foe " and " The Krusty Sponge " . The remaining 21 segment episodes of the season were also released under the title " Volume 2 " in the United States and Canada on November 18 , 2008 . In Region 2 and 4 , the DVD release for the season was a complete set . On November 13 , 2012 , The Complete Fifth Season DVD was released in Region 1 , three years after the season had completed broadcast on television . 
 = Steve Burdick = 
 " Steve Burdick " is an episode of the 1990 NBC television series Lifestories , an anthology drama that each week followed a new set of characters dealing with a medical issue . The episode revolves around Burdick ( D. W. Moffett ) , a gay television newsman with AIDS . When his lover dies of the disease , Burdick reveals his own diagnosis on the air to the displeasure of his station manager . The episode was loosely based on Paul Wynne , a newscaster out of San Francisco who died of AIDS in 1990 . 
 The episode was originally scheduled for December 2 , 1990 . However , NBC pulled the episode , sparking criticism from gay and AIDS activists . The network rescheduled it for December 18 , when Lifestories was changed from being a weekly series to a monthly special . The episode was critically acclaimed , winning a GLAAD Media Award , but financially unsuccessful for the network . 
 = = Synopsis = = 
 Steve Burdick is a local television news anchor who keeps his homosexuality private . He and his lover are tested for HIV and both test positive . Burdick struggles to keep himself together as his lover 's health declines . When his lover dies , Burdick breaks down on the air and announces the death and that he too is HIV @-@ positive . Station managers want to fire him , but his producer , Barbara Hudson , convinces the station that AIDS reportage is newsworthy and socially responsible . Burdick 's pieces are tagged with a viewer discretion advisory . He continues to report until he begins to show symptoms of AIDS , at which time the station managers pull him off the air . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Robert <unk> – Storyteller ( voice ) 
 D.W. Moffett – Steve Burdick 
 Joyce <unk> – Barbara Hudson 
 = = Scheduling controversy = = 
 " Steve Burdick " was originally scheduled to air on December 2 , 1990 . Had it aired on that date it would have been one of several programs relating to AIDS airing in early December , which is designated World AIDS Month , with December 1 being World AIDS Day . Gay and AIDS activists accused NBC of pulling the episode out of fear of advertiser backlash , a charge that NBC denied . A network spokesperson also denied that network schedulers were aware of World AIDS Month and , in a perhaps unfortunate choice of phrase , characterized the decision to pull the episode as a " straight programming decision " . Series producer Jeffrey Lewis also believed there was an economic motive , saying " I suspect a show about AIDS would not be popular with advertisers — particularly ( when it focused on ) a gay person with AIDS . " NBC changed Lifestories from a weekly series to a monthly one in December and on December 5 confirmed that " Steve Burdick " would be the first of the monthly episodes aired . 
 = = Reception = = 
 " Steve Burdick " was well received by critics . The Seattle Times described the episode as " as honest an exploration of AIDS as anything seen on commercial network TV " . Moffett 's performance was singled out for praise , as was Richard <unk> 's script , for " look [ ing ] at a number of aspects of the AIDS problem , exploring a variety of attitudes about it " . The Times marks this as the best episode of the series . The Hartford Courant concurred in this assessment , citing the episode as the most memorable of one of the season 's most daring new series . <unk> 's script was also praised by critic Jon Burlingame , writing for United Features Syndicate , for delivering accurate information on AIDS and HIV . Burlingame called the episode " as much an indictment of commercial television for its <unk> in dealing with the AIDS crisis as it is a show about AIDS patients " and speculated that this may have been the reason NBC initially pulled it . He cited this episode , along with two AIDS @-@ themed episodes of NBC 's Midnight Caller ( themselves the subject of protests from gay and AIDS activists ) , as " network series TV 's finest AIDS @-@ related dramas to date " . Right @-@ wing activists criticized dialogue from the episode in which Burdick overhears his hospital roommate in prayer and admonishes him that he didn 't pay attention well enough in church to learn that God ignores the prayers of " faggots " . 
 " Steve Burdick " scored a Nielsen rating of 9 @.@ 7 , equating to approximately 9 @.@ 5 million viewers , and a 17 share , meaning that 17 % of all television sets in use during its time period were tuned to the episode . NBC reported losing $ 500 @,@ 000 in advertising revenue . Speaking of this loss , then @-@ NBC president Warren Littlefield said , at odds with NBC 's earlier denial of possible revenue loss being a factor in its scheduling decision , " There are few things in broadcasting that we know for sure , and one of those is that when you do an episode of any series that deals with AIDS , there is going to be advertiser sensitivity to it . And if you choose to do it anyway , you better count on losing money . " 
 " Steve Burdick " won a GLAAD Media Award as the best television drama episode of 1990 . 
 = New York State Route 73 = 
 New York State Route 73 ( NY 73 ) is a state highway located entirely within Essex County , New York , in the United States . The highway begins at an intersection with NY 86 in the village of Lake Placid and ends at a junction with U.S. Route 9 ( US 9 ) north of the hamlet of Underwood in the extreme southwestern corner of the town of Elizabethtown . NY 73 meanders through a mountainous region of Adirondack Park and passes by several named peaks , including Porter Mountain and Lower <unk> Mountain . Along the way , the route has a short concurrency with NY 9N in the town of Keene . 
 In the early 19th century , Lake Placid and Keene were connected by the North West Bay Road , an east – west highway linking Hopkinton to Westport . The highway was initially a crude , impassable road ; however , it was significantly improved by the state of New York in the mid @-@ 1810s . A highway linking Keene to Underwood was constructed by 1846 ; at Underwood , the road connected to a stagecoach road that went from Albany to the Canadian border . The latter road became the basis for most of modern US 9 . 
 NY 73 was assigned as part of the 1930 renumbering of state highways in New York from NY 28N in Tahawus to NY 22 in Ticonderoga . The portion of the route from Tahawus to North Hudson followed the Blue Ridge Road ; from North Hudson to Schroon , NY 73 overlapped US 9 . At the time , modern NY 73 was designated as New York State Route 86A from Lake Placid to Keene . By the following year , the remainder of current NY 73 had become New York State Route 427 . NY 73 was cut back to Schroon c . 1936 while NY 427 was replaced by an extended NY 86A c . 1938 . In the 1950s , NY 73 was extended northward to Lake Placid , supplanting NY 86A . The eastern terminus of NY 73 was moved to the vicinity of Underwood c . 1973 , and the former routing of NY 73 from Schroon to Ticonderoga became NY 74 . 
 = = Route description = = 
 NY 73 begins at a traffic light along NY 86 near the eastern end of the village of Lake Placid in the town of North Elba . The highway heads towards the southwest , passing homes as Sentinel Road . At the intersection with Mill Pond Road , NY 73 passes a small pond , crossing over an associated creek . For that short time , the highway takes on a more southerly direction , mainly to the southeast . The surroundings of the highway remain the same as NY 73 leaves Lake Placid via Cascade Road . 
 NY 73 exits Lake Placid , where it passes Lake Placid Airport . There , County Route 35 ( CR 35 ) merges from the northwest , providing a bypass around the village of Lake Placid to NY 86 . Just south of North Elba , NY 73 passes the Lake Placid Olympic Ski Jumping Complex , accessible via NY <unk> to nearby John Brown 's Farm at the intersection with CR 35 . The highway crosses the West Branch of the Ausable River , intersecting with CR 21 at an elevation of 1 @,@ 800 feet ( 550 m ) . 
 Cascade Road makes several turns , passing south of the Craig Wood Golf Course . After the golf course , NY 73 climbs in elevation , up to 2 @,@ 000 feet ( 610 m ) . The highway turns from the southeast to the east , and to the southeast once more as it rounds Round Lake . The road passes Mud Pond , where it turns to the northeast along the side of a high ridge . <unk> Mountain is directly to the northwest as NY 73 passes Upper Cascade and Lower Cascade Lakes . 
 NY 73 begins to descend in elevation , while CR 51 splits off and NY 73 heads into Keene . After crossing the East Branch of the Ausable River , NY 73 merges in with NY 9N . The two roads continue to drop in elevation , passing and circling mountains as they head along . After Norton Cemetery , NY 9N splits off to the east and NY 73 continues southward . NY 73 now runs along the East Branch , intersecting with county and local roads as it heads southward . 
 The highway heads along the base of Porter Mountain and into Keene Valley , crosses Johns Brook and heads through downtown . Lower <unk> Mountain , which averages the same height as Porter , is nearby . NY 73 continues , eventually crossing the Ausable River branch , later coming in the towns of Elizabethtown and North Hudson . There are a few more ponds and mountains before NY 73 ends at an intersection with US 9 . 
 According to estimates made by the New York State Department of Transportation ( NYSDOT ) in 2009 , NY 73 serves an average of 1 @,@ 950 vehicles per day from US 9 to the east end of the NY 9N overlap in Keene . The overlap with NY 9N accumulated an average of 4 @,@ 360 vehicles , with the stretch up to the control station at NY <unk> having a less amount of traffic . After NY <unk> , the average increases , peaking at 4 @,@ 810 vehicles at NY 86 in Lake Placid . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Early highways = = = 
 = = = = North West Bay Road = = = = 
 The area that is now known as the hamlet of Keene — the modern junction of NY 9N and NY 73 — was first settled in the first few years of the 19th century . Many of the early settlers arrived in the region by traveling along a rough and nearly unusable highway connecting what became Keene to Jay in the north and Lewis in the east . By 1810 , part of the crude roadway had been supplanted by a privately funded highway leading westward from Westport to at least North Elba and possibly to Saranac Lake by way of Keene . On April 5 , 1810 , the New York State Legislature passed an act establishing a new state highway linking Westport to Hopkinton by way of Keene and Saranac Lake . The highway incorporated the entirety of the pre @-@ existing roadway between Westport and Saranac Lake . 
 Initially , the state highway was poorly constructed and largely impassable , mirroring the condition of the roadways that preceded it . An act passed by the state legislature on June 19 , 1812 , indicated that the funds that had been allocated to the highway were " entirely inadequate to open and improve " the road . On April 17 , 1816 , the state attempted to correct the issue by approving a measure that appointed two sets of commissioners to oversee the reconstruction of the highway . Each set was to work on opposite ends of the route and eventually converge at a point midway along the route . Work on the highway was completed by 1818 . The road was officially named the " North West Bay Road " ; however , it eventually became known as the " Old Military Road " . The route did not enter the village of Lake Placid ; instead , it bypassed it to the southwest . This portion of the highway is still known today by the latter name . 
 = = = = Other highways = = = = 
 The highway through Keene Valley from Underwood to Keene was built by 1846 . At its southern end , it connected to a major stagecoach road that connected Albany to the Canadian border . The route fostered the rise of local lumber and tanning industries ; up to 40 wagon loads of timber used the stagecoach route daily . Various hotels and taverns opened in the nearby town of North Hudson to serve travelers along the route . 
 = = = State ownership and designations = = = 
 In 1909 , the state of New York began to take control of many private highways across the state under the terms of the new highway law developed in 1908 . One of these highways was the old north – south stagecoach road from Albany to Canada . Most of the highway north of modern NY 8 in Chester became the northern half of Route 22 , an unsigned legislative route , under the text of the highway law . In 1913 , the New York State Legislature created Route 22 @-@ b , a spur route connecting Route 22 in Schroon to the then @-@ village of Ticonderoga . On March 1 , 1921 , Route 22 @-@ b became part of Route 48 , a new route created as part of a partial renumbering of New York 's legislative route system . The path of the former Albany – Canada stagecoach route was largely designated as US 9 in 1927 . 
 NY 73 was assigned as part of the 1930 renumbering of state highways in New York ; however , it did not initially follow any of its modern routing . It began at an intersection with NY 28N in Tahawus and followed the Blue Ridge Road east to US 9 in North Hudson . From there , it overlapped US 9 south to Schroon , where it proceeded eastward on the former legislative Route 48 to Ticonderoga , where it ended at a junction with NY 22 . At the time , modern NY 73 from Lake Placid to Keene — identical to the old North West Bay Road east of the Lake Placid area — was assigned NY 86A . The remainder of what is now NY 73 from Keene south to Underwood was designated as NY 427 within a year 's time . 
 The portion of NY 73 between Tahawus and North Hudson was removed from the state highway system c . 1936 . As a result , NY 73 was truncated to a new western terminus at US 9 in Schroon , eliminating the concurrency with US 9 . To the north , NY 427 was supplanted by an extended NY 86A c . 1938 . In the early 1950s , NY 73 was extended eastward through Ticonderoga to the ferry dock on Lake Champlain , where it connected to the Fort Ticonderoga – Larrabees Point Ferry . The change supplanted NY 347 , a short spur route off NY 22 that had been in place since c . 1934 . In the mid @-@ 1950s , NY 73 was extended northward to Lake Placid via Underwood and Keene , replacing NY 86A and overlapping US 9 from Severance to Underwood . NY 73 was truncated to its current eastern terminus in Underwood c . 1973 , eliminating the 16 @-@ mile ( 26 km ) overlap with US 9 . Its former routing from Schroon to Lake Champlain was renumbered to NY 74 . 
 On September 14 , 1994 , the state of New York signed a proposal to turn NY 73 into a scenic byway into law . The 30 @-@ mile ( 48 km ) byway , known as the " High Peaks Scenic Byway " , begins at the western terminus of NY 73 in Lake Placid and follows NY 73 and US 9 to Interstate 87 exit 30 . In December 1994 , the group Scenic America designated the highway as one of the ten most scenic areas in the nation . 
 = = Future = = 
 In 2009 , NYSDOT has made plans to repair seven bridges along NY 73 . The seven projects will cost the state an estimated $ 11 @.@ 1 million ( equivalent to $ 12 @.@ 2 million in 2016 ) and are tentatively scheduled to begin at various times between 2013 and 2016 . The $ 11 million cost includes $ 4 @.@ 3 million for two bridges over the West Branch of the Ausable River that were built in 1932 , $ 1 @.@ 3 million for a bridge over the Southern Fork of the Bouquet River in Keene , $ 2 @.@ 6 million for two bridges over <unk> Brook that were built in 1935 and 1936 , $ 1 @.@ 3 million for a bridge over the outlet of Lower Cascade Lake , and $ 1 @.@ 6 million for a bridge over Johns Brook . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The entire route is in Essex County . 
 = Blood Sugar Sex Magik = 
 Blood Sugar Sex Magik is the fifth studio album by American rock band Red Hot Chili Peppers , released on September 24 , 1991 . Produced by Rick Rubin , it was the band 's first record released on Warner Bros. Records . The musical styles of Blood Sugar Sex Magik differed notably from the techniques employed on the Chili Peppers ' preceding album , Mother 's Milk , and featured little use of heavy metal guitar riffs . The album 's subject matter incorporated sexual innuendos and references to drugs and death as well as themes of lust and exuberance . 
 Peaking at number one in Australia , Canada , and New Zealand , and at three on the United States ' Billboard 200 , the album has sold over 13 million copies worldwide and was the Red Hot Chili Peppers ' introduction into worldwide popularity and critical acclaim . Blood Sugar Sex Magik produced an array of hit singles including the hugely successful " Under the Bridge " and one of their most popular songs , " Give It Away " . The other three singles released were " Suck My Kiss " , " Breaking the Girl " , and " If You Have to Ask " . Guitarist John Frusciante quit the band mid @-@ tour in 1992 ( not returning until 1998 ) due to his inability to cope with the album 's popularity . Blood Sugar Sex Magik is recognized as an influential and seminal component of the alternative rock explosion in the early 1990s . Steve Huey of AllMusic stated that Blood Sugar Sex Magik is " ... probably the best album the Chili Peppers will ever make . " 
 = = Background = = 
 The band 's previous album , 1989 's Mother 's Milk would become the band 's second album to enter in the Billboard 200 , peaking at number 52 and at the time the biggest of their career . Although the record was mildly successful , production was weighed down by producer Michael Beinhorn . He convinced Frusciante to play with an overall heavier tone , and instructed Kiedis to write lyrics that would be more radio viable , thus causing the band to feel restricted creatively . 
 As the Chili Peppers ' contract with EMI came to an end , they began looking for a new record company to release their next album . The group reached a consensus to go with Sony BMG / Epic , with the proviso that they buy out their last album from EMI . Even though the label promised it would take only a few days , the process stretched out into several months . Although a deal had been made with Sony / Epic , Mo Ostin of Warner Bros. Records called Kiedis to congratulate him on the successful deal , and complimented the rival record label . Kiedis recalled of the situation : " The coolest , most real person we had met during all these negotiations had just personally called to encourage me to make a great record for a rival company . That was the kind of guy I 'd want to be working for . " The group pursued the idea , and eventually dropped the contract with Sony in favor of a deal with Warner Bros. Ostin called an old friend at EMI , who immediately allowed for the label transfer . 
 = = Recording and production = = 
 Now settled into Warner Bros. Records , the Chili Peppers began looking for a suitable producer . One person in particular , Rick Rubin , stood out , as he was more broadminded in contrast to individuals they had worked with in the past even though Rubin previously turned down the band 's offer to produce their 1987 album The Uplift Mofo Party Plan due to the drug problems of Kiedis and guitarist Hillel Slovak who would die of a heroin overdose a year later . Eventually , the band decided Rubin would be the best choice as a producer , and therefore hired him to produce what would become Blood Sugar Sex Magik . Unlike the Peppers ' previous producers , Rubin was someone that they felt confident to ask for guidance and input during times of difficulty . He would often help arrange drum beats , guitar melodies and lyrics . 
 The band sought to record the album in an unconventional setting , believing it would enhance their creative output . Rubin suggested the mansion magician Harry Houdini once lived in , to which they agreed . A crew was hired to set up a recording studio and other equipment required for production in the house . The band decided that they would remain inside the mansion for the duration of recording , though Smith , convinced the location was haunted , refused to stay . He would , instead , come each day by motorcycle . Frusciante agreed with Smith , and said " There are definitely ghosts in the house , " but unlike Smith , Frusciante felt they were " very friendly . We [ the band ] have nothing but warm vibes and happiness everywhere we go in this house . " 
 Frusciante , Kiedis , and Flea each had their own separate rooms at each end of the house . When not recording with the band , Frusciante would spend his time painting , listening to music , reading and recording songs he 'd written . Due to the seclusion , Kiedis ended up recording all his vocals in his room , as it was large enough to accommodate the recording equipment . For over thirty days , the Chili Peppers worked inside the house ; Kiedis felt it was an accommodating and resourceful environment which allowed him to complete the rest of the lyrics . During production , the band agreed to let Flea 's brother @-@ in @-@ law document the creative process on film . When the album 's recording was complete , the Chili Peppers released the film , titled Funky Monks . 
 = = Music = = 
 Blood Sugar Sex Magik was written at a more rapid pace than the band 's previous album . Prior to the Chili Peppers relocation into the mansion , Frusciante and Kiedis collaborated at each other 's homes , in order to arrange song structures and guitar riffs . They would then present ideas to Flea and Smith , and the band would , as a whole , decide what they would use for the bass , guitar , vocal and percussion ensembles . 
 Kiedis focused lyrically on sexual references and innuendos as they were frequently on his mind . Songs such as " Suck My Kiss , " " If You Have to Ask , " " Sir Psycho Sexy , " " Give It Away " and " Blood Sugar Sex Magik " all contained various sexual links , with lyrics like " A state of sexual light / Kissing her virginity / My affinity " and " Glorious euphoria / Is my must / Erotic shock / Is a function of lust . " The concept behind " The Greeting Song " was a request by Rubin , who asked Kiedis to write a song solely about girls and cars . Although Kiedis disliked the concept , he wrote the song as Rubin requested and ended up hating nearly every aspect of the lyrics . Kiedis also began to write about anguish , and the self mutilating thoughts he would experience as a result of his heroin and cocaine addiction ; he believed his life had come to its lowest point under a bridge in downtown Los Angeles . Over a month later , Rubin stumbled upon a poem that would become the lyrics to " Under the Bridge " , and suggested Kiedis show it to the rest of the band . Kiedis was , however , apprehensive because he believed the lyrics to be " too soft " and unlike the band 's style . After singing the verse to Frusciante , they began structuring the song the next day . The two worked for several hours arranging chords and melodies until they both agreed it was complete . Frusciante ultimately chose the chords he played in the intro to balance out the depressing atmosphere of the song : " my brain interpreted it as being a really sad song so I thought if the lyrics are really sad like that I should write some chords that are happier . " " Naked in the Rain " was one of the first songs written for the album and even played once at the end of the Mother 's Milk Tour in 1990 while the intros for " The Greeting Song " and " Sir Psycho Sexy " were also teased during the end of that tour but neither song was completed or had lyrics . 
 Blood Sugar Sex Magik integrated the band 's typical punk and funk style , but moved away from this with more melodically driven songs . Tracks like " The Righteous and the Wicked , " " Suck My Kiss , " " Blood Sugar Sex Magik , " " Give it Away " and " Funky Monks " still incorporated use of heavy metal guitar riffs , but differed from Mother 's Milk in that they contained less distortion . Flea , who had centered his bass playing around the slapping technique , downplayed on this in favor of more traditional and melodic bass lines . He also adopted a minimalist , " less is more " philosophy : " I was trying to play simply on Blood Sugar Sex Magik because I had been playing too much prior to that , so I thought , ' I 've really got to chill out and play half as many notes ' . When you play less , it 's more exciting — there 's more room for everything . If I do play something busy , it stands out , instead of the bass being a constant onslaught of notes . Space is good . " Kiedis felt that the album would expand the Chili Peppers ' musical horizons , and that it was a departure from their previous material . One of Blood Sugar Sex Magik 's more melodic tracks , " Breaking the Girl , " was written about Kiedis ' constantly shifting relationships . He feared that he was following in his father 's footsteps and simply becoming a womanizer , rather than establishing stable and long @-@ term relationships : " ... As exciting and temporarily fulfilling as this constant influx of interesting and beautiful girls can be , at the end of the day , that shit is lonely and you 're left with nothing . " The track also featured a bridge in the middle , consisting of percussion instruments salvaged from a garbage dump . 
 Although jams had always been an integral aspect of song creation for the Chili Peppers , Blood Sugar Sex Magik saw songs being created with more structure . One specific jam would lead to the breakout song on the album : Frusciante , Flea and Smith were all playing together — with Kiedis at another part of the room watching — when " ... Flea started playing this insane bass line , and Chad cracked up and played along ... I always had fragments of song ideas or even specific isolated phrases in my mind . I ( Kiedis ) took the mic and belted out ' Give it away , give it away , give it away , give it away now . " The philosophy behind the lyrics originated from a conversation Kiedis had with Nina Hagen , regarding selflessness and how insignificant material possessions were in his life . It , thus , gave birth to the song " Give It Away . " He 'd also been reminiscing about late Chili Peppers guitarist Hillel Slovak , composing " My Lovely Man " in his tribute . Kiedis wrote " Sir Psycho Sexy " to be an over @-@ zealous and overly exaggerated version of himself ; a figure that could get any woman , and do anything he pleased to them . " The Power of Equality " confronted topics concerning racial equality , prejudice and sexism . Kiedis wrote " I Could Have Lied " to document the brief relationship he had with Irish singer Sinéad O 'Connor . 
 = = Artwork = = 
 All photography , paintings and art direction for Blood Sugar Sex Magik were credited to filmmaker Gus Van Sant , with the exception of the " tongue illustration " , which , according to the album booklet , is credited to <unk> <unk> ( Henk <unk> ) . The cover of the album features the four band members ' faces positioned around a rose . The lyrics are printed in white lettering across a black background , hand written by Kiedis . The booklet also contains a collage of photos assembled to showcase the band members ' various tattoos , which feature faces of Native American tribal leaders , animals and sea creatures , as well as various symbols and phrases . Photographs of each band member alone , and two photographs of the band as a whole are also included . 
 Singles released to coincide with the album share little with Blood Sugar 's artwork . The cover of " Give It Away " was a painting of a Chinese infant , surrounded by fish , vegetables , fruits and sushi ; " Under the Bridge " is a photograph of a bridge in the city of Los Angeles ; " Suck My Kiss " had a black and white photograph of the band , with Kiedis and Flea holding a large fish ; " If You Have to Ask " is an illustration of an avocado next to a girl 's large buttocks in a yellow bikini ; and " Breaking the Girl " featured a painting of a human being covered in magma . 
 = = Promotion and release = = 
 Blood Sugar Sex Magik was released on September 24 , 1991 , the same day as Nirvana 's breakthrough album Nevermind . It was certified gold just over two months later on November 26 , 1991 , and certified platinum on April 1 , 1992 ; since then it has gone seven times platinum in the United States . The album peaked at number 3 on the Billboard 200 . Originally , " Give it Away " did not fare well in the mainstream ; several of Warner Bros. ' target radio stations refused to air it , telling the band to " come back to us when you have a melody in your song . " KROQ ( of Los Angeles ) , however , began to play the single several times daily , and that , according to Kiedis , " was the beginning of the infusion of ' Give It Away ' into mass consciousness . " The single ultimately peaked at number 9 on the UK Top 40 and number 73 on the Billboard Hot 100 . Blood Sugar Sex Magik has sold over 13 million copies worldwide . 
 Due to the success of " Give it Away , " the band did not foresee " Under the Bridge " as being equally viable . Warner Bros. sent representatives to a Chili Peppers ' concert in order to figure out what would ultimately be the next single . When Frusciante began playing " Under the Bridge " , Kiedis missed his cue ; the entire audience began singing the song , instead . Kiedis was initially " mortified that I had fucked up in front of Warner 's people ... I apologized for fucking up but they said ' Fucking up ? Are you kidding me ? When every single kid at the show sings a song , that 's our next single . ' " " Under the Bridge " was , therefore , selected as Blood Sugar Sex Magik 's second single . By January 1992 , " Under the Bridge " had exploded , peaking at number 2 on the Billboard Hot 100 . 
 To promote the album in Europe , Kiedis and Frusciante both agreed they would make the trip . However , it proved difficult for Frusciante to adapt to life outside of the mansion , after being in near @-@ seclusion for almost 30 days . Kiedis recalled of the situation : " He had such an outpouring of creativity while we were making that album that I think he really didn 't know how to live life in tandem with that creativity . " It was also during this period when Frusciante began to experiment with heroin , which further compromised his mental stability . The European promotional trek took its toll on Frusciante , and he decided to return home when he and Kiedis reached London . 
 = = Critical reception and legacy = = 
 Blood Sugar Sex Magik was well received by critics , who praised the Chili Peppers for not overpowering the listener with heavy metal guitar riffs as their previous album had . Rolling Stone 's Tom Moon credited Rick Rubin for the change in style ; Rubin " [ gave ] the <unk> ' dynamic . " He went on to praise the overall sound , which " displayed a growing curiosity about studio texture and nuance . " Steve Huey of AllMusic said the album was " The Red Hot Chili Peppers ' best album ... John Frusciante 's guitar is less overpoweringly noisy , leaving room for differing textures and clearer lines , while the band overall is more focused and less indulgent . " He considered Blood Sugar to be " varying ... it expands the group 's musical and emotional range . " Guitar Player magazine credited Frusciante with the Chili Peppers ' drastic change in style : " by blending acid @-@ rock , soul @-@ funk , early art @-@ rock , and blues style with a raw , unprocessed Strat @-@ and @-@ Marshall tone , [ Frusciante ] hit on an explosive formula that has yet to be duplicated . " Devon <unk> of PopMatters said that " in one funked @-@ out , fucked up , diabolical swoop , Blood Sugar Sex Magik reconfigured my relationship to music , to myself , to my culture and identity , to my race and class . " In an article published in The Tampa Tribune , editor Philip Booth praised the record as " an ambitious effort that amounts to a culmination and blossoming of the musical forces that have been brewing in the band 's sound since Kiedis and Flea birthed the band in 1983 . " Music critic Robert Christgau gave the album a two star honorable mention . Blood Sugar Sex Magik is considered to be an influential album , throughout the nineties , by establishing itself as a fundamental foundation for alternative rock . It has also been referred to as " the cornerstone album of funk rock " by FasterLouder . 
 " Under the Bridge , " which became a breakout song for the band , was considered to be a highlight of the album by several critics . Allmusic reviewed the song individually and called it a " ... poignant sentiment ... it is self evident among the simple guitar which cradles the introductory verse , and the sense of fragility that is only doubled by the still down @-@ tempo choral crescendo " , and ultimately " has become an integral part of the 1990s alterna @-@ landscape , and remains one of the purest diamonds that sparkle amongst the rough @-@ hewn and rich funk chasms that dominate the Peppers ' own oeuvre . " However , Entertainment Weekly criticized the seriousness that the Red Hot Chili Peppers explored as being " disapproving of the band 's usual Red Hot antics " , and " Under the Bridge " had " fancy @-@ <unk> touches " . The song ended up peaking at number 2 on the Billboard Hot 100 in April 1992 . " Give It Away " was also praised , though as " ... a free @-@ associative mixture of positive vibes , tributes to musical heroes , and free love " , with Frusciante " ... adding the song 's two most unpredictable change @-@ ups : a sudden contrast to Kiedis ' hyperactivity in the form of a languid solo pre @-@ recorded and dubbed backwards over the rhythm track , and a hard @-@ rocking riff which is not introduced until the song 's outro ... " Tracks such as " Sir Psycho Sexy " , however , were criticized for being overly explicit . Devon <unk> of Pop Matters said that " Eight minutes of ' Sir Psycho Sexy ' will turn RHCP 's young listeners into quivering masses of hormonal jello . <unk> lines sneak their way into ' Apache Rose Peacock ' ; ' Blood Sugar Sex Magik ' , simply , sounds like fucking . Even the purest virgin comes away from Blood Sugar Sex Magik with a degree of sexual maturity ; even the slickest playa can learn a couple of new moves . " In contrast , " Suck My Kiss " , according to Amy Hanson of Allmusic , " completely flew in the face of the established pecking order of alternative rock . " With the song , the Chili Peppers " fully allied themselves with the very few genre @-@ bending bands that were able to make a radical impact on the sonic landscape that was dominated , it seemed , from every minute angle by grunge . " 
 Years later , Blood Sugar was placed atop many " Best Of " lists , especially those pertaining to the ' 90s . Spin magazine charted the album at number 58 on their " Top 90 Albums of the 90s " , and number 11 on a similar list compiled by Pause & Play . The record was placed in <unk> Magazine " 101 Essential Guitar Albums " ; and included in the book 1001 Albums You Must Hear Before You Die . Blood Sugar Sex Magik also ranked number 310 on Rolling Stone 's the " 500 Greatest Albums of All Time " and number 14 on the " 100 Best Albums of the Nineties " . 
 = = Blood Sugar Sex Magik Tour and John Frusciante 's departure = = 
 Before the Blood Sugar Sex Magik Tour began , Kiedis saw the music video for The Smashing Pumpkins ' " Rhinoceros " on MTV . He then called the band 's manager and asked him to accommodate The Smashing Pumpkins for the tour . Several days after the Pumpkins confirmed they would accompany the Chili Peppers , former Chili Peppers drummer Jack Irons called and asked the band to allow his friend 's new group , Pearl Jam , to open for them on the forthcoming tour . The first show following the release of Blood Sugar Sex Magik was at the Oscar Mayer Theater in Madison , Wisconsin , which was met with positive reactions from the Milwaukee Journal : " the audience was a swirling mass of airborne cups , ice cubes , shoes , shirts , pogo dancers , body @-@ passers and stage divers . And it wasn 't purely a boy 's club in the <unk> — many females bought into the mayhem , stripping down to their bras and flinging themselves about madly as the band tore through ' Higher Ground ' , ' Suck My Kiss ' , and ' Give it Away ' , which was Goth @-@ ed up by Frusciante when he added a riff from Black Sabbath 's ' Sweet Leaf ' . " 
 Blood Sugar Sex Magik began receiving heavy radio play and massive sales in the middle of their U.S. tour . Frusciante , who preferred the Chili Peppers to remain in the underground music scene , entered a state of denial and depression because of this . According to Kiedis , " He began to lose all of the manic , happy @-@ go @-@ lucky , fun aspects of his personality . Even onstage , there was a much more serious energy around him . " Frusciante was slowly slipping away from the band altogether , and began to form grudges against his band mates . He saw the band 's newfound popularity as shameful . 
 Onstage tension began to grow between Kiedis and Frusciante . Kiedis recalled an argument after a show in New Orleans : " We had a sold @-@ out house and John just stood in the corner , barely playing his guitar . We came offstage and John and I got into it . " With the Peppers now playing shows at arenas rather than theaters , the promoters of the tour decided that Pearl Jam should be replaced with a more successful act . Kiedis contacted Nirvana drummer Dave Grohl , and asked him if Nirvana would replace Pearl Jam on the tour — an offer Grohl accepted . The Smashing Pumpkins ' Billy Corgan , however , refused to play with Nirvana as he once dated frontman Kurt Cobain 's wife Courtney Love . The Pumpkins were , therefore , taken off the concert bill and replaced with Pearl Jam . Their first show with Nirvana was at the L.A Sports Arena . Kiedis considered their act to be " raw energy ; their musicality , their song selection , they were like a chain saw cutting through the night . " When the Red Hot Chili Peppers finished touring with Nirvana , they traveled to Europe , where Frusciante , in need of someone to connect to , brought along his girlfriend Toni Oswald . Kiedis said that " John had broken our unwritten rule of no spouses or girlfriends on the road . " Briefly interrupting the European @-@ tour , the Chili Peppers flew to New York City and performed on an episode of Saturday Night Live . The band played " Under the Bridge " as the second number ; a performance that Kiedis felt was sabotaged by Frusciante : 
 [ Frusciante ] was experimenting the way he would have if we 'd been rehearsing the tune . Well we weren 't . We were on live TV in front of millions of people and it was torture . I started singing in what I thought was the key he was playing in . I felt like I was getting stabbed in the back and hung out to dry in front of all of America while this guy was off in a corner in the shadow , playing some dissonant out @-@ of @-@ tune experiment . 
 The band took a two @-@ week hiatus between the European and Japanese legs of the tour , which began in May 1992 . Minutes before the Chili Peppers were scheduled to perform in Tokyo , Frusciante refused to go on stage , claiming he quit the band . After half an hour of coaxing , Frusciante agreed to play the show , though he asserted it would be his last . Kiedis recalled of the situation : " It was the most horrible show ever . Every single note , every single word , hurt , knowing that we were no longer a band . I kept looking over at John and seeing this dead statue of disdain ... And that night , John disappeared from the topsy @-@ turvy world of the Red Hot Chili Peppers . " The band hired guitarist Arik Marshall to complete the rest of the tour , which included <unk> and several European festivals . Marshall , however , was fired at the end of the tour . 
 = = Accolades = = 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All songs written by Red Hot Chili Peppers , except where noted . 
 = = Album outtakes = = 
 Around 25 songs were written and recorded during the Blood Sugar Sex Magik sessions . Seventeen of those songs made the album 's final cut . The album 's singles contained four outtakes from the album sessions as b @-@ sides . Among those songs were the instrumental " Fela 's Cock " , a cover of the Stooges ' " Search and Destroy " , " <unk> " ( which would also appear on the Wayne 's World soundtrack " in 1992 ) , and " Soul to Squeeze " , a song that would eventually become a hit single in 1993 when it was released on the Coneheads soundtrack . The song was also included on the band 's 2003 Greatest Hits album . " Little Miss Lover " and " Castles Made of Sand " ( a song the band had been performing live for a few years ) , two Jimi Hendrix cover songs , would eventually be released in 2006 as iTunes bonus tracks . An unknown song appeared in the VH @-@ 1 Blood Sugar Sex Magik documentary , Ultimate Albums . A rough mix of the album surfaced on the Internet and contains some alternate versions of the songs recorded during the album 's sessions . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Red Hot Chili Peppers 
 Flea – bass , backing vocals , percussion on " Breaking the Girl " , trumpet on " Apache Rose Peacock " , piano on " <unk> Slinky in B Major " 
 John Frusciante – electric and acoustic guitars , backing vocals , percussion on " Breaking the Girl " 
 Anthony Kiedis – lead vocals , percussion on " Breaking the Girl " 
 Chad Smith – drums , percussion on " Breaking the Girl " and " Give It Away " 
 Additional musicians 
 Brendan O 'Brien – mellotron on " Breaking the Girl " and " Sir Psycho Sexy " , B3 Organ on " Suck My Kiss " and " Give It Away " , toy celeste on " Apache Rose Peacock " 
 Gail Frusciante and her friends – choir vocals on " Under the Bridge " 
 Pete Weiss – Jew 's harp on " Give It Away " 
 Recording personnel 
 Brendan O 'Brien – engineering , mixing ( with Rick Rubin ) 
 Rick Rubin – production 
 Howie Weinberg – mastering engineering 
 Additional personnel 
 Gus Van Sant – art direction 
 = = Chart positions and sales certifications = = 
 = = = Album = = = 
 = = = Singles = = = 
 = William Hayden English = 
 William Hayden English ( August 27 , 1822 – February 7 , 1896 ) was an American congressman from Indiana and the Democratic nominee for vice president in 1880 . English entered politics at a young age , becoming a part of Jesse D. Bright 's conservative faction of the Indiana Democratic Party . After a few years in the federal bureaucracy in Washington beginning in 1845 , he returned to Indiana and participated in the state constitutional convention of 1850 . He was elected to the state house of representatives in 1851 and served as its speaker at the age of twenty @-@ nine . After a two @-@ year term in the state house , English represented Indiana in the federal House of Representatives for four terms from 1853 to 1861 , working most notably to achieve a compromise on the admission of Kansas as a state . 
 English retired from the House in 1861 , but remained involved in party affairs . In the American Civil War he was a War Democrat , supporting the Union war effort . As well as pursuing a political career , he was an author and businessman , owning an opera house , serving as president of a bank , and developing many residential properties . English 's business career was successful , and he became one of the wealthiest men in Indiana . After nearly two decades in the private sector , English returned to political life as the Democratic nominee for vice president in 1880 . English and his presidential running mate , Winfield Scott Hancock , lost narrowly to their Republican opponents , James A. Garfield and Chester A. Arthur . 
 = = Family and early career = = 
 William Hayden English was born August 27 , 1822 , in Lexington , Indiana , the only son of Elisha Gale English and his wife , <unk> ( Eastin ) English . Both his parents were Kentucky natives from slaveholding families of English and French Huguenot ancestry . They moved to southern Indiana in 1818 . Elisha English quickly became involved in local politics as a Democrat , serving in the state legislature as well as building a prominent business career . William English was educated in the local public schools , later attending Hanover College . He left college after three years and began to read law . In 1840 , English was admitted to the bar at the age of eighteen and soon built a practice in his native Scott County . He started early in politics as well , attending the state Democratic convention that same year and giving speeches on behalf of the Democratic presidential candidate , Martin Van Buren . 
 By the end of 1842 , English came under the mentorship of Lieutenant Governor Jesse D. Bright , who helped him rise within Bright 's faction of the party . The following year , Indiana House of Representatives selected English as their clerk . In 1844 , he worked the campaign trail , this time in the service of presidential candidate James K. Polk . 
 = = Politics and marriage = = 
 As a reward , after Polk took office in 1845 , he granted English a patronage appointment as a clerk in the federal Treasury Department in Washington , D.C. English held this position for four years , during which time he met Emma <unk> Jackson . They married in November 1847 . They would have two children : William Eastin and Rosalind . 
 English attended the 1848 Democratic National Convention in Baltimore , where he supported Lewis Cass , the eventual presidential nominee . With the election of the Whig Party 's candidate , Zachary Taylor , to the presidency , a Whig party member replaced English at the Treasury Department . He secured a job as clerk to the United States Senate 's Claims Committee through party connections ; serving until 1850 in Washington , DC . 
 Later that year , English and his wife returned to Indiana , where he worked as secretary to the Indiana Constitutional Convention . Democrats were in the majority at the convention , and their proposals were included in the new law , including increasing the number of elective offices , guaranteeing a homestead exemption , and restricting voting rights to white men . Free blacks had earlier had formerly had suffrage in the state . The voters approved the new Constitution of 1851 by a large majority . 
 In August 1851 , English won his first election to the state house of Representatives . As it was the first meeting of the legislature under the 1851 constitution , English 's knowledge of it contributed to his election , at the age of twenty @-@ nine , as speaker of the House . The House had a Democratic majority and at Bright 's direction , English worked for the election of Graham N. Fitch , a member of Bright 's faction of the party , to the federal Senate . The legislature chose a different Democrat , John Pettit , instead . Holding the office of Speaker increased English 's influence throughout the state ; in 1852 , the Democrats chose him as their nominee for the federal House of Representatives from the newly redistricted 2nd district . The Democrats were victorious in the election that October , sweeping all but one House seat . English defeated his Whig opponent 55 % - 45 % and joined the 33rd Congress when it convened in Washington in 1853 . 
 = = Congress = = 
 = = = Kansas – Nebraska Act = = = 
 The House of Representatives convened for the 33rd Congress in December 1853 . At that time , the simmering disagreement between the free and slave states heated up with the introduction of the Kansas – Nebraska Act , proposed by Illinois Democrat Stephen A. Douglas , which would open the Kansas and Nebraska territories to slavery , an implicit repeal of the Missouri Compromise of 1820 . Intended to quiet national agitation over slavery by shifting the decision to local settlers , Douglas 's proposal instead inflamed anti @-@ slavery sentiment in the North by allowing the possibility of slavery 's expansion to territories held as free soil for three decades . English , a member of the Committee on Territories , thought the bill was unnecessary and disagreed with its timing ; when the committee approved the bill , English wrote a minority report to that effect . He was not altogether opposed to the principle of popular sovereignty , however , believing that " each organized community ought to be allowed to decide for itself " . Northern Democrats divided almost evenly on the bill , but English , despite his stated reservations , was among those who voted for it . In doing so , he said that Congress was bound to respect the decision of the territories ' residents and pledged to uphold their decisions . President Franklin Pierce signed the bill into law on May 30 , 1854 . 
 The Kansas – Nebraska Act was grossly unpopular across the North . The reaction ultimately killed the Whig Party , weakened northern Democrats , and brought about a new party , the Republicans . Only 3 of 42 free @-@ state representatives were reelected after voting for it ; English was one of them . English was a conservative Democrat , and his southern Indiana district , while not pro @-@ slavery , also had little sympathy for abolitionism . He was reelected again in 1856 , when the Democrats regained the House majority in the 35th Congress . The Speaker , James Lawrence Orr , assigned English to the Post Office and Post Roads Committee , but the issue of Kansas claimed more of his time . 
 = = = English Bill = = = 
 In December 1857 , in an election boycotted by free @-@ state partisans , Kansas adopted the pro @-@ slavery Lecompton Constitution and petitioned Congress to be admitted as a slave state . President James Buchanan , a Democrat , urged that Congress take up the matter , and the Senate approved a bill to admit Kansas . The bill was defeated in the House , 112 – 120 . English found the process by which the pro @-@ slavery Kansans forced through their constitution inadequate , and voted against admission . Congress continued to debate the matter for months without resolution . English and Georgia Democrat Alexander H. Stephens came up with a compromise measure , later called the English Bill . The English Bill offered Kansas admission as a slave state , but only if they endorsed that choice in a referendum . The Bill also required Kansans to renounce the unusually large grant of federal lands they had requested in the Lecompton Constitution . The Kansas voters could , thus , reject Lecompton by the face @-@ saving measure of turning down the smaller land grant . Congress passed the English Bill , and Kansans duly rejected their pro @-@ slavery constitution by a ratio of six to one . Some of English 's political allies , including Bright ( now a senator ) , would have preferred Kansas be admitted as a slave state , but the decision was popular enough in his district to allow English to be reelected in 1858 with a majority of 56 % to 44 % . 
 = = Business career = = 
 English declined to run for reelection in 1860 , but did give several speeches advocating compromise and moderation in the growing North @-@ South divide . After Abraham Lincoln 's election that year , English urged Southerners not to secede . When the Southern states did secede and the Civil War began , Governor Oliver P. Morton offered English command of a regiment , but he declined it , having no military knowledge or interests . He did , however , support Morton 's ( and Lincoln 's ) war policies and considered himself a War Democrat . English loaned money to the state government to cover the expenses of outfitting the troops and served as provost marshal for the 2nd congressional district . 
 After retiring from Congress , English spent a year at his home in Scott County before relocating to Indianapolis , the state capital . English and ten associates ( including James Lanier ) organized the First National Bank of Indianapolis in 1863 , the first bank in that city chartered under the new National Bank Act . He remained president of that bank until 1877 , including the difficult period during the Panic of 1873 , when many other banks folded . English 's business interests included other industries as well . He became the controlling shareholder of the Indianapolis Street Railway Company , remaining in charge of that company until 1876 , when he sold his shares . Having also sold his shares of the bank by 1877 , English turned most of his investment capital to real estate . By 1875 , he had already ordered construction of seventy @-@ five houses along what is now English Avenue . His wife , Emma , died two years later , in 1877 . English survived her by nineteen years . By the time he died in 1896 , he owned 448 pieces of property , most of them in Indianapolis . 
 In 1880 , English constructed English 's Opera House , which , according to the 1994 Encyclopedia of Indianapolis , quickly became known as the city 's finest . The building was modeled after the Grand Opera House in New York and seated 2000 people . It opened on September 27 , 1880 , with a performance of Hamlet starring Lawrence Barrett . By that time , English was involved in politics once more . He turned over management of the Opera House to his son , William Eastin English , who was interested in the theater ( and had just married an actress , Annie Fox ) . English senior later added a hotel to the Opera House , and both operated until 1948 . 
 = = Vice @-@ presidential candidate = = 
 After leaving the House of Representatives , English had remained in touch with local politics , even serving as chairman of the Indiana Democratic Party . His son had been elected to the state house in 1879 , and the elder English was still consulted on political matters . Although he had not sought elected office since 1858 , he had raised his national profile in 1879 through several interviews and letters to friendly newspapers . English attended the 1880 Democratic National Convention in Cincinnati as a member of the Indiana delegation , where he favored presidential candidate Thomas F. Bayard of Delaware , whom he admired for his support of the gold standard . The first ballot was inconclusive , with Bayard in second place . Major General Winfield Scott Hancock of Pennsylvania led the voting , and on the second ballot was nominated for President . 
 The Indiana delegation held back their votes from Hancock until the crucial moment , and as a reward , the delegates selected English for the vice @-@ presidential nomination . The nomination was unanimous . He was not expected to add much to the ticket outside of Indiana , but the party leaders thought his popularity in that swing state would help Hancock against James A. Garfield and Chester A. Arthur , the Republican nominees . The Republicans believed that the real reason for English 's nomination was his willingness to use his personal fortune to finance the campaign , as Democratic campaign coffers were low . English gave a brief speech accepting the nomination , then replied more formally in a letter a month later . In that letter , English called the disputes of the Civil War settled , and promised a " sound currency , of honest money " , the restriction of Chinese immigration , and a " rigid economy in public expenditure " . He characterized the election as one between 
 the people endeavoring to regain the political power which rightfully belongs to them , and to restore the pure , simple , economical , constitutional government of our fathers on the one side , and a hundred thousand federal office @-@ holders and their backers , pampered with place and power , and determined to retain them at all hazards , on the other . 
 Hancock and the Democrats expected to carry the Solid South , which , with the disenfranchisement of black Southerners following the end of Reconstruction , was dominated electorally by white Democrats . In addition to the South , the ticket needed to add a few of the Midwestern states to their total to win the election ; national elections in that era were largely decided by closely divided states there . The practical differences between the parties were few , and the Republicans were reluctant to attack Hancock personally because of his heroic reputation . The one policy difference the Republicans were able to exploit was a statement in the Democratic platform endorsing " a tariff for revenue only " . Garfield 's campaign used this statement to paint the Democrats as unsympathetic to the plight of industrial laborers , who benefited from the high protective tariff then in place . The tariff issue cut Democratic support in industrialized Northern states , which were essential in establishing a Democratic majority . 
 The October state elections in Ohio and Indiana resulted in Republican victories there , discouraging Democrats about the federal election to come the following month . There was even some talk among party leaders of dropping English from the ticket , but English convinced them that the October losses owed more to local issues , and that the Democratic ticket could still carry Indiana , if not Ohio , in November . In the end , English was proven wrong : the Democrats and Hancock failed to carry any of the Midwestern states they had targeted , including Indiana . Hancock and English lost the popular vote by just 7 @,@ 018 . The electoral vote , however , had a much larger spread : 214 for Garfield and Arthur , compared to 155 for Hancock and English . 
 = = Post @-@ election career and legacy = = 
 English resumed his business career after the election . He also became more interested in local history , joining a reunion of the survivors of the 1850 state constitutional convention , which met at his opera house in 1885 . He became the president of the Indiana Historical Society and wrote two volumes , which were published at his death : Conquest of the Country Northwest of the River Ohio , 1778 – 1783 ; and Life of General George Rogers Clark . He served on the Indianapolis Monument Commission in 1893 , and helped to plan and finance the Soldiers ' and Sailors ' Monument there . 
 He died at his home in Indianapolis on February 7 , 1896 . English was interred in Crown Hill Cemetery with his wife , who had died in 1877 . Although many of the buildings he constructed have been demolished , English , Indiana , the county seat of Crawford County , is named after him , as is English Street in Indianapolis . Identical statues of English stand in front of the Scott County Courthouse in <unk> , Indiana , and at the Crawford County Fairgrounds in English . His son William served in Congress from 1884 to 1885 . His grandson , William English Walling , the son of his daughter Rosalind , was a co @-@ founder of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People . An extensive collection of English 's personal and family papers is housed at the Indiana Historical Society in Indianapolis , where it is open for research . 
 = Black Hawk War = 
 The Black Hawk War was a brief 1832 conflict , between the United States and Native Americans , led by Black Hawk , a Sauk leader . The war erupted soon after Black Hawk and a group of Sauks , Meskwakis , and Kickapoos , known as the " British Band " , crossed the Mississippi River , into the US state of Illinois , from Iowa Indian Territory in April 1832 . Black Hawk 's motives were ambiguous , but he was apparently hoping to avoid bloodshed while resettling on tribal land that had been ceded to the United States in the disputed 1804 Treaty of St. Louis . 
 US officials , convinced that the British Band was hostile , mobilized a frontier militia and opened fire on a delegation from the Native Americans on May 14 , 1832 . Black Hawk responded by successfully attacking the militia at the Battle of Stillman 's Run . He led his band to a secure location in what is now southern Wisconsin and was pursued by US forces . Meanwhile , other Native Americans conducted raids against forts and settlements largely unprotected with the absence of US troops . Some Ho @-@ Chunk and Potawatomi warriors with grievances against European @-@ Americans took part in these raids , although most tribe members tried to avoid the conflict . The Menominee and Dakota tribes , already at odds with the Sauks and Meskwakis , supported the US . 
 Commanded by General Henry Atkinson , the US troops tracked the British Band . Militia under Colonel Henry Dodge caught up with the British Band on July 21 and defeated them at the Battle of Wisconsin Heights . Black Hawk 's band was weakened by hunger , death , and desertion and many native survivors retreated towards the Mississippi . On August 2 , US soldiers attacked the remnants of the British Band at the Battle of Bad Axe , killing many or capturing most who remained alive . Black Hawk and other leaders escaped , but later surrendered and were imprisoned for a year . 
 The Black Hawk War gave the young captain Abraham Lincoln his brief military service . Other participants who later became famous included Winfield Scott , Zachary Taylor , and Jefferson Davis . The war gave impetus to the US policy of Indian removal , in which Native American tribes were pressured to sell their lands and move west of the Mississippi River and stay there . 
 = = Background = = 
 In the 18th century , the Sauk and Meskwaki ( or Fox ) Native American tribes lived along the Mississippi River in what is now the U.S. states of Illinois and Iowa . The two tribes had become closely connected after having been displaced from the Great Lakes region in conflicts with New France and other Native American tribes , particularly after the so @-@ called Fox Wars ended in the 1730s . By the time of the Black Hawk War , the population of the two tribes was about 6 @,@ 000 people . 
 = = = Disputed treaty = = = 
 As the United States expanded westward in the early 19th century , government officials sought to buy as much Native American land as possible . In 1804 , territorial governor William Henry Harrison negotiated a treaty in St. Louis in which a group of Sauk and Meskwaki leaders supposedly sold their lands east of the Mississippi for more than $ 2 @,@ 200 , in goods and annual payments of $ 1 @,@ 000 in goods . The treaty became controversial because the Native leaders had not been authorized by their tribal councils to cede lands . Historian Robert Owens argued that the chiefs probably did not intend to give up ownership of the land , and that they would not have sold so much valuable territory for such a modest price . Historian Patrick Jung concluded that the Sauk and Meskwaki chiefs intended to cede a little land , but that the Americans included more territory in the treaty 's language than the Natives realized . According to Jung , the Sauks and Meskwakis did not learn the true extent of the cession until years later . 
 The 1804 treaty allowed the tribes to continue using the ceded land until it was sold to American settlers by the U.S. government . For the next two decades , Sauks continued to live at Saukenuk , their primary village , which was located near the confluence of the Mississippi and Rock Rivers . In 1828 , the U.S. government finally began to have the ceded land surveyed for white settlement . Indian agent Thomas Forsyth informed the Sauks that they should vacate Saukenuk and their other settlements east of the Mississippi . 
 = = = Sauks divided = = = 
 The Sauks were divided about whether to resist implementation of the disputed 1804 treaty . Most Sauks decided to relocate west of the Mississippi rather than become involved in a confrontation with the United States . The leader of this group was Keokuk , who had helped defend Saukenuk against the Americans during the War of 1812 . Keokuk was not a chief , but as a skilled orator , he often spoke on behalf of the Sauk civil chiefs in negotiations with the Americans . Keokuk regarded the 1804 treaty as a fraud , but after having seen the size of American cities on the east coast in 1824 , he did not think the Sauks could successfully oppose the United States . 
 Although the majority of the tribe decided to follow Keokuk 's lead , about 800 Sauks — roughly one @-@ sixth of the tribe — chose instead to resist American expansion . Black Hawk , a war captain who had fought against the United States in the War of 1812 and was now in his 60s , emerged as the leader of this faction in 1829 . Like Keokuk , Black Hawk was not a civil chief , but he became Keokuk 's primary rival for influence within the tribe . Black Hawk had actually signed a treaty in May 1816 that affirmed the disputed 1804 land cession , but he insisted that what had been written down was different from what had been spoken at the treaty conference . According to Black Hawk , the " whites were in the habit of saying one thing to the Indians and putting another thing down on paper . " 
 Black Hawk was determined to hold onto Saukenuk , where he lived and had been born . When the Sauks returned to the village in 1829 after their annual winter hunt in the west , they found that it had been occupied by white squatters who were anticipating the sale of land . After months of clashes with the squatters , the Sauks left in September 1829 for the next winter hunt . Hoping to avoid further confrontations , Keokuk told Forsyth that he and his followers would not return to Saukenuk . 
 Against the advice of Keokuk and Forsyth , Black Hawk 's faction returned to Saukenuk in the spring of 1830 . This time , they were joined by more than 200 Kickapoos , a people who had often allied with the Sauks . Black Hawk and his followers became known as the " British Band " because they sometimes flew a British flag to defy claims of U.S. sovereignty , and because they hoped to gain the support of the British at Fort Malden in Canada . 
 When the British Band once again returned to Saukenuk in 1831 , Black Hawk 's following had grown to about 1 @,@ 500 people , and now included some Potawatomis , a people with close ties to the Sauks and Meskwakis . American officials determined to force the British Band out of the state . General Edmund P. Gaines , commander of the Western Department of the United States Army , assembled troops with the hope of intimidating Black Hawk into leaving . The army had no cavalry to pursue the Sauks should they flee further into Illinois on horseback , and so on June 5 Gaines requested that the state militia provide a mounted battalion . Illinois governor John Reynolds had already alerted the militia ; about 1 @,@ 500 volunteers turned out . Meanwhile , Keokuk convinced many of Black Hawk 's followers to leave Illinois . 
 On June 26 , 1831 , Gaines launched an assault against Saukenuk , only to find that Black Hawk and his followers had abandoned the village and recrossed the Mississippi . On June 30 , Black Hawk , <unk> , and other Sauk leaders met with Gaines and signed an agreement in which the Sauks promised to remain west of the Mississippi and to break off further contact with the British in Canada . 
 = = Black Hawk 's return = = 
 Black Hawk did not remain west of the Mississippi for long . In late 1831 , Neapope , a Sauk civil chief , returned from Fort Malden and told Black Hawk that the British and the other Illinois tribes were prepared to support the Sauks against the United States . Why Neapope made these claims , which would prove to be unfounded , is unclear . Historians have described Neapope 's report to Black Hawk as " wishful thinking " and the product of a " fertile imagination " . Black Hawk welcomed the information , though he would later criticize Neapope for misleading him . He spent the winter in an unsuccessful attempt to recruit additional allies from other tribes and from Keokuk 's followers . 
 According to Neapope 's erroneous report , Wabokieshiek ( " White Cloud " ) , a shaman known to Americans as the " Winnebago Prophet " , had claimed that other tribes were ready to support Black Hawk . Wabokieshiek 's mother was a Ho @-@ Chunk ( Winnebago ) , but his father had belonged to a Sauk clan that provided the tribe 's civil leaders . When Wabokieshiek joined the British Band in 1832 , he would become the ranking Sauk civil chief in the group . His village , Prophetstown , was about thirty @-@ five miles up the Rock River from Saukenuk . The village was inhabited by about 200 Ho @-@ Chunks , Sauks , Meskwakis , Kickapoos , and Potawatomis who were dissatisfied with tribal leaders who refused to stand up to American expansion . Although some Americans would later characterize Wabokieshiek as a primary instigator of the Black Hawk War , the Winnebago Prophet , according to historian John Hall , " actually discouraged his followers from resorting to armed conflict with the whites " . 
 On April 5 , 1832 , the British Band entered Illinois once again . Numbering about 500 warriors and 600 non @-@ combatants , they crossed near the mouth of the Iowa River over to Yellow Banks ( present @-@ day <unk> , Illinois ) , and then headed north . Black Hawk 's intentions upon reentering Illinois are not entirely clear , since reports from both white and Indian sources are conflicting . Some said that the British Band intended to reoccupy Saukenuk , while others said that the destination was Prophetstown . According to historian Kerry Trask , " even Black Hawk may not have been sure where they were going and what they intended to do " . 
 As the British Band moved into Illinois , American officials urged Wabokieshiek to advise Black Hawk to turn back . Previously , the Winnebago Prophet had encouraged Black Hawk to come to Prophetstown , arguing that the 1831 agreement made with General Gaines prohibited a return to Saukenuk , but did not forbid the Sauks from moving to Prophetstown . Now , instead of telling Black Hawk to turn back , Wabokieshiek told him that , as long as the British Band remained peaceful , the Americans would have no choice but to let them settle at Prophetstown , especially if the British and the area tribes supported the band . Although the British Band traveled with armed guards as a security precaution , Black Hawk was probably hoping to avoid a war when he reentered Illinois . The presence of women , children , and the elderly indicated that the band was not a war party . 
 = = Intertribal war and American policy = = 
 Although the return of Black Hawk 's band worried U.S. officials , they were at the time more concerned about the possibility of a war among the Native American tribes in the region . Most accounts of the Black Hawk War focus on the conflict between Black Hawk and the United States , but historian John Hall argues that this overlooks the perspective of many Native American participants . According to Hall , " the Black Hawk War also involved an intertribal conflict that had smoldered for decades " . Tribes along the Upper Mississippi had long fought for control of diminishing hunting grounds , and the Black Hawk War provided an opportunity for some Natives to resume a war that had nothing to do with Black Hawk . 
 After having displaced the British as the dominant outside power following the War of 1812 , the United States had assumed the role of mediator in intertribal disputes . Before the Black Hawk War , U.S. policy discouraged intertribal warfare . This was not strictly for humanitarian reasons : intertribal warfare made it more difficult for the United States to acquire Indian land and move the tribes to the West , a policy known as Indian removal , which had become the primary goal by the late 1820s . U.S. efforts at mediation included multi @-@ tribal treaty councils at Prairie du Chien in 1825 and 1830 , in which tribal boundaries were drawn . Native Americans sometimes resented American mediation , especially young men , for whom warfare was an important avenue of social advancement . 
 The situation was complicated by the American spoils system . After Andrew Jackson assumed the U.S. presidency in March 1829 , many competent Indian agents were replaced by unqualified Jackson loyalists , argues historian John Hall . Men like Thomas Forsyth , John Marsh , and Thomas McKenney were replaced by less qualified men such as Felix St. Vrain . In the 19th century , historian Lyman Draper argued that the Black Hawk War could have been avoided had Forsyth remained as the agent to the Sauks . 
 In 1830 , violence threatened to undo American attempts at preventing intertribal warfare . In May , Dakotas ( Santee Sioux ) and Menominees killed fifteen Meskwakis attending a treaty conference at Prairie du Chien . In retaliation , a party of Meskwakis and Sauks killed twenty @-@ six Menominees , including women and children , at Prairie du Chien in July 1831 . American officials discouraged the Menominees from seeking revenge , but the western bands of the tribe formed a coalition with the Dakotas to strike at the Sauks and Meskwakis . 
 Hoping to prevent the outbreak of a wider war , American officials ordered the U.S. Army to arrest the Meskwakis who massacred the Menominees . General Gaines was ill , and so his subordinate , Brigadier General Henry Atkinson , received the assignment . Atkinson was a middle @-@ aged officer who had ably handled administrative and diplomatic tasks , most notably during the 1827 Winnebago War , but he had never seen combat . On April 8 , he set out from Jefferson Barracks in Missouri , moving up the Mississippi River by steamboat with about 220 soldiers . By chance , Black Hawk and his British Band had just crossed into Illinois . Although Atkinson did not realize it , his boats passed Black Hawk 's band . 
 When Atkinson arrived at Fort Armstrong on Rock Island on April 12 , he learned that the British Band was in Illinois , and that most of the Meskwakis he wanted to arrest were now with the band . Like other American officials , Atkinson was convinced that the British Band intended to start a war . Because he had few troops at his disposal , Atkinson hoped to get support from the Illinois state militia . He wrote to Governor Reynolds on April 13 , describing — and perhaps purposely exaggerating — the threat that the British Band posed . Reynolds , who was eager for a war to drive the Indians out of the state , responded as Atkinson had hoped : he called for militia volunteers to assemble at Beardstown by April 22 to begin a thirty @-@ day enlistment . The 2 @,@ 100 men who volunteered were organized into a brigade of five regiments under Brigadier General Samuel Whiteside . Among the militiamen was 23 @-@ year @-@ old Abraham Lincoln , who was elected captain of his company . 
 = = Initial diplomacy = = 
 After Atkinson 's arrival at Rock Island on April 12 , 1832 , he , Keokuk , and Meskwaki chief Wapello sent emissaries to the British Band , which was now ascending the Rock River . Black Hawk rejected the messages advising him to turn back . Colonel Zachary Taylor , a regular army officer who served under Atkinson , later stated that Atkinson should have made an attempt to stop the British Band by force . Some historians have agreed , arguing that Atkinson could have prevented the outbreak of war with more decisive action or astute diplomacy . Cecil Eby charged that " Atkinson was a paper general , unwilling to proceed until all risk had been eliminated " . Kerry Trask , however , argued that Atkinson was correct in believing that he did not yet have enough troops to stop the British Band . According to Patrick Jung , leaders on both sides had little chance of avoiding bloodshed at this point , because the militiamen and some of Black Hawk 's warriors were spoiling for a fight . 
 Meanwhile , Black Hawk learned that the Ho @-@ Chunk and Potawatomi tribes were less supportive than anticipated . As in other tribes , different bands of these tribes often pursued different policies . The Ho @-@ Chunks who lived along the Rock River in Illinois had family ties to the Sauks ; they cautiously supported the British Band while trying not to provoke the Americans . Ho @-@ Chunks in Wisconsin were more divided . Some bands , remembering their loss to the Americans in the 1827 Winnebago War , decided to stay clear of the conflict . Other Ho @-@ Chunks with ties to the Dakotas and Menominees , most notably Waukon Decorah and his brothers , were eager to fight against the British Band . 
 Most Potawatomis wanted to remain neutral in the conflict , but found it difficult to do so . Many white settlers , recalling the Fort Dearborn massacre of 1812 , distrusted the Potawatomis and assumed that they would join Black Hawk 's uprising . Potawatomi leaders worried that the tribe as a whole would be punished if any Potawatomis supported Black Hawk . At a council outside Chicago on May 1 , 1832 , Potawatomi leaders including Billy Caldwell " passed a resolution declaring any Potawatomi who supported Black Hawk a traitor to his tribe " . In mid May , Potawatomi chiefs <unk> and <unk> told Black Hawk that neither they nor the British would come to his aid . 
 Without British supplies , adequate provisions , or Native allies , Black Hawk realized that his band was in serious trouble . By some accounts , he was ready to negotiate with Atkinson to end the crisis , but an ill @-@ fated encounter with Illinois militiamen would end all possibility of a peaceful resolution . 
 = = Stillman 's Run = = 
 On May 8 , General Whiteside 's militia brigade was mustered into federal service under Atkinson . Two days later , the militia and regulars began marching up the Rock River in pursuit of the British Band , with Governor Reynolds accompanying the expedition as a major general of militia . Atkinson allowed Reynolds , Whiteside , and the militiamen to take the lead while he brought up the rear with the regular soldiers . In what historian Patrick Jung calls a " serious lapse in judgment " , Atkinson directed the militia — his least trained and disciplined men — to " move upon the Indians should they be within striking distance without waiting for my arrival " . On May 12 , the militiamen learned that Black Hawk 's band was only twenty @-@ five miles away . Reynolds wanted to send out a scouting force , but the cautious Whiteside insisted on waiting for Atkinson . Because most of the militia were now under U.S. Army command , Reynolds could not give them orders , but he did have two battalions of mounted militia under Major Isaiah Stillman that had not been federalized . In what would prove to be a controversial decision , Reynolds sent these 260 amateur citizen @-@ soldiers forward to reconnoiter the British Band . 
 In what became known as the Battle of Stillman 's Run , the two battalions of militia came into contact with Black Hawk and his warriors on May 14 , near present @-@ day Stillman Valley . Accounts of how the battle began are varied . Black Hawk later stated that he sent three men under a white flag to parley , but the Americans imprisoned them and opened fire on a second group of observers who followed . Some militiamen never reported seeing a white flag ; others believed that the flag was a ruse the Indians used to set an ambush . All accounts agree that Black Hawk 's warriors attacked the militia camp at dusk . To Black Hawk 's surprise , his forty warriors completely routed the much larger militia force . Twelve Illinois militiamen were killed in the humiliating defeat ; the British Band suffered only three fatalities . 
 The Battle of Stillman 's run was a turning point . Prior to this battle , Black Hawk had not been committed to war . Now he determined to avenge what he saw as the treacherous killing of his warriors under a flag of truce . After Stillman 's defeat , American leaders like President Jackson and Secretary of War Lewis Cass would not consider a diplomatic solution ; they wanted a resounding victory over Black Hawk to serve as an example to other Native Americans who might consider similar uprisings . 
 = = Initial raids = = 
 With hostilities now underway , and few allies to depend upon , Black Hawk sought a place of refuge for the women , children , and elderly in his band . Accepting an offer from the Rock River Ho @-@ Chunks , the band traveled further upriver to Lake Koshkonong in the Michigan Territory and camped in an isolated place known as the " Island " . With the non @-@ combatants secure , members the British Band , with a number of Ho @-@ Chunk and Potawatomi allies , began raiding white settlers . Not all Native Americans in the region supported this turn of events ; most notably , Potawatomi chief <unk> rode throughout the settlements , warning whites of the impending attacks . 
 The initial raiding parties consisted primarily of Ho @-@ Chunk and Potawatomi warriors . The first attack came on May 19 , 1832 , when Ho @-@ Chunks ambushed six men near Buffalo Grove , Illinois , killing a man named William Durley . Durley 's scalped and mutilated body was found by Indian agent Felix St. Vrain . The Indian agent was himself killed and mutilated , along with three other men , several days later at Kellogg 's Grove . 
 The Ho @-@ Chunks and Potawatomis , who took part in the war , were sometimes , motivated by grievances , not directly related to Black Hawk 's objectives . One such incident was the Indian Creek massacre . In the spring of 1832 , Potawatomis living along Indian Creek were upset that a settler named William Davis had dammed the creek , preventing fish from reaching their village . Davis ignored the protests , and assaulted a Potawatomi man who tried to dismantle the dam . The Black Hawk War provided the Indian Creek Potawatomis with an opportunity for revenge . On May 21 , about fifty Potawatomis and three Sauks from the British Band attacked Davis 's settlement , killing , scalping , and mutilating fifteen men , women , and children . Two teenage girls from the settlement were kidnapped and taken to Black Hawk 's camp . A Ho @-@ Chunk chief named White Crow negotiated their release two weeks later . Like other Rock River Ho @-@ Chunks , White Crow was trying to placate the Americans while clandestinely aiding the British Band . 
 = = American reorganization = = 
 News of Stillman 's defeat , the Indian Creek massacre , and other smaller attacks triggered panic among the white population . Many settlers fled to Chicago , then a small town , which became overcrowded with hungry refugees . Many Potawatomis also fled towards Chicago , not wanting to get caught in the conflict nor be mistaken for hostiles . Throughout the region , settlers hurriedly organized militia units and built small forts . 
 After Stillman 's defeat on May 14 , the regulars and militia continued up the Rock River to search for Black Hawk . The militiamen became discouraged at not being able to find the British Band . When they heard about the Indian raids , many deserted so that they could return home to defend their families . As morale plummeted , Governor Reynolds asked his militia officers to vote on whether to continue the campaign . General Whiteside , disgusted with the performance of his men , cast the tie @-@ breaking vote in favor of disbanding . Most of Whiteside 's brigade disbanded at Ottawa , Illinois , on May 28 . About 300 men , including Abraham Lincoln , agreed to remain in the field for twenty more days until a new militia force could be organized . 
 As Whiteside 's brigade disbanded , Atkinson organized a new force in June 1832 that he dubbed the " Army of the Frontier " . The army consisted of 629 regular army infantrymen and 3 @,@ 196 mounted militia volunteers . The militia was divided into three brigades commanded by Brigadier Generals Alexander Posey , Milton Alexander , and James D. Henry . Since many men were assigned to local patrols and guard duties , Atkinson had only 450 regulars and 2 @,@ 100 militiamen available for campaigning . Many more militiamen served in units that were not part of the Army of the Frontier 's three brigades . Abraham Lincoln , for example , reenlisted as a private in an independent company that was taken into federal service . Henry Dodge , a Michigan territorial militia colonel who would prove to be one of the best commanders in the war , fielded a battalion of mounted volunteers that numbered 250 men at its strongest . The overall number of militiamen who took part in the war is not precisely known ; the total from Illinois alone has been estimated at six to seven thousand . 
 In addition to organizing a new militia army , Atkinson also began to recruit Native American allies , reversing the previous American policy of trying to prevent intertribal warfare . Menominees , Dakotas , and some Ho @-@ Chunks bands were eager to go to war against the British Band . By June 6 , agent Joseph M. Street had assembled about 225 Natives at Prairie du Chien . This force included about eighty Dakotas under Wabasha and L 'Arc , forty Menominees , and several bands of Ho Chunks . Although the Indian warriors followed their own leaders , Atkinson placed the force under the nominal command of William S. Hamilton , a militia colonel and a son of Alexander Hamilton . Hamilton would prove to be an unfortunate choice to lead the force ; historian John Hall characterized him as " pretentious and unqualified " . Before long , the Indians became frustrated with marching around under Hamilton and not seeing any action . Some Menominee scouts remained , but most of the Natives eventually left Hamilton and fought the war on their own terms . 
 = = June raids = = 
 In June 1832 , after hearing that Atkinson was forming a new army , Black Hawk began sending out raiding parties . Perhaps hoping to lead the Americans away from his camp at Lake Koshkonong , he targeted areas to the west . The first major attack occurred on June 14 near present @-@ day South Wayne , Wisconsin , when a band of about 30 warriors attacked a group of farmers , killing and scalping four . 
 Responding to this attack , militia Colonel Henry Dodge gathered a force of twenty @-@ nine mounted volunteers and set out in pursuit of the attackers . On June 16 , Dodge and his men cornered about eleven of the raiders at a bend in the Pecatonica River . In a brief battle , the Americans killed and scalped all of the Natives . The Battle of Horseshoe Bend ( or Battle of Pecatonica ) was the first real American victory in the war , and helped restore public confidence in the volunteer militia force . 
 On the same day of Dodge 's victory , another skirmish took place at Kellogg 's Grove in present @-@ day Stephenson County , Illinois . American forces had occupied Kellogg 's Grove in an effort to intercept war parties raiding to the west . In the First Battle of Kellogg 's Grove , militia commanded by Adam W. Snyder pursued a British Band raiding party of about thirty warriors . Three Illinois militiamen and six Native warriors died in the fighting . Two days later , on June 18 , militia under James W. Stephenson encountered what was probably the same war party near Yellow Creek . The Battle of Waddams Grove became a hard fought , hand @-@ to @-@ hand melee . Three militiamen and five or six Indians were killed in the action . 
 Back on June 6 , when a civilian miner was killed by raiders near the village of Blue Mounds in the Michigan Territory , residents began to fear that the Rock River Ho @-@ Chunks were joining the war . On June 20 , a Ho @-@ Chunk raiding party estimated by one eyewitness to be as large as 100 warriors attacked the settler fort at Blue Mounds . Two militiamen were killed in the attack , one of whom was badly mutilated . 
 On June 24 , 1832 , Black Hawk and about 200 warriors attacked at the hastily constructed Apple River Fort , near present @-@ day Elizabeth , Illinois . Local settlers , warned of Black Hawk 's approach , took refuge in the fort , which was defended by about 20 to 35 militiamen . The Battle of Apple River Fort lasted about forty @-@ five minutes . The women and girls inside the fort , under the direction of Elizabeth Armstrong , loaded muskets and molded bullets . After losing several men , Black Hawk broke off the siege , looted the nearby homes , and headed back towards his camp . 
 The next day , June 25 , Black Hawk 's party encountered a militia battalion commanded by Major John Dement . In the Second Battle of Kellogg 's Grove , Black Hawk 's warriors drove the militiamen inside their fort and commenced a two @-@ hour siege . After losing nine warriors and killing five militiamen , Black Hawk broke off the siege and returned to his main camp at Lake Koshkonong . This would prove to be Black Hawk 's last military success in the war . With his band running low on food , he decided to take them back across the Mississippi . 
 = = Final campaign = = 
 On June 15 , 1832 , President Andrew Jackson , displeased with Atkinson 's handling of the war , appointed General Winfield Scott to take command . Scott gathered about 950 troops from eastern army posts just as a cholera pandemic had spread to eastern North America . As Scott 's troops traveled by steamboat from Buffalo , New York , across the Great Lakes towards Chicago , his men started getting sick from cholera , with many of them dying . At each place the vessels landed , the sick were deposited and soldiers deserted . By the time the last steamboat landed in Chicago , Scott had only about 350 effective soldiers left . On July 29 , Scott began a hurried journey west , ahead of his troops , eager to take command of what was certain to be the war 's final campaign , but he would be too late to see any combat . 
 General Atkinson , who learned in early July that Scott would be taking command , hoped to bring the war to a successful conclusion before Scott 's arrival . The Americans had difficulty locating the British Band , however , thanks in part to false intelligence given to them by area Native Americans . Potawatomis and Ho @-@ Chunks in Illinois , many of whom had sought to remain neutral in the war , decided to cooperate with the Americans . Tribal leaders knew that some of their warriors had aided the British Band , and so they hoped that a highly visible show of support for the Americans would dissuade U.S. officials from punishing the tribes after the conflict was over . Wearing white headbands to distinguish themselves from hostile Natives , Ho @-@ Chunks and Potawatomis served as guides for Atkinson 's army . Ho @-@ Chunks sympathetic to the plight of Black Hawk 's people misled Atkinson into thinking that the British Band was still at Lake Koshkonong . While Atkinson 's men were trudging through the swamps and running low on provisions , the British Band had in fact relocated miles to the north . Potawatomis under Billy Caldwell also managed to demonstrate support for the Americans while avoiding battle . 
 In mid @-@ July , Colonel Dodge learned from métis trader Pierre Paquette that the British Band was camped near the Rock River rapids , at present <unk> , Wisconsin . Dodge and James D. Henry set out in pursuit from Fort Winnebago on July 15 . The British Band , reduced to fewer than 600 people due to death and desertion , headed for the Mississippi River as the militia approached . The Americans pursued them , killing and scalping several Native stragglers along the way . 
 = = = Wisconsin Heights = = = 
 On July 21 , 1832 , the militiamen caught up with the British Band near present @-@ day Sauk City , Wisconsin . To buy time for the noncombatants to cross the Wisconsin River , Black Hawk and Neapope confronted the Americans in a rear guard action that became known as the Battle of Wisconsin Heights . Black Hawk was desperately outnumbered , leading about 50 Sauks and 60 to 70 Kickapoos against 750 militiamen . The battle was a lopsided victory for the militiamen , who lost only one man while killing as many as 68 of Black Hawk 's warriors . Despite the high casualties , the battle allowed much of the British Band , including many women and children , to escape across the river . Black Hawk had managed to hold off a much larger force while allowing most of his people to escape , a difficult military operation that impressed some U.S. Army officers when they learned of it . 
 The Battle of Wisconsin Heights had been a victory for the militia ; no regular soldiers of the U.S. Army had been present . Atkinson and the regulars joined up with the volunteers several days after the battle . With a force of about 400 regulars and 900 militiamen , the Americans crossed the Wisconsin River on July 27 and resumed the pursuit of the British Band . The British Band was moving slow , encumbered with wounded warriors and people dying of starvation . The Americans followed the trail of dead bodies , cast off equipment , and the remains of horses the hungry Natives had eaten . 
 = = = Bad Axe = = = 
 After the Battle of Wisconsin Heights , a messenger from Black Hawk had shouted to the militiamen that the starving British Band was going back across the Mississippi and would fight no more . No one in the American camp understood the message , however , since their Ho @-@ Chunk guides were not present to interpret . Black Hawk may have believed that the Americans had gotten the message , and that they had not pursued him after the Battle of Wisconsin Heights . He apparently expected that the Americans were going to let his band recross the Mississippi unmolested . 
 The Americans , however , had no intentions of letting the British Band escape . The Warrior , a steamboat outfitted with an artillery piece , patrolled the Mississippi River , while American allied @-@ Dakotas , Menominees , and Ho @-@ Chunks watched the banks . On August 1 , the Warrior arrived at the mouth of the Bad Axe River , where the Dakotas told the Americans that they would find Black Hawk 's people . Black Hawk raised a white flag in an attempt to surrender , but his intentions may have been garbled in translation . The Americans , in no mood to accept a surrender anyway , thought that the Indians were using the white flag to set an ambush . When they became certain that the Natives on land were the British Band , they opened fire . Twenty @-@ three Natives were killed in the exchange of gunfire , while just one soldier on the Warrior was injured . 
 After the Warrior left , Black Hawk decided to seek refuge in the north with the Ojibwes . Only about 50 people , including Wabokieshiek , agreed to go with him ; the others remained , determined to cross the Mississippi and return to Sauk territory . The next morning , on August 2 , Black Hawk was heading north when he learned that the American army had closed in on the members of the British Band who were trying to cross the Mississippi . He tried to rejoin the main body , but after a skirmish with American troops near present @-@ day Victory , Wisconsin , he gave up the attempt . Sauk chief <unk> later criticized Black Hawk and Wabokieshiek for abandoning the people during the final battle of the war . 
 The Battle of Bad Axe began at about 9 : 00 am on August 2 after the Americans caught up with the remnants of the British Band a few miles downstream from the mouth of the Bad Axe River . The British Band was reduced to roughly 500 people by this time , including about 150 warriors . The warriors fought with the Americans while the Native noncombatants frantically tried to cross the river . Many made it to one of the two nearby islands , but were dislodged after the steamboat Warrior returned at noon , carrying regulars and Menominees allied with the Americans . 
 The battle was another lopsided victory for the Americans , who lost just 14 men , including one Menominee who died by friendly fire and was buried with honors alongside the white soldiers . At least 260 members of the British Band were killed , including about 110 who drowned while trying to cross the river . Although the regular soldiers of the U.S. Army generally tried to avoid needless bloodshed , many of the militiamen intentionally killed Native noncombatants , sometimes in cold blood . The encounter was , in the words of historian Patrick Jung , " less of a battle and more of a massacre " . 
 Menominees from Green Bay , who had mobilized a battalion of nearly 300 men , arrived too late for the battle . They were upset at having missed the chance to fight their old enemies , and so on August 10 , General Scott sent 100 of them after a part of the British Band that had escaped . Indian agent Samuel C. Stambaugh , who accompanied them , urged the Menominees not to take any scalps , but Chief Grizzly Bear insisted that such a prohibition could not be enforced . The group tracked down about ten Sauks , only two of whom were warriors . The Menominees killed and scalped the warriors , but spared the women and children . 
 The Dakotas , who had volunteered 150 warriors to fight against the Sauks and Meskwakis , also arrived too late to participate in the Battle of Bad Axe , but they pursued the members of the British Band who made it across the Mississippi into Iowa . On about August 9 , in the final engagement of the war , they attacked the remnants of the British Band along the Cedar River , killing 68 and taking 22 prisoners . Ho @-@ Chunks also hunted survivors of the British Band , taking between fifty and sixty scalps . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 The Black Hawk War resulted in the deaths of 77 white settlers , militiamen , and regular soldiers . This figure does not included the deaths from cholera suffered by the relief force under General Winfield Scott . Estimates of how many members of the British Band died during the conflict range from about 450 to 600 , or about half of the 1 @,@ 100 people who entered Illinois with Black Hawk in 1832 . 
 A number of American men with political ambitions fought in the Black Hawk War . At least seven future U.S. Senators took part , as did four future Illinois governors , and future governors of Michigan , Nebraska , and the Wisconsin Territory . The Black Hawk War demonstrated to American officials the need for mounted troops to fight a mounted foe . During the war , the U.S. Army did not have cavalry ; the only mounted soldiers were part @-@ time volunteers . After the war , Congress created the Mounted Ranger Battalion under the command of Henry Dodge , which was expanded to the 1st Cavalry Regiment in 1833 . 
 = = = Black Hawk 's imprisonment and legacy = = = 
 After the Battle of Bad Axe , Black Hawk , Wabokieshiek , and their followers traveled northeast to seek refuge with the Ojibwes . American officials offered a reward of $ 100 and forty horses for Black Hawk 's capture . While camping near present @-@ day Tomah , Wisconsin , Black Hawk 's party was seen by a passing Ho @-@ Chunk man , who alerted his village chief . The village council sent a delegation to Black Hawk 's camp and convinced him to surrender to the Americans . On August 27 , 1832 , Black Hawk and Wabokieshiek surrendered at Prairie du Chien to Indian agent Joseph Street . Colonel Zachary Taylor took custody of the prisoners , and sent them by steamboat to Jefferson Barracks , escorted by Lieutenants Jefferson Davis and Robert Anderson . 
 By war 's end , Black Hawk and nineteen other leaders of the British Band were incarcerated at Jefferson Barracks . Most of the prisoners were released in the succeeding months , but in April 1833 , Black Hawk , Wabokieshiek , Neapope , and three others were transferred to Fort Monroe in Virginia , which was better equipped to hold prisoners . The American public was eager to catch a glimpse of the captured Indians . Large crowds gathered in Louisville and Cincinnati to watch them pass . On April 26 , the prisoners met briefly with President Jackson in Washington , D.C. , before being taken to Fort Monroe . Even in prison they were treated as celebrities : they posed for portraits by artists such as Charles Bird King and John Wesley Jarvis , and a dinner was held in their honor before they left . 
 American officials decided to release the prisoners after a few weeks . First , however , the Natives were required to visit several large U.S. cities on the east coast . This was a tactic often used when Native American leaders came to the East , because it was thought that a demonstration of the size and power of the United States would discourage future resistance to U.S. expansion . Beginning on June 4 , 1833 , Black Hawk and his companions were taken on a tour of Baltimore , Philadelphia , and New York City . They attended dinners and plays , and were shown a battleship , various public buildings , and a military parade . Huge crowds gathered to see them . Black Hawk 's handsome son <unk> ( Whirling Thunder ) was a particular favorite . Reaction in the west , however , was less welcoming . When the prisoners traveled through Detroit on their way home , one crowd burned and hanged effigies of the Indians . 
 According to historian Kerry Trask , Black Hawk and his fellow prisoners were treated like celebrities because the Indians served as a living embodiment of the noble savage myth that had become popular in the eastern United States . Then and later , argues Trask , white Americans absolved themselves of complicity in the dispossession of Native Americans by expressing admiration or sympathy for defeated Indians like Black Hawk . The mythologizing of Black Hawk continued , argues Trask , with the many plaques and memorials that were later erected in his honor . " Indeed , " writes Trask , " most of the reconstructed memory of the Black Hawk War has been designed to make white people feel good about themselves . " Black Hawk also became an admired symbol of resistance among Native Americans , even among descendants of those who had opposed him . 
 = = = Treaties and removals = = = 
 The Black Hawk War marked the end of Native armed resistance to U.S. expansion in the Old Northwest The war provided an opportunity for American officials such as Andrew Jackson , Lewis Cass , and John Reynolds to compel Native American tribes to sell their lands east of the Mississippi River and move to the West , a policy known as Indian removal . Officials conducted a number of treaties after the war to purchase the remaining Native American land claims in the Old Northwest . The Dakotas and Menominees , who won approval from American officials for their role in the war , largely avoided postwar removal pressure until later decades . 
 After the war , American officials learned that some Ho @-@ Chunks had aided Black Hawk more than had been previously known . Eight Ho @-@ Chunks were briefly imprisoned at Fort Winnebago for their role in the war , but charges against them were eventually dropped due to a lack of witnesses . In September 1832 , General Scott and Governor Reynolds conducted a treaty with the Ho @-@ Chunks at Rock Island . The Ho @-@ Chunks ceded all their land south of the Wisconsin River in exchange for a forty @-@ mile strip of land in Iowa and annual payments of $ 10 @,@ 000 for twenty @-@ seven years . The land in Iowa was known as the " Neutral Ground " because it had been designated in 1830 as a buffer zone between the Dakotas and their enemies to the south , the Sauks and Meskwakis . Scott hoped that the settlement of the Ho @-@ Chunks in the Neutral Ground would help keep the peace . Ho @-@ Chunks remaining in Wisconsin were pressured to sign a removal treaty in 1837 , even though leaders such as Waukon Decorah had been U.S. allies during the Black Hawk War . General Atkinson was assigned to use the army to forcibly relocate those Ho @-@ Chunks who refused to move to Iowa . 
 Following the September 1832 treaty with the Ho @-@ Chunks , Scott and Reynolds conducted another with the Sauks and Meskwakis , with Keokuk and Wapello serving as the primary representatives of their tribes . Scott told the assembled chiefs that " if a particular part of a nation goes out of their country , and makes war , the whole nation is responsible " . The tribes sold about 6 million acres ( 24 @,@ 000 km ² ) of land in eastern Iowa to the United States for payments of $ 20 @,@ 000 per year for thirty years , among other provisions . Keokuk was granted a reservation within the cession and recognized by the Americans as the primary chief of the Sauks and Meskwakis . The tribes sold the reservation to the United States in 1836 , and additional land in Iowa the following year . Their last lands in Iowa were sold in 1842 , and most of the Natives moved to a reservation in Kansas . 
 Thanks to the decision of Potawatomi leaders to aid the U.S. during the war , American officials did not seize tribal land as war reparations . Instead , only three individuals accused of leading the Indian Creek massacre were tried in court ; they were acquitted . Nevertheless , the drive to purchase Potawatomi land west of the Mississippi began in October 1832 , when commissioners in Indiana bought a large amount of Potawatomi land , even though not all Potawatomi bands were represented at the treaty . The tribe was compelled to sell their remaining land west of the Mississippi in a treaty held in Chicago in September 1833 . 
 = Tracing in English law = 
 Tracing in English law is a procedure to identify property ( such as money ) that has been taken from the claimant involuntarily . It is not in itself a way to recover the property , but rather to identify it so that the courts can decide what remedy to apply . The procedure is used in several situations , broadly demarcated by whether the property has been transferred because of theft , breach of trust , or mistake . 
 Tracing is divided into two forms , common law tracing and equitable tracing . Common law tracing relies on the claimant having legal ownership of the property , and will fail if the property has been mixed with other property , the legal title has been transferred to the defendant , or the legal title has been transferred by the defendant to any further recipient of the property . Equitable tracing , on the other hand , relies on the claimant having an equitable interest in the property , and can succeed where the property has been mixed with other property . 
 Defences to tracing are possible , particularly if returning the property would harm an innocent defendant , where the claimant has made false representations that the defendant relied on to his detriment , or where the property has been transferred to an innocent third party without anything given to the defendant in return that the claimant could recover in lieu . 
 = = Definition = = 
 Tracing is a process that allows for the recovery of property ( such as land or money ) by the owner if it is taken involuntarily , and the owner has not consented to the transfer of title . This can be through theft , breach of trust , or mistake . Owners can recover their property and perhaps also any profits made from it , or in situations where the property cannot be recovered ( as it has been mixed in with other property , or cannot be found ) , substitute property . The process has two steps , following and tracing . In Foskett v McKeown , Lord Millett defined them by saying that " [ Following and tracing ] are both exercises in locating assets which may or may be taken to represent an asset belonging to the [ claimants ] and to which they assert ownership . The process of following and tracing are , however , distinct . Following is the process of following the same asset as it moves from hand to hand . Tracing is the process of identifying a new asset as the substitute for the old " . Following , therefore , is simply establishing who the original owner of property is , where that property is , and returning it to the original owner . Tracing arises when the property cannot be returned and the court is asked to recognise an interest in new property , such as whatever the defendant received in exchange for the claimant 's original property . Tracing can occur at both the common law and equity . It is not a remedy for breach of trust ; tracing is merely the process of identifying the property . It is then up to the courts to decide what will happen to it . 
 = = Tracing in common law = = 
 Common law tracing is where the claimant seeks to identify property that belongs to him at common law . This is where physical possession of the property passes , but not legal ownership . The problem with common law tracing is that the property must be identifiable ; if it has been mixed with other property , such as money paid into an account with other money from a different source , it cannot be successfully recovered . It is also essential that the involuntary transfer did not also transfer the legal title , nor any succeeding transfer . If this has happened , the property is also not recoverable under the common law . Someone with an equitable interest in the property but no legal title , as in MCC Proceeds v Lehman Brothers , cannot recover the money under common law . Due to these limitations , " many leading academics and judges " have suggested that common law tracing should be completely merged with equitable tracing . 
 = = Tracing in equity = = 
 Equitable tracing is based not on legal ownership but on the claimant 's possession of an equitable interest . There are several advantages to equitable tracing ; first , it can trace property now mixed with other property . In Boscawen v Bajwa , Millett justified this by saying that " equity 's power to charge a mixed fund with the repayment of trust moneys enables the claimant to follow the money , not because it is his , but because it is derived from a fund which is treated as if it were subject to a charge in his favour " . A limitation is that where the property has been put into a bank account that no longer contains enough money to repay it , it cannot be traced . 
 For equitable tracing to be valid , several things must be demonstrated . First , the equitable title must exist ; it can be brought into existence by the courts , such as in Constructive trusts . Secondly , there must be some kind of fiduciary relationship between the claimant and the defendant . If the property was transferred through breach of trust , it will not be necessary to establish such a relationship , because it already exists . In addition , property transferred through breach of trust may be traced to any third party ( other than a purchaser in good faith ) , even if they did not previously have a fiduciary relationship with the claimant . Historically , the courts have been willing to be " generous in finding that the necessary fiduciary relationship existed " , even going so far as to recognise relationships that did not exist at the time of the transfer . 
 = = = Mixture of trust funds with trustee 's funds = = = 
 Equitable tracing 's greatest strength is its ability to trace into mixtures of money . Different rules apply in different situations ; where the money has been mixed with the money of a trustee , where a trust fund has been mixed with another trust fund ( or money belonging to an innocent volunteer ) , and where money has been transferred by mistake rather than malicious intent . Where the money has been mixed with the money of a trustee , the court 's decision depends on the motive of the trustee . Because a trustee is expected to invest trust property and behave honestly , the courts may choose to find that the trustee transferred the money to further the goal of the trust . Since the trustee is assumed to behave honestly , any profits made may be assumed ( by this " convenient fiction " ) to be made by the trust money , and any losses from the trustee 's personal funds . 
 The alternate approach taken is the " beneficiary election " approach . This is that where trust funds are wrongly mixed with the trustee 's personal funds , used for an investment , and the money is thus not recoverable , the beneficiaries are allowed to " elect " whether the investment is to be held as a security for the amounts owed to them , or whether to take the unauthorised investment as part of the trust fund . This is considered the exception , rather than the rule ; in Foskett v McKeown , Millett said that " The primary rule in regard to a mixed fund , therefore , is that gains and losses are borne by the contributors <unk> . The beneficiary 's right to elect instead to enforce a lien to obtain repayment is an exception to the primary rue , exercisable where the fund is deficient and the claim is made against the wrongdoer and those claiming through him " . 
 = = = Innocent parties and mistake = = = 
 Where funds are mixed with those of another trust , or mixed with the funds of an " innocent volunteer " , certain general principles apply . As laid out in Re Diplock , the principle applied is that the claimant 's entitlement ranks pari <unk> to that of the volunteer ; each has an equal claim to their funds . Whether the fund decreases or increases in value , each party can claim a percentage equal to their contribution . The problem here comes if the mixed funds are used in unequal chunks to acquire other property . The long @-@ standing rule is that established in Clayton 's Case ; that the money deposited first is deemed to be spent on the first property purchased . The problem with this is that if the first property becomes less valuable than the second property purchased , the first claimant loses some of their money while the second claimant is able to claim their money in its entirety . The alternate approach is the previously mentioned pari <unk> idea ; whatever the total property is worth , the claimants get a share proportionate to their input , without assuming that the first claimant 's money is tied to the first property purchased and the second claimant 's money to the second property . In Barlow Clowes International v Vaughan , the Court of Appeal applied a similar set of principles , holding that the size of the contribution and the amount of time the money was part of the mixed fund were the factors to be considered . 
 Where payments have been made by mistake claimants may or may not be able to recoup their losses . The leading case is Westdeutsche <unk> <unk> v Islington LBC , where Lord Browne @-@ Wilkinson declared that a constructive trust would be created when the recipient of the funds became aware of the mistaken transfer . As such , ignorance of the mistake would not create a fiduciary relationship , therefore not a trust , and the property would be untraceable . 
 = = Loss of the right to trace and defences = = 
 The right to trace may be lost if the property cannot be found , or no longer exists . Defences to tracing are possible . The " change of position " defence is where the defendant has received property and giving it back would change his personal circumstances . This was concisely defined by Lord Goff in Lipkin Gorman v <unk> as " Where an innocent defendant 's position is so changed that he will suffer an injustice if called upon to repay or to repay in full , the injustice of requiring him so to repay outweighs the injustice of denying the plaintiff restitution " . Such a defence is closely linked with unjust enrichment , and has limitations . Any bad faith on the part of the defendant will invalidate the defence , such as if the recipient of the property has encouraged the payer to transfer it or has received it by mistake and then used it without making enquiries . The defence is also not available to people who act illegally , as in Barros Mattos v <unk> Ltd . Activity which constitutes a " change of position " can be broadly defined as taking steps which would not otherwise have been taken , or not taking steps which otherwise would have been taken , as a result of receiving the property . 
 Another defence is that of " estoppel by representation " . This is similar to " change of position " , and comes about when the defendant can show that the claimant made some false representation to him , which he acted upon to his detriment . Traditionally , the entire property would be the defendant 's if the defence was successful . In National Westminster Bank plc v Somer International , however , the Court of Appeal decided that the defendant was only allowed to retain property equal to his losses due to the claimant 's representation . Another defence similar to " change of position " is that of passing on , where the defendant has passed the property on to a third person without any benefit for the defendant ; it is thus impossible to trace the property as the defendant has neither the property nor any proceeds from transferring it . 
 = Actuary = 
 An actuary is a business professional who deals with the measurement and management of risk and uncertainty ( BeAnActuary <unk> ) . The name of the corresponding profession is actuarial science . These risks can affect both sides of the balance sheet , and require asset management , liability management , and valuation skills ( BeAnActuary 2011b ) . Actuaries provide assessments of financial security systems , with a focus on their complexity , their mathematics , and their mechanisms ( Trowbridge 1989 , p . 7 ) . 
 While the concept of insurance dates to antiquity ( Johnston 1903 , § 475 – § 476 , Loan 1992 , Lewin 2007 , pp. 3 – 4 ) , the mathematics and finance needed to scientifically measure and mitigate risks have their origins in the 17th century studies of probability and annuities ( Heywood 1985 ) . Actuaries of the 21st century require analytical skills , business knowledge , and an understanding of human behavior and information systems to design and manage programs that control risk ( BeAnActuary <unk> ) . The actual steps needed to become an actuary are usually country @-@ specific ; however , almost all processes share a rigorous schooling or examination structure and take many years to complete ( Feldblum 2001 , p . 6 , Institute and Faculty of Actuaries 2014 ) . 
 The profession has consistently ranked as one of the most desirable ( Riley 2013 ) . In various studies , being an actuary was ranked number one or two multiple times since 2010 ( Thomas 2012 , Weber 2013 , CareerCast 2015 ) . 
 = = Responsibilities = = 
 Actuaries use skills primarily in mathematics , particularly calculus @-@ based probability and mathematical statistics , but also economics , computer science , finance , and business . For this reason , actuaries are essential to the insurance and reinsurance industries , either as staff employees or as consultants ; to other businesses , including sponsors of pension plans ; and to government agencies such as the Government Actuary 's Department in the United Kingdom or the Social Security Administration in the United States of America . Actuaries assemble and analyze data to estimate the probability and likely cost of the occurrence of an event such as death , sickness , injury , disability , or loss of property . Actuaries also address financial questions , including those involving the level of pension contributions required to produce a certain retirement income and the way in which a company should invest resources to maximize its return on investments in light of potential risk . Using their broad knowledge , actuaries help design and price insurance policies , pension plans , and other financial strategies in a manner that will help ensure that the plans are maintained on a sound financial basis ( Bureau of Labor Statistics 2015 , Government Actuary 's Department 2015 ) . 
 = = = Disciplines = = = 
 Most traditional actuarial disciplines fall into two main categories : life and non @-@ life . 
 Life actuaries , which include health and pension actuaries , primarily deal with mortality risk , morbidity risk , and investment risk . Products prominent in their work include life insurance , annuities , pensions , short and long term disability insurance , health insurance , health savings accounts , and long @-@ term care insurance ( Bureau of Labor Statistics 2015 ) . In addition to these risks , social insurance programs are influenced by public opinion , politics , budget constraints , changing demographics , and other factors such as medical technology , inflation , and cost of living considerations ( GAO 1980 , GAO 2008 ) . 
 Non @-@ life actuaries , also known as property and casualty or general insurance actuaries , deal with both physical and legal risks that affect people or their property . Products prominent in their work include auto insurance , homeowners insurance , commercial property insurance , workers ' compensation , malpractice insurance , product liability insurance , marine insurance , terrorism insurance , and other types of liability insurance ( AIA 2014 ) . 
 Actuaries are also called upon for their expertise in enterprise risk management ( Bureau of Labor Statistics 2015 ) . This can involve dynamic financial analysis , stress testing , the formulation of corporate risk policy , and the setting up and running of corporate risk departments ( Institute and Faculty of Actuaries 2011b ) . Actuaries are also involved in other areas of the financial services industry , such as analysing securities offerings or market research ( Bureau of Labor Statistics 2015 ) . 
 = = = Traditional employment = = = 
 On both the life and casualty sides , the classical function of actuaries is to calculate premiums and reserves for insurance policies covering various risks ( Institute and Faculty of Actuaries 2014 ) . On the casualty side , this analysis often involves quantifying the probability of a loss event , called the frequency , and the size of that loss event , called the severity . The amount of time that occurs before the loss event is important , as the insurer will not have to pay anything until after the event has occurred . On the life side , the analysis often involves quantifying how much a potential sum of money or a financial liability will be worth at different points in the future . Since neither of these kinds of analysis are purely deterministic processes , stochastic models are often used to determine frequency and severity distributions and the parameters of these distributions . Forecasting interest yields and currency movements also plays a role in determining future costs , especially on the life side ( Tolley , Hickman & Lew 2012 ) . 
 Actuaries do not always attempt to predict aggregate future events . Often , their work may relate to determining the cost of financial liabilities that have already occurred , called retrospective reinsurance , or the development or re @-@ pricing of new products . 
 Actuaries also design and maintain products and systems . They are involved in financial reporting of companies ' assets and liabilities . They must communicate complex concepts to clients who may not share their language or depth of knowledge . Actuaries work under a code of ethics that covers their communications and work products ( ASB 2013 ) . 
 = = = Non @-@ traditional employment = = = 
 As an outgrowth of their more traditional roles , actuaries also work in the fields of risk management and enterprise risk management for both financial and non @-@ financial corporations ( D 'Arcy 2005 ) . Actuaries in traditional roles study and use the tools and data previously in the domain of finance ( Feldblum 2001 , p . 8 ) . The Basel II accord for financial institutions ( 2004 ) , and its analogue , the <unk> II accord for insurance companies ( to come into effect in 2016 ) , require institutions to account for operational risk separately , and in addition to , credit , reserve , asset , and insolvency risk . <unk> skills are well suited to this environment because of their training in analyzing various forms of risk , and judging the potential for upside gain , as well as downside loss associated with these forms of risk ( D 'Arcy 2005 ) . 
 Actuaries are also involved in investment advice and asset management , and can be general business managers and chief financial officers ( <unk> 2002 , Stefan 2010 ) . They analyze business prospects with their financial skills in valuing or discounting risky future cash flows , and apply their pricing expertise from insurance to other lines of business . For example , insurance securitization requires both actuarial and finance skills ( Krutov 2006 ) . Actuaries also act as expert witnesses by applying their analysis in court trials to estimate the economic value of losses such as lost profits or lost wages ( Wagner 2006 ) . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Need for insurance = = = 
 The basic requirements of communal interests gave rise to risk sharing since the dawn of civilization . For example , people who lived their entire lives in a camp had the risk of fire , which would leave their band or family without shelter . After barter came into existence , more complex risks emerged and new forms of risk manifested . Merchants embarking on trade journeys bore the risk of losing goods entrusted to them , their own possessions , or even their lives . <unk> developed to warehouse and trade goods , which exposed them to financial risk . The primary providers in extended families or households ran the risk of premature death , disability or infirmity , which could leave their dependents to starve . Credit procurement was difficult if the creditor worried about repayment in the event of the borrower 's death or infirmity . Alternatively , people sometimes lived too long from a financial perspective , exhausting their savings , if any , or becoming a burden on others in the extended family or society ( Lewin 2007 , p . 3 ) . 
 = = = Early attempts = = = 
 In the ancient world there was not always room for the sick , suffering , disabled , aged , or the poor — these were often not part of the cultural consciousness of societies ( Perkins 1995 ) . Early methods of protection , aside from the normal support of the extended family , involved charity ; religious organizations or neighbors would collect for the destitute and needy . By the middle of the 3rd century , 1 @,@ 500 suffering people were being supported by charitable operations in Rome ( Perkins 1995 ) . Charitable protection remains an active form of support in the modern era ( <unk> 2009 ) , but receiving charity is uncertain and is often accompanied by social stigma . Elementary mutual aid agreements and pensions did arise in antiquity ( Thucydides ) . Early in the Roman empire , associations were formed to meet the expenses of burial , cremation , and monuments — precursors to burial insurance and friendly societies . A small sum was paid into a communal fund on a weekly basis , and upon the death of a member , the fund would cover the expenses of rites and burial . These societies sometimes sold shares in the building of <unk> , or burial vaults , owned by the fund — the precursor to mutual insurance companies ( Johnston 1903 , § 475 – § 476 ) . Other early examples of mutual surety and assurance pacts can be traced back to various forms of fellowship within the Saxon clans of England and their Germanic forbears , and to Celtic society ( Loan 1992 ) . 
 Non @-@ life insurance started as a hedge against loss of cargo during sea travel . Anecdotal reports of such guarantees occur in the writings of Demosthenes , who lived in the 4th century BCE ( Lewin 2007 , pp. 3 – 4 ) . The earliest records of an official non @-@ life insurance policy come from Sicily , where there is record of a 14th @-@ century contract to insure a shipment of wheat ( Sweeting 2011 , p . 14 ) . In 1350 , Lenardo Cattaneo assumed " all risks from act of God , or of man , and from perils of the sea " that may occur to a shipment of wheat from Sicily to Tunis up to a maximum of 300 florins . For this he was paid a premium of 18 % ( Lewin 2007 , p . 4 ) . 
 = = = Development of theory = = = 
 During the 17th century , a more scientific basis for risk management was being developed . In 1662 , a London draper named John Graunt showed that there were predictable patterns of longevity and death in a defined group , or cohort , of people , despite the uncertainty about the future longevity or mortality of any one individual . This study became the basis for the original life table . Combining this idea with that of compound interest and annuity valuation , it became possible to set up an insurance scheme to provide life insurance or pensions for a group of people , and to calculate with some degree of accuracy each member 's necessary contributions to a common fund , assuming a fixed rate of interest . The first person to correctly calculate these values was Edmond Halley ( Heywood 1985 ) . In his work , Halley demonstrated a method of using his life table to calculate the premium someone of a given age should pay to purchase a life @-@ annuity ( Halley 1693 ) . 
 = = = Early actuaries = = = 
 James Dodson 's pioneering work on the level premium system led to the formation of the Society for Equitable Assurances on Lives and <unk> ( now commonly known as Equitable Life ) in London in 1762 . This was the first life insurance company to use premium rates that were calculated scientifically for long @-@ term life policies , using Dodson 's work . After Dodson 's death in 1757 , Edward Rowe Mores took over the leadership of the group that eventually became the Society for Equitable Assurances . It was he who specified that the chief official should be called an actuary ( <unk> 1956 , p . 235 ) . Previously , the use of the term had been restricted to an official who recorded the decisions , or acts , of ecclesiastical courts , in ancient times originally the secretary of the Roman senate , responsible for compiling the Acta <unk> ( <unk> 1956 , p . 233 ) . Other companies that did not originally use such mathematical and scientific methods most often failed or were forced to adopt the methods pioneered by Equitable ( Bühlmann 1997 , p . 166 ) . 
 = = = Development of the modern profession = = = 
 In the 18th and 19th centuries , computational complexity was limited to manual calculations . The actual calculations required to compute fair insurance premiums are complex . The actuaries of that time developed methods to construct easily used tables , using sophisticated approximations called commutation functions , to facilitate timely , accurate , manual calculations of premiums ( <unk> 2006 ) . Over time , actuarial organizations were founded to support and further both actuaries and actuarial science , and to protect the public interest by ensuring competency and ethical standards ( Hickman 2004 , p . 4 ) . Since calculations were cumbersome , actuarial shortcuts were commonplace . 
 Non @-@ life actuaries followed in the footsteps of their life compatriots in the early 20th century . In the United States , the 1920 revision to workers ' compensation rates took over two months of around @-@ the @-@ clock work by day and night teams of actuaries ( <unk> 1920 , pp. 224 , 230 ) . In the 1930s and 1940s , rigorous mathematical foundations for stochastic processes were developed ( Bühlmann 1997 , p . 168 ) . Actuaries began to forecast losses using models of random events instead of deterministic methods . Computers further revolutionized the actuarial profession . From pencil @-@ and @-@ paper to <unk> to microcomputers , the modeling and forecasting ability of the actuary has grown exponentially ( <unk> 1980 , pp. 50 – 51 ) . 
 Another modern development is the convergence of modern financial theory with actuarial science ( Bühlmann 1997 , pp. 169 – 171 ) . In the early 20th century , actuaries were developing techniques that can be found in modern financial theory , but for various historical reasons , these developments did not achieve much recognition ( Whelan 2002 ) . In the late 1980s and early 1990s , there was a distinct effort for actuaries to combine financial theory and stochastic methods into their established models ( D 'Arcy 1989 ) . In the 21st century , the profession , both in practice and in the educational syllabi of many actuarial organizations , combines tables , loss models , stochastic methods , and financial theory ( Feldblum 2001 , pp. 8 – 9 ) , but is still not completely aligned with modern financial economics ( Bader & Gold 2003 ) . 
 = = Remuneration and ranking = = 
 As there are relatively few actuaries in the world compared to other professions , actuaries are in high demand , and are highly paid for the services they render ( Hennessy 2003 , Kurtz 2013 ) . As of 2014 , in the United States , newly credentialed actuaries on average earn around $ 100 @,@ 000 per year , while more experienced actuaries can earn over $ 150 @,@ 000 per year ( Ezra <unk> 2014 ) . Similarly , a 2014 survey in the United Kingdom indicated a starting salary for a newly credentialed actuary of about £ 50 @,@ 000 ; actuaries with more experience can earn well in excess of £ 100 @,@ 000 ( Crail 2014 ) . 
 The actuarial profession has been consistently ranked for decades as one of the most desirable . Actuaries work comparatively reasonable hours , in comfortable conditions , without the need for physical exertion that may lead to injury , are well paid , and the profession consistently has a good hiring outlook ( Riley 2013 ) . Not only has the overall profession ranked highly , but it also is considered one of the best professions for women ( <unk> 2014 ) , and one of the best recession @-@ proof professions ( <unk> 2008 ) . In the United States , the profession was rated as the best profession by CareerCast , which uses five key criteria to rank jobs — environment , income , employment outlook , physical demands , and stress , in 2010 ( Needleman 2010 ) , 2013 ( Weber 2013 ) , and 2015 ( CareerCast 2015 ) . In other years , it remained in the top 10 ( Thomas 2012 , CareerCast 2014 ) . In the United Kingdom ( <unk> 2013 ) , and around the world ( <unk> 2014 ) , actuaries continue to be highly ranked as a profession . 
 = = Credentialing and exams = = 
 Becoming a fully credentialed actuary requires passing a rigorous series of professional examinations , usually taking several years . In some countries , such as Denmark , most study takes place in a university setting ( Norberg 1990 , p . 407 ) . In others , such as the US , most study takes place during employment through a series of examinations ( <unk> 2015 , CAS 2015 ) . In the UK , and countries based on its process , there is a hybrid university @-@ exam structure ( Institute and Faculty of Actuaries <unk> ) . 
 = = = Exam support = = = 
 As these qualifying exams are extremely rigorous , support is usually available to people progressing through the exams . Often , employers provide paid on @-@ the @-@ job study time and paid attendance at seminars designed for the exams ( BeAnActuary <unk> ) . Also , many companies that employ actuaries have automatic pay raises or promotions when exams are passed . As a result , actuarial students have strong incentives for devoting adequate study time during off @-@ work hours . A common rule of thumb for exam students is that , for the Society of Actuaries examinations , roughly 400 hours of study time are necessary for each four @-@ hour exam ( Sieger 1998 ) . Thus , thousands of hours of study time should be anticipated over several years , assuming no failures ( Feldblum 2001 , p . 6 ) . 
 = = = Pass marks and pass rates = = = 
 Historically , the actuarial profession has been reluctant to specify the pass marks for its examinations ( <unk> 2010 , <unk> 2000 ) . To address concerns that there are pre @-@ existing pass / fail quotas , a former Chairman of the Board of Examiners of the Institute and Faculty of Actuaries stated that " [ a ] lthough students find it hard to believe , the Board of Examiners does not have fail quotas to achieve . Accordingly pass rates are free to vary ( and do ) . They are determined by the quality of the candidates sitting the examination and in particular how well prepared they are . Fitness to pass is the criterion , not whether you can achieve a mark in the top 40 % of candidates sitting . " ( <unk> 2010 ) . In 2000 , the Casualty <unk> Society ( CAS ) decided to start releasing pass marks for the exams it offers ( <unk> 2000 ) . The CAS 's policy is also not to grade to specific pass ratios ; the CAS board affirmed in 2001 that " the CAS shall use no predetermined pass ratio as a guideline for setting the pass mark for any examination . If the CAS determines that 70 % of all candidates have demonstrated sufficient grasp of the syllabus material , then those 70 % should pass . Similarly , if the CAS determines that only 30 % of all candidates have demonstrated sufficient grasp of the syllabus material , then only those 30 % should pass . " ( CAS 2001 ) . 
 = = Notable actuaries = = 
 = = Fictional actuaries = = 
 Actuaries have appeared in works of fiction including literature , theater , television , and film . At times , they have been portrayed as " math @-@ obsessed , socially disconnected individuals with shockingly bad comb @-@ overs " , which has resulted in a mixed response amongst actuaries themselves ( Coleman 2003 ) . 
 = Destiny 's Child = 
 Destiny 's Child was an American girl group whose final and best @-@ known line @-@ up comprised Beyoncé Knowles , Kelly Rowland , and Michelle Williams . Formed in 1990 in Houston , Texas , Destiny 's Child members began their musical endeavors as Girl 's Tyme comprising , among others , Knowles , Rowland , LaTavia Roberson and LeToya Luckett . After years of limited success , they were signed in 1996 to Columbia Records as Destiny 's Child . Destiny 's Child was launched into mainstream recognition following the 1999 release of their best @-@ selling second album , The Writing 's on the Wall , which contained the number @-@ one singles " Bills , Bills , Bills " and " Say My Name " . Despite critical and commercial success , the group was plagued by internal conflict and legal turmoil , as Roberson and Luckett attempted to split from the group 's manager Mathew Knowles , citing favoritism of Knowles and Rowland . 
 Both Roberson and Luckett were soon replaced with Williams and Farrah Franklin ; however , in 2000 , Franklin left , leaving the group as a trio . Their third album , Survivor , which contains themes the public interpreted as a channel to the group 's experience , contains the worldwide hits " Independent Women " , " Survivor " and " Bootylicious " . In 2002 , they announced a hiatus and re @-@ united two years later for the release of their fourth and final studio album , Destiny Fulfilled ( 2004 ) . Destiny 's Child has sold more than 60 million records worldwide to date . Billboard magazine ranks the group as one of the greatest musical trios of all time , the ninth most successful artist / band of the 2000s , and placed the group 68th in its All @-@ Time Hot 100 Artists list in 2008 . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = 1990 – 97 : Early beginnings and Girl 's Tyme = = = 
 In 1990 , Beyoncé Knowles met rapper LaTavia Roberson while auditioning for a girl group . Based in Houston , Texas , they were joined to a group that performed rapping and dancing . Kelly Rowland , who relocated to Knowles 's house because of family issues , joined them in 1992 . Originally named Girl 's Tyme , they were eventually cut down to six members including <unk> Davis and sisters Nikki and Nina Taylor . With Knowles and Rowland , Girl 's Tyme attracted nationwide attention : west @-@ coast R & B producer Arne Frager flew to Houston to see them . He brought them to his studio , The Plant Recording Studios , in Northern California , with focus on Knowles 's vocals because Frager thought she had personality and the ability to sing . With efforts to sign Girl 's Tyme to a major record deal , Frager 's strategy was to debut the group in Star Search , the biggest talent show on national TV at the time . However , they lost the competition because , according to Knowles , their choice of song was wrong ; they were actually rapping instead of singing . 
 Because of the group 's defeat , Knowles 's father , Mathew , voluntarily dedicated his time to manage them . Mathew Knowles cut down the original lineup to four , with the removal of Davis and the Taylor sisters and the inclusion of LeToya Luckett in 1993 . Aside from spending time at their church in Houston , Girl 's Tyme practiced in their backyards and at <unk> Salon , owned by Knowles 's mother , Tina . The group would test routines in the salon , when it was on Montrose Boulevard in Houston , and sometimes would collect tips from the customers . Their try out would be critiqued by the people inside . During their school days , Girl 's Tyme performed at local gigs . When summer came , Mathew Knowles established a " boot camp " to train them in dance and vocal lessons . After rigorous training , they began performing as opening acts for established R & B groups of that time such as SWV , Dru Hill and Immature . Tina Knowles designed the group 's attire for their performances . 
 Over the course of the early years in their career , Girl 's Tyme changed their name to Something Fresh , Cliché , the Dolls , and to Destiny . The group signed with Elektra Records with the name Destiny , but were dropped several months later before they could release an album . The pursuit of a record deal affected the Knowles family : in 1995 , Mathew Knowles resigned from his job as a medical @-@ equipment salesman , a move that reduced Knowles 's family 's income by half , and her parents briefly separated due to the pressure . In 1996 , they finally changed their name to Destiny 's Child , which was taken from a passage in the Book of Isaiah . Mathew Knowles helped in negotiating a record deal with Columbia Records , which signed the group that same year . Prior to signing with Columbia , the group had recorded several tracks in Oakland , California produced by D 'wayne Wiggins of Tony ! Toni ! Toné ! , including " Killing Time " , which upon the label 's recognition that Destiny 's Child had a " unique quality " , was included in the soundtrack to the 1997 film Men in Black . 
 = = = 1998 – 2000 : Breakthrough and lineup changes = = = 
 Destiny 's Child released their self @-@ titled debut album in the United States on February 17 , 1998 , featuring productions by Tim & Bob , Rob Fusari , Jermaine Dupri , Wyclef Jean , Dwayne Wiggins and Corey Rooney . Destiny 's Child peaked at number sixty @-@ seven on the Billboard 200 and number fourteen on the Billboard Top R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Albums . It managed to sell over one million copies in the United States , earning a platinum certification by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) . The remix version to the album 's lead single , " No , No , No " , reached number one on the Billboard Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Singles & Tracks and number three on the Billboard Hot 100 . Its follow @-@ up single , " With Me Part 1 " failed to reproduce the success of " No , No , No " . Meanwhile , the group featured on a song from the soundtrack album of the romantic drama Why Do Fools Fall in Love and " Get on the Bus " had a limited release in Europe and other markets . In 1998 , Destiny 's Child garnered three Soul Train Lady of Soul awards including Best New Artist for " No , No , No " . Knowles considered their debut successful but not huge , claiming as a neo soul record it was too mature for the group at the time . 
 After the success of their debut album , Destiny 's Child re @-@ entered the studio quickly , bringing in a new lineup of producers , including Kevin " She 'kspere " Briggs and Rodney Jerkins . Coming up with The Writing 's on the Wall , they released it on July 27 , 1999 and it eventually became their breakthrough album . The Writing 's on the Wall peaked at number five on the Billboard 200 and number two on R & B chart in early 2000 . " Bills , Bills , Bills " was released in 1999 as the album 's lead single and reached the top spot of the Billboard Hot 100 , becoming their first US number @-@ one single . The Writing 's on the Wall has been credited as Destiny 's Child 's breakthrough album , spurring their career and introducing them to a wider audience . The main key to the group 's breakthrough was the album 's third single , " Say My Name " , which topped the Billboard Hot 100 for three consecutive weeks . The successful release of the singles bolstered the album 's sales , eventually selling over eight million copies in the United States , gaining eight @-@ time platinum certification by the RIAA . The Writing 's on the Wall sold more than 11 million copies worldwide and was one of the top @-@ selling albums of 2000 . 
 In December 1999 , Luckett and Roberson attempted to split with their manager , claiming that he kept a disproportionate share of the group 's profits and unfairly favored Knowles and Rowland . While they never intended to leave the group , when the video for " Say My Name " surfaced in February 2000 , Roberson and Luckett found out that two new members were joining Knowles and Rowland . Prior to the video premiere , Knowles announced on TRL that original members Luckett and Roberson had left the group . They were replaced by Michelle Williams , a former backup singer to Monica , and Farrah Franklin , an aspiring singer @-@ actress . Shortly after her stint with Monica , Williams was introduced to Destiny 's Child by choreographer Braden Larson aka " Peanut Orlando " , and was flown to Houston where she stayed with the Knowles family . 
 In March 2000 , Roberson and Luckett filed a lawsuit against Mathew Knowles and their former bandmates for breach of partnership and fiduciary duties . Following the suit , both sides were disparaging towards each other in the media . Five months after joining , Franklin left the group . The remaining members claimed that this was due to missed promotional appearances and concerts . According to Williams , Franklin could not handle stress . Franklin , however , disclosed that she left because of the negativity surrounding the strife and her inability to assert any control in the decision making . Her departure was seen as less controversial . Williams , on the other hand , disclosed that her inclusion in the group resulted in her " battling insecurity " : " I was comparing myself to the other members , and the pressure was on me . " 
 Towards the end of 2000 , Roberson and Luckett dropped the portion of their lawsuit aimed at Rowland and Knowles in exchange for a settlement , though they continued the action against their manager . As part of the agreement , both sides were prohibited from speaking about each other publicly . Roberson and Luckett formed another girl group named <unk> but also left it due to issues with the record company . Although band members were affected by the turmoil , Destiny 's Child 's success continued . The following years of their career were seen as the group 's most successful stretch , becoming a pop culture phenomenon . " Say My Name " became their second number @-@ one and biggest single to date . The fourth single from The Writing 's on the Wall , " Jumpin ' , Jumpin ' " , also became a top @-@ ten hit . During this time , Destiny 's Child began performing as an opening act at the concerts of pop singers Britney Spears and Christina Aguilera . 
 With Williams in the new lineup , Destiny 's Child released a theme song for the soundtrack to the film version of Charlie 's Angels . Released as a single in October 2000 , " Independent Women Part 1 " spent eleven consecutive weeks atop the Billboard Hot 100 from November 2000 to January 2001 , the longest @-@ running number @-@ one single of Destiny 's Child 's career and of that year in the United States . The successful release of the single boosted the sales of the soundtrack album to Charlie 's Angels to 1 @.@ 5 million by 2001 . In 2000 , Destiny 's Child won Soul Train 's Sammy Davis Jr . Entertainer of the Year award . 
 = = = 2001 – 2003 : Survivor , subsequent releases , hiatus and side projects = = = 
 At the 2001 Billboard Music Awards , Destiny 's Child won several accolades , including Artist of the Year and Duo / Group of the Year , and again won Artist of the Year among five awards they snagged in 2001 . In September 2000 , the group took home two at the sixth annual Soul Train Lady of Soul Awards , including R & B / Soul Album of the Year , Group for The Writing 's on the Wall . Destiny 's Child recorded their third album , Survivor , from mid @-@ 2000 until early 2001 . In the production process , Knowles assumed more control in co @-@ producing and co @-@ writing almost the entire album . Survivor hit record stores in the spring of 2001 and entered the Billboard 200 at number one , selling over 663 @,@ 000 copies in its first week sales . The first three singles , " Independent Women Part I " , " Survivor " and " Bootylicious " reached the top three in the United States and were also successful in other countries ; the first two were consecutive number @-@ one singles in the United Kingdom . The album was certified four @-@ time platinum in the United States and double platinum in Australia . It sold 6 million copies as of July 27 , 2001 . 
 In the wake of the September 11 attacks , Destiny 's Child canceled a European tour and performed in a concert benefit for the survivors . In October 2001 , the group released a holiday album , 8 Days of Christmas , which contained updated versions of several Christmas songs . The album managed to reach number thirty @-@ four on the Billboard 200 . In February 2001 , Destiny 's Child won two Grammy awards for " Say My Name " : Best R & B Vocal Performance by a Duo or Group and Best R & B Song . They also earned an American Music Award for Favorite Soul / R & B Band / Duo . Also in 2001 , Destiny 's Child sang backup vocals for Solange Knowles , who was the lead , on the theme song to the animated Disney Channel series The Proud Family . In March 2002 , a remix compilation titled This Is the Remix was released to win fans over before a new studio album would be released . The remix album reached number 29 in the United States . The lead single " Survivor " was by some interpreted as a response to the strife between the band members , although Knowles claimed it was not directed at anybody . Seeing it as a breach of the agreement that barred each party from public disparagement , Roberson and Luckett once again filed a lawsuit against Destiny 's Child and Sony Music , shortly following the release of This Is the Remix . In June 2002 , remaining cases were settled in court . 
 In late 2000 , Destiny 's Child announced their plan to embark on individual side projects , including releases of solo albums , an idea by their manager . In 2002 , Williams released her solo album , Heart to Yours , a contemporary gospel collection . The album reached number one on the Billboard Top Gospel Albums chart . In the same date Heart to Yours hit stores , Destiny 's Child released their official autobiography , Soul Survivors . Rowland collaborated with hip hop artist Nelly on " Dilemma " , which became a worldwide hit and earned Rowland a Grammy ; she became the first member of Destiny 's Child to have achieved a US number @-@ one single . In the same year , Knowles co @-@ starred with Mike Myers in the box @-@ office hit Austin Powers in Goldmember . She recorded her first solo single , " Work It Out " , for the film 's soundtrack . To capitalize on the success of " Dilemma " , Rowland 's solo debut album Simply Deep was brought forward from its early 2003 release to September 2002 . Rowland 's career took off internationally when Simply Deep hit number one on the UK Albums Chart . In the same year , she made her feature film debut in the horror film Freddy vs. Jason . Meanwhile , Knowles made her second film , " The Fighting Temptations " , and appeared as featured vocalist on her then @-@ boyfriend Jay @-@ Z 's single " ' 03 Bonnie & Clyde " , which paved the way for the release of her debut solo album . 
 As an upshot from the success of " Dilemma " , Knowles ' debut album , Dangerously in Love , was postponed many times until June 2003 . Knowles was considered the most successful among the three solo releases . Dangerously in Love debuted at number one on the Billboard 200 , selling 317 @,@ 000 copies . It yielded the number @-@ one hits " Crazy in Love " , and " Baby Boy " ; and the top @-@ five singles " Me , Myself and I " and " Naughty Girl " . The album was certified 4x platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) . It remains as Knowles ' best @-@ selling album to date , with sales of 4 @.@ 9 million copies in the United States , as of July 2009 . Worldwide , the album has sold more than eleven million copies . Knowles solo debut was well received by critics , earning five Grammy awards in one night for Dangerously in Love , tying the likes of Norah Jones , Lauryn Hill , and Alicia Keys for most Grammys received in one night by a female artist . In November 2003 , Williams appeared as Aida on Broadway . In January 2004 , she released her second gospel album , Do You Know . 
 Dwayne Wiggins , who had produced their first recordings as Destiny 's Child , filed suit in 2002 against his former counsel ( Bloom , <unk> , Diemer & Cook LLP ) seeking $ 15 million in damages for lessening his contractual agreement with the group without his consent , effectively nullifying his original contract that offered Sony Music / Columbia Destiny 's Child 's exclusive recording services for an initial seven years , in exchange for " certain royalties " , instead of royalties only from the first three albums . The case was settled for an undisclosed amount . In June 2003 , Mathew Knowles announced that Destiny 's Child would expand back to a quartet , revealing Knowles ' younger sister , Solange , as the latest addition to the group . Destiny 's Child had previously recorded songs with Solange and shared the stage when she temporarily replaced Rowland after she broke her toes while performing . Their manager , however , said the idea was used to test reactions from the public . In August 2003 , Knowles herself confirmed that her sister would not be joining in the group , and instead promoted Solange 's debut album , Solo Star , released in January 2003 . 
 = = = 2004 – 2006 : Destiny Fulfilled and # 1 's = = = 
 Three years after the hiatus , members of Destiny 's Child reunited to record their fourth and final studio album , Destiny Fulfilled . The album introduces the trio to a harder , " urban " sound , and songs featured are conceptually interrelated . Destiny Fulfilled saw equality in the trio : each member contributed to writing on the majority songs , as well as becoming executive producers aside from their manager . Released on November 15 , 2004 , Destiny Fulfilled failed to top Survivor ; the album reached number two the following week , selling 497 @,@ 000 copies in its first week , compared to 663 @,@ 000 for the previous album . Certified three @-@ time platinum in the United States , it was still one of the best @-@ selling albums of 2005 , selling over eight million copies worldwide ; it pushed the group back into the position of the best @-@ selling female group and American group of the year . Four singles were released from the album : the lead " Lose My Breath " , " Soldier " , " Cater 2 U " and " Girl " ; the first two reached number three in the United States . " Soldier " " Cater 2 U " were certified platinum by the RIAA in 2006 . 
 To promote the album , Destiny 's Child embarked on their worldwide concert tour , Destiny Fulfilled ... and Lovin ' It Tour . On June 11 , 2005 , while at the Palau Sant Jordi in Barcelona , Spain , the group announced before 16 @,@ 000 people their official breakup . Destiny 's Child claimed , however , that naming it Destiny Fulfilled was not a coincidence of sort . Right in the making of the album , they planned to part ways after their fourteen @-@ year career as a group to facilitate their continued pursuit in individual aspirations . Knowles stated that their destinies were already fulfilled . The group exclusively sent a letter to MTV about the decision : 
 We have been working together as Destiny 's Child since we were 9 , and touring together since we were 14 . After a lot of discussion and some deep soul searching , we realized that our current tour has given us the opportunity to leave Destiny 's Child on a high note , united in our friendship and filled with an overwhelming gratitude for our music , our fans , and each other . After all these wonderful years working together , we realized that now is the time to pursue our personal goals and solo efforts in earnest ... No matter what happens , we will always love each other as friends and sisters and will always support each other as artists . We want to thank all of our fans for their incredible love and support and hope to see you all again as we continue fulfilling our destinies . 
 — Destiny 's Child , MTV 
 Destiny 's Child released their greatest hits album , # 1 's , on October 25 , 2005 . The compilation includes their number @-@ one hits including " Independent Woman Part 1 " , " Say My Name " and " Bootylicious " . Three new tracks were recorded for the compilation including " Stand Up for Love " , which was recorded for the theme song to the World Children 's Day , and " Check on It " , a song Knowles recorded for The Pink Panther 's soundtrack . Record producer David Foster , his daughter Amy Foster @-@ Gillies and Knowles wrote " Stand Up for Love " as the anthem to the World Children 's Day , an annual worldwide event to raise awareness and funds for children causes . Over the past three years , more than $ 50 million have been raised to benefit Ronald McDonald House Charities and other children 's organizations . Destiny 's Child lent their voices and support as global ambassadors for the 2005 program . # 1 's was also released as a DualDisc , featuring the same track listing , seven videos of selected songs and a trailer of the concert DVD Destiny 's Child : Live in Atlanta . The DVD was filmed during the Atlanta visit of the Destiny Fulfilled ... And Lovin ' It tour , and was released on March 28 , 2006 . It has been certified platinum by the RIAA , denoting shipments of over one million units . The title of the compilation fueled a ripple as it contained number @-@ one singles , although not exclusively . While the liner notes of the compilation does not present any information regarding commercial performances of the songs featured , writer Keith Caulfield of Billboard magazine suggested that the name could only be " a marketing angle " . Despite this , journalist Chris Harris of MTV said that it " lives up to its name " . 
 = = Disbandment and aftermath = = 
 Destiny 's Child reunited for a farewell performance at the 2006 NBA All @-@ Star Game on February 19 in Houston , Texas ; however , Knowles commented , " It 's the last album , but it 's not the last show . " Their final televised performance was at the Fashion Rocks benefit concert in New York a few days later . On March 28 , 2006 , Destiny 's Child was inducted into the Hollywood Walk of Fame , the <unk> recipient of the coveted recognition . At the 2006 BET Awards , Destiny 's Child won Best Group , a category they also earned in 2005 and 2001 . 
 After their formal disbandment , all members continued on their solo projects including LeToya Luckett , who released her debut solo album , LeToya , in July 2006 , peaking at number @-@ one on the Billboard 200 . Knowles co @-@ starred in the 2006 comedy film The Pink Panther , for which she recorded the number @-@ one single " Check on It " . She landed a role in Dreamgirls , the film adaptation of the 1981 hit Broadway musical about a 1960s singing group loosely based on Motown all @-@ female group The Supremes . In the film , she portrays the Diana Ross @-@ based character Deena Jones . Inspired by her role in the film , she went to crafting her second solo album , aptly titled B 'Day , released on September 4 , 2006 in the United States to coincide her birthday . Knowles ' music video to her single " Get Me Bodied " features Rowland , Williams , and Knowles ' sister Solange . The video was released on the B 'Day Anthology Video Album in April 2007 . Knowles said : " It really sets the tone of the video , because you feel like you 're there for part of the experience . " 
 In 2007 , Rowland released her second solo album , Ms. Kelly . On June 26 , 2007 , the group made a mini @-@ reunion at the 2007 BET Awards . Knowles performed " Get Me Bodied " with special guests Williams , Solange Knowles , and Mo 'Nique . After her performance , Knowles introduced Rowland who performed her single " Like This " with Eve . On the September 2 , 2007 Los Angeles stop of The Beyoncé Experience tour , Knowles sang a snippet of " Survivor " with Rowland and Williams , it was the first time they were singing a song together since the last date on their world tour , Destiny Fulfilled ... And Lovin ' It . The latter two rendered a " Happy Birthday " song to Knowles . The performance was featured in Knowles ' tour DVD , The Beyoncé Experience Live , released on November 20 , 2007 . In spring 2008 Rowland released a repackaged , reworked version of her 2007 album under the title Ms. Kelly Deluxe . This in turn spawned a UK Top 20 single with her newly recorded cover of the Seventies Bobby Womack track " Daylight " , which featured Gym Class Heroes rapper Travis McCoy . Knowles recorded a cover of Billy Joel 's " Honesty " , which was included on a Mathew Knowles / Music World CD released only in Japan towards the end of June 2008 to celebrate the tenth @-@ year anniversary of Destiny 's Child . Williams released her first non @-@ Gospel third solo album , Unexpected , in October 2008 , with several of the tracks boasting an uptempo Euro @-@ dance flavour . The following month , Knowles released her third studio solo album , I Am ... Sasha Fierce . LeToya Luckett released her second album , Lady Love , in the summer of 2009 . Also , that summer Williams made history by becoming the first African @-@ American actress to play murderous chorus @-@ girl Roxie Hart in the London West End run of the stage musical Chicago . In June 2010 , Rowland released " Commander " , the first single from her third album Here I Am . Knowles then released new albums in 2011 , 2013 , 2016 , which were named 4 , Beyoncé and Lemonade respectively . 
 The Associated Press reported in October 2012 that Destiny 's Child was a potential collaborator during Beyoncé 's performance at Super Bowl XLVII , set to take place February 3 , 2013 , following the release of the group 's second compilation album Playlist : The Very Best of Destiny 's Child . It was essentially a re @-@ release of their first with a difference of four songs and an updated track @-@ listing . On January 10 , 2013 , Beyoncé announced that the group would release its third compilation album titled Love Songs later that month on January 29 . This album differs from the first two compilations in that it features mostly album @-@ only selections as well as the newly recorded song " Nuclear " . The next day , Legacy Recordings , which is responsible for the release of Playlist and Love Songs , posted " Nuclear " on the group 's official SoundCloud account , jointly with <unk> , where the song was posted along with a message reading , " Sony Music has exclusively given Mashable the audio for ' Nuclear ' , the first song from Destiny 's Child since the group broke up in 2005 . " During the Super Bowl XLVII halftime show , the members of Destiny 's Child performed " Bootylicious " , " Independent Women " and Knowles ' " Single Ladies " . On April 16 , 2013 it was announced on Destiny 's Child website that a video anthology will be released on June 4 , 2013 titled Destiny 's Child Video Anthology . The anthology consisting of 16 music videos , is the group 's third release through Legacy Recordings . The trio released " Say Yes " in June 2014 , a song credited to Williams , featuring Knowles and Rowland . They performed the song together during the 2015 Stellar Awards . The live version of the song was Mastered for iTunes in April 2015 . 
 = = Members timeline = = 
 = = Artistry = = 
 = = = Style and themes = = = 
 Destiny 's Child recorded R & B songs with styles that encompasses urban , contemporary , and dance @-@ pop . Destiny 's Child revealed that R & B singer Janet Jackson is one of their influences . Ann Powers of The New York Times described Destiny 's Child music as " fresh and emotional ... these ladies have the best mixes , the <unk> samples and especially the most happening beats . " In the same publication , Jon Pareles noted that the sound that defines Destiny 's Child , aside from Knowles ' voice , " is the way its melodies jump in and out of double @-@ time . Above brittle , syncopated rhythm tracks , quickly articulated verses alternate with smoother choruses . " The group usually harmonize their vocals in their songs , especially on the ballads . In most instances of their songs , each member sings one verse and chimes in at the chorus . In Survivor , each members sings lead in the majority of the album : " ... everybody is a part of the music ... Everybody is singing lead on every song , and it 's so great — because now Destiny 's Child is at the point vocally and mentally that it should be at . " Knowles , however , completely led songs like " Brown Eyes " and " Dangerously in Love " . The group explored their lyrics to man @-@ to @-@ woman relationship , and sisterhood and female empowerment anthems . 
 Survivor contains themes interpreted by the public as a reference to the group 's internal conflict . The title track , " Survivor " , which set the theme used throughout the album , features the lyrics " I 'm not gonna blast you on the radio ... I 'm not gonna lie on you or your family ... I 'm not gonna hate you in the magazine " caused LaTavia and LeToya Luckett to file a lawsuit against the group ; the lyrics were perceived to be a violation over their agreement following a settlement in court . In an interview , Knowles commented : " The lyrics to the single ' Survivor ' are Destiny 's Child 's story , because we 've been through a lot , ... We went through our drama with the members ... Any complications we 've had in our 10 @-@ year period of time have made us closer and tighter and better . " In another song called " Fancy " , which contains the lyrics " You always tried to compete with me , girl ... find your own identity " , was interpreted by critic David Browne , in his review of the album for Entertainment Weekly magazine , as a response to the lawsuit . Stephen Thomas Erlewine of AllMusic summarized Survivor as " a determined , <unk> record , intent on proving Destiny 's Child has artistic merit largely because the group survived internal strife . ... It 's a record that tries to be a bold statement of purpose , but winds up feeling forced and artificial . " Despite the albums receiving critical praise , Knowles ' close involvement has occasionally generated criticism . Knowles wrote and co @-@ produced the bulk of Survivor . Browne suggested that her help made Survivor a " premature , but inevitable , growing pains album " . 
 = = = Public image = = = 
 Destiny 's Child were compared to The Supremes , a 1960s American female singing group , with Knowles being compared to Supremes frontwoman Diana Ross ; Knowles , however , has dismissed the notion . Coincidentally , Knowles starred in the film adaptation of the 1981 Broadway musical Dreamgirls as Deena Jones , the front woman of the Dreams , a female singing group based on the Supremes . With Knowles ' wide role assumed in the production of Survivor , Gil Kaufman of MTV noted that " it became clear that Beyoncé was emerging as DC 's unequivocal musical leader and public face " . Her dominance to the creative input in the album made the album " very much her work " . For Lola <unk> of The New York Times , " It 's been a long @-@ held belief in the music industry that Destiny 's Child was little more than a launching pad for Beyoncé Knowles 's inevitable solo career . " 
 In the wake of Knowles ' Dangerously in Love , rumors spread about a possible split of Destiny 's Child after each member had experienced success and had ongoing projects . Comparisons were drawn to Justin Timberlake , who did not return to band ' N Sync after his breakthrough debut solo album , Justified . Rowland responded to such rumors , announcing they were back in the studio together . The group claimed that the reunion was destined to happen and that their affinity to each other kept them cohesive . Margeaux Watson , arts editor at Suede magazine , suggests that " the star does not want to appear disloyal to her former partners , " and called Beyoncé 's decision to return to the group " a charitable one " . Knowles ' mother , Tina , wrote a 2002 @-@ published book , titled Destiny 's Style : Bootylicious Fashion , Beauty and Lifestyle Secrets From Destiny 's Child , an account of how fashion had an impact on Destiny 's Child 's success . 
 Whilst Knowles was compared to Ross , Kelly Rowland perhaps considered to be Destiny 's Child deputy leader has been equated to Mary Wilson , the Supremes 's second lead singer . Wilson declared about their second lead singer <unk> in the groups as " Same as our situation .... " and about the possibility to emerge as solo artist , she says " It 's very difficult , but it can be done . You 've got to really want to give that and that way it will work . " . Rowland performed live with Wilson and Cindy Birdsong of The Supremes at the Motown 45th anniversary , in 2004 . After the international success of her worldwide hit singles " Dilemma " and " Stole " and of her debut album Simply Deep , music critics wrote of Rowland as an emancipated and different artist from Beyoncé , that has established herself as a solo singer and songwriter . In the first three albums of the group , Rowland sang her solo verses and bridges in a lot of songs ( like in the hit singles " Bills , Bills , Bills " , " Independent Woman " , " Survivor " and " Bootylicious " ) , led choruses ( " Say My Name " ) and harmonized Knowles ( " No , No , No " and " Jumpin ' Jumpin ' " ) , but in Destiny Fulfilled she conquered more space in all songs of the album . 
 = = Discography = = 
 Destiny 's Child ( 1998 ) 
 The Writing 's on the Wall ( 1999 ) 
 Survivor ( 2001 ) 
 8 Days of Christmas ( 2001 ) 
 Destiny Fulfilled ( 2004 ) 
 = = Tours = = 
 Headlining 
 1999 European Tour ( 1999 ) 
 2002 World Tour ( 2002 ) 
 Destiny Fulfilled ... and Lovin ' It ( 2005 @-@ 06 ) 
 Co @-@ headlining 
 Total Request Live Tour ( with 3LW , Dream , Jessica Simpson , City High , Eve and Nelly with the St. Lunatics ) ( 2001 ) 
 Opening act 
 SWV World Tour ( opened for SWV ) ( 1996 ) 
 Evolution Tour ( opened for Boyz II Men ) ( 1998 ) 
 FanMail Tour ( opened for TLC ) ( 1999 ) 
 Introducing IMx Tour ( opened for IMx ) ( 2000 ) 
 Christina Aguilera in Concert ( opened for Christina Aguilera ) ( 2000 ) 
 ( You Drive Me ) Crazy Tour ( opened for Britney Spears ) ( 2000 ) 
 = = Solo careers = = 
 The group has sold over 60 million records , but sales can be credited entirely only to Beyoncé and Kelly Rowland , only Destiny 's Child members from its foundation to its disbandment . Original lineup with Roberson and Luckett has sold 25 million records , while the trio lineup with Williams has sold over 35 million copies worldwide . 
 Beyoncé has released seventeen albums ( including six studio albums , four extended plays , four live albums , one soundtracks and two compilation albums ) , seven video albums , sixty @-@ seven singles ( including ten as a featured artist , eight promotional singles and five charity singles ) , fifty @-@ four charted songs on Billboard Hot 100 and fifty @-@ eight music video , gained more than 5 billion views and 10 million subscribers on her VEVO channel , selling over 118 million records worldwide , and a further 60 million with Destiny 's Child . Her biggest hits are Work It Out , 03 Bonnie & Clyde , Crazy in Love , Baby Boy , Naughty Girl , Check on It , Déjà Vu , Irreplaceable , Listen , Beautiful Liar , Until the End of Time , If I Were a Boy , Single Ladies , Diva , Sweet Dreams , Halo , Sweet Dreams , Video Phone , Telephone , Run the World , Best Thing I Never Had , Love on Top , Countdown , XO , Drunk in Love , Partition , 7 / 11 , Formation and Sorry , which Crazy In Love , Baby Boy , Naughty Girl , Check On It , Single Ladies ( Put A Ring On It ) and Telephone reached top 20 on the Billboard Year @-@ End Hot 100 singles Chart in 2003 , 2004 , 2006 , 2009 , 2010 respectively and topped the chart with Irreplaceable in 2007 . She also received a 5 @-@ star album rating from Rolling Stone based on her sixth album Lemonade in 2016 , which only 23 albums received such rating since 2000 . It also makes her the first female African @-@ American solo artist to receive a 5 @-@ star rating from Rolling Stone . 
 She has embarked on seven concert tours , three residency shows , three notable concerts and 37 notable live performances . Her work has earned her several awards and nominations , including 20 Grammy Awards ( she is the most nominated woman in the award 's history also ) , eight Billboard Music Awards , six American Music Awards , and 3 World Music Awards , from almost 600 international awards nomination . Beyoncé also transitioned into acting in several commercials and eight films , including " Austin Powers in Goldmember " , " The Pink Panther " and " Dreamgirls " . She also has its own fashion house , cosmetics and fragrances . 
 Kelly Rowland has released nine albums ( including four studio albums , two extended plays , and three compilation albums ) , one video album , forty @-@ three singles ( including nineteen as a featured artist and five promotional singles ) , four charted songs , forty @-@ nine music video and two workout DVDs , selling over 27 million records worldwide , and a further 60 million with Destiny 's Child . In her solo career , she has also reached 742 million views on YouTube , combining her VEVO channel with her other videos as a solo lead and featuring singer . Her biggest hits are Dilemma , Stole , Can 't Nobody , Train on a Track , Here We Go , Like This , Work , Daylight , Breathe Gentle , When Love Takes Over , Commander , Invincible , Motivation , What a Feeling , Down for Whatever , Neva End , Kisses Down Low and One Life , which Dilemma reached No.4 on the Billboard Year @-@ End Hot 100 singles Chart in 2002 and No.11 on Billboard Decade @-@ End Hot 100 Singles Chart , while Motivation peaked at <unk> in 2011 's Year @-@ End Chart . She has embarked on six concert tours and 39 notable live performances . Her work has earned her several awards and nominations , including 4 Grammy Awards , one Billboard Music Awards , one International Dance Music Awards , and one Soul Train Music Awards , winning in total 41 international awards from 88 worldwide nomination as a solo artist . Rowland also transitioned into acting in several commercials , seventeen telefilms and six films , including " Freddy Vs . Jason " and " The Seat Filler " . She also worked as a television personality , in seven television programs , including the English and American version of " The X @-@ Factor " . 
 Michelle Williams has released five albums ( including four studio albums and one compilation albums ) , sixteen singles ( including three as a featured artist and three promotional singles ) , one charted song and fourteen music video . As a member of Destiny 's Child she has sold over 35 million records worldwide . Her biggest hits are Heard a Word , Do You Know , We Break The Dawn , The Greatest , Hello Heartbreak , Waiting on You , If We Had Your Eyes and Say Yes . She has embarked on several notable live performances and promotional concerts . Her work has earned her several awards and nominations , including one Grammy Award , one MOBO Awards , one Stellar Awards , and one Gospel Touch Music Awards , winning in total 10 international awards from 28 worldwide nomination as a solo artist . Williams also transitioned into theater acting , in hit shows and musicals like " Aida " , " The Color Purple " , " Chicago " , " What My Husband Doesn 't Know " and " Fela ! " . She also worked as actress roles and TV personality in several commercials and eleven TV shows and telefilms , including " Strictly Come Dancing " . 
 LeToya Luckett has released two studio albums ( and a third upcoming studio album ) , fifteen singles ( including four as a featured artist and four promotional singles ) and nine music video . As a member of Destiny 's Child she has sold 25 million records worldwide . Her biggest hits are Torn , She Don 't , Not Anymore , She Ain 't Got ... and Regret . She has embarked on several notable live performances and promotional concerts . Her work has earned her several awards and nominations , including 2 Grammy Award , one Urban Music Awards and one <unk> Music Awards , winning in total 4 international awards from 8 worldwide nomination as a solo artist . Luckett also transitioned into acting , in eleven films , including " Preacher 's Kid " , " Killers " and " From the Rough " , and seven television film and TV series , including " Treme " and " Single Ladies " . 
 = = = Albums and singles certifications = = = 
 = Tameside = 
 The Metropolitan Borough of Tameside is a metropolitan borough of Greater Manchester in North West England . It is named after the River Tame , which flows through the borough and spans the towns of Ashton @-@ under @-@ Lyne , Audenshaw , Denton , Droylsden , Dukinfield , Hyde , Mossley , Longdendale and Stalybridge . Its western border is approximately 4 miles ( 6 @.@ 4 km ) east of Manchester city centre . It borders Derbyshire to the east , the Metropolitan Borough of Oldham to the north , the Metropolitan Borough of Stockport to the south , and the City of Manchester to the west . As of 2011 the overall population was 219 @,@ 324 . 
 The history of the area extends back to the Stone Age . There are over 300 listed buildings in Tameside and three Scheduled Ancient Monuments , which includes a castle of national importance . The settlements in Tameside were small townships centred on agriculture until the advent of the Industrial Revolution . The towns of the borough grew and became involved in the cotton industry , which dominated the local economy . The current borough was created in 1974 as part of the provisions of the Local Government Act 1972 . Since then the area has been administered by Tameside Borough Council , which has been judged by the Audit Commission to be " performing strongly " . 
 = = History = = 
 The history of the area stretches back up to 10 @,@ 000 years ; there are 22 Mesolithic sites in Tameside , the oldest dating to around 8 @,@ 000 BC ; 21 of the 22 sites are in the hilly uplands in the north east of the borough . Evidence of Neolithic and Bronze Age activity is more limited in the borough , although the Bronze Age Stalybridge Cairn is the most complete prehistoric funerary monument in the borough . The people in the area changed from hunter @-@ gatherers to farmers around 2500 BC – 1500 BC due to climate change . Werneth Low is the most likely Iron Age farmstead site in the borough , probably dating to the late 1st millennium BC . Before the Roman conquest of Britain in the 1st century AD , the area was probably part of the territory of the Brigantes , the Celtic tribe controlling most of what is now north west England . 
 The area came under control of the Roman Empire in the second half of the 1st century . Roads through the area were established from Ardotalia fort in Derbyshire to Mamucium ( Manchester ) west of Tameside and Castleshaw Roman fort in the north . Romano @-@ British finds in the borough include a bog body in Ashton Moss , occupation sites at Werneth Low , Harridge Pike , Roe Cross , and Mottram . A 4th @-@ century coin hoard was found in Denton and is one of only four hoards from the 4th century in the Mersey basin . A Byzantine coin from the 6th or 7th centuries , also found in Denton , indicates continued or renewed occupation once the Romans left Britain in the early 5th century . 
 Nico Ditch , an earthwork stretching from Stretford to Ashton @-@ under @-@ Lyne , is evidence of Anglo @-@ Saxon activity in Tameside . It was probably dug between the 7th and 9th centuries and may have been used as a boundary between the kingdoms of Mercia and Northumbria . Further evidence of Anglo @-@ Saxon era activity in Tameside comes from the derivation of settlement names from Old English such as -tun , meaning farmstead , and leah meaning clearing . 
 According to the Domesday Survey of 1086 , Tameside was divided into four manors , those of Tintwistle , Hollingworth , Werneth , and Mottram . The land east or the River Tame was in the Hundred of <unk> in Cheshire and held by the Earl of Chester while to the west of the river was in the Hundred of Salford under Roger de Poitevin . These manors were divided to create further manors , so that by the 13th century most of them were owned by local families and remained in the hands of the same families until the 16th century . <unk> continued as the main for of administration and governance until the mid @-@ 19th century . 
 The Industrial Revolution had a significant impact on Tameside ; the area , whose main towns had previously been Ashton @-@ under @-@ Lyne and Mottram @-@ in @-@ Longdendale , was transformed from a collection of the rural , farming communities into mill towns . The towns of Ashton @-@ under @-@ Lyne , Dukinfield , Hyde , Mossley and Stalybridge have been described as " amongst the most famous mills towns in the North West " . With only a brief interruption for the Lancashire Cotton Famine of 1861 to 1865 , factories producing and processing textiles were the main industry in Tameside from the late @-@ 18th century until the mid @-@ 20th century . 
 In 1964 , Dukinfield Borough Council convened a meeting of neighbouring local authorities with the aim of formulating a policy of cross @-@ authority social improvement for the districts in the Tame Valley . Following deindustrialisation , the area had suffered " gross @-@ neglect " and had large areas of housing unsuitable for human habitation . This joint enterprise comprised the nine districts that would become Tameside ten years later , plus the County Borough of Stockport . This collective agreed on creating " a linear park in the valley [ of the River Tame ] for the use of the townspeople and as a major recreational resource within the Manchester metropolis " . 
 Tameside was created on 1 April 1974 , by the Local Government Act 1972 as one of the ten metropolitan districts of Greater Manchester . It took over the local government functions of nine districts which were formerly in the administrative counties of Lancashire and of Cheshire . In 1986 Tameside effectively became a unitary authority with the abolition of the Greater Manchester County Council . 
 A name for the metropolitan borough proved problematic . The Redcliffe @-@ Maud Report had used the name Ashton @-@ Hyde , but double @-@ barrelled names were prohibited for the new districts . Had Ashton @-@ under @-@ Lyne been a county borough , or had had a less common name , " it might have been chosen as the new name " for the new district . The eight other towns objected , adamant that " a new name should be found " . Thirty suggestions were put forward , including <unk> , Clarendon , Hartshead , <unk> , Tame , <unk> , and West Pennine , with Hartshead ( with reference to Hartshead Pike ) being the most popular throughout most of the consultation period . However , the name Tameside ( with reference to the River Tame , but a concocted name with no historical basis ) won 15 votes to Hartshead 's 10 in a final stage of voting . 
 The borough underwent a boundary review in 2002 . The review altered the areas covered by some wards to ensure councillors represented roughly equal numbers . Between 12 October 2006 – 8 January 2007 , a dispersal order was enforced in the Dukinfield and Newton Hyde areas of the borough . The move was designed to reduce anti @-@ social behaviour . A representative of Stalybridge police post said " Due to the serious nature of recent incidents in Dukinfield and Newton Hyde involving a number of confrontations between large groups of youths , the decision has been made to introduce a Dispersal Order " . 
 = = Geography = = 
 Tameside is bordered by the metropolitan boroughs of Stockport and Oldham to the south and north respectively , the city of Manchester to the west and the borough of High Peak in Derbyshire to the east . Tameside features flat lowlands in the west and highlands in the east where the western edge of the Pennines encroaches on the borough . The hills in the east include Hartshead Pike and Werneth Low which is also a country park . As well as coal measures running north @-@ south through the centre of the borough , there are areas of peat in the north east and there are large areas of boulder clay all over Tameside . Ashton Moss is a peat bog covering about 107 hectares ( 260 acres ) and Denton Moor is an area of about 81 hectares ( 200 acres ) of peat . 
 Waterways in Tameside include the rivers Medlock and Etherow , which form parts of Tameside 's western and eastern boundaries respectively , and the River Tame crosses the borough north to south , giving Tameside its name . The Ashton Canal , the Hollinwood Branch Canal , the Huddersfield Narrow Canal , and the Peak Forest Canal all run through the borough . There are also several reservoirs , including the Audenshaw Reservoirs . Greenspace accounts for 63 @.@ 5 % of the Tameside 's total area , domestic buildings and gardens comprise 17 @.@ 4 % , and the rest is made up of roads and non @-@ domestic buildings . 
 Localities within the boundaries of Tameside include : Ashton @-@ under @-@ Lyne , Audenshaw , Broadbottom , Carrbrook , Copley , Denton , Droylsden , Dukinfield , Flowery Field , Gee Cross , Godley , Godley Green , Guide Bridge , Hartshead Green , Hattersley , Haughton Green , Hazelhurst , <unk> , Hollingworth , Hyde , <unk> Green , <unk> , Millbrook , Mossley , Mottram in Longdendale , Newton , Park Bridge , Roe Cross , Stalybridge , <unk> , and Woolley Bridge . 
 = = Governance = = 
 = = = Parliamentary constituencies = = = 
 The residents of the Tameside are represented in the United Kingdom Parliament by members of Parliament ( MPs ) for three constituencies . Ashton @-@ under @-@ Lyne , which also includes parts of the Metropolitan Borough of Oldham , is represented by Angela Rayner ( Labour ) . Denton and Reddish , which also covers parts of the Metropolitan Borough of Stockport , is represented by Andrew Gwynne ( Labour ) . Stalybridge and Hyde , which is entirely within Tameside , is represented by Jonathan Reynolds ( Labour ) . Tameside is part of the North West England constituency in the European Parliament . North West England elects eight MEPs , as at 2014 made up of three Labour members , three members of the United Kingdom Independence Party , and two Conservatives . 
 = = = Council = = = 
 Labour retained control of Tameside Council at the 2015 local elections . It holds 52 seats and the Conservatives hold the other five . The Executive Leader of the Council is Cllr Kieran Quinn . 
 Tameside Borough Council was assessed by the Audit Commission and judged to be " improving strongly " in providing services for local people . Overall the council was awarded " four star " status meaning it was " performing strongly " and " well above minimum requirements " , putting it in the top 38 % of all local authorities . 
 Civil parishes form the bottom tier of local government ; the parish councils are involved in planning , management of town and parish centres , and promoting tourism . Mossley is the only civil parish in Tameside . In 2001 9 @,@ 856 people lived there , 4 @.@ 6 % of the borough 's population . 
 Before becoming a civil parish , Mossley was a municipal borough . The unparished areas are : Ashton @-@ under @-@ Lyne ( municipal borough ) , Audenshaw ( urban district ) , Denton ( urban district ) , Droylsden ( urban district ) , Dukinfield ( municipal borough ) , Hyde ( municipal borough ) , Longdendale ( urban district ) , and Stalybridge ( municipal borough ) . The status of each area before 1974 is shown in brackets . An urban district was a type of local government district which covered an urbanised area . Ashton @-@ under @-@ Lyne , Audenshaw , Denton , Droylsden , and Mossley were previously in Lancashire . Dukinfield , Hyde , Longdendale , and Stalybridge were in Cheshire . 
 = = Demography = = 
 At the 2001 UK census , the Metropolitan Borough of Tameside had a total population of 213 @,@ 043 . Of the 89 @,@ 981 households in Tameside , 35 @.@ 7 % were married couples living together , 31 @.@ 0 % were one @-@ person households , 7 @.@ 8 % were co @-@ habiting couples and 9 @.@ 3 % were lone parents , following a similar trend to the rest of England . 
 The population density was 2 @,@ 065 / km2 ( 5 @,@ 350 / sq mi ) and for every 100 females , there were 94 @.@ 2 males . Of those aged 16 – 74 in Tameside , 35 @.@ 2 % had no academic qualifications , significantly higher than 28 @.@ 9 % in all of England . 4 @.@ 8 % of Tameside 's residents were born outside the United Kingdom , significantly lower than the national average of 9 @.@ 2 % . The largest minority group was Asian , at 4 @.@ 0 % of the population . 
 In 1841 , 8 @.@ 5 % of Tameside 's population was middle class compared to 14 % in England and Wales ; this increased to 13 @.@ 1 % in 1931 ( 15 % nationally ) and 37 @.@ 0 % in 2001 ( 48 % nationally ) . From 1841 to 1991 , the working class population of Tameside and across the country was in decline , falling steadily from 58 @.@ 0 % ( 36 % nationally ) to 22 @.@ 8 % in 1991 ( 21 % nationally ) . It has since increased slightly , up to 32 @.@ 9 % ( 26 % nationwide ) . The rest of the population was made up of clerical workers and skilled manual workers . 
 = = = Population change = = = 
 Although Tameside has only existed as a Metropolitan Borough since 1974 , the table below details the population change – including the percentage change since the last census 10 years earlier – in the area since 1801 using figures from the towns , villages , and civil parishes that would later become constituent parts of Tameside . 
 = = = Religion = = = 
 At the 2001 UK census , 75 @.@ 5 % of Tameside 's residents reported themselves as being Christian , 2 @.@ 5 % Muslim , 1 @.@ 4 % Hindu , and 0 @.@ 1 % Buddhist . 12 @.@ 1 % had no religion , 0 @.@ 2 % had an alternative religion and 8 @.@ 1 % did not state their religion . 
 Tameside is covered by the Roman Catholic dioceses of Shrewsbury and Salford , and the Church of England dioceses of Manchester and Chester . 
 There are two Grade I listed churches in Tameside , St Anne 's Church , in Haughton , was built in 1881 in the Gothic Revival style by J Medland Taylor . St Michael and All Angels ' Church in Ashton @-@ under @-@ Lyne is a 15th @-@ century parish church which was virtually rebuilt in the 19th century . A church on the site dates back to at least 1262 . St Lawrence 's Church , in Denton , is a Grade II * listed building and a timber framed church . It was remodelled by J Medland Taylor in 1872 . 
 = = Economy = = 
 <unk> is currently undergoing a huge transformation through the Vision Tameside project which should be completed by 2018 . 
 Vision Tameside – a partnership between Tameside council and Tameside College – is an ambitious redevelopment strategy to bring greater economic prosperity and transform learning and skills in the borough . 
 It will deliver an exciting future for Tameside by attracting new businesses and creating jobs and opportunities for residents . Central to the project is a transformational three @-@ phase development of the Tameside College campus . 
 Three advanced learning centres are being built in central Ashton town and at the college ’ s Beaufort Road home . The new learning and skills centres will offer state @-@ of @-@ the @-@ art facilities to equip them for the challenges of a changing economy requiring a highly skilled workforce . 
 Phase one comprises two sites . The new Clarendon Sixth Form College , which began taking students in the autumn of 2015 , was officially opened by Coronation Street actress Brooke Vincent on 9 March 2016 . The college theatre was named in Brooke ’ s honour . 
 An advanced technologies centre is being built on Stamford Street , Ashton . When it opens in 2017 it will provide a cutting @-@ edge learning facility to support the growth of advanced engineering and technology in Tameside . 
 Employers and students have been involved in the design of the workshop and laboratory spaces and the new equipment required to ensure Tameside retains its credentials as the manufacturing hub of Greater Manchester . 
 Phase two of <unk> will create an advanced skills centre for Tameside College alongside a new joint service centre for Tameside Council and partners . The skills centre will provide first @-@ class facilities for students studying a wide range of vocational subjects including hair and beauty , hospitality and catering , bakery and confectionery , travel and tourism and business skills . 
 Tameside Council ’ s joint public @-@ service centre will be a more cost @-@ effective , energy @-@ efficient and customer @-@ friendly building than the rambling Tameside Administrative Centre it is replacing . It will generate considerable cost savings and provide better access to services . 
 Ashton ’ s Victorian town hall and the old water board offices , which are both listed buildings , are being retained . Work should be completed in early 2018 . 
 Phase three will ensure the Beaufort Road campus offers learners modern , inspirational learning spaces . Alongside the new advanced technologies centre , they will have access to facilities for engineering , construction and the built environment , motor @-@ vehicle , sport and public services and health and social care provision 
 Provision for students with severe learning difficulties and / or disabilities will continue to be based at the Beaufort Road where a new sports academy was opened in February , 2015 , by former Manchester United and England footballer Paul Scholes . 
 In addition , Ashton ’ s old public baths , which lay derelict for many years , has been reborn as a high @-@ tech business incubator with help from the European Regional Development Fund and the Heritage Lottery Fund . 
 Work at the mid @-@ Victorian building , which closed as a swimming baths in 1975 , has involved cleaning , repairs and the replacement of external stonework . The new office space is housed inside a free @-@ standing timber @-@ clad pod within the former main pool . 
 The incubator has been established to support innovative set @-@ ups , predominantly in the creative , media and digital sectors . Such businesses have high growth potential and will bolster the competitiveness of the borough ’ s economy . 
 At the same time , Ashton ’ s award @-@ winning market has been refurbished with the installation of kiosks alongside traditional stalls . 
 The Ashton Arcades shopping centre opened in 1995 . The centre covers 13 @,@ 000 square metres ( 140 @,@ 000 sq ft ) on two floors with over 40 shops . In 2006 , after failing twice to gain permission to develop a site in the neighbouring borough of Stockport , IKEA announced plans to build its first town centre @-@ store in Ashton @-@ under @-@ Lyne . The store is expected to create 500 new jobs as well as attract other businesses to the area . The store opened on 19 October 2006 and covers 27 @,@ 500 square metres ( 296 @,@ 000 sq ft ) At the time of its creation , the store was the tallest in Britain . 
 Life science industries have been identified as growth industries in Greater Manchester and are concentrated in Oldham and Tameside . 
 Average house prices in Tameside are the 7th highest out of the ten metropolitan boroughs in Greater Manchester , 11 @.@ 9 % below the average for the county . 
 At the 2001 UK census , Tameside had 152 @,@ 313 residents aged 16 to 74 . 2 @.@ 0 % of these people were students with jobs , 5 @.@ 7 % looking after home or family , 7 @.@ 9 % permanently sick or disabled and 3 @.@ 2 % economically inactive for other reasons . 
 In 2001 , of 96 @,@ 255 residents of Tameside in employment , the industry of employment was 21 @.@ 7 % manufacturing , 10 @.@ 4 % health and social work , 18 @.@ 2 % retail and wholesale , 10 @.@ 2 % property and business services , 7 @.@ 2 % construction , 6 @.@ 8 % transport and communications , 6 @.@ 4 % education , 5 @.@ 3 % public administration and defence , 4 @.@ 2 % finance , 4 @.@ 0 % hotels and restaurants , 0 @.@ 9 % energy and water supply , 0 @.@ 5 % agriculture , and 4 @.@ 0 % other . This was roughly in line with national figures , except for the proportion of jobs in agriculture which is less than half the national average , and property which was also below the national average . Manufacturing was 50 % more than the national average . 
 = = Landmarks = = 
 In February 2001 , Tameside had one Grade I listed buildings , 19 Grade II * , and 289 Grade II . The number of Grade I listed buildings in Tameside has increased to three , these are St Anne 's Church in Haughton ; St Michael and All Angels ' Church in Ashton @-@ under @-@ Lyne ; and Fairbottom Farm Barn , a 17th @-@ century farm building . In Tameside are three of Greater Manchester 's Sites of Special Scientific Interest , Boar Flat , part of Dark Peak , the Hollinwood Branch Canal and the Huddersfield Narrow Canal . The Huddersfield Narrow Canal runs for 20 miles ( 32 km ) from Huddersfield to Ashton @-@ under @-@ Lyne ; it is protected for its biological interest , and is " the best example of a flowing eutrophic water system in Greater Manchester " . 
 There are three Scheduled Ancient Monuments in the borough , a Bronze Age cairn in Stalybridge , Buckton Castle , and Nico Ditch . Buckton Castle is a 12th @-@ century ringwork near Carrbrook . It was probably built for William de Neville and was the centre of lordship of Longdendale . The castle lay ruinous by 1360 , and has been described as " one of England 's most important castles " . Nico Ditch is an earthwork running from Ashton @-@ under @-@ Lyne in the east to Stretford in the west , in the borough of Trafford . It survives to a depth of 1 @.@ 5 metres ( 4 @.@ 9 ft ) in some places and is up to 4 metres ( 13 ft ) wide . 
 Tameside has nine conservation areas : Ashton and Stalybridge town centres ; Carrbrook , Copley St.Paul 's , and Millbrook in Stalybridge ; Fairfield in Droylsden ; Mottram @-@ in @-@ Longdendale ; Portland Basin ; and <unk> 's in Haughton . 
 The Museum of the Manchester Regiment is housed in Ashton @-@ under @-@ Lyne 's town hall . The museum displays relics related to the Manchester Regiment including five Victoria Crosses awarded to members of the regiment . Park Bridge Heritage Centre in the Medlock Valley is a museum dedicated to the history of the settlement of Park Bridge and its industry . Broad Mills Heritage Site , in Broadbottom , preserves the remains of an early 19th @-@ century textile works . Art galleries in the borough include Astley Cheetham Art Gallery in Stalybridge and Central Art Gallery in Ashton @-@ under @-@ Lyne . 
 Tameside has eight designated Local Nature Reserves which are Knott Hill , Hollinwood Branch Canal , Great Wood , Haughton Dale , <unk> and Hardy Woods , Castle Clough and <unk> Dale , Hurst Clough and Rocher Vale . Four more are to be designated . 
 = = Education = = 
 Since 2007 Tameside ’ s schools have been transformed as the result of multimillion @-@ pound investment . 
 Virtually every high school has been replaced or remodelled . Eighteen primary schools have been rebuilt in recent years and another 20 have undergone major remodelling . In addition , the borough has opened the first entirely new schools in its history : Inspire Academy on Mossley Road , Ashton , and Discovery Academy off Porlock Avenue , Hattersley . Both offer 420 places plus a nursery . 
 In 2015 , <unk> results improved more in Tameside than anywhere else in the North West , and the borough was one of the top 10 nationally for the most improved results . 
 At Key Stage 4 57 @.@ 3 % of pupils in the borough achieved five or more A * to C grades including English and maths – a 3 @.@ 6 % improvement on the previous year . 
 In terms of expected progress in English , 73 % of pupils make expected progress in Tameside compared to 71 % nationally . In maths 66 % of pupils make expected progress , in line with the national average of 67 % . 
 At Key Stage 2 , 80 % of pupils in Tameside achieved level 4 + in reading , writing and maths combined , sustaining the borough ’ s 6 % improvement in results from 2013 to 2014 . 
 = = Transport = = 
 Work on an extension of the Manchester Metrolink costing £ 260 million began in 2008 . Trams began to run to Droylsden in February , 2013 , and to Ashton in September , 2013 . 
 Ashton Bus Station is being converted into a state @-@ of @-@ the @-@ art transport interchange . A covered concourse will replace the five island platforms , and the site will be linked to the Metrolink terminus . It will have new waiting areas , bicycle parking , and better access to travel information and tickets . Improved pedestrian routes will take people into the town centre . Construction is expected to take two years and the interchange should be open by the end of 2018 . 
 The new Hyde Bus Station opened on August 23 , 2007 , having cost £ 3 @.@ 7 million . 
 Tameside Council is responsible for maintaining the public rights of way in the borough , including 145 mi ( 233 km ) of footpaths . In 2014 , the Government finally gave the go @-@ ahead to create a bypass between the M67 and the A628 as part of a £ 15 billion national transport spending plan . 
 The borough is served by 13 railway stations . Denton railway station is on the Stockport to Stalybridge Line . Fairfield railway station , Guide Bridge railway station , Hyde Central railway station , and Hyde North railway station are all on the Hope Valley Line between Sheffield and Manchester . Broadbottom railway station , Flowery Field railway station , Godley railway station , Guide Bridge railway station , Hattersley railway station , and Newton for Hyde railway station are served by the Glossop Line between Glossop and Manchester . Ashton @-@ under @-@ Lyne railway station , Mossley railway station , and Stalybridge railway station are on the Huddersfield Line . 
 = = Twin towns = = 
