 The Metropolitan Borough of Tameside has formal twinning links with places in China , France and Germany . ( The arrangement with Mutare , Zimbabwe has been suspended due to the political unrest in that country . ) 
 Some localities were originally twinned with a place within the Metropolitan Borough prior to its creation in 1974 . In the list below the brackets show where the place was twinned with before 1974 and since when . 
 <unk> , China , ( Tameside 1995 ) 
 Colmar , France , ( Municipal Borough of Hyde , 1963 ) 
 <unk> , France ( Municipal Borough of Dukinfield , 1958 ) 
 Chaumont , France , ( Municipal Borough of Ashton @-@ under @-@ Lyne , 1956 ) 
 Montigny @-@ le @-@ Bretonneux , France , and <unk> , Germany ( Denton Town Twinning Association , 1992 and 2012 ) 
 <unk> , France , ( Droylsden Town Twinning Association , 1983 ) 
 Armentières , France , ( Municipal Borough of Stalybridge , 1955 ) 
 Hem , France , ( Municipal Borough of Mossley , 1972 ) 
 <unk> , Germany , ( Longdendale Urban District , 1974 ) 
 = = = Video clips = = = 
 Tameside MBC YouTube channel 
 = Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency = 
 The Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency ( MIGA ) is an international financial institution which offers political risk insurance and credit enhancement guarantees . Such guarantees help investors protect foreign direct investments against political and non @-@ commercial risks in developing countries . MIGA is a member of the World Bank Group and is headquartered in Washington , D.C. , United States . It was established in 1988 as an investment insurance facility to encourage confident investment in developing countries . MIGA 's stated mission is " to promote foreign direct investment into developing countries to support economic growth , reduce poverty , and improve people 's lives " . It targets projects that endeavor to create new jobs , develop infrastructure , generate new tax revenues , and take advantage of natural resources through sustainable policies and programs . 
 MIGA is owned and governed by its member states , but has its own executive leadership and staff which carry out its daily operations . Its shareholders are member governments which provide paid @-@ in capital and have the right to vote on its matters . It insures long @-@ term debt and equity investments as well as other assets and contracts with long @-@ term periods . The agency is assessed by the World Bank 's Independent Evaluation Group each year . 
 = = History = = 
 In September 1985 , the Board of Governors of the World Bank endorsed the Convention establishing the Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency . MIGA was established and became operational on April 12 , 1988 under the leadership of then @-@ Executive Vice President Yoshio Terasawa , becoming the fifth member institution of the World Bank Group . MIGA initially had $ 1 billion ( $ 1 @.@ 94 billion in 2012 dollars ) in capital and 29 member states . All members of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development ( IBRD ) were eligible to become members of the agency . MIGA was established as an effort to complement existing sources of non @-@ commercial risk insurance for investments in developing countries , and thereby improve investor confidence . The agency 's mandate to be apolitical has been said to be an advantage over private and national risk insurance markets . By serving as a multilateral guarantor , the agency reduces the likelihood of confrontations among the investor 's country and the host country . 
 MIGA 's inaugural investment guarantees were issued in 1990 to cover $ 1 @.@ 04 billion ( $ 1 @.@ 83 billion in 2012 dollars ) worth of foreign direct investment ( FDI ) comprising four individual projects . The agency also issued its first reinsurance contracts signed in collaboration with Export Development Canada and the United States ' Overseas Private Investment Corporation ( <unk> ) . That same year , MIGA held a conference in Ghana to promote investment . The agency joined the Berne Union , an international community of export credit and investment insurance providers in 1994 . In 1997 , MIGA issued the inaugural contract under its Cooperative Underwriting Program to support an energy project in Indonesia . In collaboration with the European Union Investment Trust Fund for Bosnia and Herzegovina , the agency set up a fund for investment guarantees amounting to $ 12 million ( $ 17 million in 2012 dollars ) . The agency also established the West Bank and Gaza Investment Guarantee Trust Fund with a capacity of $ 20 million ( $ 29 million in 2012 dollars ) . In 1998 the Council of Governors of MIGA adopted a resolution establishing a general capital increase of $ 850 million ( $ 1 @.@ 2 billion in 2012 dollars ) , and transferring a grant of $ 150 million ( $ 212 million in 2012 dollars ) from the IBRD . MIGA exceeded $ 1 billion ( $ 1 @.@ 4 billion in 2012 dollars ) in investment guarantees within a single year for the first time in 1999 . The agency also approved an Environmental Assessment and Disclosure Policy and began attempting to implement such standards for new projects . 
 In 2000 MIGA paid its first insurance claim since the agency 's founding . In 2001 MIGA 's issuance of new investment guarantees grew to $ 2 billion . The agency launched its Small Investment Program in 2005 in an effort to promote investment among small and medium enterprises . That same year , MIGA set up its Afghanistan Investment Guarantee Facility in an effort to promote FDI into Afghanistan . In 2007 MIGA issued investment guarantees for a Djibouti port , marking its first support in the form of Islamic finance . The agency also launched PRI @-@ <unk> as a portal for information on political risk management and investment insurance , which also contains its FDI information services . In 2009 , the Board of Directors enacted changes to MIGA 's operating procedures and authorized coverage for default of sovereign financial obligations . The agency also launched an annual publication titled World Investment and Political Risk which reports on trends in worldwide investment and corporate perceptions of prospects and risk , as well as shifts in the political risk insurance industry . 
 Although once dominated by large public and multilateral underwriters , private insurance firms accounted for approximately half of the political risk insurance market in 2007 . As a result , MIGA has paid closer attention to exceptionally risky countries that have little appeal to foreign investors , and has insured projects among nations in the global south . MIGA conducted a survey in 2010 which showed that political risk is the most important deterrent of long @-@ term foreign direct investment in developing countries , even more than economic uncertainty and poor public infrastructure . MIGA 's Council of Governors amended the agency 's convention in 2010 in an attempt to improve the organization 's effectiveness by expanding the range of investments eligible for political risk insurance . 
 = = Governance = = 
 MIGA is governed by its Council of Governors which represents its member countries . The Council of Governors holds corporate authority , but primarily delegates such powers to MIGA 's Board of Directors . The Board of Directors consists of 25 directors and votes on matters brought before MIGA . Each director 's vote is weighted in accordance with the total share capital of the member nations that director represents . MIGA 's board is stationed at its Washington , D.C. headquarters where it meets regularly and oversees the agency 's activities . The agency 's Executive Vice President directs its overall strategy and manages its daily operations . As of 15 July 2013 , Keiko Honda serves as Executive Vice President of MIGA . 
 = = Membership = = 
 MIGA is owned by its 181 member governments , consisting of 156 developing and 25 industrialized countries . The members are composed of 180 United Nations member states plus Kosovo . Membership in MIGA is available only to countries who are members of the World Bank , particularly the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development . 
 As of 2015 , the seven World Bank member states that are not MIGA members are Brunei , Kiribati , Marshall Islands , San Marino , Somalia , Tonga , and Tuvalu . ( The UN states that are non @-@ members of the World Bank , and thus MIGA , are Andorra , Cuba , Liechtenstein , Monaco , Nauru , and North Korea . ) The Holy See and Palestine are also non @-@ MIGA members . Bhutan is the most recent country to have joined MIGA , having done so in December 2014 . 
 = = Investment guarantees = = 
 MIGA offers insurance to cover five types of non @-@ commercial risks : currency <unk> and transfer restriction ; government expropriation ; war , terrorism , and civil disturbance ; breaches of contract ; and the non @-@ honoring of financial obligations . MIGA will cover investments such as equity , loans , shareholder loans , and shareholder loan guarantees . The agency may also insure investments such as management contracts , asset securitization , bonds , leasing activities , franchise agreements , and license agreements . The agency generally offers insurance coverage lasting up to 15 years with a possible five @-@ year extension depending on a given project 's nature and circumstances . When an event occurs that is protected by the insurance , MIGA can exercise the investor 's rights against the host country through <unk> to recover expenses associated with covering the claim . However , the agency 's convention does not require member governments to treat foreign investments in any special way . As a multilateral institution , MIGA is also in a position to attempt to sort out potential disputes before they ever turn into insurance claims . 
 The agency 's Small Investment Program aims to promote FDI into specifically small and medium enterprises . The program offers standard MIGA coverage types except it does not cover breaches of contract . Under the program , small and medium enterprises may take advantage of discounted insurance premiums and no application fees , which are not available to larger investors . To qualify an investment for the Small Investment Program , MIGA defines small and medium enterprise projects as having 300 or fewer employees , total assets not to exceed $ 15 million and annual revenues not to exceed $ 15 million . MIGA limits the request amount for the investment guarantee to $ 10 million , and will guarantee only up to 10 years with a possible 5 @-@ year extension . 
 MIGA 's annual reports offer an overview of the agency 's business . 
 = = Financial performance = = 
 MIGA prepares consolidated financial statements in accordance with United States GAAP which are audited by KPMG . 
 = William Burges = 
 William Burges ( / <unk> / ; 2 December 1827 – 20 April 1881 ) was an English architect and designer . Among the greatest of the Victorian art @-@ architects , he sought in his work to escape from both nineteenth @-@ century industrialisation and the Neoclassical architectural style and re @-@ establish the architectural and social values of a utopian medieval England . Burges stands within the tradition of the Gothic Revival , his works echoing those of the Pre @-@ Raphaelites and heralding those of the Arts and Crafts movement . 
 Burges 's career was short but illustrious ; he won his first major commission for Saint Fin Barre 's Cathedral in Cork in 1863 , when he was 35 , and he died , in 1881 , at his Kensington home , The Tower House , aged only 53 . His architectural output was small but varied . Working with a long @-@ standing team of craftsmen , he built churches , a cathedral , a warehouse , a university , a school , houses and castles . Burges 's most notable works are Cardiff Castle , constructed between 1866 and 1928 , and Castell Coch ( 1872 – 91 ) , both of which were built for John Crichton @-@ Stuart , 3rd Marquess of Bute . Other significant buildings include Gayhurst House , Buckinghamshire ( 1858 – 65 ) , Knightshayes Court ( 1867 – 74 ) , the Church of Christ the Consoler ( 1870 – 76 ) , St Mary 's , Studley Royal ( 1870 – 78 ) in Yorkshire , and Park House , Cardiff ( 1871 – 80 ) . 
 Many of his designs were never executed or were subsequently demolished or altered . His competition entries for cathedrals at Lille ( 1854 ) , Adelaide ( 1856 ) , Colombo , Brisbane ( 1859 ) , Edinburgh ( 1873 ) , and Truro ( 1878 ) were all unsuccessful . He lost out to George Edmund Street in the competition for the Royal Courts of Justice ( 1866 – 67 ) in The Strand . His plans for the redecoration of the interior of St Paul 's Cathedral ( 1870 – 77 ) were abandoned and he was dismissed from his post . Skilbeck 's Warehouse ( 1865 – 66 ) was demolished in the 1970s , and work at Salisbury Cathedral ( 1855 – 59 ) , at Worcester College , Oxford ( 1873 – 79 ) and at Knightshayes Court had been lost in the decades before . 
 Beyond architecture , Burges designed metalwork , sculpture , jewellery , furniture and stained glass . Art Applied to Industry , a series of lectures he gave to the Society of Arts in 1864 , illustrates the breadth of his interests ; the topics covered including glass , pottery , brass and iron , gold and silver , furniture , the weaver 's art and external architectural decoration . For most of the century following his death , Victorian architecture was neither the subject of intensive study nor sympathetic attention and Burges 's work was largely ignored . However the revival of interest in Victorian art , architecture , and design in the later twentieth century has led to a renewed appreciation of Burges and his work . 
 = = Early life and travels = = 
 Burges was born on 2 December 1827 , the son of Alfred Burges ( 1796 – 1886 ) , a wealthy civil engineer . Alfred made a considerable fortune , some £ 113 @,@ 000 ( £ 11 @,@ 101 @,@ 266 in 2016 adjusted for inflation ) at his death , enabling his son to devote his life to the study and practice of architecture without requiring that he actually earn a living . 
 Burges entered King 's College School , London , in 1839 to study engineering , his contemporaries there including Dante Gabriel Rossetti and William Michael Rossetti . He left in 1844 to join the office of Edward Blore , surveyor to Westminster Abbey . Blore was an established architect , having worked for both William IV and Queen Victoria , and had made his reputation as a proponent of the Gothic Revival . In 1848 or 1849 , Burges moved to the offices of Matthew Digby Wyatt . Wyatt was as prominent an architect as Blore , evidenced by his leading role in the direction of The Great Exhibition in 1851 . Burges 's work with Wyatt , particularly on the Medieval Court for this exhibition , was influential on the subsequent course of his career . During this period , he also worked on drawings of medieval metalwork for Wyatt 's book , Metalwork , published in 1852 , and assisted Henry Clutton with illustrations for his works . 
 Of equal importance to Burges 's subsequent career was his travelling . Burges believed that all architects should travel , remarking that it was " absolutely necessary to see how various art problems have been resolved in different ages by different men . " <unk> by his private income , Burges moved through England , then France , Belgium , Holland , Switzerland , Germany , Spain , Italy , Greece and finally into Turkey . In total , he spent some 18 months abroad developing his skills and knowledge by sketching and drawing . What he saw and drew provided a repository of influences and ideas that he used and re @-@ used for the whole of his career . Although he never went beyond Turkey , the art and architecture of the East , both Near and Far , had a significant impact on him ; his fascination with Moorish design found ultimate expression in the Arab Room at Cardiff Castle , and his study of Japanese techniques influenced his later metalwork . Burges received his first important commission at the age of 35 , but his subsequent career did not see the development that might have been expected . His style had already been formed over the previous twenty years of study , thinking and travelling . J. Mordaunt Crook , the foremost authority on Burges , writes that , " once established , after twenty years ' preparation , his ' design language ' had merely to be applied , and he applied and re @-@ applied the same vocabulary with increasing subtlety and gusto . " 
 = = Early works = = 
 In 1856 Burges established his own architectural practice in London at 15 Buckingham Street , The Strand . Some of his early pieces of furniture were created for this office and were later moved to The Tower House , Melbury Road , Kensington , the home he built for himself towards the end of his life . His early architectural career produced nothing of major note , although he won prestigious commissions for Lille Cathedral , the Crimea Memorial Church and the Bombay School of Art . None were built to Burges 's designs . His failed entry for the Law Courts in the Strand , if successful , would have given London its own Carcassonne , the plans being described by the architectural writers Dixon and Muthesius as " a re @-@ creation of a thirteenth century dream world [ with ] a skyline of great inventiveness . " In 1859 , he submitted a French @-@ inspired design for St John 's Cathedral in Brisbane , Australia , which was rejected . He also provided designs for Colombo Cathedral in Ceylon and St Francis Xavier 's Cathedral , Adelaide , without success . In 1855 , however , he obtained a commission for the reconstruction of the chapter house of Salisbury Cathedral . Henry Clutton was the lead architect but Burges , as assistant , contributed to the restoration of the sculpture and to the general decorative scheme . Much was lost in restorations of the 1960s . More lasting was Burges 's work of 1858 onwards in the substantial remodelling of Gayhurst House , in Buckinghamshire , for Robert Carrington , 2nd Baron Carrington . Rooms there contain some of his large signature fireplaces , with carving by Burges 's long @-@ time collaborator Thomas Nicholls , in particular those in the Drawing Room which include motifs from Paradise Lost and Paradise Regained . He also designed a circular lavatory for the male servants , which Jeremy Cooper describes as being " surmounted by a growling Cerberus , each of his three heads inset with bloodshot glass eyes . " 
 In 1859 Burges began work with Ambrose Poynter on the Maison Dieu , Dover , which was completed in 1861 . Emulation of the original medieval style can be seen in his renovation of the grotesque animals and in the coats of arms incorporated into his new designs . Burges later designed the Council Chamber , added in 1867 , and in 1881 began work on Connaught Hall in Dover , a town meeting and concert hall . The new building contained meeting rooms and mayoral and official offices . Although Burges designed the project , most of it was completed after his death by his partners , Pullan and Chapple . In 1859 – 60 , Burges took over the restoration of Waltham Abbey from Poynter , working with Poynter 's son Edward Poynter and with furniture makers Harland and Fisher . He commissioned Edward Burne @-@ Jones of James Powell & Sons to make three stained @-@ glass windows for the east end , representing the Tree of Jesse . 
 In 1861 – 2 , Burges was commissioned by Charles Edward Lefroy , secretary to the Speaker of the House of Commons , to build All Saints Church , Fleet as a memorial to Lefroy 's wife . She was the daughter of James Walker , who established the marine engineering company of Walker and Burges with Burges 's father Alfred , and this family connection brought Burges the commission . Pevsner says of Fleet that " it has no shape , nor character nor notable buildings , except one , " that one being All Saints . The church is of red brick and Pevsner considered it " astonishingly restrained . " The interior too is simply decorated but the massive sculpture , particularly of the tomb of the <unk> and of the gabled arch below which the tomb originally stood , is quintessentially Burges , Crook describing it as " not so much muscular ( gothic ) as muscle @-@ bound . " 
 = = Saint Fin Barre 's Cathedral , Cork = = 
 Despite early competition setbacks , Burges was sustained by his belief that Early French provided the answer to the crisis of architectural style that beset mid @-@ Victorian England , writing " I was brought up in the thirteenth century belief and in that belief I intend to die " ; and in 1863 , at the age of 35 , he finally secured his first major commission , for Saint Fin Barre 's Cathedral , Cork . Burges 's diary records his delight at the result : " Got Cork ! " 
 The competition for Saint Fin Barre 's occurred as a result of widespread dissatisfaction with the existing church of 1735 which the Dublin Builder described as " a shabby apology for a cathedral which has long disgraced Cork . " It was to be the first new cathedral built in the British Isles since St Paul 's . The proposed budget was low , at £ 15 @,@ 000 , but Burges ignored this constraint , producing a design that he admitted would cost twice as much . Despite the protestations of fellow competitors , it won , though the final cost was to be in excess of £ 100 @,@ 000 . 
 Burges , who had worked in Ireland before , at the Church of St Peter , <unk> , at the Holy Trinity Church <unk> , at <unk> and at Douglas , enjoyed strong local support , including that of the Bishop , John Gregg . In addition , as the Ireland Handbook notes , Burges " combined his love of medievalism with a conspicuous display of Protestant affluence " which was an important factor at a time when the established Anglican Church in Ireland was seeking to assert its predominance . 
 For the exterior , Burges re @-@ used some of his earlier unexecuted plans , the overall design from the Crimea Memorial Church and St John 's Cathedral , Brisbane , the elevations from Lille Cathedral . The main problem of the building was its size . Despite the prodigious efforts of its fundraisers , and despite Burges exceeding the original budget , Cork was still unable to afford a really large cathedral . Burges overcame this obstacle by using the grandeur of his three @-@ spired exterior to offset the lesser scale of the remainder of the building . 
 Although the cathedral is modest in size , it is very richly ornamented . As was his usual practice , from his office in Buckingham Street and in the course of many site visits , Burges oversaw all aspects of the design , including the statuary , the stained glass and the furniture , charging 10 % rather than his usual 5 % , owing to the high level of his personal involvement . He drew designs for every one of the 1 @,@ 260 sculptures that adorn the West Front and decorate the building inside and out . He sketched cartoons for the majority of the 74 stained glass windows . He designed the mosaic pavement , the altar , the pulpit and the bishop 's throne . Lawrence and Wilson consider the result " undoubtedly [ Burges 's ] greatest work in ecclesiastical architecture " with an interior that is " overwhelming and intoxicating . " Through his ability , by the careful leadership of his team , by total artistic control , and by vastly exceeding the intended budget of £ 15 @,@ 000 , Burges produced a building that in size is little more than a large parish church but in impression is described in Lawrence and Wilson 's study as " a cathedral becoming such a city and one which posterity may regard as a monument to the Almighty 's praise . " 
 = = Architectural team = = 
 Burges inspired considerable loyalty within his team of assistants , and his partnerships were long @-@ lived . John Starling Chapple was the office manager , joining Burges 's practice in 1859 . It was Chapple , designer of most of the furniture for Castell Coch , who completed its restoration after Burges 's death . Second to Chapple was William Frame , who acted as clerk of works . Horatio Walter Lonsdale was Burges 's chief artist , contributing extensive murals for both Castell Coch and Cardiff Castle . His main sculptor was Thomas Nicholls who started with Burges at Cork , completing hundreds of figures for Saint Fin Barre 's Cathedral , worked with him on his two major churches in Yorkshire , and undertook all of the original carving for the Animal Wall at Cardiff . William Gualbert Saunders joined the Buckingham Street team in 1865 and worked with Burges on the development of the design and techniques of stained glass manufacture , producing much of the best glass for Saint Fin Barre 's . Ceccardo Egidio Fucigna was another long @-@ time collaborator who sculpted the Madonna and Child above the drawbridge at Castell Coch , the figure of St John over the mantelpiece in Lord Bute 's bedroom at Cardiff Castle and the bronze Madonna in the roof garden . Lastly , there was Axel Haig , a Swedish @-@ born illustrator , who prepared many of the watercolour perspectives with which Burges entranced his clients . Crook calls them " a group of talented men , moulded in their master 's image , art @-@ architects and medievalists to a man – jokers and jesters too – devoted above all to art rather than to business . " 
 = = Partnership with the Marquess of Bute = = 
 In 1865 , Burges met John Patrick Crichton @-@ Stuart , 3rd Marquess of Bute . This may have resulted from Alfred Burges 's engineering firm , Walker , Burges and Cooper , having undertaken work on the East Bute Docks in Cardiff for the second Marquess . The 3rd Marquess became Burges 's greatest architectural patron ; both were men of their times ; both had fathers whose industrial endeavours provided the means for their sons ' architectural achievements , and both sought to " redeem the evils of industrialism by re @-@ living the art of the Middle Ages " . 
 On his succession to the Marquessate at the age of one , Bute inherited an income of £ 300 @,@ 000 a year , and , by the time he met Burges , he was considered the richest man in Britain , if not the world . Bute 's wealth was important to the success of the partnership : as Burges himself wrote , " Good art is far too rare and far too precious ever to be cheap . " But , as a scholar , antiquarian , compulsive builder and enthusiastic medievalist , Bute brought more than money to the relationship and his resources and his interests allied with Burges 's genius to create what McLees considers to be " Bute 's most memorable overall achievement . " 
 However occasioned , the connection lasted the rest of Burges 's life and led to his most important works . To the Marquess and his wife , Burges was the " soul @-@ inspiring one " . The architectural writer Michael Hall considers Burges 's rebuilding of Cardiff Castle and the complete reconstruction of the ruin of Castell Coch , north of the city , as representing his highest achievements . In these buildings , Crook contends that Burges escaped into " a world of architectural fantasy " which Hall describes as " amongst the most magnificent the Gothic Revival ever achieved . " 
 = = = Cardiff Castle = = = 
 In the early nineteenth century , the original Norman castle had been enlarged and refashioned by Henry Holland for the 1st Marquess , the 3rd Marquess 's great @-@ grandfather . The 2nd Marquess occupied the castle on visits to his extensive Glamorgan estates , during which he developed modern Cardiff and created Cardiff Docks as the outlet for coal and steel from the South Wales Valleys , but did little to the castle itself , beyond completing the 1st Marquess 's work . The 3rd Marquess despised Holland 's efforts , describing the castle as having been " the victim of every barbarism since the Renaissance " , and , on his coming of age , engaged Burges to undertake rebuilding on a Wagnerian scale . Almost all of Burges 's usual team were involved , including Chapple , Frame and Lonsdale , creating a building which John Newman describes in Glamorgan : The Buildings of Wales as the " most successful of all the fantasy castles of the nineteenth century . " 
 Work began in 1868 with the 150 feet high Clock Tower , in Forest of Dean ashlar . The tower forms a suite of bachelor 's rooms , the Marquess not marrying until 1872 . They comprise a bedroom , a servant 's room and the Summer and Winter Smoking Rooms . Externally , the tower is a re @-@ working of a design Burges used for the unsuccessful Law Courts competition . Internally , the rooms are sumptuously decorated with gilding , carvings and cartoons , many allegorical in style , depicting the seasons , myths and fables . The Summer Smoking Room is the tower 's literal and metaphorical culmination . It rises two storeys high and has an internal balcony that , through an unbroken band of windows , gives views to Cardiff docks , one source of Bute 's wealth , the Bristol Channel , and the Welsh hills and valleys . The floor has a map of the world in mosaic and the sculpture is by Thomas Nicholls . 
 As the castle was developed , work continued with alterations to Holland 's Georgian range , including his Bute Tower , and to the medieval Herbert and Beauchamp Towers , and the construction of the Guest Tower and the Octagonal Tower . In plan , the castle broadly follows the arrangement of a standard Victorian stately home . The Bute Tower includes Lord Bute 's bedroom and ends in another highlight , the Roof Garden , with a sculpture of the Madonna by Fucigna . Bute 's bedroom has much religious iconography and a mirrored ceiling . The Marquess 's name , John , is repeated in Greek , <unk> , along the ceiling beams . The Octagon Tower followed , including the oratory , built on the spot where Bute 's father died , and the Chaucer Room , the roof of which Mark Girouard cites as " a superb ... example of Burges 's genius in the construction of roofs . " The Guest Tower contains the site of the original kitchen at its base and above , the Nursery , decorated with painted tiles depicting Aesop 's Fables and characters from nursery rhymes . 
 The central block of the castle comprises the two storey banqueting hall , with the library below . Both are enormous , the former to act as a suitable reception hall where the Marquess could fulfil his civic duties , the latter to hold part of his vast library . Both include elaborate carvings and fireplaces , those in the banqueting hall depicting the castle itself in the time of Robert , Duke of Normandy , who was imprisoned there in 1126 – 1134 . The fireplace in the library contains five figures , four representing the Greek , Egyptian , Hebrew and Assyrian alphabets , while the fifth is said to represent Bute as a Celtic monk . The figures refer to the purpose of the room and to the Marquess , a noted linguist . The decoration of these large rooms is less successful than in the smaller chambers ; much was completed after Burges 's death and Girouard considers that the muralist , Lonsdale , " was required to cover areas rather greater than his talents deserved . " The central portion of the castle also included the Grand Staircase . Illustrated in a watercolour perspective prepared by Axel Haig , the staircase was long thought never to have been built but recent research has shown that it was constructed , only to be torn out in the 1930s , reputedly after the third Marchioness had " once slipped on its polished surface . " The staircase was not universally praised in the contemporary press ; the Building News writing that the design was " one of the least happy we have seen from Mr Burges 's pencil ... the contrasts of colour are more startling than pleasing . " The Arab Room in the Herbert Tower was the last room on which Burges was working when he fell ill in 1881 . Bute placed Burges 's initials , together with his own and the date , in the fireplace of that room as a memorial . The room was completed by Burges 's brother @-@ in @-@ law , Richard Popplewell Pullan . 
 Following Burges 's death , further areas of the castle were developed along the lines he had set by , amongst others , William Frame . This included extensive reconstruction of the walls of the original Roman fort . The Animal Wall , completed in the 1920s by the 4th Marquess , originally stood between the castle moat and the city and has nine sculptures by Thomas Nicholls , with a further six sculpted by Alexander Carrick in the 1930s . The Swiss bridge , which once crossed the moat to the pre @-@ Raphaelite garden encompassed by the Animal Wall , was removed in the 1930s . The stables , which lie to the north , on the edge of Bute Park , were designed by Burges in 1868 – 69 . 
 Megan Aldrich contends that Burges 's interiors at Cardiff have " rarely [ been ] equalled ; " [ although ] " he executed few buildings as his rich fantastic gothic required equally rich patrons ( .. ) his finished works are outstanding monuments to nineteenth century gothic , " the suites of rooms he created at Cardiff being amongst " the most magnificent that the gothic revival ever achieved . " Crook goes further still , arguing that the rooms reach beyond architecture to create " three dimensional passports to fairy kingdoms and realms of gold . In Cardiff Castle we enter a land of dreams . " 
 The Castle was given to Cardiff City Corporation by the 5th Marquess of Bute in 1947 . 
 = = = Castell Coch = = = 
 In 1872 , while work at Cardiff Castle was proceeding , Burges presented a scheme for the complete reconstruction of Castell Coch , a ruined thirteenth @-@ century fort on the Bute estate to the north of Cardiff . Burges 's report on the possible reconstruction was delivered in 1872 but building was delayed until 1875 , in part because of the pressure of works at Cardiff Castle and in part because of an unfounded concern on behalf of the Marquess 's trustees that he was facing bankruptcy . The exterior comprises three towers , described by Newman as " almost equal to each other in diameter , [ but ] arrestingly dissimilar in height . " Burges 's main inspiration was the work of the almost contemporaneous French architect Eugène Viollet @-@ le @-@ Duc who was undertaking similar restoration and building work for Napoleon III . Viollet @-@ le @-@ Duc 's work at the Château de Coucy , The Louvre and particularly at the Château de Pierrefonds is echoed at Castell Coch , Burges 's Drawing Room roof drawing heavily on the octagonal , rib @-@ vaulted chambre de l <unk> at Pierrefonds . Burges 's other main source was the Château de Chillon , from which his conical , and conjectural , tower roofs are derived . 
 Severely damaged during Welsh rebellions in the early fourteenth century , Castell Coch fell into disuse and by the Tudor period , the antiquary John Leland described it as " all in ruin no big thing but high . " A set of drawings for the planned rebuilding exists , together with a full architectural justification by Burges . The castle reconstruction features three conical roofs to the towers that are historically questionable . According to Crook , Burges " supported his roofs with a considerable body of examples of doubtful validity ; the truth was that he wanted them for their architectural effect . " 
 The Keep Tower , the Well Tower and the Kitchen Tower comprise a series of apartments , of which the main sequence , the Castellan 's Rooms , lie within the Keep . They begin weakly , the Banqueting Hall , completed well after Burges 's death , being described by Newman as " dilute [ and ] unfocused " while Crook considers it " anaemic . " It contains a colossal chimney piece , carved by Thomas Nicholls . The identity of the central figure in the overmantel is uncertain ; Girouard states that it is King David while McLees suggests that it depicts St Lucius . The Drawing Room is a double @-@ height room with decoration that Newman describes as illustrating the " intertwined themes ( of ) the fecundity of nature and the fragility of life . " A stone fireplace by Nicholls features the Three Fates , spinning , measuring and cutting the thread of life . The murals around the walls draw on Aesop 's Fables with delicate drawings of animals in the Aesthetic Movement style . 
 The octagonal chamber with its great rib @-@ vault , modelled on Viollet @-@ le @-@ Duc 's chambers at Coucy and Pierrefonds , is decorated with drawings of butterflies and birds . Off the hall lies the Windlass Room , in which Burges delighted in assembling the fully functioning apparatus for the drawbridge , together with murder @-@ holes for expelling boiling oil . The Marquess 's bedroom provides some spartan relief before the culmination of the castle , Lady Bute 's Bedroom . Crook considers this room " pure Burges : an arcaded circle , punched through by window embrasures , and topped by a trefoil @-@ sectioned dome . " The decorative theme is ' love ' , symbolised by monkeys , pomegranates and nesting birds . The decoration was completed long after Burges 's death but his was the guiding spirit . " Would Mr Burges have done it ? " William Frame wrote to Thomas Nicholls in 1887 . Burges 's original design for the castle included a chapel to be built on the roof of the Well Tower . It was never finished and the remains were removed in the late nineteenth century . 
 Following Burges 's death in 1881 , work on the interior continued for another ten years . The castle was little used , the Marquess never came after its completion , and its main function was as a family sanatorium , although the Marchioness and her daughter , Lady Margaret Crichton @-@ Stuart , did occupy it for a period following the death of the Marquess in 1900 . In 1950 , the 5th Marquess of Bute handed the castle over to the Ministry of Works . McLees views it as " one of the greatest Victorian triumphs of architectural composition " , whilst Crook writes of Burges " recreating from a heap of rubble a fairy @-@ tale castle which seems almost to have materialised from the margins of a medieval manuscript . " 
 = = Later works = = 
 Bute 's commissions formed the major corpus of Burges 's work from the 1860s until his death . However , he continued to accept other appointments . 
 = = = Worcester College , Oxford = = = 
 The interiors of the Hall and Chapel of Worcester College , Oxford , had been designed by James Wyatt in 1776 – 90 . In 1864 , Burges was commissioned to overhaul Wyatt 's unremarkable designs for the Chapel by the Reverend H C O Daniel , a member of the College 's Senior Common Room and future Provost , who had known Burges when they were contemporaries at King 's College London . Burges 's extensive iconography envelopes the building , with animals and birds depicted on the end of pews , and Burges 's mosaic flooring astonished his contemporaries . Drawing on his rare knowledge of medieval techniques and working with his meticulous attention to detail , Burges created a chapel that Crook describes as " almost unique amongst High Victorian ecclesiastical interiors . " The richly symbolic iconography " and Masonic influences on the scheme of decoration are significant , Gillingham suggesting that Burges 's Freemasonry connections were a partial explanation for his appointment and noting that a " symbolic masonic commentary pervades the Chapel . Unusually , in the redecoration of the Chapel , Burges did not use members of his usual team . The stained glass and the ceiling paintings are by Henry Holiday , and the statues , lectern and candlesticks are by William Grinsell Nicholl . 
 In 1873 – 79 Burges also undertook a redecoration of the College 's Hall . The funds needed for the Hall were raised by an appeal in which the decorated wooden panels on the walls were individual gifts , incorporating the crests and shields of the donors . In some cases , where there were no known crests or shields , those of former members were substituted and Burges made several painted imitations of marbling on wood . The large window at the end of the Hall was also filled with the armorial bearings for which room had not been found in the panels . A fireplace was also inserted on the dais . Almost all of Burges 's work in the Hall was lost in a redevelopment of the 1960s in which Wyatt 's designs were reinstated , although the fireplace was removed to Knightshayes Court and the East Window , above the high table , was restored circa 2009 . 
 = = = Skilbeck 's Warehouse = = = 
 Skilbeck 's Warehouse , formerly at 46 Upper Thames Street , London , and now demolished , was a <unk> 's warehouse constructed by Burges in 1866 and is important as his only foray into industrial design . Burges was commissioned by the Skilbeck Brothers to re @-@ model an existing warehouse ; the result was influential , representing what one of Burges 's obituarists described as " probably the most successful attempt ever made to unite the requirements of art and mercantile convenience . " Bradley describes Burges 's re @-@ modelling as using " twin pointed bays under a single Gothic relieving arch and gable " . The use of exposed cast iron was revolutionary . Modern materials and technologies were combined with gothic iconography , an article of 1886 in The <unk> describing " the great crane supported by a corbel carved into a bust of a fair Oriental maid , symbolising the clime from which so much of the <unk> 's materials are brought , and over a circular window in the gable ( a ) ship bringing in its precious freight . " The total cost of the work was £ 1 @,@ 413 . 
 = = = Knightshayes Court = = = 
 The commission for the brand new house of Knightshayes Court was obtained from Sir John Heathcoat @-@ Amory in 1867 and the foundation stone was laid in 1869 . By 1874 , the building was still incomplete , owing to ongoing difficulties with Heathcoat @-@ Amory , who objected to many of Burges 's designs on the grounds of cost and of style . Although work had begun on the interior , the turbulent relationship between architect and client led to Burges 's sacking in 1874 and his replacement by John <unk> Crace . Nevertheless , Knightshayes Court remains the only example of a medium @-@ sized Burges country house , built in a standard Victorian arrangement . Early French Gothic in style , it follows a standard neo @-@ Tudor plan of a large central block with projecting gables . The tower Burges planned was never built . 
 The interior was to have been a riot of <unk> excess but not a single room was completed to Burges 's designs . Of the few interior features that were fully executed , much was altered or diluted by Heathcoat @-@ Amory and his successors . However some of the interiors , such as the library , vaulted hall and the arched red drawing room , remain or have been re @-@ instated . 
 Since the house passed to the National Trust in 1972 , major works of restoration and re @-@ creation have been undertaken and a number of pieces of Burges furniture , mostly not original to the house , are displayed . These include a bookcase from Buckingham Street and a chimney piece from the Hall at Worcester College , Oxford , where , in the 1960s , some decorative works by Burges were removed , although his redecoration of the college Chapel remains . The aim is , as far as possible , to reinstate the work of Burges and Crace . 
 = = = Park House = = = 
 Park House , Cardiff was built by Burges for Lord Bute 's engineer , James McConnochie , between 1871 and 1875 . With its steep roofs and boldly textured walls , Park House revolutionised Cardiff 's domestic architecture , and was highly influential , in the city and beyond . The impact of the building can be seen in many of Cardiff 's inner suburbs , where imitations of Park House and its features can frequently be identified . Cadw described it as " perhaps the most important 19th century house in Wales " , a position reflected in its status as a Grade I listed building . 
 The style of the house is Early French Gothic , with triangle and rectangle to the fore , although it is without the conical tower Burges considered appropriate both for his own home , The Tower House and for Castell Coch . Burges used various building stones for Park House : Pennant Sandstone for the walls , Bath Stone around the windows , entrance porch and plinths , with pillars in pink Peterhead granite from Aberdeenshire . The external frontage comprises four gables , the windows of the last gable concealing what Newman describes as " the major peculiarity of the interior . On entering , one is immediately confronted by the underside of the staircase , and has to skirt round it to reach the rest of the house . " The arrangement was not repeated at The Tower House , which is an almost reversed replica with added conical tower . The interior fittings are of high quality , including the massive , mahogany staircase and marble chimneypieces . Both the drawing room and the dining room have beamed ceilings . The whole is built with a solidity that was guaranteed by the use of the Marquess of Bute 's own workforce from Cardiff Docks . 
 = = = Christ the Consoler , St Mary 's and St Paul 's Cathedral = = = 
 Burges 's two finest gothic churches were also undertaken in the 1870s , the Church of Christ the Consoler , Skelton @-@ on @-@ Ure , and St Mary 's , Studley Royal . His patron , George Robinson , 1st Marquess of Ripon , although not as rich as Bute , was his equal in romantic medievalism and had been a friend of Bute 's at Oxford , which may account for the choice of Burges as architect . Both churches were built as memorial churches for Ripon 's brother @-@ in @-@ law , Frederick Grantham Vyner , who was murdered by Greek bandits in 1870 . Vyner 's mother commissioned the Church of Christ the Consoler and his sister St Mary 's . Both begun in 1870 , Skelton was consecrated in 1876 and Studley Royal in 1878 . 
 The Church of Christ the Consoler , in the grounds of Newby Hall in North Yorkshire , is built in the Early English style . The exterior is constructed of grey <unk> stone , with Morcar stone for the mouldings . The interior is faced with white limestone , and richly fitted out with marble . The work was undertaken by members of Burges 's usual team , Gualbert Saunders making the stained glass , from cartoons by Lonsdale , and Nicholls sculpting the carvings . Leach and Pevsner describe the scheme of stained glass as " uncommonly excellent . " It is particularly interesting as representing an architectural move from Burges 's favourite Early French style to an English inspiration . Pevsner considers it : " Of determined originality ; the impression is one of great opulence , even if of a somewhat elephantine calibre . " 
 The Church of St Mary , Studley Royal , is also in the Early English style and is located in the grounds of Studley Royal Park at Fountains Abbey , in North Yorkshire . As at Christ the Consoler , the exterior is of grey limestone , with a two @-@ stage west tower topped with a soaring spire . The interior is equally spectacular , exceeding Skelton in richness and majesty , Leach commenting that " everything is precisely calculated as to its visual impact . " The theme , previously used at Gayhurst , is Paradise Lost and Paradise Regained . The stained glass , by Saunders & Co , is of particularly high quality . Pevsner describes St Mary 's as " a dream of Early English glory " and Crook writes , " [ although ] Cork Cathedral may stand as Burges 's greatest Gothic work , Studley Royal is his ' ecclesiastical ' masterpiece . " Burges also constructed an estate cottage in 1873 . 
 In 1870 , Burges was asked to draw up an iconographic scheme of internal decoration for St Paul 's Cathedral , unfinished since the death of Sir Christopher Wren . In 1872 , he was appointed architect and over the next five years produced what Crook describes as a " full @-@ blown scheme of early Renaissance decoration " for the interior which he intended would eclipse that of St Peter 's in Rome . However , as Crook writes , his plans were " rather too creative for most Classicists " and these artistic , and linked religious , controversies led to Burges 's dismissal in 1877 with none of his plans undertaken . 
 = = = Trinity College , Hartford , Connecticut = = = 
 In 1872 , Abner Jackson , the President of Trinity College , Connecticut , visited Britain , seeking models and an architect for a planned new campus for the college . Burges was chosen and he drew up a four @-@ <unk> masterplan , in his Early French style . Lavish illustrations were produced by Axel Haig . However , the estimated cost , at just under one million dollars , together with the sheer scale of the plans , thoroughly alarmed the College Trustees . Only one sixth of the plan was executed , the present Long Walk , with Francis H. Kimball acting as local , supervising , architect , and Frederick Law Olmsted laying out the grounds . Crook considers the result , " unsatisfactory .. [ but important ] .. in its key position in the development of late nineteenth @-@ century American architecture . " Other critics have viewed Burges 's design more positively : the American architectural historian Henry @-@ Russell Hitchcock thought Trinity " perhaps the most satisfactory of all of [ Burges 's ] works and the best example anywhere of Victorian Gothic collegiate architecture " ; whilst Charles Handley @-@ Read suggested the college was " is in some ways superior to Butterfield 's Keble or Seddon 's Aberystwyth . " 
 = = = The Tower House = = = 
 From 1875 , although he continued to work on the completion of projects already begun , Burges received no further major commissions . The construction , decoration and furnishing of his own home , The Tower House , Melbury Road , Kensington , occupied much of the last six years of his life . Burges designed the house in the style of a substantial thirteenth century French townhouse . Of red brick , and in an L plan , the exterior is plain . The house is not large , its floor @-@ plan being little more than 50 feet square . But the approach Burges took to its construction was on a grand scale : the floor depths were sufficient to support rooms four or five times their size and the architect Richard Norman Shaw wrote of the concrete foundations as being suitable " for a fortress . " This approach , combined with Burges 's architectural skills and the minimum of exterior decoration , created a building that Crook describes as " simple and massive " . As was usual with Burges , many elements of earlier designs were adapted and included , the street frontage from the McConnochie House , the cylindrical tower and conical roof from Castell Coch and the interiors from Cardiff Castle . 
 The interior centres on the double @-@ height entrance hall , Burges having avoided the error that he had made at the McConnochie House when he placed a vast central staircase in the middle of the building . At The Tower House , the stair is consigned to the conical tower . The ground floor contains a drawing room , dining room and library , while the first floor holds bedroom suites and a study . If Burges shunned exterior decoration at The Tower House , he more than compensated internally . Each room has a complex iconographic scheme of decoration : that of the hall is Time , in the drawing room , Love , in Burges 's bedroom , the Sea . Massive fireplaces with elaborate <unk> were carved and installed , a castle in the Library and mermaids and sea @-@ monsters of the deep in his own bedroom . His brother @-@ in @-@ law , Pullan , wrote that " Chaucer and Tennyson 's poems were Mr Burges ' chief text @-@ books when engaged in designing these decorations . " 
 In designing the medieval interior to the house , Burges also illustrated his skill as a jeweller , metalworker and designer , and produced some of his best works of furniture including the Zodiac settle , the Dog Cabinet and the Great Bookcase , the last of which Charles Handley @-@ Read described as " occupying a unique position in the history of Victorian painted furniture . " The fittings were as elaborate as the furniture : the tap for one of the guest washstands was in the form of a bronze bull from whose throat water poured into a sink inlaid with silver fish . Within the Tower House Burges placed some of his finest metalwork ; the artist Henry Stacy Marks wrote " he could design a chalice as well as a cathedral ... His decanters , cups , jugs , forks and spoons were designed with an equal ability to that with which he would design a castle . " 
 Upon completion , the Tower House was sensationally received . In a survey of the architecture of the past fifty years , published by The Builder in 1893 , it was the only private town house to be included . Crook considers the house , the " synthesis of [ Burges 's ] career and a glittering tribute to his achievement . " The Tower House , which remains a private home , owned by Jimmy Page for many years , retains much of its internal structural decoration , but the furniture and contents that Burges designed for his home have been dispersed . 
 = = Metalwork and jewellery = = 
 Burges was a notable designer of Gothic @-@ inspired metalwork and jewellery , and he has been cited as " Pugin 's successor in the Gothic revival style . " Although Burges was foremost an architect , Edmund Gosse described his buildings as " more jewel than architecture " , and Crook states that " Burges 's genius as a designer is expressed to perfection in his jewellery and metalwork . " He began with religious artifacts ( candlesticks , chalices , pectoral crosses ) as individual commissions or as part of the decorative scheme for buildings over which he had complete artistic control . Examples include the chalices for St Michael 's Church , Brighton , the statue of the Angel which stands above St Fin Barre 's and which was his personal gift to the cathedral , and the Dunedin Crozier . This item , carved in ivory and depicting St George slaying the dragon , was made for the first Bishop of Dunedin . In 1875 Burges published the design in a French magazine as a thirteenth century original , an example of his delight in tricks and jokes . Similarly inventive were his designs for fish plates for Lord Bute , in which a service of eighteen plates is decorated with punning illustrations , such as a skating skate , and a winged perch seated on the branch of a tree . He also undertook commissions for other patrons , including the Sneyd dessert service . On 3 April 1872 , Burges produced a gothic @-@ style brooch for the marriage of the Marquess of Bute to Lady Bute . In September 1873 , he produced another brooch for the Marchioness , in the shape of a gothic G , a gold heraldic shield in enamel , encrusted with gems and pearls . He followed this with a necklace and earrings , an attempt to " design in Castellani 's archeological style . " Another example of the works that Burges created for Lady Bute as a present for her husband , was a silver <unk> set , in the form of two medieval retainers carrying tiny barrels of salt and pepper ; the answer to the question of " what to give a man who ( could ) afford everything . " 
 Some of his most notable works , however , were those he created for himself , often with the proceeds of the winning of an architectural competition . Examples include the Elephant <unk> , which Crook considers " the very epitome of its creator 's special genius " , the pair of jewelled decanters paid for with the fees for the plans of the Crimea Memorial Church and for his series of lectures , Art Applied to Industry , and the Cat Cup , created by <unk> in commemoration of the Law Courts competition , of which Crook writes : " Its technical virtuosity sets standards for the Arts and Crafts phase . But the overall conception , the range of materials , the ingenuity , the inventiveness , the sheer gusto of the design , is peculiarly , triumphantly Burges . " Burges also designed more utilitarian articles which were nonetheless imbued with his love of allusion and punning , including silverware featuring mermaids , spiders and other creatures and a set of knives and forks for the Tower House , with the handles , carved by Nicholls , showing symbols of " meat and vegetables , veal , <unk> , onion , pea and so on . " He was also a knowledgeable critic , referred to by a contemporary as " one of the best judges of armour in Europe . " His large collection of armour was bequeathed to the British Museum upon his death . 
 The whereabouts of some of Burges 's most important pieces are unknown , but discoveries are sometimes made : a brooch which he designed as a wedding present for his friend John Pollard Seddon was identified on the BBC television series Antiques Roadshow and subsequently sold at auction for £ 31 @,@ 000 in August 2011 . 
 = = Stained glass = = 
 Burges played an important role in the renaissance of High Victorian stained glass . The provision of glass of appropriate colour and richness was central to many of his decorative themes , and he invested effort in working with the best cartoonists and manufacturers to achieve this . He also studied the history of glass production , writing in his second Art Applied to Industry lecture , " [ a ] use of antiquarian studies is to restore disused arts , and to get all the good we can out of them for our own improvement . " In the catalogue to the exhibition of stained glass cartoons from Cardiff Castle , Sargent pays tribute to " his deep knowledge of the history and techniques of glass manufacture " and Lawrence considers him a pioneer who , by his " painstaking studies , re @-@ established the principles of medieval decoration and used this to make [ his ] own bold and original statements . " The results were outstanding ; Lawrence wrote that Burges designed with " a vibrancy , an intensity and a brilliance which no other glass maker could match . " He acknowledges Burges 's debt to the manufacturers and craftsmen with whom he worked , in particular , Gualbert Saunders , whose " technique [ gave ] Burges 's glass its most distinctive characteristic , namely the flesh colour . This is unique , had no precedents and has had no imitators . " As well as at Saint Fin Barre 's , Burges designed stained glass for all of his own significant churches , for reconstructions of medieval churches undertaken by others , and for his secular buildings . He undertook significant work at Waltham Abbey with Edward Burne @-@ Jones , but much of his work there was destroyed in the Blitz . Crook writes , " At Waltham , Burges does not copy . He meets the Middle Ages as an equal . " . 
 Windows by Burges continue to be discovered . In 2009 , a stained glass window found in the vaults of Bath Abbey was confirmed as a design by Burges . The window , which was commissioned by Mallet and Company , featured on the Antiques Roadshow in early 2010 and is currently on display at the Bath Aqua Theatre of Glass . In March 2011 , two glass panels designed by Burges were purchased for £ 125 @,@ 000 by Cadw . The panels were part of a set of twenty Burges designed for the chapel at Castell Coch but were removed when the unfinished chapel was demolished . Ten of the panels were put on display at Cardiff Castle , and eight were used in the model of the chapel in the attic room of the Well Tower at Castell Coch ; the two purchased by Cadw were considered lost until they failed to sell at auction in Salisbury in 2010 . The Inspector of Ancient Monuments for Cadw , speaking after their purchase , said , " The panels show a variety of Welsh and British saints and key biblical figures and are of the highest quality Victorian stained glass . William Burges ' work attracts enormous worldwide attention and the price reflects the artistic genius of the man and the rare quality of these glass panels . " 
 Research has also led to being Burges properly credited with work previously attributed to others . In his 1958 volume on North Somerset and Bristol , Pevsner praises the " aesthetic quality " of the stained glass at the Church of St James , in <unk> but erroneously describes it as " one of the best examples of Morris glass in existence and quite unrecorded . " In fact , the glass is by Burges . 
 = = Furniture = = 
 Burges 's furniture was , second to his buildings , his major contribution to the Victorian Gothic Revival ; as Crook writes , " More than anyone , it was Burges , with his eye for detail and his lust for colour , who created the furniture appropriate to High Victorian Gothic . " Enormous , elaborate and highly painted , Crook considers his " art furniture medieval in a way no other designer ever approached . " The first detailed study of Burges 's work in this area was by Charles Handley @-@ Read in his article in The Burlington Magazine of November 1963 , Notes on William Burges 's Painted Furniture . Despised as much as his buildings in the reaction against Victorian taste that occurred in the twentieth century , his furniture came back into fashion in the latter part of that century and now commands very high prices . 
 Burges 's furniture is characterised by its historical style , its mythological iconography , its vibrant painting and , often , by rather poor workmanship . The Great Bookcase collapsed in 1878 and required complete restoration . The painting of his furniture was central to Burges 's views on its purpose . Describing his ideal medieval chamber in the lecture on furniture , delivered as part of the Art Applied to Industry series , he writes of its fittings being " covered with paintings ; it not only did its duty as furniture , but spoke and told a story . " The designs were frequently collaborative , with artists from Burges 's circle completing the painted panels that they mostly comprise . The contributors were often notable , <unk> 's sales catalogue for the Mirrored <unk> suggesting that some of its panels were by Dante Gabriel Rossetti and Edward Burne @-@ Jones . 
 Much of his early furniture , such as the Great Bookcase and the Zodiac settle , was designed for his offices at Buckingham Street and subsequently moved to the Tower House . The Great Bookcase was also part of Burges 's contribution to the Medieval Court at the 1862 International Exhibition . Others , such as the <unk> Cabinet , were created as commissions . Later pieces , such as the Crocker Dressing Table and the Golden Bed and its accompanying Vita Nuova washstand , were specifically made for suites of rooms at the Tower House . The Narcissus washstand was originally made for Buckingham Street and subsequently moved to Burges 's bedroom at the Tower House . John Betjeman , later Poet Laureate and a leading champion of the art and architecture of the Victorian Gothic Revival , was left the remaining lease on the Tower House , including some of the furniture , by E. R. B. Graham in 1961 . He gave the washstand to the novelist Evelyn Waugh who made it the centrepiece of his 1957 novel , The Ordeal of Gilbert Pinfold , in which Pinfold is haunted by the stand . 
 Examples of Burges 's painted furniture can be seen in major museums including the Victoria and Albert Museum , the Detroit Institute of Arts , the National Museum Wales and the Manchester Art Gallery . The Higgins Art Gallery & Museum , Bedford holds a particularly fine collection , begun with a large number of purchases from the estate of Charles and Lavinia Handley @-@ Read , including the Narcissus washstand , Burges 's bed and the Crocker Dressing Table . The most recent acquisition by the Bedford Museum is the Zodiac settle ( 1869 – 70 ) , painted by Henry Stacy Marks . The Museum paid £ 850 @,@ 000 for the settle , comprising a £ 480 @,@ 000 grant from the National Heritage Memorial Fund , £ 190 @,@ 000 from the Trustees of the Cecil Higgins Art Gallery and £ 180 @,@ 000 from the Art Fund after the British government imposed an export ban on the work . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Burges , who never married , was considered by his contemporaries to be eccentric , unpredictable , over @-@ indulgent and flamboyant . He was also physically unprepossessing , described by the wife of his greatest patron as " ugly Burges . " Short , fat , and so near @-@ sighted that he once mistook a peacock for a man , Burges appears to have been sensitive about his appearance and very few images of him exist . The known portraits are : a painting of 1858 by Edward John Poynter on a panel of the <unk> Cabinet ; a photograph from the 1860s , by an unknown author , showing Burges dressed as a court jester ; a sketch of 1871 in The Graphic by Theodore Blake Wirgman ; a pencil drawing in profile of 1875 by Edward William Godwin ; three posed photographs from 1881 by Henry Van der <unk> and a posthumous caricature by Edward Burne @-@ Jones . 
 Whatever his physical shortcomings , his personality , his conversation and his sense of humour were attractive and infectious , Crook commenting that " his range of friends [ covered ] the whole gamut of pre @-@ Raphaelite London . " Burges 's childlike nature occasioned comment ; Dante Gabriel Rossetti composing a limerick about him ( see box ) . 
 Robert Kerr 's novel of 1879 , The Ambassador Extraordinary , involves an architect Georgius <unk> , whom Crook considers to be based on Burges ; he is " not exactly young in years but is in an odd way youthful in appearance and in manners Georgius can never grow old ... His strong point is a disdain for Common Sense ... His vocation is Art ... [ a ] matter of Uncommon Sense . " Burges was a clubbable man . Elected to the Institute of British Architects in 1860 , in 1862 he was appointed to its Council and in 1863 was elected to the Foreign Architectural Book Society , the <unk> , which comprised the RIBA elite and was limited to fifteen members . He became a member of the Athenaeum Club in 1874 , was a member of the Arts Club , the Medieval Society , the Hogarth Club , and was elected to the Royal Academy in the year of his death . As with many of his friends Burges also joined The Artists Rifles . 
 Burges was a fanatical collector , particularly of drawings and metalwork . He was also a Freemason . Other pursuits included ratting and opium . The influence of drugs on his life and his architectural output has been debated ; Crook speculating that it was in Constantinople , on his tour in the 1850s , that he first tasted opium and the Dictionary of Scottish Architects stating with certainty that his early death was brought about " at least partly as a result of his bachelor lifestyle of smoking both tobacco and opium . " The architectural writer Simon Jenkins speculated as to why Sir John Heathcoat @-@ Amory chose as his architect " an opium @-@ addicted bachelor <unk> who dressed in medieval costume . " Burges 's own diary of 1865 includes the reference , " Too much opium , did not go to Hayward 's wedding " , and Crook concludes that " it is hard to resist the conclusion that [ opium ] reinforced the <unk> elements in his artistic make @-@ up " . 
 = = Death = = 
 Burges died , aged 53 , at The Tower House on 20 April 1881 . While on a tour of works at Cardiff , he caught a chill and returned to London , half @-@ paralysed , where he lay dying for some three weeks . Among his last visitors were Oscar Wilde and James Whistler . He was buried in the tomb he designed for his mother at West Norwood , London . On his death , John Starling Chapple , Burges 's office manager and close associate for more than twenty years , wrote " a constant relationship ... with one of the brightest ornaments of the profession has rendered the parting most severe . Thank God his work will live and ... be the admiration of future students . I have hardly got to realize my lonely position yet . He was almost all the world to me . " Lady Bute , wife of his greatest patron , wrote , " Dear Burges , ugly Burges , who designed such lovely things – what a duck . " 
 In Saint Fin Barre 's , together with memorials to his mother and sister , there is a memorial plaque to Burges , designed by him , and erected by his father . It shows the King of Heaven presiding over the four apostles , who hold open the Word of God . Under the inscription " Architect of this cathedral " is a simple shield and a small , worn , plaque with a mosaic surround , bearing Burges 's entwined initials and name . Legal complications obstructed Burges 's wish to be buried in the cathedral he had built . Burges 's own words on Saint Fin Barre 's , in his letter of January 1877 to the Bishop of Cork , sum up his career , " Fifty years hence , the whole affair will be on its trial and , the elements of time and cost being forgotten , the result only will be looked at . The great questions will then be , first , is this work beautiful and , secondly , have those to whom it was entrusted , done it with all their heart and all their ability . " 
 = = Legacy and influence = = 
 On Burges 's death in 1881 , his contemporary , the architect Edward William Godwin , said of him that " no one of the century of this country or any other that I know of , ever possessed that artistic rule over the kingdom of nature in a measure at all comparable with that which he shared in common with the creator of the Sphinx and the designer of Chartres . " But the Gothic Revival he championed with such force was in decline . Within twenty years his style was considered hopelessly outdated and owners of his works sought to eradicate all traces of his efforts . From the 1890s to the later twentieth century , Victorian art was under constant assault , critics writing of " the nineteenth century architectural tragedy " , ridiculing " the uncompromising ugliness " of the era 's buildings and attacking the " sadistic hatred of beauty " of its architects . Of Burges , they wrote almost nothing . His buildings were disregarded or altered , his jewellery and stained glass were lost or ignored , and his furniture was given away . The architectural historian Megan Aldrich writes , " He founded no school ... had few adherents outside the circle of his practice ... and trained no further generation of designers . " In comparison with more prolific contemporaries , he completed relatively few works and lost many architectural competitions . Burges 's collaborator , the artist Nathaniel Westlake , lamented " competitions are seldom given to the best man – look at the number poor Burges won , or should have won , and I think he executed only one . " 
 Almost his sole champion in the years after his death was his brother @-@ in @-@ law , Richard Popplewell Pullan . Primarily an illustrator , as well as a scholar and archaeologist , Pullan trained with Alfred Waterhouse in Manchester , before joining Burges 's office in the 1850s . In 1859 , he married Burges 's sister . Following Burges 's death in 1881 , Pullan lived at The Tower House and published collections of Burges 's designs , including Architectural Designs of William Burges ( 1883 ) and The House of William Burges ( 1886 ) . In his preface to Architectural Designs Pullan expressed the hope that illustrated volumes of his brother @-@ in @-@ law 's work " would be warmly welcomed and thoroughly appreciated , not only by his professional <unk> , but by all men of educated taste in Europe and America . " This hope was not to be fulfilled for a hundred years but Burges 's work did continue to attract followers in Japan . Josiah Conder studied under him , and , through Conder 's influence , the notable Japanese architect <unk> Kingo was articled to Burges in the year before the latter 's death . 
 From the later twentieth century to the present a renaissance has occurred in the study of Victorian art , architecture and design and Crook contends that Burges 's place at the centre of that world , as " a wide @-@ ranging scholar , an intrepid traveller , a coruscating lecturer , a brilliant decorative designer and an architect of genius , " is again appreciated . Crook writes further that , in a career of only some twenty years , he became " the most brilliant architect @-@ designer of his generation , " and , beyond architecture , his achievements in metalwork , jewellery , furniture and stained glass place him as Pugin 's only " rival [ . ] as the greatest art @-@ architect of the Gothic Revival . " 
 = = Architectural scholarship = = 
 Burges 's limited output , and the general unpopularity of his work for much of the century following his death , meant that he was little studied . In a seventy @-@ one page guide to Cardiff Castle , published in 1923 , he is referenced only three times , and on each occasion his name is misspelt as " Burgess " . Pevsner 's 1951 volume on the exhibits at The Great Exhibition , High Victorian Design , makes no mention of him , despite his significant contributions to the Medieval Court . The 1950s saw the small beginnings of a reaction against the condemnation of all that the Victorian architects , including Burges , had produced . The exhibition of Victorian and Edwardian Decorative Arts held at the Victoria and Albert Museum in 1952 included five pieces of his furniture and four examples of his metalwork . This was followed by the foundation of the Victorian Society in 1958 . Victorian Architecture , a collection of essays edited by Peter Ferriday and published in 1963 , contained an article on him by Charles Handley @-@ Read , perhaps the first serious scholar of Burges . Handley @-@ Read took a measured view of Burges 's work writing that , " as a designer , he ( was ) apt to be aggressive rather than charming " , but he was in no doubt of Burges 's significance , writing of his best works as " indispensable examples of ' Victorian <unk> ' . " The last thirty years , however , have seen a significant revival of interest . Burges 's rehabilitation can be dated to 1981 , the centenary of his death , when a major exhibition on his life and works was held , firstly at the National Museum Cardiff , until October 1981 , and then at the Victoria and Albert Museum , London , from November 1981 to January 1982 . The catalogue to that exhibition , entitled The Strange Genius of William Burges , was edited by J. Mordaunt Crook . A much smaller exhibition of his work was also held at the Crawford Municipal Art Gallery in Cork . In the same year , the only full study of Burges , Crook 's William Burges and the High Victorian Dream , was published . In the dedication to that volume , " In Mem . <unk> " , Crook acknowledges his debt to Charles Handley @-@ Read , whose notes on Burges Crook inherited following Handley @-@ Read 's suicide . A revised edition was published in February 2013 . Other sources include articles on Cardiff Castle and Castle Coch in Mark Girouard 's The Victorian Country House . The Buildings of England , The Buildings of Wales , The Buildings of Scotland and The Buildings of Ireland series provide comprehensive coverage of Burges 's works by county , although in the last two instances they are not yet complete . The current ( 2012 ) curator of Cardiff Castle , Matthew Williams , has also written a number of <unk> / Bute articles for the architectural press . The Cathedral of Saint Fin Barre at Cork , by David Lawrence and Ann Wilson , covers Burges 's work in Ireland . 
 = = List of works = = 
 The chronological list of Burges 's major buildings is believed to be complete , although some minor works , or minimal additions to pre @-@ existing structures , have not been included . The list of furniture and other works is selective . No listing is given of his extensive creations of jewellery , metalwork and stained glass . Crook has a comprehensive , chronological , appendix of Burges 's work with indications as to whether the work is still in situ , was never executed , has been removed elsewhere , has been demolished or where the present location is unknown . 
 = = = Buildings = = = 
 = = = Unexecuted designs = = = 
 = = = Major pieces of furniture with locations = = = 
 = New York State Route 173 = 
 New York State Route 173 ( NY 173 ) is a state highway located in the Syracuse area of central New York in the United States . It takes a slightly bow @-@ shaped route from NY 31 in the town of Van Buren to NY 5 in Chittenango , gently curving to the south of Downtown Syracuse in the center of its 30 @.@ 59 @-@ mile ( 49 @.@ 23 km ) routing . Even so , NY 173 briefly enters the Syracuse city limits near where it intersects U.S. Route 11 ( US 11 ) . NY 173 passes through several suburbs of Syracuse , including Camillus , where it first meets NY 5 , and Manlius , where it has a short overlap with NY 92 . 
 NY 173 was assigned as part of the 1930 renumbering of state highways in New York to its modern alignment . The route itself has not been altered since ; however , the portion of the route from Onondaga to Manlius became part of NY 20N c . 1938 and a small section of the route within Manlius was included in NY 20SY when that highway was assigned in the early 1950s . Both designations were removed c . 1962 . All of NY 173 east of Onondaga was originally part of the Seneca Turnpike . 
 = = Route description = = 
 = = = West of Syracuse = = = 
 NY 173 begins at an intersection with NY 31 in Ionia , a hamlet within the town of Van Buren . The route heads southeast , intersecting several county roads as it proceeds through a rural , marshy area of Onondaga County as Warners Road . It crosses over the New York State Thruway ( Interstate 90 or I @-@ 90 ) on its way into the hamlet of Warners , where it briefly follows Canton Street and crosses the CSX Transportation @-@ owned Rochester Subdivision rail line before becoming Warners Road once again as it follows the railroad east out of the community and into the town of Camillus . 
 The route parallels the track for roughly 2 miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) , over which time it passes to the north of Greenlawn Memorial Park . As the trackage and the highway approach a point known as Amboy Station , NY 173 curves away from the railroad and heads southeast toward Amboy . After making the turn , NY 173 meets Pottery Road ( County Route 164 or CR 164 ) , a local road leading to Camillus Airport , a simple one @-@ runway facility located adjacent to the railroad line . NY 173 continues into and through Amboy , passing a large area of tailings that was once the site of the Syracuse Municipal Airport . The <unk> are bordered to the north by Ninemile Creek and to the south by the Old Erie Canal , both of which are traversed by NY 173 on its way into the densely populated Fairmount neighborhood of Camillus . 
 In Fairmount , NY 173 passes Reed Webster Park and turns to the east ahead of the Camillus Bypass , a limited @-@ access highway carrying NY 5 through the town . NY 173 parallels NY 5 for about 1 mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) before connecting to westbound NY 5 by way of a partial interchange ; the eastbound connection is made by way of Hinsdale Road ( CR 209 ) 1 mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) to the west . East of the westbound on @-@ ramps , NY 173 passes over NY 5 and turns to the southeast ahead of an intersection with NY 297 . The route continues on through Fairmount , intersecting West Genesee Street ( CR 98 ) before becoming Onondaga Road and exiting the neighborhood upon entering the town of Onondaga . 
 Within Onondaga , NY 173 passes through both open areas with sparse development and areas containing built @-@ up residential neighborhoods . The route heads southeast to Onondaga Hill , a large community built up just east of Onondaga Community College . Here , it overlaps with NY 175 for about 100 yards ( 91 m ) before NY 175 forks off to the northeast into Syracuse . NY 173 continues eastward as the Seneca Turnpike , passing to the south of Community General Hospital before it enters the southernmost portion of Syracuse . This portion of the city is mostly residential , save for a smattering of businesses around NY 173 's junctions with NY 80 and US 11 . Near the midpoint of the route 's 2 miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) stay in Syracuse , it crosses over Onondaga Creek , on the banks of which lie Faith Heritage School and <unk> Field . The route leaves the city limits shortly after passing under both directions of I @-@ 81 . 
 All of NY 173 west of Genesee Street in Camillus is maintained by Onondaga County . NY 173 is co @-@ designated with CR 204 from NY 31 to Bennetts Corners Road in Van Buren , CR 64 between Bennetts Corners Road and Canton Street in the hamlet of Warners , CR 57 from Canton Street to Thompson Road in Camillus , and CR 63 between Thompson Road and Genesee Street . Within Syracuse , NY 173 is maintained by the city . The remainder of the route in both Onondaga and Madison counties is maintained by the New York State Department of Transportation . 
 = = = East of Syracuse = = = 
 East of Syracuse , the route passes through a narrow 1 mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) portion of the town of Onondaga and the hamlet of Southwood before entering the adjacent town of DeWitt . It continues east , serving Clark Reservation State Park as it heads toward the community of Jamesville , located at the northern end of the Jamesville Reservoir on Butternut Creek . Here , NY 173 intersects NY 91 in the center of the hamlet . Past Jamesville , the homes that had lined the highway give way to open areas to the south and large quarries to the north . The route passes north of the Onondaga County Correctional Facility just east of Jamesville . 
 NY 173 continues on into the town of Manlius , where the homes gradually return as the highway enters the village of Manlius . Inside the village limits , the route becomes surrounded by homes once again as it crosses over Limestone Creek and enters the village 's business district . Here , it intersects and briefly overlaps NY 92 for roughly 250 yards ( 230 m ) between Fayette and Washington Streets . At Washington Street , NY 92 turns to the southeast towards Cazenovia while NY 173 continues northeastward out of the village . Now back in the surrounding town of Manlius , NY 173 passes south of Fayetteville – Manlius High School before entering another rural area near a point known as Eagle Village . The route continues northeast from there into Madison County . 
 Upon crossing the county line , NY 173 initially turns slightly eastward to follow a less pronounced northeasterly alignment . However , as the route approaches the Chittenango Creek valley , it gradually turns northward . At Brinkerhoff Hill , NY 173 enters the Chittenango village limits and descends into the valley , where it ends at an intersection with NY 5 in the village center at the base of the valley . 
 = = History = = 
 The portion of modern NY 173 between NY 175 in Onondaga and NY 5 in Chittenango was originally part of the original Seneca Turnpike . The Seneca Turnpike was originally the longest road in the state of New York when it was built in the 1800s . NY 173 was assigned as part of the 1930 renumbering of state highways in New York to the entirety of its modern alignment . Although NY 173 itself has not changed since that time , other routes have been overlaid on parts of NY 173 over the years . The segment of NY 173 between NY 175 in Onondaga and the east end of the NY 92 overlap in Manlius became part of NY 20N , a northerly alternate route of US 20 between Skaneateles and Cazenovia , c . 1938 . In the early 1950s , the portion of NY 173 concurrent with NY 92 in Manlius also became part of NY 20SY , a second , even more northern alternate route of US 20 between Marcellus and Cazenovia . The NY 20N and NY 20SY designations were removed c . 1962 . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 = Steve Javie = 
 Steve Javie ( born January 17 , 1955 ) is an American retired professional basketball referee who refereed in the National Basketball Association ( NBA ) from the 1986 – 87 NBA season to the 2010 – 11 season . As of the beginning of the 2006 – 07 NBA season , Javie has officiated 1 @,@ 264 regular season , 190 playoff , and 18 NBA Finals games . According to Referee magazine , Javie was a highly regarded referee in the NBA , and he was respected within the officiating community for his game management skills . He was also notable during his NBA officiating career for his quickness in assessing technical fouls . 
 Prior to his NBA career , he played and graduated from La Salle College High School . He later played baseball for Temple University from 1974 to 1976 and later was an umpire in the Florida State League ( Class @-@ A ) from 1978 to 1981 . Transitioning to basketball , he officiated in the Continental Basketball Association ( CBA ) from 1981 to 1986 . 
 = = Personal = = 
 = = = Early life = = = 
 Steve Javie was born on January 17 , 1955 in Philadelphia , Pennsylvania to Stan and Stella Javie . During his childhood , he attended and later graduated from La Salle College High School in Philadelphia , Pennsylvania , where he played baseball , football , and basketball , earning All @-@ League honors in baseball and basketball . Following high school , he continued a baseball career at Temple University . He graduated from the university in 1976 with a bachelor 's degree in business administration . As a prospect in baseball , Javie signed with the Baltimore Orioles minor league organization . He was released from the Orioles minor league system ( Class @-@ A ) after one year due to an arm injury suffered as a pitcher . Also is the proud owner of a beer distributor in the Roxborough section of Philadelphia . Supporting the city in each and every way he can . 
 = = = Family = = = 
 Steve Javie 's father , Stan Javie , was also a sports official . Stan Javie worked in the National Football League from 1951 to 1980 as a field judge and back judge , and was assigned to officiate four Super Bowls . In an interview with Referee magazine , Steve Javie described his father as " a guy you 'd go to war with . He had a passion . He was probably the official that everyone strives to be , but can 't , because you have to be yourself . I can 't be a Stan Javie and you can 't be , but if you took all the characteristics and makeup , you 'd want to be that kind of official . " His godfather , Johnny Stevens , was an American League umpire and worked four World Series in a career that spanned from 1948 to 1975 . 
 Javie resides in Blue Bell , Pennsylvania . He is married to Mary Ellen , whom he met in 1990 at the Philadelphia International Airport , where she was employed . The couple was married in August 1991 . 
 = = = Charity = = = 
 Along with his wife , Steve Javie started the Javie Foundation for Charity to raise money for the homeless , disabled , abused and neglected children . He hosts an annual fundraising golf tournament to support a variety of causes in the Philadelphia metropolitan area . The two @-@ day event , which also includes dinner , dance , and silent auction , has raised US $ 1 million since its inception . 
 In 2007 , he participated in a summer clinic at Don <unk> High School in Springfield , Pennsylvania , along with four other NBA officials , teaching developmentally challenged boys the rules of basketball and how to signal violations . 
 = = Baseball umpire = = 
 After his baseball playing career was over at age 22 , Javie began working at Johnson & Johnson in their baby products line . Becoming uninterested in his job at Johnson & Johnson , he decided to pursue an occupation within sports , and became a baseball umpire in 1978 . Having no prior experience as an arbiter , Javie attended an umpire school operated by Major League Baseball ( MLB ) umpire Bill <unk> . Upon completion of training , he was selected to work in the Florida State League . Looking to be promoted to the Class @-@ AA Eastern League , he was denied entrance into the league due to scheduling conflicts and later a players ' strike . In June 1981 , after two and a half years in the Florida State League , Javie left the organization over disagreements with executives due to the lack of promotion opportunities , and being forced to split from an experienced umpire crew that included Jerry Layne , who later worked in the major leagues . 
 = = Basketball referee = = 
 = = = CBA career = = = 
 While serving as an umpire , Javie had officiated basketball games at the high school level in Pennsylvania during the baseball off @-@ season . In addition , he was invited to NBA camps for prospective officials . Within a week of return home following the end of his umpiring career , Javie contacted his father 's friend , NBA referee Earl Strom , who assisted Javie in reaching then @-@ CBA supervisor Cecil Watkins about the possibility of working in the CBA . After officiating games in Philadelphia 's Baker League , he was hired by the CBA in the fall of 1981 . He arrived to the CBA with a " baseball mentality " and had to make quick decisions on the court because of the league 's reputation for fighting among players and arguing by coaches . During a game at The Armory in Albany , New York , Javie was chased down a staircase by then @-@ Albany Patroons coach Phil Jackson , who had received a technical foul . He worked CBA games for five years before being hired by the NBA in 1986 . 
 = = = NBA career = = = 
 = = = = Early years = = = = 
 Upon arriving in the NBA , Javie developed a reputation early for having a " quick trigger finger " , and he was believed to be one of the league leaders in calling technical fouls during the late 1980s and early 1990s . Reflecting on his early years in the league , Javie told Sports Illustrated in October 2000 , " I 'd get so mad I 'd lose control for two or three minutes , and that 's when I would miss calls . " Javie developed <unk> with referees Joe Crawford and Jack Madden to assist in the maturation process . Working his debut game with Crawford at the Pontiac Silverdome in Detroit , Michigan , Javie received a grade of 40 points out of 100 by supervisor Darell Garretson . While reviewing game film later at the hotel , Crawford noted errors made throughout the game by himself . As a result of this film study , Javie learned that experienced officials make mistakes and admitting error will improve a referee 's ability in the long @-@ term . Ninety minutes after the conclusion of a game , Javie reviews game film . In addition to film review , Madden taught Javie not to lose focus when players and coaches were upset , and to walk away from them rather than becoming angry . Javie credited his mentors for success as a referee saying , " My mentors have made me what I am today . I 'm a little part of each of them . It 's their success in teaching me . " 
 = = = = On @-@ court controversies = = = = 
 Javie 's first public incident came during the 1990 – 91 NBA season in a game between the Portland Trail Blazers and Washington Bullets at the Capital Centre on April 4 , 1991 . Bullets ' forward <unk> Ellison was called for a personal foul and then threw the ball at referee Billy Spooner . Javie ran across the court to impose a technical foul on Ellison for this action . In the sequence of events that followed , Javie ejected Ellison after protesting the call , the Bullets ' head coach Wes Unseld for protesting the dismissal of Ellison , and the Bullets ' mascot , " Hoops " , for making gestures to incite the crowd . Rod Thorn , then the NBA 's vice president for operations , ruled that Javie overreacted in ejecting Ellison and would be subject to discipline . The extent of the disciplinary action was not disclosed . Javie reflected on the experience saying , " My fatal mistake was getting involved with Billy [ Spooner ] and <unk> [ Ellison ] in the first place . You have to be there for your partners , but most of the time you 've got to let them call their game . " 
 Nearly three years later in another game involving the Portland Trail Blazers , Trail Blazers radio broadcast analyst Mike Rice was ejected by Javie for disputing calls from his broadcast position . In the third quarter of the game in Indianapolis , Indiana , Rice made a " choke " gesture towards Javie in disagreement over a goaltending violation non @-@ call on shot attempt by Portland 's Cliff Robinson . After a verbal exchange between Javie and Rice , Rice was removed from the broadcast and escorted to the locker room area by arena security . 
 During the 2002 – 03 NBA season , Javie was fined $ 1 @,@ 000 by the league for a verbal altercation with Pat Riley , then @-@ head coach of the Miami Heat . 
 In a January 2007 game between the Philadelphia 76ers and Denver Nuggets , Denver point guard Allen Iverson received two technical fouls and was ejected from the game in the fourth quarter . Iverson was quoted postgame about Javie , telling the press , " I thought I got fouled on that play , and I said I thought that he was calling the game personal , and he threw me out , his fuse is real short anyway , and I should have known that I couldn 't say anything anyway . It 's been something personal with me and him since I got in the league . This was just the perfect game for him to try and make me look bad . " Iverson was fined $ 25 @,@ 000 for his remarks , as well as for " verbal abuse of a game official " . 
 = = = = Income tax evasion trial = = = = 
 In January 1999 , Javie was the only one of fifteen referees to be acquitted of tax evasion charges as a result of not reporting income he received by downgrading airline tickets provided by the league . Other referees were sentenced to probation or a period of house arrest , and ordered to pay the taxes . He fought the charges because he believed he did not intentionally do anything wrong . Discussing the trial , Javie told Referee magazine , " My job is about my name . My dad taught me your name is the most important thing . I had to fight for my name . " During the trial , Javie argued that he didn 't owe taxes on more than $ 84 @,@ 000 in income over three years because the money was value @-@ earned from frequent flyer miles , which are non @-@ taxable . He later described the trial as " the hardest two weeks " of his life . 
 = = = = Memorable games = = = = 
 In April 2003 , Javie was the referee in Michael Jordan 's final game of his fifteen @-@ year NBA career . During a game break towards the end of regulation , Javie congratulated Jordan on his career and told him he was a " class act " . Javie then turned around and told the younger players on the court , " You could do a lot worse than modeling yourselves after this guy . " 
 = = = = Retirement = = = = 
 Javie announced his retirement before the beginning of the 2011 – 12 season . 
 = Finnieston Crane = 
 The Finnieston Crane or Stobcross Crane is a disused giant cantilever crane in the centre of Glasgow , Scotland . It is no longer in working order , but is retained as a symbol of the city 's engineering heritage . The crane was used for loading cargo , in particular steam locomotives , onto ships to be exported around the world . 
 It is one of four such cranes on the River Clyde , a fifth one having been demolished in 2007 , and one of only eleven giant cantilever cranes remaining worldwide . The crane can be seen in the background of news broadcasts from BBC Pacific Quay . 
 = = History = = 
 Queens Dock was opened in August 1877 as a 61 acres ( 25 ha ) dock for exporting goods from the centre of Glasgow . A 130 tonnes ( 130 long tons ; 140 short tons ) steam crane was constructed west of the current one in the 1890s , until it was demolished to make way for a proposed bridge crossing between Finnieston Quay and Mavisbank Quay that was never built . The present crane , constructed as a replacement , was the last giant cantilever crane to be built on the Clyde . 
 It was commissioned in June 1928 by the Clyde Navigation Trust , the operators of the port and dock facilities in Glasgow , completed in 1931 and commenced operation in 1932 . The tower was built by Cowans , Sheldon & Company of Carlisle and the cantilever by the Cleveland Bridge & Engineering Company , under the supervision of Daniel Fife , mechanical engineer to the Clyde Navigation Trust . The contract to build the crane did not go to Sir William Arrol & Co . , who had significant experience in dock cranes , and built a number of other cranes along the Clyde including the Titan Clydebank , although Arrol was involved in the design of the foundations . 
 The total cost of the crane and foundations was GB £ 69 @,@ 000 , 85 % of which was met by the Trust . It is properly known as the " Stobcross Crane " or " Clyde Navigation Trustees crane # 7 " , but its proximity to Finnieston Quay , and the fact that it was intended to replace the previous Finnieston Crane , has led to its being popularly known as the Finnieston Crane . 
 = = Public artwork = = 
 In the summer of 1987 , a full @-@ size replica locomotive made from straw by local sculptor George Wyllie was hauled from the old Hyde Park Works in Springburn and suspended from the crane , then hauled back to Springburn and burned to reveal the metal framework underneath . 
 After Wyllie 's death in May 2012 , a giant question mark was suspended from the crane in an acknowledgement of his work . In 2013 , microphones were attached to the crane by American artist Bill Fontana , to record the sounds made by the structure . 
 = = Purpose = = 
 Connected to a spur of the Stobcross Railway , the crane 's primary purpose was the lifting of heavy machinery , such as tanks and steam locomotives , onto ships for export . As many as 30 @,@ 000 locomotives were hauled through the streets of Glasgow by Clydesdale horses , traction engines and diesel tractors , from the works at Springburn to the crane for export to the British Empire . The crane is ( as of 1988 ) not in working order , but is retained as a symbol of the city 's engineering heritage . 
 = = Design = = 
 The Finnieston Crane is a giant cantilever crane , 174 feet ( 53 m ) tall with a 152 feet ( 46 m ) cantilever jib . It has a lifting capacity of 175 tons , and could perform a full rotation in three and a half minutes . It can be ascended either by a steel staircase or an electric lift , the only example of such a personnel lift in Britain . It is also the only crane fitted with a horizontal rail to permit movement of the <unk> hoist , an auxiliary crane intended to handle lighter loads . 
 The docks serviced by the crane were closed in 1969 , and have since been filled in and redeveloped . The North Rotunda ( part of the defunct Clyde Harbour Tunnel ) stands to the east of the crane , and the Scottish Exhibition and Conference Centre and the Clyde Auditorium to the west . 
 It is one of four such cranes on the Clyde , after the Fairfield Titan was demolished in 2007 , and one of only eleven giant cantilever cranes remaining worldwide . The crane can be seen in the background of Reporting Scotland broadcasts from BBC Pacific Quay and also in the backdrop of The Riverside Show on STV Glasgow . 
 = Let It Down = 
 " Let It Down " is a song by English musician George Harrison , released on his 1970 triple album All Things Must Pass . The recording was co @-@ produced by Phil Spector and employs the latter 's Wall of Sound production technique to lavish effect . Its brash opening and choruses contrast with the ethereal quality of the verses – a loud / soft approach that has been credited with influencing indie bands during the 1980s and 1990s . 
 Harrison wrote the song in 1968 and offered it to the Beatles in January 1969 for inclusion on what became their Let It Be album ( 1970 ) , also produced by Spector . It is one of several Harrison compositions that were turned down by the band and subsequently found acclaim on his first solo release following their break @-@ up . Harrison biographers recognise " Let It Down " as an erotic love song , perhaps written to a woman other than Pattie Boyd , his wife at the time . Separated by eighteen months , the song 's conception and recording marked two periods of romantic intrigue involving Harrison , Boyd and their friend Eric Clapton . Author Ian Inglis describes " Let It Down " as " a dynamic and passionate depiction of lust and desire " . 
 Harrison recorded the song in London , backed by a large cast of musicians , including the whole of Clapton 's newly formed band Derek and the Dominos , Gary Brooker , Gary Wright , Bobby Keys and the group Badfinger . With its dense mix of horns , orchestral strings and heavy rock instrumentation , commentators identify " Let It Down " as an extreme example of Spector 's influence on All Things Must Pass , an influence that also provided a disruptive element during the album 's creation . An acoustic version of " Let It Down " , also taped in 1970 but with overdubs recorded in 2000 , appeared as a bonus track on the 30th anniversary edition of All Things Must Pass . 
 = = Background and composition = = 
 According to Pattie Boyd 's recollection in 2007 , her marriage to George Harrison was already " in trouble " by the time he wrote his 1969 hit song " Something " , dedicated to her . Harrison and Boyd were married in January 1966 , having met two years before on the set of the Beatles ' film A Hard Day 's Night , but by 1968 , his dedication to meditation and Eastern mysticism had begun to divide the couple . Boyd writes of an associated issue at this time : " And there were other women ... George was fascinated by the god Krishna who was always surrounded by young maidens . He came back from India [ in June 1968 ] wanting to be some kind of Krishna figure , a spiritual being with lots of concubines . He actually said so . " 
 Harrison wrote " Let It Down " in late 1968 . The song features the same major @-@ seventh chord voicings that intrigued Bob Dylan during that year 's Thanksgiving holidays , when the two musicians collaborated on " I 'd Have You Anytime " in upstate New York . In the absence of any discussion of the track by Harrison in his 1980 autobiography , commentators have identified " Let It Down " as a sensual love song . 
 Harrison 's musical biographer , Simon Leng , describes the lyrics as being among its composer 's " most tactile " , full of " sexual passion " and " images of sight and touch " . The verses , he suggests , " [ revel ] in the kind of sensory luxury any Krishna devotee is required to reject " . Leng also notes the " clear climactic overtones " evident in the choruses , where Harrison urges his lover to " Let your hair hang all around me ... / Let your love flow and astound me . " Musically , the composition features contrasting moods between the ethereal , ballad @-@ like verses and the more strident choruses . 
 Author Ian Inglis terms " Let It Down " an " unashamedly erotic " song that most likely describes " an act , or acts , of infidelity " . " Two lovers hide behind a veil of nonchalance , but both are equally aware of the other 's intentions , " Inglis suggests , with specific reference to the third verse : 
 While you look so sweetly and divine 
 I can feel you here 
 See your eyes are busy kissing mine ... 
 The message behind the verses ' recurring lines " I do , I do " and " Should someone be looking at me " has invited conflicting interpretations . Leng suggests that in the first of these lines , Harrison might be restating his marriage vow , and that the second line is an early example of the singer viewing his life " as a battle with an unseen enemy waiting to pounce " . To Inglis , the characters in " Let It Down " are engaged in an adulterous affair , with the " constant threat " of being discovered – hence the conclusion to verse one : " Hiding it all behind anything I see / Should someone be looking at me . " 
 Harrison biographer Gary Tillery observes of this period when the song was written : " Despite his spiritual hunger , [ for Harrison ] the temptations of a rock star were still too much to resist . He had affairs with other women , and he became less guarded about them with Pattie . " One such affair took place shortly after the couple 's return from New York , in December 1968 , and involved Charlotte Martin , a French model who had just ended a relationship with Harrison 's friend and occasional collaborator Eric Clapton . Harrison invited Martin to stay at Kinfauns , the home he shared with Boyd in Esher , south of London , whereupon , according to Boyd : " She didn 't seem remotely upset about Eric ... " 
 = = The Beatles ' Get Back sessions = = 
 Harrison and Boyd returned to England just before Christmas 1968 , ready for the start of the Beatles ' ill @-@ fated Get Back film project , released as Let It Be in May 1970 , a month after their break @-@ up . On 1 January 1969 , author Peter Doggett writes , Harrison arrived at Apple 's central London headquarters in an " exuberant " mood , inspired by his recent music @-@ making with Dylan and fellow Woodstock residents the Band , and " enjoying the frisson of sharing his home with two beautiful women " . 
 Harrison put forward " Let It Down " , along with as many as nine other compositions , during the Get Back sessions . On 2 January , before the arrival of bandmates Paul McCartney and Ringo Starr for the first day of filming , he debuted the song to John Lennon at Twickenham Film Studios , in south @-@ west London . Tapes from this session reveal Lennon struggling with the song 's chord changes , during a run @-@ through that authors Doug Sulpy and Ray Schweighardt describe as an " excellent performance by George ... seriously marred by John 's distracting accompaniment on guitar " . Once the film project was under way , a combination of Lennon 's barbed criticism of Harrison 's songwriting and McCartney 's attempts to " dominate " him musically , as Starr later put it , resulted in Harrison walking out on 10 January , apparently having quit the band for good . Doggett observes that , for Harrison , there had been " no relief from the tension " that week , since an upset Boyd had recently left Kinfauns to stay with friends in London . 
 Following Harrison 's return to the Beatles , and the film project 's relocation to their familiar Apple Studio , the band rehearsed " Let It Down " briefly on 25 and 29 January . Author Bruce Spizer writes of the song being embellished with " gospel @-@ style organ runs " , played by future Apple Records artist Billy Preston , during these late January sessions . Although the Beatles dedicated more time to it than to Harrison songs such as " Isn 't It a Pity " and " Hear Me Lord " , the track was dropped without being recorded , due to a lack of interest from Lennon and McCartney . 
 = = = Phil Spector 's involvement = = = 
 After engineer Glyn Johns had failed to compile a satisfactory album from the Get Back tapes throughout 1969 , the project passed to American producer Phil Spector , via the latter 's connection with Beatles manager Allen Klein . Like Lennon , Harrison welcomed Spector 's involvement , and he offered a glowing endorsement of the producer 's talents on the sleeve of Ike & Tina Turner 's album River Deep – Mountain High . In January 1970 , Spector was in London discussing the possibility of producing a solo album by Harrison when the latter invited him to a recording session for Lennon 's Plastic Ono Band single " Instant Karma ! " After this session , Spector urged Harrison to record his album , which would become the triple set All Things Must Pass . In 2011 , Spector recalled of the material that Harrison had amassed , such as " Let It Down " : " He had literally hundreds of songs , and each one was better than the rest . He had all this emotion built up ... I don 't think he had played them to anybody , maybe Pattie . " 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Initial recording = = = 
 With Spector as his co @-@ producer , Harrison taped the basic track for " Let It Down " in London early in the summer of 1970 . Similar to the " libidinous detour " provided by " I Dig Love " , Leng views the inclusion of " Let It Down " on All Things Must Pass as " a brief sensory interlude " from the predominant spiritual concerns found on the album . In his discussion of the song , Inglis notes that this period coincided with heightened suspicion on Boyd 's part regarding her husband 's womanising , while music journalist John Harris has written of there being an element of intrigue during the All Things Must Pass sessions , through Clapton 's growing infatuation with Boyd . This development was an open secret to the musicians with whom Clapton formed Derek and the Dominos at this time – his fellow Delaney & Bonnie bandmates Bobby Whitlock , Jim Gordon and Carl Radle – and to an apparently indifferent Harrison . Clapton sought refuge in heroin from his " torment " , Harris writes , while pouring his feelings for Boyd into the songs that Derek and the Dominos would soon record for their album Layla and Other Assorted Love Songs ( 1970 ) . 
 Having also toured with Delaney & Bonnie in December 1969 , Harrison used Gordon ( on drums ) , Radle ( bass ) and the band 's horn section , Bobby Keys and Jim Price , on the session for " Let It Down " . While Leng and Spizer both credit the Hammond organ and piano parts to Gary Wright and Gary Brooker , respectively , and list Whitlock as a backing vocalist only , Whitlock maintains that he played the organ on the recording , " with the Leslie cranked [ up ] " , and that Billy Preston was the pianist . In addition to Harrison and Clapton on electric guitars , Leng and Spizer list Pete Ham , Tom Evans and Joey Molland of Apple band Badfinger as acoustic rhythm guitarists on the track . 
 With its choruses presented in what Harrison biographer Elliot Huntley describes as " thundering , echo @-@ drenched crescendo " , " Let It Down " received a hard rock arrangement that recalls the sound of Wright 's former band Spooky Tooth . Like Huntley , authors Chip Madinger and Mark Easter recognise the song as the most obvious example of Spector 's influence on the album . In their book Eight Arms to Hold You , Madinger and Easter also credit the producer with " creating havoc " during the making of All Things Must Pass . According to Harrison 's later recollections and those of Molland , Klaus Voormann and orchestral arranger John Barham , Spector 's erratic behaviour and alcohol intake became a further burden on Harrison , alongside his marital problems and the death of his mother in July 1970 . During a session at Apple Studio , Spector fell over and broke his arm ; that and other " health issues " left Harrison to do much of the production work alone through to 12 August . 
 = = = Overdubbing and mixing = = = 
 While convalescing in Los Angeles , Spector wrote to Harrison with ideas for each of the early mixes completed in his absence , leaving his most detailed suggestions for " Let It Down " . Once Spector had returned to London , later in August , he and Harrison worked at Trident Studios , overseeing remixes as the recordings were transferred from 8- to 16 @-@ track tape – a process that allowed for greater flexibility when overdubbing further instruments and vocal parts . Among the subsequent overdubs on " Let It Down " , Keys added " a wailing sax ( old rock and roll style ) " , as the producer had described it in his letter , to complement " all that madness at the end [ of the song ] " . Barham 's string arrangements for All Things Must Pass were also recorded at this point ; in the case of " Let It Down " , former Melody Maker editor Richard Williams has written of Barham and Spector " extract [ ing ] a very unusual texture " from their combination of strings and horns . 
 In Leng 's description , the finished recording opens with Harrison 's " heaviest @-@ ever intro " – the " shattering concoction " of Harrison and Clapton 's " angry " guitar riffs , " sledgehammer " drums from Gordon , and Wright 's " roaring " Hammond organ – before the music " slips into the cool waters of a balmy , smooth sensuality " for the first verse . The horns similarly adopt contrasting musical textures , providing a soft , " Moonlight Bay " -like setting , as Spector put it , during the song 's quieter moments . From its aggressive sound over the intro and choruses , Harrison 's slide guitar reverts to a warmer tone , on a track that Leng views as Harrison developing his " unique voice " on slide guitar . Leng also highlights the " gospel passion " of Clapton and Whitlock 's vocal contributions , as the so @-@ called " George O 'Hara @-@ Smith Singers " . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 " Let It Down " was released on All Things Must Pass in November 1970 , sequenced between the two minimalist , Band @-@ influenced tracks " Behind That Locked Door " and " Run of the Mill " . Writing in 1977 of the acclaim afforded the album on release , author Nicholas Schaffner described All Things Must Pass as the " crowning glory " of Harrison and Spector 's respective careers , and concluded : " Spector was at last working with a talent comparable with his own . The producer 's cosmic sound proved a perfect complement to the artist 's cosmic vision . " Author Robert Rodriguez groups " Let It Down " with other Beatles @-@ era compositions such as " All Things Must Pass " , " Isn 't It a Pity " and " Wah @-@ Wah " , as the " essential components " of an album that was " revelatory , helping the public understand that , with a talent this big alongside two acknowledged geniuses [ in Lennon and McCartney ] , no wonder the group could not remain intact " . In his album review for the NME , Alan Smith noted " Let It Down " ' s " big fuzzy " introduction against its verses ' " quiet acid float " and admired the " romantic delicacy and perception " of Harrison 's lyrics . " No matter the quality of the music , " Smith added , " his words never let him down . " 
 In a retrospective review for Rolling Stone , James Hunter cited the " grooving " performance on " Let It Down " as an example of how All Things Must Pass represents " a rock orchestra recorded with sensitivity and teeth and faraway mikes " . Writing for Rough Guides , Chris Ingham considers that without Spector 's Wall of Sound excesses , Harrison 's triple album " wouldn 't be the magnificently overblown item that it is " . Ingham comments on " the sheer size of the sound " on tracks such as " Let It Down " , " Wah @-@ Wah " and " What Is Life " , all of which " build up a head of steam that could only be generated by multiple live takes of dozens of musicians playing their hearts out " . 
 Bruce Spizer has written of the " unfortunate " decision that saw " Let It Down " rejected by the Beatles in 1969 , since " it is one of George 's most exquisite and sensual love songs . " Elliot Huntley finds the same decision " perverse " and <unk> : " I simply don 't have enough hyperbole for ' Let It Down ' ... Spector really earns his corn on this track ... " Huntley writes that the song 's much @-@ admired " soft / loud approach " would be " ripped off by every indie band in the world a generation later " , a point to which John Bergstrom of PopMatters adds : " How many guitar @-@ driven , echo @-@ drenched bands have come around since [ All Things Must Pass ] , mixing powerful rave @-@ ups with moody , reflective down @-@ tempo numbers and a spiritual bent ? ... [ One ] listen to ' Let It Down ' , and you 'll understand a big part of how ' Dream Pop ' came to be . " 
 Also impressed with the song 's musical moods , Ian Inglis writes : " The switches between periods of pulsating rhythm and interludes of musical calm echo the ebb and flow of seduction itself . Like a painter who uses contrasting colors to create tension and movement , Harrison is ... using the tools of the songwriter to create a dynamic and passionate depiction of lust and desire . " Madinger and Easter describe the track as " an absolutely apocalyptic production " and " the best example of Spector running rampant with the ' Wall of Sound ' " . Writing in his book Phil Spector : Out of His Head , Richard Williams views " Let It Down " as " the record 's most thrilling track " , adding that it " picks the listener up and , in the best Spector tradition , never lets him down , building an electrifying tension between the subdued , reverential verses and the roaring chorus " . In September 2014 , the song appeared as Harrison 's selection on the solo Beatles EP 4 : John Paul George Ringo , exclusive to iTunes . 
 = = Other versions = = 
 = = = Alternative mixes = = = 
 Madinger and Easter write of the revelatory nature of the various rough mixes of " Let It Down " , which were made at different stages of the recording process and first issued , unofficially , during the mid 1990s . Available on bootleg compilations such as the multi @-@ disc Making of All Things Must Pass and Songs for Patti – The <unk> Version , the mixes demonstrate the layers of instrumentation that were combined to form the commercially released recording – ranging from a sparse backing of just guitar , bass and drums , to the larger sound following brass and slide guitar overdubs . Madinger and Easter write that " Let It Down " was " a much rougher , rockin ' track in its initial phase " , and the mixes provide a " fascinating view " of how the song could have ended up without the heavy production favoured by Spector . AllMusic critic Bruce Eder similarly admires the " raw band track " , where the mix " puts Harrison 's voice up real close where it sounds amazingly good " . 
 = = = Acoustic version = = = 
 At London 's Abbey Road Studios on 20 May 1970 , Harrison performed " Let It Down " among a selection of songs for Spector , with a view to narrowing down the amount of material that they would be recording for All Things Must Pass . Along with compositions that have yet to see release , including " Window , Window " , " Nowhere to Go " , " Cosmic Empire " and " Mother Divine " , this solo acoustic version of " Let It Down " became available in 1994 on a bootleg titled Beware of ABKCO ! In January 2001 , Harrison included the song , along with a similar run @-@ through of " Beware of Darkness " , as one of five bonus tracks on the 30th anniversary reissue of All Things Must Pass ; in his liner notes , he states that he had been unaware that the session was ever recorded . Harrison added acoustic lead guitar to the song , as well as a string @-@ synthesizer part played by Ray Cooper , both recorded at Harrison 's home studio , FPSHOT , during 2000 . 
 While viewed as an " inessential " extra by Hunter in his review for Rolling Stone , this alternative version does provide " a taste of fluid , jazzy Harrison guitar " , Leng writes . Titled " Let It Down ( Alternate Version ) " , it also appears on the 2014 Apple Years 1968 – 75 reissue of All Things Must Pass . On the website Something Else ! , Nick DeRiso writes of Harrison 's stated regret at Spector 's overuse of reverberation on the album , and opines that " [ This ] stripped @-@ down version of ' Let It Down ' best illustrates how so much of Harrison 's pent @-@ up songcraft instantly resonated , even as first drafts . " 
 = = = Cover versions = = = 
 In 2010 , Brazilian singer Maria <unk> contributed an acoustic version of " Let It Down " to Tudo <unk> , a Harrison tribute album recorded by various Brazilian musicians . Backed by the band Big Black Delta , Harrison 's son Dhani performed the song on the US television show Conan in September 2014 . This appearance was part of the show 's " George Harrison Week " , celebrating the release of the Apple Years 1968 – 75 box set . Dhani Harrison subsequently performed the song at George Fest , a multi @-@ artist concert tribute to his father 's music , held at the Fonda Theatre , Los Angeles , on 28 September that same year . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 The musicians who performed on " Let It Down " are believed to be as follows : 
 George Harrison – vocals , electric guitar , slide guitar , backing vocals 
 Eric Clapton – electric guitar , backing vocals 
 Gary Wright – organ 
 Gary Brooker – piano 
 Carl Radle – bass 
 Jim Gordon – drums 
 Bobby Keys – saxophones 
 Jim Price – trumpet , trombone , horn arrangement 
 John Barham – string arrangement 
 Pete Ham – acoustic guitar 
 Tom Evans – acoustic guitar 
 Joey Molland – acoustic guitar 
 uncredited – shaker 
 Bobby Whitlock – backing vocals 
 = Holly & Ivy = 
 Holly & Ivy is a 1994 Christmas album and sixteenth overall by American singer Natalie Cole . It was released on October 4 , 1994 , by Elektra ; it is Cole 's first album featuring Christmas music and serves as a follow @-@ up to Take a Look ( 1993 ) . Cole co @-@ produced the album with American music producer Tommy <unk> , with whom she worked on Unforgettable ... with Love . Holly & Ivy consists of twelve tracks , including eleven covers of Christmas standards and carols , and one original song written by Gerry Goffin and Michael Masser . Cole promoted the album as " non @-@ traditional " in interviews and performances . 
 Upon release , critics gave generally positive reviews of the album , praising its composition and Cole 's interpretations of the covered material . The album was moderately successful in the United States and was certified gold by Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) on March 20 , 1996 , for 500 @,@ 000 sales shipments . The album peaked at number 36 on the Billboard 200 chart . The album spawned one single : " No More Blue Christmas " . In support of the album , Cole filmed a television special , " Natalie Cole 's <unk> Traditional Christmas " , at State University of New York Performing Arts Center in Purchase , New York ; it premiered on WNET on December 7 , 1994 . 
 = = Background = = 
 In an interview with Clarence Waldron from Jet , Cole said the idea of recording a Christmas album started after a telephone call from producer and longtime friend Michael Masser , with whom Cole had worked on the songs " Someone That I Used to Love " from the 1980 album Don 't Look Back and " Miss You Like Crazy " . Cole described the telephone call from Masser as unexpected ; Masser told her , " I 've got this beautiful Christmas song I wrote just for you " . When they met , Messer played " No More Blue Christmas " ; after the session they both agreed to record a Christmas album . Cole described the decision to form a Christmas album as leaving her " running around in April , looking for Christmas songs " . Cole expressed hope that the album would remind her fans about " the true spirit of the holiday season " . She wanted it to communicate that Christmas is " a time for families to reflect and not just wait until the holidays to be a family " . Cole 's twin sister <unk> Cole said , " Christmas Eve has always been a magical time with Natalie " when she could connect with family over holiday traditions . 
 One of the main inspirations of the record came from her father 's Christmas album The Magic of Christmas ( 1960 ) . Cole called the album one of " the nicest , warmest Christmas albums that I 've heard " . She described the original version of " The Christmas Song ( Chestnuts Roasting on an Open Fire ) " as " a darling sweet song " that has yet to be imitated by other original Christmas songs . In an interview with NPR , Cole said in the beginning of her career , " the last thing [ she ] wanted to do was sing [ her ] dad 's music " and that " it took 15 years into [ her ] career before [ she ] felt comfortable and confident enough to even attempt at singing my father 's music " . The album includes three cover version of her father 's songs ; " Caroling , Caroling " , " The First Noel " , and " The Christmas Song ( Chestnuts Roasting on an Open Fire ) " done in tribute to him . Waldron said the album was " keeping the holiday spirit in the family " . Cole would later re @-@ record " The Christmas Song ( Chestnuts Roasting on an Open Fire ) " as a posthumous duet with her father on her 1999 Christmas album The Magic of Christmas . The song also appears on Cole 's 2008 Christmas album ( Caroling , Caroling : Christmas with Natalie Cole ) and her 1995 collaborative Christmas live album with Plácido Domingo and José Carreras ( A Celebration of Christmas ) . 
 = = Composition = = 
 Holly & Ivy is a Christmas album influenced by R & B and gospel elements . Cole said she wanted to explore other genres , saying , " she just likes to expand a little , every now and then " and staying true to her soulful roots . She described the album as " a non traditional album " and said , " Though we do ' Silent Night ' , ' Merry Christmas Baby ' , and a wonderful gospel version of ' Joy to the World ' , ( featuring L.A. ' s Friendly Baptist Church choir ) we move around a lot " . In its biography of Cole , Billboard identified the album and the following album Stardust as " continu [ ing ] Cole 's exploration of American pop standards " . 
 The album 's opening track is " Jingle Bells , " a classic Christmas song that is reinvented with a " jazzy , sassy " sound . The second and third tracks are covers of Nat King Cole 's " Caroling , Caroling " and " The First Noel " respectively . The fourth song is " No More Blue Christmas ' " ; Billboard called the song " a soulful , torch @-@ like burner " . " Christmas Medley " contains excerpts from " Jingle Bell Rock " , " Winter Wonderland " , " Little Drummer Boy " , and " I 'll Be Home for Christmas " . A writer from Billboard picked out " a pure blues ' Merry Christmas Baby ' " as a highlight of the album . 
 Waldron described Cole 's interpretation of the seventh track , " Joy to the World " , as " tak [ ing ] listeners to church on her gospel flavored rendition " , while a writer from Billboard called it " rollicking " . The eighth and ninth tracks are covers of Vera Lynn 's " The Little Boy That Santa Claus Forgot " and Ida <unk> 's " A Song for Christmas " respectively . The tenth track is a cover of " Silent Night " . " The Christmas Song ( Chestnuts Roasting on an Open Fire ) " is the third and final cover of Nat King Cole on the album ; David Browne of Entertainment Weekly described the decision to cover " The Christmas Song " with no vocals from her father benefited the song , which he said worked better " alone , not as a duet with the dead " . The album concludes with the title track " Holly and Ivy " , which Waldron called a " touching Christmas ballad " and described Cole 's vocal performance as belonging to " one of the sweetest songbirds " . 
 = = Promotion = = 
 Cole promoted Holly & Ivy by headlining a special edition of the Public Broadcasting Service ( PBS ) series Great Performances , titled " Natalie Cole 's <unk> Traditional Christmas " ; the program was directed by Patricia Birch and was filmed at the State University of New York Performing Arts Center in Purchase , New York . It featured special appearances by the New York Restoration Choir and Sesame Street character Elmo . The show premiered on WNET on December 7 , 1994 , and was later was released on a VHS home video cassette that was distributed by Warner Music Vision . <unk> @-@ TV aired the program along with two other Christmas specials , " Perry Como 's Irish Christmas " and " A Christmas Special With Luciano Pavarotti " . It was Cole 's first television special . 
 The Christmas special served as the album 's primary promotional medium . No More Blue Christmas ' " was released as the lead single from the album . Cole promoted the single with a performance on her Christmas special . The program received a lukewarm reception from critics . Chris Willman from the Los Angeles Times said the program 's title was misleading because " it 's hard to find anything the slightest bit untraditional about [ it ] " . Willman commended the 1960s influence reminiscent of her father 's Christmas songs and said the special was " a good @-@ enough live video counterpart " to the album with an obvious inclusion of ' The Christmas Song ' " . John J. O 'Conner of The New York Times gave it a negative review , saying , " a couple of new songs are forgettable " and describing Cole 's performance as " sweetly , and somewhat <unk> " , and the production as unable to leave a lasting impression on the viewers . O 'Connor also said Cole 's rendition of " The Christmas Song " was the highlight of the show and , " Ms. Cole once again dips in the repertory of her incomparable father " . He compared the program to " Perry Como 's Irish Christmas " and said both had " the same lulling level " . Following Cole 's death on December 31 , 2015 , PBS released a statement saying " we are grateful to have been able to capture [ Cole 's ] extraordinary artistry for generations to come " through her Great Performances solo specials including her Christmas special . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 Holly & Ivy was released in October 1994 and received positive reviews from music critics . Reviews frequently made comparisons with Cole 's father 's album The Magic of Christmas . AllMusic 's Robert Taylor gave the album three stars out of five , and said Cole 's album " does not have the same ' classic ' quality of her dad 's ' The Christmas Album ' " , but described it as a " fine outing " ; he further praised Cole 's choice of holiday classics and lesser known songs such as " The Little Boy That Santa Claus Forgot " and " No More Blue Christmas " . David Browne of Entertainment Weekly gave the album a " B " rating , praising the possible influence from her appearance on Frank Sinatra 's Duets and her ability to make " the usual yuletide tunes brassy and bustling ; when she and the musicians swagger through ' Winter Wonderland ' , it 's like Christmas Eve at the Copa " ; Browne also wrote about Cole 's decision to stay away from traditionally Christmas images and sounds , instead " opt [ ing ] for a simple black evening dress on the cover " in comparison to Mariah Carey 's Merry Christmas , which was released the same year . He said Cole 's voice stays " warm and <unk> " even when the material is lowered " from overly gushy arrangements " . Billboard 's review , which was edited by Paul Verna , Marilyn A. Gillen , and Peter Cronin , described the album as the " rarest of Christmas albums : an elegant set with appeal that could outlast the season " . Waldron said the album " already has become a top favorite among music lovers this season " . 
 = = = Commercial performance = = = 
 Holly & Ivy became a moderate commercial success in the United States , peaking on the Billboard 200 at number 36 and on Billboard 's R & B Albums chart at number 20 . It also peaked at number 25 on Billboard 's Catalog Albums chart on January 6 , 1996 . Holly & Ivy also peaked on the U.S. Top Holiday Albums at number 6 , on February 27 , 2013 , roughly nineteen years after its release , becoming Cole 's only Christmas album to appear on that chart . The album was certified gold by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) , denoting shipments of 500 @,@ 000 copies . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 The following credits are adapted from AllMusic : 
 Managerial 
 Performance credits 
 Visuals and imagery 
 Instruments 
 Production and composition 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 The follow release history was adapted from Amazon and AllMusic . 
 = It Only Hurts When I 'm Breathing = 
 " It Only Hurts When I 'm Breathing " is a song co @-@ written and performed by Canadian country music singer @-@ songwriter Shania Twain . The track was composed by Twain and her then @-@ husband Robert John " Mutt " Lange , and produced by Lange . It was released on February 9 , 2004 as the eighth and final single from Twain 's album Up ! , and the fifth to impact the North American market . <unk> to the remainder of Up ! , " It Only Hurts when I 'm Breathing " is a ballad that Twain labeled to be the sole heartbreak song on the album . Musically , it lies within the country pop genre while its lyrics speak of misery . 
 " It Only Hurts When I 'm Breathing " received mixed reviews from music critics . Commercially , the single performed well in Canada , where it peaked at number four , and mildly in United States ' country and adult contemporary markets . It peaked at number seventy @-@ one on the Billboard Hot 100 and at number eighteen on Hot Country Singles & Tracks . Although an official music video for " It Only Hurts when I 'm Breathing " was never filmed , it was given a promotional music video taken from a performance for the concert film Up ! Live in Chicago ( 2003 ) . Contestant Michael Lynche performed a cover version of " It Only Hurts when I 'm Breathing " on a Twain @-@ themed episode of the ninth season of the singing competition American Idol . 
 = = Background = = 
 After collaborating on her great successes The Woman in Me ( 1995 ) and Come on Over ( 1997 ) , Twain and her then @-@ husband Robert John " Mutt " Lange decided to take a musical hiatus . The two relocated to Switzerland , settled down , and had a child , <unk> , in August 2001 . Twain felt content and was in a very positive state of mind , which inspired Up ! ( 2002 ) . She and Lange conceptualized the album to be very positive , optimistic , and uplifting ; they desired to evade dark subject matters , yet still be profound through optimism . In doing so , they co @-@ wrote every track on Up ! , in which few tracks were ballads , something Twain considered a small ratio compared to the nineteen songs on the album . She explained it was not done deliberately , but influenced by her and Lange 's state of mind at the time , adding , " There just didn 't seem to be enough room for [ ballads ] " . One of the ballads was " It Only Hurts when I 'm Breathing " , which Twain deemed necessary to come down in tempo . She said the song was very powerful and , as with each track on Up ! , was significant to her . Twain said of the track , " This is the only heartbreak song on the new CD . [ ... ] a chance for all of us to catch our breath here . " " It Only Hurts when I 'm Breathing " was later selected as the eighth and final single from Up ! , fifth to impact the North American music market . It was released to country radio on February 9 , 2004 and to adult contemporary radio on March 22 , 2004 . A live CD single and digital download were taken from Up ! Live in Chicago , and released on March 9 , 2004 with the same cover as the video album . CD singles and 7 " singles were later issued by Mercury Nashville Records on March 30 , 2004 . 
 = = Composition = = 
 " It Only Hurts when I 'm Breathing " is a ballad that lies within a fine line of country pop , most instrumentation are typical of country music , yet it does not sound distinctively country . The country " Green " version is of three minutes and nineteen seconds in length , and the pop " Red " version is of three minutes and twenty seconds in length . Paul <unk> of The Daily Campus stated , " Twain decides to deeply cross the line into pop music in her song , ' It Only Hurts when I 'm Breathing . ' Since there isn 't any type of country @-@ feel in it , the song sounds like a typical pop ballad that could be found on Kiss 95 @.@ 7 . " It is set in common time and has a slow tempo of 76 beats per minute . Written in the key of D ♭ major , " It Only Hurts when I 'm Breathing " follows the chord progression G – Am7 – F9 . Twain 's vocals span two octaves , from A ♭ 3 to D5 . Its lyrics reflect misery and burden . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 " It Only Hurts When I 'm Breathing " received mixed reviews from music critics . Ron Rollins of Dayton Daily News believed the song was " catchier " under its pop format from the Red CD of Up ! . Eric R. Danton of the Hartford Courant felt his heartstrings weakly tugged by " It Only Hurts when I 'm Breathing " , and added , " The whole endeavor feels like a calculated and spectacularly cynical attempt to make money while expending as little effort as possible . " Carol Tannehill of The News @-@ Sentinel called the song one of the hottest singles on country and pop radio at the time . Stephen Thomas Erlewine of Allmusic noted the song 's absence from Twain 's Greatest Hits ( 2004 ) album ; however , he said it was not greatly missed . In 2004 , " It Only Hurts when I 'm Breathing " was listed as a " Winning Song " in the country genre by Broadcast Music Incorporated ( BMI ) . The song was nominated for " Song of the Year " at the 2004 Canadian Country Music Association Awards , but lost to Carolyn Dawn Johnson 's " Die of a Broken Heart " . 
 = = = Chart performance = = = 
 " It Only Hurts When I 'm Breathing " debuted at number fifty @-@ seven in mid @-@ March 2004 , and eventually peaked at number four in mid @-@ April 2004 on the Canadian Singles Chart . On the week ending May 8 , 2004 , " It Only Hurts when I 'm Breathing " debuted at number seventy @-@ six on the United States ' main singles chart , the Billboard Hot 100 . In the succeeding week , the track jumped to its peak position at number seventy @-@ one . It spent a total of seven weeks on the Billboard Hot 100 . On the week ending February 21 , 2004 , " It Only Hurts when I 'm Breathing " entered the US Hot Country Singles & Tracks chart at number fifty . The following week , the track ascended to number forty @-@ three , and , after thirteen weeks on the chart , on the week ending May 15 , 2004 , it reached its peak at number eighteen , where it remained for three consecutive weeks . In all , the single managed to remain aboard Hot Country Singles & Tracks for twenty weeks . " It Only Hurts when I 'm Breathing " also charted on the US Adult Contemporary chart , where it peaked at number sixteen on the week ending May 29 , 2004 . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 Twain first performed the song as part of her setlist for an outdoor concert on July 5 , 2003 at Nowlan Park in Kilkenny , Ireland . She then performed it at another concert on July 12 , 2003 at Hyde Park in London , England . The singer last performed " It Only Hurts when I 'm Breathing " on July 27 , 2003 at a free outdoor concert held in Grant Park in Chicago , filmed for the Up ! Live in Chicago ( 2003 ) concert film . The singer donned a tan , multi @-@ patterned halter top and black , sequined wide leg trousers , and performed sitting on a stool placed at the end of the runaway . The recording of the performance at Grant Park was used as a promotional music video for the single . 
 = = Cover version = = 
 Contestant Michael Lynche performed a cover version of " It Only Hurts when I 'm Breathing " on a Twain @-@ themed episode of the ninth season of the singing competition American Idol , aired on April 27 , 2010 . Lynche performed the contemporary R & B @-@ oriented rendition of song sitting on the staircase of the show 's stage . His performance was received well by judges Ellen DeGeneres ( who compared Lynche 's delivery to that of Luther Vandross ) , Kara DioGuardi , and Randy Jackson ; judge Simon Cowell felt Lynche 's song selection poor , deeming the song too feminine for him . Sitting in the audience after serving as a guest mentor , Twain herself was moved to tears listening to Lynche 's rendition . Eric Ditzian of MTV News desired for the contestant to tap into his R & B and soul music roots further and concluded , " Last night 's performance was hardly the stuff of Luther Vandross , as Randy Jackson and Simon Cowell maintained , but it 's a comparison that Mike should take to heart . " Leslie Grey Steeler of The Palm Beach Post acknowledged Lynche was usually cheesy in his performances , but favored his rendition of " It Only Hurts when I 'm Breathing " , saying , " I loved it " and calling it " awesome " . Mary T. Kelly of Salon.com commented , " Big Mike went back to good , ole country basics and sang the song sweet , simple and pure . Tammy Tyree would have been proud . " Lynche was placed in the bottom three that week , and later eliminated . 
 = = Track listings = = 
 Live CD / Digital Download 
 " It Only Hurts When I 'm Breathing " ( Live from Up ! Live in Chicago ) – 3 : 42 
 CD / 7 " single 
 " It Only Hurts When I 'm Breathing " ( Green Version ) – 3 : 20 
 " It Only Hurts When I 'm Breathing " ( Red Version ) – 3 : 19 
 = = Charts = = 
 = Olivia de Havilland = 
 Olivia Mary de Havilland ( born July 1 , 1916 ) is a British @-@ American former actress whose career spanned from 1935 to 1988 . She is one of the last surviving stars from the Golden Age of Hollywood . She appeared in forty @-@ nine feature films , and was one of the leading movie stars during the golden age of Classical Hollywood . She is best known for her early screen performances in The Adventures of Robin Hood ( 1938 ) and Gone with the Wind ( 1939 ) , and her later award @-@ winning performances in To Each His Own ( 1946 ) , The Snake Pit ( 1948 ) , and The Heiress ( 1949 ) . Born in Tokyo to English parents , de Havilland and her younger sister , actress Joan Fontaine , moved to California in 1919 . They were raised by their mother Lilian , a former stage actress who taught them dramatic art , music , and elocution . De Havilland made her acting debut in amateur theatre in Alice in Wonderland and later appeared in a local production of Shakespeare 's A Midsummer Night 's Dream , which led to her playing Hermia in Max Reinhardt 's stage production of the same play and a movie contract with Warner Bros. 
 Olivia de Havilland made her screen debut in Reinhardt 's A Midsummer Night 's Dream in 1935 . She began her career playing demure <unk> opposite popular leading men , including Errol Flynn , with whom she made eight films . They became one of Hollywood 's most popular romantic on @-@ screen pairings . She achieved her initial popularity in romantic comedy films , such as The Great Garrick ( 1937 ) , and in Westerns , such as Dodge City ( 1939 ) . Her natural beauty and refined acting style made her particularly effective in historical period dramas , such as Anthony Adverse ( 1936 ) , and romantic dramas , such as Hold Back the Dawn ( 1941 ) . In her later career , she was most successful in drama films , such as Light in the Piazza ( 1962 ) , and unglamorous roles in psychological dramas including Hush … Hush , Sweet Charlotte ( 1964 ) . 
 As well as her film career , de Havilland continued her work in the theatre , appearing three times on Broadway , in Romeo and Juliet ( 1951 ) , Candida ( 1952 ) , and A Gift of Time ( 1962 ) . She also worked in television , appearing in the successful miniseries , Roots : The Next Generations ( 1979 ) , and television feature films , such as Anastasia : The Mystery of Anna , for which she received a Primetime Emmy Award nomination . During her film career , de Havilland won two Academy Awards , two Golden Globe Awards , two New York Film Critics Circle Awards , the National Board of Review Award for Best Actress , and the Venice Film Festival Volpi Cup . For her contributions to the motion picture industry , she received a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame . For her lifetime contribution to the arts , she received the National Medal of Arts from President George W. Bush , and was appointed a Chevalier of the Légion d 'honneur by French President Nicolas Sarkozy . 
 After romantic relationships with Howard Hughes , James Stewart , and John Huston , de Havilland married author Marcus Goodrich , with whom she had a son , Benjamin . Following her divorce from Goodrich in 1953 , she moved to Paris and married Pierre Galante , an executive editor for the French journal Paris Match , with whom she had a daughter , Gisèle . In 1962 she published Every Frenchman Has One , an account of her life in France . De Havilland and Joan Fontaine are the only siblings to have won Academy Awards in a lead acting category . A lifelong rivalry between the two resulted in an estrangement that lasted over three decades . She has lived in Paris since 1956 , and celebrated her 100th birthday on July 1 , 2016 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 De Havilland was born on July 1 , 1916 , in Tokyo , Japan , to English parents . Her father , Walter ( August 31 , 1872 – May 23 , 1968 ) , served as an English professor at the Imperial University in Tokyo before becoming a patent attorney . Her mother , Lilian Augusta ( née Ruse ; June 11 , 1886 – February 20 , 1975 ) , was educated at the Royal Academy of Dramatic Art in London and became a stage actress . Lilian also sang with the Master of the King 's Music , Sir Walter Parratt , and toured England with the composer Ralph Vaughan Williams . Olivia 's paternal cousin was Sir Geoffrey de Havilland ( 1882 – 1965 ) , an aircraft designer and founder of the de Havilland aircraft company . Lilian and Walter met in Japan in 1913 and were married the following year . They moved into a large house in Tokyo , where Lilian gave informal singing recitals for the European colony . The marriage was not a happy one due in part to Walter 's infidelities . Olivia 's younger sister Joan ‍ — ‌ later known as actress Joan Fontaine ‍ — ‌ was born on October 22 , 1917 . In February 1919 Lilian persuaded her husband to take the family back to England to a climate better suited for their ailing daughters . They sailed aboard the SS Siberia Maru to San Francisco , where the family stopped to treat Olivia 's tonsillitis . 
 After Joan developed pneumonia , Lilian decided to remain with her daughters in California , where they eventually settled in the village of Saratoga , 50 miles ( 80 km ) south of San Francisco . Her father abandoned the family and returned to his Japanese housekeeper , who eventually became his second wife . 
 Olivia was raised to appreciate the arts , beginning with ballet lessons at the age of four , and piano lessons a year later . She learned to read before she was six , and her mother , who occasionally taught dramatic art , music , and elocution , had her reciting passages from Shakespeare to strengthen her diction . During this period her younger sister Joan first started calling her " <unk> " ‍ — ‌ a nickname that would last throughout her life . De Havilland entered Saratoga Grammar School in 1922 and did well in her studies . She enjoyed reading , writing poetry , and drawing , and once represented her grammar school in a county spelling bee , coming in second place . In 1923 , Lilian had a new Tudor @-@ style house built at 231 La Paloma Avenue ( now <unk> ) , where the family resided until the early 1930s . 
 In April 1925 , after her divorce was finalized , Lilian married George Milan Fontaine , a department store manager for O. A. Hale & Co. in San Jose . Fontaine was a good provider and respectable businessman , but his strict parenting style generated animosity and later rebellion in both of his new stepdaughters . 
 De Havilland continued her education at Los Gatos High School , near Saratoga in Los Gatos , CA . There she excelled in oratory and field hockey and participated in school plays and the school drama club , eventually becoming the club 's secretary . With plans of becoming a schoolteacher of English and speech , she also attended Notre Dame Convent in Belmont . In 1933 de Havilland made her debut in amateur theatre in Alice in Wonderland , a production of the Saratoga Community Players based on the novel by Lewis Carroll . She also appeared in several school plays , including The Merchant of Venice and Hansel and Gretel . Her passion for drama eventually led to a confrontation with her stepfather , who forbade her from participating in further extracurricular activities . When he learned that she had won the lead role of Elizabeth Bennet in a school fund @-@ raising production of Jane Austen 's Pride and Prejudice , he gave her an ultimatum to either stay home or not return home . Not wanting to let her school and classmates down , she left home forever , moving in with a family friend . 
 After graduating from high school in 1934 , de Havilland was offered a scholarship to Mills College in Oakland to pursue her chosen career as an English teacher . She was also offered the role of Puck in the Saratoga Community Theater production of Shakespeare 's A Midsummer Night 's Dream . That summer , Austrian director Max Reinhardt came to California for a major new production of the same play to premiere at the Hollywood Bowl . After one of Reinhardt 's assistants saw her perform in Saratoga , he offered her the second understudy position for the role of Hermia . One week before the premiere , the understudy Jean <unk> and lead actress Gloria Stuart both left the project , leaving eighteen @-@ year @-@ old de Havilland to play Hermia . Impressed with her performance , Reinhardt offered her the part in the four @-@ week autumn tour that followed . During that tour , Reinhardt received word that he would direct the Warner Bros. film version of his stage production , and he offered her the film role of Hermia . With her mind still set on becoming a teacher , de Havilland initially wavered , but eventually Reinhardt and executive producer Henry <unk> persuaded her to sign a five @-@ year contract with Warner Bros. on November 12 , 1934 , with a starting salary of two hundred dollars a week . 
 = = Career = = 
 = = = Early films , 1935 – 37 = = = 
 De Havilland made her screen debut in Reinhardt 's A Midsummer Night 's Dream , which was filmed at Warner Bros. studios from December 19 , 1934 , to March 9 , 1935 . During the production , de Havilland picked up film acting techniques from the film 's co @-@ director William Dieterle , and camera techniques from cinematographer Hal Mohr , who was impressed with her questions about his work . By the end of filming , she had learned the effect of lighting and camera angles on how she appeared on screen and how to find her best lighting . Following premieres in New York and Beverly Hills , the film was released on October 30 , 1935 . Despite the publicity campaign , the film generated little enthusiasm with audiences . While the critical response was mixed , de Havilland 's performance was praised by The San Francisco Examiner critic . In his review in the Brooklyn Daily Eagle , Winston Burdett noted that de Havilland " acts graciously and does greater justice to Shakespeare 's language than anyone else in the cast " . Two minor comedies followed , Alibi Ike with Joe E. Brown and The Irish in Us with James Cagney . In both films , she played the sweet and charming love interest ‍ — ‌ a role into which she would later become typecast . After the experience of being a Reinhardt player , de Havilland felt disappointed being assigned these routine heroine roles . In March de Havilland and her mother moved into an apartment at the Chateau des Fleurs at <unk> Franklin Avenue in Hollywood . 
 In July 1935 Warner Bros. paired de Havilland with an unknown Australian actor named Errol Flynn in the swashbuckler film Captain Blood ( 1935 ) . According to film historian Tony Thomas , both actors had " classic good looks , cultured speaking voices , and a sense of distant aristocracy about them " . Filmed between August 5 and October 29 , 1935 , Captain Blood gave de Havilland the opportunity to appear in her first costumed historical romance and adventure epic ‍ — ‌ a genre to which she was well suited , given her beauty and elegance . In the film , she played Arabella Bishop , the niece of a Jamaica plantation owner , who purchases at auction an Irish physician wrongly condemned to servitude . The on @-@ screen chemistry between de Havilland and Flynn was evident from their first scenes together , where clashes between her character 's spirited hauteur and his character 's playful braggadocio did not mask their mutual attraction to each other . Unlike her two previous roles , Arabella is a feisty young woman who knows what she wants and is willing to fight for it . The bantering tone of their exchanges in the film ‍ — ‌ the healthy give @-@ and @-@ take and mutual respect ‍ — ‌ became the basis for their on @-@ screen relationship in subsequent films . Captain Blood was released on December 28 , 1935 , and received good reviews and wide public appeal . De Havilland 's performance was singled out in The New York Times and Variety . The film was nominated for four Academy Awards , including Best Picture . The popular success of the film , as well as the critical response to the on @-@ screen couple , led to seven additional collaborations . 
 In 1936 de Havilland appeared in Mervyn LeRoy 's historical period drama Anthony Adverse with Fredric March . Based on the popular novel by Hervey Allen , the film follows the adventures of an orphan raised by a Scottish merchant , whose pursuit of fortune separates him from the innocent peasant girl he loves , marries , and eventually loses . De Havilland played the peasant girl Angela who , after being separated from her slave trader husband , becomes opera star Mademoiselle Georges , the mistress of Napoleon . The film earned six Academy Award nominations , including Best Picture . It also garnered de Havilland good exposure and the opportunity to portray a character as she develops over time . Howard Barnes of the New York Herald Tribune found her later scenes as Mademoiselle Georges " not very credible " , but Frank S. Nugent of The New York Times called her " a winsome Angela " . That same year , she was reunited with Flynn in Michael Curtiz 's period action film The Charge of the Light Brigade , set during the Crimean War which became a box office success . During the film 's production , de Havilland renegotiated her contract with Warner Bros. and signed a seven @-@ year contract on April 14 , 1936 , with a starting weekly salary of five hundred dollars ( equivalent to $ 8 @,@ 500 in 2015 ) . Toward the end of the year , twenty @-@ year @-@ old de Havilland and her mother moved to 2337 Nella Vista Avenue in the Los Feliz section of Los Angeles . 
 In 1937 de Havilland had her first top billing in Archie Mayo 's comedy Call It a Day , about a middle class English family struggling with the romantic effects of spring fever during the course of a single day . De Havilland played daughter Catherine Hilton , who falls in love with the handsome artist hired to paint her portrait . The film did not do well at the box office and did little to advance her career . She fared better in Mayo 's screwball comedy It 's Love I 'm After with Leslie Howard and Bette Davis . De Havilland played Marcia West , a young debutante and theater fan enamored with a Barrymore @-@ like matinee idol who decides to help the girl 's fiancé by pretending to be an abominable cad . The film received good reviews , with Variety calling it " fresh , clever , excellently directed and produced , and acted by an ensemble that clicks from start to finish " , and praising de Havilland . 
 That same year , de Havilland made two more period films , beginning with The Great Garrick , a fictional romantic comedy about the eighteenth @-@ century English actor 's encounter with jealous players from the Comédie @-@ Française who plot to embarrass him on his way to Paris . Wise to their prank , Garrick plays along with the ruse determined to get the last laugh ‍ — ‌ even on a lovely young aristocrat , de Havilland 's Germaine Dupont , whom he mistakenly believes to be one of the players . With her refined demeanor and diction , de Havilland delivers a performance that is " lighthearted and thoroughly believable " , according to Judith Kass . Variety praised the film , calling it " a production of superlative workmanship " . 
 Despite the positive reviews , the film did not do as well at the box office . Her final film that year was Michael Curtiz 's romantic drama Gold Is Where You Find It , a film about the late nineteenth century conflict in the Sacramento Valley between gold miners and their hydraulic equipment and farmers whose land is being flooded . De Havilland played the daughter of a farmer , Serena Ferris , who falls in love with the mining engineer responsible for the flooding . The film was released in February 1938 , and was her first appearance in three @-@ strip Technicolor . 
 = = = Movie stardom , 1938 – 40 = = = 
 In September 1937 de Havilland was selected by Warner Bros. studio head Jack L. Warner to play Maid Marian opposite Errol Flynn in The Adventures of Robin Hood ( 1938 ) . The Technicolor production was filmed on location between September 26 , 1937 , and January 14 , 1938 , at Bidwell Park , Busch Gardens , and Lake Sherwood in California . Directed by William Keighley and Michael Curtiz , the film is about the legendary Robin Hood , a Saxon knight who opposes the corrupt and brutal Prince John and his Norman lords while good King Richard is away fighting in the Third Crusade . The King 's ward , Maid Marian , initially opposes Robin but later supports him after learning his true intentions of helping his oppressed people . No mere bystander to events , Marian risks her life to save Robin by providing his men a plan for his escape . As defined by de Havilland , Marian is both a beautiful fairy @-@ tale heroine and a spirited , intelligent woman " whose actions are governed by her mind as well as her heart " , according to author Judith Kass . The Adventures of Robin Hood was released on May 14 , 1938 , and was an immediate critical and commercial success , earning an Academy Award nomination for Best Picture . It went on to become one of the most popular adventure films of the Classical Hollywood era . 
 The popularity of The Adventures of Robin Hood brought de Havilland a new level of fame as a movie star , but this new status was not reflected in her subsequent film assignments at Warner Bros. Her next several roles were more routine and less challenging . In the romantic comedy Four 's a Crowd ( 1938 ) , de Havilland played Lorri <unk> , a dizzy rich girl being romanced by a conniving PR man looking to land an account with her eccentric grandfather . In Ray Enright 's romantic comedy Hard to Get ( 1938 ) , she played another dizzy rich girl , Margaret Richards , whose desire to exact revenge on a gas station attendant leads to her own comeuppance . While de Havilland was certainly capable of playing these kinds of characters , her personality was better suited to stronger and more dramatic roles , according to Judith Kass . By this time , de Havilland had serious doubts about her career at Warner Bros. 
 Some film scholars consider 1939 to be the high point of the golden age of Classical Hollywood , producing classics in many genres , including the Western . Warner Bros. produced Michael Curtiz 's sprawling Technicolor adventure Dodge City , Flynn and de Havilland 's first Western film . Set during the American Civil War , the film is about a Texas trailblazer who witnesses the brutal lawlessness of Dodge City , Kansas , and becomes sheriff to clean up the town . De Havilland played Abbie Irving , whose initial hostility towards Flynn 's character Wade Hatton is transformed by events , and the two fall in love ‍ — ‌ by now a proven formula for their on @-@ screen relationships . Curtiz 's action sequences , Sol Polito 's cinematography , Max Steiner 's expansive film score , and perhaps the " definitive saloon brawl in movie history " all contributed to the film 's success . Variety described the film as " a lusty western , packed with action " . For de Havilland , playing yet one more supporting love interest in a limited role , Dodge City represented the emotional low point of her career to that point . She later said , " I was in such a depressed state that I could hardly remember my lines . " 
 In a letter to a colleague dated November 18 , 1938 , film producer David O. Selznick wrote , " I would give anything if we had Olivia de Havilland under contract to us so that we could cast her as Melanie . " The film he was preparing to shoot was Gone with the Wind , and Jack L. Warner was unwilling to lend her out for the project . De Havilland had read the novel , and unlike most other actresses , who wanted the Scarlett O 'Hara role , she wanted to play Melanie Hamilton ‍ — ‌ a character whose quiet dignity and inner strength she understood and felt she could bring to life on the screen . De Havilland turned to Warner 's wife Anne for help . Warner later recalled , " Olivia , who had a brain like a computer concealed behind those fawn @-@ like eyes , simply went to my wife and they joined forces to change my mind . " Warner relented , and de Havilland was signed to the project a few weeks before the start of principal photography on January 26 , 1939 . 
 Set in the American South during the nineteenth century , the film is about the strong @-@ willed daughter of a Georgia plantation owner in love with the husband of her sister @-@ in @-@ law , Melanie , whose kindness stands in sharp contrast to those around her . According to film historian Tony Thomas , de Havilland 's skillful and subtle performance effectively presents this character of selfless love and quiet strength in a way that keeps her vital and interesting throughout the film . Gone with the Wind had its world premiere in Atlanta , Georgia , on December 15 , 1939 , and was well received . Frank S. Nugent of The Times wrote that de Havilland 's Melanie " is a gracious , dignified , tender gem of characterization " , and John C. Flinn , Sr. , in Variety called her " a standout " . The film won ten Academy Awards , including Best Picture , and de Havilland received her first nomination for Best Supporting Actress . 
 Melanie was someone different . She had very , deeply feminine qualities ... that I felt were very endangered at that time , and they are from generation to generation , and that somehow they should be kept alive , and ... that 's why I wanted to interpret her role . ... The main thing is that she was always thinking of the other person , and the interesting thing to me is that she was a happy person ... loving , compassionate . 
 Within days of completing her work in Gone with the Wind in June 1939 , de Havilland returned to Warner Bros. and began filming Michael Curtiz 's historical drama The Private Lives of Elizabeth and Essex with Bette Davis and Errol Flynn . She had hoped her work on Selznick 's prestige picture would lead to first @-@ rate roles at Warner Bros. , but instead she received third billing below the title as the Queen 's lady @-@ in @-@ waiting . In early September she was lent out to Samuel Goldwyn Productions for Sam Wood 's romantic caper film Raffles with David Niven , about a high society cricketer and jewel thief . De Havilland would later complain , " I had nothing to do with that style of film . " In early 1940 de Havilland refused to appear in several films assigned to her , initiating the first of her suspensions at the studio . She agreed to play in Curtis Bernhardt 's musical comedy drama My Love Came Back with Jeffrey Lynn and Eddie Albert , who played a classical music student turned swing jazz bandleader . De Havilland played violinist Amelia Cornell , whose life becomes complicated by the support of a wealthy sponsor . In his review in The New York Times , Bosley Crowther described the film as " a <unk> frolic , a rollicking <unk> of deliciously pointed nonsense " , noting that de Havilland " plays the part with pace and wit " . 
 That same year , de Havilland was reunited with Flynn in their seventh film together , Michael Curtiz 's Western adventure Santa Fe Trail , set against the backdrop of abolitionist John Brown 's fanatical anti @-@ slavery attacks in the days leading up to the American Civil War . The mostly fictional story follows West Point cadets J. E. B. Stuart , played by Flynn , and George Armstrong Custer , played by Ronald Reagan , as they make their way west ‍ — ‌ both vying for the affection of de Havilland 's Kit Carson Halliday . Unlike some of her previous adventure film roles , Kit is a vital , interesting , and confident character who knows her mind and plays a pivotal role in the story . Playing Kit in a provocative , tongue @-@ in @-@ cheek manner , de Havilland creates a character of real substance and dimension , according to Tony Thomas . Following a world premiere on December 13 , 1940 , at the <unk> Theatre in Santa Fe , New Mexico ‍ — ‌ attended by cast members , reporters , the governor , and over 60 @,@ 000 fans ‍ — ‌ Santa Fe Trail went on to become one of the top grossing films of 1940 . De Havilland , who accompanied Flynn on the well @-@ publicized train ride to Santa Fe , did not attend the premiere , having been diagnosed with appendicitis that morning and rushed into surgery . 
 = = = War years , 1941 – 44 = = = 
 Following her emergency surgery , de Havilland began a long period of convalescence in a Los Angeles hospital during which time she rejected several scripts offered to her by Warner Bros. , leading to another suspension . In 1941 she appeared in three commercially successful films , beginning with Raoul Walsh 's romantic comedy The Strawberry Blonde with James Cagney . Set during the Gay Nineties , the story involves a man who marries an outspoken advocate for women 's rights after a rival steals his glamorous " strawberry blonde " girlfriend , and later discovers he ended up with a loving and understanding wife . Her performance revealed a growing confidence playing comedic roles , and a real talent for combining the qualities of kindness and love with a refined sense of naughtiness , according to film historian Tony Thomas . The film was a critical and commercial success . In Mitchell Leisen 's romantic drama Hold Back the Dawn with Charles Boyer for Paramount Pictures , de Havilland transitioned to a different type of role for her ‍ — ‌ an ordinary , decent small @-@ town teacher whose life and sexuality are awakened by a sophisticated European gigolo , whose own life is positively affected by her love . Leisen 's careful direction and guidance appealed to de Havilland ‍ — ‌ much more than the workmanlike approach of her Warner Bros. directors . Bosley Crowther of The New York Times wrote , " Olivia de Havilland plays the school teacher as a woman with romantic fancies whose honesty and pride are her own ‍ — ‌ and the film 's ‍ — ‌ chief support . Incidentally , she is excellent . " Her performance earned de Havilland her second Academy Award nomination ‍ — ‌ this time for Best Actress . 
 In July 1941 de Havilland was reunited with Errol Flynn for their eighth and final movie together , Raoul Walsh 's Western adventure epic They Died with Their Boots On . The film is loosely based on the courtship and marriage of George Armstrong Custer and Elizabeth " Libbie " Bacon . Flynn and de Havilland had a falling out the previous year ‍ — ‌ mainly over the roles she was being given ‍ — ‌ and she did not intend to work with him again . Even Flynn acknowledged , " She was sick to death of playing ' the girl ' and badly wanted a few good roles to show herself and the world that she was a fine actress . " After she learned from Warner that Flynn had come to his office saying he needed her in the film , de Havilland accepted . Screenwriter Lenore Coffee was brought in to add several romantic scenes , and improve the overall dialogue . The result is a film that includes some of their finest work together . Their last appearance on screen is Custer 's farewell to his wife . " Errol was quite sensitive , " de Havilland would later remember , " I think he knew it would be the last time we worked together . " Flynn 's final line in that scene would hold special meaning for her : " Walking through life with you , ma 'am , has been a very gracious thing . " They Died with Their Boots On was released on November 21 , 1941 , and while some reviewers criticized the film 's historical inaccuracies , most applauded the action sequences , cinematography , and acting . Thomas M. Pryor of The New York Times found de Havilland " altogether captivating " . The film went on to earn $ 2 @,@ 550 @,@ 000 ( equivalent to $ 41 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 in 2015 ) , Warner Bros. ' s second biggest money @-@ maker of that year . 
 In 1942 de Havilland appeared in Elliott Nugent 's romantic comedy The Male Animal with Henry Fonda , about an idealistic professor fighting for academic freedom while trying to hold onto his job and his wife Ellen . While her role was not particularly challenging , de Havilland 's delineation of an intelligent , good @-@ natured woman trying to resolve the unsettling circumstances of her life played a major part in the film 's success , according to Tony Thomas . The film was a critical and commercial success , with Bosley Crowther of The Times noting that de Havilland " concocts a delightfully pliant and saucy character as the wife " . That year she also appeared in John Huston 's drama In This Our Life with Bette Davis . Based on the Pulitzer Prize @-@ winning novel of the same name by Ellen Glasgow , the story is about two sisters whose lives are destroyed by the anger and jealousy of one of the sisters . Crowther gave the film a negative review , but noted de Havilland 's " warm and easy performance " . During production , de Havilland and Huston began a romantic relationship that would last three years . 
 According to de Havilland , one of the few truly satisfying roles she played for Warner Bros. was the title character in Norman Krasna 's romantic comedy Princess O 'Rourke ( 1943 ) with Robert Cummings . Filmed in July and August 1942 , the story is about a European princess in Washington , D.C. , visiting her diplomat uncle , who is trying to find her an American husband . Intent on marrying a man of her own choosing , she boards a plane heading west and ends up falling in love with an American pilot who is unaware of her true identity . The film was released on October 23 , 1943 , and did well at the box office . Bosley Crowther called it " a film which is in the best tradition of American screen comedy " , and found de Havilland 's performance " charming " . 
 I wanted to do complex roles , like Melanie for example , and Jack Warner saw me as an ingénue . I was really restless to portray more developed human beings . Jack never understood this , and ... he would give me roles that really had no character or quality in them . I knew I wouldn 't even be effective . 
 After fulfilling her seven @-@ year Warner Bros. contract in 1943 , de Havilland was informed that six months had been added to her contract for times she had been on suspension . The law then allowed studios to suspend contract players for rejecting a role , and the period of suspension could be added to the contract period . Most contract players accepted this , but a few tried to change the system , including Bette Davis , who mounted an unsuccessful lawsuit against Warner Bros. in the 1930s . On August 23 , 1943 , on the advice of her lawyer , Martin Gang , de Havilland took Warner Bros. to court , citing an existing California labor law that forbade an employer from enforcing a contract against an employee for longer than seven years . In November 1943 the California Superior Court found in de Havilland 's favor , and Warner Bros. immediately appealed . On December 8 , 1944 , the California Court of Appeals for the Second District ruled in her favor . The decision was one of the most significant and far @-@ reaching legal rulings in Hollywood , reducing the power of the studios and extending greater creative freedom to performers . California 's resulting " seven @-@ year rule " , also known as Labor Code Section <unk> , is still known today as the De Havilland Law . Her legal victory , which cost her $ 13 @,@ 000 ( equivalent to $ 170 @,@ 000 in 2015 ) in legal fees , won de Havilland the respect and admiration of her peers , among them her own sister Joan Fontaine , who later commented , " Hollywood owes Olivia a great deal . " Warner Bros. reacted to de Havilland 's lawsuit by circulating a letter to other studios that had the effect of a " virtual blacklisting " . As a consequence , de Havilland did not work at a film studio for nearly two years . 
 De Havilland became a naturalized citizen of the United States on November 28 , 1941 . During the war years , she actively sought out ways to express her patriotism and contribute to the war effort . In May 1942 she joined the Hollywood Victory Caravan , a three @-@ week train tour of the country that raised money through the sale of war bonds . Later that year she began attending events at the Hollywood Canteen , meeting and dancing with the troops . In December 1943 de Havilland joined a USO tour that traveled throughout the United States , Alaska , and the South Pacific , visiting wounded soldiers in military hospitals . She earned the respect and admiration of the troops for visiting the isolated islands and battlefronts in the Pacific . She survived flights in damaged aircraft and a bout with viral pneumonia requiring several days ' stay in one of the island barrack hospitals . She would later remember , " I loved doing the tours because it was a way I could serve my country and contribute to the war effort . " 
 = = = Vindication and recognition , 1945 – 52 = = = 
 After the California Court of Appeals ruling freed her from her Warner Bros. contract , de Havilland signed a two @-@ picture deal with Paramount Pictures . In June 1945 she began filming Mitchell Leisen 's drama To Each His Own , about an unwed mother who gives up her child for adoption and then spends the rest of her life trying to undo that decision . De Havilland insisted on bringing in Leisen as director , trusting his eye for detail , his empathy for actors , and the way he controlled sentiment in their previous collaboration , Hold Back the Dawn . The role required de Havilland to age nearly thirty years over the course of the film ‍ — ‌ from an innocent small town girl to a shrewd , ruthless businesswoman devoted to her cosmetics company . While de Havilland never formally studied acting , she did read Stanislavsky 's autobiography My Life in Art and applied one of his " methods " for this role . To help her define her character during the four periods of the story , she used a different perfume for each period . She also lowered the pitch of her voice incrementally in each period until it became a mature woman 's voice . Her performance earned her the Academy Award for Best Actress in 1946 ‍ — ‌ her first Oscar . According to film historian Tony Thomas , the award represented a vindication of her long struggle with Warner Bros. and confirmation of her abilities as an actress . 
 De Havilland 's next two roles were also challenging . In Robert Siodmak 's psychological thriller The Dark Mirror ( 1946 ) , de Havilland played twin sisters Ruth and Terry Collins ‍ — ‌ one loving and normal , the other psychotic . In addition to the technical problems of showing her as two characters interacting with each other on screen at the same time , de Havilland needed to portray two separate and psychologically opposite people . While the film was not well received by critics ‍ — ‌ Variety said the film " gets lost in a maze of psychological gadgets and speculation " ‍ — ‌ de Havilland 's performance was praised by Tony Thomas , who called her final scene in the film " an almost frighteningly convincing piece of acting " . De Havilland would later state that playing the evil sister haunted her for years . In his review in The Nation , James Agee wrote that " her playing is thoughtful , quiet , detailed , and well sustained , and since it is founded , as some more talented playing is not , in an unusually healthful @-@ seeming and likable temperament , it is an undivided pleasure to see . " While appearing in a summer stock production of What Every Woman Knows in Westport , Connecticut ‍ — ‌ her second professional stage appearance ‍ — ‌ de Havilland began dating Marcus Goodrich , a Navy veteran , journalist , and author of the 1941 novel Delilah . They were married on August 26 , 1946 . 
 I met a young woman who was very much like Virginia , about the same age and physical description , as well as being a schizophrenic with guilt problems . ... What struck me most of all was the fact that she was rather likable and appealing . It hadn 't occurred to me before that a mental patient could be appealing , and it was that that gave me the key to the performance . 
 De Havilland was also widely praised for her performance as Virginia Cunningham in Anatole Litvak 's drama The Snake Pit ( 1948 ) , one of the first films to attempt a realistic portrayal of mental illness and an important exposé of the harsh conditions in state mental hospitals , according to film critic Philip French . Based on a novel by Mary Jane Ward and produced by Darryl F. Zanuck , the film is about a woman placed in a mental institution by her husband to help her recover from a nervous breakdown . Virginia Cunningham was one of the most difficult of all her film roles , requiring significant preparation both mentally and physically ‍ — ‌ she deliberately lost weight to help create her gaunt appearance on screen . She consulted regularly with psychiatrists hired as consultants for the film , and visited Camarillo State Mental Hospital to research her role and observe the patients . The extreme physical discomfort of the hydrotherapy and simulated electric shock therapy scenes were especially challenging for the slight 5 @-@ foot @-@ 3 @-@ inch ( 160 cm ) actress . In her performance , she conveyed her mental anguish by physically transforming her face with furrowed brow , wild staring eyes , and grimacing mouth . According to author Judith Kass , de Havilland delivered a performance both " restrained and electric " , portraying varied and extreme aspects of her character ‍ — ‌ from a shy young woman to a tormented and disoriented woman . For her performance in The Snake Pit , de Havilland received an Academy Award nomination for Best Actress , the New York Film Critics Circle Award for Best Actress , and the Venice Film Festival Volpi Cup . 
 In 1949 de Havilland appeared in William Wyler 's period drama The Heiress ( 1949 ) , the fourth in a string of critically acclaimed performances . After seeing the play on Broadway , de Havilland called Wyler and urged him to fly to New York to see what she felt would be a perfect role for her . Wyler obliged , loved the play , and with de Havilland 's help arranged for Paramount to secure the film rights . Adapted for the screen by Ruth and Augustus Goetz and based on the 1880 novel Washington Square by Henry James , the film is about a young naïve woman who falls in love with a young man , over the objections of her emotionally abusive father who suspects the man of being a gold digger . As she had done in Hold Back the Dawn , de Havilland portrays a character 's transformation from a shy trusting innocent to a guarded mature woman over a period of years . Her delineation of Catherine Sloper is developed through carefully crafted movements , gestures , and facial expressions that convey a submissive and inhibited young woman . Her timid voice , nervous hands , downcast eyes , and careful movements all communicate what the character is too shy to verbalize . Throughout the production , Wyler pressed de Havilland hard to elicit the requisite visual points of the character . In the scene where Catherine returns home after being jilted , the director had the actress carry a suitcase filled with heavy books up the stairs to convey the weight of Catherine 's trauma physically instead of using a planned speech in the original script . The Heiress was released in October 1949 and was well received by critics . For her performance , de Havilland received the New York Film Critics Award , the Golden Globe Award , and the Academy Award for Best Actress ‍ — ‌ her second Oscar . 
 After giving birth to her first child , Benjamin , on September 27 , 1949 , de Havilland took time off from making films to be with her infant . She turned down the role of Blanche DuBois in A Streetcar Named Desire , later explaining that becoming a mother was a " transforming experience " and that she could not relate to the character . In 1950 her family moved to New York City , where she began rehearsals for a major new stage production of Shakespeare 's Romeo and Juliet ; it was her lifelong ambition to play Juliet on the stage . The play opened at the Broadhurst Theatre on March 11 , 1951 , to mixed reviews , with some critics believing the thirty @-@ five year old actress was too old for the role . The play closed after forty @-@ five performances . Undaunted , de Havilland accepted the title role in the stage production of George Bernard Shaw 's comedy Candida , which opened at the National Theatre on Broadway in April 1952 . While reviews of the play were mixed , de Havilland 's performance was well received , and following the scheduled thirty @-@ two performances , she went on tour with the company and delivered 323 additional performances , many to sold @-@ out audiences . While de Havilland achieved major accomplishments during this period of her career , her marriage to Goodrich ‍ — ‌ eighteen years her senior ‍ — ‌ had grown strained due to his unstable temperament . In August 1952 de Havilland filed for divorce , which became final the following year . 
 = = = New life in Paris , 1953 – 62 = = = 
 Of course the thing that staggers you when you first come to France is the fact that all the French speak French ‍ — ‌ even the children . Many Americans and Britishers who visit the country never quite adjust to this , and the idea persists that the natives speak the language just to show off or be difficult . 
 In April 1953 , at the invitation of the French government , de Havilland traveled to the Cannes Film Festival , where she met Pierre Galante , an executive editor for the French journal Paris Match . Following a long @-@ distance courtship and the requisite nine @-@ month residency requirement , de Havilland and Galante married on April 2 , 1955 , in the village of <unk> @-@ le @-@ Marron , and settled together in a three @-@ story house near Bois de Boulogne park in the Rive Droite section of Paris . That same year , de Havilland returned to the screen in Terence Young 's period drama That Lady ( 1955 ) , about a Spanish princess and her unrequited love for King Philip II of Spain , whose respect she earned in her youth after losing an eye in a sword fight defending his honor . According to Tony Thomas , the film uses authentic Spanish locations effectively , but suffers from a convoluted plot and excessive dialogue , and while de Havilland delivered a warm and elegant performance as Ana de Mendoza , the film was disappointing . Following her appearances in the romantic melodrama Not as a Stranger ( 1955 ) and The Ambassador 's Daughter ( 1956 ) ‍ — ‌ neither of which were successful at the box office ‍ — ‌ de Havilland gave birth to her second child , Gisèle Galante , on July 18 , 1956 . 
 De Havilland returned to the screen in 1958 in Michael Curtiz 's Western drama The Proud Rebel , a film about a former Confederate soldier whose wife was killed in the war and whose son lost the ability to speak after witnessing the tragedy . De Havilland played <unk> Moore , a tough yet feminine frontier woman who cares for the boy and comes to love his father . The movie was filmed on location in Utah , where de Havilland learned to hitch and drive a team of horses and handle a gun for her role . The Proud Rebel was released May 28 , 1958 , and was well received by audiences and critics . In his review for The New York Times , A. H. Weiler called the film a " truly sensitive effort " and " heartwarming drama " , and praised de Havilland 's ability to convey the " warmth , affection and sturdiness needed in the role " . 
 One of de Havilland 's most noted performances during this period was in Guy Green 's romantic drama Light in the Piazza ( 1962 ) with Rossano Brazzi . Filmed in Florence and Rome , and based on Elizabeth Spencer 's novel of the same name , the film is about a middle @-@ class American tourist on extended vacation in Italy with her beautiful twenty @-@ six @-@ year @-@ old daughter , who is mentally disabled as a result of a childhood accident . Faced with the prospect of her daughter falling in love with a young Italian , the mother struggles with conflicting emotions about her daughter 's future . De Havilland projects a calm maternal serenity throughout most of the film , only showing glimpses of the worried mother anxious for her child 's happiness . The film was released on February 9 , 1962 , and was well received , with a Hollywood Reporter reviewer calling it " an uncommon love story ... told with rare delicacy and force " , and Variety noting that the film " achieves the rare and delicate balance of artistic beauty , romantic substance , dramatic novelty and commercial appeal " . Variety singled out de Havilland ’ s performance as " one of great consistency and subtle projection " . 
 In early 1962 de Havilland traveled to New York and began rehearsals for Garson Kanin 's stage play A Gift of Time . Adapted from the autobiographical book Death of a Man by Lael Tucker Wertenbaker , the play explores the emotionally painful struggle of a housewife forced to deal with the slow death of her husband , played by Henry Fonda . The play opened at the Ethel Barrymore Theatre on Broadway to positive notices , with de Havilland receiving her best reviews as a stage actress . Theater critic Walter Kerr praised her final scene , writing , " As darkness gathers , the actress gains in stature , taking on the simple and resolute willingness to understand . " The New York World Telegram and Sun reviewer concluded , " It is Miss de Havilland who gives the play its unbroken continuity . This distinguished actress reveals Lael as a special and admirable woman . " She stayed with the production for ninety performances . The year 1962 also saw the publication of de Havilland 's first book , Every Frenchman Has One , a lighthearted account of her often amusing attempts to understand and adapt to French life , manners , and customs . The book sold out its first printing prior to the publication date and went on to become a bestseller . 
 = = = Later films and television , 1963 – 88 = = = 
 In 1964 de Havilland appeared in her last two leading roles in feature films ‍ — ‌ both psychological thrillers . In Walter Grauman 's Lady in a Cage she played a wealthy poet who gets trapped in her mansion 's elevator and faces the threat of three terrorizing hooligans in her own home . This was the only controversial film in her career ‍ — ‌ it was banned in England ‍ — ‌ and critics responded negatively to the graphic violence and cruelty shown on screen . A. H. Weiler of The New York Times called it a " sordid , if suspenseful , exercise in aimless brutality " . That same year , de Havilland appeared in Robert Aldrich 's Hush … Hush , Sweet Charlotte with her close friend Bette Davis . After Joan Crawford left the picture due to illness , Davis had Aldrich fly to Switzerland to persuade a reluctant de Havilland to accept the role of Miriam Deering , a cruel , conniving character hidden behind the charming façade of a polite and cultured lady . De Havilland 's quiet , restrained performance provided a counterbalance to Davis 's ranting characterization . Film historian Tony Thomas described her performance as " a subtle piece of acting " that was " a vital contribution to the effectiveness of the film " . The film was well received and earned seven Academy Award nominations . 
 As film roles became more difficult to find ‍ — ‌ a common problem shared by many Hollywood veterans from her era ‍ — ‌ de Havilland began working in television dramas , despite her dislike of the networks ' practice of breaking up story lines with commercials . Her first venture into the medium was a teleplay directed by Sam Peckinpah called Noon Wine ( 1966 ) on ABC Stage 67 , a dark tragedy about a farmer 's act of murder that leads to his suicide . The production and her performance as the farmer 's wife Ellie were well received . In 1972 she starred in her first television feature film , The Screaming Woman , about a wealthy woman recovering from a nervous breakdown . In 1979 she appeared in the ABC miniseries Roots : The Next Generations in the role of Mrs. Warner , the wife of a former Confederate officer played by Henry Fonda . The miniseries was seen by an estimated 110 million people ‍ — ‌ nearly one @-@ third of American homes with television sets . Throughout the 1970s , de Havilland 's film work was limited to smaller supporting roles and cameo appearances . Her last feature film was The Fifth Musketeer ( 1979 ) . 
 During this period , de Havilland began doing speaking engagements in cities across the United States with a talk entitled " From the City of the Stars to the City of Light " , a program of personal reminiscences about her life and career . She also attended tributes to Gone with the Wind . In the 1980s , her television work included an Agatha Christie television film Murder Is Easy ( 1982 ) , the television drama The Royal Romance of Charles and Diana ( 1982 ) in which she played The Queen Mother , and the 1986 ABC miniseries North and South , Book II . Her most notable performance of the decade was in the television film Anastasia : The Mystery of Anna ( 1986 ) as Dowager Empress Maria , which earned her a Golden Globe Award for Best Supporting Actress in a Series , Miniseries or Television Film . In 1988 de Havilland appeared in the HTV romantic television drama The Woman He Loved ‍ — ‌ it was her final screen performance . 
 = = = Retirement and remembrance , 1989 – present = = = 
 In retirement , de Havilland remained active in the film community . In 1998 she traveled to New York to help promote a special showing of Gone with the Wind . In 2003 she appeared as a presenter at the 75th Academy Awards . In 2004 Turner Classic Movies produced a retrospective piece called Melanie Remembers in which she was interviewed for the sixty @-@ fifth anniversary of the original release of Gone with the Wind . In June 2006 she made appearances at tributes commemorating her 90th birthday at the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences and the Los Angeles County Museum of Art . 
 On November 17 , 2008 , at the age of 92 , de Havilland received the National Medal of Arts , the highest honor conferred to an individual artist on behalf of the people of the United States . The medal was presented to her by President George W. Bush , who commended her " for her persuasive and compelling skill as an actress in roles from Shakespeare 's Hermia to Margaret Mitchell 's Melanie . Her independence , integrity , and grace won creative freedom for herself and her fellow film actors . " The following year , de Havilland narrated the documentary I Remember Better When I Paint ( 2009 ) , a film about the importance of art in the treatment of Alzheimer 's disease . On September 9 , 2010 , de Havilland was appointed a Chevalier ( knight ) of the Légion d 'honneur , the highest decoration in France , awarded by French President Nicolas Sarkozy , who told the actress , " You honor France for having chosen us . " In February the following year she appeared at the César Awards in France , where she was greeted with a standing ovation . De Havilland celebrated her 100th birthday on July 1 , 2016 . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 = = = Relationships = = = 
 Although known as one of Hollywood 's most exciting on @-@ screen couples , de Havilland and Errol Flynn were never involved in a romantic relationship . Upon first meeting her at Warner Bros. in August 1935 , Flynn was drawn to the nineteen @-@ year @-@ old actress with " warm brown eyes " and " extraordinary charm " . In turn , de Havilland fell in love with him , but kept her feelings inside , later recalling , " He never guessed I had a crush on him ... it never occurred to me that he was smitten with me , too . " Flynn would later write , " By the time we made The Charge of the Light Brigade , I was sure that I was in love with her . " Flynn finally professed his love on March 12 , 1937 , at the Coronation Ball for King George VI at the Ambassador Hotel in Los Angeles , where they slow danced together to " Sweet Leilani " at the hotel 's Cocoanut Grove nightclub . " I was deeply affected by him , " she would later remember , " It was impossible for me not to be . " The evening ended on a sobering note , however , with de Havilland insisting that despite his separation from his wife Lili Damita , he needed to divorce her before their relationship could proceed . Flynn reunited with his wife later that year , and de Havilland never acted on her feelings for Flynn . 
 In July 1938 de Havilland began dating business tycoon , aviator , and filmmaker Howard Hughes , who had just completed his record @-@ setting flight around the world in 91 hours . In addition to escorting her about town , he gave the actress her first flying lessons . She would later remember , " He was a rather shy man ... and yet , in a whole community where the men every day played heroes on the screen and didn 't do anything heroic in life , here was this man who was a real hero . " In December 1939 de Havilland began a romantic relationship with actor James Stewart . At the request of Irene Mayer Selznick , the actor 's agent asked Stewart to escort de Havilland to the New York premiere of Gone with the Wind at the Astor Theater on December 19 , 1939 . Over the next few days , Stewart took her to the theater several times and to the 21 Club . They continued to see each other back in Los Angeles , where Stewart provided occasional flying lessons and romance . According to de Havilland , Stewart proposed marriage to her in 1940 , but she felt that he was not ready to settle down . Their relationship ended in late 1941 when de Havilland began a romantic relationship with film director John Huston while making In This Our Life . " John was a very great love of mine " , she would later admit , " He was a man I wanted to marry . " 
 = = = Marriages and children = = = 
 On August 26 , 1946 , she married Marcus Goodrich , a Navy veteran , journalist , and author of the 1941 novel Delilah . The marriage ended in divorce in 1953 . They had one child , Benjamin Goodrich , who was born on December 1 , 1949 . He was diagnosed with Hodgkin 's lymphoma at the age of nineteen , but was able to graduate from the University of Texas . He worked as a statistical analyst for Lockheed Missiles and Space Company in Sunnyvale , California , and as an international banking representative for the Texas Commerce Bank in Houston . He died on October 1 , 1991 , in Paris at the age of forty @-@ one of heart disease brought on by treatments for Hodgkin 's disease , three weeks before the death of his father . 
 On April 2 , 1955 , de Havilland married Pierre Galante , an executive editor for the French journal Paris Match . Her marriage to Galante prompted de Havilland to move to Paris . The couple separated in 1962 but continued to live in the same house for another six years to raise their children together . Galante moved across the street and the two remained close , even after the finalization of the divorce in 1979 . She looked after him during his final bout with lung cancer prior to his death in 1998 . They had one child , Gisèle Galante , who was born on July 18 , 1956 . After studying law at the Université de Droit de Nanterre School of Law , she worked as a journalist in France and the United States . Since 1956 , de Havilland has lived in the same three @-@ story house near Bois de Boulogne park in the Rive Droite section of Paris . 
 = = = Religion and politics = = = 
 De Havilland was raised in the Episcopal Church and has remained an Episcopalian throughout her life . After moving to France , she became one of the first women lectors at the American Cathedral in Paris , where she was on the regular rota for Scripture readings . As recently as 2012 , she was still doing readings on major feast days , including Christmas and Easter . " It 's a task I love , " she once said . In describing her preparation for her readings , de Havilland once observed , " You have to convey the deep meaning , you see , and it has to start with your own faith . But first I always pray . I pray before I start to prepare , as well . In fact , I would always say a prayer before shooting a scene , so this is not so different , in a way . " De Havilland prefers to use the Revised English Bible for its poetic style . She raised her son Benjamin in the Episcopal Church and her daughter Gisèle in the Roman Catholic Church , the faith of the child 's father . 
 As a United States citizen , de Havilland became involved in politics as a way of exercising her civic responsibilities . She campaigned for Franklin D. Roosevelt 's re @-@ election in 1944 . After the war , she joined the Independent Citizens ' Committee of the Arts , Sciences and Professions , a national public policy advocacy group that included Bette Davis , Gregory Peck , and Humphrey Bogart in its Hollywood chapter . In June 1946 she was asked to deliver speeches for the committee that reflected the Communist Party line ‍ — ‌ the group was later identified as a Communist front organization . Disturbed at seeing a small group of Communist members manipulating the committee , de Havilland removed the pro @-@ Communist material from her speeches and rewrote them to reflect Harry S. Truman 's anti @-@ Communist platform . She later recalled , " I realized a nucleus of people was controlling the organization without a majority of the members of the board being aware of it . And I knew they had to be Communists . " 
 She organized a fight to regain control of the committee from its pro @-@ Soviet leadership , but her reform efforts failed . Her resignation from the committee triggered a wave of resignations from eleven other Hollywood figures , including future President Ronald Reagan . In 1958 she was secretly called before the House Un @-@ American Activities Committee and recounted her experiences with the Independent Citizens ' Committee . 
 = = = Sibling rivalry = = = 
 De Havilland and her sister Joan Fontaine are the only siblings to have won Academy Awards in a lead acting category . According to biographer Charles Higham , the sisters always had an uneasy relationship , starting in early childhood when Olivia had trouble accepting the idea of having a younger sister , and Joan resenting her mother 's favoritism for her older sister . This tension was made worse by Fontaine 's frequent childhood illnesses , which led to her mother 's overly protective expression , " <unk> can , Joan can 't . " Of the two sisters , de Havilland was the first to become an actress , and for several years Fontaine was overshadowed by her accomplishments . When Mervyn LeRoy offered Fontaine a personal contract , her mother told her that Warner Bros. was " Olivia 's studio " and that she could not use the name " de Havilland " . In 1942 de Havilland and Fontaine were both nominated for an Academy Award for Best Actress ‍ — ‌ de Havilland for Hold Back the Dawn , and Fontaine for Suspicion . When Fontaine 's name was announced as winner , de Havilland reacted graciously saying , " We 've got it ! " According to biographer Charles Higham , Fontaine rejected de Havilland 's attempts to congratulate her , and de Havilland was offended and embarrassed . 
 Their relationship was further strained in 1946 when Fontaine made negative comments to an interviewer about de Havilland 's new husband . When she read her sister 's remarks , de Havilland was deeply hurt and waited for an apology that was never offered . The following year after accepting her first Academy Award for To Each His Own , de Havilland was approached backstage by Fontaine who wanted to congratulate her ; de Havilland turned away from her sister . They did not speak to each other for the next five years , and their silence may have caused the estrangement between Fontaine and her own daughters , who secretly maintained a relationship with de Havilland . Following her divorce from Goodrich , de Havilland resumed contact with her sister , coming to her apartment in New York and spending Christmas together there in 1961 . The final break between the sisters occurred in 1975 from a disagreement over their mother 's cancer treatment ‍ — ‌ de Havilland wanted to consult other doctors and supported exploratory surgery ; Fontaine disagreed . Fontaine also claimed that de Havilland did not notify her of their mother 's death while she was touring with a play ‍ — ‌ de Havilland in fact had sent a telegram , which took two weeks to reach her sister . The sibling feud ended with Fontaine 's death on December 15 , 2013 . The following day , de Havilland released a statement saying she was " shocked and saddened " by the news . 
 = = Career assessment and legacy = = 
 De Havilland 's career spanned fifty @-@ three years , from 1935 to 1988 . During that time , she appeared in forty @-@ nine feature films , and was one of the leading movie stars during the golden age of Classical Hollywood . She began her career playing demure <unk> opposite popular male stars , including Errol Flynn , with whom she made her breakout film Captain Blood in 1935 . They would go on to make seven more feature films together , and became one of Hollywood 's most popular romantic on @-@ screen pairings . Her range of performances included roles in most major movie genres . Following her film debut in the Shakespeare adaptation A Midsummer Night 's Dream , de Havilland achieved her initial popularity in romantic comedies , such as The Great Garrick and Hard to Get , and Western adventure films , such as Dodge City and Santa Fe Trail . Her natural beauty and refined acting style made her particularly effective in historical period dramas , such as Anthony Adverse , The Adventures of Robin Hood , Gone with the Wind , and The Heiress , and romantic dramas , such as Hold Back the Dawn and To Each His Own . In her later career , she was most successful in drama films , such as In This Our Life and Light in the Piazza , and psychological dramas playing unglamorous characters in films such as The Dark Mirror , The Snake Pit , and Hush ... Hush , Sweet Charlotte . 
 During her career , de Havilland won two Academy Awards ( To Each His Own and The Heiress ) , two Golden Globe Awards ( The Heiress and Anastasia : The Mystery of Anna ) , two New York Film Critics Circle Awards ( The Snake Pit and The Heiress ) , the National Board of Review Award and the Venice Film Festival Volpi Cup ( The Snake Pit ) , and a Primetime Emmy Award nomination ( Anastasia : The Mystery of Anna ) . 
 For her contributions to the motion picture industry , de Havilland received a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame at 6762 Hollywood Boulevard on February 8 , 1960 . Since her retirement in 1988 , her lifetime contribution to the arts has been honored on two continents . In 1998 she received an honorary doctorate from the University of Hertfordshire in England . 
 In 2006 , she was inducted into the Online Film & Television Association Award Film Hall of Fame . On November 17 , 2008 , President George W. Bush presented de Havilland the National Medal of Arts , the highest honor given for achievement in the arts conferred to an individual artist on behalf of the American people . On September 9 , 2010 , de Havilland was appointed a Chevalier ( knight ) of the Légion d 'honneur , the highest decoration in France , awarded by French President Nicolas Sarkozy . 
 The moving image collection of Olivia de Havilland is held at the Academy Film Archive , which preserved a nitrate reel of a screen test for " Danton , " Max Reinhardt ’ s never @-@ produced follow @-@ up to “ A Midsummer Night ’ s Dream ” ( 1935 ) . 
 = = Honors and awards = = 
 = = Filmography = = 
 = New York State Route 590 = 
 New York State Route 590 ( NY 590 ) is a 4 @.@ 98 @-@ mile ( 8 @.@ 01 km ) north – south state highway located in the eastern suburbs of Rochester , New York , in the United States . The route is a limited @-@ access northward extension of Interstate 590 ( I @-@ 590 ) that begins at the Can of Worms , an interchange between I @-@ 490 , I @-@ 590 , and NY 590 on the boundary between the town of Brighton and the city of Rochester , and ends at a roundabout with Titus Avenue in the town of Irondequoit . NY 590 is known as the Sea Breeze Expressway , a name derived from the small community of Sea Breeze located near the highway 's former northern terminus at Culver Road near the southern shore of Lake Ontario . 
 The portion of NY 590 between the Can of Worms and NY 104 is part of the northeastern quadrant of the Rochester Outer Loop , a series of expressways that form a beltway around the city of Rochester . At NY 104 , the Outer Loop turns west to follow NY 104 through Irondequoit . The Sea Breeze Expressway was built in stages from the 1950s to the 1960s and carried various designations until 1970 , when the entirety of the Rochester – Sea Breeze highway was designated as part of NY 47 . It was redesignated as NY 590 in 1980 . In the late 2000s , the section of NY 590 north of Titus Avenue was reconfigured into a two @-@ lane road named Sea Breeze Drive , and NY 590 was truncated to end at Titus Avenue . 
 = = Route description = = 
 The four @-@ lane I @-@ 590 becomes NY 590 upon passing under I @-@ 490 at the Can of Worms on the eastern edge of Rochester . It heads northeast into Brighton and through the remainder of the interchange , passing under the ramp connecting I @-@ 490 west to I @-@ 590 south , the CSX Transportation @-@ owned Rochester Subdivision , and the ramps from NY 590 south to I @-@ 490 in succession before widening to six lanes and turning northward ahead of a diamond interchange with Blossom Road , once designated as NY 286A . Between Blossom Road and NY 286 ( Browncroft Boulevard ) , NY 590 slowly turns to the northwest , passing through densely populated neighborhoods located adjacent to the Rochester – Brighton boundary . It reaches the city line and reenters Rochester upon meeting NY 286 . 
 The lone portion of NY 590 within the city of Rochester runs due north – south , acting as a divider between residential neighborhoods to the west and the Irondequoit Creek valley ( much of which is part of Ellison Park ) to the east . Little more than a half mile after entering the city , NY 590 exits the city and enters the neighboring town of Irondequoit . Here , the freeway turns to the northwest to avoid the area surrounding the intersection of North Winton Road and NY 404 ( Empire Boulevard ) . After passing under North Winton Road , NY 590 resumes its northward trek and connects to NY 404 by way of a modified cloverleaf interchange . The expressway continues onward , separating a large residential area from Irondequoit Bay Park West as it progresses toward a northbound @-@ only exit with Norton Street . One half @-@ mile to the north of Norton , NY 590 meets NY 104 via a large interchange . 
 Due to the terrain surrounding the interchange and the location of the Irondequoit Bay Bridge , NY 104 is forced to run parallel to NY 590 for a short distance between the Keeler Street Expressway and NY 590 's next exit , a diamond interchange connecting to East Ridge Road . Through this stretch , NY 590 — now just four lanes wide — runs in between NY 104 westbound and NY 104 eastbound . At East Ridge Road , NY 104 turns to the northeast to cross Irondequoit Bay while NY 590 continues north through residential areas toward Sea Breeze . The road has an at @-@ grade intersection with Sunrise Crescent , a private residential street , before meeting Titus Avenue at a roundabout that serves as NY 590 's northern terminus . Past this point , the right @-@ of @-@ way of NY 590 continues north to Culver Road at the Lake Ontario shoreline as a divided two @-@ lane street named Sea Breeze Drive . 
 Traveling southbound on NY 590 , two significant movements are restricted due to the composition of the expressway . One is at Blossom Road in Brighton , where traffic entering NY 590 southbound cannot access I @-@ 490 due to the location of the exit 5 ( left exit ) flyover , which begins north of the Blossom Road onramp . This movement was possible prior to the reconstruction of the Can of Worms , as the original connection point between the Sea Breeze Expressway and I @-@ 490 was south of the Blossom Road interchange . In Irondequoit , there are no southbound exits between East Ridge Road and NY 404 ; thus , there is no access to either NY 104 or Norton Street . An access road between NY 590 at Titus Avenue and the Irondequoit Bay Bridge was planned to provide access from NY 590 southbound to NY 104 eastbound and from NY 104 westbound to NY 590 northbound , but it was never completed . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Construction and designation = = = 
 The origins of NY 590 date back to the start of the 1950s when work first began on the Sea Breeze Expressway , a part @-@ divided highway , part limited @-@ access highway that extended from Rochester north to the Lake Ontario shoreline at Sea Breeze . The highway was built in stages from north to south , with the first section — a divided highway connecting Culver Road to East Ridge Road in Irondequoit — opening to traffic in the early 1950s as a realignment of NY 18 . The northern end of the roadway was situated just west of the Irondequoit Bay outlet , where Irondequoit Bay meets Lake Ontario . Construction on the next segment , a limited @-@ access extension south to Empire Boulevard ( U.S. Route 104 or US 104 ) , began in the mid @-@ 1950s . The new roadway was completed in the late 1950s , at which time it became part of a rerouted US 104 . 
 By 1960 , construction was underway on the final piece , a second extension south to the Eastern Expressway ( I @-@ 490 ) in eastern Rochester . The under @-@ construction highway generally paralleled Winton Road , then designated as part of NY 47 . The new extension was completed c . 1961 , but went unnumbered until c . 1962 when NY 47 was realigned north of Blossom Road to follow the expressway north to the Empire Boulevard interchange , where it ended at US 104 . The remainder of the Sea Breeze Expressway from I @-@ 490 to Blossom Road became part of NY 47 c . 1965 following the completion of what is now I @-@ 590 from the Can of Worms to Elmwood Avenue . 
 From 1970 to 1980 , the Sea Breeze Expressway underwent a series of designation changes . On January 1 , 1970 , NY 47 was extended northward to encompass the entirety of the Sea Breeze Expressway . The change resulted in overlaps with US 104 from Empire Boulevard to the new Keeler Street Expressway , which was built south of Ridge Road in the late 1960s as a realignment of US 104 , and NY 18 from East Ridge Road to Culver Road , from where NY 18 continued east along Lake Road to Webster . Both overlaps proved to be temporary : US 104 was realigned c . 1971 to cross Irondequoit Bay on the Irondequoit Bay Bridge while NY 18 was truncated c . 1973 to end in Rochester 's Kodak Park . 
 In the late 1970s , the state of New York submitted a proposal to the American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials that would substantially alter how the Outer Loop was numbered . As part of the plan , the NY 47 designation would be eliminated while most of the northeastern section of the Outer Loop — from I @-@ 490 in Rochester to NY 104 ( former US 104 ) to Irondequoit — would become the northernmost part of I @-@ 590 . A replacement designation for NY 47 north of NY 104 was not named at the time . Most of the proposed changes took effect on March 18 , 1980 , when NY 47 was eliminated ; however , I @-@ 590 was modified to end at its junction with I @-@ 490 . In its place , the Rochester – Irondequoit leg of the Outer Loop was assigned NY 590 , which continued north to Sea Breeze over former NY 47 . 
 = = = Sea Breeze Drive = = = 
 = = = = Project origins = = = = 
 In 1995 , Irondequoit Town Supervisor David Schantz proposed the idea of converting the portion of NY 590 north of Titus Avenue into a parkway that would serve as a " gateway " into Irondequoit . He presented the idea to Jim Walsh , the United States Representative representing Irondequoit , who later secured $ 8 million from the federal government for the project . Another $ 4 @.@ 5 million of funding was also devoted to the project from the state of New York . Planning for the project began in mid @-@ 2004 . In late 2006 , the <unk> Town Board chose a configuration calling for the number of lanes on NY 590 to be reduced to two and for four intersections to be replaced with roundabouts as its " preferred alternative " . 
 The final project design was presented on February 6 , 2008 , in the last of five public meetings on the project . Under the plan , the section of NY 590 north of Titus Avenue would be reduced to a two @-@ lane , 25 @-@ mile @-@ per @-@ hour ( 40 km / h ) parkway and named " Sea Breeze Drive " . Its signalized intersections with Titus Avenue , Durand Boulevard , and Seneca and Point Pleasant Roads would be converted into roundabouts as part of the reconstruction . Also , the portion of NY 590 north of Durand Boulevard would be realigned to meet Culver Road at a new intersection farther west along the lakeshore . The realignment would open up 3 acres ( 1 @.@ 2 ha ) of waterfront land along the shore of Irondequoit Bay that had previously been occupied by the expressway . The town of Irondequoit would then acquire the former right @-@ of @-@ way of NY 590 from the state of New York for future recreational uses in a transaction that would officially cost the town $ 1 . 
 Public opinion on the proposed project was split . Many residents supported the project , stating it would improve the safety of the highway ; however , others believed that the reduction in lanes would result in increased traffic on Culver Road , which runs parallel to NY 590 through Irondequoit , and that the roundabouts would make navigating the highway difficult . 
 = = = = Construction = = = = 
 On July 15 , 2008 , the town of Irondequoit let a $ 12 @.@ 8 million contract for the Sea Breeze Drive project , a mark that was within the $ 14 million accumulated in funding by this time . Ground was officially broken on the project on July 28 as part of a ceremony attended by several Rochester @-@ area dignitaries . Among those present were Jim Walsh and David Schantz , both of whom played large roles in making the project a reality . The corridor was subsequently reduced to two lanes as the southbound lanes of NY 590 were reconfigured to handle both directions of traffic while work ensued on permanently narrowing the northbound lanes to a single lane . Northbound traffic on NY 590 was realigned to use the new northbound lane on August 17 , 2009 . 
 The first two of the roundabouts to reach operational status were those at Point Pleasant Road and Durand Boulevard . The Point Pleasant Road roundabout opened to traffic on September 8 , 2009 , by which time the Durand Boulevard roundabout was also ready for use . The Titus Avenue roundabout was completed in late 2009 , while work on the Seneca Road junction was delayed until October 2009 due to the proximity of the intersection to the side of the hill overlooking Irondequoit Bay . Although the original plans for the project had already accounted for the issue , the plans had to be revised to comply with new federal standards regarding the use of steel pilings for supporting the hillside . Work on the roundabout finally began on October 12 . The Seneca Road roundabout and the new alignment of Sea Breeze Drive north of Durand Boulevard were completed in the first half of 2010 . 
 The completion date for the project , dubbed " the largest public works project ever done in the town of Irondequoit " by then @-@ Town Supervisor Mary Ellen Heyman , was pushed back several times . It was originally set for May 2010 , but was subsequently pushed back to late August or early September . It was finally completed in October 2010 with the installation of a decorative ship mast structure at the Durand Boulevard roundabout . Following the project 's completion , NY 590 was truncated to Titus Avenue and ownership and maintenance of Sea Breeze Drive was transferred to the town of Irondequoit . According to New York State Department of Transportation ( NYSDOT ) official Rick <unk> , the state turned Sea Breeze Drive over to the town because the portion of NY 590 north of Titus Avenue had low traffic volumes and was situated in a residential area . <unk> added , " [ the portion of NY 590 north of Titus Avenue ] didn 't make sense ( to us ) anymore . 590 effectively ends at Route 104 . " 
 = = Exit list = = 
 The entire route is in Monroe County . 
 = United States rainfall climatology = 
 The characteristics of United States rainfall climatology differ significantly across the United States and those under United States sovereignty . Late summer and fall extratropical cyclones bring a majority of the precipitation which falls across western , southern , and southeast Alaska annually . During the winter , and spring , Pacific storm systems bring Hawaii and the western United States most of their precipitation . Nor 'easters moving down the East coast bring cold season precipitation to the Carolinas , Mid @-@ Atlantic and New England states . Lake @-@ effect snows add to precipitation potential downwind of the Great Lakes , as well as Great Salt Lake and the Finger Lakes during the cold season . The snow to liquid ratio across the contiguous United States averages 13 : 1 , meaning 13 inches ( 330 mm ) of snow melts down to 1 inch ( 25 mm ) of water . 
 During the summer , the North American monsoon combined with Gulf of California and Gulf of Mexico moisture moving around the subtropical ridge in the Atlantic ocean bring the promise of afternoon and evening air @-@ mass thunderstorms to the southern tier of the country as well as the Great Plains . <unk> of the subtropical ridge , tropical cyclones enhance precipitation across southern and eastern sections of the country , as well as Puerto Rico , the United States Virgin Islands , the Northern Mariana Islands , Guam , and American Samoa . Over the top of the ridge , the jet stream brings a summer precipitation maximum to the Great Lakes . Large thunderstorm areas known as mesoscale convective complexes move through the Plains , Midwest , and Great Lakes during the warm season , contributing up to 10 % of the annual precipitation to the region . 
 The El Niño – Southern Oscillation affects the precipitation distribution , by altering rainfall patterns across the West , Midwest , the Southeast , and throughout the tropics . There is also evidence that global warming is leading to increased precipitation to the eastern portions of North America , while droughts are becoming more frequent in the western portions . 
 = = General = = 
 The eastern part of the contiguous United States east of the 98th meridian , the mountains of the Pacific Northwest , the Willamette Valley , and the Sierra Nevada range are the wetter portions of the nation , with average rainfall exceeding 30 inches ( 760 mm ) per year . The drier areas are the Desert Southwest , Great Basin , valleys of northeast Arizona , eastern Utah , and central Wyoming . Increased warming within urban heat islands leads to an increase in rainfall downwind of cities . 
 = = Alaska = = 
 Juneau averages over 50 inches ( 1 @,@ 270 mm ) of precipitation a year , while other areas in southeast Alaska receive over 275 inches ( 6 @,@ 980 mm ) . South central Alaska does not get nearly as much rain as the southeast of Alaska , though it does get more snow . On average , Anchorage receives 16 inches ( 406 mm ) of precipitation a year , with around 75 inches ( 1 @,@ 905 mm ) of snow . The northern coast of the Gulf of Alaska receives up to 150 inches ( 3 @,@ 800 mm ) of precipitation annually . Across western sections of the state , the northern side of the Seward Peninsula is a desert with less than 10 inches ( 250 mm ) of precipitation annually , while some locations between Dillingham and Bethel average around 100 inches ( 2 @,@ 540 mm ) of precipitation . Inland , often less than 10 inches ( 250 mm ) falls a year , but what precipitation falls during the winter tends to stay throughout the season . La Niña events lead to drier than normal conditions , while El Niño events do not have a correlation towards dry or wet conditions . Precipitation increases by 10 to 40 percent when the Pacific decadal oscillation is positive . 
 = = West = = 
 From September through May , extratropical cyclones from the Pacific Ocean move inland into the region due to a southward migration of the jet stream during the cold season . This shift in the jet stream brings much of the annual precipitation to the region , and also brings the potential for heavy rain events . The West Coast occasionally experiences ocean @-@ effect showers , usually in the form of rain at lower elevations south of the mouth of the Columbia River . These occur whenever an Arctic air mass from western Canada is drawn westward out over the Pacific Ocean , typically by way of the Fraser Valley , returning shoreward around a center of low pressure . Strong onshore flow is brought into the mountain ranges of the west , focusing significant precipitation into the Rocky Mountains , with rain shadows occurring in the Harney Basin , Great Basin , the central valley of California , and the lower Colorado River valley . In general , rainfall amounts are lower on the southern portions of the West coast . The biggest recipients of the precipitation are the coastal ranges such as the Olympic Mountains , the Cascades , and the Sierra Nevada range . Lesser amounts fall upon the Continental Divide . Cold @-@ season precipitation into this region is the main supply of water to area rivers , such as the Colorado River and Rio Grande , and also acts as the main source of water to people living in this portion of the United States . During El Niño events , increased precipitation is expected in California due to a more southerly , zonal , storm track . California also enters a wet pattern when thunderstorm activity within the tropics associated with the Madden – Julian oscillation nears <unk> longitude . During La Niña , increased precipitation is diverted into the Pacific Northwest due to a more northerly storm track . 
 = = = Lake @-@ effect snow off Great Salt Lake = = = 
 The southern and southeastern sides of the Great Salt Lake receive significant lake @-@ effect snow . Since the Great Salt Lake never freezes , the lake @-@ effect can affect the weather along the Wasatch Front year around . The lake @-@ effect largely contributes to the 55 inches ( 140 cm ) to 80 inches ( 200 cm ) annual snowfall amounts recorded south and east of the lake , with average snowfall amounts exceeding 600 inches ( 1 @,@ 500 cm ) in the Wasatch Mountains . The snow , which is often very light and dry due to the desert climate , is referred to as " The Greatest Snow on Earth " in the mountains . Lake @-@ effect snow contributes to approximately 6 @-@ 8 snowfalls per year in Salt Lake City , with approximately 10 % of the city 's precipitation being contributed by the phenomenon . 
 = = = North American Monsoon = = = 
 The North American Monsoon ( NAM ) occurs from early July into September , originating over Mexico and spreading into the southwest United States by mid @-@ July . This allows the wet season to start in the Southwest during the summer rather than early fall as seen across the remainder of the West . Within the United States , it affects Arizona , New Mexico , Nevada , Utah , Colorado , West Texas , and California . The North American monsoon is known to many as the Summer , Southwest , Mexican or Arizona monsoon . It is also sometimes called the Desert Monsoon as a large part of the affected area is desert . 
 When precipitable water values near 1 @.@ 32 inches ( 34 mm ) , brief but often torrential thunderstorms can occur , especially over mountainous terrain . This activity is occasionally enhanced by the passage of <unk> ( westward @-@ moving ) upper cyclones moving under the subtropical ridge and the entrainment of the remnants of tropical storms . Tropical cyclones from the eastern Pacific contribute to the moisture within the monsoon system , and bring up to 20 percent of the average annual rainfall to southern California . Flash flooding is a serious danger during the monsoon season . Dry washes can become raging rivers in an instant , even when no storms are visible as a storm can cause a flash flood tens of miles away . Lightning strikes are also a significant danger . Because it is dangerous to be caught in the open when these storms suddenly appear , many golf courses in Arizona have thunderstorm warning systems . 
 As much as 45 % of the annual rainfall across New Mexico occurs during the summer monsoon . Many desert plants are adapted to take advantage of this brief wet season . Because of the monsoons , the Sonoran and Mojave are considered relatively " wet " when ranked among other deserts such as the Sahara . Monsoons play a vital role in managing wildfire threat by providing moisture at higher elevations and feeding desert streams . Heavy monsoon rain can lead to excess winter plant growth , in turn a summer wildfire risk . A lack of monsoon rain can hamper summer seeding , reducing excess winter plant growth but worsening drought . 
 = = Great Plains = = 
 <unk> winds off the Rocky Mountains can aid in forming the dry line . Major drought episodes in the midwestern United States are associated with an amplification of the upper tropospheric subtropical ( or monsoon ) ridge across the West and Plains , along with a weakening of the western edge of the " Bermuda high " . During the summer , a southerly low @-@ level jet draws moisture from the Gulf of Mexico . Additional moisture comes from more local sources , especially transpiring vegetation . Maximum precipitation generally occurs in late spring and early summer , with minimum precipitation in winter . During La Niña events , the storm track shifts far enough northward to bring wetter than normal conditions ( in the form of increased snowfall ) to the Midwestern states , as well as hot and dry summers . 
 The convective season for the Plains ranges between May and September . Organized systems of thunderstorms known as mesoscale convective systems develop over the region during this period , with a bulk of the activity occurring between midnight and 6 a.m. local time . The time of maximum precipitation during the day gradually varies from late afternoon near the slopes of the Rockies to early morning near the Ohio River valley , in part reflecting the west @-@ to @-@ east propagation of mesoscale convective systems . Mesoscale convective systems bring 30 to 70 percent of the annual warm season rainfall to the Plains . An especially long @-@ lived and well @-@ organized type of mesoscale convective system called a mesoscale convective complex produces on average 8 % to 18 % of the annual warm season rainfall across the Plains and Midwest . Squall lines account for 30 % of the large thunderstorm complexes which move through the region . 
 = = Gulf Coast and Southeast = = 
 = = = Cold season = = = 
 The subtropical jet stream brings in upper level moisture from the Pacific Ocean during the cold season . Ahead of storm systems , significant moisture becomes drawn in from the Gulf of Mexico , which increases moisture within the atmospheric column and leads to precipitation ahead of extratropical cyclones . During the El Niño portion of ENSO , increased precipitation falls along the Gulf coast and Southeast due to a stronger than normal , and more southerly , polar jet stream . Rare ocean effect snows are possible along the coast of eastern Florida . In the area around Memphis , Tennessee and across the state of Mississippi , there are two rainfall maxima in the winter and spring . Across Georgia and South Carolina , the first of the annual precipitation maxima occurs in late winter , during February or March . Alabama has an annual rainfall maximum in winter or spring and a dry summer . 
 = = = Warm season = = = 
 During the summer , the subtropical ridge in the Atlantic Ocean strengthens , bringing in increasingly humid air from the warm Atlantic , Caribbean , and Gulf of Mexico . Once precipitable water values exceed 1 @.@ 25 inches ( 32 mm ) , afternoon and evening thunderstorms break out at the western periphery of the subtropical ridge across the Southeast on a daily basis . Summer is the time of the second rainfall maximum during the year across Georgia , and the time of the main rainfall maximum in Florida . Evidence shows that increased air pollution is causing rainfall to reach a maximum in intensity during the middle of the week . During the late summer and fall , tropical cyclones move into the region from the Atlantic and Gulf of Mexico , supplying portions of the area with one @-@ quarter of their annual rainfall , on average . Fall is the time of the rainfall minimum across Louisiana . Sometimes , Gulf moisture sneaks up the Front Range of Rockies as far north as the northern High Plains , bringing higher dewpoint air into states such as Wyoming and Montana . 
 = = Great Lakes = = 
 = = = Cold season = = = 
 Extratropical cyclones can bring moderate to heavy snowfall during the cold season . On the backside of these systems , particularly those moving through the eastern United States , lake effect snowfall is possible . Low level cold in the winter sweeping in from Canada combine with relatively warmer , unfrozen lakes to produce dramatic lake @-@ effect snow on the eastern and southern shores of the Great Lakes . Lake @-@ effect precipitation produces a significant difference between the snowfall around the Great Lakes , sometimes within small distances . Lake effect snowfall accounts for 30 to 60 percent of the annual snowfall near the coasts of the Great Lakes . Lake Erie has the distinction of being the only great lake capable of completely freezing over during the winter due to its relative shallowness . Once frozen , the resulting ice cover alleviates lake @-@ effect snow downwind of the lake . The influence of the Great Lakes allows the region to lie within a Humid Continental Climate regime . 
 = = = Warm season = = = 
 Late spring through summer is the wettest time of the year for the region . Weather systems in the westerlies that cause precipitation move along jet stream , which migrates north into the region by summer . This also increases the likelihood for severe weather to develop due to stronger upper @-@ level divergence in its vicinity . Mesoscale convective complexes move into the region from the Plains from May through August , with June the peak month for Michigan . These systems contribute about 2 % of the annual precipitation for the region . Also , remnants of tropical cyclones occasionally move northward into the region , though their overall contribution to precipitation across the region is minimal . From the spring through the summer , areas near the shores of the relatively cooler Great Lakes develop sea breezes , which lowers rainfall amounts near the immediate coastline . 
 = = Northeast = = 
 Average precipitation across the region show maxima along the coastal plain and along the mountains of the Appalachians . Between 28 inches ( 710 mm ) and 62 inches ( 1 @,@ 600 mm ) of precipitation falls annually across the area . Seasonally , there are slight changes to precipitation distribution through the year . For example , Burlington , Vermont has a summer maximum and a winter minimum . In contrast , Portland , Maine has a fall and winter maximum , with a summer minimum in precipitation . <unk> , a maximum in precipitation is seen around three peak times : 3 a.m. , 10 a.m. , and 6 p.m. During the summer , the 6 p.m. peak is most pronounced . 
 = = = Cold season = = = 
 Coastal extratropical cyclones , known as nor 'easters , bring a bulk of the wintry precipitation to the region during the cold season as they track parallel to the coastline , forming along the natural temperature gradient of the Gulf stream before moving up the coastline . The Appalachian Mountains largely shield New York City and Philadelphia from picking up any lake @-@ effect snow , though ocean @-@ effect snows are possible near Cape Cod . The Finger Lakes of New York are long enough for lake @-@ effect precipitation . Lake @-@ effect snow from the Finger Lakes occurs in upstate New York until those lakes freeze over . Bay @-@ effect snows fall downwind of Delaware Bay , Chesapeake Bay , and Massachusetts Bay when the basic criteria are met . Ocean effect snows are possible downwind of the Gulf Stream across the Southeast . 
 = = = Warm season = = = 
 During the summer and early fall , mesoscale convective systems can move into the area from Canada and the Great Lakes . Tropical cyclones and their remains occasionally move into the region from the south and southwest . Recently , the region has experienced a couple heavy rainfall events that exceeded the 50 @-@ year return period , during October 1996 and October 1998 , which suggest an increase in heavy rainfall along the coast . 
 = = Pacific islands = = 
 = = = Hawaii = = = 
 Snow , although not usually associated with tropics , falls at higher elevations on the Big Island , on Mauna Loa as well as Mauna Kea , which reaches an altitude of 13 @,@ 796 feet ( 4 @,@ 205 m ) in some winter months . Snow only rarely falls on Maui 's Haleakala . Mount Waiʻaleʻale ( Waiʻaleʻale ) , on the island of Kauai , is notable for its extreme rainfall , as it has the second highest average annual rainfall on Earth , with 460 inches ( 12 @,@ 000 mm ) . Storm systems affect the state with heavy rains between October and March . Showers are common across the island chain , but thunderstorms are relatively rare . Local climates vary considerably on each island due to their topography , divisible into windward ( <unk> ) and leeward ( Kona ) regions based upon location relative to the higher mountains . The Kona coast is the only area in Hawaii with a summer precipitation maximum . Windward sides face the east to northeast trade winds and receive much more rainfall ; leeward sides are drier and sunnier , with less rain and less cloud cover . In the late winter and spring during El Niño events , drier than average conditions can be expected in Hawaii . 
 = = = Northern Marianas = = = 
 The islands have a tropical marine climate moderated by seasonal northeast trade winds . There is a dry season which stretches from December to June , and a rainy season from July to November . Saipan 's average annual precipitation is 82 @.@ 36 inches ( 2 @,@ 092 mm ) , with 67 percent falling during the rainy season . Typhoons frequent the island chain , which can lead to excessive rainfall . 
 = = = Guam = = = 
 Guam 's climate is moderated by east to northeast trade winds through the year . The average annual rainfall for the island is 86 inches ( 2 @,@ 200 mm ) . There is a distinct dry season from January to June , and a rainy season from July to December . Typhoons frequent the island , which can lead to excessive rainfall . During El Niño years , dry season precipitation averages below normal . However , the threat of a tropical cyclone is over triple what is normal during El Niño years , so extreme shorter duration rainfall events are possible . 
 = = = American Samoa = = = 
 American Samoa 's climate regime is dominated by southeast trade winds . The island dependency is wet , with annual rainfall averaging near 120 inches ( 3 @,@ 000 mm ) at the airport , with amounts closer to 200 inches ( 5 @,@ 100 mm ) in other areas . There is a distinct rainy season when tropical cyclones occasionally visit between November and April . The dry season lasts from May to October . During El Niño events , precipitation averages about 10 percent above normal , while La Niña events lead to precipitation amounts which average close to 10 percent below normal . 
 = = Atlantic islands = = 
 = = = Puerto Rico = = = 
 There is a pronounced rainy season from April to November across the commonwealth , encompassing the annual hurricane season . Due to the commonwealth 's topography , rainfall varies greatly across the island . Pico del Este averages 171 @.@ 09 inches ( 4 @,@ 346 mm ) of rainfall yearly while Magueyes Island averages only 29 @.@ 32 inches ( 745 mm ) a year . Despite known changes in tropical cyclone activity due to changes in the El Niño / Southern Oscillation ( ENSO ) , there is no known relationship between rainfall in Puerto Rico and the ENSO cycle . However , when values of the North Atlantic oscillation are high during the winter , precipitation is lower than average for Puerto Rico . There have not been any documented cases of snow falling within Puerto Rico , though occasionally it is brought in from elsewhere as a publicity stunt . 
 = = = United States Virgin Islands = = = 
 The climate of the United States Virgin Islands has sustained easterly trade winds through the year . There is a rainy season which lasts from September to November , when hurricanes are more prone to visit the island chain . The average rainfall through the island chain ranges from 51 @.@ 55 inches ( 1 @,@ 309 mm ) at Annually to 37 @.@ 79 inches ( 960 mm ) at East Hill . 
 = = Changes due to global warming = = 
 Increasing temperatures tend to increase evaporation which leads to more precipitation . As average global temperatures have risen , average global precipitation has also increased . Precipitation has generally increased over land north of 30 ° N from 1900 to 2005 , but declined over the tropics since the 1970s . Eastern portions of North America have become wetter . There has been an increase in the number of heavy precipitation events over many areas during the past century , as well as an increase since the 1970s in the prevalence of droughts — especially in the tropics and subtropics . Over the contiguous United States , total annual precipitation increased at an average rate of 6 @.@ 1 percent per century since 1900 , with the greatest increases within the East North Central climate region ( 11 @.@ 6 percent per century ) and the South ( 11 @.@ 1 percent ) . Hawaii was the only region to show a decrease ( − 9 @.@ 25 percent ) . From this excess precipitation , crop losses are expected to increase by US $ 3 billion ( 2002 dollars ) annually over the next 30 years . 
 = Tropical Storm Toraji ( 2007 ) = 
 Tropical Storm Toraji was a short @-@ lived and minimal tropical cyclone that brought inundating rainfall to areas of Southeast Asia in July 2007 . The name Toraji was contributed to the western Pacific typhoon naming list by North Korea and stands for a broad bell flower ( <unk> <unk> ) . The third named storm of the annual typhoon season , Toraji developed from an area of disturbed weather within the South China Sea on July 4 . As a result of its northwesterly track , the tropical depression moved over Hainan shortly after tropical cyclogenesis . Upon its emergence into the Gulf of Tonkin on July 5 , Toraji quickly intensified into a tropical storm with winds of 65 km / h ( 40 mph ) ; this would be the tropical cyclone 's peak intensity for its entire duration . However , the JMA indicated that tropical storm intensity had been reached a day earlier . On the evening of July 5 , Toraji made its final landfall on <unk> , Guangxi before rapidly deteriorating inland and degenerating into a remnant low @-@ pressure area by the following day . 
 During its two @-@ day duration , Toraji brought heavy rainfall to areas of southeastern China and Vietnam . Prior to impacting China , 147 @,@ 000 people were evacuated from potentially affected regions . In that country , the storm 's effects were spread out over a 800 @,@ 000 – 1 @,@ 200 @,@ 000 km2 ( 310 @,@ 000 – 460 @,@ 000 sq mi ) area . The torrential rainfall produced by the tropical storm damaged agricultural land and destroyed several hundred homes , while damaging many more . Total damage in China was estimated at CN ¥ 73 million ( $ 9 @.@ 6 million ) . Despite making landfall near the border of Vietnam and China , effects in the former were generally minimal . However , several fishing boats capsized offshore ; these sinkings did not result in any deaths . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 In early July 2007 , an area of disturbed weather began to persist in the South China Sea roughly 155 mi ( 250 km ) southeast of Hainan . The Japan Meteorological Agency ( JMA ) classified the system as a tropical depression at 0000 UTC on July 3 after the storm had organized sufficiently , however , other tracking agencies did not indicate that tropical cyclogenesis had occurred at the time . However , the Joint Typhoon Warning Center ( JTWC ) began to monitor the disturbance for potential signs of tropical cyclogenesis at 0100 UTC later that day , At the time , the storm system was situated in an area of weak to moderate wind shear , exposing the disturbance 's low @-@ level circulation center . Despite the prevailing conditions and proximity to land , the storm continued to organize , and as such the JTWC issued a tropical cyclone formation alert for the system at 0130 UTC the following day . 
 As it tracked in a general northwesterly direction , intensification continued , and both the JMA and JTWC consequently upgraded the disturbance to tropical storm intensity at 0600 UTC on July 4 , giving the storm the name Toraji . Meanwhile , the Hong Kong Observatory ( HKO ) upgraded the same system to tropical depression status . At the same time , Toraji made its first landfall on Hainan Island . According to the JMA , the tropical storm had winds of 65 km / h ( 40 mph ) and a minimum barometric pressure of 996 mbar ( hPa ; 29 @.@ 42 inHg ) . As the cyclone passed over the island , Toraji weakened marginally , and whilst the HKO and JMA maintained their prior intensities for the system , the JTWC downgraded Toraji to tropical depression status at 1800 UTC before a subsequent re @-@ upgrade as the cyclone emerged into the Gulf of Tonkin early the following day . Once over open water , modest intensification ensued , with the storm reaching peak intensity at 1800 UTC on July 4 with winds still at 65 km / h ( 40 mph ) and a pressure of 994 mbar ( hPa ; 29 @.@ 36 inHg ) . Six hours later on the following day , the HKO upgraded Toraji to tropical storm intensity . After having tracked north @-@ northwestward along the western periphery of a subtropical ridge , Toraji made its final landfall near Cẩm Phả , Vietnam at approximately 1200 UTC on July 5 at the same intensity . Six hours later , all three agencies downgraded Toraji to tropical depression intensity . By that time , the JTWC had ceased the issuance of tropical cyclone products on the storm . However , the JMA and HKO continued to monitor the system until 0000 UTC on July 5 . 
 = = Preparations and impact = = 
 Due to the impending threat of Toraji , Chinese officials evacuated over 147 @,@ 000 people from areas potentially affected by the cyclone . Upon making its first landfall in China , Toraji became the first of six tropical cyclones to move ashore the country in the first three quarters of 2007 . The system 's effects were spread out over a region approximately 800 @,@ 000 – 1 @,@ 200 @,@ 000 km2 ( 310 @,@ 000 – 460 @,@ 000 sq mi ) in area . In Guangxi , Toraji caused extensive impacts . In <unk> , a weather station clocked gusts peaking at 120 km / h ( 75 mph ) . Associated rains destroyed approximately 16 @,@ 600 acres ( 6 @,@ 700 ha ) of farm and agricultural land , and the resulting flooding caused the collapse of 376 homes . An additional 946 residences sustained at least partial damage . In China , the total economic loss resulting from Toraji was estimated at approximately CN ¥ 73 million ( $ 9 @.@ 6 million ) . 
 In preparation for the tropical storm , the Government of Vietnam redirected all boats back to port in Ha Long Bay . A hundred people were evacuated from low @-@ lying areas prone to landslides . Off of Vietnam , late reports indicated that several small fishing vessels were sunk by Toraji in Quảng Ninh Province , located in the northern part of the country . However , no deaths resulted in these sinkings . On Bach Long Vi , a station recorded 152 mm ( 5 @.@ 98 in ) of rain . Further inland , damage from Toraji in Vietnam remained generally minimal . Throughout northern areas of the country , an average of 155 mm ( 6 @.@ 1 in ) of rain fell , leading to flooding and landslides . At least 27 homes were damaged and 13 others were destroyed by the storm , leaving millions of Vietnamese dong in losses . A power station at a nearby military base was also damaged during the storm , causing roughly ₫ 40 million ( US $ 2 @,@ 240 ) in damage . 
 = Dartford Crossing = 
 The Dartford @-@ Thurrock River Crossing , commonly known as the Dartford Crossing and until 1991 the Dartford Tunnel , is a major road crossing of the River Thames in England , connecting Dartford in Kent to the south to Thurrock in Essex to the north . It consists of two bored tunnels and the Queen Elizabeth II Bridge , a cable stayed bridge . The only fixed road crossing of the Thames east of Greater London , it is the busiest <unk> crossing in the United Kingdom , with an average daily use of over 130 @,@ 000 vehicles . It opened in stages : the west tunnel in 1963 , the east tunnel in 1980 and the bridge in 1991 . The crossing forms part of the M25 motorway 's route , though it is not under motorway restrictions itself . It has been described as one of the most important road crossings in Britain , and suffers from heavy traffic and congestion . 
 The crossing 's development started in the late 1930s , but was interrupted due to the Second World War and resumed in the 1950s . The original tunnel catered for a single lane of traffic in each direction , but rising traffic levels required the second tunnel to be built . The M25 connected to the tunnels at both ends when completed in 1986 , and this increased traffic put pressure on the tunnels ' capacity . A Private Finance Initiative scheme was started in 1988 to build the bridge . The combined crossing now handles four lanes of traffic in each direction . 
 The crossing had always been tolled , and from 1 April 2003 this became a charge , though since 2008 it has been free from 10 pm to 6 am . An electronic charging scheme ( Dart Charge ) began in November 2014 . As a result , the charge can no longer be paid in cash and the old toll booths have been removed . A residents ' scheme is available , offering further discounts for people living near the crossing . 
 = = Location = = 
 The crossing spans the River Thames between Dartford , Kent , to the south and Thurrock , Essex , to the north . It is about 20 miles ( 32 km ) east of the centre of London , outside the Greater London boundary . The two tunnels are 1 @,@ 430 metres ( 4 @,@ 690 ft ) long , while the cable @-@ stayed bridge is 137 metres ( 449 ft ) high with a main span of 450 metres ( 1 @,@ 480 ft ) . The high @-@ speed rail line High Speed 1 from St Pancras International Station to Ebbsfleet International Station passes under the crossing approach roads on the north side of the river , at a near right angle . 
 The design capacity is 135 @,@ 000 vehicles per day , but in practice the crossing can carry as much as 160 @,@ 000 . It has been described by the Highways Agency as " a vital transport link for the national and South East economies " and by the Secretary of State for Transport , Patrick McLoughlin as " a crucial part of the country ’ s strategic road network " . It is signed as a major destination on London 's orbital route , the M25 , though the crossing and its approach road are an all @-@ purpose road ( the <unk> ) , allowing traffic prohibited from motorways to use it . Southbound traffic crosses the four lane bridge , while northbound traffic uses both of the two lane road tunnels . However , the bridge is sometimes closed due to bad weather , such as high winds , or for maintenance . On these occasions , traffic uses the tunnels in both directions . 
 = = = Alternative routes = = = 
 The crossing is the easternmost road crossing of the River Thames , and the only one that is east of Greater London . The next nearest vehicle crossings to the west are the Woolwich Ferry and the Blackwall Tunnel , both well within East London . There is no official diversion route through London for high vehicles . When the bridge is closed , vehicles over 5 @.@ 03 metres ( 16 @.@ 5 ft ) are diverted around the M25 in the opposite direction . 
 A number of new crossings have been proposed as relief for the Dartford Crossing . The proposed Thames Gateway Bridge to the west was given planning permission in December 2004 , but was cancelled in November 2008 when Boris Johnson became Mayor of London . Johnson subsequently proposed the Gallions Reach Ferry , a ferry crossing in the same location , as an alternative . The Lower Thames Crossing is a proposal for an alternative crossing , most likely a tunnel , to the east . Thurrock Council suggest that this crossing will be essential for managing congestion . In July 2014 , the government announced it would develop further plans for an alternative route . Option A is an additional crossing at the current location , while option C is a new crossing east of Gravesend . 
 = = Charges = = 
 A free @-@ flow electronic charging system called Dart Charge came into force in November 2014 based on automatic number plate recognition . The charge can be paid online , by text message or by phone in advance or by midnight the day after crossing , but can no longer be paid in cash since the old toll booths have been removed . Charges are payable between 6am and 10pm and this is indicated on overhead @-@ gantry signs . The schedule of charge , however , is not displayed at any location on either of the approaching roads . Reduced charges are available to users with a pre @-@ pay account and holders of DART @-@ Tags , a device held in a vehicle that is detected at the payment booth , automatically deducting the charge from a pre @-@ paid account . The charges for the crossing as of November 2014 are as follows : 
 The charge payment booths for both directions of travel are located on the south side of the crossing . Various categories of vehicles are exempt from the charge , including emergency services vehicles , military vehicles and those exempt from Vehicle Excise Duty on the grounds of disability . The charge may generally be suspended when it would ease congestion , such as when there is a continuous queue of traffic travelling under 10 mph from either junction 4 ( between Sevenoaks and Bromley ) or junction 28 ( near Brentwood ) on the M25 . 
 The charges vary according to the type of vehicle . Motorcycles are free but there are standard charges for cars , two @-@ axle goods vehicles and larger vehicles with more than two axles . Drivers who fail to pay the charge are issued with a penalty charge notice . There are no signs warning of penalty charges . 
 Since 2008 , a local residents ' scheme gives 50 free crossings to car drivers resident in the Dartford and Thurrock council areas for an annual registration fee of £ 10 , with additional crossings at 20p each . On 1 March 2014 , this scheme was extended to include privately owned 2 @-@ axle goods vehicles . A further option was introduced giving unlimited free crossings for £ 20 annually . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = First tunnel = = = 
 The idea of a tunnel crossing was first proposed by the Ministry of Transport in 1924 . Initial reports at the start of the year suggested a crossing between Tilbury and Gravesend , replacing a ferry service , but this had been rejected by July in favour of a route further upstream , near Dartford . By 1929 , the total cost of building the tunnel had been estimated at £ 3M . The tunnel was planned to be part of a general orbital route around London and was provisionally known as part of the " South Orbital Road " . 
 The first engineering work to take place was a compressed air driven pilot tunnel , which was drilled between 1936 and 1938 . Work on the tunnel was delayed due to World War II , and resumed in 1959 , using a Greathead Shield , similar to the work on the Blackwall Tunnel some 60 years earlier . The delay in work due to the war allowed the tunnel 's design to be improved , which included a better ventilation system . After negotiations with the Ministry of Transport , Kent and Essex County Councils successfully levied a toll on the tunnel in 1960 , before opening . The two @-@ lane bore tunnel opened to traffic on 18 November 1963 , costing £ <unk> . It initially served approximately 12 @,@ 000 vehicles per day . 
 The toll was originally two shillings and sixpence , equivalent to <unk> post @-@ decimalisation , and approximately equivalent in purchasing power to £ 2 @.@ 00 in 2015 . The Dartford Tunnel Act 1967 gave Kent and Essex County Councils authority to change the tolls , and in December 1977 , the toll was raised from 25p to <unk> for cars , <unk> to <unk> for 2 axle goods vehicles , and 60p to <unk> for HGVs . By 1984 , the toll for cars had risen to 60p . 
 = = = Second tunnel = = = 
 The tunnel was expected to carry two million vehicles a year but by 1970 was carrying over eight million . That year , Michael Heseltine , then a transport minister , announced that a second tunnel would be built in conjunction with the North Orbital Road , later to become the M25 . 
 Construction was approved in April 1971 , with an initial expected opening date in 1976 . Work was delayed due to a lack of funds , which was resolved by EEC funding granted in 1974 . The second tunnel opened in May 1980 , allowing each tunnel to handle one direction of traffic , by which time the joint capacity of the two tunnels had increased to 65 @,@ 000 vehicles per day . Connection of the crossing to the M25 was completed on the northerly Essex side in September 1982 ( Junction 31 ) , and to the southerly Kent side in September 1986 ( Junction 1a ) . Following the completion of the M25 in 1986 , the daily demand had grown to 79 @,@ 000 vehicles . 
 = = = Queen Elizabeth II Bridge = = = 
 During the early 1980s , it was anticipated that traffic through the tunnel would rise on the completion of the M25 in 1986 . At the time , the expectation was that other routes in London would be improved instead , diverting 15 % of traffic away from the tunnel . In 1985 , the Transport Minister , Lynda <unk> , announced that the number of toll booths would be increased to 12 each way , but concern grew that two tunnels would not be able to cope with the full demands of a completed M25 . 
 Between September 1985 and December 1986 , proposals for improvements to the Dartford Crossing underwent several changes , and in 1986 , a Trafalgar House consortium won a bid to build a new bridge at Dartford crossing , valued at £ <unk> . At the time there were several other privately financed projects planned or under construction in the UK , including the Second Severn Crossing . From 1981 until the establishment of the Private Finance Initiatives ( <unk> ) in the late 1980s , private investment projects were governed by the Ryrie Rules which dictated that " any privately @-@ financed solution must be shown to be more cost @-@ effective than a publicly @-@ financed alternative , and that privately @-@ financed expenditure by nationalised industries could not be additional to public expenditure provision , which would be reduced by the amount of private financed borrowed . " 
 On 31 July 1988 , a Private Finance Initiative concession was enabled under the Dartford @-@ Thurrock Crossing Act 1988 , which transferred control of the crossing from Kent and Essex county councils to Dartford River Crossing Limited , a private company managed by Rodney Jones . The company would also bear the debt of the bridge , then under construction , " financed 100 % by debt , with no equity contribution " . The private company was at risk of not recuperating their costs , but ultimately the Dartford scheme demonstrated that the Ryrie Rules were no longer a barrier to the private financing of public infrastructure projects . The concession was scheduled for 20 years from the transfer date , with a stipulation that it could end when debts had been paid off , which was agreed to have been achieved on 31 March 2002 . According to the International Handbook on Public @-@ Private Partnership , the chief financing for the project came from a " 20 @-@ year subordinated loan stock , 16 @-@ year loan stock and £ 85 million as a term loan from banks " . 
 Construction of bridge started immediately after the creation of the PFI in 1988 . It was designed by German engineer Hellmut <unk> , and the two main caissons supporting the bridge piers were constructed in the Netherlands . Each caisson was designed to withstand a bridge strike of a ship weighing up to 65 @,@ 000 tonnes and travelling up to 18 @.@ 5 kilometres per hour ( 11 @.@ 5 mph ) The towers are about 61 metres ( 200 ft ) high , and it took a team of around 56 to assemble the bridge structure . During construction of the approach road , a World War II bomb was found in its path , which required closure of the entire crossing . 
 The bridge was opened by Queen Elizabeth II on 30 October 1991 . The total cost of construction was £ 120 million ( £ 246 million as of 2015 ) , including £ 30m for the approach roads . The proposed name had been simply the Dartford Bridge , but Thurrock residents objected and suggested the Tilbury Bridge , leading to a compromise . At the time of opening , it had the longest cable @-@ stayed span of any bridge in Europe . It is the only bridge across the Thames downstream of Central London to be opened since Tower Bridge in 1894 . 
 = = = Charging scheme = = = 
 In 2000 , the European Union issued a directive that value @-@ added tax should be charged on all road tolls , including the Dartford Crossing . The Government opposed the directive and said it would bear the additional cost . It was anticipated that the tolls would be removed on 1 April 2003 under the original PFI scheme contract . However , the Highways Agency decided that the tolls would become a " charge " , under a charging scheme under powers introduced by the Transport Act 2000 to introduce charging schemes on any trunk road bridge or tunnel at least 600 metres ( 2 @,@ 000 ft ) in length . 
 Under the 2000 Transport Act , the <unk> Trunk Road ( Dartford @-@ Thurrock Crossing charging scheme ) Order 2002 allowed the continuation of the crossing fee , which officially became a charge and not a toll on 1 April 2003 . Management of the crossing was contracted to Le Crossing Company Limited on behalf of the Highways Agency . In September 2009 the Highways Agency made a new contract with Connect Plus ( M25 ) Limited . As well as maintaining the crossing , the contract required the company to widen around 40 miles of the M25 and to refurbish a tunnel on the A1 ( M ) at Hatfield . In October 2009 , the Government announced its intention to sell the crossing as part of a public sector deficit reduction strategy . The announcement was unpopular with local residents , who encouraged drivers to sound their horns in protest when using the crossing . After the change of government following the 2010 Election , the new prime minister David Cameron announced that the crossing might still be sold , despite local opposition , particularly from Gareth Johnson , member of parliament for Dartford . Subsequently , the chancellor George Osborne announced that charges would be increased instead to cover the budget deficit . 
 Under the 2008 Charging Order introduced on 15 November 2008 , charges between 10pm and 6am were discontinued , but standard daytime rates increased , starting at £ 1 @.@ 50 for cars . On 7 October 2012 the charges increased to £ 2 for cars , £ 2 @.@ 50 for 2 axle goods vehicles and £ 5 for multi @-@ axle goods vehicles . By 2012 , local businesses were complaining that the crossing 's charge booths were impeding local growth . The government announced that a new electronic charging system would be introduced in 2014 . Drivers would be able to pay by phone , text , online or in shops . The charge is proposed to increase to £ 2 @.@ 50 for cars , £ 3 for 2 @-@ axle goods vehicles and £ 6 for multi @-@ axle vehicles . A later report stated that drivers evading the charge could be fined as much as £ 105 . 
 Preparation work on the free @-@ flow scheme started in April 2014 . Concerns have been raised about reliability , with a Highways Agency report predicting that it could lose up to £ 6m of unpaid charges per year . In September , the Highways Agency announced that the new scheme would start to operate at the end of November , though related works to remove barriers would continue until April 2015 . Subsequently , the date for removal of the booths was confirmed as 30 November . Drivers can browse to the official charge website and pay for credits to use the crossing at a discount . 
 = = Traffic = = 
 A total of 1 @,@ 486 @,@ 929 @,@ 267 vehicles have used the crossing as of 31 March 2014 . The highest recorded daily usage was 181 @,@ 990 vehicles on 23 July 2004 ; since then traffic levels have decreased . From April 2013 to March 2014 , 49 @,@ 645 @,@ 356 vehicles used the crossing : a daily average of 136 @,@ 015 vehicles . The total income for the financial year ended 31 March 2012 was £ 72 @,@ 147 @,@ 091 , while the corresponding figure for the following financial year was £ 80 @,@ 331 @,@ 662 . 
 Bicycles are not permitted on the crossing , but cyclists can be carried across the crossing by the transport authority at no charge . Cyclists report to the crossing control offices on either side , using a free telephone service . The transfer takes around 15 to 30 minutes . 
 In October 1963 , London Transport ordered five double decker buses based on the Ford Thames Trader chassis for special duties , taking cyclists through the Dartford Tunnel . These had a lower deck purpose @-@ built for carrying bicycles , with upper deck seats for cyclists . Access was via a stairwell to the upper deck starting several feet above the level of the road , accessible from special platforms built at either end of the tunnel ; there was also a ladder built into the side of the bodywork for access elsewhere . The design was criticised for failing to protect any passenger from falling off the vehicle , and running costs were estimated at £ 2 @,@ 550 per month , with only £ 45 revenue . The service was reduced to one bus in April 1964 and then cancelled in 1965 , to be replaced by the current transfer service . One of these buses has been preserved . 
 The transport of hazardous goods through the crossing is governed by the European ADR Agreement . The Dartford Crossing is class C , which restricts transporting goods such as nitrates and flammable liquids . The introduction of the ADR scheme initially caused confusion , and for a short time , transporting aerosols through the tunnel was banned . Certain hazardous goods vehicles , together with some oversize and abnormal loads ( if permitted ) may require escorting by Highways Agency Traffic Officers . The crossing authority must hold exercises in conjunction with the emergency services . In 2006 Exercise Orpheus was held , involving the closure of both road tunnels for five hours . 
 The tunnel is patrolled by Highways Agency Traffic Officers . Officers may stop and direct traffic on the crossing and its approach roads , and must be in uniform to exercise their powers . The crossing is subject to a 50 mph speed limit for all vehicles , which is enforced by safety cameras . Between October 2012 and June 2014 , 24 @,@ 229 drivers were caught speeding , with some travelling as fast as 94 mph . A spokesman from the Highways Agency said the cameras were " helping us improve safety and make journeys more reliable " . 
 = = = Congestion = = = 
 The crossing is the busiest in the United Kingdom . Because the design capacity has been exceeded , the crossing is subject to major traffic congestion and disruption , particularly when parts are closed because of accidents or bad weather . Though the Government was adamant that the Queen Elizabeth II Bridge should be designed to avoid closure due to high winds , the bridge has nevertheless had to close on occasions . In February 2014 , during the winter storms , it was closed on the 12th owing to 60 mph winds , and again on the evening of 13th – 14th . 
 At busy times there was significant delay at the payment booths when these existed . There are numerous junctions on either side of the crossing , and because it is not under motorway restrictions , a high proportion of local traffic mixes with long distance traffic , for example travelling from the North and Midlands onwards to Continental Europe . In 2004 , a BBC survey reported that the crossing was " the most stressful section of the M25 " while in 2009 , the crossing was listed in a Royal Automobile Club report as the fourth most congested road in Britain . Though Highways England have reported greatly improved journey times since automatic charging was introduced , Gareth Johnson claims otherwise and has insisted that the Lower Thames Crossing , along with improved signing around Dartford , are better options to reduce congestion . 
 = Queen 's University = 
 Queen 's University at Kingston ( commonly shortened to Queen 's University or Queen 's ) is a public research university located in Kingston , Ontario , Canada . Founded on 16 October 1841 via a royal charter issued by Queen Victoria , the university predates the founding of Canada by 26 years . Queen 's holds more than 1 @,@ 400 hectares ( 3 @,@ 500 acres ) of land throughout Ontario and owns Herstmonceux Castle in East Sussex , England . Queen 's is organized into ten undergraduate , graduate and professional faculties and schools . 
 The Church of Scotland established Queen 's College in 1841 with a royal charter from Queen Victoria . The first classes , intended to prepare students for the ministry , were held 7 March 1842 with 13 students and two professors . Queen 's was the first university west of the maritime provinces to admit women , and to form a student government . In 1883 , a women 's college for medical education affiliated with Queen 's University was established . In 1888 , Queen 's University began offering extension courses , becoming the first Canadian university to do so . In 1912 , Queen 's secularized and changed to its present legal name . 
 Queen 's is a co @-@ educational university , with more than 23 @,@ 000 students , and with over 131 @,@ 000 living alumni worldwide . Notable alumni include government officials , academics , business leaders and 56 Rhodes Scholars . The university was ranked 4th in Canada by Maclean 's University Ranking Guide for 2015 , 206th in the 2015 – 2016 QS World University Rankings , 251 – 300th in the 2015 – 2016 Times Higher Education World University Rankings , and 201 – 300 in the 2015 Academic Ranking of World Universities . Queen 's varsity teams , known as the Golden Gaels , compete in the Ontario University Athletics conference of the Canadian Interuniversity Sport . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Nineteenth century = = = 
 Queen 's was a result of an outgrowth of educational initiatives planned by Presbyterians in the 1830s . A draft plan for the university was presented at a synod meeting in Kingston in 1839 , with a modified bill introduced through the 13th Parliament of Upper Canada during a session in 1840 . On 16 October 1841 , a royal charter was issued through Queen Victoria . Queen 's resulted from years of effort by Presbyterians of Upper Canada to found a college for the education of ministers in the growing colony and to instruct the youth in various branches of science and literature . They modelled the university after the University of Edinburgh and the University of Glasgow . Classes began on 7 March 1842 , in a small wood @-@ frame house on the edge of the city with two professors and 15 students . 
 The college moved several times during its first eleven years , before settling in its present location . Prior to Canadian Confederation , the college was financially supported by the Presbyterian Church in Scotland , the Canadian government and private citizens . After Confederation the college faced ruin when the federal government withdrew its funding and the Commercial Bank of the Midland District collapsed , a disaster which cost Queen 's two @-@ thirds of its endowment . The college was rescued after Principal William Snodgrass and other officials created a fundraising campaign across Canada . 
 The risk of financial ruin continued to worry the administration until the final decade of the century . They actively considered leaving Kingston and merging with the University of Toronto as late as the 1880s . With the additional funds bequeathed from Queen 's first major benefactor , Robert Sutherland , the college staved off financial failure and maintained its independence . Queen 's was given university status on 17 May 1881 . In 1883 , Women 's Medical College was founded at Queen 's with a class of three . Theological Hall , completed in 1880 , originally served as Queen 's main building throughout the late 19th century . 
 = = = Twentieth century = = = 
 In 1912 , Queen 's separated from the Presbyterian Church of Scotland and changed its name to Queen 's University at Kingston . Queen 's Theological College remained in the control of the Presbyterian Church in Canada , until 1925 , when it joined the United Church of Canada , where it remains today . The university faced another financial crisis during World War I , from a sharp drop in enrolment due to the military enlistment of students , staff , and faculty . A $ 1 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 fundraising drive and the armistice in 1918 saved the university . Approximately 1 @,@ 500 students participated in the war and 187 died . Months before Canada joined World War II , US President Franklin D. Roosevelt , came to Queen 's to accept an honorary degree and , in a broadcast heard around the world , voiced the American policy of mutual alliance and friendship with Canada . During World War II , 2 @,@ 917 graduates from Queen 's served in the armed forces , suffering 164 fatalities . The Memorial Room in Memorial Hall of the John Deutsch University Centre lists those Queen 's students who died during the world wars . 
 Queen 's grew quickly after the war , propelled by the expanding postwar economy and the demographic boom that peaked in the 1960s . From 1951 to 1961 , enrolment increased from just over 2 @,@ 000 students to more than 3 @,@ 000 . The university embarked on a building program , constructing five student residences in less than ten years . 
 Following the reorganization of legal education in Ontario in the mid @-@ 1950s , Queen 's Faculty of Law opened in 1957 in the newly built John A. Macdonald Hall . Other construction projects at Queen 's in the 1950s included the construction of Richardson Hall to house Queen 's administrative offices , and Dunning Hall . By the end of the 1960s , like many other universities in Canada , Queen 's tripled its enrolment and greatly expanded its faculty , staff , and facilities , as a result of the baby boom and generous support from the public sector . By the mid @-@ 1970s , the number of full @-@ time students had reached 10 @,@ 000 . Among the new facilities were three more residences and separate buildings for the Departments of Mathematics , Physics , Biology and Psychology , Social Sciences and the Humanities . 
 During this period Schools of Music , Public Administration ( now part of Policy Studies ) , Rehabilitation Therapy , and Urban and Regional Planning were established at Queen 's . The establishment of the Faculty of Education in 1968 on land about a kilometre west of the university inaugurated the university 's west campus . 
 Queen 's celebrated its sesquicentennial anniversary in 1991 , and was visited by Charles , Prince of Wales , and his then @-@ wife , Diana , to mark the occasion . The Prince of Wales presented a replica of the 1841 Royal Charter granted by Queen Victoria , which had established the university ; the replica is displayed in the John Deutsch University Centre . The first female chancellor of Queen 's University , Agnes Richardson Benidickson , was installed on 23 October 1980 . In 1993 , Queen 's received Herstmonceux Castle as a donation from alumnus Alfred Bader . The castle is used by the university as the Bader International Study Centre . 
 = = = Twenty @-@ first century = = = 
 In 2001 the Senate Educational Equity Committee ( <unk> ) studied the experiences of visible minority and Aboriginal faculty members at Queen 's after a black female professor left , alleging that she had experienced racism . Following this survey <unk> commissioned a study which found that many perceived a ' Culture of Whiteness ' at the university . The report concluded that “ white privilege and power continues to be reflected in the Eurocentric curricula , traditional pedagogical approaches , hiring , promotion and tenure practices , and opportunities for research ” at Queen ’ s . The university 's response to the report is the subject of continuing debate . The administration implemented measures to promote diversity beginning in 2006 , such as the position of diversity advisor and the hiring of " dialogue monitors " to facilitate discussions on social justice . 
 In May 2010 , Queen 's University joined the Matariki Network of Universities , an international group of universities created in 2010 , which focuses on strong links between research and undergraduate teaching . 
 = = Campus = = 
 The university grounds lies within the neighbourhood of Queen 's in the city of Kingston , Ontario . The university 's main campus is bordered to the south by Lake Ontario , Kingston General Hospital to the southeast , city parks to the east , and by residential neighbourhoods , known as the Kingston student ghetto or the university district , in all other directions . The campus grew to its present size of 40 ha ( 99 acres ) through gradual acquisitions of adjacent private lands , and remains the university 's largest landholding . The campus 's original site and holds the majority of its facilities . In addition to its main campus in Kingston , Queen 's owns several other properties around Kingston , as well as in Central Frontenac Township , Ontario , Rideau Lakes , Ontario , and East Sussex , England . 
 The buildings at Queen 's vary in age , from Summerhill which opened in 1839 , to the new Queen 's School of Medicine building , which opened in 2011 . Grant Hall , completed in 1905 , is considered the university 's most recognizable landmark . It is named after Rev. George Munro Grant who served as Queen 's seventh principal . The building is used to host concerts , lectures , meetings , exams , and convocations . Two buildings owned and managed by the university have been listed as National Historic Sites of Canada . The Kingston General Hospital is the oldest operating public hospital in Canada . The Roselawn House , which is located east of the west campus , is the core component of the university 's Donald Gordon Centre . 
 = = = Libraries , museums and galleries = = = 
 Queen 's University Libraries include six campus libraries in five facilities housing 2 @.@ 2 million physical items and 400 @,@ 000 electronic resources , including e @-@ books , serial titles and databases . The library 's budget in 2007 – 2008 was $ 18 @.@ 1 million , with $ 9 @.@ 8 million dedicated to acquisitions . The libraries are Bracken Health Sciences Library , Education Library , Lederman Law Library , Stauffer Humanities and Social Sciences Library and Engineering & Science Library . The W.D. Jordan Special Collections and Music Library notably harbors early @-@ dated books from 1475 to 1700 . The Engineering & Science Library and the W.D. Jordan Library Special Collections and Music Library share facilities , known as Douglas Library . 
 Queen 's operates the Miller Museum of Geology , an earth @-@ science teaching museum which features an Earth Science and Geological Collections of 10 000 Minerals , and 865 fossils as well as an exhibit of the geology of the Kingston area . The museum is largely used as an earth @-@ science teaching museum for local schools and natural @-@ science interest groups in eastern Ontario . The permanent exhibits feature dinosaurs , dinosaur eggs , fossils of early multi @-@ celled animals and land tracks fossilized from 500 million years ago . 
 Queen 's art collections are housed at the Agnes Etherington Art Centre . The art centre owes its namesake to Agnes Etherington , whose house was donated to the university and is being used as an art museum . Opened in 1957 , it contains over 14 @,@ 000 works of art , including works by Rembrandt , and Inuit art . The Union Gallery , an art gallery opened in 1994 , is run by the university 's student body and faculty . The gallery is dedicated to the promotion of contemporary art . 
 = = = Housing and student facilities = = = 
 The university has eighteen student residences : Adelaide Hall , Ban <unk> Hall , Brandt House , <unk> Hall , Gordon House , Brockington House , Graduate Residence , Harkness Hall , John Orr Tower Apartments , Leggett Hall , Leonard Hall , McNeill House , Morris Hall , Smith House , Victoria Hall , Waldron Tower , Watts Hall and Jean Royce Hall . The largest is Victoria Hall , built in 1965 , which houses nearly 900 students . In September 2010 , 83 @.@ 3 percent of first @-@ year students lived on campus , part of the 26 percent of the overall undergraduate population which lived on campus . Residents were represented by two groups , the Main Campus Residents ' Council , which represents the main campus , and the Jean Royce Hall Council , which represents the west campus ( Jean Royce Hall , Harkness International Hall and the Graduate Residence ) . They were responsible for representing resident concerns , providing entertainment services , organizing events and upholding rules and regulations . In 2012 , the Main Campus and Jean Royce Hall Residents ' Councils were amalgamated into one organization , called <unk> , standing for Residence Society . 
 The Student Life Centre is the centre of student governance and student directed social , cultural , entertainment and recreational activities . The Student Life Centre consists of the John Deutsch University Centre ( <unk> ) , Grey House , Carruthers Hall , Queen ’ s Journal House , MacGillivray @-@ Brown Hall , and the non @-@ athletic sections of Queen 's Centre . Collectively , these buildings provide 10 @,@ 500 square metres ( 113 @,@ 000 sq ft ) of space to the Queen 's community . The <unk> contains the offices of a number of student organizations , including the Alma Mater Society of Queen 's University , as well as retail and food services . The university has sixteen food outlets located throughout the campus , as well as three major residence dining facilities . 
 = = = Off @-@ campus facilities = = = 
 Queen 's has off @-@ campus faculties located in the Kingston area and abroad . The university has a second campus located in Kingston , known as the west campus . The west campus , acquired in 1969 , is 2 km ( 1 @.@ 2 mi ) west of the main campus , and covers 27 ha ( 67 acres ) of land . The west campus has two student residences , the Faculty of Education , the Coastal Engineering Lab , and several athletic facilities , including the Richardson Memorial Stadium . In May 2007 , the university approved the designs for the Isabel Bader Centre for Performing Arts , also located in Kingston . The new centre for performing arts was expected to open in 2014 . 
 The university owns a research facility in Rideau Lakes , Ontario , known as the Queen 's University Biological Station . Opened during the 1950s , the field station encompasses approximately 3 @,@ 000 ha ( 7 @,@ 400 acres ) of property , a range of habitat types typical of Eastern Ontario , and many species of conservation concern in Canada . 
 Queen ’ s has an agreement with <unk> Inc. to acquire a 20 @-@ hectare ( 49 @-@ acre ) property adjacent to the company 's research and development centre in Kingston . The agreement is part of the plan to establish an innovative technology park located at the corner of Princess and Concession streets , which is to be called Innovation Park at Queen 's University . The property was acquired for $ 5 @.@ 3 million , a portion of the $ 21 million grant Queen 's received from the Ontario government last spring to pioneer this innovative new regional R & D " co @-@ location " model . Queen 's leases approximately 7 @,@ 900 square metres ( 85 @,@ 000 sq ft ) of the <unk> R & D facilities to accommodate faculty @-@ led research projects that have industrial partners and small and medium @-@ size companies with a research focus and a desire to interact with Queen 's researchers . The remainder of the government funds support further development of the technology park to transform the property into a welcoming and dynamic site for business expansion and relocation . 
 The Bader International Study Centre ( BISC ) is housed in Herstmonceux Castle , East Sussex , England , which was donated to Queen 's in 1993 by alumnus Alfred Bader . BISC is academically fully integrated with Queen 's , although financially self @-@ sufficient . Its mission is to provide academic programs for undergraduate students whose academic interests are oriented toward the United Kingdom , Europe and the European Union , continuing @-@ education programs for executives and other professional or “ special interest ” groups , a venue for conferences and meetings , a base for international graduate students and other scholars undertaking research in the United Kingdom and Europe and as an enhanced educational , social and cultural environment for the local community , using the unique heritage of the castle . The opportunity to study at the BISC is not limited to Queen 's students . Queen 's has academic exchange agreements with Canadian and foreign universities . 
 = = = Sustainability = = = 
 Queen 's Sustainability Office , which was created in 2008 , is charged with the university 's green initiatives and creating awareness about environmental issues . The office is headed by a Sustainability Manager , who works with the university , external community groups and the government . In 2009 , with the signing of the agreement , the Ontario Universities Committed to a Greener World , Queen 's had pledged to transform its campus into a model of environmental responsibility . Queen 's was the second Ontario university to sign the University and College Presidents ’ Climate Change Statement of Action for Canada , in 2010 . 
 The university campus received a B grade from the Sustainable Endowments Institute on its College Sustainability Report Card for 2011 . 
 = = Administration = = 
 Academics at Queen 's is organized into ten undergraduate , graduate and professional faculties and schools . The governance of the university is conducted through the Board of Trustees , the Senate , and the University Council , all three of which were established under the Royal Charter of 1841 . The Board is responsible for the university 's conduct and management and its property , revenues , business , and affairs . Ex officio governors of the Board include the university 's chancellor , principal and the rector . The Board has 34 other trustees , 33 of which are elected by the various members of the university community , including elected representatives from the student body . The representative from Queen 's Theological College is the only appointed trustee . 
 The Senate is responsible for determining all academic matters affecting the university as a whole , including student discipline . The Senate consists of 17 ex officio positions granted to the principal and vice @-@ chancellor , the vice @-@ principals of the university , the senior dean of each faculty , dean of student affairs , the deputy provost , and the presidents of the undergraduate , graduate and faculty associations . The Senate also consists of 55 other members , appointed or elected by various communities of the university including elected representatives of the student body . 
 The Royal Charter of 1841 was amended to include the University Council in 1874 . The Council is a composite of the Board of Trustees , senators and an equal number of elected graduates . It serves as both an advisory and an ambassadorial body to the university as a whole and is responsible for the election of the chancellor . Although it is not directly involved in operations , the Council may bring to the Senate or Board of Trustees any matter that it believes affects Queen 's well @-@ being . The Council meets once per year , typically in May . 
 The Chancellor is the highest officer and the ceremonial head of the university . The office was created in 1874 and first filled in 1877 , although it was only enshrined in law in 1882 after its amendment into the Royal Charter of 1841 . The responsibilities of the chancellor includes presiding over convocations , conferring degrees , chairing the annual meetings of the Council and is an ex officio , voting member of the Board of Trustees . A person is elected to the office of chancellor on a three @-@ year term by the Council unless there is more than one candidate , in which case an election is conducted among Queen 's graduates . 
 The Principal acts as the chief executive officer of the university under the authority of the Board and the Senate , and supervises and directs the academic and administrative work of the university and of its teaching and non @-@ teaching staff . <unk> , principals have been appointed for five @-@ year terms , renewable subject to review . The formal authority for the appointment of the Principal rests under the Royal Charter with the Board of Trustees although recent principals have been selected by a joint committee of trustees and senators . Daniel Woolf has served as the twentieth principal , serving since 1 September 2009 . The office of the vice @-@ chancellor has typically been held by the incumbent principal . In 1961 , an amendment was secured by the Board to separate the office of principal from vice @-@ chancellor if it wished . The first , and only person to ever hold the office of vice @-@ chancellor , but not the office of principal , was William Archibald Mackintosh . 
 = = = Finances = = = 
 The university completed the 2011 – 12 year with revenues of $ 769 @.@ 9 million and expenses of $ 773 @.@ 3 million , yielding a deficit of $ 3 @.@ 4 million . Government grants made up 48 percent of the 2011 – 12 operating budget . Student fees made up 28 percent of the 2010 – 11 operating budget . As of 30 April 2012 , Queen 's endowment was valued at C $ 584 @.@ 4 million . 
 The university has been registered as an educational charitable organization by Canada Revenue Agency since 1 January 1967 . As of 2011 , the university registered primarily as a post @-@ secondary institution , with 70 percent of the charity dedicated to management and maintenance . The charity has 21 percent dedicated towards research , while the remaining 8 percent has been dedicated towards awards , bursaries and scholarships . Proceeds from the charity also go toward Queen 's Theological College ( as an affiliated college ) and the Bader International Study Centre at <unk> Castle . 
 = = Academics = = 
 Queen 's is a publicly funded research university , and a member of the Association of Universities and Colleges of Canada . The full @-@ time undergraduate programs comprise the majority of the school 's enrolment , made up of 16 @,@ 339 full @-@ time undergraduate students . In 2009 the two largest programs by enrolment were the social sciences , with 3 @,@ 286 full @-@ time and part @-@ time students , followed by engineering , with 3 @,@ 097 full @-@ time and part @-@ time students . The university conferred 3 @,@ 232 bachelor 's degrees , 153 doctoral degrees , 1 @,@ 142 master 's degrees , and 721 first professional degrees in 2008 – 2009 . 
 = = = Reputation = = = 
 Queen 's University has consistently been ranked one of Canada 's top universities . The 2015 – 2016 QS World University Rankings ranked the university 206th in the world , and the tenth in Canada . In the 2015 Academic Ranking of World Universities ( ARWU ) rankings , the university ranked 201 – 300th in the world and ranked 8 – 16 in Canada . In the same year , ARWU had also ranked Queen 's 151 – 200th globally in the field of social sciences and in clinical medicine . The 2015 – 2016 Times Higher Education World University Rankings placed Queen 's 251 – 300th in the world , and 14 – 15th in Canada . In terms of national rankings , Maclean 's ranked Queen 's 4th in their 2015 Medical Doctoral university rankings . Queen 's University Faculty of Law was ranked third nationally in Maclean 's 2013 rankings for common law schools in Canada . 
 The Queen 's School of Business has received significant recognition in the past years . The School of Business placed 48th in the world , in the 2012 Business Insiders business school rankings . In Eduniversal 's 2012 ranking of business schools , the School of Business was rated as a 5 <unk> business school , placing the school 37th globally , and fourth nationally . In the 2011 edition of Mines <unk> 's evaluation of universities , The School of Business was also found to have the most number of graduates employed as Chief Executive Officers ( or equivalent ) in a Fortune Global 500 , out of any university in Canada , and 38th globally . Queen 's had also ranked 90th in the world , and first in Canada in the 2013 Times Higher Education Alma Mater Index , which ranks institutions by the number of degrees they have awarded to CEOs of Fortune Global 500 companies . In an employability survey published by the New York Times in October 2011 , when CEOs and chairpersons were asked to select the top universities which they recruited from , the university placed 74th in the world , and fifth in Canada . In Bloomberg L.P. ' s 2014 rankings of business schools , the school ranked second in Canada , and 10th out of all business schools outside the United States . 
 The full @-@ time MBA program at Queen 's has also received significant recognition . In Bloomberg 's 2014 rankings of MBA programmes outside the United States , the school was ranked ninth , and second in Canada . The QS ranking of North American MBA programs placed the School of Business 16th in North America , and 3rd in Canada . In the Financial Times rankings on EMBA programs , Queen 's joint degree business programs with Cornell University 's Samuel Curtis Johnson Graduate School of Management was ranked 45th in the world . In the same rankings , the Financial Times ranked the Queen 's School of Business 's individual EMBA program 92nd in the world , and fourth in Canada . The Queen 's Economics Department is ranked first in Canada and 24th in the world based on the publication records of its graduate students . 
 = = = Research = = = 
 In Research Infosource 's 2011 ranking of Canada 's 50 top research universities , Queen 's ranked 11th , with sponsored research income of $ 197 @.@ 016 million . With an average of $ 237 @,@ 900 per faculty member , Queen 's ranked Canada 's sixth most research @-@ intensive university . The federal government is the largest funding source , providing 49 @.@ 8 percent of Queen 's research budget , primarily through grants . Corporations contribute another 26 @.@ 3 percent of the research budget . In terms of research performance , High Impact Universities 2010 ranked Queen 's 185th out of 500 universities . The Higher Education Evaluation and Accreditation Council of Taiwan ( HEEACT ) , an organization which evaluates universities based on the performance of scientific papers , ranked Queen 's 272nd . 
 The university operates six research centres and institutes , the Centre for Neuroscience Studies , <unk> Centre , High Performance Computing Virtual Laboratory , Human Mobility Research Centre , Sudbury Neutrino Observatory Institute , and the Southern African Research Centre . The Sudbury Neutrino Observatory 's director , Arthur B. McDonald , is a member of the university 's physics department . The observatory managed the SNO experiment , which demonstrated that the solution to the solar neutrino problem was that neutrinos change flavour ( type ) as they propagate through the Sun . The SNO experiment proved that a non @-@ zero mass neutrino exists . This was a major breakthrough in cosmology . A research paper published on 17 October 2013 has offered new perspectives on the star death . These astronomers believe that " the brightest exploding stars , called super @-@ luminous supernovae , are powered by <unk> — small and incredibly dense neutron stars , with gigantic magnetic fields . In October 2015 , Arthur B. McDonald and Takaaki <unk> ( University of Tokyo ) jointly received the Nobel Prize in Physics for illustration of neutrino change identities and identification of mass . This is the first Nobel Prize awarded to a Queen 's University researcher . In 1976 urologist Alvaro Morales , along with his colleagues , developed the first clinically effective immunotherapy for cancer by adapting the <unk> Calmette @-@ Guérin tuberculosis vaccine for treatment of early stage bladder cancer . 
 Queen 's University has a joint venture with McGill University , operating an academic publishing house known as the McGill @-@ Queen 's University Press . It publishes original peer @-@ reviewed and books in all areas of the social sciences and humanities . While the press 's emphasis is on providing an outlet for Canadian authors and scholarship , the press also publishes authors throughout the world . The press has over 2 @,@ 800 books in print . The publishing house was known as the McGill University Press in 1963 prior to it amalgamating with Queen 's in 1969 . 
 = = = Admission = = = 
 The requirements for admission differ between students from Ontario , other provinces in Canada , and international students due to the lack of uniformity in marking schemes . In 2013 , 29 % of applications to full @-@ time , first @-@ year studies were accepted . In 2014 , 66 transfer students were admitted from a pool of 600 making its acceptance rate 11 % for those who had attended other post @-@ secondary institutions . In 2013 , the secondary school average for full @-@ time first @-@ year students at Queen 's was 89 % overall , with the Commerce , Education and Engineering faculties having the highest entrance averages at 91 @.@ 7 % , 90 @.@ 8 % , and 90 @.@ 6 % respectively . The application process emphasizes the mandatory Personal Statement of Experience ( PSE ) . The statement expresses how the applicant 's personal experiences may contribute to the university . It focuses on qualifications and involvement outside of academics and is an important factor in determining admission . Several faculties require applicants to submit a supplementary essay . 
 Students may apply for financial aid such as the Ontario Student Assistance Program and Canada Student Loans and Grants through the federal and provincial governments . The financial aid provided may come in the form of loans , grants , bursaries , scholarships , fellowships , debt reduction , interest relief , and work programs . In the 2010 – 11 academic year , Queen 's provided $ 36 @.@ 5 million worth of student need @-@ based and merit @-@ based financial assistance . 
 = = Student life = = 
 The student body of Queen 's is represented by two students ' unions , the Alma Mater Society ( AMS ) for all undergraduate students and the Society of Graduate and Professional Students for graduate students . The AMS of Queen 's University is the oldest undergraduate student government in Canada . The AMS recognizes more than 200 student clubs and organizations . All accredited extracurricular organizations at Queen 's fall under the jurisdiction of either the AMS , or the Society of Graduate and Professional Students . The organizations and clubs accredited at Queen 's cover a wide range of interests including academics , culture , religion , social issues , and recreation . The oldest accredited club at Queen 's is the Queen 's Debating Union , which was formed in 1843 as the Dialectic Society . The Dialectic Society served as a form of student government , until the AMS was formed from the dialectic society in 1858 . The Queen 's Bands is a student marching band founded in 1905 , which claims to be the largest and oldest student marching band in Canada . Fraternities and sororities have been banned at the university , since a ruling made by the AMS in 1933 . The ruling was passed in response to the formation of two fraternities in the 1920s . No accredited sororities have ever existed at Queen 's . 
 The AMS also manages the Student Constable peer to peer security service at the university . They are responsible for ensuring the safety of patrons and staff at sanctioned events and venues across the campus , enforcing governing regulations of the AMS and uphold regulations stipulated in the Liquor Licence Act of Ontario . Student Constables do not serve as the university 's primary security service as they are legally not peace officers , nor are they registered as a private security service under the Ministry of Community Safety and Correctional Services . The university 's administration operates its own security service which is registered in Ontario as a private security service . As of March 2012 , the Student Constables are funded through a mandatory $ 10 fee levied on undergraduates annually by the AMS . 
 The Agnes Benidickson Tricolour Award and induction in the Tricolour Society is the highest tribute that can be paid to a student for valuable and distinguished service to the University in non @-@ athletic , extra @-@ curricular activities . 
 = = = Media = = = 
 Queen 's University 's student population operates a number of media outlets throughout the campus environment . The Queen 's Journal is Queen 's main student newspaper . During the academic year , the Queen 's Journal publishes two issues a week , until the last month of the semester , when only one issue is published each week . In total the Queen 's Journal publishes 40 issues a year . The newspaper was established in 1873 , making it one of the oldest student newspapers in Canada . The other weekly student publication from Queen 's is the Golden Words , a weekly satirical humour publication managed by the Engineering Society . 
 Queen 's student population runs a radio station , <unk> . Queen 's radio station is the longest running campus @-@ based broadcaster in the world , and the second @-@ longest @-@ running radio station in the world , surpassed only by the Marconi companies . The first public broadcast of the station was on 27 October 1923 when the football game between Queen 's and McGill was called play @-@ by @-@ play . Since 2001 , the station has broadcast on a 24 @-@ hour schedule . Since 1980 , the university has had a student @-@ run television service , known as Queen 's TV . The television station airs every weekday on its website , and every Wednesday on local television . 
 = = = Sport = = = 
 Sport teams at Queen 's University are known as the Golden Gaels . The Golden Gaels sports teams participate in the Canadian Interuniversity Sport 's Ontario University Athletics conference for most varsity sports . Varsity teams at Queen 's include basketball , cross country , Canadian football , ice hockey , rowing , rugby , soccer and volleyball . The Men 's Rugby team has won the <unk> Championship the past 3 years ( 2012 – 14 ) The athletics program at Queen 's University dates back to 1873 . With 39 regional and national championships , Queen 's football program has secured more championships than any other sport team at Queen 's , and more than any other football team in Canada . Queen 's and the University of Toronto are the only universities to have claimed Grey Cups ( 1922 , 1923 and 1924 ) , now the championship trophy for the Canadian Football League . Queen ’ s also competed for the Stanley Cup in 1894 – 95 , 1898 – 99 and 1905 – 06 . 
 Queen 's University has a number of athletic facilities open to both their varsity teams as well as to their students . The stadium with the largest seating capacity at Queen 's is Richardson Memorial Stadium . Built in 1971 , the stadium seats over 10 @,@ 000 and is home to the varsity football team . The stadium has also played host for a number of international games including Canada 's second round 2006 FIFA World Cup qualification games and the inaugural match for the Colonial Cup , an international rugby league challenge match . Other athletic facilities at Queen 's include the Athletic and Recreation Centre , which houses a number of gymnasiums and pools ; Tindall Field , a multi @-@ season playing field and jogging track ; Nixon Field , home to the school 's rugby teams ; and West Campus Fields , which is used by a number of varsity teams and student intramural leagues . 
 = = <unk> and other representations = = 
 = = = Coat of Arms = = = 
 The coat of arms appeared as early as 1850 , but was not registered with the College of Arms until 1953 . The coat of arms was registered with the Scottish equivalent of the College of Arms , the Lord Lyon King of Arms , in 1981 and with the Canadian Heraldic Authority during Queen 's sesquicentennial celebrations in 1991 . The coat of arms is based on that of the University of Edinburgh , the institution after which Queen 's was modelled . 
 The Coat of Arms consists of a gold shield with red edges , divided into four triangular compartments by a blue , diagonal St. Andrew 's Cross . A golden book , symbolizing learning , sits open at the centre of the cross . In each of the four compartments is an emblem of the university 's Canadian and British origins : a pine tree for Canada , a thistle for Scotland , a rose for England , and a shamrock for Ireland . The border is decorated with eight gold crowns , symbolic of Queen Victoria and the university 's Royal Charter . 
 = = = Motto and song = = = 
 Queen 's motto , chosen from Isaiah 33 : 6 is <unk> et Doctrina <unk> . The Latin motto is literally translated as " Wisdom and knowledge shall be the stability of thy times , " and has been in use since the 1850s . A number of songs are commonly played and sung at various events such as commencement , convocation , and athletic contests , including the " Queen 's College Colours " ( 1897 ) also known as " Our University Yell " and " Oil Thigh " , with words by A.E. Lavell , sung to the tune ' John Brown 's Body ' . Oil Thigh , which was created in 1891 , consists of the old song " Queen 's College Colours " . The name " Oil Thigh " comes from the chorus of the song , which begins with the Gaelic words oil thigh . The modern version of the song was crafted in 1985 , when a line was changed to include Queen 's woman athletes in the cheer . 
 = = = Symbols = = = 
 Queen 's official colours are gold , blue , and red . Queen 's colours are also used on the school flag . It displays three vertical stripes one for each colour . In the upper left corner on the blue stripe is a crown in yellow symbolizing the royal charter . The university also has a ceremonial flag , which is reserved for official university uses . The ceremonial flag is a square design of the Queen 's coat of arms . 
 The university also has a tartan made up of six colours , each representing an academic discipline : blue ( medicine ) , red ( arts & science ) , gold ( applied science ) , white ( nursing science ) , maroon ( commerce & MBA ) , light blue ( Kinesiology and Physical Education ) , and Purple ( theology ) . The tartan was created in 1966 by Judge John Matheson and is registered under the Scottish Tartans Authority . 
 = = Notable people = = 
 Queen 's graduates have found success in a variety of fields , heading diverse institutions in the public and private sectors . In 2011 , there were over 131 @,@ 000 alumni , living in 156 countries . Queen 's faculty and graduates have won many awards including the Turing Award and the Victoria Cross . As of 2009 , 56 Queen 's students and graduates had been awarded the Rhodes Scholarship . 
 Notable politicians who were once Chancellor include Robert Borden , Prime Minister of Canada , Roland Michener , Governor General of Canada , and provincial premiers Peter Lougheed and Charles Avery Dunning . Many alumni have gained international prominence for serving in government , such as Prince <unk> , member of the Imperial House of Japan ; and Kenneth O. Hall , formerly Governor General of Jamaica . The 28th Governor General of Canada , David Johnston , was a former graduate and faculty member of the university . Three Canadian premiers graduated from Queen 's , William Aberhart , the 7th Premier of Alberta , Frank McKenna , the 27th Premier of New Brunswick , and Kathleen Wynne , the 25th Premier of Ontario . The 14th Premier of Alberta , Alison Redford studied at the university for two years . Thomas Cromwell , a Justice of the Supreme Court of Canada was also a graduate from the university . 
 Business leaders who studied at Queen 's include Derek Burney , former chairman and CEO of Bell Canada , Donald J. Carty , chairman of Virgin America and Porter Airlines and former chairman and CEO of AMR Corporation , Earle McLaughlin , former president and CEO of Royal Bank of Canada , Gordon Nixon , president and CEO of the Royal Bank of Canada , and Elon and <unk> Musk , founders of <unk> , SpaceX and Tesla Motors . David A. Dodge , the former Governor of the Bank of Canada ( 2001 @-@ 2008 ) and the university 's chancellor ( 2008 – 2014 ) is similarly a Queen 's graduate . 
 Notable Queen 's faculty and graduates include Adolfo de Bold who won the prestigious Gairdner Foundation Award in 1986 for the discovery and isolation of atrial <unk> peptide . In 2015 , Queen 's astrophysicist Arthur B. McDonald received the Nobel Prize in Physics for fundamental research elucidating neutrino change identities and mass . Sandford Fleming , an engineer and inventor who was known for proposing worldwide standard time zones also served as the Chancellor of Queen 's . 
 = French cuisine = 
 French cuisine consists of the cooking traditions and practices from France . 
 In the 14th century Guillaume Tirel , a court chef known as " Taillevent " , wrote Le Viandier , one of the earliest recipe collections of medieval France . During that time , French cuisine was heavily influenced by Italian cuisine . In the 17th century , chefs François Pierre La Varenne and Marie @-@ Antoine Carême spearheaded movements that shifted French cooking away from its foreign influences and developed France 's own indigenous style . Cheese and wine are a major part of the cuisine , playing different roles regionally and nationally , with many variations and appellation d 'origine contrôlée ( AOC ) ( regulated appellation ) laws . 
 French cuisine was codified in the 20th century by Auguste Escoffier to become the modern haute cuisine ; Escoffier , however , left out much of the local culinary character to be found in the regions of France and was considered difficult to execute by home cooks . Gastro @-@ tourism and the Guide Michelin helped to acquaint people with the rich bourgeois and peasant cuisine of the French countryside starting in the 20th century . Gascon cuisine has also had great influence over the cuisine in the southwest of France . Many dishes that were once regional have proliferated in variations across the country . 
 Knowledge of French cooking has contributed significantly to Western cuisines and its criteria are used widely in Western cookery school boards and culinary education . In November 2010 , French gastronomy was added by the UNESCO to its lists of the world 's " intangible cultural heritage " . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Middle Ages = = = 
 In French medieval cuisine , banquets were common among the aristocracy . Multiple courses would be prepared , but served in a style called service en confusion , or all at once . Food was generally eaten by hand , meats being sliced off in large pieces held between the thumb and two fingers . The sauces were highly seasoned and thick , and heavily flavored <unk> were used . Pies were a common banquet item , with the crust serving primarily as a container , rather than as food itself , and it was not until the very end of the Late Middle Ages that the shortcrust pie was developed . Meals often ended with an issue de table , which later changed into the modern dessert , and typically consisted of <unk> ( in the Middle Ages , meaning spiced lumps of hardened sugar or honey ) , aged cheese and spiced wine , such as hypocras . 
 The ingredients of the time varied greatly according to the seasons and the church calendar , and many items were preserved with salt , spices , honey , and other preservatives . Late spring , summer , and autumn afforded abundance , while winter meals were more sparse . Livestock were slaughtered at the beginning of winter . Beef was often salted , while pork was salted and smoked . Bacon and sausages would be smoked in the chimney , while the tongue and hams were brined and dried . <unk> were brined as well , while greens would be packed in jars with salt . Fruits , nuts and root vegetables would be boiled in honey for preservation . Whale , dolphin and porpoise were considered fish , so during Lent , the salted meats of these sea mammals were eaten . 
 Artificial freshwater ponds ( often called stews ) held carp , pike , tench , bream , eel , and other fish . Poultry was kept in special yards , with pigeon and squab being reserved for the elite . Game was highly prized , but very rare , and included venison , wild boar , hare , rabbit , and birds . Kitchen gardens provided herbs , including some , such as tansy , rue , pennyroyal , and hyssop , which are rarely used today . Spices were treasured and very expensive at that time – they included pepper , cinnamon , cloves , nutmeg , and mace . Some spices used then , but no longer today in French cuisine are cubebs , long pepper ( both from vines similar to black pepper ) , grains of paradise , and <unk> . Sweet @-@ sour flavors were commonly added to dishes with <unk> and <unk> combined with sugar ( for the affluent ) or honey . A common form of food preparation was to finely cook , pound and strain mixtures into fine pastes and <unk> , something believed to be beneficial to make use of nutrients . 
 Visual display was prized . Brilliant colors were obtained by the addition of , for example , juices from spinach and the green part of leeks . Yellow came from saffron or egg yolk , while red came from sunflower , and purple came from <unk> tinctoria or Heliotropium <unk> . Gold and silver leaf were placed on food surfaces and brushed with egg whites . Elaborate and showy dishes were the result , such as tourte <unk> which was a pastry dish made to look like a castle with chicken @-@ drumstick turrets coated with gold leaf . One of the grandest showpieces of the time was roast swan or peacock sewn back into its skin with feathers intact , the feet and beak being gilded . Since both birds are stringy , and taste unpleasant , the skin and feathers could be kept and filled with the cooked , minced and seasoned flesh of tastier birds , like goose or chicken . 
 The most well known French chef of the Middle Ages was Guillaume Tirel , also known as Taillevent . Taillevent worked in numerous royal kitchens during the 14th century . His first position was as a kitchen boy in 1326 . He was chef to Philip VI , then the Dauphin who was son of John II . The Dauphin became King Charles V of France in 1364 , with Taillevent as his chief cook . His career spanned sixty @-@ six years , and upon his death he was buried in grand style between his two wives . His tombstone represents him in armor , holding a shield with three cooking pots , <unk> , on it . 
 = = = Ancien Régime = = = 
 Under the ancien régime , Paris was the central hub of culture and economic activity , and as such , the most highly skilled culinary craftsmen were to be found there . Markets in Paris such as Les Halles , la <unk> , those found along Rue <unk> , and similar smaller versions in other cities were very important to the distribution of food . Those that gave French produce its characteristic identity were regulated by the guild system , which developed in the Middle Ages . In Paris , the guilds were regulated by city government as well as by the French crown . A guild restricted those in a given branch of the culinary industry to operate only within that field . 
 There were two basic groups of guilds – first , those that supplied the raw materials ; butchers , fishmongers , grain merchants , and gardeners . The second group were those that supplied prepared foods ; bakers , pastry cooks , <unk> , <unk> , and caterers . There were also guilds that offered both raw materials and prepared food , such as the <unk> and <unk> ( purveyors of roasted meat dishes ) . They would supply cooked meat pies and dishes as well as raw meat and poultry . This caused issues with butchers and <unk> , who sold the same raw materials . The guilds served as a training ground for those within the industry . The degrees of assistant @-@ cook , full @-@ fledged cook and master chef were conferred . Those who reached the level of master chef were of considerable rank in their individual industry , and enjoyed a high level of income as well as economic and job security . At times , those in the royal kitchens did fall under the guild hierarchy , but it was necessary to find them a parallel appointment based on their skills after leaving the service of the royal kitchens . This was not uncommon as the Paris cooks ' guild regulations allowed for this movement . 
 During the 16th and 17th centuries , French cuisine assimilated many new food items from the New World . Although they were slow to be adopted , records of banquets show Catherine de ' Medici ( 1519 – 1589 ? ) serving sixty @-@ six turkeys at one dinner . The dish called cassoulet has its roots in the New World discovery of haricot beans , which are central to the dish 's creation , but had not existed outside of the New World until its exploration by Christopher Columbus . 
 Haute cuisine ( pronounced : [ ot <unk> ] , " high cuisine " ) has foundations during the 17th century with a chef named La Varenne . As author of works such as Le Cuisinier françois , he is credited with publishing the first true French cookbook . His book includes the earliest known reference to roux using pork fat . The book contained two sections , one for meat days , and one for fasting . His recipes marked a change from the style of cookery known in the Middle Ages , to new techniques aimed at creating somewhat lighter dishes , and more modest presentations of pies as individual pastries and turnovers . La Varenne also published a book on pastry in 1667 entitled Le <unk> <unk> ( republished as Le <unk> françois ) which similarly updated and codified the emerging haute cuisine standards for desserts and pastries . 
 Chef François Massialot wrote Le Cuisinier <unk> et bourgeois in 1691 , during the reign of Louis XIV . The book contains menus served to the royal courts in 1690 . Massialot worked mostly as a freelance cook , and was not employed by any particular household . Massialot and many other royal cooks received special privileges by association with the French royalty . They were not subject to the regulation of the guilds ; therefore , they could cater weddings and banquets without restriction . His book is the first to list recipes alphabetically , perhaps a forerunner of the first culinary dictionary . It is in this book that a marinade is first seen in print , with one type for poultry and feathered game , while a second is for fish and shellfish . No quantities are listed in the recipes , which suggests that Massialot was writing for trained cooks . 
 The successive updates of Le Cuisinier <unk> et bourgeois include important refinements such as adding a glass of wine to fish stock . Definitions were also added to the 1703 edition . The 1712 edition , retitled Le Nouveau <unk> royal et bourgeois , was increased to two volumes , and was written in a more elaborate style with extensive explanations of technique . Additional smaller preparations are included in this edition as well , leading to lighter preparations , and adding a third course to the meal . <unk> , a stew still central to French cookery , makes its first appearance as a single dish in this edition as well ; prior to that , it was listed as a garnish . 
