 Most wickets : 10 by West Indian Darren Sammy . 
 Best bowling figures ( innings ) : 5 / 26 by West Indian Darren Sammy . 
 = Final Resolution ( January 2008 ) = 
 Final Resolution ( January 2008 ) was a professional wrestling pay @-@ per @-@ view ( PPV ) event produced by the Total Nonstop Action Wrestling ( TNA ) promotion , which took place on January 6 , 2008 at the TNA Impact ! Zone in Orlando , Florida . It was the fourth event under the Final Resolution chronology ; the first of two Final Resolution events held in 2008 and the last event held in January . It was the first event in the 2008 TNA PPV schedule . Eight professional wrestling matches were featured on the event 's card , three of which involved championships . 
 The main event was for the TNA World Heavyweight Championship between then @-@ champion Kurt Angle and the challenger Christian Cage . Angle ended up winning the bout , thus retaining the championship . A.J. Styles and Tomko defended the TNA World Tag Team Championship against the team of Kevin Nash and Samoa Joe on the card . Styles and Tomko retained the tag team championship in the encounter . The team of Johnny Devine and Team 3D ( Brother Devon and Brother Ray ) fought the team of Jay Lethal and The Motor City Machine Guns ( Alex Shelley and Chris Sabin ) in a Six Man Tag Team Ultimate X match . Devine and Team 3D were the victors in the contest . The TNA Women 's Knockout Championship defense by Gail Kim against Awesome Kong in a No Disqualification match was another highly promoted match for the event . Kim won the bout , successfully retaining the title . 
 Mark Xamin of the professional wrestling section of the Canadian Online Explorer rated the event a six out of ten , the same rating given to the second Final Resolution event held in December , but lower than the seven and a half out of ten given to the 2007 event 's ranking by Chris Sokol . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 Final Resolution was announced in mid @-@ October 2007 to be taking place on January 6 , 2008 . The location for the gathering was not specified . In late @-@ November 2007 the TNA Impact ! Zone in Orlando , Florida was revealed as the location for the spectacle . TNA created a section regarding their event on their website to help promote the event . TNA released a poster featuring Kurt Angle , Christian Cage , A.J. Styles , and Tomko sometime prior to help promote the event . TNA moved Final Resolution to December later in the year and held a second event for unknown reasons . 
 = = = Storylines = = = 
 Final Resolution featured eight professional wrestling matches that involved different wrestlers from pre @-@ existing scripted feuds and storylines . Wrestlers portrayed villains , heroes , or less distinguishable characters in the scripted events that built tension and culminated in a wrestling match or series of matches . 
 The main storyline heading into Final Resolution revolved around the group The Angle Alliance . On November 11 , 2007 at TNA 's Genesis PPV event partners in Christian 's Coalition , A.J. Styles and Tomko , aided Kurt Angle in retaining the TNA World Heavyweight Championship in the main event without Coalition leader Christian Cage 's consent . Afterwards on the November 15 , 2007 episode of TNA 's television program TNA Impact ! , Styles and Tomko joined Angle in creating The Angle Alliance , while remaining tied to Cage . Styles followed by trying to join the two fractions together leading up to the December 6 , 2007 episode of Impact ! , where Cage became leader of a joint alliance , until Angle and Robert Roode attacked Cage later in the episode . On the December 20 , 2007 episode of Impact ! , Angle versus Cage for the title was promoted for Final Resolution . 
 Due to this storyline , the TNA World Tag Team Championship defense by A.J. Styles and Tomko against Samoa Joe and Kevin Nash was added to the event . The match was originally promoted to have been Scott Hall and Nash challenging for the titles , however this was changed due to unknown reasons on the January 3 , 2008 episode of Impact ! by Management Director Jim Cornette . A narrative tied to this match involved Joe becoming angry with his position in the company and requesting more money and title opportunities due to Hall 's no @-@ showing of TNA 's Turning Point event on December 2 , 2007 and events that transpired as a result . 
 Robert Roode and Ms. Brooks facing Booker T and Sharmell in a Mixed Tag Team match was also promoted for the event . On the December 13 episode of Impact ! , Sharmell came to Roode 's manager Ms. Brooks ' defense as she was being <unk> by Roode for losing a match . This followed with weekly segments involving Sharmell , Brooks , and Roode on Impact ! , leading to an encounter between Roode and Booker T on the December 27 episode of Impact ! . However , before the encounter it was changed to a tag team match pitting Booker T and Christian Cage against Kurt Angle and Robert Roode for later in the episode , which the latter lost . On the January 3 episode of Impact ! , the match was promoted by TNA to take place at Final Resolution . 
 A Six Man Tag Team Ultimate X match pitting the teams of Johnny Devine and Team 3D ( Brother Devon and Brother Ray ) against Jay Lethal and The Motor City Machine Guns ( Alex Shelley and Chris Sabin ) ( MCMG ) was another featured match on the card . This match was the result of Team 3D 's feud with the TNA X Division . In October 2007 , Team 3D began a storyline in which they were trying to eliminate the X Division . MCMG became their rivals in the thread with MCMG defeating Team 3D at Genesis . TNA X Division Champion Lethal later joined MCMG in the fight ; around the same time , Devine turned on the division and joined Team 3D . The teams then fought in a Six Man Tag Team Tables match at Turning Point , which Devine and Team 3D won . The two teams fought again on the December 6 , 2007 episode of Impact ! in a Six Man Tag Team Ladder match , which Devine and Team 3D won . On the December 20 , 2007 episode of Impact ! , Lethal and MCMG defeated Devine and Team 3D in a Double North Pole match to determine the stipulation to their match at Final Resolution ; choosing an Ultimate X match over a Plate glass Tables match . On the January 3 , 2008 episode of Impact ! , Team 3D attacked and injured MCMG in the storyline by beating their hands with kendo sticks . 
 The TNA Women 's Knockout Championship was defended by Gail Kim against Awesome Kong in a No Disqualification match at Final Resolution . Kim first defended the title against Kong at Turning Point , which ended in a disqualification after Kong attacked the referee . On the December 6 , 2007 episode of Impact ! , Kong attacked Kim after Kim lost a bout to ODB , which led to a brawl that was broken up by security . The two had another brawl on the December 20 , 2007 episode of Impact ! . On the December 27 , 2007 episode of Impact ! , the match was announced to be taking place at Final Resolution . 
 = = Event = = 
 = = = On @-@ air employees = = = 
 The event featured employees other than the wrestlers involved in the matches . Mike Tenay and Don West were the commentators for the telecast . Jeremy Borash and David Penzer were ring announcers for the event . Andrew Thomas , Earl Hebner , Rudy Charles , and Mark " Slick " Johnson participated as referees for the encounters . Besides employees appearing in a wrestling role , Christy Hemme , Shelly Martinez , Angelina Love , Velvet Sky , Karen Angle , and Father James Mitchell all appeared on camera , either in backstage or ringside segments . Crystal Louthan and Borash were used as interviewers during the event . A series of backstage segments featured on the show had James Storm and Eric Young , with Jackie Moore , Borash , and Crystal as observers , competing in a beer drinking contest in which the winner would determine their match at the Against All Odds PPV event on February 10 , 2008 . The first was a " never have I ever " round , which Storm won . The second round was contested with both participants having beer bottles taped to their hands and not being allowed to go to the bathroom . Young won after Storm wet himself , which was confirmed by Moore . The third round involved the two taking shots , which was won by Storm after Young passed out due to Storm drugging him . With Storm winning two contests to one , he earned the ability to determine their match at Against All Odds . 
 = = = Preliminary matches = = = 
 The first match of the event was between The Latin American Xchange ( Hernandez and Homicide ; LAX ) and The Rock ' n Rave Infection ( Jimmy Rave and Lance Hoyt ) , who were accompanied by Christy Hemme . The match lasted six minutes and forty @-@ eight seconds before Hernandez performed his signature Border Toss maneuver from the top of a padded turnbuckle on Rave to gain the pinfall . After the contest , Shelly Martinez made her debut attacking Hemme and aligning herself with LAX . 
 A bout between Kaz and Black Reign was next on the card . The duration of the contest was seven minutes and twenty @-@ eight seconds . Kaz won after countering a Reverse DDT by Black Reign , into a reverse DDT of his own to force the back of Black Reign 's head into the mat for the pinfall . Afterwards , Kaz stole Black Reign 's rat Misty . 
 Gail Kim defended the TNA Women 's Knockout Championship against Awesome Kong in a No Disqualification match . It began with the two fighting throughout the crowd , before entering the ring . There , Kong performed her signature Awesome Bomb maneuver on the referee and followed by hitting him with a steel chair . Kim took the steel chair from Kong , bashed her over the back and head with it , before getting a near @-@ fall which was counted by a replacement referee . Kong then proceeded to try an Awesome Bomb on the second referee , but was stopped by Kim as she attempted a roll @-@ up pin which led to the three count and the retaining of the TNA Women 's Knockout Championship at twelve minutes and forty @-@ four seconds . Following the contest , Kong and Kim fought at ringside before it was broken up by security . 
 The fourth match pitted Judas Mesias , who was accompanied by Father James Mitchell , against Abyss . Abyss attempted to use a steel chair wrapped in barbed wire during the bout , but was stopped and it was taken away by the referee . Near the end , Abyss performed his signature Black Hole Slam maneuver on Mesias , however Mitchell distracted the referee from counting the pinfall . This allowed Mesias to spray red mist in Abyss ' face and then follow by slamming Abyss face @-@ first into the steel chair wrapped in barb @-@ wire with his signature Straight to Hell maneuver at eleven minutes and three seconds . 
 = = = Main event matches = = = 
 Booker T and Sharmell fought Robert Roode and Ms. Brooks in a Mixed Tag Team match . The encounter lasted ten minutes and forty @-@ seven seconds . Sharmell ended up getting the pinfall on Brooks with a roll up pin . After the contest , Roode blamed Brooks for the lost , which resulted in Brooks slapping Roode and Roode grabbing her by the hair . Sharmell then came to Brooks ' defense , causing Roode to accidentally smack her in the face , knocking her out in storyline . 
 TNA held a Six Man Tag Team Ultimate X match pitting the team of Johnny Devine and Team 3D against the team of Jay Lethal and The Motor City Machine Guns . In an Ultimate X match , ropes are hung above the ring in a manner to form an " X " , in which the objective is to climb the ropes and retrieve an object at the center of the " X " . During the bout , Sabin and Shelley consistently could not climb the ropes due to the attack by Team 3D on the January 3 , 2008 episode of Impact ! . Due to their size , Ray nor Devon were able to climb the ropes , this led to Ray allowing Devon to stand on his shoulders in an attempt to do so . They were stopped by Lethal before winning the contest . Later , Ray grabbed a ladder which Devon set up in the ring under the TNA X Division Championship . After an attempt by MCMG and Lethal to stop them , Devine climbed the ladder and removed the X Division Championship belt . Afterwards , Ray disposed of the ladder before the referee saw , giving the win to Team 3D and Devine at twelve minutes and two seconds . 
 The TNA World Tag Team Championship was defended by the team of A.J. Styles and Tomko against the team of Kevin Nash and Samoa Joe in the seventh encounter , lasting twelve minutes and ten seconds . Near the end , Joe went to tag in Nash , who instead pulled his hand back , flipped Joe off , and left the ring . With Joe having to defend for himself , he fought off both Styles and Tomko before performing his signature Muscle Buster maneuver on Styles , <unk> a near @-@ fall that was broken up by Tomko . Tomko and Styles then performed their signature tag team Tornado – Plex maneuver forcing Joe into the mat to retain the TNA World Tag Team Championship . 
 The main event was for the TNA World Heavyweight Championship , in which then @-@ champion Kurt Angle , who was accompanied by Karen Angle , fought Christian Cage . The duration of the match was eighteen minutes and forty @-@ five seconds . Near the end , Angle performed his signature Angle Slam maneuver , resulting in a near @-@ fall . Cage then performed his signature Unprettier maneuver , also resulting in a near @-@ fall . Angle attempted his ankle lock submission maneuver which was countered by Cage into one of his own . Angle soon submitted to the hold , however the referee was distracted by the Karen . A.J. Styles ran down to the ring and pulled Karen away from the ring . Styles then hugged Cage , before springboarding off the top rope and bashing Cage in the back of the head with his forearm , effectively siding with The Angle Alliance . Angle then performed the Angle Slam to gain the victory and retain the TNA World Heavyweight Championship . 
 = = Reception = = 
 A total of nine hundred people attended the event . Canadian Online Explorer writer Mark Xamin rated the entire event a six out of ten , which was lower than the seven and a half out of ten given to the 2007 Final Resolution event by Chris Sokol , but equal with the second Final Resolution held in December 2008 given by Bryan and Chris Sokol . Final Resolution 's rating was lower than TNA 's previous event Turning Point , which was given a six and half out of ten . It was also lower than the seven and half given to TNA 's next event Against All Odds . Compared to rival World Wrestling Entertainment 's Royal Rumble PPV event held on January 27 , Final Resolution was rated lower as Royal Rumble was given an eight out of ten by Dale Plummer and Nick Tylwalk . In Xamin 's review two matches were rated an eight out of ten , his overall highest rating given in the review . The first was the TNA Women 's Knockout Championship defense by Gail Kim against Awesome Kong in a No Disqualification match . Xamin felt it was an " absolutely fantastic match " and that they showed " the world how good women 's wrestling can be . " The second match given this score was the main event between Kurt Angle and Christian Cage for the TNA World Heavyweight Championship . Xamin felt it was a " very solid match " and that they put on a " wrestling clinic . " The TNA World Tag Team Championship match and the Six Man Tag Team Ultimate X match were both rated six out of ten . Xamin stated that in the Tag Team Championship match " Nash looked his age " despite the efforts of Joe and Styles doing " their best to carry the match " ; although he felt it was still an " entertaining segment . " Xamin also thought that due to Team 3D 's creativity in the Ultimate X match they " stole the show in a match they had no business being in . " Regrading the overall event , Xamin wrote that " Final Resolution was more about advancing storylines and entertainment value than it was about watching good wrestling . " He also believed that Final Resolution had two " stand @-@ out matches ( Gail Kim vs Awesome Kong and Angle vs Christian Cage ) " despite the rest of the card being " lacklustre [ sic ] at best . " 
 Wade Keller of the Pro Wrestling Torch rated the main event and the Women 's Knockout Championship match three and a three @-@ quarter stars out of five . Keller gave the Tag Team Championship match a two and three @-@ quarter stars out of five , while the Ultimate X match was given three stars out of five . The first two encounters of the event were both given one and a one @-@ quarter stars out of five , the lowest ratings . When commenting on the main event Keller said the " first half wasn 't stellar " , but that the " second half was very good , " although the " finish took away " from the match . Keller believed the Women 's Knockout Championship encounter was an " excellent women 's match . " Speaking on the Tag Team Championship match , Keller said it was " good action , " while the Ultimate X match as being " a fun match . " Phil Allely , a journalist for United Kingdom newspaper The Sun , stated in his review of Final Resolution that he thought Kurt and Karen Angle " stole the show with their unique combination of in @-@ ring talent and out of ring seduction . " He also felt that Final Resolution " was a night of good grappling all round . " He also felt that the Women 's Knockout Championship match was a " hard @-@ hitting women 's title match . " The event was released on DVD on March 11 , 2008 by TNA Home Video . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 There were technical difficulties in viewing the show for Cable providers supported by Shaw Pay @-@ Per @-@ View and Shaw Video On Demand . 
 After Final Resolution with Kurt Angle retaining the TNA World Heavyweight Championship , TNA had to determine who he would face at TNA 's Against All Odds PPV event on February 10 , 2008 . On the January 17 , 2008 episode of Impact ! , Samoa Joe , Christian Cage , and A.J. Styles fought in a Three Way match to determine the number one contender . Stipulations for the match were that the winner would get a TNA World Heavyweight Championship match against Angle at Against All Odds , however if Styles won he could choose instead of the title match to allow Angle to not have to defend his title for two months . Cage ended up winning the contest , setting up Angle versus Cage at Against All Odds . On the January 24 , 2008 episode of Impact ! , Management Director Jim Cornette announced that Joe would be the Special Outside Enforcer at Against All Odds due him being controversially disqualified during the match . Angle defeated Cage at Against All Odds after interference from Tomko . 
 A.J. Styles and Tomko went on to Against All Odds to defend the TNA World Tag Team Championship against the team of Bob Armstrong and B.G. James . This match was announced on the January 24 , 2008 episode of Impact ! when the team announced they were using James ' Feast or Fired World Tag Team Title shot . Styles and Tomko retained the title at Against All Odds . 
 On the January 10 , 2008 episode of Impact ! , Johnny Devine and Team 3D challenged Jay Lethal and MCMG to a Street Fight at Against All Odds , with the stipulation that if Team 3D won the X Division would disband , but if Lethal and MCMG won they would regain possession of the TNA X Division Championship and the X Division would continue to exist . On the January 17 , 2008 episode of Impact ! , Lethal and MCMG accepted the agreement but only after including that Team 3D would have to weigh less than 275 pounds in order to compete in their matches in TNA . At Against All Odds , Lethal and MCMG defeated Devine and Team 3D to save the X Division from disbandment . 
 Robert Roode and Booker T went on to fight at Against All Odds , which ended in a double count @-@ out . At TNA 's Destination X PPV event on March 9 , 2008 , Roode defeated Booker T in a Stand By Your Man Strap match . Sharmell returned after this encounter , resulting in an Intergender Tag Team Six Sides of Steel Cage match at TNA 's Lockdown PPV event on April 13 , 2008 pitting Roode and his new manager Payton Banks against Booker T and Sharmell , which the later team won . 
 Gail Kim defended the TNA Women 's Knockout Championship against Kong once again on the January 10 , 2008 episode of Impact ! . Kong defeated Kim in the encounter , thus winning the championship . 
 Judas Mesias and Abyss continued their feud heading into Against All Odds . There , Abyss fought Mesias in the second @-@ ever Barbed Wire Massacre . Abyss won the contest , ending the feud . 
 = = Results = = 
 = No. 80 Wing RAAF = 
 No. 80 Wing was a Royal Australian Air Force ( RAAF ) wing of World War II . The unit was formed on 15 May 1944 and eventually comprised three squadrons equipped with Spitfire fighter aircraft . The wing 's headquarters was absorbed into the newly formed No. 11 Group on 30 July 1945 . 
 The wing was established to provide fighter protection for an Allied offensive from Darwin in northern Australia into the eastern Netherlands East Indies ( NEI ) . This operation was effectively cancelled in June 1944 , however , leaving No. 80 Wing without a clear mission . The unit remained at Darwin until it moved to Morotai in the NEI between December 1944 and March 1945 . Due to the small number of Japanese aircraft remaining in this area the Wing 's aircraft were mainly used in the ground attack role . From May 1945 to the end of the war two of No. 80 Wing 's squadrons participated in the Borneo Campaign . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Darwin = = = 
 In early 1944 General George Kenney , the commander of the Allied air forces in the South West Pacific Area ( SWPA ) , adopted a goal of landing forces at Selaru Island in the eastern NEI and establishing a bomber base there . Accordingly , in early March , Air Vice Marshal William Bostock , who led RAAF Command , presented Kenney with a proposal for the RAAF to contribute two fighter wings and several ancillary units to this operation , which at the time was scheduled for 15 June . One of these wings would be equipped with P @-@ 40 Kittyhawks and the other with Spitfires . In March Group Captain Clive Caldwell , the RAAF 's highest @-@ scoring flying ace of the war , reluctantly accepted command of the projected Spitfire wing after his request for a transfer to Europe was rejected by Chief of the Air Staff Air Vice Marshal George Jones . In a meeting between Jones and Caldwell , Jones stated that the wing would have the highest priority for supplies and equipment . 
 No. 80 Wing was formed at Darwin , Northern Territory on 15 May 1944 . It initially comprised No. 452 and No. 457 Squadrons , which were transferred from No. 1 Wing . Both of these squadrons had seen extensive combat over Europe and northern Australia and were based at Sattler Airfield near Darwin . The squadrons were equipped with Spitfire Vc aircraft at the time of the wing 's establishment , but received superior Mark VIII Spitfires between June and August . 
 General Douglas MacArthur , the commander of Allied forces in the SWPA , decided on 6 June to postpone the Selaru operation until after Allied forces landed in the Philippines . This was not communicated to No. 80 Wing , however , and Caldwell continued to develop plans for its involvement in the Selaru operation until late August . The effective cancellation of the operation left No. 80 Wing without a clear mission , and its pilots were left with nothing to do other than train . In September Air Commodore Alan Charlesworth , the commander of North @-@ Western Area , reported to Bostock that the wing 's morale could drop if it was not either given an active role or transferred to southern Australia . During the same period No. 80 Wing 's pilots observed that No. 1 Wing 's Spitfires were making occasional strafing attacks on Japanese positions in the NEI and sought approval to conduct similar operations . Caldwell did not agree to this , however , as be believed that the risks associated with flying Spitfires to the edge of their range to attack unimportant targets outweighed any benefits to morale . 
 = = = Morotai = = = 
 In mid @-@ September Bostock gained the agreement of Kenney 's headquarters to deploy No. 80 Wing to the recently captured island of Morotai in the NEI as part of a redeployment of RAAF units in the SWPA . While this raised morale within No. 80 Wing , it had only a short time to prepare to move overseas . On 8 November Caldwell received orders to begin the movement to Morotai as soon as possible , and he visited the island late that month . During this visit he observed that it was likely that supply shortages would impede the wing 's operations . No. 80 Wing 's headquarters left Darwin on 9 December and No. 452 Squadron departed on 15 December . During the squadron 's trip to Morotai three Spitfires were destroyed or damaged as a result of landing accidents at Merauke , New Guinea on 15 December . As expected , living facilities at Morotai were initially very basic , and Caldwell traded liquor for the services of US engineer units to improve the wing 's camp site . 
 The wing began flying night defence patrols shortly after No. 452 Squadron arrived at Morotai . At the time Morotai was a major Allied base and had been attacked by Japanese aircraft on multiple occasions . During the night of 24 December a Spitfire shot down a Japanese bomber over the island . This proved to be one of the last Japanese raids on Morotai , however , and no further interceptions were made . The lack of aerial opposition meant that No. 80 Wing 's aircraft were increasingly used to strafe Japanese positions near Morotai . During January 1945 the wing flew 84 ground attack sorties , losing three Spitfires in the process . The lack of opportunities for aerial combat disappointed No. 80 Wing 's pilots and contributed to a decline in their morale . 
 No. 80 Wing completed its move to Morotai in March . No. 457 Squadron 's Spitfires left Darwin on 6 February and arrived on the island two days later . Later that month No. 79 Squadron joined the wing at Morotai . This squadron had previously operated Spitfires in New Guinea and nearby islands before withdrawing to Darwin in January 1945 to receive Mark VIII Spitfires . The final ship carrying No. 80 Wing personnel and equipment from Darwin arrived at Morotai in early March . Wing Commander Bobby Gibbes , who had been appointed No. 80 Wing 's wing leader in October 1944 , assumed temporary command of the unit for several days in late March while Caldwell made a trip to Manila . On 31 March Wing Commander Glen Cooper assumed command from Caldwell , who had reached the end of his appointment and was disillusioned with how No. 80 Wing had been used . 
 Dissatisfaction with the tasks being undertaken by the First Tactical Air Force ( 1TAF ) , of which No. 80 Wing was part , led to the " Morotai Mutiny " in April 1945 . On 19 April , Caldwell , Gibbes and six other senior 1TAF officers attempted to resign in protest against what they believed was the misuse of fighter aircraft in ground attack operations against isolated Japanese positions . While no action was taken against these officers , Caldwell and Gibbes were later court martialled for selling liquor . 
 From May No. 80 Wing units participated in the Australian @-@ led Borneo Campaign . No. 457 Squadron was attached to No. 81 Wing and deployed to Labuan on 18 June as part of the Operation Oboe Six landings in the Brunei Bay region . The squadron provided air defence and flew close air support sorties alongside No. 76 Squadron , and shot down a Japanese aircraft on 20 June . In April No. 452 Squadron was attached to No. 78 Wing and took part in the landing at Tarakan in May . Delays in repairing Tarakan 's airfield meant that it did not see any combat until 30 June , however . The squadron subsequently supported the landing at Balikpapan in July , and one of its Spitfires shot down a Japanese aircraft in the early hours of 24 July . During this period No. 79 Squadron remained at Morotai and continued to fly ground attack sorties against Japanese positions on the nearby island of Halmahera . On 30 July 1945 No. 80 Wing Headquarters was absorbed into the newly formed No. 11 Group . While it was intended that the wing 's three flying squadrons would come under the command of this group , in the event it only took operational control of No. 79 Squadron before the war ended . 
 A memorial plaque for No. 80 Wing was unveiled at the Australian War Memorial on 29 November 2013 . 
 = Skipper W = 
 Skipper W ( 1945 – 1963 ) was an American Quarter Horse and a famous breeding stallion . Despite not being shown in many horse shows , he went on to become the senior stallion of his breeder 's reproductive program . Although he sired only 132 offspring , the products of his breeder 's program are still often known as " Skipper W " horses . He will be inducted into the American Quarter Horse Hall of Fame in 2011 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Skipper W was a 1945 sorrel stallion bred by H. J. Wiescamp of Alamosa , Colorado . Sired by Nick Shoemaker , whose father was Nick sired by <unk> P @-@ 11 , Skipper W was out of Hired Girl , a daughter of Cowboy P @-@ 12 . His second dam , or maternal grandmother , was Leche , who was also fathered by Nick by <unk> P @-@ 11 . The colt was named Skipper W because , as Wiescamp related : 
 I had another good stud colt born around the same time as Skipper . He was a palomino sired by Gold Mount and out of <unk> Wiescamp . That was also the year that the good movie , Showboat , came out and I named the little yellow colt after that picture . Anyway , I had Hired Girl up in a corral and , after she foaled , I told a fellow who was working for me to disinfect the naval on the colt [ Skipper W ] . After the man did that , the colt got up and turned around and kicked him ' cause it <unk> . I said to that fellow , " Look at that , he already knows he 's the boss ! I 've got a showboat , and every boat needs a skipper , so that 's what I 'm going to name him – Skipper . " I added the W for Wiescamp . 
 Before Skipper W was born , Wiescamp had attempted to sell Hired Girl while she was pregnant with the colt , but at $ 150 ( approximately $ 2 @,@ 000 in 2016 ) , did not get any buyers . While the colt was a weanling , Wiescamp priced him at $ 500 ( approximately $ 6 @,@ 600 in 2016 ) , and the one potential purchaser decided it was too high a price for a colt the buyer planned to make into a gelding . When Skipper W was a yearling , another possible buyer , who was wanting a potential breeding stallion , looked at the colt , but when they found out that Wiescamp wanted $ 1500 ( approximately $ 18 @,@ 200 in 2016 ) for the horse decided against purchasing . Instead , Skipper W never sold and spent his entire life with Wiescamp . 
 Wiescamp had Skipper W trained as a riding horse when he was a two @-@ year @-@ old , and the ranch hand who did the training said after a couple of days of working him in a small corral , he " just got on him . And the first time I got on him , I just turned this colt around , <unk> to him , and just kind of spanked him with the rein a little bit . And the colt took to it and just walked off . That 's the way he was . The colt never hopped up , he never done nothing . " The same ranch hand later used Skipper W as a roping horse , and said that the horse really liked to do ranch work . At the age of three years , Skipper W was about 15 hands high ( 60 inches ( 150 centimeters ) and weighed about 1 @,@ 250 pounds ( 570 kilograms ) . 
 Wiescamp showed Skipper W as a halter horse three times when the stallion was four years old . Skipper W was named grand champion stallion at the three shows he attended , the 1948 National Western Stock Show in Denver , the 1948 Colorado State Fair , and the 1948 New Mexico State Fair . Wiescamp later remarked that " I 'm glad now that we didn 't show him more , because he would have been before the public so much that he probably would have been sold . " However , Skipper W 's American Quarter Horse Association , or AQHA , show record does not show any record of these wins , which is not unusual for horses shown in the 1940s , as the record keeping was not always the best during the early years of the AQHA . 
 = = Breeding career = = 
 In early 1948 , Nick Shoemaker , Wiescamp 's senior stallion and Skipper W 's sire , died in a freak accident while in his paddock , by slipping on some ice and breaking his neck against a fence . This meant that Skipper W 's show career was cut short so that he could replace his sire as the main breeding stallion . During his entire career , Skipper W never was bred to any mare that was not owned by Wiescamp . Wiescamp wanted to make sure that the mares that he bred his stallions to were the best possible matches for the particular stallion . From the time of Nick Shoemaker 's death until Skipper W 's own death , the horse remained Wiescamp 's senior stallion . 
 During his breeding career he sired 18 foal crops , with a total of 132 horses registered with the AQHA . Among his offspring were Skip 's Dilly , the 1964 AQHA High Point Western Pleasure Mare , <unk> , the 1964 AQHA High Point Calf <unk> Mare , and Skip Sir Bar , the 1968 AQHA High Point Steer <unk> Horse . As well , he sired 13 AQHA Champions , 7 Superior Halter Horses , and 18 Performance Register of Merit earners . He sired 4 horses that earned a Race Register of Merit with the AQHA . 
 Skipper W died in 1963 , probably of a heart attack . Wiescamp kept 7 of his sons as breeding stallions and 57 of his daughters as broodmares in Wiescamp 's linebreeding program . 
 Although he did not sire a great number of horses , the linebreeding program that Wiescamp followed led to the products of that program often being called " Skipper W horses " . The horse will be inducted into the AQHA Hall of Fame in 2011 . 
 = = Pedigree = = 
 = Worthington Brewery = 
 The Worthington Brewery ( Worthington & Co . ) was founded by William Worthington in the English Midlands town of Burton upon Trent in 1761 . It is the second oldest continuously brewed beer brand in the country after Whitbread . The best known Worthington beers are the Creamflow <unk> bitter and White Shield India Pale Ale . 
 When William Worthington died in 1800 , his brewery was one of the largest outside London . From 1866 a Worthington chemist , Horace <unk> Brown , pioneered brewing science in the separation and cultivation of pure yeast strains , and from 1872 the company was the first in the world to systematically utilise a laboratory in the brewing process . The company merged with its major Burton rival Bass in 1927 . Throughout the 1920s until the 1960s the brand , in bottled form , ranked alongside Bass and Guinness as one of only three beers with nationwide distribution . However , bottled beer sales declined as keg beer grew in popularity throughout the 1960s , and the Worthington brewery was closed in 1965 . The beers continued to be brewed elsewhere , and Bass used the Worthington brand for its principal keg bitter offerings from the 1960s onward , first as Worthington E , then as Worthington Best Bitter from the 1980s , and Worthington Creamflow from the 1990s to the present . 
 The Worthington brand was purchased from Bass by the American brewing company Coors in 2002 , which following a merger became Molson Coors in 2005 . Creamflow is the third highest selling ale in the United Kingdom , as well as the highest selling ale in Wales , and is brewed in Burton . Worthington 's White Shield IPA has continued to be brewed since 1829 , and has been the recipient of a number of awards . In 2010 , Molson Coors opened the William Worthington microbrewery , which brews historical and seasonal beers . 
 The Worthington brand has had an association with rugby union sponsorship since the latter half of the twentieth century . The brand also sponsored the Football League Cup from 1998 until 2003 . 
 = = History = = 
 William Worthington ( 1723 – 1800 ) was born at Orton on the Hill in Leicestershire , the fourth child of William Worthington ( 1687 – 1742 ) , yeoman farmer , and his wife , Elizabeth . In 1744 , he moved to Burton upon Trent in Staffordshire where he worked as a cooper at Joseph Smith 's brewery . In 1760 , Worthington purchased the brewery from Smith 's successor , Richard <unk> , for £ 320 ( equivalent to £ 40 @,@ 000 as of 2015 ) . 
 By the 1780s , the brewery probably had an annual output of around 1 @,@ 500 barrels , similar to the rival breweries of Benjamin Wilson and Michael Bass . Throughout the eighteenth century , Worthington sales were mostly of porter , directed towards the Baltic market , which was transported via narrowboat through the River Trent to the Port of Hull . Largely as a result of this trade , by the time of Worthington 's death in 1800 , Worthington & Co. ranked among the largest of the provincial breweries . 
 Worthington 's eldest son , also named William ( 1764 – 1825 ) , assumed control of the company following his father 's death . On the death of Worthington in 1825 he was succeeded by his son , also named William ( 1799 – 1871 ) . A combination of factors conspired to make the Baltic trade infeasible ; the Napoleonic Wars disrupted trade in the region and the Russian government increased import tariffs in 1822 . Combined with a decrease on malt duty in 1823 , this led to an oversupply of beer in Burton . As a result , the brewers instead looked towards the expatriate community in India as an increasingly important export market . Worthington produced their own India Pale Ale from 1829 onwards . 
 The railway network joined Burton in August 1839 , which made it much more economical to distribute beer throughout the country . In 1842 William Worthington entered into partnership with Thomas Robinson , and the business traded as Worthington & Robinson . By 1861 Worthington employed 191 men and boys . Worthington dissolved the Robinson partnership in 1864 , in order for his sons to acquire the business . The company became known as Worthington and Company , the co @-@ partners being : William ( 1799 @-@ 1871 ) , with two of his sons , William Henry ( 1826 @-@ 1894 ) and Calvert ( 1830 @-@ 1871 ) , who were joined two years later by his youngest son , Albert Octavius ( 1844 @-@ 1918 ) . After the introduction of agencies in British conurbations from the mid @-@ 1860s , the company began to rapidly expand . In 1866 the Prince of Wales awarded the company the Royal Warrant . Worthington pioneered brewing science from 1866 by employing a chemist , Horace <unk> Brown , who led the world in separation and cultivation of pure yeast strains . From 1872 the Worthington brewery was the first in the world to systematically utilise a laboratory in the brewing process . The company had previously resisted employing a laboratory , for fear that the public would perceive the scientific apparatus as a means of doctoring the beer . In order to differentiate themselves from other brewers , Worthington labelled their beers with alphabetical letters : their Burton Ales were called G , F and D , their light dinner ale was labelled M. Worthington E was an India Pale Ale , a competitor to Bass Pale Ale . By 1880 , Worthington 's IPA was challenging Bass 's sales in the home market . 
 From 1886 , Worthington began to acquire public houses , which provided a captive market for their product . In order to raise capital for this expansion , the firm became a public company in 1889 , and Horace Brown was created joint managing director alongside William <unk> Manners . By this time the company had an annual output of around 200 @,@ 000 barrels , and employed 470 people . By 1890 , the company 's bottling operations equalled those of Bass , Guinness , Allsopp and Whitbread . When William Henry Worthington ( 1826 – 1894 ) died he left no direct heirs and was the fourth and final generation of the family to manage Worthington & Co . Horace Brown left the company in 1894 following a dispute with co @-@ manager William Manners . By 1900 , 73 per cent of the company 's equity was in the hands of William <unk> Manners ( 1846 – 1915 ) , who had joined the company in 1862 as a junior clerk , and under his astute leadership Worthington acquired a reputation for the quality of its bottled pale ales . The company acquired the Burton Brewery Company in 1915 . On Manners ' death in 1915 , control of the company passed to two of his sons , Arthur ( 1879 – 1968 ) and Ernest . Arthur was the architect of the merger with arch rival Bass in 1927 , and proved to be more than a match for John Gretton , 1st Baron Gretton , the chairman of the much larger Bass . Despite Bass 's superior capitalization , the terms of the merger were such that Manners became chairman and joint managing director of Worthington , and deputy chairman and joint managing director of Bass . The amalgamation , described as ‘ the biggest non @-@ merger in the history of the brewing industry ’ , failed to realize its objectives . Apart from greater co @-@ operation in bottled beer production and distribution , there were few economies and the two companies continued to operate as separate entities . Both boards were increasingly dominated by Manners and his family . 
 By the 1920s , in bottled form , Worthington was one of only three nationally distributed beer brands , alongside Bass and Guinness . Product rationalisation began after the Second World War and although Worthington occasionally overtook Bass in sales , the decision was taken to prioritise Bass products . Arthur Manners took the chairmanship of Bass in 1947 , and was instrumental in driving the company forward . Brewing industry mergers from the late 1950s onwards damaged Worthington sales , as tied house ownership became increasingly concentrated with brewers intent on promoting their own products . At the same time , bottled beer sales suffered as drinkers in search of consistency opted for the new keg beers instead . In 1965 , the original Worthington brewery was closed , although production of the Worthington beers continued , consisting of White Shield , Green Shield ( a filtered version of White Shield ) and the draught product , E. Worthington E became the main keg bitter offered by Bass from 1967 , and it had become a leading bitter brand by the 1970s , boosted by the company 's network of 11 @,@ 000 public houses . Worthington E was replaced as Bass ' leading keg bitter by Worthington Best Bitter in the 1980s , and by Worthington <unk> from the mid @-@ 1990s . In 2000 , Bass was bought by the Belgian brewer Interbrew . The Competition Commission ordered Interbrew to divest itself of a number of its recently acquired brands , and Worthington was bought by the American brewer Coors , who later became Molson Coors in 2005 . In 2004 Coors announced that they would no longer advertise Worthington on a large scale . 
 = = Overview = = 
 Worthington 's Creamflow ( 3 @.@ 6 % ABV ) is the twelfth highest selling beer in the United Kingdom , with an estimated 640 @,@ 000 hectolitres sold in 2012 . It is the third highest selling ale brand in the United Kingdom after John Smith 's and Tetley 's . It is the highest selling ale in Wales , where it has a 20 per cent volume share , and has held pole position since at least 1999 . Most of the sales consist of the nitrogenated and pasteurised Creamflow , which was launched in 1995 and is available in kegs and cans . Cask conditioned Worthington 's Cask is made from <unk> and Challenger hops , brewing sugar and pale malt . Modest amounts of a 4 % keg bitter known as Worthington 's Ale continue to be brewed for the Teesside market . 
 = = White Shield = = 
 Worthington 's White Shield ( 5 @.@ 6 % ABV ) is an India Pale Ale available principally in bottle conditioned form , but also in casks . It has won the CAMRA Champion Bottled Beer of Britain Gold award three times , more than any other beer . 
 In 1829 , Worthington launched East India Pale Ale , their first IPA . It was exported to British expatriates across the Empire , mostly officers and civil servants , as the soldiers tended to drink the cheaper porter . In the 1870s it gained the White Shield logo , and by the end of the nineteenth century took on this name with drinkers . 
 By the 1960s White Shield had become a cult drink brewed in small quantities for a dedicated following ; production in 1965 was just 15 @,@ 000 barrels as drinkers switched to filtered and pasteurised bottled and keg beers . It found renewed popularity in the early 1970s as the demand for real ale grew , but lost this position as cask ale became easier to find . Bass moved production from Burton to their Hope & Anchor brewery in Sheffield in 1981 . The Hope & Anchor brewery closed in 1992 , and production was moved to Cape Hill in Birmingham , before being contracted to King and Barnes of Sussex in 1998 . By this time , production was down to just 1 @,@ 000 barrels a year , and the beer 's long @-@ term survival was in doubt . The King and Barnes brewery closed in 2000 , and production moved to the Bass owned White Shield microbrewery in Burton upon Trent . 
 In 2000 , a total of 500 barrels were produced ; this was forecast to grow to 1 @,@ 000 barrels by 2009 . In 2010 , production was moved to the newly constructed William Worthington 's Brewery , a microbrewery based at the National Brewery Centre in Burton . It also produces other Worthington beers such as Red Shield and seasonal beers . In 2012 , increasing demand saw White Shield production moved to the main Coors brewery in Burton . In 2013 , Roger Protz described White Shield as the highest selling bottle conditioned beer in Britain . 
 = = Advertising = = 
 1920s print advertisements linked the brand with Englishness alongside classic images of the Lake District and other national areas of beauty . Throughout the 1970s Worthington E was marketed as " The taste that satisfies ... " Advertising in the mid @-@ 1990s focused on Creamflow , with a series of television advertisements featuring comedian Harry Enfield . 
 = = = Logo = = = 
 The brewery 's blood red heart shield and dagger logo was introduced in 1863 . The name was changed to Worthington 's in 2002 and shield became more obviously heart shaped . The shield was restored in 2011 , and the brand 's design was modified to resemble its 1920s appearance . 
 = = = Sponsorship = = = 
 Worthington 's is involved in sponsorship of rugby union and rugby league . It is a major sponsor of Gloucester RFC ( with whom it has been affiliated since 1983 ) , Scarlets , Ospreys , Newport Gwent Dragons , Pontypridd RFC and Oldham Roughyeds . From 1998 until 2003 it sponsored the Football League Cup to the cost of £ 23 million ; however , a perceived lack of prestige attached to the competition saw it derided by some football fans as the " Worthless Cup " . 
 Since 2011 , the brand has sponsored the St. Simon Stakes at Newbury Racecourse . 
 = Madonna ( Madonna album ) = 
 Madonna is the eponymous debut studio album by American singer and songwriter Madonna , released on July 27 , 1983 by Sire Records . It was renamed Madonna : The First Album for the 1985 international re @-@ release of the album . In 1982 , while establishing herself as a singer in Downtown New York , Madonna met Seymour Stein , president of Sire Records , who signed her after listening to her single " Everybody " . The success of the single prompted Sire to sign her for an album 's deal . Reggie Lucas was chosen as the primary producer , while Madonna solely wrote five of eight tracks on the album . However , she was not happy with the completed tracks and disagreed with Lucas 's production techniques . She then invited John " Jellybean " Benitez to help her finish the album . Benitez remixed many of the tracks and produced " Holiday " . 
 The overall sound of Madonna is dissonant , and is in the form of upbeat synthetic disco , utilizing some of the new technology of the time , like the usage of Linn drum machine , Moog bass and the Oberheim OB @-@ X synthesizer . The songs on the album are sung by Madonna in a bright , girlish vocal timbre , and lyrically talks about love and relationships . To promote the album , Madonna performed in various one @-@ off gigs in clubs and television programs in the United States and United Kingdom throughout 1983 – 84 . The album was later promoted during The Virgin Tour in 1985 . Five singles were released from the album , including the international top @-@ ten hits " Holiday " , " Lucky Star " and " Borderline " . The music videos of the album 's singles were released on a video compilation titled Madonna , which became the best @-@ selling videocassette of 1985 in the United States . 
 Contemporary critics have applauded the album , but Madonna was dismissed by some critics when it was released in 1983 . In 2008 , the album was ranked at number five on Entertainment Weekly 's list of " Top 100 Best Albums of Past 25 Years . " The album peaked at number eight on the Billboard 200 , and was certified five @-@ times platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) for shipment of five million copies across the United States . It also reached the top ten of the charts in Australia , France , Netherlands , New Zealand , Sweden and the United Kingdom , while selling more than 10 million copies worldwide . Critics retrospectively noted that the album helped popularize dance music in mainstream recording industry . It pointed the direction for numerous female artists of the 1980s and set the standard for dance @-@ pop for decades afterward . 
 = = Background = = 
 In 1982 , the 24 @-@ year @-@ old Madonna was living in New York , and trying to set up her music career . She was joined by her Detroit boyfriend Steve Bray who became the drummer of her band , the Breakfast Club , which played generally hard @-@ rock music . Soon they abandoned playing songs in the hard @-@ rock genre , and got signed by a music management company called Gotham Records , planning to move in a new musical direction . They decided to pursue the funk genre , but the record company was not happy with their musical talents and they were dropped from the label ; Madonna and Bray left the band also . Meanwhile , she had written and developed some songs on her own . She carried rough tapes of three of the songs , " Everybody " , " Ain 't No Big Deal " and " Burning Up " . At that time she was frequenting the Danceteria nightclub in New York . It was here that Madonna convinced the DJ Mark Kamins to play " Everybody " . The song was received positively by the crowd , and Kamins decided that he should get Madonna a record deal , on the understanding that he would get to produce the single . He took her to his boss Chris Blackwell , who owned Island Records , but Blackwell refused to sign Madonna so they approached Sire Records . Michael Rosenblatt , who worked at the artists and repertoire department of Sire , offered Madonna $ 5 @,@ 000 in advance , plus $ 10 @,@ 000 in royalties , for each song she wrote . 
 Madonna was ultimately signed for two 12 " singles by the President of Sire , Seymour Stein , who was impressed by her singing , after listening to " Everybody " at a hospital in Lenox Hill where he was admitted . The 12 " version of " Everybody " was produced by Mark Kamins at Blank Tapes Studios in New York , who took over the production work from Steve Bray . The new recording ran 5 : 56 on one side and 9 : 23 for the dub version on the reverse side . Madonna and Kamins had to record the single at their own cost . Arthur Baker , friend of Mark Kamins , guided him through the role of a music producer and provided him with studio musician Fred Zarr who performed his keyboard wizardry on the track . Zarr became one of the common musical threads on the album by eventually performing on every track . Due to the restrained budget , the recording was a hefty affair as Madonna could not understand Kamins ' directions and Kamins himself faced problems directing . Rosenblatt wanted to release " Everybody " with " Ain 't No Big Deal " on the other side , but later changed his mind and put " Everybody " on both sides of the vinyl record after hearing the recorded version of " Ain 't No Big Deal " . The single was commercially released in October 1982 and became a dance hit in the United States . This led to Sire signing Madonna for an LP and two more singles . 
 = = Development = = 
 The album was primarily recorded at Sigma Sound Studios in New York City . Madonna opted not to work with either Kamins or Bray , but chose Reggie Lucas , a Warner Bros. producer . Bray decided to push her in the musical direction of pop , and recorded the song " Burning Up " with her . However , Madonna still did not have enough material to generate a full album . The songs available were , " Lucky Star " , a new version of " Ain 't No Big Deal " , " Think of Me " and " I Know It " . Lucas brought another two songs to the project , " Physical Attraction " and " Borderline " . As he recorded the tracks he deviated considerably from the original versions of the demos . One such altered song was " Lucky Star " . The song was written by Madonna for Kamins , who previously promised to play the track at Danceteria . However , the track was instead used by Madonna for the album , which she planned to call Lucky Star . She believed that " Lucky Star " , along with " Borderline " , were the perfect foundation for her album . 
 Problems arose between her and Lucas during the recording of the songs . Madonna was unhappy with the way the final versions turned out . According to her , Lucas used too many instruments and did not consider her ideas for the songs . This led to a dispute between the two and , after finishing the album , Lucas left the project without tailoring the songs to Madonna 's specifications ; hence she called John " Jellybean " Benitez , a DJ at Funhouse disco , to remix the available tracks . In the meantime , due to a conflict of interest , Bray had sold " Ain 't No Big Deal " to an act on another label , rendering it unavailable for Madonna 's project . It was Benitez who discovered a new song , written by Curtis Hudson and Lisa Stevens of the pop group Pure Energy . The song , titled " Holiday " , had been turned down by Phyllis Hyman and Mary Wilson , formerly of The Supremes . Jellybean and Madonna sent the demo to their friend , Fred Zarr so he could embellish the arrangement and program the song with his synthesizer magic . After vocals were recorded by Madonna , Benitez spent four days trying to enhance the commercial appeal of the track before the April 1983 deadline . Just before it was completed , Madonna and Benitez met Fred Zarr at Sigma Sound in Manhattan , where Zarr added the now familiar piano solo towards the end of the track . 
 = = Music and lyrics = = 
 According to Allmusic , the album is mostly influenced by dance @-@ pop , post @-@ disco and pop rock music . The overall sound of Madonna is dissonant , and is in the form of upbeat synthetic disco , utilizing some of the new technology of the time , like the usage of Linn drum machine , Moog bass and the OB @-@ X synthesizer . This equipment has dated since , consequently the sound of the album comes off as somewhat harsh . Madonna commented on her debut album : " The songs were pretty weak and I went to England during the recordings so I wasn 't around ... I wasn 't in control . [ ... ] I didn 't realise how crucial it was for me to break out of the disco mold before I 'd already finished the [ first ] album . I wish I could have got a little more variety there . " The album starts with the song " Lucky Star " , a medium @-@ paced dance track , beginning with a sparkle of synth note and is followed by heavy beats of electronic drum and handclaps . A guitar is played in high riff and a bubbling bass synth is produced to accompany the guitar sound . The song revolves around the " Starlight , <unk> " hook for more than a minute , before going to the chorus . According to author Rikky Rooksby , the lyrics are repetitive and inane , revolving around the transparent ambiguity of the stars , and juxtaposition of the male character with being a heavenly body in the sky . 
 " Borderline " is a sentimental track , talking about a love that is never quite fulfilled . According to author Santiago Fouz @-@ Hernández and his book Madonna 's drowned worlds , the lyrics of the song like " Something in the way you love me won 't let me be / I don 't want to be your prisoner so baby won 't you set me free " depicted a rebellion against male chauvinism . Madonna used a refined and expressive voice to sing the song , backed by Lucas 's instrumentations . It opens with a keyboard rich intro and a catchy synth melody provided by Fred Zarr . Bass player Anthony Jackson doubled Dean Gant 's synth bass to provide a solid & more complex texture . The chords in the song were inspired by Seventies disco sound in Philadelphia as well as Elton John 's musical style during the mid @-@ seventies . The chord sequences cite from Bachman – Turner Overdrive 's song " You Ain 't Seen Nothing Yet " while the synth phases display her typical musical style . The third track " Burning Up " has a starker arrangement , brought about by bass , single guitar and Linn drum machine . The drum beats used in the song were reminiscent to the records of singer Phil Collins . It also incorporated electric guitars and the most state @-@ of @-@ the @-@ art synthesizers of that time . The chorus is a repetition of the same three lines , while the bridge consists of a series of double entendres ; the lyrics describing what Madonna is prepared to do for her lover , and that she is individualistic and shameless . 
 Next track " I Know It " has a gentler swing to it and features music from piano , a saxophone , synth phrases while having an offbeat chord change . " Holiday " consists of a four @-@ bar sequence , featuring instrumentation from guitars , electronic drums and handclaps from the Oberheim DMX , cowbell played by Madonna and a synthesized string arrangement . A side @-@ by @-@ side repetitive progression is achieved by making use of the chorus . Towards the end of the song , a change in the arrangement happens , where a piano break is heard . Lyrically , the song expresses the universal sentiment that everybody needs a holiday . In " Think of Me " , Madonna warns her erring lover that he should pay her attention or else she would leave . The song consists of beats from the Linn drum machine and a saxophone interlude . " Physical Attraction " is a medium paced track , with synth bass , a guitar line , sounds of a brass and Madonna singing in a shrill voice , about the attraction between herself and a boy . The last song on the album is " Everybody " , which starts with a heavily synthesized and spoken introduction , with Madonna taking a loud intake of breath . She displayed her bubblegum @-@ pop like voice in the song , which was also doubletracked . 
 = = Release and artwork = = 
 The album was first released in the United States on July 27 , 1983 by Sire Records . It was originally slated to be titled Lucky Star , after the track of the same name , but eventually titled simply Madonna , perhaps that this singular name could have star power . The album 's artwork was shot by photographer Gary <unk> and directed by Carin Goldberg . The front cover shows Madonna with short @-@ cropped platinum hair , wearing a number of black rubber bangles on her hands and a dog chain around her throat . Her navel is also prominent on the inner sleeve of the album . Madonna commented : " The picture inside the dust of sleeve of my first album has me , like , in this Betty Boop pose with my belly button showing . Then when people reviews the album , they kept talking about my cute belly button . [ ... ] I think there are other <unk> places on the body that are sexy and the stomach is kind of innocent . " Regarding the album <unk> , Gary <unk> recalled : 
 " [ Madonna ] arrived at my Broadway studio in New York with a small bag of clothes and jewelery , and no entourage . Then , in front of the camera she was explosive , like a great model , but with her own unique style . She came over the next day to see some prints and the proofs , and there was shot after shot to choose from . We agreed on every choice and whittled it down to the album cover images . I had no idea what I had just been a party to . " 
 The album was re @-@ released in 1985 for the European market and re @-@ packaged as Madonna : The First Album with a different artwork created by photographer George Holy . The cover features Madonna in similar style of dress to the original cover but this time with crucifix as her <unk> . Madonna 's trademark style was catching on as a fashion statement among club kids and fans , with her crucifix accessories becoming the jewelry of the moment . Madonna said that wearing a crucifix is " kind of offbeat and interesting . I mean , everything I do is sort of tongue @-@ in @-@ cheeks . Besides , the crucifixes seem to go with my name . " In 2001 , Warner Bros. Records released a remastered version of the album with its original artwork and two bonus remix tracks of " Burning Up " and " Lucky Star " . Madonna dedicated the album to her father , Tony Ciccone , with whom her relationship had not been good until the release of the album . In an interview with Time magazine , Madonna said : " My father had never believed that what I was doing here [ in New York ] was worthwhile , nor did he believe that I was up to any good . [ ... ] It wasn 't until my first album came out and my father started hearing my songs on the radio that he stopped asking the questions . " 
 = = Promotion = = 
 Madonna had promoted the album throughout 1983 – 84 by performing a series of " track dates " , one @-@ off gigs . These shows were done at New York City and London clubs like Danceteria and Camden Palace and on American and British television programs like American Bandstand and Top of the Pops . On American Bandstand , Madonna performed the track " Holiday " and told interviewer Dick Clark that she wanted " to rule the world . " John Mitchell from MTV said that the appearance " remains one of her most legendary . " The album 's singles were later performed on The Virgin Tour in 1985 . It was Madonna 's first concert tour and visited North American dates . The Virgin Tour received mixed reception from critics , but was a commercial success . As soon as the tour was announced , tickets were sold out everywhere . Macy 's New York department store was flooded with buyers , who bought the tour merchandise like the crucifix earrings and fingerless gloves . After its end , the Virgin Tour was reported to have grossed over $ 5 million ( $ 11 million in 2016 dollars ) , with Billboard Boxscore reporting a gross of $ 3 @.@ 3 million ( $ 7 @.@ 26 million in 2016 dollars ) . The tour was recorded and released in VHS , as Madonna Live : The Virgin Tour . Later authors have looked back at the tour and commented that it was clear that " [ Madonna ] was a bonafide pop star in the process of becoming a cultural icon . " Shari Benstock and Suzanne Ferriss noted the clothes and fashion in the tour and said , " Virgin Tour established Madonna as the hottest figure in pop music . " 
 = = = Singles = = = 
 Madonna released five singles from the album , although two of those singles actually preceded the album 's release by several months . " Everybody " was released on October 6 , 1982 , as Madonna 's debut single ; at this point , the rest of the Madonna album had not yet been recorded or even conceived of . Musically incorporating R & B infused beats , " Everybody " portrayed the image of Madonna as a black artist , since her picture did not appear on the single cover . However this misconception was cleared later when Madonna convinced Sire executives to allow her to shoot a music video for the song . The low @-@ budget music video directed by Ed Steinberg portrayed Madonna and her friends singing and dancing in a club to the song . The video helped to promote the song and Madonna as an artist further . " Everybody " failed to enter the official Billboard Hot 100 chart and only charted at number seven on the Bubbling Under Hot 100 Singles on December 25 , 1982 . Nevertheless , the single was a hit on the Billboard Hot Dance / Club Play Chart , peaking at number three . 
 " Burning Up " was released as the second single in the US on March 9 , 1983 , and later issued in some countries as a double A @-@ side single with " Physical Attraction " . The single peaked at number three on the dance chart in the US , and became Madonna 's first top twenty hit in Australia . The accompanying music video of the song portrays Madonna writhing passionately on an empty road before her " lover " approaches in a car from behind . The video ends with Madonna driving the car instead , suggesting that she is ultimately in control . " Holiday " was released as the third single on September 7 , 1983 and became Madonna 's first top @-@ ten hit in many countries , including Australia , Belgium , Germany , Ireland , the Netherlands and the UK . It also became her first entry ever on the Billboard Hot 100 , reaching number 16 , and her first number @-@ one hit on the dance chart . 
 Originally released in the UK in September 1983 , " Lucky Star " was the fourth single from the album . The single peaked at number four on the Billboard Hot 100 . The music video portrayed Madonna dancing in front of a white background , accompanied by her dancers . After the video was released , Madonna 's style and mannerisms became a fashion trend among the younger generation . Scholars noted that in the video , Madonna portrayed herself as narcissistic and an ambiguous character . She referred to herself as the " lucky star " , unlike the lyrical meaning of the song . " Borderline " was the fifth single from the album , and was released on February 15 , 1984 . In the US the song was released before " Lucky Star " and became Madonna 's first top @-@ ten hit on the Billboard Hot 100 , peaking at ten . Elsewhere , the song reached the top twenty of a number of European nations while peaking the chart in Ireland . The accompanying music video portrayed Madonna , with a Latin man as boyfriend . She was enticed by a British photographer to pose and model for him , but later returned to her original boyfriend . The video generated interest amongst academics , who noted the use of power as symbolism in it . 
 = = = Video compilation = = = 
 A video compilation , titled Madonna , was released by Warner Music Video and Sire Records in November 1984 to promote the album . The singer 's first video compilation , it contained three music videos from the album — " Burning Up " , " Borderline " and " Lucky Star " — as well as the then current single " Like a Virgin " . The music video for " Lucky Star " was a special extended dance mix , and when she says " ooh yeah " it is echoed three times and her image is repeated three times . " Like a Virgin " omits the scene where the lion 's tongue moves in time with the beat of the music . These videos were later released on the 1990 greatest hits compilation The Immaculate Collection with these edits changed . The video was promoted at the Cabaret Metro club in Chicago , on February 9 , 1985 . Dubbed as ' The Virgin Party ' , the event drew a crowd of around 1 @,@ 200 and promoted Madonna 's LPs , cassettes , CDs and the videocassette . Attendees were encouraged to wear white , and for $ 5 admission fees , were able to view the Madonna videocassette and the premiere of the music video of her then upcoming single " Material Girl " . The event was organised as a drive to promote music videos , which at that point did not have a large market . 
 Madonna topped the Music Videocassette chart of Billboard for the period from April 13 , 1985 to November 9 , 1985 . Jim <unk> from Billboard attributed the strong sales of the video to Madonna 's recent studio album Like a Virgin and The Virgin Tour concert . It placed at number one on the year @-@ end music <unk> chart for 1985 . Madonna was certified platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) for shipments of 100 @,@ 000 units of the video . It won the award for the " Best Selling Video Cassette <unk> as Music Video " from the National Association of Recording Merchandisers . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Stephen Thomas Erlewine from AllMusic wrote the album as " cleverly incorporated great pop songs with stylish , state @-@ of @-@ the @-@ art beats , and it shrewdly walked a line between being a rush of sound and a showcase for a dynamic lead singer . This is music where all of the elements may not particularly impressive on their own — the arrangement , synth , and drum programming are fairly rudimentary — but taken together , it 's utterly irresistible . Tony Power from Blender said that the album consisted of " quacking synths , <unk> bass and state @-@ of @-@ the @-@ art mechanical disco , with Madonna strapped to the wing rather than holding the controls . It 's a breathless , subtlety @-@ free debut , with overtones of Soft Cell and Tom Tom Club . " While reviewing the remastered version of the album , released in 2001 , Michael Paoletta from Billboard felt that " Nearly 20 years after the release of Madonna , such tracks as ' Holiday ' , ' Physical Attraction ' , ' Borderline ' and ' Lucky Star ' remain irresistible . " Jim Farber from Entertainment Weekly gave the album an A , saying " [ Madonna ] might have wound up just another post @-@ disco dolly if [ the songs on the album ] didn 't announce her ability to fuse club beats with peerless pop . " In July 2008 , the magazine ranked the album at number five in their list of " Top 100 Best Albums of Past 25 Years " . 
 Bill Lamb from About.com commented : " [ The ] album is state of the art dance @-@ pop loaded with hits from ' Holiday ' and ' Lucky Star ' to ' Borderline ' . Irresistible pop hooks glide across shimmering synth beats to make this a landmark album of the early 80 's . " Jonathan Ross from Q said that " ' Borderline ' is sweet and ' Holiday ' still fizzes with invention and joie de vivre .... this quintessentially ' 80s dance hit also features a barrelhouse piano solo . " Robert Christgau wrote in The Village Voice , " In case you bought the con , disco never died — just reverted to the crazies who thought it was worth living for . This shamelessly ersatz blonde is one of them , and with the craftily orchestrated help of a fine selection of producers , remixers , and DJs , she 's come up with a shamelessly ersatz sound that 's tighter than her tummy — essence of electro , the D in <unk> . " Don Shewey from Rolling Stone was of the opinion that " without overstepping the modest ambitions of minimal funk , Madonna issues an irresistible invitation to the dance . " Sal Cinquemani from Slant Magazine rated the album four and a half out of five stars and commented : " <unk> the synth @-@ heavy movement was a debut album [ Madonna ] that sounds just as fresh today as it did almost two decades ago . " In March 2012 , the publication placed the album at number 33 on their " Best Albums of the 1980s " list . Michaelangelo Matos from Spin selected the album among " The Definitive Guide to Classic Disco " and noted that it " mashed @-@ up street sounds and reinvigorated disco for a generation that wanted nothing to do with polyester suits , ending an era and birthing a new one . " 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 In the United States , the album entered the Billboard 200 albums chart at number 190 , the week of September 3 , 1983 . The album had a slow and steady climb , and peaked at eight on the Billboard 200 on the week ending October 20 , 1984 , more than a year after its release . It also peaked at twenty on the Top R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Albums . Within a year , Madonna had sold 2 @.@ 8 million copies in the United States . It placed at number seven on the year @-@ end chart for 1984 and at number 25 on the year @-@ end chart for 1985 , with Madonna becoming the top pop artist for the year 1985 . After 17 years since its release , the album was certified quintuple platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) for shipment of five million copies across United States . With the advent of the Nielsen SoundScan era in 1991 , the album sold a further 450 @,@ 000 copies as of August 2010 . 
 In Canada , the album was released on March 10 , 1984 , and debuted at number 87 on the RPM Albums Chart . After few weeks it re @-@ entered the chart again , at number 95 on August 4 , 1984 . The album finally reached its peak position of number 16 in its 29th week . It was present on the chart for a total of 47 weeks , and ranked at number 50 on the RPM Top 100 Albums of 1984 list . 
 In the United Kingdom , the album was released on February 11 , 1984 , and charted on the UK Albums Chart , reaching a peak of thirty @-@ seven and present on the chart for twenty weeks . After a re @-@ release titled Madonna – The First Album in July 1985 , the album charted again on the UK Albums chart . It reached a higher peak of fourteen and was present on the chart for eighty weeks . Six months since the re @-@ release , the album was certified platinum by the British Phonographic Industry ( BPI ) for shipment of 300 @,@ 000 copies of the album . In Australia , the album reached a peak of ten on the Kent Music Report albums chart and was certified triple platinum . The album reached the top ten of the charts in Netherlands , France and New Zealand ; in the last two markets , it was certified platinum . It was also certified platinum in Hong Kong and gold in Germany and Spain . Worldwide the album has sold more than 10 million copies . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Stephen Thomas Erlewine said that with the album , Madonna began her career as a disco diva , in an era that did not have any such divas to speak of . In the beginning of the 80s , disco was an anathema to the mainstream pop , and according to him , Madonna had a huge role in popularizing dance music as mainstream music , utilizing her charisma , chutzpah and sex appeal . Erlewine claimed that Madonna " launched dance @-@ pop " and set the standard for the genre for the next two decades . The staff of Vice magazine stated that the album " drew the blueprint for future dance @-@ pop . " Rolling Stone ranked the album at number 50 on " The 100 Best Albums of the Eighties " list , writing : " Indeed , initial response to Madonna gave no indication of the mania to follow . It took a year and a half for the album to go gold . But its assured style and sound , as well as Madonna 's savvy approach to videos , helped the singer make the leap from dance diva to pop phenom , and it pointed the direction for a host of female vocalists from Janet Jackson to Debbie Gibson . " 
 According to biographer Andrew Morton , the album made Madonna a household name , and was instrumental in introducing her star power . Martin Charles Strong , author of The Great Rock Discography felt that the album 's unprecedented dance @-@ pop and naive appeal served Madonna in establishing her base as an artist . Kyle Anderson from Entertainment Weekly commented : " Madonna 's sound , and of course her look , would be heavily copied for years to come , but Madonna heralded something much bigger : the arrival of the pop diva as a singular force who put personality above all else . " According to author Santiago Fouz @-@ Hernández , the songs on Madonna reveal several key trends that have continued to define her success , including a strong dance @-@ based idiom , catchy hooks , highly polished arrangement and Madonna 's own vocal style . In songs such as " Lucky Star " and " Burning Up " , Madonna introduced a style of upbeat dance music that would prove particularly appealing to future gay audiences . 
 Music critics Bob Batchelor and Scott Stoddart , commented in their book The 1980s that " the music videos for the singles off the album , was more effective in introducing Madonna to the rest of the world . " Author Carol Clerk said that the music videos of " Burning Up " , " Borderline " and " Lucky Star " established Madonna , not as the girl @-@ next @-@ door , but as a sassy and smart , tough funny woman . Her clothes worn in the videos were later used by designers like Karl Lagerfeld and Christian Lacroix , in Paris Fashion week of the same year . Professor Douglas Kellner , in his book Media Culture : Cultural Studies , Identity , and Politics Between the Modern and the Postmodern , commented that the videos depicted motifs and strategies which helped Madonna in her journey to become a star . With the " Borderline " music video , Madonna was credited for breaking the taboo of interracial relationships , and it was considered one of her career @-@ making moments . MTV played the video in heavy rotation , increasing Madonna 's popularity further . 
 Following the release of the album , Madonna was dismissed by some critics . They called her voice sounding as " Minnie Mouse on helium " , while the other detractors suggested that she was " almost entirely helium , a gas @-@ filled , lighter @-@ than @-@ air creation of MTV and other sinister media <unk> . " Madonna said : " From the very beginning of my career , people have been writing shit about me and saying , ' She 's a one @-@ hit wonder , she 'll disappear after a year ' . " She responded to the comment " Minnie Mouse on helium " by doing a photoshoot with Alberto Tolot , where she flirted with a giant Mickey Mouse toy , putting its hand inside her dress and looking at it with an admonishing glare . Author Debbi Voller noted that " such provocative imagery at a young age of her career , could have hurt her too much . But it went on to shut those <unk> who dared to take a swag at her voice again . " Twenty @-@ five years later , in her acceptance speech of Rock and Roll Hall of Fame induction , Madonna thanked the critics who snubbed her in the early years , " The ones that said I was talentless , that I was chubby , that I couldn 't sing , that I was a one @-@ hit wonder . They pushed me to be better , and I am grateful for their resistance . " 
 = = Track listings = = 
 Notes 
 " Burning Up " ( Alternate Album Version ) – 4 : 48 , was used for the Vinyl edition of Madonna : The First Album , released in Europe in 1985 . The same version was the b @-@ side for the single " Angel " ( 1985 ) in the same countries . 
 " Everybody " has a duration of 4 : 57 on the original 1983 album release ; the 2001 remastered album includes a version which is 6 : 02 , which is the original 12 " version . 
 ^ a signifies a remixer 
 = = = Formats = = = 
 Vinyl – includes the 8 track album and the 4 : 57 version of " Everybody " . 
 Cassette – includes the 8 track album and the 4 : 57 version of " Everybody " . 
 CD – includes the 8 track album and the 4 : 57 version of " Everybody " . 
 <unk> CD – includes the 8 track album and the 4 : 57 version of " Everybody " . 
 Vinyl ( 1985 ) – Re @-@ released in Europe with new artwork and renamed as Madonna : The First Album . This format includes the same tracks as the original but includes " Burning Up " ( Alternate Album Version ) – 4 : 48 . Also released as a limited edition with fold @-@ out poster of the cover minus typography . 
 Vinyl Picture Disc ( 1985 ) – Madonna : The First Album includes the same tracks as the original album . 
 Cassette ( 1985 ) – Madonna : The First Album includes the same tracks as the original album . 
 CD ( 1985 ) – Madonna : The First Album includes the same tracks as the original album . 
 CD ( 2001 ) – Remastered 10 @-@ track edition includes all tracks from the original album and two bonus remixes of " Burning Up " and " Lucky Star " . This version was released by Warner Bros. and also includes a longer version of " Everybody " – 6 : 02 . This version replaced the 1985 international re @-@ release and reverted the album back to its original artwork and title in those territories . 
 Digital download ( 2005 ) – Same tracks as the 2001 remastered version , except for " Holiday " which is a 3 : 51 edited version . 
 Vinyl ( 2012 ) – 8 @-@ track European reissue of the original album which includes the 4 : 57 version of " Everybody " . This version was released by Warner Bros. and Rhino Entertainment . 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Credits and personnel adapted from the album 's liner notes . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications and sales = = 
 = Folding @ home = 
 Folding @ home ( <unk> or F @ h ) is a distributed computing project for disease research that simulates protein folding , computational drug design , and other types of molecular dynamics . The project uses the idle processing resources of thousands of personal computers owned by volunteers who have installed the software on their systems . Its main purpose is to determine the mechanisms of protein folding , which is the process by which proteins reach their final three @-@ dimensional structure , and to examine the causes of protein misfolding . This is of significant academic interest with major implications for medical research into Alzheimer 's disease , Huntington 's disease , and many forms of cancer , among other diseases . To a lesser extent , Folding @ home also tries to predict a protein 's final structure and determine how other molecules may interact with it , which has applications in drug design . Folding @ home is developed and operated by the Pande Laboratory at Stanford University , under the direction of Prof. Vijay Pande , and is shared by various scientific institutions and research laboratories across the world . 
 The project has pioneered the use of GPUs , PlayStation 3s , Message Passing Interface ( used for computing on multi @-@ core processors ) , and some Sony Xperia smartphones for distributed computing and scientific research . The project uses statistical simulation methodology that is a paradigm shift from traditional computational approaches . As part of the client @-@ server network architecture , the volunteered machines each receive pieces of a simulation ( work units ) , complete them , and return them to the project 's database servers , where the units are compiled into an overall simulation . Volunteers can track their contributions on the Folding @ home website , which makes volunteers ' participation competitive and encourages long @-@ term involvement . 
 Folding @ home is one of the world 's fastest computing systems , with an approximate speed of nearly 100 petaFLOPS . This performance from its large @-@ scale computing network has allowed researchers to run computationally expensive atomic @-@ level simulations of protein folding thousands of times longer than formerly achieved . Since its launch on October 1 , 2000 , the Pande Lab has produced 129 scientific research papers as a direct result of Folding @ home . Results from the project 's simulations agree favorably with experiments . 
 = = Project significance = = 
 Proteins are an essential component to many biological functions and participate in virtually all processes within biological cells . They often act as enzymes , performing biochemical reactions including cell signaling , molecular transportation , and cellular regulation . As structural elements , some proteins act as a type of skeleton for cells , and as antibodies , while other proteins participate in the immune system . Before a protein can take on these roles , it must fold into a functional three @-@ dimensional structure , a process that often occurs spontaneously and is dependent on interactions within its amino acid sequence and interactions of the amino acids with their surroundings . Protein folding is driven by the search to find the most energetically favorable conformation of the protein , i.e. its native state . Thus , understanding protein folding is critical to understanding what a protein does and how it works , and is considered a " holy grail " of computational biology . Despite folding occurring within a crowded cellular environment , it typically proceeds smoothly . However , due to a protein 's chemical properties or other factors , proteins may misfold — that is , fold down the wrong pathway and end up misshapen . Unless cellular mechanisms are capable of destroying or refolding such misfolded proteins , they can subsequently aggregate and cause a variety of debilitating diseases . Laboratory experiments studying these processes can be limited in scope and atomic detail , leading scientists to use physics @-@ based computational models that , when complementing experiments , seek to provide a more complete picture of protein folding , misfolding , and aggregation . 
 Due to the complexity of proteins ' conformation space — the set of possible shapes a protein can take — and limitations in computational power , all @-@ atom molecular dynamics simulations have been severely limited in the timescales which they can study . While most proteins typically fold in the order of milliseconds , before 2010 simulations could only reach nanosecond to microsecond timescales . General @-@ purpose supercomputers have been used to simulate protein folding , but such systems are intrinsically expensive and typically shared among many research groups . Additionally , because the computations in kinetic models are serial in nature , strong scaling of traditional molecular simulations to these architectures is exceptionally difficult . Moreover , as protein folding is a stochastic process and can statistically vary over time , it is computationally challenging to use long simulations for comprehensive views of the folding process . 
 Protein folding does not occur in a single step . Instead , proteins spend the majority of their folding time — nearly 96 % in some cases — " waiting " in various intermediate conformational states , each a local thermodynamic free energy minimum in the protein 's energy landscape . Through a process known as adaptive sampling , these conformations are used by Folding @ home as starting points for a set of simulation trajectories . As the simulations discover more conformations , the trajectories are restarted from them , and a Markov state model ( MSM ) is gradually created from this cyclic process . MSMs are discrete @-@ time master equation models which describe a biomolecule 's conformational and energy landscape as a set of distinct structures and the short transitions between them . The adaptive sampling Markov state model approach significantly increases the efficiency of simulation as it avoids computation inside the local energy minimum itself , and is amenable to distributed computing ( including on <unk> ) as it allows for the statistical aggregation of short , independent simulation trajectories . The amount of time it takes to construct a Markov state model is inversely proportional to the number of parallel simulations run , i.e. the number of processors available . In other words , it achieves linear parallelization , leading to an approximately four orders of magnitude reduction in overall serial calculation time . A completed MSM may contain tens of thousands of sample states from the protein 's phase space ( all the conformations a protein can take on ) and the transitions between them . The model illustrates folding events and pathways ( i.e. routes ) and researchers can later use kinetic clustering to view a coarse @-@ grained representation of the otherwise highly detailed model . They can use these MSMs to reveal how proteins misfold and to quantitatively compare simulations with experiments . 
 Between 2000 and 2010 , the length of the proteins Folding @ home has studied have increased by a factor of four , while its timescales for protein folding simulations have increased by six orders of magnitude . In 2002 , Folding @ home used Markov state models to complete approximately a million CPU days of simulations over the span of several months , and in 2011 , MSMs <unk> another simulation that required an aggregate 10 million CPU hours of computing . In January 2010 , Folding @ home used MSMs to simulate the dynamics of the slow @-@ folding 32 @-@ residue <unk> protein out to 1 @.@ 52 milliseconds , a timescale consistent with experimental folding rate predictions but a thousand times longer than formerly achieved . The model consisted of many individual trajectories , each two orders of magnitude shorter , and provided an unprecedented level of detail into the protein 's energy landscape . In 2010 , Folding @ home researcher Gregory Bowman was awarded the Thomas Kuhn Paradigm Shift Award from the American Chemical Society for the development of the open @-@ source <unk> software and for attaining quantitative agreement between theory and experiment . For his work , Pande was awarded the 2012 Michael and Kate <unk> Award for Young Investigators for " developing field @-@ defining and field @-@ changing computational methods to produce leading theoretical models for protein and RNA folding " as well as the 2006 Irving <unk> Young Investigator Award for his simulation results which " have stimulated a re @-@ examination of the meaning of both ensemble and single @-@ molecule measurements , making Dr. Pande 's efforts pioneering contributions to simulation methodology . " 
 = = Biomedical research = = 
 Protein misfolding can result in a variety of diseases including Alzheimer 's disease , cancer , Creutzfeldt – Jakob disease , cystic fibrosis , Huntington 's disease , sickle @-@ cell anemia , and type II diabetes . Cellular infection by viruses such as HIV and influenza also involve folding events on cell membranes . Once protein misfolding is better understood , therapies can be developed that augment cells ' natural ability to regulate protein folding . Such therapies include the use of engineered molecules to alter the production of a certain protein , help destroy a misfolded protein , or assist in the folding process . The combination of computational molecular modeling and experimental analysis has the possibility of fundamentally shaping the future of molecular medicine and the rational design of therapeutics , such as expediting and lowering the costs of drug discovery . The goal of the first five years of Folding @ home was to make advances in understanding folding , while the current goal is to understand misfolding and related disease , especially Alzheimer 's disease . 
 The simulations run on Folding @ home are used in conjunction with laboratory experiments , but researchers can use them to study how folding in vitro differs from folding in native cellular environments . This is advantageous in studying aspects of folding , misfolding , and their relationships to disease that are difficult to observe experimentally . For example , in 2011 Folding @ home simulated protein folding inside a ribosomal exit tunnel , to help scientists better understand how natural confinement and crowding might influence the folding process . Furthermore , scientists typically employ chemical <unk> to unfold proteins from their stable native state . It is not generally known how the <unk> affects the protein 's refolding , and it is difficult to experimentally determine if these denatured states contain residual structures which may influence folding behavior . In 2010 , Folding @ home used GPUs to simulate the unfolded states of Protein L , and predicted its collapse rate in strong agreement with experimental results . 
 The Pande Lab is part of Stanford University , a non @-@ profit entity , and does not sell the results generated by Folding @ home . The large data sets from the project are freely available for other researchers to use upon request and some can be accessed from the Folding @ home website . The Pande lab has collaborated with other molecular dynamics systems such as the Blue Gene supercomputer , and they share Folding @ home 's key software with other researchers , so that the algorithms which benefited Folding @ home may aid other scientific areas . In 2011 , they released the open @-@ source Copernicus software , which is based on Folding @ home 's MSM and other parallelization techniques and aims to improve the efficiency and scaling of molecular simulations on large computer clusters or supercomputers . Summaries of all scientific findings from Folding @ home are posted on the Folding @ home website after publication . 
 = = = Alzheimer 's disease = = = 
 Alzheimer 's disease is an incurable neurodegenerative disease which most often affects the elderly and accounts for more than half of all cases of dementia . Its exact cause remains unknown , but the disease is identified as a protein misfolding disease . Alzheimer 's is associated with toxic aggregations of the amyloid beta ( Aβ ) peptide , caused by Aβ misfolding and clumping together with other Aβ peptides . These Aβ aggregates then grow into significantly larger senile plaques , a pathological marker of Alzheimer 's disease . Due to the heterogeneous nature of these aggregates , experimental techniques such as X @-@ ray crystallography and NMR have had difficulty characterizing their structures . Moreover , atomic simulations of Aβ aggregation are extremely computationally demanding due to their size and complexity . 
 Preventing Aβ aggregation is a promising approach to the development of therapeutic drugs for Alzheimer 's disease , according to Drs. Naeem and <unk> in a literature review article . In 2008 , Folding @ home simulated the dynamics of Aβ aggregation in atomic detail over timescales of the order of tens of seconds . Prior studies were only able to simulate about 10 microseconds — Folding @ home was able to simulate Aβ folding for six orders of magnitude longer than formerly possible . Researchers used the results of this study to identify a beta hairpin that was a major source of molecular interactions within the structure . The study helped prepare the Pande lab for future aggregation studies and for further research to find a small peptide which may stabilize the aggregation process . 
 In December 2008 , Folding @ home found several small drug candidates which appear to inhibit the toxicity of Aβ aggregates . In 2010 , in close cooperation with the Center for Protein Folding Machinery , these drug leads began to be tested on biological tissue . In 2011 , Folding @ home completed simulations of several mutations of Aβ that appear to stabilize the aggregate formation , which could aid in the development of therapeutic drug approaches to the disease and greatly assist with experimental NMR spectroscopy studies of Aβ oligomers . Later that year , Folding @ home began simulations of various Aβ fragments to determine how various natural enzymes affect the structure and folding of Aβ . 
 = = = Huntington 's disease = = = 
 Huntington 's disease is a neurodegenerative genetic disorder that is associated with protein misfolding and aggregation . Excessive repeats of the glutamine amino acid at the N @-@ terminus of the Huntingtin protein cause aggregation , and although the behavior of the repeats is not completely understood , it does lead to the cognitive decline associated with the disease . As with other aggregates , there is difficulty in experimentally determining its structure . Scientists are using Folding @ home to study the structure of the Huntingtin protein aggregate and to predict how it forms , assisting with rational drug design approaches to stop the aggregate formation . The <unk> fragment of the Huntingtin protein accelerates this aggregation , and while there have been several mechanisms proposed , its exact role in this process remains largely unknown . Folding @ home has simulated this and other fragments to clarify their roles in the disease . Since 2008 , its drug design approaches for Alzheimer 's disease have been applied to Huntington 's . 
 = = = Cancer = = = 
 More than half of all known cancers involve mutations of p53 , a tumor suppressor protein present in every cell which regulates the cell cycle and signals for cell death in the event of damage to DNA . Specific mutations in p53 can disrupt these functions , allowing an abnormal cell to continue growing unchecked , resulting in the development of tumors . Analysis of these mutations helps explain the root causes of p53 @-@ related cancers . In 2004 , Folding @ home was used to perform the first molecular dynamics study of the refolding of p53 's protein dimer in an all @-@ atom simulation of water . The simulation 's results agreed with experimental observations and gave insights into the refolding of the dimer that were formerly unobtainable . This was the first peer reviewed publication on cancer from a distributed computing project . The following year , Folding @ home powered a new method to identify the amino acids crucial for the stability of a given protein , which was then used to study mutations of p53 . The method was reasonably successful in identifying cancer @-@ promoting mutations and determined the effects of specific mutations which could not otherwise be measured experimentally . 
 Folding @ home is also used to study protein chaperones , heat shock proteins which play essential roles in cell survival by assisting with the folding of other proteins in the crowded and chemically stressful environment within a cell . Rapidly growing cancer cells rely on specific chaperones , and some chaperones play key roles in chemotherapy resistance . <unk> to these specific chaperones are seen as potential modes of action for efficient chemotherapy drugs or for reducing the spread of cancer . Using Folding @ home and working closely with the Center for Protein Folding Machinery , the Pande lab hopes to find a drug which inhibits those chaperones involved in cancerous cells . Researchers are also using Folding @ home to study other molecules related to cancer , such as the enzyme <unk> kinase and certain forms of the engrailed <unk> — a large protein which may be involved in many diseases , including cancer . In 2011 , Folding @ home began simulations of the dynamics of the small <unk> protein <unk> , which can identify carcinomas in imaging scans by binding to surface receptors of cancer cells . 
 Interleukin 2 ( IL @-@ 2 ) is a protein that helps T cells of the immune system attack pathogens and tumors . Unfortunately , its use as a cancer treatment is restricted due to serious side effects such as pulmonary edema . IL @-@ 2 binds to these pulmonary cells differently than it does to T cells , so IL @-@ 2 research involves understanding the differences between these binding mechanisms . In 2012 , Folding @ home assisted with the discovery of a form of IL @-@ 2 which is three hundred times more effective in its immune system role but carries fewer side effects . In experiments , this altered form significantly outperformed natural IL @-@ 2 in impeding tumor growth . Pharmaceutical companies have expressed interest in the mutant molecule , and the National Institutes of Health are testing it against a large variety of tumor models in the hopes of accelerating its development as a therapeutic . 
 = = = <unk> imperfecta = = = 
 <unk> imperfecta , known as brittle bone disease , is an incurable genetic bone disorder which can be lethal . Those with the disease are unable to make functional connective bone tissue . This is most commonly due to a mutation in Type @-@ I collagen , which fulfills a variety of structural roles and is the most abundant protein in mammals . The mutation causes a deformation in collagen 's triple helix structure , which if not naturally destroyed , leads to abnormal and weakened bone tissue . In 2005 , Folding @ home tested a new quantum mechanical method that improved upon prior simulation methods , and which may be useful for future computational studies of collagen . Although researchers have used Folding @ home to study collagen folding and misfolding , the interest stands as a pilot project compared to Alzheimer 's and Huntington 's research . 
 = = = Viruses = = = 
 Folding @ home is assisting in research towards preventing certain viruses such as influenza and HIV from recognizing and entering biological cells . In 2011 , Folding @ home began simulations of the dynamics of the enzyme RNase H , a key component of HIV , in the hopes of designing drugs to deactivate it . Folding @ home has also been used to study membrane fusion , an essential event for viral infection and a wide range of biological functions . This fusion involves conformational changes of viral fusion proteins and protein docking , but the exact molecular mechanisms behind fusion remain largely unknown . Fusion events may consist of over a half million atoms interacting for hundreds of microseconds . This complexity limits typical computer simulations to about ten thousand atoms over tens of nanoseconds : a difference of several orders of magnitude . The development of models to predict the mechanisms of membrane fusion will assist in the scientific understanding of how to target the process with antiviral drugs . In 2006 , scientists applied Markov state models and the Folding @ home network to discover two pathways for fusion and gain other mechanistic insights . 
 Following detailed simulations from Folding @ home of small cells known as vesicles , in 2007 the Pande lab introduced a new computational technique for measuring the topology of its structural changes during fusion . In 2009 , researchers used Folding @ home to study mutations of influenza hemagglutinin , a protein that attaches a virus to its host cell and assists with viral entry . Mutations to hemagglutinin affect how well the protein binds to a host 's cell surface receptor molecules , which determines how infective the virus strain is to the host organism . Knowledge of the effects of hemagglutinin mutations assists in the development of antiviral drugs . As of 2012 , Folding @ home continues to simulate the folding and interactions of hemagglutinin , complementing experimental studies at the University of Virginia . 
 = = = Drug design = = = 
 Drugs function by binding to specific locations on target molecules and causing a certain desired change , such as disabling the target or causing a conformational change . Ideally , a drug should act very specifically and bind only to its target without interfering with other biological functions . However , it is difficult to precisely determine where and how tightly two molecules will bind . Due to limitations in computational power , current in silico approaches usually have to trade speed for accuracy ; e.g. use rapid protein docking methods instead of computationally expensive free energy calculations . Folding @ home 's computational performance allows researchers to use both techniques , and evaluate their efficiency and reliability . Computer @-@ assisted drug design has the potential to expedite and lower the costs of drug discovery . In 2010 , Folding @ home used MSMs and free energy calculations to predict the native state of the villin protein to within 1 @.@ 8 Å RMSD ( root mean square deviation ) from the crystalline structure experimentally determined through X @-@ ray crystallography . This accuracy has implications to future protein structure prediction approaches , including for intrinsically unstructured proteins . Scientists have used Folding @ home to research drug resistance by studying vancomycin , an antibiotic of " last resort " , and beta @-@ lactamase , a protein that can break down antibiotics like penicillin . 
 Chemical activity occurs along a protein 's active site . Traditional drug design approaches involve tightly binding to this site and blocking its activity , under the assumption that the target protein exists in a single rigid structure . However , this approach only works for approximately 15 % of all proteins . Proteins contain allosteric sites which , when bound to by small molecules , can alter a protein 's conformation and ultimately affect the protein 's activity . These sites are attractive drug targets , but locating them is very computationally expensive . In 2012 , Folding @ home and MSMs were used to identify allosteric sites in three medically relevant proteins : beta @-@ lactamase , interleukin @-@ 2 , and RNase H. 
 Approximately half of all known antibiotics interfere with the workings of a bacteria 's ribosome , a large and complex biochemical machine that performs protein biosynthesis by translating messenger RNA into proteins . <unk> antibiotics clog the ribosome 's exit tunnel , preventing synthesis of essential bacterial proteins . In 2007 , the Pande lab received a grant to study and design new antibiotics . In 2008 , they used Folding @ home to study the interior of this tunnel and how specific molecules may affect it . The full structure of the ribosome has only been recently determined , and Folding @ home has also simulated ribosomal proteins , as many of their functions remain largely unknown . 
 = = Participation = = 
 In addition to reporting active processors , Folding @ home determines its computing performance as measured in floating point operations per second ( FLOPS ) based on the actual execution time of its calculations . Originally this was reported as native FLOPS : the raw performance from each given type of processing hardware . In March 2009 Folding @ home began reporting the performance in native and x86 FLOPS , the latter being an estimation of how many FLOPS the calculation would take on a standard x86 CPU architecture , which is commonly used as a performance reference . Specialized hardware such as GPUs can efficiently perform certain complex functions in a single floating point operation which would otherwise require multiple operations on the x86 architecture . The x86 measurement attempts to even out these hardware differences . Despite conservative conversions , the GPU clients ' x86 FLOPS are consistently greater than their native FLOPS and comprise a large majority of Folding @ home 's measured computing performance . 
 In 2007 , Guinness World Records recognized Folding @ home as the most powerful distributed computing network . As of September 30 , 2014 , the project has 107 @,@ 708 active CPU cores and 63 @,@ 977 active GPUs for a total of 40 @.@ 190 x86 petaFLOPS ( 19 @.@ 282 native petaFLOPS ) . At the same time , the combined efforts of all distributed computing projects under BOINC totals 7 @.@ 924 petaFLOPS . In November 2012 Folding @ home updated its accounting of FLOPS , especially for GPUs , and now reports the number of active processor cores as well as physical processors . Using the Markov state model approach , Folding @ home achieves strong scaling across its user base and gains a linear speedup for every additional processor . This network allows Folding @ home to do work that was formerly computationally impractical . 
 In March 2002 Google co @-@ founder Sergey Brin launched Google Compute as an add @-@ on for the Google <unk> . Although limited in functionality and scope , it increased participation in Folding @ home from 10 @,@ 000 , up to about 30 @,@ 000 active CPUs . The program ended in October 2005 in favor of the official Folding @ home clients , and is no longer available for the <unk> . Folding @ home also gained participants from Genome @ home , another distributed computing project from the Pande lab and a sister project to Folding @ home . The goal of Genome @ home was protein design and associated applications . Following its official conclusion in March 2004 , users were asked to donate computing power to Folding @ home instead . 
 = = = Performance = = = 
 On September 16 , 2007 , due in large part to the participation of PS3s , the Folding @ home project officially attained a sustained performance level higher than one native petaFLOPS , becoming the first computing system of any kind to do so . <unk> 's fastest supercomputer at the time was <unk> / L , at 0 @.@ 280 petaFLOPS . The following year , on May 7 , 2008 , the project attained a sustained performance level higher than two native petaFLOPS , followed by the three and four native petaFLOPS milestones on August 20 and September 28 , 2008 respectively . On February 18 , 2009 , Folding @ home achieved five native petaFLOPS , and was the first computing project to meet these five levels . In comparison , November 2008 's fastest supercomputer was IBM 's Roadrunner at 1 @.@ 105 petaFLOPS . On November 10 , 2011 , Folding @ home 's performance exceeded six native petaFLOPS with the equivalent of nearly eight x86 petaFLOPS . In mid @-@ May 2013 , Folding @ home attained over seven native petaFLOPS , with the equivalent of 14 @.@ 87 x86 petaFLOPS . It then reached eight native petaFLOPS on June 21 , followed by nine on September 9 of that year , with 17 @.@ 9 x86 petaFLOPS . Folding @ home reached 100 x86 petaFLOPS in May 2016 . 
 = = Points = = 
 Similarly to other distributed computing projects , Folding @ home quantitatively assesses user computing contributions to the project through a credit system . All units from a given protein project have uniform base credit , which is determined by benchmarking one or more work units from that project on an official reference machine before the project is released . Each user receives these base points for completing every work unit , though through the use of a <unk> they can receive additional bonus points for reliably and rapidly completing units which are more computationally demanding or have a greater scientific priority . Users may also receive credit for their work by clients on multiple machines . This point system attempts to align awarded credit with the value of the scientific results . 
 Users can register their contributions under a team , which combine the points of all their members . A user can start their own team , or they can join an existing team . In some cases , a team may have their own community @-@ driven sources of help or recruitment such as an Internet forum . The points can foster friendly competition between individuals and teams to compute the most for the project , which can benefit the folding community and accelerate scientific research . Individual and team statistics are posted on the Folding @ home website . 
 = = Software = = 
 Folding @ home software at the user 's end involves three primary components : work units , cores , and a client . 
 = = = Work units = = = 
 A work unit is the protein data that the client is asked to process . Work units are a fraction of the simulation between the states in a Markov state model . After the work unit has been downloaded and completely processed by a volunteer 's computer , it is returned to Folding @ home servers , which then award the volunteer the credit points . This cycle repeats automatically . All work units have associated deadlines , and if this deadline is exceeded , the user may not get credit and the unit will be automatically reissued to another participant . As protein folding is serial in nature and many work units are generated from their predecessors , this allows the overall simulation process to proceed normally if a work unit is not returned after a reasonable period of time . Due to these deadlines , the minimum system requirement for Folding @ home is a Pentium 3 450 MHz CPU with Streaming SIMD Extensions ( SSE ) . However , work units for high @-@ performance clients have a much shorter deadline than those for the uniprocessor client , as a major part of the scientific benefit is dependent on rapidly completing simulations . 
 Before public release , work units go through several quality assurance steps to keep problematic ones from becoming fully available . These testing stages include internal , beta , and advanced , before a final full release across Folding @ home . Folding @ home 's work units are normally processed only once , except in the rare event that errors occur during processing . If this occurs for three different users , the unit is automatically pulled from distribution . The Folding @ home support forum can be used to differentiate between issues arising from problematic hardware and bad work units . 
 = = = Cores = = = 
 Specialized molecular dynamics programs , referred to as " <unk> " and often abbreviated " cores " , perform the calculations on the work unit as a background process . A large majority of Folding @ home 's cores are based on GROMACS , one of the fastest and most popular molecular dynamics software packages , which largely consists of manually optimized assembly language code and hardware optimizations . Although GROMACS is open @-@ source software and there is a cooperative effort between the Pande lab and GROMACS developers , Folding @ home uses a closed @-@ source license to help ensure data validity . Less active cores include <unk> and <unk> . Folding @ home has used AMBER , <unk> , Desmond , and <unk> , but these have since been retired and are no longer in active service . Some of these cores perform explicit solvation calculations in which the surrounding solvent ( usually water ) is modeled atom @-@ by @-@ atom ; while others perform implicit solvation methods , where the solvent is treated as a mathematical continuum . The core is separate from the client to enable the scientific methods to be updated automatically without requiring a client update . The cores periodically create calculation checkpoints so that if they are interrupted they can resume work from that point upon startup . 
 = = = Client = = = 
 A Folding @ home participant installs a client program on their personal computer . The user interacts with the client , which manages the other software components in the background . Through the client , the user may pause the folding process , open an event log , check the work progress , or view personal statistics . The computer clients run continuously in the background at an extremely low priority , using idle processing power so that normal computer usage is unaffected . The maximum CPU usage can be adjusted through client settings . The client connects to a Folding @ home server and retrieves a work unit and may also download the appropriate core for the client 's settings , operating system , and the underlying hardware architecture . After processing , the work unit is returned to the Folding @ home servers . Computer clients are tailored to uniprocessor and multi @-@ core processors systems , as well as graphics processing units . The diversity and power of each hardware architecture provides Folding @ home with the ability to efficiently complete many types of simulations in a timely manner ( in a few weeks or months rather than years ) , which is of significant scientific value . Together , these clients allow researchers to study biomedical questions formerly considered impractical to tackle computationally . 
 Professional software developers are responsible for most of Folding @ home 's code , both for the client and server @-@ side . The development team includes programmers from Nvidia , ATI , Sony , and Cauldron Development . Clients can be downloaded only from the official Folding @ home website or its commercial partners , and will only interact with Folding @ home computer files . They will upload and download data with Stanford 's Folding @ home data servers ( over port 8080 , with 80 as an alternative ) , and the communication is verified using 2048 @-@ bit digital signatures . While the client 's GUI is open @-@ source , the client is proprietary software citing security and scientific integrity as the reasons . 
 Folding @ home uses the <unk> software libraries for networking . Folding @ home was launched on October 1 , 2000 , and was the first distributed computing project aimed at bio @-@ molecular systems . Its first client was a screensaver , which would run while the computer was not otherwise in use . In 2004 , the Pande lab collaborated with David Anderson to test a supplemental client on the open @-@ source BOINC framework . This client was released to closed beta in April 2005 ; however , the approach became unworkable and was shelved in June 2006 . 
 = = = = Graphics processing units = = = = 
 The specialized hardware of GPUs is designed to accelerate rendering of 3 @-@ D graphics applications such as video games and can significantly outperform CPUs for certain types of calculations . GPUs are one of the most powerful and rapidly growing computational platforms and many scientists and researchers are pursuing general purpose GPU ( GPGPU ) computing . However , GPU hardware is difficult to use for non @-@ graphics tasks and usually requires significant algorithm restructuring and an advanced understanding of the underlying architecture . Such customization is challenging , especially to researchers with limited software development resources . Folding @ home uses the open source OpenMM library , which uses a bridge design pattern with two application programming interface ( API ) levels to interface molecular simulation software to an underlying hardware architecture . With the addition of hardware optimizations , OpenMM @-@ based GPU simulations do not require significant modification but achieve performance nearly equal to hand @-@ tuned GPU code , and greatly outperform CPU implementations . 
 Before 2010 the computational reliability of GPGPU consumer @-@ grade hardware was largely unknown , and circumstantial evidence related to the lack of built @-@ in error detection and correction in GPU memory raised reliability concerns . In the first large @-@ scale test of GPU scientific accuracy , a 2010 study of over 20 @,@ 000 hosts on the Folding @ home network detected soft errors in the memory subsystems of two @-@ thirds of the tested GPUs . These errors strongly correlated to board architecture , though the study concluded that reliable GPU computing was very feasible as long as attention is paid to the hardware characteristics , such as software @-@ side error detection . 
 The first generation of Folding @ home 's GPU client ( GPU1 ) was released to the public on October 2 , 2006 , delivering a 20 @-@ <unk> speedup for certain calculations over its CPU @-@ based GROMACS counterparts . It was the first time GPUs had been used for either distributed computing or major molecular dynamics calculations . GPU1 gave researchers significant knowledge and experience with the development of GPGPU software , but in response to scientific inaccuracies with DirectX , on April 10 , 2008 it was succeeded by GPU2 , the second generation of the client . Following the introduction of GPU2 , GPU1 was officially retired on June 6 . Compared to GPU1 , GPU2 was more scientifically reliable and productive , ran on ATI and CUDA @-@ enabled Nvidia GPUs , and supported more advanced algorithms , larger proteins , and real @-@ time visualization of the protein simulation . Following this , the third generation of Folding @ home 's GPU client ( GPU3 ) was released on May 25 , 2010 . While backwards compatible with GPU2 , GPU3 was more stable , efficient and had greater flexibility in its scientific capabilities , and used OpenMM on top of an OpenCL framework . Although these GPU3 clients did not natively support the Linux and OS @-@ X operating systems , Linux users with Nvidia graphics cards were able to run them through the Wine software application . GPUs remain Folding @ home 's most powerful platform in terms of FLOPS ; as of November 2012 GPU clients account for 87 % of the entire project 's x86 FLOPS throughput . 
 Native support for Nvidia and AMD graphics cards under Linux was introduced with <unk> 17 , which uses OpenCL rather than CUDA . 
 = = = = PlayStation 3 = = = = 
 From March 2007 until November 2012 , Folding @ home took advantage of the computing power of PlayStation 3s . At the time of its inception , its main streaming Cell processor delivered a 20x speed increase over PCs for certain calculations , processing power which could not be found on other systems such as the Xbox 360 . The PS3 's high speed and efficiency introduced other opportunities for worthwhile optimizations according to Amdahl 's law , and significantly changed the tradeoff between computational efficiency and overall accuracy , allowing for the use of more complex molecular models at little additional computational cost . This allowed Folding @ home to run biomedical calculations that would have been otherwise computationally infeasible . 
 The PS3 client was developed in a collaborative effort between Sony and the Pande lab and was first released as a standalone client on March 23 , 2007 . Its release made Folding @ home the first distributed computing project to use PS3s . On September 18 of the following year , the PS3 client became a channel of Life with PlayStation on its launch . In terms of the types of calculations it can perform , at the time of its introduction the client took the middle ground between a CPU 's flexibility and a GPU 's speed . However , unlike CPUs and GPUs , users were unable to perform other activities on their PS3 while running Folding @ home . The PS3 's uniform console environment made support easier and made Folding @ home more user friendly . The PS3 also has the ability to stream data quickly to its GPU , which was used for real @-@ time atomic @-@ level visualizations of the current protein dynamics . 
 On November 6 , 2012 , Sony concluded support for the Folding @ home PS3 client and other services available under Life with PlayStation . Over its lifetime of five years and 7 months , more than 15 million users contributed over 100 million hours of computation to Folding @ home , greatly assisting the project with disease research . Following discussions with the Pande lab , Sony decided to terminate the application . Pande considers the PlayStation 3 client a " game changer " for the project . 
 = = = = Multi @-@ core processing client = = = = 
 Folding @ home can use the parallel computing abilities of modern multi @-@ core processors . The ability to use several CPU cores simultaneously allows completing the full simulation far faster . Working together , these CPU cores complete single work units proportionately faster than the standard uniprocessor client . This approach is scientifically valuable because it enables much longer simulation trajectories to be performed in the same amount of time , and reduces the traditional difficulties of scaling a large simulation to many separate processors . A 2007 publication in the Journal of Molecular Biology relied on multi @-@ core processing to simulate the folding of part of the villin protein approximately 10 times longer than was possible with a single @-@ processor client , in agreement with experimental folding rates . 
 In November 2006 , first @-@ generation symmetric multiprocessing ( SMP ) clients were publicly released for open beta testing , referred to as <unk> . These clients used Message Passing Interface ( MPI ) communication protocols for parallel processing , as at that time the GROMACS cores were not designed to be used with multiple threads . This was the first time a distributed computing project had used MPI . Although the clients performed well in Unix @-@ based operating systems such as Linux and OS X , they were troublesome under Windows . On January 24 , 2010 , SMP2 , the second generation of the SMP clients and the successor to <unk> , was released as an open beta and replaced the complex MPI with a more reliable thread @-@ based implementation . 
 SMP2 supports a trial of a special category of " bigadv " work units , designed for simulating proteins that are unusually large and computationally intensive and have a great scientific priority . These units originally required a minimum of eight CPU cores , which was later increased on February 7 , 2012 to sixteen CPU cores . In addition to these additional hardware requirements over standard SMP2 work units , they require more system resources such as random @-@ access memory ( RAM ) and Internet bandwidth . In return , users who run these are rewarded with a 20 % increase over SMP2 's bonus point system . The bigadv category allows Folding @ home to run particularly demanding simulations on long timescales that had formerly required the use of <unk> clusters and could not be performed anywhere else on Folding @ home . Many users with hardware capable of running bigadv units have later had their hardware setup deemed ineligible for bigadv work units when CPU core minimums were increased , leaving them only able to run the normal SMP work units . This frustrated many users who invested significant amounts of money into the program only to have their hardware be obsolete for bigadv purposes shortly after . As a result , Vijay Pande announced in January 2014 that the bigadv program would end on January 31 , 2015 . 
 = = = = V7 = = = = 
 The V7 client is the seventh and latest generation of the Folding @ home client software , and is a complete rewrite and unification of the prior clients for Microsoft Windows , OS X and Linux operating systems . It was released on March 22 , 2012 . Like its predecessors , V7 can run Folding @ home in the background at a very low priority , allowing other applications to use CPU resources as they need . It is designed to make the installation , start @-@ up , and operation more user @-@ friendly for novices , as well as offer greater scientific flexibility to researchers than prior clients . V7 uses <unk> for managing its bug tickets so that users can see its development process and provide feedback . 
 V7 consists of four integrated elements . The user typically interacts with V7 's open @-@ source GUI , known as <unk> . This has Novice , Advanced , and Expert user interface modes , and has the ability to monitor , configure , and control many remote folding clients from a single computer . <unk> directs <unk> — a back @-@ end application that in turn manages each <unk> ( or " slot " ) . Each slot acts as replacement for the formerly distinct Folding @ home <unk> uniprocessor , SMP , or GPU computer clients , as it can download , process , and upload work units independently . The <unk> function , modeled after the PS3 's viewer , displays a real @-@ time 3 @-@ D rendering , if available , of the protein currently being processed . 
 = = = = Google Chrome = = = = 
 In 2014 , a client for the Google Chrome and Chromium web browsers was released , allowing users to run Folding @ home in their web browser . The client uses Google 's Native Client ( NaCl ) feature on Chromium @-@ based web browsers to run the Folding @ Home code at near @-@ native speed in a sandbox on the user 's machine . 
 = = = = Android = = = = 
 In July 2015 , a client for Android mobile phones was introduced , which is available on Google Play . 
 = = Comparison to other molecular simulators = = 
 Rosetta @ home is a distributed computing project aimed at protein structure prediction and is one of the most accurate tertiary structure predictors . The conformational states from Rosetta 's software can be used to initialize a Markov state model as starting points for Folding @ home simulations . Conversely , structure prediction algorithms can be improved from thermodynamic and kinetic models and the sampling aspects of protein folding simulations . As Rosetta only tries to predict the final folded state , and not how proteins fold , Rosetta @ home and Folding @ home are complementary and address very different molecular questions . 
 Anton is a special @-@ purpose supercomputer constructed for molecular dynamics simulations . In October 2011 Anton and Folding @ home were the two most powerful molecular dynamics systems . Anton is unique in its ability to produce single ultra @-@ long computationally expensive molecular trajectories , such as one in 2010 which reached the millisecond range . These long trajectories may be particularly helpful towards certain types of biochemical problems . However , Anton does not use Markov state models for analysis . In 2011 , the Pande lab constructed a MSM from two 100 @-@ µs Anton simulations and found alternative folding pathways that were not visible through Anton 's traditional analysis . They concluded that there was little difference between MSMs constructed from a limited number of long trajectories or one assembled from many shorter trajectories . In June 2011 Folding @ home began additional sampling of an Anton simulation in an effort to better determine how its techniques compare to Anton 's methods . However , unlike Folding @ home 's shorter trajectories , which are more amenable to distributed computing and other parallelization techniques , longer trajectories do not require adaptive sampling to sufficiently sample the protein 's phase space . Due to this , it is possible that a combination of Anton 's and Folding @ home 's simulation methods would provide a more thorough sampling of this space . 
 = Lure of the Temptress = 
 Lure of the Temptress is Revolution Software 's debut point @-@ and @-@ click adventure game published by Virgin Interactive Entertainment . It was released in June 1992 for Atari ST , DOS and Amiga home computers . The player assumes the role of a young peasant named Diermot who has to overthrow an evil sorceress . Lure of the Temptress is the first game built with the Virtual Theatre engine , which Revolution used in the subsequent games Beneath a Steel Sky and the first two games in the Broken Sword series . It was received favourably by critics , a commercial success and re @-@ released as freeware on April 1 , 2003 . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Lure of the Temptress is a 2D adventure game played from a third @-@ person perspective . Via a point @-@ and @-@ click interface and a system of drop @-@ down lists , the player guides protagonist Diermot through the game 's world and interacts with the environment by selecting from multiple commands . 
 The player controls Diermot 's movements and actions with a mouse or a gamepad . Diermot can pick up various objects ; these can then be used with either other collectible objects , parts of the scenery , or with other people in order to solve puzzles and progress in the game . He can also engage in dialogue with other characters through conversation trees to gain hints of what needs to be done to solve the puzzles or progress the plot . A few simple action @-@ oriented battle scenes are also included . 
 = = Plot = = 
 A young peasant named Diermot is employed as a beater for the king 's hunting party . One night the king receives a note from a messenger , requesting his services to help quell a rebellion in the remote village of Turnvale . As the king 's party departs , Diermot ’ s pony follows them , unwittingly carrying him to the battle . When the party arrives at Turnvale they are not confronted by a peasant revolt . Instead they find a band of man @-@ eating Skorl , led by an enchantress named Selena , the titular temptress . The king 's men are defeated and the king is killed . In the process , Diermot is thrown from his saddle and is knocked unconscious . The Skorl take Diermot prisoner and imprison him in the local dungeon . 
 With help from a peasant named <unk> , Diermot manages to escape from the dungeon and visits <unk> , the blacksmith . <unk> reveals that a girl named Goewin who runs a herb shop has recently disappeared . Diermot discovers that she had been arrested by the Skorl . With help from <unk> , Diermot breaks into the house of <unk> , the magician , where he creates a potion which disguises him as Selena . He enters the mansion where Goewin is being held and orders the Skorl to free her . Not long after , a man named <unk> gives Diermot a book wrapped in cloth to take to a man named <unk> . In the process of delivering the book , Diermot sees a notice stating that whoever returns the book to its rightful owner will be rewarded . Diermot delivers the book to a man named Toby , who rewards him with a statuette . Toby reveals that the dragon can help Diermot defeat Selena , but that he will need an infusion made of three herbs to wake the dragon up , which Goewin then makes for Diermot . 
 Diermot enters the dragon 's cave and wakes him up . The dragon agrees to help Diermot , revealing that Turnvale was the domain of a demon long before humans came to the area . This demon should have died along with his breed long ago , but did not perish because it was able to feed on man 's greed and ambition in order to survive . The demon was driven out by the great Gethryn , but the young sorceress Selena 's meddling with evil has reawakened the demon , and it controls her mortal form . The dragon possesses the Eye of Gethryn , an enchanted stone left by Gethryn at the time of his death . The stone contains the power to defeat the demon , and the dragon then gives the stone to Diermot . A Skorl named Wayne , who turns against Selena , sneaks Diermot into Selena 's castle in a barrel . Diermot defeats Selena with the Eye of Gethryn , freeing Turnvale from her tyranny . 
 = = Development and release = = 
 Charles Cecil and Tony Warriner had worked together at Artic Computing , an English video game development company . In 1990 , they decided that they would set up their own video game development company , together with David Sykes and Noirin Carmody . The four started up Revolution Software , initially based in Hull , with a 10 thousand pounds loan from Cecil 's mother . Cecil wanted the game to differ from popular Sierra games at the time , saying : " While I enjoyed Sierra games , I felt that there had to be more than yet again saving King Graham of Daventry from a – let ’ s be frank – fairly unlikely series of events . It was all a little bit twee . So we came up with the idea of writing an adventure game that did not take itself too seriously , but did have a serious story – something in @-@ between Lucasarts and Sierra . " The game was published by Virgin Interactive Entertainment . 
 Lure of the Temptress was the first game built with the Virtual Theatre engine , which allowed in @-@ game characters to wander around the gameworld independently of each other , performing " every day life " actions , which had not previously been featured in a game . It was later used for Beneath a Steel Sky and the first two games in the Broken Sword series . The title cost between 20 and 30 thousand pounds . 
 On April 1 , 2003 , the game was released as freeware . The data files are available from the Revolution Software website for download and the game 's engine has been added to ScummVM . This version of Lure of the Temptress was released on GOG.com on December 18 , 2008 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Upon its release , Lure of the Temptress was received favorably by critics , who praised the game 's innovative controls and graphics , and compared it to Sierra and LucasFilm games . In 1993 , Dragon gave the game 4 out of 5 stars . Computer Gaming World liked the game 's sophisticated NPC interactions and how it prevented unwinnable situations , but criticized its short playing time . The magazine concluded that " Lure of the Temptress is a fine first release from this developer and bodes well for the future " . Amiga Power ranked it at # 47 in 1993 , and at # 66 in 1994 , on their list of Amiga Power All @-@ Time Top 100 . In 2011 , Wirtualna Polska ranked it as the 30th best Amiga game , saying it was " indeed a revolution " in the genre . It was also a commercial success , reaching number one in the British Gallup charts at the beginning of July 1992 and remaining in the Top 20 for most of the rest of the year . 
 Amiga Format stated that this " fine adventure game well worth investigating " could compete with Sierra and LucasFilm games ; " in any event , Temptress surpasses almost anything Sierra have offered , by being larger , funnier , and a whole lot better drawn ... an innovative system knocks spots of the Sierra @-@ standards and shows LucasFilm a thing or two " and also praised its humour , saying that there 's " a good dose of tongue @-@ in @-@ cheek humour and fairy @-@ tale nonsense . " The One praised the game 's controls , saying that " the game 's impressive user @-@ friendliness is undoubtably one of its strong points , " adding that " Lure of the Temptress is every bit as professional and polished as anything the Americans and French have been able to offer us recently " but " Lure is , if anything , a little too serious and sombre " and that " LucasFilm 's games boast the more interesting characters and interaction sequences . " Amiga Power praised its graphics , saying they are " very pretty drawn , with the dark , moody look you 'd expect from a town being oppressed by an evil Temptress , " calling it " one of the best graphic adventures ever " that 's " up there with Monkey Island 1 and Beneath a Steel Sky , " and adding that the " only drawback is that it 's shorter than your average adventure . " Mega Zone praised the game , stating that it is a " Sierra / <unk> with really , really good playability . We 're talking 32 colours graphics which look really nice , with playability which is really smooth , and simply pure gaming enjoyment here , " adding that " the manual is very well written , the sound the graphics are all there , disc access is very good , and looking at the way the whole game is put together right down to the intro it 's one of the most amazing Amiga Adventures every written ! An Adventure Zone classic ! " Stuart Campbell of Amiga Power opined that Core Design 's rival 1992 fantasy <unk> game Curse of Enchantia ( also published by Virgin ) was " a funny version of Lure of the Temptress with a different plot . " 
 Adventure Classic Gaming was less positive in its retrospective review , stating " what makes Lure of the Temptress fun — but also annoying — is the game 's unique gameplay engine " and that its graphics " unfortunately do not hold up well over the passage of time , " but that many of the backgrounds are " quite beautiful " and summarizing by stating , " While far from being a dull game , Lure of the Temptress is also full of clichés and stagnant periods of gameplay which ultimately undermine the game 's overall enjoyment . " 
 = The Economist ( Lost ) = 
 " The Economist " is the third episode of the fourth season and 75th episode overall of the ABC 's serial drama television series Lost . It was aired on February 14 , 2008 , on ABC in the United States and on CTV in Canada . The episode was written by co @-@ executive producers Edward Kitsis and Adam Horowitz and directed by executive producer Jack Bender . In the episode 's narrative , Sayid Jarrah ( Naveen Andrews ) and Kate Austen ( Evangeline Lilly ) negotiate for John Locke 's ( Terry O 'Quinn ) hostage Charlotte Lewis ( Rebecca Mader ) , while physicist and Kahana crew member Daniel Faraday ( Jeremy Davies ) discovers that time on the island runs at an offset from the rest of the world . Another storyline follows Sayid working as an assassin after being rescued from the island . 
 " The Economist " was watched by 14 million American viewers and received positive reactions from critics . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Jack Shephard ( Matthew Fox ) and Miles Straume ( Ken Leung ) , calling himself Marvin Candle , argue about what to do about leader of the Others , Ben Linus ( Michael Emerson ) , and Miles 's colleague Charlotte , both sought after by Miles and his colleagues and taken prisoner by Locke . Sayid pays his respects to Naomi Dorrit , and takes her bracelet . He then offers to retrieve Charlotte without bloodshed , in return gaining a helicopter flight to the freighter anchored offshore . He takes along Miles and Kate . Sayid asks Jack not to come with them as he might be unpredictable around Locke . 
 While Sayid is gone , Daniel asks Regina ( Zoë Bell ) , a colleague on the freighter to shoot a projectile onto the island . Regina does so , but the projectile does not arrive for thirty minutes . When it lands , Daniel extracts a clock from the payload and finds that the two times , that running on the island and that running outside , are not synchronized . 
 The survivors led by Locke arrive at the location of Jacob 's cabin , but find the area deserted . Locke changes his course to the barracks , and uses Hugo " Hurley " Reyes ( Jorge Garcia ) to ambush Sayid , Kate and Miles . Kate is watched by James " Sawyer " Ford ( Josh Holloway ) , and they discuss their reasons for wanting or not wanting to go home . Kate , realizing that she would be arrested for her crimes upon rescue , defects to Locke 's group . Sayid negotiates with Locke to exchange Charlotte with Miles , in order to get access to the boat . Locke tells him that wouldn 't be necessary as Ben has a spy on that freighter , to which Sayid responds that he would rather sell his soul than trust Ben . 
 At the helicopter , Desmond Hume ( Henry Ian Cusick ) confronts pilot Frank Lapidus ( Jeff Fahey ) about the picture Naomi had of him and his ex @-@ fiancé Penelope Widmore ( Sonya Walger ) . Frank denies any knowledge of her , but Desmond nevertheless demands a place on a helicopter . At the same time , Sayid returns , with only Charlotte . While Frank accuses Sayid of being dishonest , he considered Miles a " pain in the ass " , and agrees to fly him offshore . 
 The episode 's flashforwards are centered on Sayid in Berlin , who had since become one of the Oceanic Six . He is hired as an assassin , and courts a German woman , Elsa ( Thekla <unk> ) , in order to get closer to her employer ( the eponymous " economist " ) . After several dates , Sayid turns on Elsa , who reveals herself to be a counter @-@ spy by unexpectedly shooting Sayid in the shoulder . Sayid is able to shoot and kill Elsa . As the episode ends , Sayid is treated for his wound by Ben , who gives him another assignment . Sayid is now wary since they now know that he 's after them , to which Ben replies , " Good " . 
 = = Production = = 
 The story of Sayid 's future was influenced by spy fiction — in particular , the writing eventually " gravitated " towards a story much like the Jason Bourne franchise . The story was justified by Sayid 's status as part of the " Oceanic Six " , as his celebrity status would provide the perfect cover for his clandestine activities . The episode was written in autumn 2007 . At the end of the first scene in Berlin , the flag shown on the building across the street from where Sayid stands is actually that of the former East German GDR . 
 An important scene in the episode regarded Faraday 's experiment and the resulting time differential . The scene set up a prominent theme of " time @-@ travel " for later episodes . In the episode 's respective podcast , Lost 's show runners Carlton Cuse and Damon Lindelof further discussed the time differential as part of an already existing theme regarding transport between the island and the rest of the world . In particular , the theme was alluded to the " Orchid video " , a Dharma Initiative video that premiered at the 2007 Comic @-@ Con. 
 However , some scenes in the episode gained unintentional significance . The Boston Red Sox won the World Series for the second time in three years after the episode was written , which prompted the question " Is it possible Lapidus is actually from 2008 ? " due to his annoyed reply . Likewise , the only reason that Elsa and Naomi had similar bracelets was that it would serve as an " emotional touchstone " for Sayid . After the episode , the producers received several emails about both issues . 
 Andrews enjoyed his role in " The Economist " . He appreciated that , unlike the third season , he was able to " push the story forward " , which he thought was " infinitely more interesting and rewarding . " The premise " threw [ him ] for a loop " , and he was pleased with how complex the episode was . 
 = = Reception = = 
 " The Economist " was seen by 13 @.@ 76 million American viewers , making Lost the fourth most watched program of the week . The episode received a Nielsen rating of 5 @.@ 8 / 15 in the key adults 18 – 49 demographic . In Great Britain , Lost brought in 1 @.@ 2 million viewers . 
 The first four episodes of the fourth season were watched beforehand by TV Guide , who called them " worth the wait " and " emotionally satisfying " . TV Guide also stated that they " provide <unk> plot twists that should whip fans into a theory @-@ spinning tizzy . " Sarah <unk> of <unk> thought the scene where Daniel discovers the time discrepancy the most mind @-@ blowing scene of the episode . Entertainment Weekly commented that " for the second straight year , Cupid was kicked in the nuts " , as the episode " Flashes Before Your Eyes " also aired on St. Valentine 's Day . Also discussed in the review was possible Biblical allegory to the Book of Daniel . However , Mark Madley of The National Post thought that this episode , along with the previous two , gave away too much plot detail , and compared the off @-@ island storyline to " that awful Stallone / Banderas movie Assassins " . Don Williams of BuddyTV thought that the scene where Sayid disposes of his cellphone after calling Ben " like an episode of Alias " , and finished his recap by saying " consider my mind blown again " . MaryAnn Johanson of Film.com called the episode " mind @-@ blowing " , and theorized that Sayid had been working for Ben before the crash , and that the crash of Oceanic 815 was deliberate . Chris Carabott of IGN stated that , in the episode " Sayid Jarrah is a badass who could give Jack Bauer , James Bond , and Jason Bourne all a run for their money " , and praised Lost 's nature for being able to have " a lighthearted episode featuring Hurley [ one week ] and the next can be an action spy thriller starring Sayid . " He praised the episode for being a perfect example of serialized television , and thought that Elsa 's double cross to be " very reminiscent of Vesper Lynd and her true employer in Casino Royale " . Overall , he rated the episode 8 @.@ 6 out of 10 . 
 = Homer and Apu = 
 " Homer and Apu " is the thirteenth episode of The Simpsons ' fifth season . It originally aired on the Fox network in the United States on February 10 , 1994 . In the episode , Homer participates in a hidden camera investigation of the expired meat selling at the Kwik @-@ E @-@ Mart . Apu is immediately fired and replaced by actor James Woods , who is doing research for a role in an upcoming film . Apu begins to miss his job at the Kwik @-@ E @-@ Mart , so in an attempt to get it back , Apu and Homer travel to India to talk with the head of the Kwik @-@ E @-@ Mart corporation . 
 The episode was written by Greg Daniels , and directed by Mark Kirkland . James Woods made a guest appearance as himself . The episode features cultural references to films such as The Hard Way , JFK , and Lawrence of Arabia . Since airing , the episode has received mostly positive reviews from television critics . It acquired a Nielsen rating of 13 @.@ 3 , and was the highest @-@ rated show on the Fox network the week it aired . 
 = = Plot = = 
 At the Kwik @-@ E @-@ Mart , Apu is selling items to customers at outrageous prices , like normal . Apu scribbles out the best before date and then lowers the price on expired ham from 1989 instead of throwing it out . Homer buys the meat , eats it , and contracts food poisoning . After recovering , Homer returns to the Kwik @-@ E @-@ Mart to complain , and Apu gives him two five @-@ pound buckets of expired shrimp to placate him . Homer eats the shrimp and gets the same symptoms . Whilst recovering at home , Homer sees the investigative news program Bite Back with Kent Brockman , hosted by Channel 6 journalist Kent Brockman . Lisa gives him the idea to get the show to investigate the Kwik @-@ E @-@ Mart . Kent gives Homer a giant novelty hat containing a spy camera to expose Apu for selling expired food . Though Homer almost immediately abandons the hat after mistaking the buzzing of the machinery as a bee , the camera catches Apu placing a hotdog in the bain @-@ marie that he had recently dropped on the ground . Apu is immediately fired by his company ( even though he actually follows the company " ethics " ) , and is replaced by actor James Woods , who is doing research for a role in an upcoming film . 
 After being fired , Apu appears at the Simpsons home , acting like he 's about to strangle Homer , but this turns out to be the bizarre traditional form of apology of Apu 's village , because he thinks that he is in debt to Homer for selling him expired food , and helping him would pay off his debt of karma . At first , Homer is reluctant to accept his help , as " karma can only be portioned out by the cosmos ! " , but as time goes by , the family begins to love Apu and his dutiful behavior ( especially after he helps Marge buy products in another market , and cooks an exotic Indian dinner for the family ) . However , Apu misses his job at the Kwik @-@ E @-@ Mart , so Homer decides to help him by accompanying him to the Kwik @-@ E @-@ Mart head office in India . Once they arrive , they meet with the head of the Kwik @-@ E @-@ Mart corporation , who says that they can ask him three questions . Unfortunately , Homer wastes the three questions ( " Are you really the head of the Kwik @-@ E @-@ Mart ? ! " , " Really ? ! " , and " You ? ! " ) , and the head of the Kwik @-@ E @-@ Mart does not help Apu with his problems . An enraged Apu chokes Homer ( which is mistaken for another apology ) before they return home disappointed . 
 When they get home to Springfield , Apu decides to return to the Kwik @-@ E @-@ Mart to " face his demons " . A robber bursts into the store and shoots at Woods , but Apu saves him by jumping in front of the bullet . At the hospital , Dr. Hibbert says that Apu survived because the bullet ricocheted off another bullet that was lodged in his chest from a previous robbery . Eternally grateful , Woods gives Apu his job back , and goes away to fight against extraterrestrial beings in his next ' movie ' . 
 = = Production = = 
 The episode was written by Greg Daniels , and directed by Mark Kirkland . It was the first full episode of the show that Daniels wrote . The Simpsons writers Al Jean and Mike Reiss , who were show runners during the previous two seasons , came up with the idea for the episode . They left the idea with David Mirkin , who took over the job as show runner during this season . Mirkin said he was " very excited and intrigued " with the idea of the episode . Soon thereafter , he assigned Daniels to write the script because he knew that Daniels would " step up " and " throw himself into it " . In an interview with the Chicago Tribune , Mirkin stated that when he took over the show , he wanted to " bring it back " to character and story , unlike the previous season which got " so fast @-@ moving and so full of cutaway gags " . Mirkin added : " I explored the characters a little more , took them a little further . I had one of the first episodes where Homer was really tempted by another woman , " The Last Temptation of Homer " , and Bart having a girlfriend even nastier than himself , " Bart 's Girlfriend " , plus more of a focus on side characters . We did the first episode to really feature Apu as a main character . Those were my goals . " Kirkland said he was grateful that he got to work with a " wonderful crew " on the episode , including Bob Anderson , who he thought was a " wonderful " director . Kirkland said that Anderson assisted him on the episode and did " fine animation throughout " . 
 When Mirkin took over as show runner , he listed actor James Woods as one of the people he would most like to guest star on the show . Michael Caine was originally supposed to be the actor in the episode who takes over Apu 's job at the Kwik @-@ E @-@ Mart , but he rejected the role . The story was therefore rewritten so that Woods received Apu 's job instead . Woods was one of animation director David Silverman 's favorite guest stars . Mirkin said he provided one of the " most fantastic " performances ever on the show , and commented that he " nailed " all of his lines and was " so funny , right at the top of his head " . Mirkin said that when most guest stars come in to record their lines for the show , they are a little nervous because they have never done voice @-@ over before . Mirkin noted , however , that Woods was a " fearless guy " and he was " so excited to do it because he was a huge fan of the show " . Silverman noted that in addition to his humorous ad @-@ libbing , Woods 's tendency to hesitate while speaking was " great for animation " , explaining that it made the character feel more realistic . " Homer and Apu " features the popular Simpsons song " Who Needs The Kwik @-@ E @-@ Mart ? " , sung by Apu and the Simpson family . The song was written by all of the show 's writers in the writer 's room , and it was composed by Alf Clausen . The song later appeared on the soundtrack album Songs in the Key of Springfield , which was released on March 18 , 1997 , and compiled many musical numbers from the show . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 The episode features cultural references to many American and British films . Woods becoming a convenience store clerk to prepare for a film is similar to Nick Lang ( Michael J. Fox ) becoming a police officer in the 1991 film The Hard Way , which Woods also starred in ( interestingly , this is a reversal of roles : Woods played the cop that Lang was saddled with in the film ) . When Kent asks Homer if he is willing to go undercover to " nail " Apu , Homer replies : " No way , man , get yourself another patsy ! " This is a reference to a line in the 1991 film JFK . The scene of Homer and Apu riding on mules to the Springfield Airport , with their luggage strapped to the mules ' backs , is similar to a scene from the 1962 film Lawrence of Arabia . In his Kwik @-@ E @-@ Mart job interview , the interviewer asks Woods why he would want to work at the Kwik @-@ E @-@ Mart , to which he replies : " To be honest , in my upcoming movie I 'm going to be playing this tightly @-@ wound convenience store clerk and , I kind of like to research my roles and really get into it . For instance , in True Believer I actually worked in a law firm for two months . And then , the film Chaplin I had a little cameo in that . I actually traveled back in time , back to the twenties , where ... Well , I 've said too much , " referencing the 1989 film True Believer and the 1992 film Chaplin . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings and critical reviews = = = 
 In its original American broadcast , " Homer and Apu " finished twenty @-@ sixth in the ratings for the week of February 7 – 13 , 1994 , with a Nielsen rating of 13 @.@ 3 . The episode was the highest @-@ rated show on the Fox network that week . The song " Who Needs The Kwik @-@ E @-@ Mart ? " was nominated for an Emmy Award in the " Outstanding Individual Achievement in Music and Lyrics " category , but lost to " The Song Remembers When " from the television special Trisha Yearwood : The Song Remembers When . 
 Since airing , the episode has received mostly positive reviews from television critics . The authors of the book I Can 't Believe It 's a Bigger and Better Updated Unofficial Simpsons Guide , Warren Martyn and Adrian Wood , wrote : " One of the very best , with the gags coming thick and fast . We particularly like the spy camera concealed in Homer 's massive stetson , Apu and Marge 's trip to the Monster Mart , and ' Who Needs the Kwik @-@ E @-@ Mart ? ' , possibly the cleverest song in the series . And the Christians harassing people at the Indian airport , and Homer 's wastage of three questions , and James Woods ' parting words to the Simpsons , and the footage of Apu doing a hummingbird impression ... " DVD Movie Guide 's Colin Jacobson said : " The first episode to focus on Apu , this one works well . Our glimpses of Apu ’ s sleaziness and culture are entertaining , and the ' Who Needs the Kwik @-@ E @-@ Mart ? ' tune is one of the better musical numbers [ of the show ] . " Jacobson went on to say : " Also count James Woods as one of the all @-@ time best guest stars , which is likely why he gets many more lines than the average cameo voice . " Total Film 's Nathan Ditum named Woods ' performance in the episode the 19th best guest appearance on The Simpsons . 
 Patrick Bromley of DVD Verdict gave the episode a grade of A + and commented that it features one of the best musical numbers in the show 's " history of great musical numbers " . Adam Suraf of Dunkirkma.net named it the best episode of the season , and added : " I don ’ t know what it is about this episode — the ' Who Needs the Kwik @-@ E @-@ Mart ? ' song number ; James Woods filling in for Apu at the store ; or Homer ’ s wise line ' I ’ ve learned that life is one crushing defeat after another until you just wish Flanders was dead ' — but the entire affair is inspired . [ ... ] It ’ s in the little details that make this episode the year ’ s best , and solidifies The Simpsons as the funniest sitcom of all time . " AskMen.com ranked " Homer and Apu " as number six on their list of the top ten The Simpsons episodes . Bill Gibron of DVD Talk gave the episode a score of 5 out of 5 . 
 = = = Analysis = = = 
 The episode has become study material for sociology courses at University of California Berkeley , where it is used to " examine issues of the production and reception of cultural objects " . In the book Leaving Springfield , Duncan Beard said the episode served as a parody of the peculiarities of the American convenience store . Beard particularly cited the Muzak and the <unk> bell as Homer and Apu entered the Kwik @-@ E @-@ Mart in India , and the sign that read , " The Master Knows All ( except combination to safe ) " . Beard said , " Here the show presents its own instance of the global culture of consumer capitalism , transplanted intact and indistinguishably unaltered from the suburbs of America to a mountain top in some indefinable region of the post @-@ partitioned Commonwealth nation of India , purely for the purpose of parodically criticizing the banality of quick @-@ stop stores . " 
 Paul Cantor , who analyzed the episode in his book Gilligan Unbound : Pop Culture in the Age of Globalization , said , " The Simpsons could offer no better image of the bizarre logic of contemporary globalization than a worldwide convenience store empire run by an enlightened guru from the sacred mountains of India . " Cantor also specifically cited the " Master Knows " sign , which he said combined the perceived wisdom of the East with the business acumen of the West . 
 <unk> Shakur and Karen D 'Souza write in their book <unk> South Asian culture in English that " Homer and Apu " typifies the key articulation of the character of Apu juxtaposed to Homer , " something like his alter @-@ ego " , where Homer is the all American , Duff drinking , rather lazy nuclear plant worker , and Apu is the immigrant , clean living , hard working , small businessman . Their friendship , the authors added , is typically of a strong degree of mutual respect and a kind of admiration for what the other represents . 
 = 1903 New Jersey hurricane = 
 The 1903 New Jersey hurricane , also known as the Vagabond Hurricane by The Press of Atlantic City , is the first and only known North Atlantic hurricane to make landfall in the state of New Jersey since records were kept starting in 1851 . The fourth hurricane of the season , the cyclone was first observed on September 12 about 550 miles ( 885 <unk> ) northeast of Antigua . It moved quickly westward , then later turned to the north @-@ northwest , steadily strengthening to reach a peak intensity of 100 miles per hour ( 155 kilometres per hour ) , a Category 2 on the modern @-@ day Saffir @-@ Simpson scale . The hurricane weakened slightly before striking near Atlantic City , New Jersey on September 16 with winds of 80 mph ( 130 km / h ) . It weakened over Pennsylvania and became an extratropical cyclone over western New York on September 17 . 
 Rough surf and moderate winds from the hurricane capsized several ships along the East Coast of the United States ; 30 people were left missing and presumed killed from a shipwreck in Chincoteague , Virginia . Along the coast , 57 people died due to the storm . In New Jersey , the hurricane caused heavy damage , particularly near the coast and in Atlantic City . Dozens of buildings were damaged or destroyed , and damage across the state totaled $ 8 million ( 1903 USD ) . In New York City , high winds disrupted traffic , closed businesses , and overturned wagons , with many windows and roofs damaged . On Long Island , President Theodore Roosevelt directly experienced the effects of the hurricane while on a yacht . The life of the president was briefly threatened by the rough conditions , though none on board the yacht suffered any problems from the hurricane . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 The genesis of the storm is unknown ; it was first observed on September 12 as a 70 mph ( 120 km / h ) tropical storm about 550 miles ( 885 km ) northeast of Antigua in the Lesser Antilles . On that day , the storm appeared on weather maps , and subsequently was tracked by ship reports as a small system . The storm tracked quickly northwestward , followed by a turn to the west @-@ northwest . Around 18 : 00 UTC on September 13 , the storm passed about 270 mi ( 435 km ) south of Bermuda . Its exact track and intensity is unknown , though it is estimated the storm attained hurricane status late on September 14 about 360 mi ( 580 km ) west @-@ southwest of Bermuda . The hurricane steadily intensified as it curved northward , and attained an estimated peak intensity of 100 mph ( 155 km / h ) late on September 15 about 110 mi ( 190 km ) southeast of Cape Hatteras , North Carolina . 
 By late on September 15 , the hurricane was beginning to affect the North Carolina coastline . The high winds near the center prompted the United States Weather Bureau to issue storm warnings on the morning of September 16 into the next day . Turning northward , the hurricane weakened slightly and made landfall near Atlantic City , New Jersey , shortly before 12 : 00 UTC on September 16 . The estimated barometric pressure was 990 mbar ( 29 inHg ) , suggesting hurricane @-@ force winds of 80 mph ( 130 km / h ) at landfall . This made it the first and only known hurricane to strike New Jersey since the Atlantic hurricane database 's beginning in 1851 . The storm structure broadened after landfall , and the Weather Bureau assessed one center splitting off and tracking north @-@ northeastward into New York and Connecticut . The main center continued northwestward , weakening into a tropical storm near Trenton , New Jersey . After crossing northeastern Pennsylvania , the system transitioned into an extratropical cyclone near Syracuse , New York on September 17 . The extratropical remnant persisted for another six hours before losing its identity over eastern Ontario . 
 = = Impact = = 
 Overall , the hurricane killed 57 people during its passage through the Mid @-@ Atlantic states . Winds of over 60 mph ( 97 km / h ) affected large portions of the coastline from New Jersey to southern New England . 
 The hurricane first brought rainfall to coastal parts of Georgia and South Carolina . Strong winds were reported along coastal areas of North Carolina , with sustained winds peaking at 72 mph ( 116 km / h ) at Kitty Hawk . Winds reached 54 mph ( 87 km / h ) at Cape Henry , Virginia , and the combination of the winds and rough surf washed some boats ashore . The schooner Beatrice was lost near Chincoteague with a crew of 30 ; 28 people on board were killed . A squall line destroyed the front mast of a schooner near Cape Henry . Several boats broke free from their moorings near Salisbury and were subsequently destroyed after passing downstream . The schooner Hattie A. Marsh encountered strong winds from the hurricane along the Delaware coast , while strong waves washed it ashore the rocky coastline . The boat was wrecked and the rooms onboard were washed overboard , killing five members of the crew . Two people were rescued after conditions calmed , one of whom was injured and taken to a hospital . 
 A flock of birds encountered the hurricane over eastern Virginia ; hundreds of birds were killed and fell to the ground near Old Point Comfort , many stripped of their feathers . The outer rainbands of the storm produced heavy amounts of precipitation near Washington , D.C. , canceling a baseball game between the Detroit Tigers and the Washington Senators after the field was flooded . In Ocean City , Maryland , the hurricane was considered the worst in 40 years . The hurricane produced 80 mph ( 130 km / h ) winds and rough waves along the Delaware Capes , indicating hurricane @-@ force winds affected the state . It was one of only two storms on record to produce such winds in the state . Three barges and a steamer capsized in the Delaware Bay , while onshore , the winds of the hurricane destroyed the roofs of four houses in Laurel . The winds downed many trees and destroyed several chimneys near Lewes . In Philadelphia , Pennsylvania , winds reached 45 mph ( 72 km / h ) , which damaged telegraph and phone lines , knocked down several trees , and damaged the roof of Pennsylvania Railroad 's Broad Street Station . 
 Described by the Weather Bureau as " a most unusual tempest , " the storm was one of only four to produce hurricane @-@ force winds in New Jersey . The storm 's strong surf destroyed several boats along the coastline , including 34 in Waretown . Less than 10 % of the people in Atlantic City evacuated , and after the storm , many people visited the city to observe the storm damage described in newspapers . High winds disrupted 800 telephone lines in Atlantic City , and most communications were cut from the Jersey Shore to the Philadelphia region . Initial damage reports were provided by trains , although there were severe transportation delays due to ongoing flooding . The disrupted communications sparked " wild rumors that the great resort had been entirely washed away , " according to the New York Times . Monetary damage in Atlantic City was estimated around $ 1 million ( 1903 USD ) . Atlantic City 's power was deliberately shut off to prevent accidents . In the city , the roof of one hotel and the porch of another were destroyed . Trees and awnings were damaged , and thousands of windows were damaged . The winds destroyed the roofs of an estimated 50 to 60 cottages . The surf damaged or destroyed most fishing piers and oceanfront pavilions in the Atlantic City area , with tons of debris dispersed across the beach . The strong winds , combined with heavy rainfall , resulted in one indirect fatality when a man , unable to see owing to the hurricane , drove into a train in Cape May . In Asbury Park , the storm wrecked the roofs of six hotels . High waves damaged the boardwalks at Belmar and <unk> . High winds heavily damaged fruit crops in Monmouth , Middlesex , and Hunterdon counties . Fruit trees were uprooted in Vineland , and in Flemington , about 75 % of apples and pears were lost . Damage across the state was estimated at $ 8 million ( 1903 USD ) ; the worst of the damage occurred in Atlantic City , though moderate damage extended from Cape May northward through Asbury Park . 
 In New York , the outer periphery of the storm produced 2 @.@ 4 inches ( 61 mm ) of rain in Central Park , where dozens of trees were knocked down or damaged . High tides peaked at 6 @.@ 4 ft ( 2 @.@ 0 m ) , which inundated Battery Park and made ferry passage difficult . Winds in New York City reached 65 mph ( 105 km / h ) , reaching 70 mph ( 110 km / h ) along the coast , with tropical storm force winds extending into Maine . The winds were the strongest in the city since August 1889 , lasting about four hours at its peak . <unk> by the streets and tall buildings of New York , the high winds swayed buildings , spires , and bridges , overturning wagons on the Brooklyn Bridge . The shape of the Flatiron Building tossed horse @-@ drawn carriages , and two people were injured when a wagon of furniture was overturned . The rains and winds knocked down signs and awnings while wrecking dozens of windows , chimneys , and roofs , causing residents to evacuate buildings and damaging several storefronts . One woman was hospitalized after being struck by an airborne sign . The high amount of damage led to the greatest number of inspectors of the New York City Department of Buildings to determine which buildings were safe . In Brighton Beach , the roof of the Ocean Hotel was completely blown off , and a similar fate befell the top of the Steeplechase Tower in Coney Island resort area , which sustained considerable damage . In Brooklyn , church steeples were dislodged or blown off , and many homes in the borough were flooded or damaged . Construction work on the Williamsburg Bridge was halted during the storm . On Staten Island , the winds blew off the roof of a school . The hurricane also left businesses and the stock market quiet for the day , owing to the threat of blowing debris . Trees and signs were blown down in the New York suburbs . One person died in New York City due to the storm . 
 The high waves and winds caused the greatest marine damage in a decade around New York City . More than 100 boats were overturned or beached in Jamaica Bay , and another 150 boats were wrecked between Hell Gate and the west end of Coney Island . At least ten houseboats were damaged or sank , with boaters injured and requiring rescue . A man attempting to row ashore near Point O ' Woods required rescue amid strong winds . Passengers swam safely ashore after their boat capsized in Hell Gate . President Theodore Roosevelt directly experienced the effects of the hurricane while vacationing on the naval yacht Sylph along Long Island . Also on the yacht were <unk> 's wife , son , his secretary , several friends and members of the press association . The yacht experienced gusty winds and heavy rainfall , along with rough seas , and witnessed a boat capsizing in Hell Gate . Passengers left the deck of the yacht for safety while their belongings were secured . After the President was considered to be in danger , the yacht headed for land , and instead of embarking toward Ellis Island as originally planned , the yacht landed at Brooklyn Navy Yard . Farther north , high winds downed many trees along coastal Connecticut , which cut telegraph and telephone lines in Bridgeport . A boy was killed in Hartford after stepping onto a downed power line . Several boats were washed ashore along the Connecticut coast . Farther inland , winds disrupted power in Leicester and damaged crops . 
 = Lightning Bar = 
 Lightning Bar ( 1951 – 1960 ) was an American Quarter Horse who raced and subsequently became a breeding stallion . He was bred by his lifelong owner Art Pollard of Sonoita , Arizona , and was the offspring of Three Bars , a Thoroughbred , and Della P , a Quarter Horse mare from Louisiana , then noted for the breeding of sprint horses . Lightning Bar raced ten times , achieving four victories and four other top three finishes . His racing career was cut short by illness after only one year , following which he spent two years as a show horse . As a breeding stallion he sired seven crops , or years , of foals , among whom Doc Bar was the best known . In 1960 Lightning Bar died of an intestinal infection at the age of nine . He was inducted into the American Quarter Horse Association 's ( AQHA ) Hall of Fame in 2008 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 <unk> , or born , in 1951 , Lightning Bar was bred to be a race horse , but injuries and bouts of illnesses kept him from racing past the age of two . His breeder , Art Pollard , owned him for the horse 's entire life . Lightning Bar was sired by Three Bars , a Thoroughbred stallion later inducted into the AQHA Hall of Fame . His dam was Della P , a daughter of the Thoroughbred stallion Doc Horn . His second dam , or maternal grandmother , was a mare who was never given a name , sired by Old D. J. Art Pollard purchased Della P from " Dink " Parker for $ 1 @,@ 750 ( approximately $ 17 @,@ 200 as of 2016 ) in the late 1940s . Della P was bred in Louisiana , a leader in breeding short distance racehorses between 1900 and 1940 , and was taken to Arizona by Parker . 
 When Lightning Bar was about five days old Pollard was afraid that he had leg problems and was buck @-@ kneed , and considered putting the colt to sleep . He sought Parker 's advice , and as Pollard later related the story , " Dink just looked at me and shook his head . ' Ain 't you ever gonna learn nothing ? That colt 's just what you 're looking for . ' " When mature , the sorrel @-@ colored Lightning Bar stood 15 @.@ 2 hands ( 62 inches , 157 cm ) tall and weighed about 1 @,@ 250 pounds ( 570 kg ) . 
 = = Racing and show career = = 
 Lightning Bar started on the racetrack ten times , winning four races , coming in second three times , and third once . Among those finishes , he ran second and third in two stakes races , a type of race for higher quality horses with a higher payout . His total earnings on the track were $ 1 @,@ 491 ( approximately $ 13 @,@ 200 as of 2016 ) , and his highest speed index , or comparative rating of his speed , was AAA , the highest achievable at the time . Lightning Bar raced for only one year , as he suffered from bouts of pneumonia , strangles , and leg injuries . He equalled one track record for two @-@ year @-@ olds at the Los Angeles County Fair race meeting in Pomona , California , running 330 yards ( 300 m ) in 17 @.@ 2 seconds . 
 After his racing career Lightning Bar went on to become a show horse , earning 18 open halter points with the AQHA , and an AQHA Champion award in 1955 . He won one grand championship and one reserve championship in halter classes at recognized AQHA shows . 
 = = Breeding career = = 
 The first year Lightning Bar stood as a breeding stallion his stud fee , the amount charged to breed a mare to him , was $ 250 ( approximately $ 2 @,@ 200 as of 2016 ) but only nine mares were bred to him . The next year , he bred 11 mares , but in 1956 , he bred 102 mares at $ 500 ( approximately $ 4 @,@ 400 as of 2016 ) each . One of Pollard 's attempts to advertise his stallion involved letting one of his ranch hands take the horse to a local jackpot roping . Pollard assumed that the hand would just ride Lightning Bar around and show him off , but he later discovered that more was involved . Pollard said later that " I should have been suspicious when he ( the ranch hand ) returned with Lightning Bar that afternoon , with a sheepish grin on his face . I asked him how the horse was received and he said ' The stud did good and I won the jackpot ! ' After congratulating him , I asked which rope horse he had used . He replied , ' The stud . ' " 
 Pollard said of Lightning Bar that " I always had to be careful about the kind of latch I used on a gate with that horse . He could figure them out faster than I could . He would open a gate , and go for a stroll . " Lightning Bar sired 148 foals in his eight breeding seasons , and 118 of those foals went on to either race or show careers . Of his foals , 108 started races , and 77 won , earning a total of $ 476 @,@ 949 . The most successful of his foals , Lightning Belle , earned $ 60 @,@ 134 ( approximately $ 465 @,@ 000 as of 2016 ) . 
 Five of Lightning Bar 's foals earned AQHA Championships : Cactus Comet , Crash Bang , Lightning Rey , Pana Bar and Relampago Bar ; Lightning Rey earned a Supreme Championship . In addition , Lightning Bar 's offspring earned $ 1 @,@ 163 @.@ 32 in National Cutting Horse Association sanctioned cattle cutting competitions , and four earned a Superior Halter Horse title from the AQHA . 
 = = Death and legacy = = 
 Lightning Bar died in June 1960 from colitis @-@ X , a disease of unknown origin that can kill rapidly and without warning . It infected many of Pollard 's horses ; of those affected only three survived . Heartbroken , Pollard sold his remaining stock and did not return to the Quarter Horse business for 15 years . He said later that " it was a nightmare when they were wiped out . Even now , we can still feel the sadness of losing those horses . " Another time , Pollard remarked that " Someone once said that a man deserves one good woman and one good dog in his lifetime . To that quip I would add one good horse . I certainly had one in Lightning Bar . " 
 Lightning Bar was inducted into the AQHA 's American Quarter Horse Hall of Fame in 2008 . His most famous son was Doc Bar , who was also inducted into the Hall of Fame . Lightning Bar 's daughter Glamour Bars was the dam of Impressive , who became well known as one of the leading sires of halter horses . Two stakes races were run in Lightning Bar 's memory , the first at Los Alamitos Race track in California for one year in 1961 . The second ran from 1962 to 1966 at Ruidoso Downs in New Mexico . 
 = = Pedigree = = 
 = Goodbye ( Glee ) = 
 " Goodbye " is the twenty @-@ second episode and season finale of the third season of the American musical television series Glee , and the sixty @-@ sixth overall . Written and directed by Brad Falchuk , it aired on Fox in the United States on May 22 , 2012 . It features the graduation of the McKinley High class of 2012 , and with it , eight members of the New Directions glee club . The episode introduces special guest star Gloria Estefan as Maribel Lopez , Santana 's ( Naya Rivera ) mother , and has appearances by six other parents of graduating seniors . 
 The episode was well received by many reviewers , though some were not as happy with it . The enthusiastic ones cited the combination of humor and tears , past events and present revelation , while those who were more critical felt there was not enough time to wrap up all the storylines or that it strayed into sappiness . Particular praise was given to the scene with Burt and Kurt Hummel that featured the former 's " Single Ladies ( Put a Ring On It ) " number , which was the favorite performance of the reviewers , and the scene when Finn tells Rachel he 's sending her to New York instead of marrying her , which was described as Monteith 's and Michele 's best acting on the show . Monteith was also praised for his solo in the song " You Get What You Give " , and Michele 's rendition of " Roots Before Branches " received even higher marks . Other songs were given a less enthusiastic reception . 
 " Goodbye " attracted 7 @.@ 46 million American viewers during its initial broadcast and received a 2 @.@ 9 / 8 Nielsen rating / share in the 18 – 49 demographic , a significant increase over the prior episode 's 2 @.@ 5 / 7 rating / share and 6 @.@ 03 million viewers on May 15 , 2012 . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Will ( Matthew Morrison ) gives the members of New Directions one final assignment : perform songs to say goodbye to each other . He starts by singing " Forever Young " . The graduating seniors as a group perform " You Get What You Give " , and tell the underclassmen that it is now their glee club . The underclassmen , joined by Will , sing " In My Life " to express their gratitude to the seniors . 
 Kurt ( Chris Colfer ) reflects on how his experience at McKinley High has enabled other students to be openly gay . His father ( Mike O 'Malley ) meets him in the school auditorium and recalls the evolution of their relationship . Tina ( Jenna Ushkowitz ) and Brittany ( Heather Morris ) then join him on the stage to help him re @-@ enact the turning point , which serves as Kurt 's graduation gift : the " Single Ladies " dance . Kurt and Blaine ( Darren Criss ) pledge to remain a couple , despite being in different cities in the fall . 
 Mercedes ( Amber Riley ) has been offered a recording contract as a backup singer and will be moving to Los Angeles ; Mike ( Harry Shum , Jr . ) has accepted a scholarship to the Joffrey Ballet in Chicago . Both revelations upset Santana ( Naya Rivera ) , who has a cheerleading scholarship from the University of Louisville , yet wants to be a performer like them . Brittany announces that she will not be graduating , and Santana tells her mother , Maribel ( Gloria Estefan ) , that she will stay in Lima . Maribel later gives Santana the money that she had been saving for Santana 's college education , saying she trusts her to follow her dreams . 
 Quinn ( Dianna Agron ) helps Puck ( Mark Salling ) study for the test he needs to pass in order to graduate . She tells him that with all they went through , they are bonded for life , and she kisses him . Emboldened , Puck passes his test . Later , Quinn returns her cheerleading uniform to Sue ( Jane Lynch ) , and the two have a tearful farewell . 
 Will tells Finn ( Cory Monteith ) that he had planted marijuana in Finn 's locker in order to blackmail him into joining the glee club , which Finn thinks makes him " even cooler " . Finn is disappointed that the Army refused to change his late father 's dishonorable discharge to an honorable one , and wonders to his mother ( Romy Rosemont ) whether his father would be proud of him if he became an actor . 
 After the graduation ceremony , Finn , Kurt , and Rachel ( Lea Michele ) gather to open their acceptance letters — Finn for the Actors Studio and Kurt and Rachel for NYADA . Finn and Kurt are rejected , while Rachel is admitted ; she decides to defer her admission for a year to help the other two reapply so the trio can go to New York together . She gets into Finn 's car to go to their wedding , but instead of driving to the wedding venue , Finn drives her to the train station . He tells her that he loves her too much to marry her if it means she has to give up her dreams ; he also reveals that he will be joining the Army . Will and the glee club meet them on the train platform to say goodbye , and a crying Rachel sings " Roots Before Branches " as she boards the train for New York . 
 = = Production = = 
 The season 's final episode was written and directed by series co @-@ creator Brad Falchuk . Shooting began on April 30 , 2012 , and was scheduled to take two weeks . The cast recorded their final vocal tracks for the episode 's songs on April 21 , 2012 , and the final scene was shot late on the evening of May 10 , 2012 . 
 Some scenes for the episode have been filmed on location in New York City . Falchuk tweeted two photos on the evening of Monday , May 7 , 2012 . One was a photo of Lea Michele sitting on a suitcase on a sidewalk , along with the message , " Two from yesterday . Yep . NYC Sunday , back in LA Monday . " 
 It was originally announced that this episode would include eight songs from the album Glee : The Music , The Graduation Album . However , only five of the album 's tracks are used in the episode , none of which have been released separately as singles . These are Bruce Springsteen 's " Glory Days " performed by Monteith and Salling , Madonna 's " I 'll Remember " performed by Colfer , New Radicals ' " You Get What You Give " performed by the graduating members of New Directions , Rod Stewart 's " Forever Young " performed by Morrison , and Room for Two 's " Roots Before Branches " performed by Michele and Monteith . The episode also has new performances of three songs that are not on the album . " In My Life " by The Beatles , performed by the non @-@ graduating members of New Directions , is the only song that has been released as a single available for digital download . The other two are repeat performances of " Sit Down , You 're Rockin ' the Boat " from Guys and Dolls , first sung in the series ' pilot by Colfer , Michele , Kevin McHale , Ushkowitz and Riley , and Beyoncé 's " Single Ladies ( Put a Ring on It ) " from " Preggers " , performed by O 'Malley , Ushkowitz , and Morris ; both numbers include flashbacks to the original performances , which for " Single Ladies " included Colfer rather than O 'Malley . There is another flashback to the pilot episode showing Monteith 's a cappella performance of " Can 't Fight This Feeling " by REO Speedwagon . 
 Gloria Estefan makes a special guest appearance as Maribel Lopez , the mother of Santana Lopez ( Naya Rivera ) . Estefan was reported to be in talks to play Santana 's mother as early as November 30 , 2011 , the morning after the episode " I Kissed a Girl " aired . After the episode , in which Santana comes out as a lesbian and her grandmother — the only relative of hers shown on screen — disowns her , though Santana says her parents accepted the news , Estefan tweeted , " Did anyone see Glee last night ? Santana could really use a sympathetic mommy right about now , don 't you think ? ? Lol ! " Estefan was definitively reported as having signed to be a guest star on December 8 , 2011 , and as being scheduled to appear in one of the then @-@ upcoming winter episodes , but this episode marks her debut on the show . 
 Many recurring guest stars appeared in the episode . These include glee club members Sam Evans ( Chord Overstreet ) , Joe Hart ( Samuel Larsen ) , Rory Flanagan ( Damian McGinty ) and Sugar Motta ( Vanessa Lengies ) , Principal Figgins ( Iqbal Theba ) , football coach Shannon Beiste ( Dot @-@ Marie Jones ) , synchronized swimming coach Roz Washington ( NeNe Leakes ) , European geography teacher Eleanor <unk> ( Kathleen M. Darcy ) , and the parents of many other graduating students : Kurt 's father Burt Hummel ( Mike O 'Malley ) , Finn 's mother Carole Hudson @-@ Hummel ( Romy Rosemont ) , Mike 's parents Michael Chang , Sr. ( Keong Sim ) and Julia Chang ( Tamlyn Tomita ) , Quinn 's mother Judy Fabray ( Charlotte Ross ) and Puck 's mother ( Gina Hecht ) . James Lipton of the Actors Studio makes an appearance as himself . 
 On August 6 , 2012 , co @-@ creator Ryan Murphy uploaded a deleted scene from this episode to YouTube in which Kurt reads a message Rachel wrote in his yearbook . On August 9 , 2012 , Murphy uploaded a second deleted scene , this one featuring Mike and Tina , in which Mike 's parents give him a graduation present . Murphy noted that the episode had initially run " 15 minutes long " , and these were two of the scenes that were cut from the finished version . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 " Goodbye " was first broadcast on May 22 , 2012 in the United States on Fox , an hour later than its usual time , in order to air after the first day of the two @-@ day American Idol finale . This was the same time that the previous episode , " Nationals " aired the week before as the second hour in a two @-@ hour special evening . " Goodbye " received a 2 @.@ 9 / 8 Nielsen rating / share in the 18 – 49 demographic and attracted 7 @.@ 46 million American viewers during its initial broadcast , a significant increase over the prior episode 's 2 @.@ 5 / 7 rating / share and 6 @.@ 03 million viewers on May 15 , 2012 . 
 In Canada , which also aired the episode an hour later than usual on the same day as its American premiere and immediately following American Idol , viewership rose by over 4 % to 1 @.@ 63 million viewers from the 1 @.@ 56 million viewers who watched " Nationals " at the same hour the week before . " Goodbye " was the seventh most @-@ viewed show of the week , an improvement of three slots over " Nationals " , which had been the tenth most @-@ viewed . 
 In the United Kingdom , " Goodbye " first aired on May 24 , 2012 , at the show 's usual time , which was the same time that " Nationals " had aired the previous week . It was watched on Sky 1 by 776 @,@ 000 viewers , the same number as had watched " Nationals " . In Australia , " Goodbye " was broadcast on May 31 , 2012 . It was watched by 657 @,@ 000 viewers , up over 6 % from the 618 @,@ 000 viewers for " Nationals " on May 24 , 2012 . Glee was the twelfth most @-@ watched program of the night , up from seventeenth the week before . 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 The episode was well received by many critics , though some were not as happy with it . The A.V. Club 's Todd VanDerWerff gave it an " A " grade , and wrote that what he " liked most of all " was it being " remarkably clear @-@ eyed about who these people are and what they 're capable of " . Crystal Bell of Huffington Post described it as " heartfelt , comical and , yes , absolutely ridiculous " , and The Hollywood Reporter 's Lesley Goldberg called it a " tearful and touching finale " . Though she acknowledged exceptions , Erica Futterman of Rolling Stone characterized the episode as a " nonstop <unk> of too many tears and not enough nostalgia " , while Entertainment Weekly 's Erin Strecker said it had " the perfect amount of flashbacks and revelations " and described it as " a season finale that sure felt like a series finale " . Rae Votta of Billboard wrote that " there simply isn 't enough time to settle the fates of so many seniors in a mere hour " , a sentiment also expressed by Houston Chronicle 's Bobby Hankinson , who thought the episode might have " felt a little more logical if it was given a full two hours to breathe " . Hankinson also said it left him with " mostly questions " but also " some fury " . TV Guide 's two reviewers were both enthusiastic : Kate Stanhope described is as a " perfect mix of the kids ' past , present and future " , and Damian Holbrook wrote that the " class of 2012 went out on a high note with a season finale so solid , emotional and entertaining , you would have thought you were watching one of the show 's first 13 episodes " . 
 VanDerWerff called Kurt opening his NYADA rejection letter " as good a gut @-@ punch as I can think of for this series " , though John Kubicek of BuddyTV characterized it as " the most unbelievable plot twist ever on this show " . Bell hoped that this would extend his stay in Lima because it could give " more screen time for Burt Hummel , who is arguably the best character on Glee " . The scene where Burt gives Kurt his present was described as a " gift " by many reviewers . Kubicek wrote , " Kudos to Glee for turning a sappy moment into a funny one " , and Strecker noted how powerful scenes typically were between the Hummels before she added " last night was no exception " , and ended by quoting Kurt : " Best . Graduation Gift . Ever . " 
 The Wall Street Journal 's Raymund Flandez deemed " unrealistic " the notion that Santana 's mother would allow the money she had saved for Santana 's college expenses to be " wasted on a dream " , and Bell described it as " too good to be true " . Michael Slezak of TVLine agreed and called Maribel " crazily lenient " , but said Estefan had done " good work " . Kubicek , however , maintained that Estefan was wasted in the role , and Futterman wrote that the " choppy , random scenes would have been a lot better with some Gloria Estefan singing " . 
 The scene where Finn tells Rachel he 's sending her to New York instead of marrying her both surprised and impressed reviewers . Strecker called it one of her " favorite non @-@ singing scenes of the year , possibly the series " , and VanDerWerff put it even more strongly : " It 's one of the best things I 've seen on TV this year " . Both Monteith and Michele were praised for their acting : Slezak said it was their " best work " , VanDerWerff said they " kill [ ed ] " the scene , and Bell said it was " some of Cory Monteith 's finest acting " . Rachel 's arrival in New York brought comparisons to Mary Tyler Moore from Bell and Strecker ; as the latter put it , " she 's going to make it after all " . 
 = = = Music and performances = = = 
 The performances were given generally good marks by reviewers , and the one that received the most enthusiastic reception was not for singing at all , but Burt 's <unk> and dance to " Single Ladies ( Put a Ring On It ) " with the aid of Tina and Brittany . Futterman called it the " best gift of the season " and Slezak said it was " another shining ( albeit silly ) moment for Glee 's best parental unit " and gave it an " A − " . Bell wrote " I loved every second of it " , and E ! Online 's Jenna Mullins described it as the episode 's " rewind moment " . Jen Chaney of The Washington Post was fond of the other flashback number , " Sit Down You 're Rockin ' the Boat " , to which she gave an " A − " and commented , " it was a nice reminder of how far these plucky Glee kids have come " . MTV 's Fallon Prinzivalli was not as enthusiastic about the repeat performance , and said it was " not much better " than the pilot rendition and he was " happy to see their version of the song retired " . 
 " Forever Young " generated differing reactions from reviewers . Slezak wondered whether Will 's " diminished role this year " reduced the impact of his farewell song and gave it a " B " , and Futterman wrote that " while the bare @-@ bones guitar arrangement is suitably melancholy , Schue 's voice never quite settles in , seeming forced the whole way through " . Strecker thought " it sounded lovely " , gave it a " B + " and asked for more in the next season , and Chaney graded it an " A " and said that it was " sweet " . The same word , " sweet " , was applied by Slezak to Kurt 's rendition of " I 'll Remember " ; he called the song an " underrated Madonna ballad " and graded it a " B + " . Chaney , however , said it was " not one of Madonna 's best " and the performance " not particularly memorable " , so she gave it a " B − " , while <unk> wrote " leave this one to Madge " . Futterman characterized Kurt as " dapper and emotional while singing in a crisp , clear and natural voice " , though she wanted the performance to be " more than everyone 's sad faces " . Strecker 's grade was an " A − " , and she wrote that " Colfer sold it " and that it was a " nice arrangement for his voice " . 
 " You Get What You Give " by the graduating seniors was welcomed by reviewers . Prinzivalli called it " one of Cory Monteith 's best solos all season " and a fun cover , while Futterman described it as " fine and fun , but nothing really spectacular " . Slezak gave it an " A " and wrote , " this spirited rendition captured [ the song 's ] jaunty essence " , and Strecker noted with her " B + " that " this was the moment when it really kicked in that the show will never be the same " . Chaney also complimented Finn for having gotten " the hang of this whole singing @-@ and @-@ dancing thing in the last three episodes of this season " and gave a grade of " B " . She gave an " A " to " In My Life " , sung by the underclassmen , and said " the harmonies sounded lovely " ; Bell called it " a perfect song to signify graduation " . Others were less enthusiastic : Futterman described it as " a blended @-@ past @-@ recognition , laden @-@ with @-@ harmonies Beatles tune " and the point where the show " entered sappy hour " , and Slezak said it was " not the most ringing endorsement for the National Champions ' 2013 chances " and graded it a " C + " . 
 Reviewers wondered at the inclusion of " Glory Days " . Chaney stated , " There is no way anyone should have been blaring Springsteen in the middle of a commencement ceremony " , and Slezak called the song " a tone @-@ deaf choice for modern teenagers on their big day " ; their grades were " B " and " C + " respectively . Strecker merely noted that the ceremony " doubled as a performance " when she gave her " B + " , and Futterman thought it looked " more like a fashion show than a graduation ceremony " . 
 The show 's final number , " Roots Before Branches " , was greatly praised . Although Hankinson was " hoping for a Journey reprise " or some other big group number , he noted that Rachel " kill [ ed ] it " , and Prinzivalli said " Lea Michele shines as always " . Strecker , Slezak and Chaney each gave the performance an " A " : Chaney called it a " well @-@ chosen song " and Slezak wrote that he was glad to be introduced to it at the episode 's " triumphant ending for a girl chasing her dreams , not her delusions , in the streets of New York City " . 
 = Making Waves ( TV series ) = 
 Making Waves is a British television drama series produced by Carlton Television for ITV . It was created by Ted Childs and chronicles the professional and personal lives of the crew of the Royal Navy frigate HMS Suffolk . The series remained in development hell for several years and was first broadcast on 7 July 2004 . However , due to low ratings it was removed from the schedules after only three episodes , the remainder of the series going unaired on television in the United Kingdom . 
 The series starred Alex Ferns as Commander Martin Brooke and Emily Hamilton as Lieutenant Commander Jenny Howard . The frigate HMS Grafton stood in for Suffolk and additional filming took place around HMNB Portsmouth with the full co @-@ operation of the Royal Navy . A limited @-@ edition DVD of all six episodes was released in December 2004 . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 Following the success of his previous series Soldier Soldier , Ted Childs , Richard Maher and Carlton began planning the series in the late 1990s , with Carlton 's controller of drama and continuing series expecting something " in the London 's Burning , Peak Practice vein " . It was turned down by ITV because it was " old @-@ fashioned " and did not fit in with the network 's existing portfolio of dramas . Despite this , Childrens and Carlton continued to develop the series and they brought it to the commissioning editors of BBC One , who negotiated with Carlton to broadcast it . By that time , the top levels of the ITV drama department had changed and due to Carlton 's links with ITV , the BBC was unable to take the series . A six @-@ episode series was commissioned in July 2002 by Nick Elliott at ITV . 
 The project was initially managed by the MoD 's Directorate of Corporate Communications ( Navy ) , headed by Commodore Richard <unk> . Lieutenant Commander Steve Tatham undertook much of the initial scoping and planning work before , in August 2002 , Commander Kevin Fincher was appointed as the specialist project officer for the series ; he would acquire the necessary ships , locations and personnel as well as advising the production team on and off set . Throughout pre @-@ production Fincher negotiated a legal agreement with Carlton , whereby a financial recovery was made for anything they used that was taxpayer @-@ funded . This included use of ships , fuel , and personnel . Another clause gave the Royal Navy a share of any royalties from the series , including advertising revenue and sales . 
 = = = Writing = = = 
 There were four credited writers on the Carlton staff , with writers from the ITV network centre involved in the development of the scripts . The first episode was written in 2002 by Terry <unk> , who later wrote Messiah IV : The Harrowing . The second episode was written by Damian <unk> of The Bill , and the third by Niall Leonard . Matthew Bardsley was the credited writer of the three unaired episodes . Although a second series was not made , storylines were planned for a potential commission . Warrant Officer Dave Allport and Leading Seaman Sarah Worthy joined Fincher as advisers in January 2003 . 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 Actors were auditioned and hired in late 2002 , and included Alex Ferns , well @-@ known to British audiences for his role as Trevor Morgan in the BBC soap opera EastEnders . Making Waves was the first lead role for Ferns , who had taken time off from television acting since leaving EastEnders to avoid being typecast in a soap role , and was pleased not to be playing " a psychotic rapist " . Emily Hamilton , cast as executive officer Jenny Howard , was largely unknown to British television audiences at the time ; her only notable role was in Russell T Davies 's The Grand in the late 1990s . Lee Boardman ( who later appeared in Rome ) took the role of the chef Art Francis to distance himself from his most well @-@ known role , drug @-@ dealer Jez Quigley in the soap opera Coronation Street . Stephen Kennedy was already known for his role as Ian Craig in the BBC Radio 4 soap opera The Archers . He mentioned in an interview the differences between the two roles , before quipping that they were not that dissimilar . The crew of Grafton appeared as extras throughout the series and schoolchildren from St. Jude 's School , Southsea appeared in the families day scenes in episode six . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 The series producers scouted Portsmouth in 2002 for ship locations . Potential main settings HMS Marlborough and HMS Dryad were put aside in favour of HMS Grafton and filming commenced on 24 March 2003 with 30 actors and 60 crew moving onto the ship for the shoot . Alex Ferns arrived two days earlier than the rest of the cast to settle in , and made a trip to Yeovilton to meet Harrier pilots , while Emily Hamilton prepared for her role by shadowing Vanessa Spiller , XO of HMS Kent . The series was directed by Matthew Evans and Nigel Douglas and was shot on digital DV cameras . The production staff filmed approximately three hours of footage on every 12 @-@ hour day , editing it using Avid systems in the production offices at the naval base . 
 Other vessels made cameos in the series ; filming took place around and aboard HMS Victory for scenes in episode two , and aerial footage of HMS Invincible and HMS Gloucester was done for the war games scenes in episode four . HMS Lindisfarne appeared for the funeral scenes in episode five . Health and safety regulations required that Grafton was shadowed at all times by a support vessel during filming at sea , in the event of a member of the production team falling overboard . 
 Location filming lasted until 26 June 2003 before post @-@ production was completed in London , and the series was delivered to ITV in August 2003 for broadcast in the autumn schedules , though it would be held back for several months . A special preview screening of episode one was held aboard HMS Richmond on 13 February 2004 , while the ship was in Aberdeen on a recruitment and promotional tour of the UK . It was also premièred aboard HMS Northumberland during the same month whilst at the London Boat Show , and was attended by much of the cast and crew . 
 = = Setting = = 
 = = = Plot = = = 
 HMS Suffolk is due for Flag Officer Sea Training in four weeks but an accident during training results in the dismissal of the executive officer and the resignation of the captain . The series follows his replacement , Commander Martin Brooke , in his attempts to get his vessel and crew ship @-@ shape for final assessment . Other storylines follow Leading Marine Engineer Artificer ( LMEA ) Dave Finnan 's relationship with his Charge Chief 's daughter Teresa , the emotional state of Mickey <unk> after a blundered rescue operation , new rating Rosie Bowen settling in to life on her first ship and the budding cross @-@ ranks relationship between officer Sam Quartermaine and medic Anita Cook . Comic relief is provided in the characters of " Scouse " Phillips and Leading Chef Art Francis . Suffolk is mainly based at Portsmouth but engages in exercises such as war games throughout the series , as well as undertaking hazardous rescues of other vessels in the English Channel . 
 = = = Episodes = = = 
 = = Characters = = 
 Making Waves featured an ensemble of actors but followed a core cast , with supporting players appearing in only a few episodes or having secondary storylines . 
 Commander Martin Brooke ( played by Alex Ferns ) is the son of a car mechanic and his naval background is based on piloting , rather than commanding a ship . He is assisted by Lt Cdr Jenny Howard ( played by Emily Hamilton ) , who is initially his temporary XO , but eventually accepts Brooke 's offer to stay on the ship . Lieutenant Commander William Lewis , the Marine Engineering Officer ( played by Ian Bartholomew ) , is the superior of Charge Chief Marine Engineering Artificer ( <unk> ) Andy Fellows ( played by Steve Speirs ) and Lewis 's refusal to give the engines full maintenance regularly infuriates him , though not as much as LMEA Dave Finnan ( played by Paul Chequer ) who has just had a baby with his daughter Teresa ( played by Chloe Howman ) . New Operator Mechanic Rosie Bowen ( played by Joanna Page ) settles in to her first posting and attracts the attention of OM Mickey <unk> ( played by Lee Turnbull ) , who is contemplating his future in the Navy after an incident in the first episode . 
 The second episode introduces the new navigating officer Lieutenant Sam Quartermaine ( played by Adam Rayner ) and a subplot involving his relationship with LMA Anita Cook ( played by Angel Coulby ) runs through the series and is eventually discovered by Lieutenant James Maguire , the Principal Warfare Officer ( played by Stephen Kennedy ) . Terry " Buffer " Duncan 's ( played by Geoff Bell ) career is in jeopardy when an accusation of assault is thrown at him in the third episode , while Leading Regulator Liz Wilson ( played by Diane Beck ) develops an unreciprocated crush on Bowen . Leading Chef Art Francis ( played by Lee Boardman ) must successfully prepare dinner for the captain and crew before it is stolen or ruined by Steward Tim " Scouse " Phillips ( played by Darren Morfitt ) . 
 = = Series information = = 
 = = = Broadcast history = = = 
 Carlton delivered the series to ITV in August 2003 for broadcast in the autumn schedules , but it was then rescheduled four times over the next several months , before ITV eventually set a premiere date of 11 July 2004 . It was then rescheduled to the preceding Wednesday , in the 9 pm slot . The series lost two million viewers over two weeks and ITV pulled episode four from the schedules on the morning before it was due for broadcast , replacing it with It Shouldn 't Happen on a TV Soap , a bloopers programme , which returned ITV 's ratings to above the five million mark . 
 Writing in The Guardian a fortnight later , ITV head of drama David Liddiment defended the decision , stating that the network had planned to let Making Waves profit from The Bill 's ( the lead @-@ in ) high ratings at a time when BBC One Wednesday night ratings were suffering , but the series just " wasn 't good enough " to hold an audience . Ted Childs later responded that Making Waves had received little publicity compared to Channel 4 's ratings smash <unk> , which aired opposite his series , and that because that programme had ended its run , the ratings for the last three episodes might have improved . He went on to question why ITV had spent £ 5 million on a series they knew would not be a hit . Making Waves had been another in a line of expensive series which had been cancelled because they performed below ITV 's expectations in the ratings , following Sweet Medicine and Family the previous year . 
 The cancellation of the series also drew criticism from the Royal Navy , with a source telling The Sun that it was " a kick in the teeth to our sailors " . In its end @-@ of @-@ year review , ITV described the series as having " quality and distinctiveness " but failing " to find a mass audience " . 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 Due to the series coming from the producer of Soldier Soldier and Kavanagh QC , the close involvement of the Royal Navy and the lead being taken by Alex Ferns , there was a strong media interest in the series , which only intensified as the series went through its many <unk> . Positive previews were run by the Manchester Evening News and The Sun . The Times predicted " ITV has a ratings winner " and called the series a " classic military soap opera " . The tabloid press was keen for the series to succeed ; The Daily Mirror described it as promising and conjectured that it would be the defining role of Alex Ferns 's career , although its Sunday equivalent did not share the sentiment : it described the series as a " seabed @-@ bound disaster " . The same writer criticised the script and directing of episode three and suggested that viewers were not interested in a naval series set in peacetime . 
 The Scotsman dismissed it as little more than a six @-@ part recruitment video , comparing scenes of refugees being lifted to real advertisements that showcased the navy 's role in humanitarian crises , and concluded that the drama was a " collection of clichés and stilted dialogue " . The Independent on Sunday compared the series to the sea @-@ based soap opera Triangle and noted " an overdependence on claustrophobic interiors " . However , the series was wryly praised for casting Alex Ferns instead of Ross Kemp in the lead role , bucking the trend of recent ITV military series and commented on the difficult time slot the series had been given . Over two years after the series was pulled , Alex Ferns admitted that it was formulaic , but blamed its failure on the constant rescheduling . 
 = = = DVD release = = = 
 The BBFC passed the series for video release on 3 December 2004 , rating episodes three and four as PG , and the rest as 12 . Granada Ventures pressed approximately 2 @,@ 500 two @-@ disc sets of the series for sale exclusively on the Navy News website and it went on sale in December 2004 , with 2 @,@ 000 sets being purchased within a month . 
 = <unk> system = 
 The endomembrane system is composed of the different membranes that are suspended in the cytoplasm within a eukaryotic cell . These membranes divide the cell into functional and structural compartments , or organelles . In eukaryotes the organelles of the endomembrane system include : the nuclear membrane , the endoplasmic reticulum , the Golgi apparatus , lysosomes , vesicles , endosomes and the cell membrane . The system is defined more accurately as the set of membranes that form a single functional and developmental unit , either being connected directly , or exchanging material through vesicle transport . Importantly , the endomembrane system does not include the membranes of chloroplasts or mitochondria , but might have evolved from the latter ( see below : Evolution ) . 
 The nuclear membrane contains two lipid bilayers that encompass the contents of the nucleus . The endoplasmic reticulum ( ER ) is a synthesis and transport organelle that branches into the cytoplasm in plant and animal cells . The Golgi apparatus is a series of multiple compartments where molecules are packaged for delivery to other cell components or for secretion from the cell . Vacuoles , which are found in both plant and animal cells ( though much bigger in plant cells ) , are responsible for maintaining the shape and structure of the cell as well as storing waste products . A vesicle is a relatively small , membrane @-@ enclosed sac that stores or transports substances . The cell membrane is a protective barrier that regulates what enters and leaves the cell . There is also an organelle known as the Spitzenkörper that is only found in fungi , and is connected with hyphal tip growth . 
 In prokaryotes <unk> are rare , although in many photosynthetic bacteria the plasma membrane is highly folded and most of the cell cytoplasm is filled with layers of light @-@ gathering membrane . These light @-@ gathering membranes may even form enclosed structures called <unk> in green sulfur bacteria . 
 The organelles of the endomembrane system are related through direct contact or by the transfer of membrane segments as vesicles . Despite these relationships , the various membranes are not identical in structure and function . The thickness , molecular composition , and metabolic behavior of a membrane are not fixed , they may be modified several times during the membrane 's life . One unifying characteristic the membranes share is a lipid bilayer , with proteins attached to either side or traversing them . 
 = = History of the concept = = 
 Most lipids are synthesized in yeast either in the endoplasmic reticulum , lipid particles , or the mitochondrion , with little or no lipid synthesis occurring in the plasma membrane or nuclear membrane . <unk> biosynthesis begins in the endoplasmic reticulum , but is completed in the Golgi apparatus . The situation is similar on mammals , with the exception of the first few steps in ether lipid biosynthesis , which occur in peroxisomes . The various membranes that enclose the other subcellular organelles must therefore be constructed by transfer of lipids from these sites of synthesis . However , although it is clear that lipid transport is a central process in organelle biogenesis , the mechanisms by which lipids are transported through cells remain poorly understood . 
 The first proposal that the membranes within cells form a single system that exchanges material between its components was by <unk> and Mollenhauer in 1974 . This proposal was made as a way of explaining how the various lipid membranes are assembled in the cell , with these membranes being assembled through lipid flow from the sites of lipid synthesis . The idea of lipid flow through a continuous system of membranes and vesicles was an alternative to the various membranes being independent entities that are formed from transport of free lipid components , such as fatty acids and sterols , through the cytosol . Importantly , the transport of lipids through the cytosol and lipid flow through a continuous endomembrane system are not mutually exclusive processes and both may occur in cells . 
 = = Components of the system = = 
 = = = Nuclear envelope = = = 
 The nuclear envelope surrounds the nucleus , separating its contents from the cytoplasm . It has two membranes , each a lipid bilayer with associated proteins . The outer nuclear membrane is continuous with the rough endoplasmic reticulum membrane , and like that structure , features ribosomes attached to the surface . The outer membrane is also continuous with the inner nuclear membrane since the two layers are fused together at numerous tiny holes called nuclear pores that perforate the nuclear envelope . These pores are about 120 nm in diameter and regulate the passage of molecules between the nucleus and cytoplasm , permitting some to pass through the membrane , but not others . Since the nuclear pores are located in an area of high traffic , they play an important role in the physiology of cells . The space between the outer and inner membranes is called the <unk> space and is joined with the lumen of the rough ER . 
 The nuclear envelope 's structure is determined by a network of intermediate filaments ( protein filaments ) . This network is organized into lining similar to mesh called the nuclear lamina , which binds to chromatin , integral membrane proteins , and other nuclear components along the inner surface of the nucleus . The nuclear lamina is thought to help materials inside the nucleus reach the nuclear pores and in the disintegration of the nuclear envelope during mitosis and its reassembly at the end of the process . 
 The nuclear pores are highly efficient at selectively allowing the passage of materials to and from the nucleus , because the nuclear envelope has a considerable amount of traffic . RNA and ribosomal subunits must be continually transferred from the nucleus to the cytoplasm . <unk> , gene regulatory proteins , DNA and RNA polymerases , and other substances essential for nuclear activities must be imported from the cytoplasm . The nuclear envelope of a typical mammalian cell contains 3000 – 4000 pore complexes . If the cell is synthesizing DNA each pore complex needs to transport about 100 histone molecules per minute . If the cell is growing rapidly , each complex also needs to transport about 6 newly assembled large and small ribosomal subunits per minute from the nucleus to the cytosol , where they are used to synthesize proteins . 
 = = = <unk> reticulum = = = 
 The endoplasmic reticulum ( ER ) is a membranous synthesis and transport organelle that is an extension of the nuclear envelope . More than half the total membrane in eukaryotic cells is accounted for by the ER . The ER is made up of flattened sacs and branching tubules that are thought to interconnect , so that the ER membrane forms a continuous sheet enclosing a single internal space . This highly convoluted space is called the ER lumen and is also referred to as the ER cisternal space . The lumen takes up about ten percent of the entire cell volume . The endoplasmic reticulum membrane allows molecules to be selectively transferred between the lumen and the cytoplasm , and since it is connected to the nuclear envelope , it provides a channel between the nucleus and the cytoplasm . 
 The ER has a central role in producing , processing , and transporting biochemical compounds for use inside and outside of the cell . Its membrane is the site of production of all the transmembrane proteins and lipids for most of the cell 's organelles , including the ER itself , the Golgi apparatus , lysosomes , endosomes , mitochondria , peroxisomes , secretory vesicles , and the plasma membrane . Furthermore , almost all of the proteins that will exit the cell , plus those destined for the lumen of the ER , Golgi apparatus , or lysosomes , are originally delivered to the ER lumen . Consequently , many of the proteins found in the cisternal space of the endoplasmic reticulum lumen are there only temporarily as they pass on their way to other locations . Other proteins , however , constantly remain in the lumen and are known as endoplasmic reticulum resident proteins . These special proteins contain a specialized retention signal made up of a specific sequence of amino acids that enables them to be retained by the organelle . An example of an important endoplasmic reticulum resident protein is the chaperon protein known as <unk> which identifies other proteins that have been improperly built or processed and keeps them from being sent to their final destinations . 
 There are two distinct , though connected , regions of ER that differ in structure and function : smooth ER and rough ER . The rough endoplasmic reticulum is so named because the cytoplasmic surface is covered with ribosomes , giving it a bumpy appearance when viewed through an electron microscope . The smooth ER appears smooth since its cytoplasmic surface lacks ribosomes . 
 = = = = Functions of the smooth ER = = = = 
 In the great majority of cells , smooth ER regions are scarce and are often partly smooth and partly rough . They are sometimes called transitional ER because they contain ER exit sites from which transport vesicles carrying newly synthesized proteins and lipids bud off for transport to the Golgi apparatus . In certain specialized cells , however , the smooth ER is abundant and has additional functions . The smooth ER of these specialized cells functions in diverse metabolic processes , including synthesis of lipids , metabolism of carbohydrates , and detoxification of drugs and poisons . 
 Enzymes of the smooth ER are vital to the synthesis of lipids , including oils , phospholipids , and steroids . Sex hormones of vertebrates and the steroid hormones secreted by the adrenal glands are among the steroids produced by the smooth ER in animal cells . The cells that synthesize these hormones are rich in smooth ER . 
 Liver cells are another example of specialized cells that contain an abundance of smooth ER . These cells provide an example of the role of smooth ER in carbohydrate metabolism . Liver cells store carbohydrates in the form of glycogen . The breakdown of glycogen eventually leads to the release of glucose from the liver cells , which is important in the regulation of sugar concentration in the blood . However , the primary product of glycogen breakdown is glucose @-@ 1 @-@ phosphate . This is converted to glucose @-@ 6 @-@ phosphate and then an enzyme of the liver cell 's smooth ER removes the phosphate from the glucose , so that it can then leave the cell . 
 Enzymes of the smooth ER can also help detoxify drugs and poisons . Detoxification usually involves the addition of a hydroxyl group to a drug , making the drug more soluble and thus easier to purge from the body . One extensively studied detoxification reaction is carried out by the cytochrome P450 family of enzymes , which catalyze water @-@ insoluble drugs or metabolites that would otherwise accumulate to toxic levels in cell membrane . 
 Muscle cells have another specialized function of smooth ER . The ER membrane pumps calcium ions from the cytosol into the cisternal space . When a muscle cell becomes stimulated by a nerve impulse , calcium goes back across the ER membrane into the cytosol and generates the contraction of the muscle cell . 
 = = = = Functions of the rough ER = = = = 
 Many types of cells export proteins produced by ribosomes attached to the rough ER . The ribosomes assemble amino acids into protein units , which are carried into the rough ER for further adjustments . These proteins may be either transmembrane proteins , which become embedded in the membrane of the endoplasmic reticulum , or water @-@ soluble proteins , which are able to pass through the membrane into the lumen . Those that reach the inside of the endoplasmic reticulum are folded into the correct three @-@ dimensional conformation . Chemicals , such as carbohydrates or sugars , are added , then the endoplasmic reticulum either transports the completed proteins , called secretory proteins , to areas of the cell where they are needed , or they are sent to the Golgi apparatus for further processing and modification . 
 Once secretory proteins are formed , the ER membrane separates them from the proteins that will remain in the cytosol . Secretory proteins depart from the ER enfolded in the membranes of vesicles that bud like bubbles from the transitional ER . These vesicles in transit to another part of the cell are called transport vesicles . An alternative mechanism for transport of lipids and proteins out of the ER are through lipid transfer proteins at regions called membrane contact sites where the ER becomes closely and stably associated with the membranes of other organelles , such as the plasma membrane , Golgi or lysosomes . 
 In addition to making secretory proteins , the rough ER makes membranes that grows in place from the addition of proteins and phospholipids . As polypeptides intended to be membrane proteins grow from the ribosomes , they are inserted into the ER membrane itself and are kept there by their hydrophobic portions . The rough ER also produces its own membrane phospholipids ; enzymes built into the ER membrane assemble phospholipids . The ER membrane expands and can be transferred by transport vesicles to other components of the endomembrane system . 
 = = = Golgi apparatus = = = 
 The Golgi apparatus ( also known as the Golgi body and the Golgi complex ) is composed of interconnected sacs called <unk> . Its shape is similar to a stack of pancakes . The number of these stacks varies with the specific function of the cell . The Golgi apparatus is used by the cell for further protein modification . The section of the Golgi apparatus that receives the vesicles from the ER is known as the cis face , and is usually near the ER . The opposite end of the Golgi apparatus is called the trans face , this is where the modified compounds leave . The trans face is usually facing the plasma membrane , which is where most of the substances the Golgi apparatus modifies are sent . 
 Vesicles sent off by the ER containing proteins are further altered at the Golgi apparatus and then prepared for secretion from the cell or transport to other parts of the cell . Various things can happen to the proteins on their journey through the enzyme covered space of the Golgi apparatus . The modification and synthesis of the carbohydrate portions of glycoproteins is common in protein processing . The Golgi apparatus removes and substitutes sugar monomers , producing a large variety of oligosaccharides . In addition to modifying proteins , the Golgi also manufactures macromolecules itself . In plant cells , the Golgi produces <unk> and other polysaccharides needed by the plant structure . 
 Once the modification process is completed , the Golgi apparatus sorts the products of its processing and sends them to various parts of the cell . Molecular identification labels or tags are added by the Golgi enzymes to help with this . After everything is organized , the Golgi apparatus sends off its products by budding vesicles from its trans face . 
 = = = Vacuoles = = = 
 Vacuoles , like vesicles , are membrane @-@ bound sacs within the cell . They are larger than vesicles and their specific function varies . The operations of vacuoles are different for plant and animal vacuoles . 
 In plant cells , vacuoles cover anywhere from 30 % to 90 % of the total cell volume . Most mature plant cells contain one large central vacuole encompassed by a membrane called the <unk> . Vacuoles of plant cells act as storage compartments for the nutrients and waste of a cell . The solution that these molecules are stored in is called the cell sap . Pigments that color the cell are sometime located in the cell sap . Vacuoles can also increase the size of the cell , which elongates as water is added , and they control the turgor pressure ( the osmotic pressure that keeps the cell wall from caving in ) . Like lysosomes of animal cells , vacuoles have an acidic pH and contain hydrolytic enzymes . The pH of vacuoles enables them to perform homeostatic procedures in the cell . For example , when the pH in the cells environment drops , the H + ions surging into the cytosol can be transferred to a vacuole in order to keep the cytosol 's pH constant . 
 In animals , vacuoles serve in exocytosis and endocytosis processes . Endocytosis refers to when substances are taken into the cell , whereas for exocytosis substances are moved from the cell into the extracellular space . Material to be taken @-@ in is surrounded by the plasma membrane , and then transferred to a vacuole . There are two types of endocytosis , phagocytosis ( cell eating ) and <unk> ( cell drinking ) . In phagocytosis , cells engulf large particles such as bacteria . <unk> is the same process , except the substances being ingested are in the fluid form . 
 = = = Vesicles = = = 
 Vesicles are small membrane @-@ enclosed transport units that can transfer molecules between different compartments . Most vesicles transfer the membranes assembled in the endoplasmic reticulum to the Golgi apparatus , and then from the Golgi apparatus to various locations . 
 There are various types of vesicles each with a different protein configuration . Most are formed from specific regions of membranes . When a vesicle buds off from a membrane it contains specific proteins on its cytosolic surface . Each membrane a vesicle travels to contains a marker on its cytosolic surface . This marker corresponds with the proteins on the vesicle traveling to the membrane . Once the vesicle finds the membrane , they fuse . 
 There are three well known types of vesicles . They are clathrin @-@ coated , <unk> @-@ coated , and <unk> @-@ coated vesicles . Each performs different functions in the cell . For example , clathrin @-@ coated vesicles transport substances between the Golgi apparatus and the plasma membrane . <unk> and <unk> @-@ coated vesicles are frequently used for transportation between the ER and the Golgi apparatus . 
 = = = Lysosomes = = = 
 Lysosomes are organelles that contain hydrolytic enzymes that are used for intracellular digestion . The main functions of a lysosome are to process molecules taken in by the cell and to recycle worn out cell parts . The enzymes inside of lysosomes are acid hydrolases which require an acidic environment for optimal performance . Lysosomes provide such an environment by maintaining a pH of 5 @.@ 0 inside of the organelle . If a lysosome were to rupture , the enzymes released would not be very active because of the cytosol 's neutral pH . However , if numerous lysosomes leaked the cell could be destroyed from autodigestion . 
 Lysosomes carry out intracellular digestion , in a process called phagocytosis ( from the Greek phagein , to eat and <unk> , vessel , referring here to the cell ) , by fusing with a vacuole and releasing their enzymes into the vacuole . Through this process , sugars , amino acids , and other monomers pass into the cytosol and become nutrients for the cell . Lysosomes also use their hydrolytic enzymes to recycle the cell 's obsolete organelles in a process called autophagy . The lysosome engulfs another organelle and uses its enzymes to take apart the ingested material . The resulting organic monomers are then returned to the cytosol for reuse . The last function of a lysosome is to digest the cell itself through <unk> . 
 = = = Spitzenkörper = = = 
 The <unk> is a component of the endomembrane system found only in fungi , and is associated with hyphal tip growth . It is a phase @-@ dark body that is composed of an aggregation of membrane @-@ bound vesicles containing cell wall components , serving as a point of assemblage and release of such components intermediate between the Golgi and the cell membrane . The <unk> is motile and generates new hyphal tip growth as it moves forward . 
 = = = Plasma membrane = = = 
 The plasma membrane is a phospholipid bilayer membrane that separates the cell from its environment and regulates the transport of molecules and signals into and out of the cell . Embedded in the membrane are proteins that perform the functions of the plasma membrane . The plasma membrane is not a fixed or rigid structure , the molecules that compose the membrane are capable of lateral movement . This movement and the multiple components of the membrane are why it is referred to as a fluid mosaic . Smaller molecules such as carbon dioxide , water , and oxygen can pass through the plasma membrane freely by diffusion or osmosis . Larger molecules needed by the cell are assisted by proteins through active transport . 
 The plasma membrane of a cell has multiple functions . These include transporting nutrients into the cell , allowing waste to leave , preventing materials from entering the cell , averting needed materials from leaving the cell , maintaining the pH of the cytosol , and preserving the osmotic pressure of the cytosol . Transport proteins which allow some materials to pass through but not others are used for these functions . These proteins use ATP hydrolysis to pump materials against their concentration gradients . 
 In addition to these universal functions , the plasma membrane has a more specific role in multicellular organisms . <unk> on the membrane assist the cell in recognizing other cells , in order to exchange metabolites and form tissues . Other proteins on the plasma membrane allow attachment to the cytoskeleton and extracellular matrix ; a function that maintains cell shape and fixes the location of membrane proteins . Enzymes that catalyze reactions are also found on the plasma membrane . Receptor proteins on the membrane have a shape that matches with a chemical messenger , resulting in various cellular responses . 
 = = Evolution = = 
 The origin of the endomembrane system is linked to the origin of eukaryotes themselves and the origin of <unk> to the endosymbiotic origin of mitochondria . Many models have been put forward to explain the origin of the endomembrane system ( reviewed in ) . The most recent concept suggests that the endomembrane system evolved from outer membrane vesicles the endosymbiotic mitochondrion secreted . This OMV @-@ based model for the origin of the endomembrane system is currently the one that requires the least amount of novel inventions at eukaryote origin and explains the many connections of mitochondria with other compartments of the cell . 
 = Hurricane Isaac ( 2000 ) = 
 Hurricane Isaac was a strong and large Cape Verde @-@ type hurricane that lasted through late September and early October 2000 . The thirteenth tropical cyclone , ninth named storm , and the fifth hurricane of 2000 Atlantic hurricane season , Isaac developed from a tropical wave south of Cape Verde on September 21 . The depression intensified , and on the following day , it was upgraded to Tropical Storm Isaac . Due to conductive atmospheric conditions , Isaac continued to strengthen , and attained hurricane intensity on September 23 . Isaac managed to become a Category 3 hurricane on September 24 , before steadily weakening shortly thereafter . By September 26 , the storm had deteriorated to a Category 1 hurricane . However , it again encountered favorable conditions , which caused Isaac to re @-@ intensify . 
 As Isaac tracked northwestward , it re @-@ strengthened into a major hurricane on September 28 . Later that day , Isaac peaked as a moderate @-@ Category 4 hurricane . However , Isaac began to track northward over an area of colder sea surface temperatures ( SSTs ) , which gradually weakened the storm over the next three days . Eventually , the storm curved northeastward , and weakened to a tropical storm early on October 1 . Later that day , Isaac transitioned into an extratropical cyclone . While extratropical , it brushed the British Isles , producing below gale @-@ force winds . The storm had no interaction with land while tropical ; however , one fatality occurred on Long Island when large swells generated by Isaac overturned a boat . In addition , rough seas also affected the coastlines of Bermuda and The Carolinas . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 A tropical wave emerged into the Atlantic from the west coast of Africa on September 20 . The wave was associated with some curvature of deep convection . Later on September 20 , the initial Dvorak classification was issued , whilst convection associated with the system began to consolidate . It is estimated that the wave became Tropical Depression Thirteen at 1200 UTC on September 21 , while located south of Cape Verde . Although the QuikScat satellite recorded winds of up to 60 mph ( 90 km / h ) , the National Hurricane Center set the initial intensity 35 mph ( 55 km / h ) , mostly due to a lack of deep convection and an elongated and poorly defined center . Because upper @-@ level winds were conductive , the depression strengthened and banding features significantly improved . As a result , the depression was upgraded to Tropical Storm Isaac early on September 22 . A ridge was present over parts of the eastern Atlantic Ocean which provided strong steering currents . 
 Later on September 22 , the National Hurricane Center began noting the possibility of increasing wind shear due to a large upper trough . Despite this , the intensity predictions did not forecast weakening within the next three days . Isaac continued to strengthen and reached hurricane status at 1200 UTC on September 23 . However , the National Hurricane Center did not operationally upgrade Isaac until 2100 UTC on September 23 , at which time the storm was a Category 2 hurricane . Thereafter , Isaac significantly intensified , and on the following day , it reached an initial peak intensity with winds of 120 mph ( 200 km / h ) . The National Hurricane Center then predicted Isaac would become a Category 4 hurricane on September 25 , though this did not materialize . 
 After reaching winds of 120 mph ( 200 km / h ) , Isaac slowly began weakening , due to both increasing vertical wind shear and internal fluctuations . By September 26 , Isaac weakened to a moderate Category 1 hurricane , though the National Hurricane Center noted that re @-@ strengthening was likely , citing the possibility of warming SST 's . Wind shear began to decrease , which caused deep convection to re @-@ organize into a more symmetrical pattern around the center of the storm . As a result , Isaac began re @-@ intensifying , starting on September 27 . Although Isaac re @-@ developed a well @-@ defined eye and a cold convective eyewall , only a portion of the storm had decent outflow . By 1800 UTC on September 28 , Isaac attained its peak intensity with winds of 140 mph ( 220 km / h ) and a minimum barometric pressure of 943 mbar ( 27 @.@ 8 inHg ) . Three hours later , the National Hurricane Center noted that the storm had likely reached peak intensity , though further strengthening could not be ruled out . After tracking steadily west @-@ northwestward or northwestward since it developed on September 21 , the storm briefly curved northward western periphery of a mid @-@ tropospheric anticyclone later on September 28 . While a Category 3 hurricane on September 29 , Isaac passed about 500 miles ( 800 km ) east of Bermuda . Further weakening occurred as Isaac tracked into decreasing SST 's , while undergoing an eyewall replacement cyclone . Late on September 29 , the storm began curving east @-@ northeastward and weakened to a Category 2 hurricane . 
 After weakening to a Category 1 hurricane on September 30 , the National Hurricane Center noted that very cold cloud tops still existed , though IR imagery indicated that the convection and circulation associated with the storm was becoming asymmetrical . Isaac remained a Category 1 hurricane for almost 24 hours , at which time the storm began to accelerate east @-@ northeastward . Early on October 1 , the National Hurricane Center noted that minimal deep convection persisted near the center and much of it was displaced to the north . Mid @-@ level dry air and low @-@ level cold air began entering the western quadrant of the storm , which caused it to begin its extratropical transition . By 0600 UTC on October 1 , Isaac weakened to a tropical storm . The National Hurricane Center noted that further weakening would be slow , due to the large wind field associated with the storm . At 1500 UTC on October 1 , the National Hurricane Center issued its final advisory on the storm ; Isaac fully transitioned into an extratropical cyclone about three hours later , while located about halfway between Newfoundland and the Azores . The extratropical remnants tracked rapidly east @-@ northeastward and affected the British Isles on October 3 and October 4 , eventually merging with another extratropical low while north of Scotland early on October 4 . 
 = = Impact = = 
 Late on September 22 and early on September 23 , the National Hurricane Center noted that due to several computer forecast models indicating a westward track , impact in the Lesser Antilles was possible , though unlikely . However , Isaac continued its west @-@ northwestward path and passed more than 820 miles ( 1 @,@ 320 km ) northeast of the Lesser Antilles . While Isaac made its closest approach to Bermuda on September 29 , it produced high waves offshore the island . Although Isaac had stayed away from the eastern coast of the United States , swells from the storm caused a boat with four passengers to overturn on September 30 . One of the passengers died from drowning . The state of North Carolina issued a heavy surf warning on October 1 , as swells from Isaac were predicted . Along the Grand Strand in South Carolina , rough surf and minor coastal flooding was reported . As an extratropical system , Isaac produced winds near gale @-@ force on the British Isles during the day of October 3 . After Isaac passed the British Isles , a bird called the blue @-@ winged warbler was seen in Europe for the first time . 
 = 1978 European Cup Final = 
 The 1978 European Cup Final was an association football match between Liverpool of England and Club Brugge of Belgium on 10 May 1978 at Wembley Stadium , London , England ( the venue was decided in Bern by the UEFA Executive Committee on 20 September 1977 ) . It was the final match of the 1977 – 78 season of Europe 's premier cup competition , the European Cup . Liverpool were the reigning champions and were appearing in their second European Cup final . Club Brugge were appearing in their first European Cup final . The two sides had met once before in European competition , when they contested the 1976 UEFA Cup Final , which Liverpool won 4 – 3 on aggregate . 
 As reigning champions , Liverpool received a bye in the first round , which meant that Club Brugge played two matches more to reach the final . All but one of Liverpool 's matches were comfortable victories and they won each round with an aggregate score at least two goals to the good . In the first round Club Brugge beat Finnish champions Kuopion Palloseura by 9 – 2 on aggregate , but they won each of their subsequent rounds by just one goal . 
 Watched by a crowd of 92 @,@ 000 , the first half was goalless . Liverpool took the lead in the second half when Kenny Dalglish scored from a Graeme Souness pass . They held this lead to win the match 1 – 0 , securing Liverpool 's second European Cup and third European trophy in succession , and they became the first British team to retain the European Cup . 
 = = Route to the final = = 
 = = = Liverpool = = = 
 Liverpool were the reigning European Cup champions after defeating Borussia Mönchengladbach 3 – 1 to win the 1977 European Cup Final . Liverpool were also the reigning English champions , having won the English league during the 1976 – 77 season . As reigning European Cup champions , they received a bye in the first round . They were drawn against East German champions Dynamo Dresden in the second round . Liverpool were expected to win the first leg , played at Anfield , their home ground , and they did so with a score of 5 – 1 . Dresden won the second leg 2 @-@ 1 at their home ground , <unk> Stadium , giving Liverpool a 6 – 3 win on aggregate . 
 In the quarter @-@ finals Liverpool were drawn against Portuguese champions Benfica . The first leg was played at the Estádio da Luz , Benfica 's home ground . <unk> scored for Benfica in the 18th minute , Jimmy Case equalised for Liverpool in the 37th minute , and Emlyn Hughes scored midway through the second half to give Liverpool a 2 – 1 victory . The second leg at Anfield was won 4 – 1 by Liverpool , giving them a 6 – 2 win on aggregate . 
 Liverpool 's opponents in the semi @-@ finals were Borussia Mönchengladbach , the team they had beaten to win the European Cup the previous year . The first leg was played in Germany at the Bökelbergstadion , which was Borussia 's home ground at that time . Borussia took an early lead when Wilfried Hannes scored . Liverpool equalised in the 88th minute , when David Johnson scored , but in the following minute Rainer Bonhof scored from a 22 @-@ yard free @-@ kick , so Borussia won 2 @-@ 1 . In the second leg , at Anfield , Ray Kennedy scored for Liverpool in the sixth minute , Kenny Dalglish scored in the 35th minute , and Jimmy Case scored in the 56th minute , giving Liverpool a 3 – 0 win in the match and a 4 – 2 win on aggregate , and securing a place in their second consecutive European Cup final . 
 = = = Club Brugge = = = 
 Club Brugge gained entry to the competition by winning the 1976 – 77 Belgian First Division and thus becoming Belgian champions . Their opponents in the first round were the Finnish champions , Kuopion Palloseura ( <unk> ) . Brugge won the first leg 4 – 0 at <unk> 's home ground , the Kuopion <unk> , and the second leg 5 – 2 at Brugge 's ground , the Jan Breydel Stadium , thus winning the round 9 – 2 on aggregate . 
 Their opponents in the second round were Greek champions Panathinaikos . The first leg was in Belgium . Brugge won 2 – 0 after Roger Davies scored from a penalty in the 24th minute and Julien Cools scored midway through the second half . The second leg was played at Panathinaikos ' home ground , the Apostolos <unk> Stadium . Panathinaikos won the match 1 – 0 , so Brugge won the round with an aggregate score of 2 – 1 . 
 Brugge 's opponents in the quarter @-@ finals were Spanish champions Atlético Madrid . The first leg in Belgium was won 2 – 0 by Brugge . The second leg , played at the Vicente Calderón Stadium , Atlético 's home ground , was a close match : Atlético scored twice in the first half ; Cools scored for Brugge in the 60th minute ; Marcial Pina scored for Atlético two minutes later ; finally Raoul Lambert scored once more for Brugge . Thus Brugge lost the match 3 – 2 but won the round with a 4 – 3 aggregate score . 
 Italian champions Juventus were the opponents in the semi @-@ finals . The first leg , at the Stadio Olimpico di Torino , Juventus ' home ground , was goalless until the 86th minute , when Roberto Bettega scored to give Juventus a 1 – 0 victory . The second leg in Belgium was a similarly close affair . Brugge scored in the third minute , but that left a 1 – 1 aggregate score after 90 minutes , requiring extra time to be played . Had the aggregate score still been tied after the extra time , there would have been a penalty shootout , but René Vandereycken scored in the 116th minute to give Brugge a 2 – 0 win in the match and a 2 – 1 win on aggregate , to progress to their first European Cup final . 
 = = Match = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 1978 was the first year in which Club Brugge had reached the final , while Liverpool were appearing in their second successive final . The two teams had met before in the final of a European competition : the 1976 UEFA Cup Final , which Liverpool won 4 – 3 on aggregate . Liverpool were the reigning champions and were aiming to become the first British team to win successive European Cups . Liverpool had already won the UEFA Cup twice , in the 1972 – 73 and 1975 – 76 seasons . Brugge were the first Belgian team to reach the final of the European Cup and thus were aiming to become the first to win the trophy . 
 As the final was held in England at Wembley , Liverpool were clear favourites to retain the European Cup . Brugge were without a number of key players , such as Raoul Lambert , whose inclusion in the Brugge squad was rumoured before the final but never materialised . Liverpool were also without a few players . Tommy Smith , who had scored in the previous season 's final , was out after dropping a pick @-@ axe on his foot and breaking a toe . Striker David Johnson was also absent . He had strained knee ligaments during a match against Leicester City , an injury that ruled him out for the rest of the season . 
 = = = Summary = = = 
 The first half was dull . Brugge held back , using tight marking and the offside trap to restrict Liverpool 's attacking threat . Towards the end of the first half , Liverpool started to have more scoring chances . Ray Kennedy volleyed across the face of the goal , and Jimmy Case took a free kick that needed to be punched away by Brugge goalkeeper Birger Jensen . In the closing minutes of the first half , Jensen made two crucial saves : he blocked David Fairclough , who had made a run towards goal , and he tipped a header by Alan Hansen over the crossbar . So the score at half @-@ time was 0 – 0 . 
 Early in the second half , Jensen made another save , this time from Terry McDermott . Brugge 's first significant chance came a few minutes afterwards , when a cross @-@ field pass by René Vandereycken reached Jan Sørensen on the right @-@ hand side of the pitch . Sørensen 's subsequent shot was blocked by Liverpool captain Emlyn Hughes . The blocked shot was not cleared , but Ray Clemence reached the ball before Brugge 's Lajos <unk> could reach it and score . After this <unk> was substituted with Dirk Sanders . Liverpool made a substitution minutes later , with Steve Heighway replacing Case . Liverpool 's substitution had more effect , as Heighway gave Liverpool more width on the right @-@ hand side of the pitch . Two minutes after Heighway 's introduction , Kenny Dalglish received the ball in the Brugge penalty area from a Graeme Souness pass and placed his shot over a diving Jensen to give Liverpool a 1 – 0 lead . 
 Brugge now needed to score , but they only created one more chance . Ten minutes before the end of the match , Sørensen intercepted a Hansen backpass and shot . His shot was blocked by Clemence , and a goal @-@ line clearance by Phil Thompson prevented Brugge from equalising . The match remained at 1 – 0 and Liverpool won their second consecutive European Cup , becoming the first British team to retain the trophy . 
 = = = Details = = = 
 = = Post @-@ match = = 
 After the match , figures from each team were critical of the other team 's play . Liverpool defender Tommy Smith criticised Brugge for their approach , saying " It was a pathetic attitude . You never win anything like that . " Liverpool manager Bob Paisley also criticised the Belgian team 's tactics : " It takes two teams to make a game into a spectacle and Bruges only seemed to be concerned with keeping the score down . Bruges didn 't come at us much – apart from one mistake in our defence , they never looked like scoring . But they were well organised at the back and it was a case of breaking them down . We controlled the game from start to finish . " Meanwhile , Club Brugge manager Ernst Happel was critical of the quality of the Liverpool team : " Liverpool seemed only a shadow of the side we played in the UEFA Cup final two seasons ago . I was disappointed with them , but they deserved their victory although we were handicapped by injuries to two players . " 
 = First Flight ( Star Trek : Enterprise ) = 
 " First Flight " is the fiftieth episode of the American science fiction television series Star Trek : Enterprise , the twenty @-@ fourth episode of the second season . It first aired on May 14 , 2003 on UPN . It was written by John Shiban and Chris Black , and was directed by Star Trek : The Next Generation actor LeVar Burton ( Geordi La Forge ) . 
 Set in the 22nd century , the series follows the adventures of the first Starfleet starship Enterprise , registration NX @-@ 01 . In this episode , after Captain Jonathan Archer ( Scott Bakula ) is informed of the death of his former colleague , A. G. Robinson ( Keith Carradine ) , he relates the story of breaking the warp 2 @.@ 5 barrier to T 'Pol ( Jolene Blalock ) whilst investigating a dark matter nebula . 
 The episode was inspired by the story of the first American astronauts as seen in the film The Right Stuff . Several sets were specifically built for this episode , and a reference to the designer of the Enterprise from Star Trek : The Original Series is included in the story . Three crew @-@ members from the U.S. Navy aircraft carrier USS Enterprise ( CVN @-@ 65 ) appeared in this episode , and handed over a flag from the ship to the cast and crew . Critical reception to this episode was mostly positive , with praise directed at Scott Bakula . However , the episode received the second lowest number of viewers received by Enterprise at that point , which was blamed on it being aired opposite the series finale of Dawson 's Creek . 
 = = Plot = = 
 As Enterprise is about to investigate a dark matter cloud , Captain Archer is informed by Admiral Forrest that his former Starfleet colleague , Captain Robinson , has died in a rock climbing accident . Archer , seeking solitude , desires to travel into the nebula in a shuttlepod armed with spatial charges to excite the dark matter . Sub @-@ Commander T 'Pol , noting that captains are prohibited from traveling off @-@ ship unaccompanied , joins him and while underway , she coaxes him into relating the story of the Warp 5 program on Earth . 
 In a series of flashbacks , Commander Archer meets with Commodore Forest , and is informed that although he excelled in simulations , his colleague Commander Robinson has been awarded the test ship , the NX Alpha . Disappointed , Archer goes to the 602 Club , a local bar , bumping into Robinson there . Later , Robinson takes the scheduled flight aboard the NX Alpha , breaking the warp 2 @.@ 0 barrier . He refuses a command from Forest to stop and instead increases speed ; the craft soon destabilizes and is destroyed as it approaches warp 2 @.@ 2 , but Robinson escapes . The Vulcans argue that the warp program should be postponed , but Archer wants the program , and his father 's engine research , to continue . Archer , and his new friend Lieutenant Tucker , then go to the 602 Club to discuss the problem . Robinson arrives and blames Archer 's father , and the two end up in a fist fight . 
 The next day Archer discovers Robinson packing up the contents of his locker . He concedes that it is primarily an intermix problem , but that the engine could still work . Archer and Robinson then steal the NX Beta , with Tucker in flight control , but it starts to suffer the same issues as the Alpha . As Starfleet security detains Tucker , Archer and Robinson manage to coax the engines towards their goal of warp 2 @.@ 5 . Afterwards , Archer and Robinson are reprimanded by Starfleet , and the Vulcans ground the program for a year , but they eventually confirm that his father 's design was sound . Back in the future , Archer launches the charges into the cloud , and T 'Pol suggests that it be named after Archer 's close friend , Robinson . 
 = = Production = = 
 " First Flight " was inspired by the 1983 film The Right Stuff , the story of the test pilots at Edwards Air Force Base and the first NASA astronauts . Reference is also made to the Apollo 11 lunar landing , when Archer mentions that no @-@ one remembers astronaut Buzz Aldrin 's first words when he stepped onto the moon . His actual first words were " Looks like the secondary strut had a little thermal effects on it right here , Neil . " 
 Warp drive was first mentioned in Gene Roddenberry 's first @-@ draft pitch for Star Trek , dated March 11 , 1964 , although in that version it was referred to as a " space @-@ warp drive " . The drive allows for a vessel to travel faster than the speed of light by warping space @-@ time around the ship itself . In 1994 , physicist Miguel Alcubierre created the theoretical Alcubierre drive , which used a similar theory . In the Star Trek universe , Zefram Cochrane invented the drive in 2063 . Cochrane was portrayed by James Cromwell in the film Star Trek : First Contact and re @-@ appeared in this role in the pilot of Enterprise , " Broken Bow " . That episode showed the culmination of the development of the warp 5 engine , which was designed by Jonathan Archer 's father , Henry , in the launch of the Enterprise itself . The Vulcans during this period gave oversight and advice to Starfleet in the development of the warp drive , but sought to slow the progress of the humans . " First Flight " showed a previously unseen period in the development of the fictional warp drive , with the pursuit of the warp 2 barrier . The dark matter seen in this episode is a real phenomenon , however it is unclear exactly what it is . It cannot be seen by telescopes , and it is theorised that it makes up a great deal of the matter in the universe . 
 John Shiban and Chris Black wrote " First Flight " , the fiftieth episode of Enterprise . Former Star Trek : The Next Generation actor LeVar Burton directed the episode , his second of the season and fourth overall . He had previously directed episodes of other shows in the franchise , including the hundredth episode of Star Trek : Voyager , " Timeless " . In this episode , Tucker states that his commanding officer at the testing facility is Captain Jefferies , this is a direct reference to Matt Jefferies , designer of the original USS Enterprise ( NCC @-@ 1701 ) . Jefferies died two months after the episode was aired . 
 Production began on March 10 , 2003 , and concluded on March 18 . The first days ' shoot consisted of scenes in the shuttlepod with Blalock and Bakula as other members of the cast were still shooting scenes for the episodes " Horizon " and " Regeneration " . The present @-@ day scenes were completed on the second day of filming , with the remaining five days of shooting being devoted to the flashback scenes . Sets were built specifically for this episode , including the NX Command Center , the 602 Club and the interior of the NX prototype vessels . 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 The guest cast in " First Flight " included the return of Vaughn Armstrong in the recurring role of Admiral Forrest , although this was his most demanding shoot so far , requiring him to be on set for five of the seven days of filming . Keith Carradine was cast as A. G. Robinson ; Carradine is also a musician , and won the Academy Award for Best Original Song for " I 'm Easy " from the 1975 film Nashville . He is also the half @-@ brother of fellow actor David Carradine . This episode also saw the return of some actors who had appeared in other series of the Star Trek franchise . These included Michael Canavan , who appeared in this episode as a Vulcan advisor , but previously appeared in the Star Trek : Deep Space Nine episode " Defiant " as a member of the Maquis terrorist group . Also appearing in " First Flight " was Victor <unk> . He had previously appeared in DS9 , Voyager and the movie Star Trek : First Contact . 
 " First Flight " also provided the stage for an exchange with the United States Navy aircraft carrier USS Enterprise ( CVN @-@ 65 ) . Three crew members of the real @-@ life Enterprise had been voted as " Sailors of the Year " by the U.S. Navy , and so were given the roles of extras in this episode . This was not the first time such an exchange had occurred ; previous winners had appeared as crew members on board the fictional Enterprise in the episode " Desert Crossing " . However , this time around they were given roles at the NX Command Center instead . Aviation Maintenance <unk> 2nd Class James D. Frey portrayed a technician , Navy Counselor 1st Class Kathleen J. Grant played a Senator and Hospital Corpsman 3rd Class Thomas P. Hunt was the Senator 's assistant . All three were pleased to be appearing on the show , with Grant saying that " My nephew told all of the kids at his school his aunt was going to be on Star Trek . That makes the experience even more of a thrill for me " , and Hunt saying " This will be on reruns for years to come , when I 'm 60 , I 'll be able to say , ' Hey , that 's me on Enterprise . ' " . In return , the three sailors presented the cast and crew of Star Trek : Enterprise with a flag that had been flying on the aircraft carrier earlier in the month . 
 = = Reception and home media release = = 
 " First Flight " was first shown in the United States on May 14 , 2003 on UPN . It was aired on the same night as the following episode , " Bounty " . Both episodes saw a reduction in viewing figures compared to previous weeks , which was attributed to them being broadcast at the same time as the series finale of Dawson 's Creek on The WB . " First Flight " received a 2 @.@ 4 / 4 % share among adults between the ages of 18 and 49 . This means that it was seen by 2 @.@ 4 percent of all 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ olds , and 4 percent of all 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ olds watching television at the time of the broadcast . It was the second lowest rating received by the series at that point , and " Bounty " received a slightly decreased rating of 2 @.@ 3 / 4 % , but the viewing figures were higher . Bounty was watched by 3 @.@ 54 million reviewers , whereas " First Flight " was watched by 3 @.@ 3 million . " First Flight " was the 93rd most watched programme of the evening . The episode aired during the following week was the season two finale , whose figures rebounded slightly ; " The Expanse " had a final rating of 2 @.@ 8 / 4 % with an audience of 3 @.@ 88 million . 
 Michelle Erica Green reviewed the episode for TrekNation , and thought that Scott Bakula in particular gave one of his best performances of the show so far . Both he and Carradine worked well together , but thought that the other characters in the flashback were clichéd . Overall , she thought it was a " superbly filmed episode " with several new sets which were well used , and the visual effects were good . Jamahl Epsicokhan at his website " Jammer 's Reviews " gave the episode a score of three out of four , saying that he welcomed the back story to the series being fleshed out in this episode . He thought that the episode itself wasn 't very challenging to watch , but thought that the melancholy ending was fitting . He even thought that it might be worthwhile to go further back in time to see the actual founding of Starfleet . 
 " First Flight " was first released for home media use on DVD as part of the second series box set of Star Trek : Enterprise . The release featured text commentary on the episode from Star Trek and NASA designers Michael and Denise Okuda . The episode also featured as one of the three Enterprise episodes on the Star Trek Fan Collective DVD Set " Captain 's Log " . The set featured episodes selected by each of the Captains from the Star Trek series , and several chosen by the fans , a total of seventeen episodes . A release on Blu @-@ ray Disc for season two occurred on August 20 , 2013 . 
 = Brian Epstein = 
 Brian Samuel Epstein ( / <unk> / ; 19 September 1934 – 27 August 1967 ) was an English music entrepreneur , best known for managing the Beatles . Epstein first discovered the Beatles in November 1961 during a lunchtime Cavern Club performance . He was instantly impressed and saw great potential in the group . Epstein was rejected by nearly all major recording companies in London , until he secured a meeting with George Martin , head of EMI 's Parlophone label . In May 1962 , Martin agreed to sign the Beatles , partly because of Epstein 's conviction that the group would become internationally famous . 
 The Beatles ' early success has been attributed to Epstein 's management style , and the band trusted him without hesitation . In addition to handling the Beatles ' business affairs , Epstein often stepped in to mediate personal disputes within the group . The Beatles ' unquestioning loyalty to Epstein later proved detrimental , as the band rarely read contracts before signing them . Shortly after the song " Please Please Me " rose to the top of the charts in 1963 , Epstein advised the creation of Northern Songs , a publishing company that would control the copyrights of all Lennon – McCartney compositions recorded between 1963 and 1973 . Music publisher Dick James and his partner Charles Silver owned 51 @-@ percent of the company , Lennon and McCartney each owned 20 % , and Epstein owned 9 % . By 1969 , Lennon and McCartney had lost control of all publishing rights to ATV Music Publishing . Still , Epstein 's death in 1967 marked the beginning of the group 's dissolution and had a profound effect on each Beatle . In 1997 , Paul McCartney said , " If anyone was the Fifth Beatle , it was Brian . " 
 Epstein 's influence on the Beatles and his complicated personal life continue to provoke controversy . In 2012 , Tom Hanks announced that his production company Playtone will back a biopic of the famed Beatles manager . They describe the film as " the story of a man who threw the biggest party of the 1960s , but ultimately forgot to invite himself . " In 2013 , author Vivek Tiwary released the graphic novel The Fifth Beatle : The Brian Epstein Story . A film of the same name was scheduled for release in 2014 , originally to be produced by Bruce Cohen and directed by Peyton Reed . Tiwary said about that project that the film would " be less a music bio and more of an inspirational human @-@ interest story about an outsider " . Tiwary , Stuart Ford , and Simon Cowell went on to co @-@ produce a film by that name , said to be set for release in 2016 . Tiwary , credited as the film 's writer , wrote at the IMDb : ' His story will unfold via a mixture of history , fantasy , allegory , dream sequences , and hallucinations . ' In March 2016 , it was announced that the project would be a television series . 
 = = Ancestry = = 
 Epstein 's family was Jewish ; his grandfather Isaac Epstein was from Lithuania ( then part of the Russian Empire ) and had arrived in Britain in the 1890s at the age of eighteen . His grandmother Dinah was the daughter of Joseph ( a draper ) and Esther Hyman , who had emigrated from Russia to Britain ( c . 1871 / 72 ) with their eldest son Jacob . The Hymans had six more children . 
 Isaac Epstein married Dinah Hyman in Manchester in 1900 . In 1901 , Isaac and Dinah were living at 80 Walton Road , Liverpool with Isaac 's sister Rachael Epstein , above the furniture dealership that he founded . Dinah and Isaac 's third child was Harry Epstein , Brian Epstein 's father . Eventually the family moved to a larger home at 27 Anfield Road , Liverpool . After Harry and his brother Leslie had joined the family firm , Isaac Epstein founded I. Epstein and Sons and enlarged his furniture business by taking over adjacent shops at 62 / 72 Walton Road to sell a range of other goods , such as musical instruments and household appliances . They called the expanding business NEMS ( North End Music Stores ) , which offered lenient credit terms , and from which Paul McCartney 's father once bought a piano . Epstein 's mother Malka ( nicknamed " Queenie " by her family , as Malka means " queen " in Hebrew ) was also involved in the Hyman furniture business , which also owned the Sheffield <unk> Company . 
 In 2003 , the family home on Anfield Road was converted into a Beatles @-@ themed hotel called Epstein House . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Epstein was born on 19 September 1934 in Rodney Street , Liverpool . Harry and Queenie also had another son named Clive who was born 22 months after his older brother . During World War II , the Epsteins moved to Southport — where two schools expelled Epstein for laziness and poor performance — but returned to Liverpool in 1945 . The Epsteins lived at 197 Queens Drive , Childwall in Liverpool , and remained there for the next 30 years . 
 Epstein 's parents moved him from one boarding school to another , including <unk> School in Dorset . He spent two years at Wrekin College in Shropshire , where he was taught the violin . Shortly before his 16th birthday , he sent a long letter to his father , explaining that he wanted to become a dress designer , but Harry Epstein was adamantly opposed , and his son finally had to " report for duty " at the family 's furniture shop , after serving an apprenticeship for six months at another company . He started work at his family 's business on a £ 5 per week wage , and was congratulated on his first day of work for selling a £ 12 dining room table to a woman who had originally wanted to buy a mirror . 
 In December 1952 , Epstein was conscripted to do his national service as a data entry clerk into the Royal Army Service Corps , and was posted to the Albany Street Barracks near Regent 's Park in London , where he was often reprimanded for not picking up his army pay . After returning to Liverpool , he was put in charge of the Clarendon <unk> shop in Hoylake and was made a director of NEMS in 1955 . In September 1956 , he took a trip to London to meet a friend but after being there for only one day , was robbed of his passport , birth certificate , <unk> , wristwatch , and all the money he had on him . He did not want his parents to find out , so he worked as a department store clerk until he had earned enough money to buy a train ticket back to Liverpool . Back in Liverpool , he confessed his homosexuality to a psychiatrist — a friend of the Epstein family — who suggested to Harry Epstein that his son should leave Liverpool as soon as possible . During the sessions , Epstein revealed his ambition of becoming an actor , so his parents allowed him go to London to study . 
 Epstein attended the Royal Academy of Dramatic Art ( RADA ) in London . His RADA classmates included actors Susannah York , Albert Finney , and Peter O 'Toole , but Epstein dropped out after the third term , saying that he had become " too much of a businessman to enjoy being a student , and I didn 't like being a student at all . " He said in 1964 that he " felt like an old man at the age of 21 " . He also revealed that he would have liked to produce a theatre play , or even act , " in something by Chekhov " , or a " straight drama " by John Osborne . 
 Back in Liverpool , his father put his son in charge of the record department of the family 's newly opened NEMS music store on Great Charlotte Street . Epstein worked " day and night " at the store to make it a success , and it became one of the biggest musical retail outlets in Northern England . The Epsteins opened a second store at 12 – 14 Whitechapel , and Epstein was put in charge of the entire operation . He often walked across the road to the Lewis 's department store ( which also had a music section ) where Peter Brown was employed . He watched Brown 's sales technique and was impressed enough to lure him to work for NEMS with the offer of a higher salary and a commission on sales . 
 = = The Beatles = = 
 Epstein first noticed the Beatles in issues of Mersey Beat and on numerous posters around Liverpool , before he asked the editor of Mersey Beat Bill Harry who they were . Harry had previously convinced Epstein to sell the magazine at NEMS , with the Beatles featured on the front page of its second issue . The Beatles had recorded the " My Bonnie " single with Tony Sheridan in Germany , and some months after its release Epstein asked his personal assistant Alistair Taylor about it in NEMS . Epstein 's version of the story was that customer Raymond Jones walked into the NEMS shop and asked him for the " My Bonnie " single , which made Epstein curious about the group . Taylor later claimed that he had used the name of Jones ( a regular customer ) to order the single and paid the deposit himself , knowing that Epstein would notice it and order further copies . Harry and McCartney later repudiated Epstein 's story , as Harry had been talking to Epstein for a long time about the Beatles — the group that he promoted the most in Mersey Beat — with McCartney saying , " Brian [ Epstein ] knew perfectly well who the Beatles were ; they were on the front page of the second issue of Mersey Beat " . On 3 August 1961 , Epstein started a regular music column in the Mersey Beat called " Stop the World — And Listen To Everything In It : Brian Epstein of NEMS " . 
 The Beatles were due to perform a lunchtime concert in the Cavern Club on 9 November 1961 . According to club owner <unk> , Epstein had visited the club quite a few times previously on Saturday nights , once asking <unk> to book a group for his twenty @-@ first birthday party . Epstein asked Harry to arrange for Epstein and his assistant Taylor to watch the Beatles perform . The club allowed Epstein and Taylor to enter without queuing . They bypassed the line of fans at the door and heard Bob Wooler , the resident DJ , announce a welcome message over the club 's public @-@ address system : " We have someone rather famous in the audience today . Mr. Brian Epstein , the owner of NEMS ... " 
 Epstein later talked about the performance : 
 " I was immediately struck by their music , their beat and their sense of humour on stage – and , even afterwards , when I met them , I was struck again by their personal charm . And it was there that , really , it all started " . 
 After the performance , Epstein and Taylor went into the dressing room ( which he later described as being " as big as a broom cupboard " ) to talk to the group . The Beatles , all regular NEMS customers , immediately recognised Epstein , but before he could congratulate them on their performance , George Harrison said , " And what brings Mr. Epstein here ? " Epstein replied with , " We just popped in to say hello . I enjoyed your performance " . He introduced Taylor , who merely nodded a greeting , said , " Well done , then , goodbye " , and left . Epstein and Taylor went to Peacock 's restaurant in <unk> Hey for lunch , and during the meal Epstein asked Taylor what he thought about the group . Taylor replied that he honestly thought they were " absolutely awful " , but there was something " remarkable " about them . Epstein sat there smiling for a long time before exclaiming , " I think they 're tremendous ! " Later , when Epstein was paying the bill , he grabbed Taylor 's arm and said , " Do you think I should manage them ? " 
 The Beatles played at the Cavern over the next three weeks , and Epstein was always there to watch them . He contacted Allan Williams ( their previous promoter / manager ) to confirm that Williams no longer had any ties to the group , but Williams advised Epstein " not to touch them with a fucking barge pole " because of a Hamburg concert percentage that the group had refused to pay . 
 = = = Management contract = = = 
 In a meeting with the group at NEMS on 3 December 1961 , Epstein proposed the idea of managing the Beatles . John Lennon , Harrison , and Pete Best arrived late for the meeting , as they had been drinking at the Grapes pub in Mathew Street . McCartney also did not arrive on time because he had just got up and was " taking a bath " , as Harrison explained . Epstein was upset , but Harrison placated him by saying , " He may be late , but he 'll be very clean . " Lennon had invited Wooler to be at the meeting so that he could give his opinion of Epstein , but he introduced Wooler by saying , " This is me dad " . Epstein was reticent throughout the short meeting , only asking if they had a manager . After learning that they had not , he said , " It seems to me that with everything going on , someone ought to be looking after you " . He had further meetings with the group on 6 and 10 December 1961 . 
 McCartney , Harrison , and Best were under 21 , and therefore needed the consent of their parents to enter into a contract . Best and his mother — Mona Best , owner of the Casbah Coffee Club — were impressed with Epstein 's professional image , as were the other Beatles , because he was a businessman , wore expensive suits , and owned a large car . Best 's mother said that Epstein " could be good for them [ the Beatles ] " . McCartney 's father was sceptical about a Jewish manager and warned his son to be careful about finances . Lennon 's aunt and guardian Mimi Smith was against the idea , believing that Epstein would lose interest when something else would attract his interest ; but Lennon had just turned twenty @-@ one and he ignored his aunt 's advice . 
 The Beatles signed a five @-@ year contract with Epstein on 24 January 1962 which gave Epstein 10 @-@ 15 per cent of their income . They signed a new contract in October 1962 which gave Epstein 15 , 20 , or 25 per cent of revenues , depending on how much he helped the band earn . The Beatles would then share any income after various expenses had been deducted . Epstein then formed a management company , NEMS Enterprises , telling his parents that managing the group was only a part @-@ time occupation and would not interfere with the family business . 
 The Beatles signed Epstein 's first management contract , but Epstein did not . He later told Taylor , " Well , if they ever want to tear it up , they can hold me but I can 't hold them " . ( Note : English law would have enforced the contract through the doctrine of part performance ) . The contract stated that Epstein would receive a management commission of 25 per cent of the group 's gross income after a certain financial threshold had been reached . The Beatles argued for a smaller percentage , but Epstein pointed out that he had been paying their expenses for months without receiving anything in return . On 1 October 1962 , four days before the release of " Love Me Do " , Epstein signed Lennon and McCartney to a three @-@ year NEMS publishing contract . 
 = = = The Beatles ' appearance on stage = = = 
 Epstein had no prior experience of artist management , yet he had a strong influence on the band 's early dress code and stage demeanor . They had previously worn blue jeans and leather jackets , and they would stop and start songs when they felt like it or when an audience member requested a certain song . David <unk> Szatmary states that when Epstein first saw them at the Cavern Club , he thought , " They were a scruffy crowd in leather , and they were not very tidy and not very clean . They smoked as they played and they ate and talked and pretended to hit each other . " Epstein encouraged them to wear suits and ties , insisted that they stop swearing , smoking , drinking , or eating on stage , and also suggested the famous synchronised bow at the end of their performances . McCartney was the first to agree with Epstein 's suggestions , believing that they reflected Epstein 's RADA training . Epstein explained that the process from leather jackets and jeans to suits took some time : ' I encouraged them , at first , to get out of the leather jackets and jeans , and I wouldn 't allow them to appear in jeans after a short time , and then , after that step , I got them to wear sweaters on stage , and then , very reluctantly , eventually , suits . ' The collarless suits which the group started wearing were of German design , which they had previously seen in Hamburg but which Epstein approved of : ' I thought it was an excellent design at the <unk> 
 Lennon resisted wearing suits and ties , but later said , ' I 'll wear a suit ; I 'll wear a bloody balloon if somebody 's going to pay me . ' Epstein began seeking publicity by ' charming and <unk> ... the newspaper people ' , as Lennon said in 1972 . According to McCartney , ' The gigs went up in stature and though the pay went up only a little bit , it did go up ' ; they were ' now playing better places . ' The group was now far more organised , having one single diary in which to record bookings , rather than using whoever 's diary was to hand . The group usually called him ' Mr. Epstein ' or ' Brian ' in interviews , but in private the group abbreviated his name to ' <unk> ' or ' Bri ' . 
 = = = Record contract = = = 
 Epstein made numerous trips to London to visit record companies in the hope of securing a record contract , but many rejected him , including Columbia , Pye , Philips , Oriole , and most notoriously Decca . On 13 December 1961 , at Epstein 's invitation , Mike Smith of Decca travelled from London to Liverpool to watch the group at the Cavern Club , which led to an audition in London on 1 January 1962 ( see The Decca Audition ) . Decca informed Epstein one month later that the audition tapes had been rejected . The Beatles later found out that Epstein had paid Decca producer Tony Meehan ( ex @-@ drummer of the Shadows ) to produce the studio recordings . While Epstein was negotiating with Decca , he also approached Ron White , an EMI marketing executive , who contacted EMI producers Norrie <unk> , Walter Ridley , and Norman Newell , but they all declined to record the group . White could not contact EMI 's fourth staff producer George Martin , as he was on holiday . 
 On 8 May 1962 , Epstein visited the HMV store ( owned by EMI ) in 363 Oxford Street , London to have the Decca tape transferred to 78 rpm acetates . An HMV disc @-@ cutter named Jim Foy liked the recordings , suggesting that Epstein should contact Sid Coleman , the head of EMI 's record publishing division which controlled the publishing company Ardmore & Beechwood . Coleman liked the recordings and sent Epstein to Martin , the A & R manager of Parlophone . On the next day , 9 May 1962 , Epstein met Martin at EMI 's Abbey Road Studios . 
 Supposedly , Martin had no intention of signing The Beatles after listening to the Decca recordings , but he offered a contract after learning that Epstein would cancel all his substantial NEMS business with EMI . Martin denied this account by saying that Epstein 's conviction that The Beatles would become internationally famous finally convinced him to offer a recording contract . He also later admitted that EMI had ' nothing to lose ' by signing a contract with The Beatles , as the terms of payment were negligible . At this point , almost every other British record company had rejected the group , and Martin had never heard the group live . The Beatles were eventually signed to EMI 's small Parlophone label , which had very little experience with pop or rock artists . Upon signing the contract , Epstein immediately sent a telegram to The Beatles ( who were in Hamburg ) and to the Mersey Beat music journal in Liverpool . 
 The recording contract gave The Beatles one penny ( 1d ) for each record sold , which was split among the four members , meaning that each earned one farthing per copy . The royalty rate was further reduced for singles sold outside the UK ; the group received half of one penny per single , which was again split amongst the whole group . Martin scheduled the first recording session to be on 6 June 1962 at Abbey Road Studios . Epstein later renegotiated EMI 's royalty rate and , on 27 January 1967 , the Beatles signed a new nine @-@ year contract with EMI . The contract stipulated that 25 per cent would be paid to NEMS for the full nine years even if The Beatles decided not to renew their management contract with Epstein , which was up for renewal later that year . 
 = = = = Dismissal of Pete Best = = = = 
 After the first recording session on 6 June 1962 , Martin had one reservation , as he felt that using an experienced studio session drummer would improve the recording , rather than using Pete Best ( this was normal practice at the time ) . Lennon , McCartney , and Harrison asked Epstein to sack Best when they learned that Martin wanted to replace him on their recordings . Epstein agonised about the decision , asking the Cavern 's DJ Bob Wooler if it was a good idea . Wooler replied that Best was ' very popular with the fans ' who would not like it at all . Epstein dismissed Best on 16 August , over two and half months after the first recording session at EMI studios . Best was never given an explanation for his dismissal . 
 Epstein initially offered the vacant position to Johnny Hutchinson of The Big Three , a group that Epstein later managed . Hutchinson turned down the offer , saying , ' Pete Best is a very good friend of mine . I couldn 't do the dirty on him ' — although Hutchinson did play for The Beatles at short notice when Best did not turn up on the evening of his dismissal and for two subsequent bookings , until Ringo Starr was able to join . Starr was well known to the group , as he was then playing with Rory Storm and the Hurricanes , the resident group at Butlins ' holiday complex in Skegness . He had also occasionally replaced Best when the drummer was ill , and had performed at a recording session with Lennon , McCartney , and Harrison in Hamburg . 
 = = = After Candlestick Park = = = 
 The Beatles ' hectic schedule kept Epstein very busy between 1963 and 1965 with touring plus television and film work . Their last live concert was at Candlestick Park in San Francisco on 29 August 1966 , and Epstein 's management duties then changed to reflect the changing nature of their career . He pressured them to continue touring but they steadfastly refused . 
 = = Business dealings = = 
 Epstein once offered all four Beatles a fixed wage of £ 50 a week for life . Harrison remembered that he was earning £ 25 a week at the time , which was more than the £ 10 a week that his father was earning . The group declined Epstein 's offer , believing that they were worth much more than £ 50 a week . 
 NEMS had a staff of twenty @-@ five at the time of its move from Liverpool to London in 1964 . NEMS booked the Beatles ' concerts , and it also presented groups as an opening act . It accrued money as promoter , booking agent , and manager for all concerts . The Beatles were constantly in demand by concert promoters , and Epstein took advantage of the situation to avoid paying some taxes by accepting " hidden " fees on the night of a performance , which he always kept in a brown paper bag . 
 Epstein also successfully managed Gerry & the Pacemakers , Billy J. Kramer and the Dakotas ( who had four hits with Lennon – McCartney songs ) , the Fourmost ( Lennon wrote their first two singles ) , the <unk> ( Epstein 's first American group ) , and Cilla Black ( who was Epstein 's only female artist ) , as well as Tommy Quickly and Sounds Incorporated ( later known as Sounds Inc . ) . He sent his roster of artists on " package tours " around the UK , a common practice at the time . This involved short sets by each act , alternating with a compère or a comedian . Epstein once revealed that , even though he was entitled to be reimbursed by acts for expenses incurred , he paid for his own flights to and from the US , as he did not see himself as being part of a touring group . Photographs , transport , and international telephone calls were paid from his own 25 per cent share in profits . 
 The Beatles toured the Philippines in July 1966 , playing two shows at the Rizal Memorial Football Stadium in Manila . Epstein unintentionally snubbed the nation 's first lady Imelda Marcos when presented with an invitation to a breakfast party . He had politely declined on behalf of the group , as it was their policy never to accept such official invitations . The Beatles and their entourage were ejected from their hotel on the same day and given a police escort to the airport , even though Epstein had publicly apologised for the misunderstanding in a televised statement , which was not seen or heard because of static . The entourage boarded the plane for home , but Epstein and Beatles ' assistant Mal Evans were ordered off , both believing that they would not be allowed back on the plane . Epstein was forced to give the tax authorities £ 6 @,@ 800 worth of Philippine peso notes earned from the Manila shows and to sign a tax bond verifying the exchange before being allowed back on the plane with Evans . 
 Epstein added the Vic Lewis Organisation to NEMS in 1966 , and later brought impresario Robert Stigwood in as a manager . He once offered to sell the control of NEMS to Stigwood , without telling any of his artists about the offer . McCartney was taking a more active interest in NEMS ' finances as it became known that some artists with more ruthless managers claimed to be benefiting from more commercially advantageous terms , such as the Rolling Stones under the management of Allen Klein . After Epstein 's death , Clive Epstein assumed control of NEMS as the company 's second largest shareholder . Stigwood then tried to take over management of NEMS , but all four Beatles vigorously objected , with Lennon saying , " We don 't know you . Why would we do this ? " 
 McCartney admitted that they had always signed all the contracts that Epstein presented to them without reading them first , but after Epstein 's death , Lennon complained , " Well , he was alright . I 've found out since , of course , that he wasn 't quite as honest to us as he made out " . Despite this , other interviews with Lennon report him as being loyal to Epstein 's memory : " We had complete faith in him when he was running us . To us , he was the expert " . When asked in 1964 about his standing as a manager or businessman , Epstein replied , " Fair , as a businessman , fair . I 've got a business background , and probably a reasonable business brain . I 'm no , sort of , genius [ laughter ] . " Asked about his deficiencies , Epstein replied , " I 'm probably too conscious of ideas , rather than finance behind ideas . " 
 = = = Merchandising = = = 
 Before the Beatles achieved nationwide success in Britain , Epstein had permitted a company ( run by his cousins and initially catering to fan club members ) , to produce Beatles ' sweaters for 30 shillings ( £ 1 @.@ 50 ) and badges for 6 pence ( 6d ) ( 2 ½ p ) . It sold 15 @,@ 000 sweaters and 50 @,@ 000 badges as the group 's popularity grew . When Beatlemania swept the UK in November 1963 , Epstein was besieged by novelty goods companies desperate to use the Beatles ' name on plastic guitars , drums , disc racks , badges , belts and other merchandise . Epstein refused to allow the Beatles to endorse any product directly , but through NEMS Enterprises he granted discretionary licences to companies who were able to produce quality products at a fair price , even though many companies were already selling products without a licence . 
 During the first Beatles ' trip to the US , merchandisers pitched many products to Epstein , including Beatles clocks , pens , cigarette lighters , plastic wigs , bracelets , games , etc . , but he rejected them all . This was because he had already allowed David Jacobs , the lawyer for NEMS , to give away 90 per cent of merchandising rights to one Nicky Byrne , in the UK . This was later deemed to be a disastrous mistake , as it left only 10 per cent for Epstein , NEMS and the Beatles . Byrne then took over Epstein 's Stramsact merchandising in the UK and set up Seltaeb ( Beatles spelled backwards ) , in the US . While the Beatles were ensconced in the Plaza Hotel in New York , Epstein was further besieged by calls and visits from promoters , retailers , television commentators and hustlers . 
 Mindful of the number of records the group was selling in the US , Capitol Records sent a well @-@ spoken Yorkshire woman , Wendy Hanson , to the Plaza Hotel to act as Epstein 's secretary and to filter his calls . Hanson later worked solely with Epstein in his Albemarle Street office in London , which was separate from the NEMS office . Lennon later said , " On the business end he [ Epstein ] ripped us off on the Seltaeb thing " . McCartney said years later , " He [ Epstein ] looked to his dad for business advice , and his dad knew how to run a furniture store in Liverpool " . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 Epstein asked chartered accountant James Trevor Isherwood to set up a company to collect Lennon and McCartney 's PRS payments — called <unk> — which he did on 12 May 1964 . When he first visited Epstein 's office , Isherwood was surprised to learn that Epstein took 25 per cent of the gross income , and not the 10 per cent that he believed most other managers received at that time . All of Epstein 's expenses were deducted from his artists ' gross income , including office rental , staff wages , travel , telephone costs , and entertaining expenses . Before his death , Epstein knew that the renegotiation of his management contract ( up for renewal on 30 September 1967 ) , would lower his management fee from 25 to 10 per cent , and that NEMS would no longer receive a share of the Beatles ' performance fees , reducing its revenues still further . 
 = = = Publishing = = = 
 The Beatles entered into a publishing agreement with Dick James Music ( <unk> ) , so James set up a company called Northern Songs . James and his financial partner and accountant , Charles Silver , would each receive 25 per cent of the shares . Lennon and McCartney received 20 per cent each , with Epstein receiving the remaining 10 per cent . The Beatles ' PRS income increased rapidly , so Epstein asked Isherwood to devise a way of avoiding the tax that Lennon and McCartney would owe . Isherwood suggested a stock market flotation for Northern Songs . He also suggested to Epstein that during the flotation Lennon and McCartney should move to houses near Isherwood 's own in Esher . Lennon , Harrison and Starr agreed , while Epstein and McCartney remained in London . 
 = = = Promoter and presenter = = = 
 After settling in London in 1965 , Epstein rented an office in Monmouth Street , and later bought the lease of the Saville Theatre on Shaftesbury Avenue . He promoted new works by writers such as Arnold Wesker , in productions that occasionally fell foul of the Lord Chamberlain for including " obscene " content or nudity . In 1966 Epstein reinvented it as a music venue featuring various US acts . On 20 February 1967 , Epstein sacked the manager of the theatre , one Michael Bullock , for lowering the safety curtain the previous day shortly before the end of a Chuck Berry concert that Epstein was attending with Lennon and Starr . Two fans had climbed onto the stage to dance , the curtain came down , and they were pushed from the stage . Although Bullock had not given the order , he was held responsible . In the wake of the Beatles ' success Epstein was asked to appear on several music @-@ based TV programmes in Britain . He also hosted a regular part of the US TV show Hullabaloo , filming his appearances in the UK . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Throughout Epstein 's life he was known to be kind and caring to his family , friends of his family , and business colleagues . When Lennon married Cynthia Powell , on 23 August 1962 , Epstein served as best man and paid for the couple 's celebration lunch afterwards . During Cynthia 's pregnancy Epstein paid for a private room in a hospital and offered the Lennons the sole use of his flat on Falkner Street , Liverpool , when they needed a home . He also agreed to be godfather to Lennon 's son Julian . 
 = = = Sexual orientation = = = 
 Epstein 's homosexuality was not publicly known until some years after his death , although it had been an open secret among his friends and business associates . 
 While Epstein was in the Army , he commissioned a tailor to make an officer 's uniform for him that he wore when cruising the bars of London , but was arrested one night at the Army and Navy Club in Piccadilly by the military police for impersonating an officer . Epstein managed to avoid a court martial by agreeing to see an army psychiatrist , who learned of Epstein 's sexuality . After 10 months he was discharged from the army on medical grounds for being " emotionally and mentally unfit " . Epstein later stated that his first homosexual experience was when he returned to Liverpool after being discharged . 
 Epstein spent a year studying acting at RADA , but dropped out shortly after his arrest for " persistent importuning " outside a men 's public toilet in Swiss Cottage , London ; cottaging , as it was called , was one of the few public places gay and bisexual men could meet at the time , especially if they were closeted . When Epstein first saw the Beatles perform he noticed their stage attire first , saying , " They were rather <unk> dressed , in the nicest possible way , or I should say in the most attractive way : black leather jackets , jeans , long hair of course . " McCartney said that when Epstein started to manage the Beatles they knew that he was homosexual but did not care , because he encouraged them professionally and offered them access to previously off @-@ limits social circles . 
 Although Lennon often made sarcastic comments about Epstein 's homosexuality to friends and to Epstein personally , no one outside the group 's inner circle was allowed to comment . Ian Sharp , one of Lennon 's art school friends , once made a sarcastic remark about Epstein , saying , " Which one of you [ Beatles ] does he fancy ? " Sharp was sent a letter by Epstein 's office within 48 hours that demanded a complete apology . Sharp apologised , but was then completely ostracised . McCartney sent him a letter directing him to have no contact with any of them in the future . Epstein went on holiday to places such as Amsterdam , Torremolinos and Barcelona or Manchester at weekends , as the attitude to homosexuals there was more tolerant than Liverpool , even though Liverpool did have several gay bars . 
 In his autobiography , Best stated that Epstein drove them both to Blackpool one evening where Epstein expressed his " very fond admiration . " Epstein then supposedly said , " Would you find it embarrassing if I ask you to stay in a hotel overnight ? " Best replied that he was not interested , and the two never mentioned the incident again . There were reports of a brief sexual encounter between Lennon and Epstein during a four @-@ day holiday in Barcelona , in April 1963 . Lennon always denied the rumours , telling Playboy in 1980 : " Well , it was almost a love affair , but not quite . It was never consummated ... but we did have a pretty intense relationship . " Lennon 's first wife Cynthia also maintains that Lennon 's relationship with Epstein was platonic . A fictionalised account of the Spanish holiday is featured in the 1991 film The Hours and Times . 
 Epstein 's autobiography , A Cellarful of Noise , was published in the UK in October 1964 , and later in the US . It was ghost @-@ written by journalist Derek Taylor , who served as Epstein 's assistant that year , and then as the publicist for NEMS from 1968 to 1970 . Lennon reportedly once quipped that the memoir should have been titled A Cellarful of Boys . Male homosexual activity was illegal in England and Wales until September 1967 , when it was decriminalised ; however , this was one month after Epstein 's death . 
 = = = Drug use = = = 
 After the start of his management career , Epstein started taking stimulants , usually Preludin , which did not require a prescription at the time . Lennon , McCartney , Harrison and Starr had also taken it since their days in Hamburg . Epstein explained his use of the drug as the only means of staying awake at night during numerous concert tours . In 1964 , Brown suspected that Epstein was taking too many pills , as he would often cough at parties , which Brown realised was Epstein 's way of secretly putting pills into his mouth without anyone noticing . McCartney often met Epstein at late night clubs in London , and remembered that Epstein would often grind his jaws , once saying to him , " <unk> , the pills " . Epstein also developed dependencies on the drug <unk> , a barbiturate @-@ like sedative / hypnotic drug . 
 In 1964 , after having been introduced to cannabis by Bob Dylan in New York , Epstein was observed by McCartney standing in front of a mirror , pointing at himself and repeatedly saying " Jew ! " , while laughing loudly , which McCartney found hilarious and " very liberating " . Epstein later became heavily involved in the 1960s drug scene . During the four months when the Sgt. Pepper album was being recorded , Epstein spent his time on holiday , or at the Priory Clinic in Putney , where he tried unsuccessfully to curb his drug use . He left the Priory to attend the Sgt. Pepper launch party at his house on 24 Chapel Street , but returned to the Priory immediately after . 
 Epstein added his name to an advertisement that appeared in The Times on 24 July 1967 , which called for the legalisation of cannabis , the release of all prisoners imprisoned because of possession , and research into marijuana 's medical uses . The advertisement was sponsored by a group called Soma and was signed by sixty @-@ five people , including the Beatles , Scottish psychiatrist R. D. Laing , sixteen doctors , and two members of parliament . Epstein responded to questions about the advertisement by saying , " My opinion is that pot smoking is definitely less harmful than drinking alcohol . I am not addicted to either , but I have been very drunk and very ' high ' . " In June 1967 , after McCartney had admitted to LSD use , Epstein defended him to the media , stating that he had taken the drug himself . 
 = = = Gambling = = = 
 In August 1965 , the Beatles and Epstein visited Elvis Presley at his house in Perugia Way in Los Angeles , where Elvis ' manager , Colonel Tom Parker , set up a roulette wheel and several packs of playing cards . Epstein immediately asked to play , as he was known for his love of gambling . McCartney frequently visited gambling clubs in London , such as Curzon House , Epstein 's favourite club , where he often ran into Epstein . He once saw Epstein put a Dunhill lighter worth £ 100 on the table , then lose it during a game of cards . Epstein often lost thousands of pounds by playing baccarat or chemin de fer , the original version of baccarat when it was introduced to France , but would stay at Curzon House the whole evening , eating an expensive meal and drinking fine wines . The club never presented Epstein with a bill , as they knew he lost so much in the casino . 
 = = Death = = 
 Epstein attended a traditional shiva in Liverpool after his father died , having just come out of the Priory clinic where he had been trying to cure his acute insomnia and addiction to amphetamines . A few days before his death , he made his last visit to a Beatles recording session on 23 August 1967 , at the Chappell Recording Studios on Maddox Street , London . 
 On 24 August , Epstein asked Brown and Geoffrey Ellis down to Kingsley Hill for the bank holiday weekend . Approximately 50 miles from his home in Chapel Street , Kingsley Hill was Epstein 's country home in <unk> , Sussex . After they arrived , Epstein decided to drive back to London alone because an expected group of rent boys he had invited failed to arrive , although they did turn up after Epstein left . Epstein phoned Brown at 5 pm the next day from his Chapel Street house in London . Brown thought that Epstein sounded " very groggy " , and suggested that he take a train back down to the nearest railway station , in Uckfield , instead of driving under the influence of <unk> . Epstein replied that he would eat something , read his mail and watch Juke Box Jury before phoning Brown to tell him which train to meet . He never called again . 
 Epstein died of an overdose of Carbitral , a form of barbiturate or sleeping pill , in his locked bedroom , on 27 August 1967 . He was discovered after his butler had knocked on the door , and then hearing no response , asked the housekeeper to call the police . Epstein was found on a single bed , dressed in pyjamas , with various correspondence spread over a second single bed . At the statutory inquest his death was officially ruled an accident ; caused by a gradual buildup of Carbitral in his system , combined with alcohol . It was revealed that he had taken six Carbitral pills in order to sleep , which was probably normal for him , but in combination with alcohol they reduced his tolerance to lethal levels . 
 The Beatles were in Bangor , Gwynedd , at the time , with the Indian guru , Maharishi Mahesh Yogi . Epstein had previously agreed to travel to Bangor after the August Bank Holiday . The shocked and stunned Beatles asked the Maharishi for his advice , and were told , " being within the direct realm of the physical world , [ Epstein 's death ] is not important " . The second of two shows by Jimi Hendrix at Epstein 's Saville Theatre was cancelled on the evening of his death . 
 Peter Brown wrote in his memoir , The Love You Make : An Insider 's Story of the Beatles , that he had once found a suicide note written by Epstein and had spoken with him about it . According to Brown the note read in part , " This is all too much and I can 't take it any more " . Brown had also found a will in which Epstein left his house and money to his mother and his brother , with Brown also being named as a minor beneficiary . When confronted with the notes , Epstein told Brown that he would be grateful if Brown did not tell anyone , and was sorry he had made Brown worry . He explained that when he wrote the note and composed the will he had simply taken one pill too many , and that he had no intention of overdosing , promising to be more careful in the future . Brown later wrote that he wondered if he had done the right thing by not showing the note to Epstein 's doctor , Norman Cowan , who would have stopped prescribing drugs . The coroner , Gavin Thurston , told the Westminster inquest that Epstein 's death was caused by an overdose of Carbitral , and ruled it as an accidental death . The pathologist , Dr. Donald Teare , stated that Epstein had been taking bromide in the form of Carbitral for some time , and that the barbiturate level in Epstein 's blood was a " low fatal level " . 
 The Beatles did not attend Epstein 's funeral , both to allow his family some privacy , and to avoid attracting fans and the media . According to Geoffrey Ellis , chief executive of NEMS Enterprises , George Harrison had given Nat Weiss , Epstein 's good friend and confidant , the day before the funeral a single flower ( Ellis remembers it being a chrysanthemum ) wrapped in a newspaper on behalf of all four Beatles , with instructions to place the flower on Brian 's coffin as a final farewell . However , flowers are forbidden at Jewish funerals and burials . Weiss and Ellis discussed this dilemma while walking back to the grave , where they observed two men beginning to shovel dirt onto the casket . Ellis : " Nat , who himself was Jewish , cast the newspaper package unopened onto Brian 's coffin , where it was swiftly covered by earth . " Epstein was buried in section A grave <unk> , in the Long Lane Jewish Cemetery , Aintree , Liverpool . The service at the graveside was held by Rabbi Dr Norman Solomon , who said , disparagingly , that Epstein was " a symbol of the malaise of our generation " . A few weeks later , on 17 October , all four Beatles attended a memorial service for Epstein at the New London Synagogue in St John 's Wood ( near Abbey Road Studios ) , which was officiated by Rabbi Louis Jacobs . The Bee Gees ' 1968 song " In the Summer of His Years " was written and recorded as a tribute to Epstein . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Epstein was overlooked when Lennon , McCartney , Harrison and Starr were honoured with the MBE in 1965 , even though Harrison had once said that the MBE stood for " Mister Brian Epstein " . The four letters that were mailed to the Beatles informing them of the Queen 's acceptance of Prime Minister Harold Wilson 's MBE recommendation sat in sacks for three weeks , thought to be fan mail . When they were finally opened , it was discovered that the acknowledgement deadline was the next day . Epstein was upset that he wasn 't honoured as well . The Beatles were among the earliest entrants into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame , but Epstein had not been included in the Hall 's " Non @-@ Performers ' Section " until his 2014 induction . Martin Lewis — previously Taylor 's assistant — created the Official Brian Epstein Website , which included a petition that Epstein be inducted into the Hall of Fame . Lewis also organised the 1998 re @-@ publication , in the US , of Epstein 's 1964 autobiography , A Cellarful of Noise . 
 McCartney summarised the importance of Epstein when he was interviewed in 1997 for a BBC documentary about Epstein , saying , " If anyone was the Fifth Beatle , it was Brian " . In his 1970 Rolling Stone interview , Lennon commented that Epstein 's death marked the beginning of the end for the group : " I knew that we were in trouble then ... I thought , ' We 've fuckin ' had it now ' " . Thirty years after Epstein 's death , McCartney said , " Brian would really be happy to hear how much we loved him " . The first contract between the Beatles and Epstein was auctioned in London in 2008 , fetching £ 240 @,@ 000 . 
 Epstein was once asked about the future of the Beatles , and as he termed it , their " fresh honesty " , which the interviewer thought could be " corrupted by time " . He replied by saying , " I think they will go in the reverse direction , and become more honest . " 
 = Crest ( heraldry ) = 
 A crest is a component of an heraldic display , consisting of the symbol or device borne on top of the helm . Originating in the decorative sculptures worn by knights in tournaments and , to a lesser extent , battles , crests became solely pictorial devices after the 16th century ( the era referred to by heraldists as that of ' paper heraldry ' ) . 
 A normal heraldic achievement consists of the shield , above which is set the helm , on which sits the crest , its base encircled by a circlet of twisted cloth known as a torse . The use of the crest and torse independently from the rest of the achievement , a practice which became common in the era of paper heraldry , has led the term ' crest ' to be frequently but erroneously used to refer to the arms displayed on the shield , or to the achievement as a whole . 
 = = Origin = = 
 The word ' crest ' derives from the Latin <unk> , meaning ' tuft ' or ' plume ' , perhaps related to crinis , ' hair ' . Crests had existed in various forms since ancient times : Roman officers wore fans of feathers or horsehair , which were placed longitudinally or transversely depending on the wearer 's rank , and Viking helmets were often adorned with wings and animal heads . They first appeared in a heraldic context in the form of the metal fans worn by knights in the 12th and 13th centuries . These were primarily decorative , but may also have served a practical purpose by lessening or deflecting the blows of opponents ' weapons ( perhaps why their edges came to be serrated ) . These fans were generally of one colour , later evolving to repeat all or part of the arms displayed on the shield . 
 The fan crest was later developed by cutting out the figure displayed on it , to form a metal outline ; this evolved in the late 13th and early 14th centuries into a three @-@ dimensional sculpture . These were usually made of cloth , leather or paper over a wooden or wire framework , and were typically in the form of an animal ; also popular were wings , horns , human figures , and <unk> of feathers . These were probably worn only in tournaments , not battle : not only did they add to the already considerable weight of the helm , they could also have been used by opponents as a handle to pull the wearer 's head down . 
 <unk> , straps or rivets were used to affix the crest to the helm , with the join being covered by a circlet of twisted cloth known as a torse or wreath , or by a coronet in the case of high @-@ ranking nobles . <unk> did not come into regular use in Britain until the 15th century , and are still uncommon on the Continent , where crests are usually depicted as continuing into the mantling . Crests were also sometimes mounted on a furred cap known as a chapeau , as in the royal crest of England . 
 = = Later development = = 
 By the 16th century the age of tournaments had ended , and physical crests largely disappeared . Their illustrated equivalents consequently began to be treated as simply two @-@ dimensional pictures . Many crests from this period are physically impossible to bear on a helm , <unk> the crest granted to Sir Francis Drake in 1581 , which consisted of a disembodied hand issuing from clouds and leading a ship around the globe ( representing God 's guidance ) . 
 In the same period , different helms began to be used for different ranks : sovereigns ' and knights ' helms faced forwards ( <unk> ) , whereas those of peers and gentlemen faced to the right ( dexter ) . In the mediaeval period crests would always have faced the same way as the helm , but as a result of these rules , the directions of the crest and the helm might be at variance : a knight whose crest was a lion statant , would have the lion depicted as looking over the side of the helm , rather than towards the viewer . <unk> also suffered artistically , being treated not as silken circlets , but as horizontal bars . 
 Heraldry in general underwent something of a renaissance in the late 19th and early 20th centuries , and many of the <unk> adopted in previous centuries were discarded . Crests are now generally not granted unless they could actually be used on a physical helm , and the rules about directions of helms are no longer rigidly observed . 
 = = Usage = = 
 The use of crests was once restricted to those of ' tournament rank ' , i.e. knights and above , but in modern times nearly all personal arms include crests . They are not generally used by women ( with the exception of reigning queens ) and clergymen , as they did not participate in war or tournaments and thus would not have helms on which to wear them . Some heraldists are also of the opinion that crests , as personal devices , are not suited for use by corporate bodies , but this is not widely observed . 
 On the Continent , particularly Germany , crests have a far greater significance than in Britain , and it is common for one person to display multiple crests with his arms ; certain high @-@ ranking noblemen are entitled to as many as seventeen . This practice did not exist in Britain until the modern era , and arms with more than one crest are still rare . In contrast to Continental practice , where a crest is never detached from its helm , a Briton with more than one crest may choose to display only one crested helm , and have the other crests simply floating in space . Though usually adopted through marriage to an heiress , examples exist of secondary crests being granted as augmentations : after defeating the Americans at the Battle of Bladensburg , Robert Ross was granted , in addition to his original crest , the crest of an arm holding the US flag with a broken flagstaff . 
 After the 16th century , it became common for armigers to detach the crest and wreath from the helm , and use them in the manner of a badge , displayed on crockery , carriage doors , stationery , etc . This led to the erroneous use of the term ' crest ' to mean ' arms ' , which has regrettably become widespread in recent years . Unlike a badge , which can be used by any amount of relatives and retainers , a crest is personal to the armiger , and its use by others is considered usurpation . In Scotland , however , a member of a clan or house is entitled to use a ' crest @-@ badge ' , which consists of the chief 's crest encircled by a strap and buckle inscribed with the chiefly motto . 
 Marks of cadency are generally not used with crests , though it is not incorrect to do so , and the British royal family continue this practice . It is , however , widely observed in England that no two families may use the same crest . This is in contrast to Scottish practice , in which crests are less significant , and are often borne in the same form by a great many people , even when no blood relationship exists between them . As a result of this lack of need for differentiation , Scottish crests tend to be far simpler than their English counterparts . 
 The usual torse around the crest is frequently replaced by some kind of coronet , known as a ' crest @-@ coronet ' . The usual form is a simplified ducal coronet , consisting of three <unk> on a golden circlet ; these are not , however , indications of rank , though they are not generally granted nowadays except in special circumstances . In some modern examples , the crest features both a crest @-@ coronet and a torse , though this practice is deprecated by purists . 
 = = Orders of chivalry = = 
 Perhaps the only places physical crests are still seen are the chapels of Britain 's orders of chivalry : the Order of the Garter 's St George 's Chapel , the Order of the Thistle 's Thistle Chapel , and the Order of the Bath 's Henry VII Chapel . Within each chapel are rows of stalls for use by the knights ; above these stalls are placed each knight 's sword and crested helm . These are carved out of lime wood and painted and gilded by Ian Brennan , the official sculptor to the royal household . 
 = Waller Hall = 
 Waller Hall is the oldest building on the campus of Willamette University in Salem , Oregon , United States . Built in 1867 as University Hall , the five @-@ story , red @-@ brick structure was added to the National Register of Historic Places in 1975 . The building has been gutted twice by fires with the interior rebuilt each time , and went through renovations in 1987 to 1989 and again in 2005 . 
 Built in the Renaissance style of architecture , it is currently used for administration offices and is the oldest university building west of the Mississippi in the U.S. still in use . Waller Hall is located on the north end of campus opposite the Oregon State Capitol building across State Street . Designed in the shape of a Greek cross , each side has the same measurements and the top has a cupola . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 Due to a variety of factors , including the deterioration of the main campus building dating from 1844 and the need for additional space , the university considered building a new building designed specifically for the university beginning in the 1850s . Then on October 3 , 1860 , the board of trustees for the school resolved to begin the process of building a new primary hall to be used by the university . Reverend Alvin F. Waller was placed in charge of the efforts to raise the funds needed for a building . However , this was unsuccessful and on November 19 , 1862 , the board again passed a resolution calling for a new structure and forming a committee of Waller , Gustavus Hines , Josiah <unk> Parrish , J. Lamson , and John H. Moores to prepare plans . 
 On December 2 , the trustees authorized subscriptions to be solicited and paid to Waller with a goal of $ 20 @,@ 000 . On May 20 , 1863 , the board met again and learned that $ 12 @,@ 800 had been pledged and the board then set up a building committee of Waller , Hines , Moores , <unk> Cook , and Thomas Milton <unk> . It was mainly through the efforts of the Reverend Waller that the hall was built . Several designs were then considered for the new building , and on February 22 , 1864 , by a vote of 16 to 1 the board selected the final plan that called for a brick building with a stone foundation . The foundation was to rise to a level 3 feet ( 0 @.@ 91 m ) above the ground to prevent moisture from the ground seeping into the bricks . 
 = = = Construction = = = 
 Construction of the new building began in February 1864 with excavation of the basement . This was on the north section of Willamette ’ s campus in downtown Salem . Then on July 24 , the cornerstone of the building was laid into place in a ceremony . The President of the Board of Trustees , David Leslie , laid the cornerstone of the hall . This ceremony included a time capsule and a speech by Governor A. C. Gibbs . 
 All of the bricks used in the construction were fired on campus using clay excavated from the construction site in order to build the foundation . The builders ordered 500 @,@ 000 bricks total for the construction project . Construction was completed in 1867 and the building was named University Hall . The school " marched " from the old school building to the new and began using it on October 21 , 1867 . 
 Total costs for the building were $ 40 @,@ 000 at occupation with a need for approximately an additional $ 17 @,@ 000 to finish and furnish the building . The building was first used for classrooms , a library , parlors , recitation rooms , and some physical education in the attic . Also in the early years the structure housed the chapel services of the school , and some temporary accommodations for students . 
 = = = Later years = = = 
 The old school building , the Oregon Institute , burned down in December 1872 leaving University Hall as the only building on campus . As a result , all departments were housed in the building including the College of Law from 1884 to 1923 when it moved to Eaton Hall and the Medical School from 1867 until 1880 when it moved to Portland . University Hall remained the only permanent campus building from 1872 when the Oregon Institute building burned down until 1906 when the Medical Building ( now Art Building ) was built . Other school buildings such as the first Lausanne Hall were located off campus . 
 On September 16 , 1891 , University Hall , the school 's first brick building , caught on fire . As a result of the fire the top two floors of the building as well as the roof were destroyed . The building was then re @-@ built after the 1891 fire , but unlike the original plans it was constructed with a Mansard style roof . Additionally , a square tower was also built on top in lieu of the original cupola which included a school bell . From its construction until 1987 , Waller Hall was used as an academic hall and hosted classes along with housing the school 's chapel and as offices for the faculty . 
 In 1912 , Willamette renamed the building in honor of the Reverend Alvan ( Alvin ) F. Waller who was instrumental in getting the hall built . Then on December 17 , 1919 , another fire swept through Waller Hall while school was on break for Christmas . This second fire completely gutted the five @-@ story building , but the exterior walls remained intact . The Mansard roof and square tower were destroyed in the fire . The university rebuilt the hall the following year , and used the original plans that included the round cupola but omitted the Mansard style roof and the square tower topping the structure . Architect Fred A. Legge oversaw the rebuilding and re @-@ design of the hall . A campaign launched in 1920 by the university was set to raise $ 100 @,@ 000 to be used for the reconstruction of Waller , plus completing the new Lausanne Hall and adding a central heating plant . 
 There was some discussion of demolishing the hall in the 1980s after the structure had become dilapidated . One proposal called for building a replica on the same site as the original , but school administrators opted to renovate Waller Hall . From November 1987 to November 1989 the 25 @,@ 000 @-@ square @-@ foot ( 2 @,@ 300 m2 ) building went through a $ 2 @.@ 26 million renovation . This renovation addressed interior issues with the building including seismic upgrades in the event of a large magnitude earthquake . These renovations also turned the attic into an office suite for the school ’ s president . After renovations in 1988 the building was used for university administration offices . Further renovations were completed in 2005 at a cost of $ 1 @.@ 3 million for upgrading the 100 @-@ year @-@ old windows to newer energy efficient models , repairing the brick , fixing leaks , installing skylights , re @-@ painting , and slightly lightening the exterior red @-@ brick coloring . 
 = = Architecture = = 
 Waller Hall was built in the Renaissance style of architecture . This red brick building was designed in the same proportions as a Greek cross . Bishop Janes was responsible for proposing this use of the cross shape for the building . Each of the two wings is 84 feet ( 26 m ) long and 44 feet ( 13 m ) wide with aedicule porches on the west , east , and north ends of the building . Originally , the building was 100 feet ( 30 m ) tall as measured from the base of the building to the top of the dome . The distance from the eaves of the structure to the base is 50 feet ( 15 m ) . The basement of the building is 12 feet ( 3 @.@ 7 m ) high and the first floor 16 feet ( 4 @.@ 9 m ) high . The foundation is made of stone and the roof has composition shingles . Both the second and third floors are 12 feet ( 3 @.@ 7 m ) tall . The hall has a cupola topping the structure . Other details include pilasters , dentils , and brick corbelling on the exterior and circular stairways on the interior . 
 = = Currently = = 
 Waller Hall houses alumni relations , the school ’ s business office , human resources for the university , the office of communications , university relations , the President ’ s office , and other administrative functions . Additionally , Cone Chapel is on the building 's second floor and seats 300 . Cone Chapel features over a dozen stained glass windows and a classic pipe organ . The chapel is occasionally used for commencement ceremonies , lectures , and concerts at the school . Waller Hall sits in the north central part of campus directly opposite of the Oregon State Capitol . The structure is the oldest university building west of the Mississippi River still in use in the United States . 
 In 1992 , during the university 's sesquicentennial , the United States Postal Service issued a postal card that featured an image of Waller Hall . Featuring a watercolor painting by George C. Warner of Eugene , Oregon , these 19 cent postcards were part of the Postal Service ’ s Historic Preservation Series . 
 = = Timeline = = 
 = Joe Lillard = 
 Joseph Johnny Lillard Jr . ( June 15 , 1905 – September 18 , 1978 ) was an American football , baseball , and basketball player . From 1932 to 1933 , he was a running back for the National Football League 's ( NFL ) Chicago Cardinals . Lillard was the last African @-@ American , along with Ray Kemp , to play in the NFL until 1946 , when Kenny Washington and Woody Strode joined the Los Angeles Rams . Lillard received the nickname " The Midnight Express " by the media . In 1933 , he was responsible for almost half of the Cardinals ' points . 
 An orphan from an early age , Lillard attended Mason City High School before moving to the University of Oregon . He played twice for the university 's football team in 1931 before he was ruled ineligible by the Pacific Coast Conference ( PCC ) for playing semi @-@ professional baseball . The following year , he signed with the Cardinals , but played less frequently toward the end of the season . Lillard was a leading contributor for the Cardinals in 1933 , receiving praise from the Chicago Defender . His performances during the season included a game against the Chicago Bears that featured a punt return for a touchdown . However , he was ejected from two games that season for fighting , into which he was often baited by white opponents . 
 With the advent of an unofficial color line that excluded black players , Lillard did not play in the NFL after 1933 . He remained active in football , playing for minor league and semi @-@ professional teams , including the New York Brown Bombers , with whom he spent three seasons . Lillard was also a pitcher in Negro league baseball for five seasons from 1932 to 1944 , and a guard in basketball for the future Harlem Globetrotters . After his athletic career , he became an appliance store employee and died in 1978 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Born in Tulsa , Oklahoma to Joe Lillard and Annie Johnson , Lillard was the first of the couple 's two children ; Johnson also had a son from a previous marriage . Lillard took up baseball at the age of six ; his other childhood hobbies included singing and tap dancing . His mother died when Lillard was nine , and his father had left about six years before that time . Afterwards , he moved in 1915 , settling in Mason City , Iowa and moving in with relatives . Lillard attended Mason City High School , graduating in 1927 . In basketball and football , Lillard won all @-@ state honors , and claimed several Iowa track titles . 
 = = College career = = 
 Although Lillard planned to attend the University of Minnesota , he changed his mind when Clarence Spears , the college 's head football coach , left to go to the University of Oregon . Lillard decided to attend Oregon , and played for the school 's freshman football team in 1930 . The following year , he appeared in two games for the varsity team . Against Idaho , Lillard was responsible for all of Oregon 's points in a 9 – 0 Ducks win . Suspected of breaking college amateurism rules by playing semi @-@ professional baseball for the <unk> Colored Giants , Lillard was briefly suspended by the PCC before Oregon 's next game . The suspected violation placed Lillard 's collegiate eligibility in question . While he did play in games , Lillard claimed that he received money not for playing , but for driving the team . The decision was overturned ; according to PCC rules , no protest was possible during the week prior to a game between PCC teams . In the game against Washington , their second of the season , the Ducks claimed an upset victory , 13 – 0 ; Lillard had a touchdown and intercepted two passes . Before Oregon 's next game against USC , Lillard was ruled ineligible by the PCC as a result of playing with the <unk> baseball team . Spears estimated that Lillard had provided half of his team 's production on offense , and USC defeated Oregon by 53 points in the game after the ruling . Lillard dropped out of the university after the PCC 's decision , becoming a professional football player and playing for various All @-@ Star teams that traveled across the United States . 
 = = Professional American football career = = 
 After the end of his college career , Lillard participated in a professional all @-@ star game on November 26 , 1931 ; he helped his team to a win with a 55 @-@ yard touchdown run . In a second All @-@ Star game , he recorded a 45 @-@ yard touchdown run for a Chicago @-@ based team in a 20 – 6 win . These performances attracted the attention of NFL teams . For the 1932 NFL season , he joined the Chicago Cardinals . In his first NFL game , against the Portsmouth Spartans , Lillard converted an extra point attempt that helped secure a 7 – 7 tie . One week later , the Cardinals tied the eventual NFL champion Chicago Bears ; Lillard 's performance was praised in the Chicago Defender , which called him " the whole show " . After wins against the Boston Braves and Providence <unk> ( in a non @-@ NFL contest ) , the number of plays in which Lillard was on the field for the Cardinals sharply declined . During the latter part of the 1932 season , " Lillard 's teammates had stopped blocking for him , " according to Coyle . Toward the end of the season , he was benched by the Cardinals ; it is unknown whether this was because of an injury or a suspension . Jack Chevigny , the Cardinals ' coach , indicated that Lillard had occasionally failed to attend practice , and had arrived late at other times . The lack of playing time for Lillard was attributed to internal disputes caused by " lackluster effort and a prideful attitude " ; the Chicago Defender offered a different explanation , accusing Chevigny of racism towards Lillard . He ended the season with 121 rushing yards in 52 attempts , and nine successful passes in 28 attempts . 
 Lillard was a backup in 1933 , although he was one of the Cardinals ' leading players when he received playing time . In the first game of the 1933 NFL season , against the Pittsburgh Pirates , he missed an extra point attempt that proved to be the margin separating the teams in a 14 – 13 Pirates ' win . Lillard was subsequently ejected from the game , having been involved in a dispute with Pirates player Tony Holm . One week later , he threw a touchdown pass in a 7 – 6 loss to the Spartans , though he received criticism from local newspapers for a missed extra point attempt and a short punt that led to a Portsmouth score . In the Cardinals ' third game of the season , against the Cincinnati Reds , Lillard kicked a fourth @-@ quarter field goal to secure Chicago 's lone win of the 1933 season . After the kick , Lillard was punched by Cincinnati guard Les Caywood ; he responded with a punch to Caywood 's head , and was thrown out of the game along with Caywood . He played a key role in the Cardinals ' October 15 , 1933 game against the Bears . In addition to converting a field goal attempt , he had 110 yards in punt returns , including a return of more than 50 yards in which he outran Bears star Red Grange for a touchdown . However , the Cardinals lost by a score of 12 – 9 . In 1933 , the Cardinals posted 52 points in 11 games ; Lillard scored 19 himself and had two touchdown passes . He had 373 rushing yards from 119 attempts . The Chicago Defender called him " easily the best halfback in football " . 
