 During his time in the NFL , Lillard was regarded as a player with multiple talents , possessing the ability to complete passes and execute running and kicking plays . Author Charles Ross called him " a superior athlete " due to his skills in baseball and basketball , and added that in the NFL " arguably he was one of the best players in the league . " He was frequently baited into fighting by opposing white players . His responses during these incidents went against cultural expectations for African @-@ American athletes ; Sports Illustrated 's Daniel Coyle wrote that they " were regarded by all whites and many blacks as prideful foolishness , if not sheer lunacy . " It is not known how other Cardinals players viewed Lillard . Cardinals coach Paul J. <unk> said that he was forced to remove Lillard from some games due to injuries suffered when teams " gave Joe the works " . Lillard also received racial abuse from fans ; author Alan Howard Levy wrote that spectators in Portsmouth , Ohio regularly taunted him when the Cardinals played there . After the 1933 season , Lillard was not retained by the Cardinals , and he did not play again in the NFL . The Cardinals ' decision was criticized as racially motivated by African @-@ American publications . <unk> acknowledged the existence of an unofficial regulation against African @-@ American players in the NFL , and stated that the team 's move was aimed at protecting them and Lillard from violence . In his two @-@ year NFL career , he had 171 rushing attempts , in which he gained 494 yards . The media gave him the nickname of " The Midnight Express " . 
 After his NFL career ended , Lillard joined the Westwood Cubs of the Pacific Coast Football League for the 1934 season , throwing the most touchdown passes of any player in the league and compiling the second @-@ most touchdowns on runs . In 1935 , he drew interest from coach Fritz Pollard , who was leading the New York Brown Bombers , a semi @-@ professional team of African @-@ American players . Based in Harlem , the team competed against minor league sides and clubs not affiliated with a league . Lillard had played for a Chicago team coached by Pollard before entering the NFL , and decided to join the Brown Bombers . In his first game with the team , on October 13 , 1935 , Lillard scored two touchdowns against the Cagle All @-@ Stars in a 28 – 6 New York win . After three more victories , the Brown Bombers faced the Passaic Red Devils , a three @-@ time champion of Eastern American football leagues . Despite suffering from an illness , Lillard converted a drop kick attempt and intercepted a pass , returning it 52 yards for a touchdown . He was responsible for all of the Brown Bombers ' points in their 10 – 3 win over the Red Devils . Lillard stayed with the Brown Bombers through the 1937 season ; the team went out of business in 1938 . That year , he was a member of an All @-@ Star team of black players that played an exhibition game against the Bears , losing 51 – 0 . 
 In later years , Lillard played for various minor league sides ; In 1938 , he joined the American Association 's ( AA ) Clifton <unk> , playing one season for the club and earning second @-@ team AA all @-@ star honors . The following year , he spent time with two AA teams : the Brooklyn Eagles and Union City Rams . Lillard was named captain of the Rams , making him the first African @-@ American to earn that title on " a major mixed @-@ race pro team . " His final year in minor league football was 1941 , as he played for a short period with the AA 's New York Yankees . 
 = = Other sports = = 
 In addition to his professional football career , Lillard was a right @-@ handed pitcher in the Negro leagues for five seasons . In 1932 , he joined the Negro Southern League 's Chicago American Giants and posted a 2 – 2 win – loss record . The Giants moved to the Negro National League before the start of the 1933 season , in which Lillard was the starting pitcher in five games and had a 4 – 0 record , along with a .387 batting average and two home runs as a hitter . He started twice in 1934 , and did not record a decision on either occasion . Lillard did not play in any more recorded games until 1937 , when he had an 0 – 1 record for the Giants , who by this time were playing in the Negro American League ( NAL ) . His final Negro league season was 1944 ; Lillard played with the NAL 's Cincinnati / Indianapolis Clowns , who had open roster space because of players lost to World War II . Along with Sol Butler and Bobby Marshall , he was one of three Negro league baseball players to also compete in the NFL . Author Charles Ross wrote that " He possessed an exceptional fast ball , but erratic control . " Previously , Lillard had been on the Savoy Big Five basketball team ( the future Harlem Globetrotters ) as a guard . 
 = = Later life and legacy = = 
 In the late 1930s , Lillard began writing a column on sports in the Independent News . Later in his life , he moved to Astoria , Queens , working at an appliance store and for <unk> Sporting Goods . Lillard had a stroke on September 18 , 1978 , and was afflicted with agnosia as a result ; he died in New York City 's Bellevue Hospital Center . 
 After five black players appeared in NFL games during the 1926 season , the number of African @-@ Americans in the league declined to between one and two each season until Lillard entered the league . He was the lone African @-@ American playing in the NFL in 1932 and one of two in 1933 ; the other was Ray Kemp , a tackle with the Pirates . Following the 1933 season , an unofficial gentlemen 's agreement was reached between the NFL 's owners not to employ African @-@ American players . Incoming segregationist Boston Redskins owner George Preston Marshall was thought to have been behind the agreement . After the introduction of an unofficial color line , no African @-@ American played in the NFL until 1946 , when Kenny Washington and Woody Strode joined the Los Angeles Rams . Author Charles Ross wrote that " NFL owners may have used Lillard 's volatile personality as an excuse to ban other black athletes . " 
 = Horatio Nelson , 1st Viscount Nelson = 
 Horatio Nelson , 1st Viscount Nelson , 1st Duke of Bronté KB ( 29 September 1758 – 21 October 1805 ) was a British flag officer in the Royal Navy . He was noted for his inspirational leadership , superb grasp of strategy , and unconventional tactics , all of which resulted in a number of decisive naval victories , particularly during the Napoleonic Wars . He was wounded several times in combat , losing one arm in the unsuccessful attempt to conquer Santa Cruz de Tenerife and the sight in one eye in Corsica . He was shot and killed during his final victory at the Battle of Trafalgar in 1805 . 
 Nelson was born into a moderately prosperous Norfolk family and joined the navy through the influence of his uncle , Maurice Suckling . He rose rapidly through the ranks and served with leading naval commanders of the period before obtaining his own command in 1778 . He developed a reputation in the service through his personal valour and firm grasp of tactics but suffered periods of illness and unemployment after the end of the American War of Independence . The outbreak of the French Revolutionary Wars allowed Nelson to return to service , where he was particularly active in the Mediterranean . He fought in several minor engagements off Toulon and was important in the capture of Corsica and subsequent diplomatic duties with the Italian states . In 1797 , he distinguished himself while in command of HMS Captain at the Battle of Cape St Vincent . 
 Shortly after the battle , Nelson took part in the Battle of Santa Cruz de Tenerife , where his attack was defeated and he was badly wounded , losing his right arm , and was forced to return to England to recuperate . The following year , he won a decisive victory over the French at the Battle of the Nile and remained in the Mediterranean to support the Kingdom of Naples against a French invasion . In 1801 , he was dispatched to the Baltic and won another victory , this time over the Danes at the Battle of Copenhagen . He subsequently commanded the blockade of the French and Spanish fleets at Toulon and , after their escape , chased them to the West Indies and back but failed to bring them to battle . After a brief return to England , he took over the Cádiz blockade in 1805 . On 21 October 1805 , the Franco @-@ Spanish fleet came out of port , and Nelson 's fleet engaged them at the Battle of Trafalgar . The battle was Britain 's greatest naval victory , but during the action Nelson , aboard HMS Victory , was fatally wounded by a French sharpshooter . His body was brought back to England where he was accorded a state funeral . 
 Nelson 's death at Trafalgar secured his position as one of Britain 's most heroic figures . The significance of the victory and his death during the battle led to his signal , " England expects that every man will do his duty " , being regularly quoted , paraphrased and referenced up to the modern day . Numerous monuments , including Nelson 's Column in Trafalgar Square , London , and the Nelson Monument in Edinburgh , have been created in his memory and his legacy remains highly influential . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Horatio Nelson was born on 29 September 1758 in a rectory in Burnham Thorpe , Norfolk , England , the sixth of eleven children of the Reverend Edmund Nelson and his wife Catherine Suckling . He was named after his godfather Horatio Walpole ( 1723 – 1809 ) then 2nd Baron Walpole , of <unk> . His mother , who died on 26 December 1767 , when he was nine years old , was a grandniece of Robert Walpole , 1st Earl of Orford , the de facto first Prime Minister of Great Britain . She lived in the village of Barsham , Suffolk , and married the Reverend Edmund Nelson at <unk> church , Suffolk , in 1749 . Nelson 's aunt , Alice Nelson was the wife of Reverend Robert Rolfe , Rector of Hilborough , Norfolk and grandmother of Sir Robert Monsey Rolfe . Rolfe twice served as Lord High Chancellor of Great Britain . 
 Nelson attended Paston Grammar School , North Walsham , until he was 12 years old , and also attended King Edward VI ’ s Grammar School in Norwich . His naval career began on 1 January 1771 , when he reported to the third @-@ rate HMS Raisonnable as an ordinary seaman and coxswain under his maternal uncle , Captain Maurice Suckling , who commanded the vessel . Shortly after reporting aboard , Nelson was appointed a midshipman and began officer training . Early in his service , Nelson discovered that he suffered from seasickness , a chronic complaint that dogged him for the rest of his life . 
 = = Early naval career = = 
 HMS Raisonnable had been commissioned during a period of tension with Spain , but when this passed , Suckling was transferred to the Nore guardship HMS Triumph and Nelson was dispatched to serve aboard the West Indiamen Mary Ann of the merchant shipping firm of Hibbert , <unk> and Horton , in order to gain experience at sea ; he sailed from Medway , Kent , on 25 July 1771 sailing to Jamaica and Tobago , returning to Plymouth on 7 July 1772 . He twice crossed the Atlantic , before returning to serve under his uncle as the commander of Suckling 's longboat , which carried men and dispatches to and from the shore . Nelson then learned of a planned expedition under the command of Constantine Phipps , intended to survey a passage in the Arctic by which it was hoped that India could be reached : the fabled Northwest Passage . At his nephew 's request , Suckling arranged for Nelson to join the expedition as coxswain to Commander Lutwidge aboard the converted bomb vessel HMS Carcass . The expedition reached within ten degrees of the North Pole , but , unable to find a way through the dense ice floes , was forced to turn back . By 1800 Lutwidge began to circulate a story that while the ship had been trapped in the ice , Nelson had seen and pursued a polar bear , before being ordered to return to the ship . Lutwidge 's later version , in 1809 , reported that Nelson and a companion had given chase to the bear , but on being questioned why , replied that " I wished , Sir , to get the skin for my father . " 
 Nelson briefly returned to Triumph after the expedition 's return to Britain in September 1773 . Suckling then arranged for his transfer to HMS Seahorse , one of two ships about to sail for the East Indies . 
 Nelson sailed for the East Indies on 19 November 1773 and arrived at the British outpost at Madras on 25 May 1774 . Nelson and Seahorse spent the rest of the year cruising off the coast and escorting merchantmen . With the outbreak of the First Anglo @-@ Maratha War , the British fleet operated in support of the East India Company and in early 1775 Seahorse was dispatched to carry a cargo of the company 's money to Bombay . On 19 February , two of Hyder Ali 's ketches attacked Seahorse , which drove them off after a brief exchange of fire . This was Nelson 's first experience of battle . The rest of the year he spent escorting convoys , during which he continued to develop his navigation and ship handling skills . In early 1776 Nelson contracted malaria and became seriously ill . He was discharged from Seahorse on 14 March and returned to England aboard HMS Dolphin . Nelson spent the six @-@ month voyage recuperating and had almost recovered by the time he arrived in Britain in September 1776 . His patron , Suckling , had risen to the post of Comptroller of the Navy in 1775 , and used his influence to help Nelson gain further promotion . Nelson was appointed acting lieutenant aboard HMS Worcester , which was about to sail to Gibraltar . 
 Worcester , under the command of Captain Mark Robinson , sailed as a convoy escort on 3 December and returned with another convoy in April 1777 . Nelson then travelled to London to take his lieutenant 's examination on 9 April ; his examining board consisted of Captains John Campbell , Abraham North , and his uncle , Maurice Suckling . Nelson passed , and the next day received his commission and an appointment to HMS Lowestoffe , which was preparing to sail to Jamaica under Captain William Locker . She sailed on 16 May , arrived on 19 July , and after reprovisioning , carried out several cruises in Caribbean waters . After the outbreak of the American War of Independence Lowestoffe took several prizes , one of which was taken into Navy service as the tender Little Lucy . Nelson asked for and was given command of her , and took her on two cruises of his own . As well as giving him his first taste of command , it gave Nelson the opportunity to explore his fledgling interest in science . During his first cruise , Nelson led an expeditionary party to the Caicos Islands , where he made detailed notes of the wildlife and in particular a bird — now believed to be the white @-@ necked <unk> . Locker , impressed by Nelson 's abilities , recommended him to the new commander @-@ in @-@ chief at Jamaica , Sir Peter Parker . Parker duly took Nelson onto his flagship , HMS Bristol . The entry of the French into the war , in support of the Americans , meant further targets for Parker 's fleet and it took many prizes towards the end of 1778 , which brought Nelson an estimated £ 400 in prize money . Parker subsequently appointed him as Master and Commander of the brig HMS Badger on 8 December . 
 Nelson and Badger spent most of 1779 cruising off the Central American coast , ranging as far as the British settlements at British Honduras ( now Belize ) , and Nicaragua , but without much success at interception of enemy prizes . On his return to Port Royal he learned that Parker had promoted him to post @-@ captain on 11 June , and intended to give him another command . Nelson handed over the Badger to Cuthbert Collingwood while he awaited the arrival of his new ship , the 28 @-@ gun frigate HMS Hinchinbrook , newly captured from the French . While Nelson waited , news reached Parker that a French fleet under the command of Charles Hector , comte d 'Estaing , was approaching Jamaica . Parker hastily organized his defences and placed Nelson in command of Fort Charles , which covered the approaches to Kingston . D 'Estaing instead headed north , and the anticipated invasion never materialised . Nelson duly took command of the Hinchinbrook on 1 September . 
 Hinchinbrook sailed from Port Royal on 5 October 1779 and , in company with other British ships , proceeded to capture a number of American prizes . On his return to Jamaica in December , Nelson began to be troubled by a recurrent attack of malaria , but remained in the West Indies in order to take part in Major @-@ General John Dalling 's attempt to capture the Spanish colonies in Central America , including an assault on the Fortress of the Immaculate Conception , also called Castillo Viejo , on the San Juan River in Nicaragua . Hinchinbrook sailed from Jamaica in February 1780 , as an escort for Dalling 's invasion force . After sailing up the mouth of the San Juan River , Nelson , with some one thousand men and four small four @-@ pounder cannon , obtained the surrender of Castillo Viejo and its 160 Spanish defenders after a two @-@ week siege . The British blew up the fort when they evacuated six months later after suffering many deaths due to disease and Nelson was praised for his efforts . Parker recalled Nelson and gave him command of the 44 @-@ gun frigate HMS Janus . Nelson had however fallen seriously ill in the jungles of Costa Rica , probably from a recurrence of malaria , and was unable to take command . During his time of convalescence he was nursed by a black " <unk> " named <unk> Cornwallis , the mistress of a fellow captain , William Cornwallis . He was discharged in August and returned to Britain aboard HMS Lion , arriving in late November . Nelson gradually recovered over several months , and soon began agitating for a command . He was appointed to the frigate HMS Albemarle on 15 August 1781 . 
 = = Command = = 
 = = = Captain of Albemarle = = = 
 Nelson received orders on 23 October to take the newly refitted Albemarle to sea . He was instructed to collect an inbound convoy of the Russia Company at Elsinore , and escort them back to Britain . For this operation , the Admiralty placed the frigates HMS Argo and HMS Enterprise under his command . Nelson successfully organised the convoy and escorted it into British waters . He then left the convoy to return to port , but severe storms hampered him . Gales almost wrecked Albemarle as she was a poorly designed ship and an earlier accident had left her damaged , but Nelson eventually brought her into Portsmouth in February 1782 . There the Admiralty ordered him to fit Albemarle for sea and join the escort for a convoy collecting at Cork in Ireland to sail for Quebec in Canada . Nelson arrived off Newfoundland with the convoy in late May , then detached on a cruise to hunt American privateers . Nelson was generally unsuccessful ; he succeeded only in retaking several captured British merchant ships and capturing a number of small fishing boats and assorted craft . 
 In August he had a narrow escape from a far superior French force under Louis @-@ Philippe de Vaudreuil , only evading them after a prolonged chase . Nelson arrived at Quebec on 18 September . He sailed again as part of the escort for a convoy to New York . He arrived in mid @-@ November and reported to Admiral Samuel Hood , commander of the New York station . At Nelson 's request , Hood transferred him to his fleet and Albemarle sailed in company with Hood , bound for the West Indies . On their arrival , the British fleet took up position off Jamaica to await the arrival of de Vaudreuil 's force . Nelson and the Albemarle were ordered to scout the numerous passages for signs of the enemy , but it became clear by early 1783 that the French had eluded Hood . During his scouting operations , Nelson had developed a plan to assault the French garrison of the Turks Islands . Commanding a small flotilla of frigates and smaller vessels , he landed a force of 167 seamen and marines early on the morning of 8 March under a supporting bombardment . The French were found to be heavily entrenched and after several hours Nelson called off the assault . Several of the officers involved criticised Nelson , but Hood does not appear to have reprimanded him . Nelson spent the rest of the war cruising in the West Indies , where he captured a number of French and Spanish prizes . After news of the peace reached Hood , Nelson returned to Britain in late June 1783 . 
 = = = The island of Nevis and marriage = = = 
 Nelson visited France in late 1783 , stayed with acquaintances at Saint @-@ Omer , and briefly attempted to learn French . He returned to England in January 1784 , and attended court as part of Lord Hood 's entourage . Influenced by the factional politics of the time , he contemplated standing for Parliament as a supporter of William Pitt , but was unable to find a seat . 
 In 1784 he received command of the frigate HMS Boreas with the assignment to enforce the Navigation Acts in the vicinity of Antigua . The Acts were unpopular with both the Americans and the colonies . Nelson served on the station under Admiral Sir Richard Hughes , and often came into conflict with his superior officer over their differing interpretation of the Acts . The captains of the American vessels Nelson had seized sued him for illegal seizure . Because the merchants of the nearby island of Nevis supported the American claim , Nelson was in peril of imprisonment ; he remained sequestered on Boreas for eight months , until the courts ruled in his favour . 
 In the interim , Nelson met Frances " Fanny " Nisbet , a young widow from a Nevis plantation family . Nelson and Nisbet were married at Montpelier Estate on the island of Nevis on 11 March 1787 , shortly before the end of his tour of duty in the Caribbean . The marriage was registered at Fig Tree Church in St John 's Parish on Nevis . Nelson returned to England in July , with Fanny following later . 
 = = = During the peace = = = 
 Nelson remained with Boreas until she was paid off in November that year . He and Fanny then divided their time between Bath and London , occasionally visiting Nelson 's relations in Norfolk . In 1788 , they settled at Nelson 's childhood home at Burnham Thorpe . Now in reserve on half pay , he attempted to persuade the Admiralty and other senior figures he was acquainted with , such as Hood , to provide him with a command . He was unsuccessful as there were too few ships in the peacetime navy and Hood did not intercede on his behalf . Nelson spent his time trying to find employment for former crew members , attending to family affairs , and cajoling contacts in the navy for a posting . In 1792 the French revolutionary government annexed the Austrian Netherlands ( modern Belgium ) , which were traditionally preserved as a buffer state . The Admiralty recalled Nelson to service and gave him command of the 64 @-@ gun HMS Agamemnon in January 1793 . On 1 February France declared war . 
 = = = Mediterranean service = = = 
 In May 1793 , Nelson sailed as part of a division under the command of Vice @-@ Admiral William Hotham , joined later in the month by the rest of Lord Hood 's fleet . The force initially sailed to Gibraltar and , with the intention of establishing naval superiority in the Mediterranean , made their way to Toulon , anchoring off the port in July . Toulon was largely under the control of moderate republicans and royalists , but was threatened by the forces of the National Convention , which were marching on the city . Short of supplies and doubting their ability to defend themselves , the city authorities requested that Hood take it under his protection . Hood readily acquiesced and sent Nelson to carry dispatches to Sardinia and Naples requesting reinforcements . After delivering the dispatches to Sardinia , Agamemnon arrived at Naples in early September . There Nelson met Ferdinand IV , King of Naples , followed by the British ambassador to the kingdom , William Hamilton . At some point during the negotiations for reinforcements , Nelson was introduced to Hamilton 's new wife , Emma Hamilton . The negotiations were successful , and 2 @,@ 000 men and several ships were mustered by mid @-@ September . Nelson put to sea in pursuit of a French frigate , but on failing to catch her , sailed for Leghorn , and then to Corsica . He arrived at Toulon on 5 October , where he found that a large French army had occupied the hills surrounding the city and was bombarding it . Hood still hoped the city could be held if more reinforcements arrived , and sent Nelson to join a squadron operating off Cagliari . 
 = = = Corsica = = = 
 Early on the morning of 22 October 1793 , Agamemnon sighted five sails . Nelson closed with them , and discovered they were a French squadron . He promptly gave chase , firing on the 40 @-@ gun Melpomene . He inflicted considerable damage but the remaining French ships turned to join the battle and , realising he was outnumbered , Nelson withdrew and continued to Cagliari , arriving on 24 October . After making repairs , Nelson and Agamemnon sailed again on 26 October , bound for Tunis with a squadron under Commodore Robert Linzee . On his arrival , Nelson was given command of a small squadron consisting of Agamemnon , three frigates and a sloop , and ordered to blockade the French garrison on Corsica . The fall of Toulon at the end of December 1793 severely damaged British fortunes in the Mediterranean . Hood had failed to make adequate provision for a withdrawal and 18 French ships @-@ of @-@ the @-@ line fell into republican hands . Nelson 's mission to Corsica took on added significance , as it could provide the British a naval base close to the French coast . Hood therefore reinforced Nelson with extra ships during January 1794 . 
 A British assault force landed on the island on 7 February , after which Nelson moved to intensify the blockade off Bastia . For the rest of the month he carried out raids along the coast and intercepted enemy shipping . By late February St Fiorenzo had fallen and British troops under Lieutenant @-@ General David Dundas entered the outskirts of Bastia . However , Dundas merely assessed the enemy positions and then withdrew , arguing that the French were too well entrenched to risk an assault . Nelson convinced Hood otherwise , but a protracted debate between the army and naval commanders meant that Nelson did not receive permission to proceed until late March . Nelson began to land guns from his ships and <unk> them in the hills surrounding the town . On 11 April the British squadron entered the harbour and opened fire , whilst Nelson took command of the land forces and commenced bombardment . After 45 days , the town surrendered . Nelson subsequently prepared for an assault on Calvi , working in company with Lieutenant @-@ General Charles Stuart . 
 British forces landed at Calvi on 19 June , and immediately began moving guns ashore to occupy the heights surrounding the town . While Nelson directed a continuous bombardment of the enemy positions , Stuart 's men began to advance . On 12 July Nelson was at one of the forward batteries early in the morning when a shot struck one of the sandbags protecting the position , spraying stones and sand . Nelson was struck by debris in his right eye and was forced to retire from the position , although his wound was soon bandaged and he returned to action . By 18 July most of the enemy positions had been disabled , and that night Stuart , supported by Nelson , stormed the main defensive position and captured it . <unk> their guns , the British brought Calvi under constant bombardment , and the town surrendered on 10 August . However , Nelson 's right eye had been irreparably damaged and he eventually lost all sight in it . 
 = = = Genoa and the fight of the Ça Ira = = = 
 After the occupation of Corsica , Hood ordered Nelson to open diplomatic relations with the city @-@ state of Genoa , a strategically important potential ally . Soon afterwards , Hood returned to England and was succeeded by Admiral William Hotham as commander @-@ in @-@ chief in the Mediterranean . Nelson put into Leghorn , and while Agamemnon underwent repairs , met with other naval officers at the port and entertained a brief affair with a local woman , Adelaide <unk> . Hotham arrived with the rest of the fleet in December ; Nelson and the Agamemnon sailed on a number of cruises with them in late 1794 and early 1795 . 
 On 8 March , news reached Hotham that the French fleet was at sea and heading for Corsica . He immediately set out to intercept them , and Nelson eagerly anticipated his first fleet action . The French were reluctant to engage and the two fleets shadowed each other throughout 12 March . The following day two of the French ships collided , allowing Nelson to engage the much larger 84 @-@ gun Ça Ira for two and a half hours until the arrival of two French ships forced Nelson to veer away , having inflicted heavy casualties and considerable damage . The fleets continued to shadow each other before making contact again , on 14 March , in the Battle of Genoa . Nelson joined the other British ships in attacking the battered Ça Ira , now under tow from the Censeur . Heavily damaged , the two French ships were forced to surrender and Nelson took possession of the Censeur . Defeated at sea , the French abandoned their plan to invade Corsica and returned to port . 
 = = = Skirmishes and the retreat from Italy = = = 
 Nelson and the fleet remained in the Mediterranean throughout the summer . On 4 July Agamemnon sailed from St Fiorenzo with a small force of frigates and sloops , bound for Genoa . On 6 July Nelson ran into the French fleet and found himself pursued by several much larger ships @-@ of @-@ the @-@ line . He retreated to St Fiorenzo , arriving just ahead of the pursuing French , who broke off as Nelson 's signal guns alerted the British fleet in the harbour . Hotham pursued the French to the Hyères Islands , but failed to bring them to a decisive action . A number of small engagements were fought but to Nelson 's dismay , he saw little action . 
 Nelson returned to operate out of Genoa , intercepting and inspecting merchantmen and cutting @-@ out suspicious vessels in both enemy and neutral harbours . Nelson formulated ambitious plans for amphibious landings and naval assaults to frustrate the progress of the French Army of Italy that was now advancing on Genoa , but could excite little interest in Hotham . In November Hotham was replaced by Sir Hyde Parker but the situation in Italy was rapidly deteriorating : the French were raiding around Genoa and strong Jacobin sentiment was rife within the city itself . A large French assault at the end of November broke the allied lines , forcing a general retreat towards Genoa . Nelson 's forces were able to cover the withdrawing army and prevent them from being surrounded , but he had too few ships and men to materially alter the strategic situation , and the British were forced to withdraw from the Italian ports . Nelson returned to Corsica on 30 November , angry and depressed at the British failure and questioning his future in the navy . 
 = = = Jervis and the evacuation of the Mediterranean = = = 
 In January 1796 the position of commander @-@ in @-@ chief of the fleet in the Mediterranean passed to Sir John Jervis , who appointed Nelson to exercise independent command over the ships blockading the French coast as a commodore . Nelson spent the first half of the year conducting operations to frustrate French advances and bolster Britain 's Italian allies . Despite some minor successes in intercepting small French warships ( e.g. , in the action of 31 May 1796 ) , Nelson 's squadron captured a convoy of seven small vessels ) , Nelson began to feel the British presence on the Italian peninsula was rapidly becoming useless . In June the Agamemnon was sent back to Britain for repairs , and Nelson was appointed to the 74 @-@ gun HMS Captain . In the same month , the French thrust towards Leghorn and were certain to capture the city . Nelson hurried there to oversee the evacuation of British nationals and transported them to Corsica , after which Jervis ordered him to blockade the newly captured French port . In July he oversaw the occupation of Elba , but by September the Genoese had broken their neutrality to declare in favour of the French . By October , the Genoese position and the continued French advances led the British to decide that the Mediterranean fleet could no longer be supplied ; they ordered it to be evacuated to Gibraltar . Nelson helped oversee the withdrawal from Corsica , and by December 1796 was aboard the frigate HMS Minerve , covering the evacuation of the garrison at Elba . He then sailed for Gibraltar . 
 During the passage , Nelson captured the Spanish frigate Santa Sabina and placed Lieutenants Jonathan Culverhouse and Thomas Hardy in charge of the captured vessel , taking the Spanish captain on board Minerve . Santa Sabina was part of a larger Spanish force , and the following morning two Spanish ships @-@ of @-@ the @-@ line and a frigate were sighted closing fast . Unable to outrun them , Nelson initially determined to fight but Culverhouse and Hardy raised the British colours and sailed northeast , drawing the Spanish ships after them until being captured , giving Nelson the opportunity to escape . Nelson went on to rendezvous with the British fleet at Elba , where he spent Christmas . He sailed for Gibraltar in late January , and after learning that the Spanish fleet had sailed from Cartagena , stopped just long enough to collect Hardy , Culverhouse , and the rest of the prize crew captured with Santa Sabina , before pressing on through the straits to join Sir John Jervis off Cadiz . 
 = = Admiralty = = 
 = = = Battle of Cape St Vincent = = = 
 Nelson joined Jervis 's fleet off Cape St Vincent , and reported the Spanish movements . Jervis decided to give battle and the two fleets met on 14 February . Nelson found himself towards the rear of the British line and realised that it would be a long time before he could bring Captain into action . Instead of continuing to follow the line , Nelson disobeyed orders and wore ship , breaking from the line and heading to engage the Spanish van , which consisted of the 112 @-@ gun San Josef , the 80 @-@ gun San Nicolas and the 130 @-@ gun Santísima Trinidad . Captain engaged all three , assisted by HMS Culloden which had come to Nelson 's aid . After an hour of exchanging broadsides which left both Captain and Culloden badly damaged , Nelson found himself alongside San Nicolas . He led a boarding party across , crying " Westminster Abbey ! " or , " glorious victory ! " and forced her to surrender . San Josef attempted to come to the San Nicolas ’ s aid , but became entangled with her compatriot and was left immobile . Nelson led his party from the deck of San Nicolas onto San Josef and captured her as well . As night fell , the Spanish fleet broke off and sailed for Cadiz . Four ships had surrendered to the British and two of them were Nelson 's . 
 Nelson was victorious , but had disobeyed direct orders . Jervis liked Nelson and so did not officially reprimand him , but did not mention Nelson 's actions in his official report of the battle . He did write a private letter to George Spencer in which he said that Nelson " contributed very much to the fortune of the day " . Nelson also wrote several letters about his victory , reporting that his action was being referred to amongst the fleet as " Nelson 's Patent Bridge for boarding first rates " . Nelson 's account was later challenged by Rear @-@ Admiral William Parker , who had been aboard HMS Prince George . Parker claimed that Nelson had been supported by several more ships than he acknowledged , and that San Josef had already struck her colours by the time Nelson boarded her . Nelson 's account of his role prevailed , and the victory was well received in Britain : Jervis was made Earl St Vincent and Nelson was made a Knight of the Bath . On 20 February , in a standard promotion according to his seniority and unrelated to the battle , he was promoted to Rear @-@ Admiral of the Blue . 
 = = = Action off Cadiz = = = 
 Nelson was given HMS Theseus as his flagship , and on 27 May 1797 was ordered to lie off Cadiz , monitoring the Spanish fleet and awaiting the arrival of Spanish treasure ships from the American colonies . He carried out a bombardment and personally led an amphibious assault on 3 July . During the action Nelson 's barge collided with that of the Spanish commander , and a hand @-@ to @-@ hand struggle ensued between the two crews . Twice Nelson was nearly cut down and both times his life was saved by a seaman named John Sykes who took the blows and was badly wounded . The British raiding force captured the Spanish boat and towed her back to Theseus . During this period Nelson developed a scheme to capture Santa Cruz de Tenerife , aiming to seize a large quantity of specie from the treasure ship Principe de Asturias , which was reported to have recently arrived . 
 = = = Battle of Santa Cruz de Tenerife = = = 
 The battle plan called for a combination of naval bombardments and an amphibious landing . The initial attempt was called off after adverse currents hampered the assault and the element of surprise was lost . Nelson immediately ordered another assault but this was beaten back . He prepared for a third attempt , to take place during the night . Although he personally led one of the battalions , the operation ended in failure : the Spanish were better prepared than had been expected and had secured strong defensive positions . Several of the boats failed to land at the correct positions in the confusion , while those that did were swept by gunfire and grapeshot . Nelson 's boat reached its intended landing point but as he stepped ashore he was hit in the right arm by a musketball , which fractured his humerus bone in multiple places . He was rowed back to Theseus to be attended to by the surgeon , Thomas <unk> . On arriving at his ship he refused to be helped aboard , declaring " Let me alone ! I have got my legs left and one arm . " He was taken to surgeon <unk> , instructing him to prepare his instruments and " the sooner it was off the better " . Most of the right arm was amputated and within half an hour Nelson had returned to issuing orders to his captains . Years later he would excuse himself to Commodore John Thomas Duckworth for not writing longer letters due to not being naturally left @-@ handed . He developed the sensation of Phantom Limb in his lost arm later on and declared that he had ' found the direct evidence of the existence of soul ' . 
 Meanwhile , a force under Sir Thomas Troubridge had fought their way to the main square but could go no further . Unable to return to the fleet because their boats had been sunk , Troubridge was forced to enter into negotiations with the Spanish commander , and the British were subsequently allowed to withdraw . The expedition had failed to achieve any of its objectives and had left a quarter of the landing force dead or wounded . The squadron remained off Tenerife for a further three days and by 16 August had rejoined Jervis 's fleet off Cadiz . <unk> Nelson wrote to Jervis : " A left @-@ handed Admiral will never again be considered as useful , therefore the sooner I get to a very humble cottage the better , and make room for a better man to serve the state " . He returned to England aboard HMS Seahorse , arriving at Spithead on 1 September . He was met with a hero 's welcome : the British public had lionised Nelson after Cape St Vincent and his wound earned him sympathy . They refused to attribute the defeat at Tenerife to him , preferring instead to blame poor planning on the part of St Vincent , the Secretary at War or even William Pitt . 
 = = = Return to England = = = 
 Nelson returned to Bath with Fanny , before moving to London in October to seek expert medical attention concerning his amputated arm . Whilst in London news reached him that Admiral Duncan had defeated the Dutch fleet at the Battle of Camperdown . Nelson exclaimed that he would have given his other arm to have been present . He spent the last months of 1797 recuperating in London , during which he was awarded the Freedom of the City of London and an annual pension of £ 1 @,@ 000 a year . He used the money to buy Round Wood Farm near Ipswich , and intended to retire there with Fanny . Despite his plans , Nelson was never to live there . 
 Although surgeons had been unable to remove the central ligature in his amputated arm , which had caused considerable inflammation and poisoning , in early December it came out of its own accord and Nelson rapidly began to recover . Eager to return to sea , he began agitating for a command and was promised the 80 @-@ gun HMS Foudroyant . As she was not yet ready for sea , Nelson was instead given command of the 74 @-@ gun HMS Vanguard , to which he appointed Edward Berry as his flag captain . French activities in the Mediterranean theatre were raising concern among the Admiralty : Napoleon was gathering forces in Southern France but the destination of his army was unknown . Nelson and the Vanguard were to be dispatched to Cadiz to reinforce the fleet . On 28 March 1798 , Nelson hoisted his flag and sailed to join Earl St Vincent . St Vincent sent him on to Toulon with a small force to reconnoitre French activities . 
 = = = Hunting the French = = = 
 Nelson passed through the Straits of Gibraltar and took up position off Toulon by 17 May , but his squadron was dispersed and blown southwards by a strong gale that struck the area on 20 May . While the British were battling the storm , Napoleon had sailed with his invasion fleet under the command of Vice @-@ Admiral François @-@ Paul Brueys d 'Aigalliers . Nelson , having been reinforced with a number of ships from St Vincent , went in pursuit . He began searching the Italian coast for Napoleon 's fleet , but was hampered by a lack of frigates that could operate as fast scouts . Napoleon had already arrived at Malta and , after a show of force , secured the island 's surrender . Nelson followed him there , but the French had already left . After a conference with his captains , he decided Egypt was Napoleon 's most likely destination and headed for Alexandria . On his arrival on 28 June , though , he found no sign of the French ; dismayed , he withdrew and began searching to the east of the port . While he was absent , Napoleon 's fleet arrived on 1 July and landed their forces unopposed . 
 Brueys then anchored his fleet in Aboukir Bay , ready to support Napoleon if required . Nelson meanwhile had crossed the Mediterranean again in a fruitless attempt to locate the French and had returned to Naples to re @-@ provision . He sailed again , intending to search the seas off Cyprus , but decided to pass Alexandria again for a final check . In doing so his force captured a French merchant ship , which provided the first news of the French fleet : they had passed south @-@ east of Crete a month before , heading to Alexandria . Nelson hurried to the port but again found it empty of the French . Searching along the coast , he finally discovered the French fleet in Aboukir Bay on 1 August 1798 . 
 = = = The Battle of the Nile = = = 
 Nelson immediately prepared for battle , repeating a sentiment he had expressed at the battle of Cape St Vincent that " Before this time tomorrow , I shall have gained a peerage or Westminster Abbey . " It was late by the time the British arrived and the French , anchored in a strong position with a combined firepower greater than that of Nelson 's fleet , did not expect them to attack . Nelson however immediately ordered his ships to advance . The French line was anchored close to a line of shoals , in the belief that this would secure their port side from attack ; Brueys had assumed the British would follow convention and attack his centre from the starboard side . However , Captain Thomas Foley aboard HMS Goliath discovered a gap between the shoals and the French ships , and took Goliath into the channel . The unprepared French found themselves attacked on both sides , the British fleet splitting , with some following Foley and others passing down the starboard side of the French line . 
 The British fleet was soon heavily engaged , passing down the French line and engaging their ships one by one . Nelson on Vanguard personally engaged Spartiate , also coming under fire from Aquilon . At about eight o 'clock , he was with Berry on the quarter @-@ deck when a piece of French shot struck him in his forehead . He fell to the deck , a flap of torn skin obscuring his good eye . Blinded and half stunned , he felt sure he would die and cried out " I am killed . Remember me to my wife . " He was taken below to be seen by the surgeon . After examining Nelson , the surgeon pronounced the wound non @-@ threatening and applied a temporary bandage . 
 The French van , pounded by British fire from both sides , had begun to surrender , and the victorious British ships continued to move down the line , bringing Brueys 's 118 @-@ gun flagship Orient under constant heavy fire . Orient caught fire under this bombardment , and later exploded . Nelson briefly came on deck to direct the battle , but returned to the surgeon after watching the destruction of Orient . 
 The Battle of the Nile was a major blow to Napoleon 's ambitions in the east . The fleet had been destroyed : Orient , another ship and two frigates had been burnt , seven 74 @-@ gun ships and two 80 @-@ gun ships had been captured , and only two ships @-@ of @-@ the @-@ line and two frigates escaped , while the forces Napoleon had brought to Egypt were stranded . Napoleon attacked north along the Mediterranean coast , but Turkish defenders supported by Captain Sir Sidney Smith defeated his army at the Siege of Acre . Napoleon then left his army and sailed back to France , evading detection by British ships . Given its strategic importance , some historians regard Nelson 's achievement at the Nile as the most significant of his career , even greater than that at Trafalgar seven years later . 
 = = = Rewards = = = 
 Nelson wrote dispatches to the Admiralty and oversaw temporary repairs to the Vanguard , before sailing to Naples where he was met with enthusiastic celebrations . The King of Naples , in company with the Hamiltons , greeted him in person when he arrived at the port and William Hamilton invited Nelson to stay at their house . Celebrations were held in honour of Nelson 's birthday that September , and he attended a banquet at the Hamiltons ' , where other officers had begun to notice his attention to Emma . Jervis himself had begun to grow concerned about reports of Nelson 's behaviour , but in early October word of Nelson 's victory had reached London . The First Lord of the Admiralty , Earl Spencer , fainted on hearing the news . Scenes of celebration erupted across the country , balls and victory feasts were held and church bells were rung . The City of London awarded Nelson and his captains swords , whilst the King ordered them to be presented with special medals . The Tsar of Russia sent him a gift , and Selim III , the Sultan of the Ottoman Empire , awarded Nelson the Order of the Turkish Crescent for his role in restoring Ottoman rule in Egypt . Lord Hood , after a conversation with the Prime Minister , told Fanny that Nelson would likely be given a <unk> , similar to Jervis 's earldom after Cape St Vincent and Duncan 's viscountcy after Camperdown . Earl Spencer however demurred , arguing that as Nelson had only been detached in command of a squadron , rather than being the commander in chief of the fleet , such an award would create an unwelcome precedent . Instead , Nelson received the title Baron Nelson of the Nile . 
 = = = Neapolitan campaign = = = 
 Nelson was dismayed by Spencer 's decision , and declared that he would rather have received no title than that of a mere barony . He was however cheered by the attention showered on him by the citizens of Naples , the prestige accorded him by the kingdom 's elite , and the comforts he received at the Hamiltons ' residence . He made frequent visits to attend functions in his honour , or to tour nearby attractions with Emma , with whom he had by now fallen deeply in love , almost constantly at his side . Orders arrived from the Admiralty to blockade the French forces in Alexandria and Malta , a task Nelson delegated to his captains , Samuel Hood and Alexander Ball . Despite enjoying his lifestyle in Naples , Nelson began to think of returning to England , but King Ferdinand of Naples , after a long period of pressure from his wife Maria Carolina of Austria and Sir William Hamilton , finally agreed to declare war on France . The Neapolitan army , led by the Austrian General Mack and supported by Nelson 's fleet , retook Rome from the French in late November , but the French regrouped outside the city and , after being reinforced , routed the Neapolitans . In disarray , the Neapolitan army fled back to Naples , with the pursuing French close behind . Nelson hastily organised the evacuation of the Royal Family , several nobles and the British nationals , including the Hamiltons . The evacuation got under way on 23 December and sailed through heavy gales before reaching the safety of Palermo on 26 December . 
 With the departure of the Royal Family , Naples descended into anarchy and news reached Palermo in January that the French had entered the city under General <unk> and proclaimed the Parthenopaean Republic . Nelson was promoted to Rear Admiral of the Red on 14 February 1799 , and was occupied for several months in blockading Naples , while a popular counter @-@ revolutionary force under Cardinal Ruffo known as the <unk> marched to retake the city . In late June Ruffo 's army entered Naples , forcing the French and their supporters to withdraw to the city 's fortifications as rioting and looting broke out amongst the ill @-@ disciplined Neapolitan troops . Dismayed by the bloodshed , Ruffo agreed to a general amnesty with the Jacobin forces that allowed them safe conduct to France . Nelson , now aboard Foudroyant , was outraged , and backed by King Ferdinand he insisted that the rebels must surrender unconditionally . He took those who had surrendered under the amnesty under armed guard , including the former Admiral Francesco Caracciolo , who had commanded the Neapolitan navy under King Ferdinand but had changed sides during the brief Jacobin rule . Nelson ordered his trial by court @-@ martial and refused Caracciolo 's request that it be held by British officers , nor was Caracciolo allowed to summon witnesses in his defence . Caracciolo was tried by royalist Neapolitan officers and sentenced to death . He asked to be shot rather than hanged , but Nelson , following the wishes of Queen Maria Carolina ( a close friend of his mistress , Lady Hamilton ) also refused this request and even ignored the court 's request to allow 24 hours for Caracciolo to prepare himself . Caracciolo was hanged aboard the Neapolitan frigate Minerva at 5 o 'clock the same afternoon . Nelson kept the Jacobins imprisoned and approved of a wave of further executions , refusing to intervene despite pleas for clemency from the Hamiltons and the Queen of Naples . When transports were finally allowed to carry the Jacobins to France , less than a third were still alive . On 13 August 1799 , King Ferdinand gave Nelson the newly created Dukedom of Bronté in the Kingdom of Sicily , in perpetual property , enclosing the <unk> Castle , the accompanying Abbey , and the land and the city of Bronte , this as a reward for his support of the monarchy . 
 Nelson returned to Palermo in August and in September became the senior officer in the Mediterranean after Jervis ' successor Lord Keith left to chase the French and Spanish fleets into the Atlantic . Nelson spent the rest of 1799 at the Neapolitan court but put to sea again in February 1800 after Lord Keith 's return . On 18 February the Généreux , a survivor of the Nile , was sighted and Nelson gave chase , capturing her after a short battle and winning Keith 's approval . Nelson had a difficult relationship with his superior officer : he was gaining a reputation for insubordination , having initially refused to send ships when Keith requested them and on occasion returning to Palermo without orders , pleading poor health . Keith 's reports , and rumours of Nelson 's close relationship with Emma Hamilton , were also circulating in London , and Earl Spencer wrote a pointed letter suggesting that he return home : 
 You will be more likely to recover your health and strength in England than in any inactive situation at a foreign Court , however pleasing the respect and gratitude shown to you for your services may be . 
 = = = Return to England = = = 
 The recall of Sir William Hamilton to Britain was a further incentive for Nelson to return , although he and the Hamiltons initially sailed from Naples on a brief cruise around Malta aboard the Foudroyant in April 1800 . It was on this voyage that Horatio and Emma 's illegitimate daughter Horatia was probably conceived . After the cruise , Nelson conveyed the Queen of Naples and her suite to Leghorn . On his arrival , Nelson shifted his flag to HMS Alexander , but again disobeyed Keith 's orders by refusing to join the main fleet . Keith came to Leghorn in person to demand an explanation , and refused to be moved by the Queen 's pleas to allow her to be conveyed in a British ship . In the face of Keith 's demands , Nelson reluctantly struck his flag and bowed to Emma Hamilton 's request to return to England over land . 
 Nelson , the Hamiltons and several other British travellers left Leghorn for Florence on 13 July . They made stops at Trieste and Vienna , spending three weeks in the latter where they were entertained by the local nobility and heard the Missa in <unk> by Haydn that now bears Nelson 's name . By September they were in Prague , and later called at Dresden , Dessau and Hamburg , from where they caught a packet ship to Great Yarmouth , arriving on 6 November . Nelson was given a hero 's welcome and after being sworn in as a freeman of the borough and received the massed crowd 's applause . He subsequently made his way to London , arriving on 9 November . He attended court and was guest of honour at a number of banquets and balls . It was during this period that Fanny Nelson and Emma Hamilton met for the first time . During this period , Nelson was reported as being cold and distant to his wife and his attention to Emma became the subject of gossip . With the marriage breaking down , Nelson began to hate even being in the same room as Fanny . Events came to a head around Christmas , when according to Nelson 's solicitor , Fanny issued an ultimatum on whether he was to choose her or Emma . Nelson replied : 
 I love you sincerely but I cannot forget my obligations to Lady Hamilton or speak of her otherwise than with affection and admiration . 
 The two never lived together again after this . 
 = = = Parker and the Baltic = = = 
 Shortly after his arrival in England Nelson was appointed to be second @-@ in @-@ command of the Channel Fleet under Lord St Vincent . He was promoted to Vice Admiral of the Blue on 1 January 1801 , and travelled to Plymouth , where on 22 January he was granted the freedom of the city , and on 29 January Emma gave birth to their daughter , Horatia . Nelson was delighted , but subsequently disappointed when he was instructed to move his flag from HMS San Josef to HMS St George in preparation for a planned expedition to the Baltic . Tired of British ships imposing a blockade against French trade and stopping and searching their merchantmen , the Russian , Prussian , Danish and Swedish governments had formed an alliance to break the blockade . Nelson joined Admiral Sir Hyde Parker 's fleet at Yarmouth , from where they sailed for the Danish coast in March . On their arrival , Parker was inclined to blockade Denmark and control the entrance to the Baltic , but Nelson urged a pre @-@ emptive attack on the Danish fleet at harbour in Copenhagen . He convinced Parker to allow him to make an assault , and was given significant reinforcements . Parker himself would wait in the Kattegat , covering Nelson 's fleet in case of the arrival of the Swedish or Russian fleets . 
 = = = = Battle of Copenhagen = = = = 
 On the morning of 2 April 1801 , Nelson began to advance into Copenhagen harbour . The battle began badly for the British , with HMS Agamemnon , HMS Bellona and HMS Russell running aground , and the rest of the fleet encountering heavier fire from the Danish shore batteries than had been anticipated . Parker sent the signal for Nelson to withdraw , reasoning : 
 I will make the signal for recall for Nelson 's sake . If he is in a condition to continue the action he will disregard it ; if he is not , it will be an excuse for his retreat and no blame can be attached to him . 
 Nelson , directing action aboard HMS Elephant , was informed of the signal by the signal lieutenant , Frederick Langford , but angrily responded : ' I told you to look out on the Danish commodore and let me know when he surrendered . Keep your eyes fixed on him . ' He then turned to his flag captain , Thomas Foley , and said ' You know , Foley , I have only one eye . I have a right to be blind sometimes . ' He raised the telescope to his blind eye , and said ' I really do not see the signal . ' The battle lasted three hours , leaving both Danish and British fleets heavily damaged . At length Nelson dispatched a letter to the Danish commander , Crown Prince Frederick , calling for a truce , which the Prince accepted . Parker approved of Nelson 's actions in retrospect , and Nelson was given the honour of going into Copenhagen the next day to open formal negotiations . At a banquet that evening , he told Prince Frederick that the battle had been the most severe he had ever been in . The outcome of the battle and several weeks of ensuing negotiations was a 14 @-@ week armistice , and on Parker 's recall in May , Nelson became commander @-@ in @-@ chief in the Baltic Sea . As a reward for the victory , he was created Viscount Nelson of the Nile and of Burnham Thorpe in the County of Norfolk , on 19 May 1801 . In addition , on 4 August 1801 , he was created Baron Nelson , of the Nile and of Hilborough in the County of Norfolk , this time with a special remainder to his father and sisters . Nelson subsequently sailed to the Russian naval base at Reval ( now Tallinn ) in May , and there learned that the pact of armed neutrality was to be disbanded . Satisfied with the outcome of the expedition , he returned to England , arriving on 1 July . 
 = = = Leave in England = = = 
 In France , Napoleon was massing forces to invade Great Britain . After a brief spell in London , where he again visited the Hamiltons , Nelson was placed in charge of defending the English Channel to prevent the invasion . He spent the summer reconnoitring the French coast , but apart from a failed attack on Boulogne in August , saw little action . On 22 October 1801 the Peace of Amiens was signed between the British and the French , and Nelson – in poor health again – retired to Britain where he stayed with Sir William and Lady Hamilton . On 30 October Nelson spoke in support of the Addington government in the House of Lords , and afterwards made regular visits to attend sessions . The three embarked on a tour of England and Wales , visiting Birmingham , Warwick , Gloucester , Swansea , Monmouth and numerous other towns and villages . Nelson often found himself received as a hero and was the centre of celebrations and events held in his honour . In 1802 , Nelson bought Merton Place , a country estate in Merton , Surrey ( now south @-@ west London ) where he lived briefly with the Hamiltons until William 's death in April 1803 . The following month , war broke out again and Nelson prepared to return to sea . 
 = = Return to sea = = 
 Nelson was appointed commander @-@ in @-@ chief of the Mediterranean Fleet and given the first @-@ rate HMS Victory as his flagship . He joined her at Portsmouth , where he received orders to sail to Malta and take command of a squadron there before joining the blockade of Toulon . Nelson arrived off Toulon in July 1803 and spent the next year and a half enforcing the blockade . He was promoted to Vice Admiral of the White while still at sea , on 23 April 1804 . In January 1805 the French fleet , under Admiral Pierre @-@ Charles Villeneuve , escaped Toulon and eluded the blockading British . Nelson set off in pursuit but after searching the eastern Mediterranean he learned that the French had been blown back into Toulon . Villeneuve managed to break out a second time in April , and this time succeeded in passing through the Strait of Gibraltar and into the Atlantic , bound for the West Indies . 
 Nelson gave chase , but after arriving in the Caribbean , spent June in a fruitless search for the fleet . Villeneuve had briefly cruised around the islands before heading back to Europe , in contravention of Napoleon 's orders . The returning French fleet was intercepted by a British fleet under Sir Robert Calder and engaged in the Battle of Cape Finisterre , but managed to reach Ferrol with only minor losses . Nelson returned to Gibraltar at the end of July , and travelled from there to England , dismayed at his failure to bring the French to battle and expecting to be censured . To his surprise he was given a rapturous reception from crowds who had gathered to view his arrival , while senior British officials congratulated him for sustaining the close pursuit and credited him with saving the West Indies from a French invasion . Nelson stayed briefly in London , where he was cheered wherever he went , before visiting Merton to see Emma , arriving in late August . He entertained a number of his friends and relations there over the coming month , and began plans for a grand engagement with the enemy fleet , one that would surprise his foes by forcing a pell @-@ mell battle on them . 
 Captain Henry Blackwood arrived at Merton early on 2 September , bringing news that the French and Spanish fleets had combined and were currently at anchor in Cádiz . Nelson hurried to London where he met cabinet ministers and was given command of the fleet blockading Cádiz . It was while attending one of these meetings on 12 September , with Lord Castlereagh , the Secretary of State for War and the Colonies , that Nelson and Major General Arthur Wellesley , the future Duke of Wellington , met briefly in a waiting room . Wellington was waiting to be debriefed on his Indian operations , and Nelson on his chase and future plans . Wellington later recalled , ' He ( Nelson ) entered at once into conversation with me , if I can call it conversation , for it was almost all on his side and all about himself and , in reality , a style so vain and so silly as to surprise and almost disgust me . ' However , after a few minutes Nelson left the room and having been told who his companion was , returned and entered into an earnest and intelligent discussion with the young Wellesley which lasted for a quarter of an hour , on the war , the state of the colonies and the geopolitical situation , that left a marked impression upon Wellesley . This was the only meeting between the two men . 
 Nelson returned briefly to Merton to set his affairs in order and bid farewell to Emma , before travelling back to London and then on to Portsmouth , arriving there early in the morning of 14 September . He breakfasted at the George Inn with his friends George Rose , the Vice @-@ President of the Board of Trade , and George Canning , the Treasurer of the Navy . During the breakfast word spread of Nelson 's presence at the inn and a large crowd of well wishers gathered . They accompanied Nelson to his barge and cheered him off , which Nelson acknowledged by raising his hat . Nelson was recorded as having turned to his colleague and stated , " I had their <unk> before : I have their hearts now " . Robert Southey reported that of the onlookers for Nelson 's walk to the dock , " Many were in tears and many knelt down before him and blessed him as he passed " . 
 Victory joined the British fleet off Cádiz on 27 September , Nelson taking over from Rear @-@ Admiral Collingwood . He spent the following weeks preparing and refining his tactics for the anticipated battle and dining with his captains to ensure they understood his intentions . Nelson had devised a plan of attack that anticipated the allied fleet would form up in a traditional line of battle . Drawing on his own experience from the Nile and Copenhagen , and the examples of Duncan at Camperdown and Rodney at the Saintes , Nelson decided to split his fleet into squadrons rather than forming it into a similar line parallel to the enemy . These squadrons would then cut the enemy 's line in a number of places , allowing a pell @-@ mell battle to develop in which the British ships could overwhelm and destroy parts of their opponents ' formation , before the unengaged enemy ships could come to their aid . 
 = = Battle of Trafalgar = = 
 = = = Preparation = = = 
 The combined French and Spanish fleet under Villeneuve 's command numbered 33 ships of the line . Napoleon Bonaparte had intended for Villeneuve to sail into the English Channel and cover the planned invasion of Britain , but the entry of Austria and Russia into the war forced Napoleon to call off the planned invasion and transfer troops to Germany . Villeneuve had been reluctant to risk an engagement with the British , and this reluctance led Napoleon to order Vice @-@ Admiral François <unk> to go to Cádiz and take command of the fleet , sail it into the Mediterranean to land troops at Naples , before making port at Toulon . Villeneuve decided to sail the fleet out before his successor arrived . On 20 October 1805 , the fleet was sighted making its way out of harbour by patrolling British frigates , and Nelson was informed that they appeared to be heading to the west . 
 At four o 'clock in the morning of 21 October Nelson ordered the Victory to turn towards the approaching enemy fleet , and signalled the rest of his force to battle stations . He then went below and made his will , before returning to the quarterdeck to carry out an inspection . Despite having 27 ships to Villeneuve 's 33 , Nelson was confident of success , declaring that he would not be satisfied with taking fewer than 20 prizes . He returned briefly to his cabin to write a final prayer , after which he joined Victory ’ s signal lieutenant , John Pasco . 
 Mr Pasco , I wish to say to the fleet " England confides that every man will do his duty " . You must be quick , for I have one more signal to make , which is for close action . 
 Pasco suggested changing ' confides ' to ' expects ' , which being in the Signal Book , could be signalled by the use of a single flag , whereas ' confides ' would have to be spelt out letter by letter . Nelson agreed , and the signal was hoisted . 
 As the fleets converged , the Victory ’ s captain , Thomas Hardy , suggested that Nelson remove the decorations on his coat , so that he would not be so easily identified by enemy sharpshooters . Nelson replied that it was too late ' to be shifting a coat ' , adding that they were ' military orders and he did not fear to show them to the enemy ' . Captain Henry Blackwood , of the frigate HMS Euryalus , suggested Nelson come aboard his ship to better observe the battle . Nelson refused , and also turned down Hardy 's suggestion to let Eliab Harvey 's HMS Temeraire come ahead of the Victory and lead the line into battle . 
 = = = Battle is joined = = = 
 Victory came under fire , initially passing wide , but then with greater accuracy as the distances decreased . A cannonball struck and killed Nelson 's secretary , John Scott , nearly cutting him in two . Hardy 's clerk took over , but he too was almost immediately killed . Victory ’ s wheel was shot away , and another cannonball cut down eight marines . Hardy , standing next to Nelson on the quarterdeck , had his shoe buckle dented by a splinter . Nelson observed ' this is too warm work to last long ' . The Victory had by now reached the enemy line , and Hardy asked Nelson which ship to engage first . Nelson told him to take his pick , and Hardy moved Victory across the stern of the 80 @-@ gun French flagship Bucentaure . Victory then came under fire from the 74 @-@ gun Redoutable , lying off the Bucentaure ’ s stern , and the 130 @-@ gun Santísima Trinidad . As sharpshooters from the enemy ships fired onto Victory ’ s deck from their rigging , Nelson and Hardy continued to walk about , directing and giving orders . 
 = = = Wounding and death = = = 
 Shortly after one o 'clock , Hardy realised that Nelson was not by his side . He turned to see Nelson kneeling on the deck , supporting himself with his hand , before falling onto his side . Hardy rushed to him , at which point Nelson smiled 
 Hardy , I do believe they have done it at last … my backbone is shot through . 
 He had been hit by a marksman from the Redoutable , firing at a range of 50 feet ( 15 m ) . The bullet had entered his left shoulder , passed through his spine at the sixth and seventh thoracic vertebrae , and lodged two inches ( 5 cm ) below his right shoulder blade in the muscles of his back . Nelson was carried below by sergeant @-@ major of marines Robert Adair and two seamen . As he was being carried down , he asked them to pause while he gave some advice to a midshipman on the handling of the tiller . He then draped a handkerchief over his face to avoid causing alarm amongst the crew . He was taken to the surgeon William Beatty , telling him 
 You can do nothing for me . I have but a short time to live . My back is shot through . 
 Nelson was made comfortable , fanned and brought lemonade and watered wine to drink after he complained of feeling hot and thirsty . He asked several times to see Hardy , who was on deck supervising the battle , and asked Beatty to remember him to Emma , his daughter and his friends . 
 Hardy came belowdecks to see Nelson just after half @-@ past two , and informed him that a number of enemy ships had surrendered . Nelson told him that he was sure to die , and begged him to pass his possessions to Emma . With Nelson at this point were the chaplain Alexander Scott , the purser Walter Burke , Nelson 's steward , Chevalier , and Beatty . Nelson , fearing that a gale was blowing up , instructed Hardy to be sure to anchor . After reminding him to " take care of poor Lady Hamilton " , Nelson said " Kiss me , Hardy " . Beatty recorded that Hardy knelt and kissed Nelson on the cheek . He then stood for a minute or two before kissing him on the forehead . Nelson asked , " Who is that ? " , and on hearing that it was Hardy , he replied " God bless you , Hardy . " By now very weak , Nelson continued to murmur instructions to Burke and Scott , " fan , fan … rub , rub … drink , drink . " Beatty heard Nelson murmur , " Thank God I have done my duty " , and when he returned , Nelson 's voice had faded and his pulse was very weak . He looked up as Beatty took his pulse , then closed his eyes . Scott , who remained by Nelson as he died , recorded his last words as " God and my country " . Nelson died at half @-@ past four , three hours after he had been shot . 
 = = Return to England = = 
 Nelson 's body was placed in a cask of brandy mixed with camphor and myrrh , which was then lashed to the Victory 's mainmast and placed under guard . Victory was towed to Gibraltar after the battle , and on arrival the body was transferred to a lead @-@ lined coffin filled with spirits of wine . Collingwood 's dispatches about the battle were carried to England aboard HMS Pickle , and when the news arrived in London , a messenger was sent to Merton Place to bring the news of Nelson 's death to Emma Hamilton . She later recalled , 
 They brought me word , Mr Whitby from the Admiralty . " Show him in directly " , I said . He came in , and with a pale countenance and faint voice , said , " We have gained a great Victory . " – " Never mind your Victory " , I said . " My letters – give me my letters " – Captain Whitby was unable to speak – tears in his eyes and a deathly paleness over his face made me comprehend him . I believe I gave a scream and fell back , and for ten hours I could neither speak nor shed a tear . 
 King George III , on receiving the news , is alleged to have said , in tears , " We have lost more than we have gained . " The Times reported 
 We do not know whether we should mourn or rejoice . The country has gained the most splendid and decisive Victory that has ever graced the naval annals of England ; but it has been dearly purchased . 
 The first tribute to Nelson was fittingly offered at sea by sailors of Vice @-@ Admiral Dmitry <unk> 's passing Russian squadron , which saluted on learning of the death . 
 = = Funeral = = 
 Nelson 's body was unloaded from the Victory at the Nore . It was conveyed upriver in Commander Grey 's yacht Chatham to Greenwich and placed in a lead coffin , and that in another wooden one , made from the mast of L 'Orient which had been salvaged after the Battle of the Nile . He lay in state in the Painted Hall at Greenwich for three days , before being taken upriver aboard a barge , accompanied by Lord Hood , chief mourner Sir Peter Parker , and the Prince of Wales . The Prince of Wales at first announced his intention of attending the funeral as chief mourner , but later attended in a private capacity with his brothers when his father George III reminded him that it was against protocol for the Heir to the Throne to attend the funerals of anyone except members of the Royal Family . The coffin was taken into the Admiralty for the night , attended by Nelson 's chaplain , Alexander Scott . The next day , 9 January , a funeral procession consisting of 32 admirals , over a hundred captains , and an escort of 10 @,@ 000 soldiers took the coffin from the Admiralty to St Paul 's Cathedral . After a four @-@ hour service he was interred within a sarcophagus originally carved for Cardinal Wolsey . The sailors charged with folding the flag draping Nelson 's coffin and placing it in the grave instead tore it into fragments , with each taking a piece as a memento . 
 = = Assessment = = 
 Nelson was regarded as a highly effective leader , and someone who was able to sympathise with the needs of his men . He based his command on love rather than authority , inspiring both his superiors and his subordinates with his considerable courage , commitment and charisma , dubbed ' the Nelson touch ' . Nelson combined this talent with an adept grasp of strategy and politics , making him a highly successful naval commander . However , Nelson 's personality was complex , often characterised by a desire to be noticed , both by his superiors , and the public . He was easily flattered by praise , and dismayed when he felt he was not given sufficient credit for his actions . This led him to take risks , and to enthusiastically publicise his resultant successes . Nelson was also highly confident in his abilities , determined and able to make important decisions . His active career meant that he was considerably experienced in combat , and was a shrewd judge of his opponents , able to identify and exploit his enemies ' weaknesses . He was often prone to insecurities however , as well as violent mood swings , and was extremely vain : he loved to receive decorations , tributes and praise . Despite his personality , he remained a highly professional leader and was driven all his life by a strong sense of duty . Nelson 's fame reached new heights after his death , and he came to be regarded as one of Britain 's greatest military heroes , ranked alongside the Duke of Marlborough and the Duke of Wellington . In the BBC 's 100 Greatest Britons programme in 2002 , Nelson was voted the ninth greatest Briton of all time . 
 Aspects of Nelson 's life and career were controversial , both during his lifetime and after his death . His affair with Emma Hamilton was widely remarked upon and disapproved of , to the extent that Emma was denied permission to attend Nelson 's funeral and was subsequently ignored by the government , which awarded money and titles to Nelson 's legitimate family . Nelson 's actions during the reoccupation of Naples have also been the subject of debate : his approval of the wave of reprisals against the Jacobins who had surrendered under the terms agreed by Cardinal Ruffo , and his personal intervention in securing the execution of Caracciolo , are considered by some biographers , such as Robert Southey , to have been a shameful breach of honour . Prominent contemporary politician Charles James Fox was among those who attacked Nelson for his actions at Naples , declaring in the House of Commons 
 I wish that the atrocities of which we hear so much and which I abhor as much as any man , were indeed unexampled . I fear that they do not belong exclusively to the French – Naples for instance has been what is called " delivered " , and yet , if I am rightly informed , it has been stained and polluted by murders so ferocious , and by cruelties of every kind so abhorrent , that the heart shudders at the recital … [ The besieged rebels ] demanded that a British officer should be brought forward , and to him they capitulated . They made terms with him under the sanction of the British name . Before they sailed their property was confiscated , numbers were thrown into dungeons , and some of them , I understand , notwithstanding the British guarantee , were actually executed . 
 Other pro @-@ republican writers produced books and pamphlets decrying the events in Naples as atrocities . Later assessments , including one by Andrew Lambert , have stressed that the armistice had not been authorised by the King of Naples , and that the retribution meted out by the Neapolitans was not unusual for the time . Lambert also suggests that Nelson in fact acted to put an end to the bloodshed , using his ships and men to restore order in the city . 
 = = = Legacy = = = 
 Nelson 's influence continued long after his death , and saw periodic revivals of interest , especially during times of crisis in Britain . In the 1860s Poet Laureate Alfred Tennyson appealed to the image and tradition of Nelson , in order to oppose the defence cuts being made by Prime Minister William Ewart Gladstone . First Sea Lord Jackie Fisher was a keen exponent of Nelson during the early years of the twentieth century , and often emphasised his legacy during his period of naval reform . Winston Churchill also found Nelson to be a source of inspiration during the Second World War . Nelson has been frequently depicted in art and literature ; he appeared in paintings by Benjamin West and Arthur William Devis , and in books and biographies by John McArthur , James Stanier Clarke and Robert Southey . Nelson is also celebrated and commemorated in numerous songs , written both during his life and following his death . Nelson 's victory in the Battle of the Nile is commemorated in " The Battle of the Nile : a favorite patriotic song . " Thomas Attwood 's " Nelson 's Tomb : a Favourite Song " commemorates Nelson 's death in the Battle of Trafalgar . 
 A number of monuments and memorials were constructed across the country , and abroad , to honour his memory and achievements , with work beginning on Dublin 's monument to Nelson , Nelson 's Pillar , in 1808 , subsequently destroyed in 1966 . In Montreal , a statue was started in 1808 and completed in 1809 . Others followed around the world , with London 's Trafalgar Square being created in his memory in 1835 and the centrepiece , Nelson 's Column , finished in 1843 . A Royal Society of Arts blue plaque was unveiled in 1876 to commemorate Nelson at 147 New Bond Street . 
 = = Titles = = 
 Nelson 's titles , as inscribed on his coffin and read out at the funeral by the Garter King at Arms , Sir Isaac Heard , were : 
 The Most Noble Lord Horatio Nelson , Viscount and Baron Nelson , of the Nile and of Burnham Thorpe in the County of Norfolk , Baron Nelson of the Nile and of Hilborough in the said County , Knight of the Most Honourable Order of the Bath , Vice Admiral of the White Squadron of the Fleet , Commander in Chief of his Majesty 's Ships and Vessels in the Mediterranean , Duke of Bronté in the Kingdom of Sicily , Knight Grand Cross of the Sicilian Order of St Ferdinand and of Merit , Member of the Ottoman Order of the Crescent , Knight Grand Commander of the Order of St Joachim . 
 He was a Colonel of the Royal Marines and voted a Freeman of Bath , Salisbury , Exeter , Plymouth , Monmouth , Sandwich , Oxford , Hereford , and Worcester . The University of Oxford , in full Congregation , bestowed the honorary degree of Doctor of Civil Law upon Nelson in 1802 . 
 In July 1799 , Nelson was created Duke of Bronté ( Duca di Bronté ) , of the Kingdom of Sicily ( after 1816 , existing in the nobility of the Kingdom of the Two Sicilies ) , by King Ferdinand , and after briefly experimenting with the signature " Brontë Nelson of the Nile " signed himself " Nelson & Brontë " for the rest of his life . Nelson had no legitimate children ; his daughter , Horatia , subsequently married the Rev. Philip Ward , with whom she had ten children before her death in 1881 . Because Lord Nelson died without legitimate issue , his viscountcy and his barony created in 1798 , both " of the Nile and of Burnham Thorpe in the County of Norfolk " , became extinct upon his death . However , the barony created in 1801 , " of the Nile and of Hilborough in the County of Norfolk " , passed by a special remainder , which included Lord Nelson 's father and sisters and their male issue , to Lord Nelson 's brother , The Reverend William Nelson . William Nelson was created Earl Nelson and Viscount Merton of Trafalgar and Merton in the County of Surrey in recognition of his brother 's services , and also inherited the Dukedom of Bronté . 
 = = = Armorial bearings = = = 
 Arms were originally granted and confirmed on 20 October 1797 . The original Nelson family arms were altered to accommodate his naval victories . After the Battle of Cape St Vincent in 1797 , Nelson was dubbed a Knight of the Bath and granted heraldic supporters of a sailor and a lion . In honour of the Battle of the Nile of 1798 , the Crown granted him an augmentation of arms that may be blazoned " on a chief wavy argent a palm tree between a disabled ship and a ruinous battery all <unk> from waves of the sea all proper " , the motto , " <unk> qui <unk> <unk> " ( " let him who has earned it , bear the palm " , Latin ) , and added to his supporters a palm branch in the hand of the sailor and the paw of the lion , and a " tri @-@ colored flag and staff in the mouth of the latter " After his death , his older brother and heir was granted the augmentation " on a fess wavy overall azure the word <unk> Or " . 
 = Heuschrecke 10 = 
 The Heuschrecke 10 ( English : Grasshopper 10 ) was a prototype self @-@ propelled gun and <unk> ( English : " Weapon carrier " ) developed by Krupp @-@ Gruson between 1943 and 1944 . The official designation of the vehicle was 105 mm leichte <unk> 18 / 1 L / 28 auf <unk> Geschützwagen IVb and was to be built in Magdeburg , Germany . The Heuschrecke featured a removable turret which could be deployed as a pillbox or towed behind the vehicle as an artillery piece . 
 Krupp produced only three prototypes from 1942 – 1943 . The Heuschrecke initially made use of a shortened Panzerkampfwagen IV ( Panzer IV ) chassis , but it was later switched to the Geschützwagen IV chassis , developed for the Hummel self @-@ propelled gun . Mass production of the Heuschrecke 10 was scheduled to start in February 1945 , but never occurred . 
 = = Development = = 
 = = = Precursor = = = 
 Towards the end of September 1939 , Krupp designed the " first real self @-@ propelled artillery piece " , the Sonderkraftfahrzeug 165 / 1 ( Special Purpose Vehicle 165 / 1 , abbreviated Sd.Kfz. 165 / 1 ) . The Sd.Kfz. 165 / 1 was similar in design to the Heuschrecke , but did not have the chassis @-@ mounted launching mechanism to remove the turret . After a series of tests , the Sd.Kfz. 165 / 1 was accepted by the Wehrmacht in early January 1940 . In 1941 , Krupp built prototype vehicles armed with the 105 mm leichte <unk> 18 / 1 L / 28 ( light field howitzer 18 / 1 L / 28 , abbreviated leFH 18 / 1 L / 28 ) cannon based on a modified Panzer IV chassis . The prototypes were fitted with a smaller six @-@ cylinder Maybach <unk> engine , which had a power capacity of 188 hp ( 140 kW ) . Although 200 vehicles were ordered , Krupp completed only 10 prototypes in the final four months of 1942 . These saw service on the Eastern Front . 
 = = = Prototypes = = = 
 The design phase of the Heuschrecke began in 1942 , when Krupp conceived a new type of self @-@ propelled artillery . In 1943 , Krupp produced three prototypes , with serial numbers from <unk> to <unk> , which were designated as either Heuschrecke 10 or Heuschrecke IVb . 
 The Heuschrecke designed by Krupp was similar in design to a vehicle built by <unk> and Rheinmetall @-@ Borsig , the 105 mm leFH 18 / 40 / 2 auf Geschützwagen III / IV , which was ready in March 1944 . The competing Rheinmetall @-@ Borsig model had overall slightly better performance than that of Krupps ' vehicle . It was decided , however , to utilize an alternate chassis on the Rheinmetall @-@ Borsig model , that of the Panzer IV . Production was to start in October 1944 , but the chassis choice was changed to that of the Geschützwagen IV in December 1944 . Production , in Magdeburg , was then intended to commence in February 1945 , but none were produced . 
 = = = Cancellation = = = 
 The Nazi high command thought that the production of the Heuschrecke would disrupt the production of the needed Panzers . The quantity of materials required for the construction of weapon @-@ carriers were so great that companies like Krupp were told to halt production . The majority of weapon @-@ carriers never left the production stage . The Heuschrecke was seen as interesting by the General Inspector of the Panzer Troops , Heinz Guderian , however , Guderian agreed that their development was not worth the disruption to tank production . The development of the Heuschrecke was therefore canceled in February 1943 . 
 = = Design = = 
 = = = Turret = = = 
 The distinguishing feature of the Heuschrecke was its removable turret . A lifting gantry attached to the chassis could remove the turret for use on concrete fortifications or the ground . Although the howitzer could equally be fired from the chassis , the vehicle was designed to carry the artillery piece to a firing emplacement for removal before usage . The turretless vehicle could be used as an ammunition carrier or recovery vehicle . The prototype turret was armed with the 105 mm leFH 18 / 1 L / 28 . The production models , however , were to have the 105 mm leFH 43 L / 28 . 
 = = = Chassis and Engine = = = 
 The Heuschrecke consisted of a welded steel hull , with thickness ranging from 10 to 25 millimeters , and sloped armour to deflect incoming fire more effectively . It had a large ammunition stowage , making it one of the chosen ammunition @-@ carriers to help alleviate losses of ammunition that could not otherwise be transported . The original prototype engine was the twelve @-@ cylinder Maybach <unk> , but for the production models , the twelve @-@ cylinder Maybach <unk> was chosen . 
 = = Surviving vehicle = = 
 It is believed only one Heuschrecke 10 survived the war . This sole survivor was originally on display at Aberdeen Proving Grounds . It was transferred from there to the Fort Sill Field Artillery Museum in Fort Sill , Oklahoma along with several other World War II self @-@ propelled guns . Shortly after its arrival at Fort Sill in 2012 , the Grasshopper 10 was restored by the Fort Sill Directorate of Logistics paint shop . 
 = = Specification comparison = = 
 = German destroyer Z3 Max Schultz = 
 The German destroyer Z3 Max Schultz was a Type 1934 destroyer built for the Kriegsmarine in the mid @-@ 1930s . Shortly before the beginning of World War II , the ship accidentally rammed and sank a German torpedo boat . Max Schultz spent the following month under repair . In mid @-@ February 1940 , while proceeding into the North Sea to search for British fishing trawlers , one of her sisters , Z1 Leberecht Maass , was bombed and sunk by a patrolling German bomber . While trying to rescue survivors , Max Schultz struck a British mine and sank with all hands . 
 = = Design and description = = 
 Max Schultz had an overall length of 119 meters ( 390 ft 5 in ) and was 114 meters ( 374 ft 0 in ) long at the waterline . The ship had a beam of 11 @.@ 30 meters ( 37 ft 1 in ) , and a maximum draft of 4 @.@ 23 meters ( 13 ft 11 in ) . She displaced 2 @,@ 223 long tons ( 2 @,@ 259 t ) at standard load and 3 @,@ 156 long tons ( 3 @,@ 207 t ) at deep load . The two Wagner geared steam turbine sets , each driving one propeller shaft , were designed to produce 70 @,@ 000 PS ( 51 @,@ 000 kW ; 69 @,@ 000 shp ) using steam provided by six high @-@ pressure Wagner boilers . The ship had a designed speed of 36 knots ( 67 km / h ; 41 mph ) , but her maximum speed was 38 @.@ 7 knots ( 71 @.@ 7 km / h ; 44 @.@ 5 mph ) . Max Schultz carried a maximum of 752 metric tons ( 740 long tons ) of fuel oil which was intended to give a range of 4 @,@ 400 nautical miles ( 8 @,@ 100 km ; 5 @,@ 100 mi ) at a speed of 19 knots ( 35 km / h ; 22 mph ) , but the ship proved top @-@ heavy in service and 30 % of the fuel had to be retained as ballast low in the ship . The effective range proved to be only 1 @,@ 530 nmi ( 2 @,@ 830 km ; 1 @,@ 760 mi ) at 19 knots . 
 The ship carried five 12 @.@ 7 cm SK C / 34 guns in single mounts with gun shields , two each superimposed , fore and aft . The fifth gun was carried on top of the aft superstructure . Her anti @-@ aircraft armament consisted of four 3 @.@ 7 cm SK C / 30 guns in two twin mounts abreast the rear funnel and six 2 cm C / 30 guns in single mounts . Max Schultz carried eight above @-@ water 53 @.@ 3 @-@ centimeter ( 21 @.@ 0 in ) torpedo tubes in two power @-@ operated mounts . A pair of reload torpedoes were provided for each mount . Four depth charge throwers were mounted on the sides of the rear deckhouse and they were supplemented by six racks for individual depth charges on the sides of the stern . Enough depth charges were carried for either two or four patterns of 16 charges each . Mine rails could be fitted on the rear deck that had a maximum capacity of 60 mines . A system of passive hydrophones designated as ' GHG ' ( Gruppenhorchgerät ) was fitted to detect submarines . The crew numbered 10 officers and 315 enlisted men , plus an additional four officers and 19 enlisted men if serving as a flotilla flagship . 
 = = Construction and career = = 
 The ship was ordered on 7 July 1934 and laid down at Deutsche Werke , Kiel , on 2 January 1935 as yard number <unk> . She was launched on 30 November 1935 and completed on 8 April 1937 . She was named after Max Schultz who commanded the torpedo boat <unk> and was killed in action in January 1917 . Korvettenkapitän Martin <unk> was appointed as her first captain . Max Schultz was assigned to the 1st Destroyer Division on 26 October 1937 and made a port visit to Ulvik , Norway in April 1938 , together with her sisters Z2 Georg Thiele and Z4 Richard Beitzen . Upon her return she was taken in hand by Deutsche Werke to have her bow rebuilt to reduce the amount of water that came over the bow in head seas . This increased her length by .3 meters ( 1 ft 0 in ) . The ship participated in the August Fleet Review and the following fleet exercise . In December , Max Schultz , together with her sisters Leberecht Maass , Georg Thiele , and Richard Beitzen , sailed to the area of Iceland to evaluate their seaworthiness in a North Atlantic winter with their new bows . On 23 – 24 March 1939 , the ship was one of the destroyers that escorted Adolf Hitler aboard the pocket battleship Deutschland to occupy Memel . She participated in the Spring fleet exercise in the western Mediterranean , as the flagship of Rear Admiral Günther Lütjens , and made several visits to Spanish and Moroccan ports in April and May . 
 Days before the outbreak of World War II , in the early morning hours of 27 August 1939 , the destroyer accidentally collided with and sank the torpedo boat Tiger near Bornholm . Two men were killed and six were wounded aboard the torpedo boat , while no one was injured aboard Max Schultz . The latter 's bow was severely damaged and she had to be towed , stern @-@ first , by Z2 Georg Thiele . Two tugboats arrived a half @-@ hour later and took over the tow to Swinemünde at a speed of 4 knots ( 7 @.@ 4 km / h ; 4 @.@ 6 mph ) . Max Schultz was under repair until late September and did not participate in the Polish Campaign . 
 She patrolled the Skagerrak to inspect neutral shipping for contraband goods during October . While returning from one such patrol on 28 October , one of the ship 's turbines exploded , causing boiler room No. 1 to flood and knocking out the ship 's power . Attempts to tow her failed , but the ship eventually managed to restore power and she sailed to Kiel for repairs . Max Schultz , Beitzen and Z16 Friedrich Eckoldt laid 110 magnetic mines in the Shipwash area , off Harwich , on 9 / 10 February 1940 that sank six ships of 28 @,@ 496 gross register tons ( GRT ) and damaged another . 
 On 22 February , Max Schultz and five other destroyers , Z1 Leberecht Maass , Z4 Richard Beitzen , Z6 Theodor Riedel , Z13 Erich Koellner and Z16 Friedrich Eckoldt , sailed for the Dogger Bank to intercept British fishing vessels in " Operation Wikinger " . En route , the flotilla was erroneously attacked by a Heinkel He 111 bomber from Bomber Wing ( Kampfgeschwader ) 26 . Leberecht Maass was hit by at least one bomb , lost steering , and broke in half , sinking with the loss of 280 of her crew . During the rescue effort , Max Schultz hit a mine and sank with the loss of her entire crew of 308 . Hitler ordered a Court of Inquiry to be convened to investigate the cause of the losses and it concluded that both ships that been sunk by bombs from the He 111 . The Kriegsmarine had failed to notify its destroyers that the Luftwaffe was making anti @-@ shipping patrols at that time and had also failed to inform the Luftwaffe that its destroyers would be at sea . Postwar evidence revealed that one or both ships struck a British minefield laid by the destroyers Ivanhoe and Intrepid . 
 = Battle of Lang Vei = 
 The Battle of Lang Vei ( Vietnamese : Trận <unk> <unk> ) began on the evening of 6 February and concluded during the early hours of 7 February 1968 , in Quảng Trị Province , South Vietnam . Towards the end of 1967 the 198th Tank Battalion , Vietnam People 's Army ( VPA ) 203rd Armored Regiment , received instructions from the North Vietnamese Ministry of Defense to reinforce the 304th Division as part of the Route 9 @-@ Khe Sanh Campaign . After an arduous journey down the Ho Chi Minh trail in January 1968 , the 198th Tank Battalion linked up with the 304th Division for a major offensive along Highway 9 , which stretched from the Laotian border through to Quảng Trị Province . On 23 January , the VPA 24th Regiment attacked the small Laotian outpost at Bane Houei Sane , under the control of the Royal Laos Army BV @-@ 33 ‘ Elephant ’ Battalion . 
 In that battle the 198th Tank Battalion failed to reach the battle on time because its tank crews struggled to navigate their tank equipment through the rough local terrain . However , as soon as the PT @-@ 76 tanks of the 198th Tank Battalion turned up at Bane Houei Sane , the Laotian soldiers and their families panicked and retreated into South Vietnam . After Bane Houei Sane was captured , the 24th Regiment prepared for another attack which targeted the U.S. Special Forces Camp at Lang Vei , manned by Detachment A @-@ 101 of the 5th Special Forces Group . On 6 February , the North Vietnamese 24th Regiment , again supported by the 198th Tank Battalion , launched their assault on Lang Vei . Despite fighting with air and artillery support , the U.S.-led forces conceded ground and the North Vietnamese quickly dominated their positions . By the early hours of 7 February the command bunker was the only position still held by allied forces , but they were besieged by North Vietnamese soldiers above ground . During the entire ordeal , U.S. and indigenous Civilian Irregular Defense Group ( CIDG ) forces trapped inside the command bunker had to endure North Vietnamese harassment , which came in the form of fragmentation and tear gas grenades . To rescue the American survivors inside the Lang Vei Camp , a counter @-@ attack was mounted , but the Laotian soldiers , who formed the bulk of the attack formation , refused to fight the North Vietnamese . Later on , U.S. Special Forces personnel were able to escape from the camp , and were rescued by a U.S. Marine task force . { 242 , Stanton , The Rise and fall of an American Army } 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = North Vietnam = = = 
 The task of capturing Lang Vei was entrusted to the 24th Regiment , Vietnam People 's Army 304th Division , led by Colonel Le Cong Phe . The regiment was to be supported by the 2nd Battalion ( part of the <unk> Regiment , 325th Division ) , the 2nd Artillery Battalion ( part of the 675th Artillery Regiment ) , one tank company ( part of the 198th Tank Battalion , 203rd Armored Regiment ) , two sapper companies , one anti @-@ aircraft gun company , and one flamethrower platoon . One of the most important features of the North Vietnamese formation were the elements of the 203rd Armoured Regiment ; the Route 9 @-@ Khe Sanh Campaign marked the first time the Vietnam People ’ s Army deployed its armored forces on the battlefield . In 1964 , soldiers of North Vietnam ’ s first armored unit — the 202nd Armored Regiment — was sent into South Vietnam without their T @-@ 34 main battle tanks , because their prime mission was to learn enemy armor tactics in order to prepare for future missions . On 22 June 1965 , the North Vietnamese Ministry of Defense passed Resolution 100 / <unk> @-@ QP , to establish the 203rd Armored Regiment , and Resolution 101 / <unk> @-@ QP to create an Armored Force Command . 
 For North Vietnamese commanders , the creation of an independent armored force command represented a significant milestone in the development of their army , because it enabled them to respond to the circumstances on the battlefield with a modern armored force . To prepare for their upcoming mission , the 203rd Armored Regiment undertook a series of combined @-@ arms training with infantry and artillery units in different types of terrain , in order to operate in Vietnam ’ s rough mountainous and jungle conditions . On 5 August 1967 , the Ministry of Defense ordered the 203rd Armored Regiment to form a sub @-@ unit , namely the 198th Tank Battalion equipped with 22 PT @-@ 76 amphibious tanks , to bolster the strength of the 304th Division in South Vietnam . From their base in Luong Son , Hòa Bình Province , the 198th Tank Battalion began their arduous 1 @,@ 350 kilometers ( 840 mi ) journey down the Ho Chi Minh trail under constant U.S. air @-@ strikes . In January 1968 , the 198th Tank Battalion arrived on the field where it joined the 304th Division for an attack on the Laotian outpost of Ban Houei Sane . 
 = = = United States = = = 
 The Lang Vei Special Forces Camp was placed under the control of the United States Army 's Detachment A @-@ 101 , Company C , 5th Special Forces Group , to train and equip locally recruited Vietnamese through the Civilian Irregular Defense Group ( CIDG ) program . Detachment A @-@ 101 had originally been established in July 1962 at Khe Sanh . In 1966 , Detachment A @-@ 101 moved to its first site at an area near the village of Lang Vei , when the United States Marines took control of Khe Sanh as part of an American military build @-@ up in South Vietnam ’ s northern provinces . However , the first camp at Lang Vei proved to be only temporary , when the North Vietnamese army attacked the camp on May 4 , 1967 . Even though the North Vietnamese attack had been repelled , damage to the camp was extensive . Since the original camp site had lacked good observation and fields of fire beyond the barbed @-@ wire perimeter , the 5th Special Forces Group commander decided to move the camp to a more suitable area , about 1 @,@ 000 meters to the west . The new camp , situated on Highway 9 about 7 kilometers ( 4 @.@ 3 mi ) to the west of Khe Sanh , was completed in 1967 . 
 In 1967 , Captain Franklin C. Willoughby assumed command of Detachment A @-@ 101 at Lang Vei , which had a tactical area of responsibility of 220 square kilometers ( 85 sq mi ) , and was one of nine operational CIDG camps in I Corps Tactical Zone . From Lang Vei , U.S Special Forces personnel worked jointly with a 14 @-@ man South Vietnamese special forces contingent and six interpreters ; they were responsible for border surveillance , interdiction of enemy infiltration and assistance in the Revolutionary Development Program . To accomplish those tasks Willoughby had one Montagnard company , three South Vietnamese rifle companies and three combat reconnaissance platoons at his disposal . Early in January 1968 , Detachment A @-@ 101 received reinforcements in the form of a Mobile Strike Force Company , consisting of 161 Hre tribesmen , along with six U.S. Special Forces advisors . Elements of this Mobile Strike Force Company operated from a fortified bunker about 800 meters west of the camp , which served as an observation post . During the day the Hre tribesmen of the Mobile Strike Force conducted patrols ; at night they took up ambush positions in the vicinity of the camp . 
 Prior to the battle , Willoughby placed Company 101 of 82 Bru Montagnard tribesmen , on the northeastern flank of the camp , with the 3rd Combat Reconnaissance Platoon positioned just behind it . Company 104 was placed in the southern end of the camp ; Company 102 , consisting of 42 men , was positioned at the opposite end about 450 meters to the west , while the 43 @-@ man Company 103 was positioned further south . The 1st and 2nd Combat Reconnaissance Platoons were placed at the northern and southern perimeters respectively , about 200 meters apart . Individually , the CIDG personnel carried M1 and M2 carbines with nearly 250 @,@ 000 rounds of ammunition , and each company was also equipped with one <unk> mortar . Among heavy weapons , there were two 106mm recoilless rifles , two 4 @.@ 2 @-@ inch mortars and nineteen 60mm mortars positioned around the camp . For close @-@ in support , the CIDG personnel were furnished with 100 disposable M @-@ 72 anti @-@ tank weapons . If necessary , Willoughby could also request support from at least two rifle companies from the United States 24th Marines Regiment based at Khe Sanh , along with artillery support from other locations within range . 
 = = Prelude = = 
 Following the construction of the new camp site west of Lang Vei , Willoughby and his CIDG soldiers concentrated their efforts on strengthening the camp ’ s defenses , and they made relatively few contacts with the North Vietnamese . However , unbeknown to Willoughby , the North Vietnamese 304th Division had assembled on the battlefield , reinforced by the 198th Tank Battalion , with the following orders : the 66th Regiment was given the task of capturing Khe Sanh village , part of Huong Hoa District , to begin their Route 9 @-@ Khe Sanh Campaign ; the 24th Regiment was ordered to destroy the enemy strongholds of Ban Houei Sane and Lang Vei ; while the 9th Regiment was ordered to destroy any reinforcements that may try to relieve those bases areas . From December 1967 , CIDG soldiers operating from Lang Vei began to report more frequent contacts with the North Vietnamese . By mid @-@ January , U.S. military intelligence also reported movements of North Vietnamese formations across the Xe <unk> River from Laos into South Vietnam . At the same time , the North Vietnamese began to harass the Lang Vei Special Forces Camp with mortar and artillery fire at least two or three times a week , and North Vietnamese patrols even probed the camp ’ s perimeters . 
 On January 21 , 1968 , the North Vietnamese 66th Regiment began their attack on Khe Sanh village , seat of the local Huong Hoa government . At that time , Khe Sanh village was defended by the South Vietnamese Regional Force 915th Company and the U.S. Marines Combined Action Company Oscar . Throughout the night , the combined U.S and South Vietnamese forces held their position , but at the first daylight U.S. soldiers on the ground called in air strikes and artillery support from the Khe Sanh Combat Base . Fighting in and around Khe Sanh village continued throughout the day and into the following night , and was finally captured at 09 : 30 on 22 January . At 11 : 00am Colonel David Lownds ordered Delta Company , of 1 / 26th Marines Regiment , to relieve the defenders inside Khe Sanh village , but reversed his orders after second thoughts about North Vietnamese ambushes . Later , the South Vietnamese Regional Force 256th Company was destroyed by the enemies ’ 9th Regiment as they marched towards Khe Sanh village . The North Vietnamese 66th Regiment paid a heavy price for their victory with 154 killed and 496 wounded . 
 On the evening of 23 January , one day after the fall of Khe Sanh village , the North Vietnamese 304th Division moved against their next target , the small Laotian outpost at Ban Houei Sane . Prior to 1968 , Laotian forces at Ban Houei Sane had played an important role in the war , watching North Vietnamese infiltration into South Vietnam from a section of the Ho Chi Minh Trail running through Laos . The outpost was manned by 700 Laotian soldiers of BV @-@ 33 ‘ Elephant ’ Battalion , Royal Laos Army , led by Lieutenant Colonel Soulang Phetsampou . As night fell , the North Vietnamese 3rd Battalion of the 24th Regiment began attacking the outpost . The 198th Tank Battalion , which was tasked with supporting the 24th Regiment , was delayed as their tank crews tried to navigate their PT @-@ 76 amphibious tanks through the rough local terrain . However , confusion quickly descended on the Laotian defenders as North Vietnamese PT @-@ 76 tanks turned up outside their outpost . After three hours of fighting , Soulang decided to abandon his outpost , so he radioed the Lang Vei Special Forces Camp and requested helicopters to evacuate his men and their families . However , as helicopters were unavailable , the Laotians decided to move eastward by foot along Highway 9 , in an attempt to reach Lang Vei just across the border in South Vietnam . 
 Following the collapse of both Khe Sanh village and Ban Houei Sane , thousands of civilian refugees made their way towards Lang Vei village and the Special Forces Camp . With an estimated 8 @,@ 000 non @-@ combatants within a thousand meters of his camp , Willoughby radioed Da Nang for assistance . This arrived on January 25 in the form of food and medical supplies , along with a six @-@ man Special Forces augmentation team . The Laotian soldiers of BV @-@ 33 , with assistance from the new Special Forces team , were given materials to restore the old Lang Vei Camp , where they would remain until further orders were issued from Da Nang . The Laotian soldiers and their families brought with them stories of a North Vietnamese attack supported by tanks , which was a cause for concern for Willoughby , because Ban Houei Sane was only 15 kilometers ( 9 @.@ 3 mi ) away across the border . On January 30 , Willoughby 's fears were confirmed when a North Vietnamese deserter , Private Luong Dinh Du , surrendered himself to the U.S. Special Forces in Lang Vei . Under interrogation , Private Du revealed that tracked vehicles had positioned near his unit , but a planned attack was canceled twice for unknown reasons . 
 = = Battle = = 
 In response to the threat posed by the North Vietnamese , Willoughby stepped up daytime patrols and night ambushes around his camp . On the afternoon of February 6 , Lieutenant Colonel Daniel F. Shungel — commander of Company C , 5th Special Forces — flew into Lang Vei from Da Nang as a diplomatic gesture towards the Laotian commander Phetsampou . At 23 : 30 , North Vietnamese artillery started pounding the Lang Vei Special Forces Camp , which covered the movement of the 24th Regiment and the 3rd Battalion , <unk> Regiment . From an observation post above the tactical operations centre , Sergeant Nickolas <unk> saw the first North Vietnamese tanks moving along Lang <unk> road , attempting to breach the barbed @-@ wires just in front of Company 104 . He immediately went down to the tactical operations center and described what he had witnessed to Willoughby ; Shungel then advised Willoughby to concentrate all available artillery and air support on the North Vietnamese formation just in front of Company 104 . Soon afterwards , three North Vietnamese PT @-@ 76 tanks were knocked out by a 106mm recoilless rifle manned by Sergeant First Class James W. Holt , but the barbed wire in front of Company 104 was quickly overcome by the combined North Vietnamese tank @-@ infantry attack . 
 Meanwhile , from inside the tactical operations center , Willoughby was busy calling in air and artillery support . He also radioed the 26th Marines Regiment at Khe Sanh to request the deployment of two rifle companies as part of the reinforcement plan , but his request was denied . Believing that the attack on Company 104 was the enemy ’ s main effort , Willoughby concentrated his artillery support there during the early stages of the battle . About 10 minutes after the artillery had begun firing , a U.S. Air Force forward air @-@ controller arrived over Lang Vei along with a <unk> and an AC @-@ 119 Shadow gunship . Willoughby then requested air strikes on the ravines located north of the camp , on Lang <unk> road , and the areas west of the early warning outpost manned by the Hre soldiers of the Mobile Strike Force . Despite the ferocity of the air strikes and artillery fire , the North Vietnamese managed to break through the Company 104 area , forcing the defenders to retreat into the 2nd and 3rd Combat Reconnaissance Platoon positions behind them . By 01 : 15 , the North Vietnamese had captured the entire eastern end of the Special Forces Camp and , from the Company 104 area , began pouring fire on Company 101 . 
 At the opposite end of the camp , three North Vietnamese PT @-@ 76 tanks rolled through the barbed @-@ wire barrier in front of Company 102 and 103 . From point blank , North Vietnamese tank crews destroyed several bunkers with their guns , forcing the soldiers of Company 102 and 103 to abandon their positions . Those who survived the onslaught either retreated to the reconnaissance positions , or along Highway 9 , toward Khe Sanh in the east . About 800 meters to the west , Sergeant First Class Charles W. <unk> , an adviser to the Mobile Strike Force , also reported back to Willoughby that the early warning outpost was in danger of being overrun . To save it , <unk> directed artillery strikes on the North Vietnamese troops moving up towards his outpost , but he later died from a gunshot wound to the stomach as the North Vietnamese overran the outpost . At about 01 : 30 , Shungel and his hastily organized tank @-@ killer teams were busy engaging the North Vietnamese tanks that were roaming the Company 104 area ; on many occasions the M @-@ 72 rockets fired by the Americans either missed completely , jammed , misfired , or simply failed to knock out the enemy tanks . By 02 : 30 , the North Vietnamese had broken through the inner perimeter of the camp , and began harassing the soldiers trapped inside the tactical operations center , which included Willoughby along with seven other Americans , three South Vietnamese special forces , and 26 CIDG soldiers . 
 Above ground , American and Vietnamese soldiers who had escaped death or capture tried to escape from the North Vietnamese . From the team house , a group of four Americans and about 50 CIDG soldiers held a quick conference and decided that they would leave the camp through the northern perimeter , where there was no visible sign of the North Vietnamese . Without much difficulty , the Americans and the CIDG soldiers were able to make it through the barbed @-@ wire barrier , but North Vietnamese soldiers on the eastern side of the camp had detected their movement and began firing on the group . Ultimately , only two Americans and about 10 Vietnamese soldiers managed to escape from the camp , taking refuge in a dry creek bed that offered some cover and concealment . At around 03 : 30 am , Willoughby made another request for the Marines at Khe Sanh to send reinforcements , but again his request was turned down . In an attempt to save the defenders at Lang Vei , Company C Headquarters in Da Nang tried to call for reinforcements from the Marines at Khe Sanh , but its request was also turned down . Finally , Company C Headquarters placed another Mobile Strike Force Company and a company @-@ sized unit on standby alert in Da Nang , to be airlifted into battle as soon as helicopters were available . 
 Back in Lang Vei , the North Vietnamese continued to harass the small force of soldiers still trapped in the command bunker with hand grenades , explosives and bursts of gunfire down the stairwell that led into the bunker . Shortly after 06 : 00 am , the North Vietnamese threw several fragmentation grenades and tear gas grenades down the stairwell , causing panic amongst the defenders . Then , a voice called down the stairwell in Vietnamese , demanding the American @-@ led forces give up at once . Following a quick discussion with his CIDG soldiers , the South Vietnamese special forces commander led his troops up the stairwell to surrender but were killed by North Vietnamese soldiers , leaving behind their American counterparts . After the South Vietnamese had gone up , there was another short verbal exchange between the Americans in the bunker and the North Vietnamese in English , which was followed by another fire @-@ fight when the Americans refused surrender . At 06 : 30 am , the North Vietnamese successfully blasted a hole on the northern wall , gaining direct access into the command bunker . However , instead of launching a direct attack on the last American stronghold , the North Vietnamese continued to throw grenades through the wall . 
 At dawn , Sergeant First Class Eugene Ashley , Jr. assembled about 100 Laotian soldiers of BV @-@ 33 at the old Lang Vei Camp in order to launch a rescue operation and , if possible , recapture the Special Forces Camp from the North Vietnamese . Even though Phetsampou had initially refused to take part in the operation , the Americans held him to his earlier promise of providing them with troops . After Ashley had formed the Laotian soldiers into a skirmish line , he radioed the forward air @-@ controllers overhead to direct strafing runs on the Special Forces Camp to soften up the enemy . Ashley was killed after making several attempts to rescue the soldiers trapped in the Command bunker , and he was <unk> awarded the Congressional Medal of Honor . 
 Meanwhile , as General William C. Westmoreland learned of the North Vietnamese attack on Lang Vei and <unk> ’ s refusal to send a relief force , he ordered the U.S. Marines to supply enough helicopters to airlift a 50 @-@ man strike force with the aim of rescuing the survivors . Subsequently , Colonel Jonathan F. Ladd — commanding officer of the 5th Special Forces Group — and Major General Norman J. Anderson , commander of the 1st Marine Aircraft Wing — were directed to formulate a rescue plan . While Willoughby and his men waited for help in the command bunker , Ashley and his Laotian contingent cautiously entered the Special Forces Camp . 
 The Laotian soldiers were evidently reluctant to advance on the enemy , and only inched forward when the Americans ordered them to do so . In their first attempt to break through North Vietnamese lines , Ashley and his men were beaten back . Undeterred , the American @-@ led forces tried to penetrate North Vietnamese positions several times , and only stopped after Ashley was shot in the chest and later killed by an exploding artillery round . The Laotians , who feared the North Vietnamese , disengaged from the fight and fled . After Ashley 's final attack had failed , Willoughby and his men made the decision to abandon their position . However , after Specialist Four James L. Moreland was mortally wounded , Captain Willoughby decided to leave him in the bunker , because the remaining Americans were in no physical condition to carry out the wounded man . Under the cover of U.S. air strikes , Willoughby and other American survivors ran towards the old Lang Vei Camp , which was evacuated by U.S. Marine CH @-@ 46 from HMM @-@ 262 , which lifted in a 50 @-@ man reaction force . By 17 : 30 on 7 February , all known survivors had been evacuated to Khe Sanh . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 The fight for Lang Vei , though short in duration , was a costly endeavor for both sides . In their efforts to hold the camp , the combined Montagnard and South Vietnamese CIDG soldiers suffered 309 killed , 64 wounded , and 122 captured . Of the original 24 Americans who took part in the battle , seven were killed in action , 11 sustained injuries , and three were captured . Nearly all of the camp ’ s weaponry and equipment were either destroyed or captured by enemy forces . In contrast , for North Vietnam , the battle for Lang Vei marked the first successful use of armor in the war . In terms of human casualties , the North Vietnamese claimed to have lost 90 soldiers killed in action , and 220 wounded . On the evening of February 7 , though the fight was over for the military forces , the ordeal continued for the civilians who were caught in the fighting . An estimated 6 @,@ 000 survivors from the old Lang Vei Camp that included South Vietnamese soldiers and their families , Montagnard tribesmen and the Laotians , followed the Americans and descended on the Khe Sanh Combat Base . 
 However , when they reached the American compound , Lownds refused to give them entry because he feared that North Vietnamese soldiers may have mingled with the crowd . Instead , Lownds ordered his soldiers to herd the civilians into bomb craters , disarmed the local soldiers , and kept them under guard even though North Vietnamese artillery shells continued to rain down on the base . No food or medical aid was given to the civilians as they were kept outside the wires of the American compound . Frustrated by the lack of support and poor treatment by the Americans , Phetsampou complained that his people were being treated more like an enemy . On 10 February , Laotian civilian refugees started walking back to Laos along Highway 9 , because they feared for their lives and preferred to die in their own country . On February 15 , through arrangements made by the Laotian embassy in Saigon , the Laotian commander and his soldiers were flown back to their country on a Royal Laotian Air Force C @-@ 47 transport aircraft . 
 = = Video = = 
 Battle of Ta May @-@ Lang Vei ( In Vietnamese ) on YouTube 
 Special Forces : Untold Stories - The U.S. Green Beret : The Battle of Lang Vei 
 = 2006 Gator Bowl = 
 The 2006 Gator Bowl was a college football bowl game between the Louisville Cardinals and the Virginia Tech Hokies at Alltel Stadium in Jacksonville , Florida , United States , on January 2 , 2006 . The game was the final contest of the 2005 football season for each team and resulted in a 35 – 24 Virginia Tech victory . Louisville represented the Big East Conference ( Big East ) , and Virginia Tech represented the Atlantic Coast Conference ( ACC ) in the competition . 
 Virginia Tech was selected as a participant in the 2006 Gator Bowl following a 10 – 2 regular season that included wins over 15th @-@ ranked Georgia Tech and traditional rivals Virginia and West Virginia . A loss to Florida State in the inaugural ACC Championship Game gave Tech a position in the Gator Bowl instead of the more prestigious Bowl Championship Series @-@ run Orange Bowl game . Facing the 12th @-@ ranked Hokies were the 15th @-@ ranked Louisville Cardinals , who finished 9 – 2 during the regular season of their first year in the Big East Conference . Louisville won its last five games before the Gator Bowl and participated in the Liberty Bowl at the end of the previous season . Pre @-@ game media coverage of the game focused on Virginia Tech 's fall from being a contender for the national championship , Louisville 's loss of star quarterback Brian Brohm to injury , the fact that both teams were playing under new conference affiliations , and the rise of Virginia Tech quarterback Marcus Vick , younger brother of NFL star Michael Vick . 
 The 2006 Gator Bowl began on January 2 , 2006 , at 12 : 30 p.m. EST in Jacksonville . Louisville led for much of the game , beginning with an 11 @-@ yard touchdown pass in the first quarter by backup quarterback Hunter Cantwell , who filled in for the injured Brohm . Tech 's offense replied with a field goal , but Louisville was able to add another touchdown before the end of the quarter , extending its lead to 14 – 3 . In the second quarter , Virginia Tech fought back and narrowed Louisville 's lead to a single touchdown . At halftime , the score was 17 – 10 in Louisville 's favor . In the second half , Virginia Tech 's offense began to have success . Tech earned the only points of the third quarter — a 28 @-@ yard field goal from kicker Brandon Pace — to narrow Louisville 's lead to 17 – 13 . In the fourth quarter , the game fully turned in the Hokies ' favor . Though Louisville scored a touchdown early in the quarter , Virginia Tech scored 22 unanswered points in the final 13 minutes of the game to take a 35 – 24 lead and earn the win . 
 Tailback Cedric Humes was named the most valuable player of the game for Virginia Tech , and quarterback Hunter Cantwell was named the Cardinals ' most valuable player . Tech punter Nic Schmitt set Gator Bowl records for punt yardage and average punt distance , kicking the ball six times for 300 yards , an average of 50 yards per kick . Virginia Tech 's win was marred by excessive penalties and unsportsmanlike conduct that resulted in the ejection of one player . Following the game , Virginia Tech quarterback Marcus Vick was released from the team as a result of several incidents of misconduct , including a stomp on Louisville defender Elvis Dumervil 's leg during the game . Several players who participated in the game , including Dumervil , later went on to careers in the National Football League . 
 = = Team selection = = 
 In the 2005 college football season , the Atlantic Coast Conference had an automatic bid to the Gator Bowl . By contract , the Gator Bowl Association — which produces the game — possessed the first pick of bowl @-@ eligible ACC teams after the winner of the ACC Championship Game was given a spot in a Bowl Championship Series ( BCS ) game . This was the final year that the Gator Bowl had first pick of eligible ACC teams , as contract renegotiations later resulted in the Gator Bowl slipping to the third selection , beginning with the 2006 college football season . Virginia Tech , losers of the 2005 ACC Championship Game , were chosen by the Gator Bowl Association to participate as the ACC 's representative to the 2006 Gator Bowl . 
 The other half of the matchup would consist of either Notre Dame or the first selection from the Big East Conference after that conference 's automatic BCS bid . Because Notre Dame was selected to play in the 2006 Fiesta Bowl , a BCS game , the Gator Bowl Association was required to select the Big East 's Louisville Cardinals , which , like Virginia Tech , finished second in their conference . 
 = = = Virginia Tech = = = 
 The Virginia Tech Hokies football team began the 2005 college football season as reigning Atlantic Coast Conference football champions . The Hokies also played in the 2005 Sugar Bowl against the third @-@ ranked Auburn Tigers , losing 16 – 13 in a close contest . Expectations were high for the Hokies to repeat their ACC championship performance the next year , and a preseason poll of media covering ACC football resulted in Virginia Tech being picked to face Florida State in the inaugural ACC Championship Game . 
 In its first game of the season , however , eighth @-@ ranked Virginia Tech almost let those expectations fall short . At North Carolina State , the Hokies trailed at halftime and were tied at the beginning of the fourth quarter before eking out a 20 – 16 win in the final minutes . The Hokies bounced back from the close contest in their second game of the season — against the Duke Blue Devils — as Tech raced to a 45 – 0 victory . The Hokies held Duke to just 35 yards of total offense , Tech 's best defensive performance in the modern era . 
 The win over Duke was followed by several others in succession . Heading into their ninth game of the season , the Hokies were 8 – 0 record and the third @-@ ranked college football team in the country . Against the fifth @-@ ranked Miami Hurricanes , however , Virginia Tech suffered its first defeat of the season , falling 27 – 7 . Tech recovered by winning its next two games , earning a spot in the inaugural Atlantic Coast Conference Championship Game , held in Jacksonville , Florida . There , the Hokies lost , 27 – 22 , to the Florida State Seminoles . The Seminoles earned an automatic bid to a Bowl Championship Series game by virtue of the victory — had Virginia Tech won the game , it would have been awarded the bid . The day after Tech lost the ACC Championship Game , the Gator Bowl extended a formal invitation to Virginia Tech , which the Hokies accepted . Ninth @-@ ranked Miami , the same team that beat the Hokies 27 – 7 earlier in the season , was considered for selection , but the Gator Bowl Association took into consideration Virginia Tech 's history of having a large fan base travel to its bowl games , and selected the Hokies on those grounds . 
 = = = Louisville = = = 
 The Louisville Cardinals football team came into the 2005 season having gone 11 – 1 the previous season , including a season @-@ ending 44 – 40 victory over Boise State in the 2004 Liberty Bowl . In addition , Louisville was also entering a new conference — the Big East — after departing Conference USA following the end of the 2004 season . In a poll of media members covering the Big East prior to the 2005 season , Louisville was predicted to win the Big East championship its first year in the conference . 
 In their first and second games of the season , the Cardinals lived up to that expectation . At in @-@ state rival Kentucky , Louisville earned a 31 – 24 victory to win the Governor 's Cup . This was followed the next week by a 63 – 27 victory over non @-@ conference opponent Oregon State . Unfortunately for the Cardinals , their first Big East conference game of the season — and of school history — did not go as well . At South Florida , the ninth @-@ ranked Cardinals were outscored 45 – 14 , the first time in 13 games Louisville 's offense was held to less than 30 points . 
 Following the loss , Louisville recovered , scoring 61 points and 69 points , respectively , in non @-@ conference wins over Florida Atlantic University and North Carolina , returning to their previous offensive success . Again , however , Louisville faltered against a Big East opponent . The Cardinals ' second Big East game , at West Virginia University , was another Louisville loss , 46 – 44 . West Virginia later went on to finish 11 – 1 for the season , winning the Big East championship and defeating the Georgia Bulldogs in the 2006 Sugar Bowl . 
 Louisville , meanwhile , returned to its winning ways . The Cardinals , following their loss to the Mountaineers , won their first Big East game in school history the next week , over the Cincinnati Bearcats , 46 – 22 . The rout of Cincinnati sparked a five @-@ game winning streak , which concluded on December 3 with a 30 – 20 victory over the University of Connecticut Huskies . Unfortunately for the Cardinals , starting quarterback Brian Brohm , who had the sixth @-@ best season ( in terms of passing yards ) in Louisville history , suffered a season @-@ ending knee injury . With West Virginia having won the Big East championship and an automatic Bowl Championship Series game bid , Big East second @-@ place Louisville was selected by the Gator Bowl even before the victory over Connecticut . 
 = = Pregame buildup = = 
 Pregame media and fan interest surrounding the game focused largely on Louisville 's top @-@ ranked offense and Virginia Tech 's first @-@ ranked scoring defense . Other major points of media coverage included the two teams ' quarterbacks : Louisville 's Hunter Cantwell , who replaced starter Brian Brohm after Brohm suffered a season @-@ ending knee injury ; and Virginia Tech 's Marcus Vick , brother of National Football League star Michael Vick . Also a concern for Louisville was the health of star running back Michael Bush , who missed two games in November due to an injury . On a wider note , there was also interest in the conference @-@ level showdown between a new Big East team ( Louisville ) and a team that left the Big East for the ACC after the 2003 season ( Virginia Tech ) . For Virginia Tech , there was also the hope of overcoming the disappointment of a season that saw the Hokies ranked third in the country and in the hunt for the national championship before failing to even win the Atlantic Coast Conference and missing a bid to a Bowl Championship Series game . 
 When betting on the game opened , spread bettors favored Virginia Tech by 10 points . Five days after betting opened , the point spread narrowed to 7 @.@ 5 , still in favor of Virginia Tech . Two weeks later , the point spread remained at 7 @.@ 5 in favor of Virginia Tech . 
 = = = Offensive matchup = = = 
 = = = = Louisville offense = = = = 
 Heading into the Gator Bowl , Louisville 's scoring offense was ranked third in the country — averaging 45 @.@ 2 points per game — and was held under 30 points just once in their preceding 21 games . The high @-@ powered Cardinals ' offense was predicted to pose a challenge for the Virginia Tech defense . 
 With star quarterback Brian Brohm having undergone surgery to repair a torn anterior cruciate ligament , there were some questions as to how backup Hunter Cantwell would perform under pressure . Cantwell played well in the Cardinals ' season @-@ ending contest against Connecticut , but some commentators predicted that Virginia Tech 's quicker defense would pose problems for him . In that contest , Cantwell completed 16 of 25 passes for 271 yards and a touchdown . In high school , Cantwell passed for 7 @,@ 272 yards and 70 touchdowns . His <unk> career completion percentage ranked 11th in Kentucky state history . 
 Running back Michael Bush was predicted to return to form after suffering a foot injury that kept him out of two games in November . Bush ran for 121 yards and three touchdowns against Connecticut , his first game back from the injury . Heading into the Gator Bowl , Bush earned a school @-@ record 24 touchdowns and led the country in scoring . He ran for 1 @,@ 049 yards in nine games . He was also a capable receiver , catching 20 passes for 245 yards and a touchdown . But with Brohm on the sidelines , it was expected the Cardinals would rely on Bush 's legs more than usual , in an effort to minimize the need for the inexperienced Cantwell to pass the ball . 
 Louisville wide receiver Mario Urrutia , who caught 31 passes for 702 yards and six touchdowns during the regular season , stirred a bit of controversy in the final days leading up to the Gator Bowl after he declared that Virginia Tech 's first @-@ ranked defense was " mostly hype " . 
 = = = = Virginia Tech offense = = = = 
 Virginia Tech quarterback Marcus Vick was considered the key player for the Virginia Tech offense heading into the Gator Bowl . The younger brother of first @-@ overall NFL Draft pick Michael Vick — who also played for Tech — Marcus led the league in passing efficiency ( 141 @.@ 6 rating ) , completed 166 of 268 passes ( 60 @.@ 3 percent ) for 2 @,@ 190 yards and 15 touchdowns , with ten interceptions . On the ground , he ran for 370 yards and six touchdowns . Prior to the Gator Bowl , he pledged that he would return for another season at Virginia Tech before entering the NFL draft . " The NFL is tough . It 's the real deal . You 've got to be ready for it . You just don 't want to rush into just throwing yourself out there because of the money or anything like that . You 've got to really be prepared for it " , he said . 
 On the ground , two different Tech players were predicted to share time running the ball . Senior running back Cedric Humes was predicted to get the bulk of the carries in the game , but redshirt freshman Branden Ore was also predicted to see some plays at times . Humes rushed the ball 140 times for 639 yards and ten touchdowns during the regular season . Ore , meanwhile , ran the ball for 591 yards and six touchdowns . 
 Wide receiver Josh Morgan was also considered a key component of the Hokie offense . Morgan finished the season with 28 receptions for 471 yards and four touchdowns . Prior to the game , Morgan predicted that if the Hokies executed their plays well , they would emerge the victors . 
 Backup guard Brandon Gore broke his ankle during the Hokies ' loss to Florida State and would not be able to participate . Senior Tech running back Mike Imoh , who shared time running the ball during the regular season with Ore and Humes , was also out after undergoing surgery to repair an injured ankle . Adding to the injury situation for Virginia Tech was offensive tackle Jimmy Martin , who suffered a sprained knee ligament in practice leading up to the game . Martin started 45 consecutive games prior to the Gator Bowl , a streak that was broken when he was replaced by Brandon Frye on the day of the game . 
 = = = Defensive matchup = = = 
 = = = = Louisville defense = = = = 
 Shortly after Louisville was selected to the 2006 Gator Bowl , Cardinals defensive end Elvis Dumervil was awarded the Bronko Nagurski Trophy , given annually to the top defensive college football player in the United States . Dumervil also earned several other honors in the weeks leading up to the game , including being named Big East Defensive Player of the Year , an Associated Press All @-@ American and earning the Ted Hendricks Award , given annually to the best defensive end in the country . Dumervil led the nation in sacks ( 20 ) and forced fumbles ( 10 ) during the regular season . Prior to the game , he announced that he was looking forward to the contest , saying , " To me , I wanted to play the best possible team in the Gator Bowl , and I think that 's what we 've got " . 
 A week and a half after Dumervil won the Nagurski Trophy , senior defensive tackle <unk> Stanley , who was a leader on defense for Louisville , underwent surgery to repair a torn pectoral muscle . Stanley was the Cardinals ' best run @-@ stopper on defense , amassing 48 tackles and 5 @.@ 5 sacks during the season . 
 = = = = Virginia Tech defense = = = = 
 Coming into the Gator Bowl , the Virginia Tech defense was ranked first in total defense , second in pass defense , fourth in rushing defense , and third in scoring defense , allowing an average of just over 12 points per game . The Virginia Tech defense was led by defensive end Darryl Tapp , a first @-@ team All @-@ ACC pick , an American Football Coaches Association ( AFCA ) All @-@ American , a finalist for the Lott Trophy , and a finalist for the Ted Hendricks Award . Tapp was considered a natural leader both on and off the field and led the Hokies ' defensive workouts during practice . Tapp finished the regular season with 45 tackles ( including 12 @.@ 5 for a loss ) and ten sacks . He was also named a second @-@ team Associated Press All @-@ American , and he won the Dudley Award , given annually to the best college football player in the state of Virginia . 
 Tech cornerback Jimmy F. Williams , considered a cornerstone of the Hokie defense , was a finalist for the Nagurski Trophy that season , but lost to Louisville 's Elvis Dumervil . Williams was Tech 's sole first @-@ team Associated Press All @-@ American and also was named to the American Football Coaches Association , Football Writers Association of American and Walter Camp All @-@ America teams . He recorded 44 tackles and an interception for the Hokies in the regular season . Williams had foregone entering the NFL draft after the 2004 college football season in order to return to Virginia Tech for his senior season , and he was expected to be a high draft pick upon graduation . 
 = = Game summary = = 
 The 2006 Gator Bowl kicked off at 12 : 30 p.m. EST on January 2 , 2006 in Jacksonville , Florida . Official attendance for the game was listed as 63 @,@ 780 , placing it at 34th ( out of 62 ) on the list of Gator Bowls in terms of attendance . At kickoff , the weather was mostly cloudy with a temperature of approximately 76 degrees . The wind was from the south @-@ southwest at 11 miles per hour ( 18 km / h ) . Approximately 4 @.@ 14 million American households watched the game on television , earning the game a Nielsen rating of 3 @.@ 93 . The pre @-@ game show featured the Marching Virginians , the Cardinal Marching Band , and the Wachovia Dance Team , a collection of Jacksonville @-@ area entertainers . Also before kickoff , the stadium was overflown by a flight of U.S. Navy F / A @-@ 18 Super Hornets from VFA @-@ 103 , based in Virginia . The national anthem was sung by Monty Lane Allen , member of a Gospel singing group . 
 = = = First quarter = = = 
 Virginia Tech won the ceremonial pre @-@ game coin toss to select first possession and deferred its option to the second half ; Louisville elected to receive the opening kick . The Cardinals began the game 's opening drive at their own 18 @-@ yard line after the opening kickoff . Running back Michael Bush rushed for 12 yards on the game 's opening play , netting the game 's first first down . Subsequent plays , however , saw Louisville struggle to gain another . Facing fourth down and six yards at their own 34 @-@ yard line , the Cardinals seemingly prepared to punt . Instead , the Cardinals executed a trick play by running back Kolby Smith , who ran with the ball . Smith surprised the Tech defense and broke free for a 30 @-@ yard run , converting the first down and continuing the Louisville drive . Eight plays later , Louisville quarterback Hunter Cantwell connected on an 11 @-@ yard pass to Mario Urrutia for a touchdown and the game 's first points . The extra point kick was good , and with 10 : 42 remaining in the first quarter , Louisville took a 7 – 0 lead . 
 Virginia Tech 's first possession of the game began at its own 32 @-@ yard line after Louisville 's post @-@ touchdown kickoff . Tech running back Cedric Humes gained 12 yards and a first down on the Hokies ' first play of the game , and quarterback Marcus Vick completed a 24 @-@ yard pass to wide receiver Josh Hyman three plays later to get another first down and drive the Hokies into Louisville territory . After Vick was stopped for losses on two consecutive rushing plays , he completed another long pass to Hyman for a first down . Subsequent plays saw Tech advance into the Louisville red zone but fail to gain another first down . Kicker Brandon Pace entered the game to attempt a 36 @-@ yard field goal kick , which was successful . With six minutes remaining in the first quarter , Tech cut Louisville 's lead to 7 – 3 . 
 Louisville 's second drive of the game was much quicker than the Cardinals ' first . After beginning at their own 20 @-@ yard line , it took the Cardinals just seven plays to travel 80 yards and earn a touchdown . Louisville was helped throughout the drive by repeated Virginia Tech personal foul penalties . Tech players committed three separate 15 @-@ yard personal fouls during the drive , one of which came after Louisville 's successful extra point kick when cornerback Jimmy Williams bumped a game official . Williams was ejected from the game for the contact and was removed from the field after watching the next series from the sidelines . The touchdown and extra point extended Louisville 's first @-@ quarter lead to 14 – 3 . 
 Tech received the ball at its 20 @-@ yard line with 2 : 44 remaining in the first quarter . Three quick rushes picked up 22 yards and two first downs , pushing the ball to the Tech 42 @-@ yard line . On the next play , however , wide receiver Justin Harper committed a 15 @-@ yard pass interference penalty , which negated much of the previous plays ' gains . Marcus Vick rushed for five yards , threw two incomplete passes , and was unable to get another first down after the penalty . With time winding down in the quarter , Tech was forced to punt the ball away . The game 's first punt traveled 53 yards , and Louisville took over on offense at its 40 @-@ yard line following a 25 @-@ yard punt return as time expired in the quarter . At the end of the first quarter , Louisville led Virginia Tech , 14 – 3 . 
 = = = Second quarter = = = 
 Louisville began the second quarter in possession of the ball at its 40 @-@ yard line . Despite having good field position , the Cardinals were unable to gain more than four yards on three plays and were forced into their first punt of the game . Throughout much of the second quarter , both teams traded punts as each went three and out on several occasions . By the quarter 's halfway point , Virginia Tech punted the ball twice in the period . Louisville punted the ball three times after kicking no punts at all in the first quarter . 
 After the third Louisville punt , Virginia Tech took over at its 46 @-@ yard line . Unlike the previous second @-@ quarter possessions , which saw the Tech offense struggle to move the ball effectively , Tech began its drive with a five @-@ yard rush . After losing seven yards on the next play , Marcus Vick completed a 19 @-@ yard pass to tight end Jeff King , driving the Hokies into Louisville territory for the first time in the quarter . Two plays later , Vick connected with wide receiver Justin Harper on a 33 @-@ yard pass that resulted in the Hokies ' first touchdown of the game . With 4 : 56 remaining in the first half of the game , Tech trimmed Louisville 's lead to 14 – 10 . 
 Following the Tech touchdown , Louisville attempted to answer with points of its own before halftime . After starting on his own 20 @-@ yard line , Hunter Cantwell completed two quick passes that resulted in 26 yards . Two plays later , Michael Bush broke free for a 34 @-@ yard run , driving Louisville deep into the Virginia Tech side of the field . Despite having a first down at the Virginia Tech 18 @-@ yard line , Louisville was unable to gain any yards on three consecutive plays . Bush was stopped for no gain on a rushing attempt , and two Cantwell passes fell incomplete . Kicker Arthur Carmody came in to complete a 35 @-@ yard field goal , and with 2 : 16 remaining in the first half , Louisville led by a score of 17 – 10 . 
 After receiving Louisville 's kickoff , Virginia Tech elected to run out the clock and bring the first half to an end . During the process , Marcus Vick ran the ball on a designed play and was tackled by Cardinals defensive end Elvis Dumervil after Vick gained nine yards . Following the play , Vick paused , then stomped on Dumervil 's leg . Though referees failed to observe the stomp , television commentators replayed the action , and Tech coaches considered pulling Vick from the game as punishment . At the end of the first half of play , Louisville held a 17 – 10 lead . 
 = = = Third quarter = = = 
 The second half of play began with Virginia Tech receiving the ball , going three and out , and punting the ball back to Louisville . The Cardinals reciprocated by also going three and out and punting the ball back to Virginia Tech . The Hokies began their second drive of the quarter at their one @-@ yard line . Despite beginning deep in their own end of the field , Virginia Tech mounted a successful drive . Tailback Branden Ore and quarterback Marcus Vick alternated rushes , picking up 18 yards and a first down . After Vick was sacked by the Louisville defense , he recovered by throwing a 29 @-@ yard pass for another first down . Following the pass , Vick and Ore rushed for six consecutive plays , alternating carries at various intervals . Inside the Louisville red zone , however , the Cardinals ' defense stiffened and the Tech offense began to falter . After Tech successfully gained a first down on fourth and one , the Hokies were unable to gain another . Tech kicker Brandon Pace was forced to make his second field goal of the game , this one a 28 @-@ yarder , to make the game 17 – 13 with 2 : 52 remaining in the quarter . The Tech drive began with 11 : 17 remaining in the quarter and took eight minutes and 25 seconds off the clock . 
 Louisville received the post @-@ field goal kickoff , but again went three and out , punting the ball back to Virginia Tech . Louisville did not pick up a first down in the third quarter , and Tech began yet another drive as time ran out in the quarter . With one quarter remaining in the game , Tech narrowed the Louisville lead to 17 – 13 . 
 = = = Fourth quarter = = = 
 Shortly after the fourth quarter began , the Virginia Tech drive that began in the waning moments of the third quarter came to an end . The Hokies were forced to punt , and Louisville began its first drive of the fourth quarter . The Cardinals ' Harry Douglas ran for 29 yards on their first play of the drive . On the second , Hunter Cantwell completed a 29 @-@ yard touchdown pass to Gary <unk> . It took Louisville just 33 seconds and two plays to travel 58 yards and earn a touchdown . The score gave Louisville a 24 – 13 lead with 13 : 32 remaining to play . But just as it took Louisville just two plays to score , so too did it take Virginia Tech two plays to answer the Louisville touchdown . After taking over at his team 's 22 @-@ yard line , Marcus Vick completed a 54 @-@ yard pass to wide receiver David Clowney . Virginia Tech and Louisville committed offsetting 15 @-@ yard personal foul penalties before the play , to no effect on the Hokie offense . On the next play after the long pass , Cedric Humes rushed for 24 yards and the answering Hokie touchdown . It took just 28 seconds for Virginia Tech to answer the Louisville touchdown . Having done that , Tech went Louisville one better , successfully scoring a two @-@ point conversion on a pass from Vick to Morgan . The touchdown and two @-@ point conversion cut the Louisville lead to 24 – 21 . 
 The Cardinals began their second drive of the quarter at their own 25 @-@ yard line . In fits and starts , the Louisville offense advanced down the field . Kolby Smith ran for a yard , Michael Bush for two , then six yards , and Cantwell completed two passes of seven yards each . The Cardinals were also helped by a defensive pass interference penalty against Virginia Tech , which gave Louisville a first down by penalty . As Louisville began to enter Tech territory in earnest , however , the Cardinals suffered their first turnover of the game . Facing third down and three yards from the Virginia Tech 40 @-@ yard line , Cantwell was sacked and fumbled the ball . Tech defender Xavier Adibi scooped up the loose ball , and Tech gained the initiative . Following the fumble , the Hokies began a drive at their 47 @-@ yard line . On the first play , Tech was aided by a pass interference penalty on Louisville . The penalty was followed by a three @-@ yard Cedric Humes rush and yet another pass interference penalty against Louisville . Humes rushed twice more for five yards , and Vick completed a 16 @-@ yard pass to David Clowney before Vick completed a five @-@ yard touchdown pass to Jeff King . The score and subsequent extra point gave Virginia Tech a 28 – 24 lead — its first of the game — with 6 : 03 remaining . 
 Louisville took over on offense needing to get a touchdown to regain a lead before the waning clock finally ran out of time . After the Tech kickoff and a touchback , the Cardinals took over at their 20 @-@ yard line . Michael Bush ran for 10 yards and a first down , and Hunter Cantwell scrambled for six more on a rushing play . Facing third down and needing four yards , Cantwell dropped back to pass for the first down . As the pass soared through the air , Tech defender James Anderson jumped and caught the ball , intercepting it . Still on his feet , Anderson quickly rushed the other way and , unimpeded , ran 39 yards into the end zone for a Virginia Tech touchdown . The score and extra point energized Virginia Tech 's offense and defense and gave the Hokies an 11 @-@ point lead — 35 – 24 — with 4 : 45 remaining in the game . 
 Louisville returned on offense , needing to score quickly , make a stop on defense , then score a second time to take the lead . The energized Tech defense was disinclined to allow any such thing . Though Cantwell completed two short passes for 16 yards and a first down , he was sacked on first down and the Tech defense prevented him from completing another pass . Two passes were knocked down by Hokie defenders , while another fell short . After Louisville failed to convert a fourth down , Virginia Tech took over on offense . The Hokies proceeded to run out the clock , executing two short rushes and an incomplete pass . Louisville had one final chance on offense after a Tech punt , but three consecutive desperation Hail Mary passes were unsuccessful . Two fell incomplete , and the third was intercepted by Tech cornerback Brandon Flowers . With time almost gone , Tech finished running out the clock and secured the victory . As time expired , Virginia Tech held a 35 – 24 lead and won the 2006 Gator Bowl . 
 = = Final statistics = = 
 Running back Cedric Humes was named the game 's most valuable player for Virginia Tech , and quarterback Hunter Cantwell was named the Cardinals ' most valuable player . Tech punter Nic Schmitt set Gator Bowl record for punt yardage and average punt distance , kicking the ball six times for 300 yards , an average of 50 yards per kick . 
 Despite being more highly promoted in pregame media coverage , Virginia Tech quarterback Marcus Vick was outperformed statistically by Louisville 's Hunter Cantwell . Vick completed 11 of 21 passes for 203 yards and two touchdowns . He also ran for 10 yards on 13 carries . Cantwell , meanwhile , completed 15 of his 37 passes for 216 yards , three touchdowns , and three interceptions . 
 On the ground , Tech running back Cedric Humes led all rushers with 22 carries for 113 yards and one touchdown . Louisville 's leading rusher , Michael Bush , had 16 carries for 94 yards and one fumble . The third @-@ leading rusher in the game was Tech 's Branden Ore , who carried the ball 11 times for 56 yards . Louisville 's Kolby Smith carried the ball three times for 32 yards , including a 30 @-@ yard run that was the game 's second @-@ longest rushing play . 
 Defensively , Virginia Tech dominated , intercepting the ball three times , forcing a fumble once , and earning one defensive touchdown . Two Louisville defenders had the best individual performances during the game , however . Brandon Johnson and Abe Brown had six tackles apiece , and Brown sacked Marcus Vick once for a loss of ten yards . The sack was one of three earned by the Louisville offense during the game . Virginia Tech 's defense earned two sacks during the game , and the Hokies ' leading tackler was Vince Hall , who recorded four and two assists on sacks of Louisville 's Hunter Cantwell . 
 = = Postgame effects = = 
 Virginia Tech 's victory in the 2006 Gator Bowl had far @-@ reaching effects for both the Hokies and the Louisville Cardinals . The win pushed Tech to 11 – 2 on the season , while the Cardinals ' loss ensured they ended the 2005 season with a 9 – 3 overall record . The game itself provided more than $ 14 million in economic benefit to the Jacksonville area as Louisville and Virginia Tech fans flocked to the region , spending money on food , hotel rooms , transportation , and entertainment . 
 Virginia Tech quarterbacks coach Kevin Rogers announced after the game that he would be leaving the team in order to become an assistant coach with the NFL 's Minnesota Vikings . Rogers was replaced by new hire Mike O 'Cain . Tech offensive coordinator Bryan Stinespring 's second job as offensive line coach was filled by James Madison University assistant coach Curt Newsome . 
 = = = Marcus Vick = = = 
 Following the 2005 ACC Championship Game , Virginia Tech quarterback Marcus Vick stormed off the field , refusing to talk to reporters following the loss . Vick , who picked up a 15 @-@ yard unsportsmanlike conduct penalty late in that game , also earned several unsportsmanlike conduct penalties in the 2006 Gator Bowl , where post @-@ game replays revealed he purposefully stomped on the leg of Louisville Cardinals ' defensive end Elvis Dumervil . Vick claimed he apologized to Dumervil after the game , but Dumervil stated that no apology was made . In the wake of the incident , Virginia Tech officials announced that they would be conducting a review of Vick 's conduct on and off the field . 
 On January 6 , 2006 , just a few days after the Gator Bowl , Virginia Tech officials dismissed Vick from the Virginia Tech football team , citing a December 17 traffic stop in which Vick was cited for speeding and driving with a revoked or suspended license . Vick hid the information from the team and the infraction was not discovered until January . The traffic stop , an earlier suspension from the team , and his unsportsmanlike conduct during the 2005 ACC Championship Game and 2006 Gator Bowl were used as grounds for his dismissal . In response to being dismissed from the team , Vick was quoted as saying , " It 's not a big deal . I 'll just move on to the next level , baby " . Vick appeared in one regular @-@ season NFL game for the Miami Dolphins in 2006 . The Dolphins did not renew his contract , and he has been out of football ever since . 
 = = = 2006 NFL Draft = = = 
 On April 29 and 30 , the National Football league held its annual player draft . Over a dozen players who participated in the 2006 Gator Bowl were selected in the draft . Virginia Tech had a record nine players selected in the draft , with Darryl Tapp ( 31st overall ) selected first from the Hokies . Jimmy Williams ( 37th overall ) , James Anderson ( 88th ) , Jeff King ( 155th ) , Jonathan Lewis ( 177th ) , Justin Hamilton ( 222nd ) , Jimmy Martin ( 227th ) , Will Montgomery ( 234th ) , and Cedric Humes ( 240th ) were the other Tech players selected . Louisville had four players selected in the draft . Offensive guard Jason Spitz was selected 75th overall and was the first Cardinals ' offensive lineman to be drafted since 1996 . Elvis Dumervil was selected with the 126th selection , linebacker Brandon Johnson was selected 142nd , and defensive tackle <unk> Stanley was selected 182nd . 
 = Ruth Archer = 
 Ruth Archer ( also Pritchard ) is a fictional character from the British BBC Radio 4 soap opera The Archers , played by English actress Felicity Finch . She made her debut in the 15 July 1987 episode . The character was created and introduced to The Archers as a love interest for established character David Archer ( Timothy Bentinck ) , whose then girlfriend was deemed unsuitable for the role of mother to the next generation of the Archer family by the editor of the show Liz Rigbey . Finch was cast as Ruth after a successful audition . 
 Ruth is portrayed as being strong @-@ willed , determined and loyal . She is also a New Woman and a farmer , traits that made her stand out from the other female characters in The Archers at the time of her introduction . In later years , Ruth has mellowed and is more open to negotiation . Her storylines have often revolved around her marriage to David and her work on Brookfield Farm . In the early 2000s , the scriptwriters had Ruth and David isolate themselves from the community during a foot @-@ and @-@ mouth outbreak . Ruth was also diagnosed with breast cancer , a storyline which Finch undertook extensive research for and later named as one of her Archers highlights . 
 The show 's 15,000th episode focused on Ruth contemplating whether to consummate her affair with herdsman Sam Batton ( Robin <unk> ) , after believing David was having his own affair with his ex @-@ girlfriend Sophie Barlow ( Moir Leslie ) . Ruth ultimately chose to return home to her family . The storyline , which had begun in 2004 , was heavily criticised by listeners , who inundated the BBC with complaints . Low listener figures were also attributed to the storyline , while the editor Vanessa Whitburn said the backlash helped keep Ruth faithful to David . 
 Critical opinion on the character differs . She has been described as a " much @-@ loved character " and a " cheery <unk> @-@ farmer " , but has also been called the " most irritating " Ambridge resident and she is disliked by some listeners for being a Geordie . Other listeners hoped Ruth would be killed off during the show 's 60th anniversary celebrations . Away from The Archers , the character has appeared in the Rwandan radio soap Urunana , the BBC telethon Children in Need and has been frequently parodied on the comedy programme Dead Ringers . 
 = = Creation and casting = = 
 When Liz Rigbey was appointed editor of The Archers in 1986 , she began implementing several changes in a bid to revitalise the show which had become tired . Rigbey brought in new writers , retired some characters and introduced new ones . In his 1996 book , The Archers : The True Story , Rigbey 's predecessor William Smethurst explained that she had " wisely " decided that David Archer 's ( Timothy Bentinck ) fashion designer girlfriend , Sophie Barlow ( Moir Leslie ) , was not suitable for the role of matriarch to the next generation of the Archer family . During the script meeting to invent David 's new love interest , the writers played with the idea of making the character Scottish and calling her either Anne , Heather or Thistle to show off her spiky nature . 
 Rigbey also wanted to make sure that everyone liked the character , and eventually nineteen year old , agricultural student Ruth Pritchard was created . Actress ( later presenter ) Felicity Finch was cast as Ruth . Finch had not listened to The Archers prior to her audition in 1987 and she tried to learn as much as she could about the history of the show before she came to the studio . Smethurst thought the decision to cast a Geordie was " odd " and wrote that it harked back to the days when the show would cast lots of Scottish and Irish actors , irritating the audience . Finch 's first scenes as Ruth were broadcast on 15 July 1987 . 
 = = Development = = 
 = = = Characterisation = = = 
 In her fictional backstory , Ruth was born on 16 June 1968 to Solly ( Richard Griffiths ) and Heather Pritchard ( Joyce Gibbs ; Margaret Jackman ) . She was raised in Prudhoe , Northumberland . Ruth worked on an Israeli kibbutz for a year , prior to her acceptance onto an agricultural course at Harper Adams University College . She then applied for a year 's work experience at Brookfield Farm and she was hired by Phil Archer ( Norman Painting ) . Smethurst wrote that Ruth stood out among many of the other female characters at the time of her introduction , as she was a New Woman , a feminist and a farmer . Her favourite style is a pair of jeans and a T @-@ shirt . Upon her arrival in Ambridge , Ruth felt like an outsider . This was not helped by David 's attitude towards her being an unskilled woman and her landlady 's nosy demeanour . Ruth 's " dedication and willingness " eventually won David round and he came to appreciate her . 
 Speaking to the BBC , Finch said Ruth " is strong willed , determined and pretty direct in her approach to life and people in general . " Finch explained having breast cancer mellowed Ruth and instead of fighting her corner , she is quite likely to negotiate instead . Finch added her character appreciates life day to day . Robert Hanks writing for The Independent described Ruth as The Archers ' " matriarch @-@ in @-@ waiting " and said she is " a family lynchpin – loyal wife , loving mother , and handy in the milking @-@ shed when called on . " Simon Frith and Chris Arnot , authors of The Archers Archives , opined Ruth is not a stereotypical farmer 's wife . They said " Ruth is more likely to have her hand in a rubber glove rather than an oven glove – thrust up the back end of a Friesian rather than delving into an Aga and emerging with something wholesome for supper . " 
 = = = Marriage to David Archer = = = 
 Ruth 's marriage to David is central to her character . Finch explained that it took Ruth a while to see that there were good qualities in David , as his initial behaviour towards her was unpleasant . Finch called David " a sexist pig " and said he resented Ruth 's presence almost immediately . However , Ruth had noticed his ruggedness and she was attracted to the way he helped the sickly animals . After David noticed his brother flirting with Ruth , he realised that he loved her and told her about his feelings . Despite getting off to a bad start , Ruth and David began dating and were married towards the end of 1988 . Finch thought Ruth and David had " a really believable partnership " and were well @-@ suited , saying " They are both very capable of becoming highly emotional if something riles them but thankfully they tend to react to different things . So , often one will be able to calm , soothe and support the other through most crises . Or at least provide some kind of balance to a problem . " The actress added that Ruth and David are the best of friends . 
 Ruth continued with her studies at Harper Adams and she and David eventually established " a good working relationship " . Ruth was given the responsibility of looking after the dairy herd , before becoming a partner in the farm . Ruth and David 's first child , Philippa Rose , or Pip ( Helen Monks ) , was born in February 1993 . Joanna Toye and Adrian Flynn , authors of The Archers Encyclopaedia , said Ruth took to motherhood well and did not let it stop her from playing an active part in Brookfield . The couple 's second child , Joshua , was born in 1997 . Ruth and David later purchased some Hereford cattle and began to establish themselves as suppliers of traditional beef . Toye and Flynn observed that Ruth and David 's marriage had to be strong when the Archer siblings began arguing over who would inherit Brookfield Farm . Ruth told David that " time was too precious to spend in argument " and suggested they moved away . However , David 's father , Phil , decided that the farm should go to the couple . 
 In 2012 , the couple were faced with a campaign of intimidation , after David witnessed an assault on Adam Macy ( Andrew Wincott ) . Ruth was " unnerved " when the silent phone calls began and she sent the children to stay with her mother . The intimidation ended after a barn at Brookfield was set alight and the arsonist was caught , following an anonymous tip off . In 2013 , Ruth and David celebrated their 25th wedding anniversary and Finch hoped the couple would continue to make Brookfield a thriving business , while relaxing into semi @-@ retirement . Finch commented , " Any couple who after 25 years still love going out for meals together , having the occasional break away without the kids and the odd roll in a haystack are doing pretty well I reckon . " The following year , Ruth discovered that , at 45 , she was expecting her fourth child . However , the pregnancy ended in a miscarriage . 
 = = = Breast cancer = = = 
 In 2000 , the character was diagnosed with breast cancer . After discovering a lump in her breast in May , Ruth was checked out by her general practitioner , Tim Hathaway ( Jay Villiers ) . The following month Ruth was told that she had breast cancer and that as it was multi @-@ focal , she would need a mastectomy followed by a course of chemotherapy . Ruth was thirty @-@ four at the time of her diagnosis , which was unusually young to contract such a cancer . Breast cancer nurse <unk> Harmer acted as a consultant to the scriptwriters during the storyline and BBC Radio 4 invited listeners to ring a helpline for further advice after Ruth received her diagnosis . Finch contacted the breast cancer charity , Breakthrough , when she learnt about her character 's new story and she spoke extensively about the research she did and the effect of the diagnosis on her character : 
 Everyone I talked to seemed to have a relative or a friend who 'd been through it . That was the other thing – everyone reacts to the problem differently so there 's no textbook way of playing Ruth in her present situation . In fact , the way I 'm playing her now might surprise some people because in the past she 's been such a strong character and here she is collapsed and weeping and thinking the worst . Occasionally you may suggest to the script editor that you don 't think your character will react a certain way , but with Ruth I have absolute trust in the scriptwriter 's characterisation . 
 The storyline continued to play out over the following months as Ruth had her mastectomy operation , began a slow process of recovery and came to terms with her new appearance . When Ruth 's chemotherapy treatment began during the Autumn months , David , Heather and close friend Usha ( <unk> <unk> ) were a constant source of support and comfort to her . Following her last course of chemotherapy , Ruth returned to work on the farm and was later given the all clear . In 2002 , Ruth became pregnant and gave birth to her third child , Ben ( Thomas Lester ) . A representative from Cancer Active explained it was medically unwise of Ruth not to take precautions for two years , as her body would still contain toxic drugs from the chemotherapy . But a consultant from the Newcastle Fertility Centre said that there were many cases of women with breast cancer going on to have babies after chemotherapy . They added that there was no evidence of an increased risk in the cancer recurring if a women goes onto have a child after remaining cancer free for two years . 
 Speaking to The Observer 's Sue Arnold , Finch believed The Archers had done " a great service for women 's health " by tackling the subject of breast cancer . Finch later revealed that she had received letters from listeners about the storyline and one woman wrote to thank her because she had found a lump in her breast after listening to the show . Finch also named the storyline as one of her Archers highlights . <unk> Morgan , chief executive of Breakthrough said The Archers treated the subject of breast cancer " as sensibly as one can reasonably expect . " Morgan continues saying that Breakthrough liked how the show had highlighted the effect that a cancer diagnosis can have on a partner . In contrast , the radio series Feedback reported that the storyline had initially attracted a negative response from listeners , who felt the subject should have been handled with more optimism . 
 = = = Foot @-@ and @-@ mouth outbreak = = = 
 Shortly after inheriting Brookfield , Ruth and David were faced with a countrywide foot @-@ and @-@ mouth outbreak . They decided to isolate themselves from the community in a bid to stop the disease spreading onto their land and infecting their animals . <unk> Bert Fry ( Eric Allan ) also came to live with the family in seclusion , so he could help out with the animals . Ruth and David became frustrated with the situation and Ruth also had trouble sleeping . The couple later sent Pip to live with relatives . Soap Opera author Dorothy Hobson wrote that it was a " drastic measure " , but believed the storyline to be part of The Archers ' continued commitment in responding to topical events . The show 's then editor , Vanessa Whitburn , said that some storylines had to be put on hold in order for the cast and crew to weave in the foot @-@ and @-@ mouth outbreak into the show . Whitburn told Samantha Lyster from the Birmingham Post , " We decided that David and Ruth Archer should isolate themselves because they had just taken control of the farm and they had the most to lose should foot @-@ and @-@ mouth hit them . " Whitburn later said she was " particularly proud " of the storyline and all the work that went into it . Finch commented that dealing with the constant re @-@ writes was hard , but enjoyable work . The storyline was praised by farmers for its realistic portrayal . 
 = = = Near affair with Sam Batton = = = 
 After expanding the dairy herd in May 2004 , David and Ruth hired specialist herdsman Sam Batton ( Robin <unk> ) . Ruth frequently came into contact with Sam around the farm and he confided in Ruth about his relationship with Kirsty Miller ( Annabelle Dowler ) . Ruth found herself becoming jealous when Sam went on holiday with Kirsty . In their book , The Archers Archives , Simon Frith and Chris Arnot commented that the " simmering mix of sexual chemistry " between Ruth and Sam reached boiling point when David 's ex @-@ girlfriend , Sophie Barlow , returned to Ambridge and asked David to help organise a charity fashion show . Ruth became stressed and insecure about David spending time with his ex @-@ girlfriend and she turned to Sam . The main reason for Ruth 's insecurity was her image , as she had recently undergone a mastectomy and felt " dowdy " next to Sophie . Ruth became emotionally confused when Sam informed her that he had broken up with Kirsty . She then caught David lying about meeting up with Sophie and believed he was having an affair . Unbeknownst to Ruth , Sophie had tried to entice David into an affair , but he resisted her advances . 
 Elisabeth Mahoney from The Guardian observed that Ruth and David 's marriage imploded while Sophie was around and she said the speed at which it happened made for genuinely shocking listening . Mahoney said " Felicity Finch and Tim Bentinck spat their toxic lines out with much relish , and for once emphatically shook off their characters ' middle @-@ of @-@ the @-@ road <unk> and golden couple status . " After seeking Sam out for comfort , Ruth kissed him . When Sam declared his love for Ruth , she agreed to spend the night with him at a hotel in Oxford . Ruth told David she was meeting an friend for the night . Tim Teeman from The Times commented that the moment Ruth became stuck in traffic contrasted with " the scary new land she was travelling towards " . Ruth 's decision to spend the night with Sam was the focus of The Archers ' 15,000th episode , which was broadcast on 7 November 2006 . The episode was written by Joanna Toye , who told Emily Lambert of the Western Mail that the traffic jam was used to increase the tension . 
 Editor Vanessa Whitburn told Chris Arnot of The Independent that the climax to the storyline was planned three months prior to the show 's anniversary . When Ruth listened to a voicemail from her daughter , it reminded her of home and she called Sam to say she could not be with him . Ruth then turned to Usha for support , before returning home to David , who observed Ruth 's emotional state . After Sam quit his job , Ruth eventually told David the truth about what happened . Bentinck explained that when he and Finch finished recording the scene , they were both crying as it had been very distressing . David was initially unable to forgive Ruth for her actions , but after speaking to Usha and gaining some perspective , over time things between himself and Ruth became easier . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Despite being popular with many , the character of Ruth has also gained much criticism over the years . In 2007 , Karen Price from the Western Mail called Ruth a " much @-@ loved character " and The Scotsman 's Fordyce Maxwell called Ruth " the archetype of common sense and forward planning " . Victoria <unk> from The Independent noted the character was " instantly recognisable " because she is a Geordie and bemoaned the fact " poor inoffensive Ruth " was disliked by some of the more hardcore fans because of this . Nicholas Lezard from the same publication disliked Ruth , branding her " highly irritating " . He later thought the scriptwriters had created in David and Ruth " the only couple in the Western Hemisphere who are delighted that their parents are coming for Christmas . " Ruth and David were described by The Times critic , Tim Teeman , as " the series ' golden couple — the future Phil and Jill " . While The Herald 's Anne Simpson said the couple were " the standing stones of Ambridge : rooted , solid , weathered by storms but unbeaten , a reassuring constant in our national life . " 
 Ruth 's mastectomy after breast cancer was named one of the most shocking storylines from The Archers by The Daily Telegraph 's Nick Collins . Stephen Glover from the Daily Mail wrote that Ruth " was the least likely candidate in the village to join the ranks of Ambridge inhabitants who over the years have relished a bit on the side . " Glover 's colleague Nigel Andrew was not a fan of the adultery storyline and wanted the old Ruth back , saying she had " been replaced by Ruth Mark 2 , a helpless overgrown teenager , reduced to a puddle of lust by amorous cowman Sam . " Rachel Cooke of the New Statesman was not a fan of the character at all , writing " Ruth bores me to sobs , so I didn 't give a fig that this was out of character . " Lezard noted that Ruth had gone from " cheery <unk> @-@ farmer to lovelorn hysteric facing total loss " . 
 Reaction to the near affair storyline from listeners was generally negative and Chris Hastings from The Daily Telegraph reported that the BBC had been inundated with complaints , saying the storyline was " utterly ridiculous " , while others questioned its plausibility . Listeners started an online protest against the storyline following Whitburn 's appearance on Feedback . The show 's presenter Roger Bolton commented on the backlash saying fans thought the plot was " unbelievable and over @-@ sensational . " Other listeners thought Ruth and David had undergone personality transplants and accused the BBC of trying to turn The Archers into a radio version of EastEnders . 
 The official website had over 11 @,@ 000 responses to a poll asking listeners whether Ruth should go with Sam , compared to the usual 3 @,@ 000 . Fifty @-@ two per cent of the listeners thought Ruth should go to Sam . The Archers website had received 1 @.@ 2 million page impressions due to the storyline in 2006 . In February 2007 , a writer for the Daily Record reported almost 200 @,@ 000 listeners had deserted The Archers due to controversial storylines , such as Ruth and Sam 's affair . The writer said figures for the last three months of 2006 , when the Ruth and Sam storyline peaked , revealed 4 @.@ 44 million listeners tuned in , which was down 169 @,@ 000 on the previous quarter . Whitburn told Midgley that the backlash from listeners helped keep Ruth faithful to David , and agreed that she was not the type to have an affair . 
 The Spectator 's Kate Chisholm was delighted that Ruth did not spend the night with Sam and believed that she " kept true to her blunt , honest character ( and biblical name ) . " Chisholm also felt that as an outsider to Ambridge , Ruth had always been treated with " slight suspicion " . Ian Sanderson , who runs Archers Anarchists , branded Ruth " ghastly " and " the Geordie gorgon " , he also opined that she was " one of Ambridge 's most irritating and frumpy residents . " In 2011 , a Belfast Telegraph reporter commented that Ruth had become an " unpopular figure " and listeners had wanted her to die during the 60th anniversary episode . Actor Graham Seed , whose character Nigel <unk> was killed off during the anniversary , shared the same view , saying he would " do in " Ruth . When asked why , he replied " Well , she goes on a bit , doesn 't she ? ' <unk> David ! ' and all that . I 'd do old Ruthie in , or Tom Archer and his bloody sausages . " 
 = = In popular culture and other media = = 
 In 1999 , Finch flew to Rwanda to help launch a new radio soap called Urunana , a programme which is aimed predominantly at women and focuses on health issues , child care and genocide within the country of Rwanda . A decade later , the makers of Urunana invited Finch to record a guest appearance as Ruth for the show . Ruth 's scenes saw her married to a shopkeeper named <unk> , who was reluctant to let her train as a community health worker . Of the storyline , Finch said " Although all this seemed not a little bizarre for strong @-@ willed , independent Ruth , when I cast my mind back , it wasn 't a million miles away from David 's ( my Archers husband of more than 20 years ) reaction to having a female student arrive to work alongside him at Brookfield in 1987 . " 
 On 18 November 2005 , Finch and six of her co @-@ stars appeared as their respective characters on the BBC 's Children in Need broadcast , alongside presenter Terry Wogan . Ruth joined her husband , David , and friend , Lynda Snell ( Carole Boyd ) , in one of three scenes written especially for the show . Ruth 's renowned way of saying " <unk> <unk> " has been frequently parodied on the comedy programme Dead Ringers . 
 = Chasing Time ( song ) = 
 " Chasing Time " is a song recorded by American rapper Azealia Banks for her debut studio album , Broke with Expensive Taste ( 2014 ) . It was released as the third single from the album on September 22 , 2014 . Production of the song was handled by Andrew " Pop " Wansel , while it was written by Banks , Ronnie Colson , Warren Felder , Jonathan Harris , Steve Mostyn , Kelly Sheehan and Wansel . Lyrically , the track discusses Banks recovering from a breakup . " Chasing Time " received positive reviews from music critics , with Mike Wass of Idolator commenting that the song included a " soaring chorus " . To promote the single , Banks released a music video for " Chasing Time " on November 13 , 2014 , which was produced by Nina <unk> @-@ Miller and directed by Marc Klasfeld . Banks also held a contest in which she asked budding producers to submit remixes of " Chasing Time " , with the winner receiving $ 10 @,@ 000 . 
 Pitchfork Media included the track in their list of ' The 100 Best Tracks of 2014 ' . 
 = = Background = = 
 In 2011 , it was reported that Banks was working on her debut studio album with British producer Paul Epworth , despite not having signed to a record label at the time . In January 2012 , Banks signed a record deal with Interscope and Polydor Records to work on new music , and a month later , she announced the title of the album as Broke with Expensive Taste . Approximately a year later , she submitted the complete version of Broke with Expensive Taste to her labels . Banks initially thought it would receive favorable reception from the labels , but the representatives informed Banks that she had not recorded a " hit " single for the album . Ultimately , Banks ended the record deal with Interscope / Polydor in July 2014 . She later approached Jeff Kwatinetz and signed a contract with his company , Prospect Park . Banks eventually released the album on November 7 , 2014 . 
 Throughout December 2014 , Banks released a series of videos in which she broke down tracks from Broke with Expensive Taste and revealed how each song came to be , dubbed the ' 16 Days of Azealia ' . During the breakdown video for " Chasing Time " , Banks revealed that the song was conceived after the aforementioned occasion of her handing a completed version of the album in to her labels . In response to their request that Banks created something more current , she produced " Chasing Time " . This was further confirmed in an interview with Pitchfork Media 's Jeremy Gordon , in which Banks said " it got to a point where they were like , ' Azealia , we get it , you ’ re cool , but we 've spent $ 2 million on this record , can you just give us one [ hit ] ? ' So then I did ' Chasing Time ' , and I was just like , ' You know , this isn 't gonna work out . ' " 
 = = Composition = = 
 " Chasing Time " is a song that runs for a duration of three minutes and thirty seconds . Jon Dolan from Rolling Stone described the song as " diva house music " , going on to commend the tracks instrumental and Banks ' vocal surge . In a later Rolling Stone article , Jon Blistein said that the song balanced an " eclectic " mix of influences , from Banks ' fast rapping technique over the electronic @-@ inspired beat to the " pop @-@ diva " hook she performs on top of house production . Colin Stutz from Billboard described the song as a " hook heavy pseudo @-@ sung track that rides the line with hip @-@ hop and pop over some crisp house production " , going on to label the track as <unk> . Elias Leight , also from Billboard , described the song 's production as a mix of hip @-@ hop , pop and dance beats , going on to describe how the track boldly shifts in genres throughout its duration , and that the track could be aimed at a man , or her former labels . Consequence of Sound 's Dusty Henry noted that Banks " spends most of the time showing off her singing chops by wailing over booming , dance club beats " . 
 Banks describes the track as genre @-@ specific , citing pop @-@ crossover and UK garage . On the song 's lyrical content , she explains " It 's about the journey , the breakup is apart of it , but it 's really about the journey " . She went on to describe how the song fits in to a larger puzzle of the album in which the album 's opening track , " Idle <unk> " , is the metaphorical morning , and later tracks on the album , including " Chasing Time " are representative of later in the evening . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 " Chasing Time " received generally positive reviews from critics . Rolling Stone 's Jon Dolan gave the song three @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half stars , commenting that Banks was " delivering a splashy anthem of resilience and determination in the face of romantic collapse " . Mike Wass from Idolator concluded that Banks " genuinely shines in the soaring chorus " , while observing the difference in style she displayed on the song compared to her earlier singles . While reviewing the music video of the single , Melissa Locker from Time commented that " Chasing Time " was " one of the more noteworthy songs " from Broke with Expensive Taste . Pitchfork Media 's Tim Finney ranked the song as the 70th best track released in 2014 . 
 = = = Commercial performance = = = 
 " Chasing Time " first appeared on charts on December 27 , 2014 , debuting on the US Dance Club Songs chart at number 39 . Over the duration of seven weeks , the song steadily climbed the chart , eventually peaking at number 12 , remaining on the chart for a total of twelve weeks . Internationally , the song peaked at number 48 on the Japan Hot 100 , as reported by Billboard . 
 = = Promotion = = 
 = = = Music video = = = 
 A music video for " Chasing Time " premiered on MTV on November 13 , 2014 . The video was produced by Nina <unk> @-@ Miller and directed by Marc Klasfeld . John Walker from MTV likened the video past sci @-@ fi themed videos , " the black and white visuals are as sleek and futuristic as some of the sci @-@ fi music video greats " going on to compare the video to visuals for songs such as " No Scrubs " by TLC and " Scream " by Michael and Janet Jackson . Both Tom Breihan for Stereogum and Melissa Locker for Time commented on the obscenity of the video , both claiming that the video was only just safe for work . Melissa Locker from Time also called the video a " beautifully minimalist [ ic ] clip " , going on to comment on Banks ' likeness to Lil ' Kim in one scene of the clip . Elias Leight from Billboard also compared Banks to past music stars , seeing three distinct similarities . He writes , " her ensembles call to mind three ' 90s acts : Missy Elliott ( when Banks and her dancers wear trash @-@ bag couture ) , Lil ' Kim ( in her famous nipple @-@ pasty look at the 1999 VMAs ) and TLC ( in their ' No Scrubs ' -era revealing space suits ) " . 
 = = = Remix contest = = = 
 In November 2014 , shortly after the release of Broke with Expensive Taste , Banks announced that a contest would take place around " Chasing Time " . The contest , for which Banks partnered with Soundcloud , BitTorrent and MTV , involved fans creating remixes to the song using stems made available to downloaded from BitTorrent , to then upload their entries to Soundcloud . The winner would receive $ 10 @,@ 000 , and their remix would become the first official remix to the track . Entries for the competition closed on December 15 , 2014 . Eliza Berman from Time commended the contest , commenting that the song " practically beg for a remix " , while revealing that there were a large variety in entries , with submissions ranging from acoustic to club sounds . The winners were announced on January 13 , 2015 . The second runner @-@ up received tickets and backstage passes to one of Banks ' upcoming shows , the first runner @-@ up was allowed to spend the day with Banks in the studio , while the winner won the aforementioned $ 10 @,@ 000 . 
 = = = Live performances = = = 
 On April 10 , 2015 , Banks performed " Chasing Time " during her set at the Coachella Festival . Rap @-@ Up commented that the audience 's " energy was consistently high " during the performance . The song was also part of Banks ' Broke with Expensive Taste Tour ( 2014 – 15 ) . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Credits adapted from Broke with Expensive Taste liner notes . 
 Locations 
 Recorded at Mason Sound and Glenwood Place studios ( North Hollywood , California ) 
 Mixed at The Fortress of Amplitude studios ( Los Angeles , California ) 
 Personnel 
 Vocals – Azealia Banks 
 Songwriting – Azealia Banks , Ronnie Colson , Warren Felder , Jonathan Harris , Steve Mostyn , Kelly Sheehan , Andrew Wansel 
 Production – Andrew Wansel 
 Mixing – Rob Kinelski 
 Mixing assistant – David Baker 
 = = Release history = = 
 = New York State Route 171 = 
 New York State Route 171 ( NY 171 ) is a state highway running east to west through Herkimer County , New York , in the United States . It connects the hamlet of Gulph in the town of Frankfort to the village of Frankfort by way of the Frankfort Gorge . Its western end is at the junction of County Route 145 ( CR 145 ) and CR 185 southeast of Gulph . The eastern end is 5 @.@ 69 miles ( 9 @.@ 16 km ) to the east at an intersection with Main Street in Frankfort village . NY 171 is a narrow , two @-@ lane highway for its whole length . 
 NY 171 is one of several signed state highways in New York that do not intersect any other signed New York state routes . However , this was not always the case . When it was originally assigned as part of the 1930 renumbering of state highways in New York , Main Street in Frankfort was part of NY 5S . A new freeway alignment for NY 5S was constructed between Utica and Ilion in the late 1960s , isolating NY 171 from the remainder of the state highway system . Frankfort 's interchange with NY 5S is now at Cemetery Street , 0 @.@ 75 miles ( 1 @.@ 21 km ) to the west . 
 = = Route description = = 
 NY 171 begins at an intersection with CR 145 ( Ball Road ) and CR 185 ( Gulph Road ) southeast of the hamlet of Gulph . The route heads eastward , passing through a dense forest in the town of Frankfort . The forest surrounds NY 171 for a substantial distance , separating it from more developed areas of the town . The highway eventually turns to the northeast , following a winding , curve @-@ filled route that leads through the Frankfort Gorge towards the village of Frankfort . As it heads through the valley , NY 171 intersects with CR 13 , known locally as Furnace Road . CR 13 and NY 171 parallel for a short distance as CR 13 climbs the north face of the gorge and then turns northward at its top . 
 The route then passes under a series of power lines , loosely paralleling the more northerly CR 96 ( Higby Road ) to the outskirts of the village of Frankfort . Here , NY 171 intersects with several roads of local importance before crossing over the NY 5S freeway to enter the village itself . On the eastern side of the highway , NY 171 becomes South Litchfield Street and passes through areas that are mostly residential . It continues to the village 's central business district . State maintenance of the route ends at a junction with Canal Street. but the route continues as a village @-@ maintained highway for one more block to an intersection with Main Street . 
 = = History = = 
 Most of what is now NY 171 was improved to state highway standards as part of a project contracted out by the state of New York on July 12 , 1916 . The work covered the 5 @.@ 10 miles ( 8 @.@ 21 km ) of the route outside of the Frankfort village limits . The reconstruction was completed in the 1920s , and the Frankfort Gorge road was added to the state highway system as unsigned State Highway 1346 ( SH 1346 ) by 1926 . In the 1930 renumbering of state highways in New York , SH 1346 became part of NY 171 , which continued northeast to Main Street in Frankfort on several state and locally maintained streets . At the time , Main Street was part of NY 5S , another route assigned as part of the renumbering . 
 In the late 1960s , a limited @-@ access highway was constructed between Utica and Ilion alongside NY 5S . The new highway became part of a rerouted NY 5S in the early 1970s . As a result , NY 171 , which does not interchange with the highway , no longer connects to any other signed state routes . NY 171 is the only signed state highway in New York that is completely isolated from the remainder of the state highway system . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The entire route is in Herkimer County . 
 = New York City Subway = 
 The New York City Subway is a rapid transit system owned by the City of New York and leased to the New York City Transit Authority , a subsidiary agency of the state @-@ run Metropolitan Transportation Authority . Opened in 1904 , the New York City Subway is one of the world 's oldest public transit systems , one of the world 's most used metro systems , and the metro system with the most stations and the most trackage . It offers service 24 hours per day and every day of the year . 
 The New York City Subway is the largest rapid transit system in the world by number of stations , with 469 stations in operation ( 422 , if stations connected by transfers are counted as single stations ) . Stations are located throughout the boroughs of Manhattan , Brooklyn , Queens , and the Bronx . The Staten Island Railway is not officially considered part of the subway , as it lacks a rail link with the subway system , so passengers to another borough take a ferry or bus . The Port Authority Trans @-@ Hudson and the AirTrain JFK , in Manhattan and Queens respectively , accept the subway 's MetroCard but are not part of the subway ; thus , free transfers are not allowed . 
 The system is also one of the world 's longest . Overall , the system contains 233 miles ( 375 km ) of routes , translating into 660 miles ( 1 @,@ 060 km ) of revenue track ; and a total of 846 miles ( 1 @,@ 362 km ) including non @-@ revenue trackage . 
 By annual ridership , the New York City Subway is the busiest rapid transit rail system in the United States and in the Western world , as well as the seventh busiest rapid transit rail system in the world ; the metro ( subway ) systems in Beijing , Seoul , Shanghai , Moscow , Tokyo , and Guangzhou record a higher annual ridership . In 2015 , the subway delivered over 1 @.@ 76 billion rides , averaging approximately 5 @.@ 7 million daily rides on weekdays and a combined 5 @.@ 9 million rides each weekend ( 3 @.@ 3 million on Saturdays ; 2 @.@ 7 million on Sundays ) . Ridership continues to increase , and on September 23 , 2014 , more than 6 @.@ 1 million people rode the subway system , establishing the highest single @-@ day ridership since ridership was regularly monitored in 1985 . 
 All services pass through Manhattan except for the G train , the Franklin Avenue Shuttle , and the Rockaway Park Shuttle . Large portions of the subway outside Manhattan are elevated , on embankments , or in open cuts , and a few stretches of track run at ground level . In total , 40 % of track is not underground despite the " subway " moniker . Many lines and stations have both express and local services . These lines have three or four tracks . Normally , the outer two are used for local trains , while the inner one or two are used for express trains . Stations served by express trains are typically major transfer points or destinations . 
 = = History = = 
 Alfred Ely Beach built the first demonstration for an underground transit system in New York City in 1869 and opened it in February 1870 . His Beach Pneumatic Transit only extended 312 feet ( 95 m ) under Broadway in Lower Manhattan operating from Warren Street to Murray Street and exhibited his idea for a subway propelled by pneumatic tube technology . The tunnel was never extended for political and financial reasons , although extensions had been planned to take the tunnel southward to The Battery and northwards towards the Harlem River . In 1912 , workers excavating for the present @-@ day BMT Broadway Line dug into the old Beach tunnel ; today , no part of this line remains as the tunnel was completely within the limits of the present day City Hall Station under Broadway . 
 The Great Blizzard of 1888 helped demonstrate the benefits of an underground transportation system . A plan for the construction of the subway was approved in 1894 , and construction began in 1900 . The first underground line of the subway opened on October 27 , 1904 , almost 36 years after the opening of the first elevated line in New York City , which became the IRT Ninth Avenue Line . The fare was $ 0 @.@ 05 and on the first day the trains carried over 150 @,@ 000 passengers . The oldest structure still in use opened in 1885 as part of the BMT Lexington Avenue Line in Brooklyn and is now part of the BMT Jamaica Line . The oldest right @-@ of @-@ way , which is part of the BMT West End Line near Coney Island Creek , was in use in 1864 as a steam railroad called the Brooklyn , Bath and Coney Island Rail Road . 
 By the time the first subway opened , the lines had been consolidated into two privately owned systems , the Brooklyn Rapid Transit Company ( BRT , later Brooklyn – Manhattan Transit Corporation ( BMT ) ) and the Interborough Rapid Transit Company ( IRT ) . The city built most of the lines and leased them to the companies . The first line of the city @-@ owned and operated Independent Subway System ( IND ) opened in 1932 ; this system was intended to compete with the private systems and allow some of the elevated railways to be torn down , but stayed within the core of the City due to its small startup capital . This required it to be run ' at cost ' , necessitating fares up to double the five @-@ cent fare popular at the time . 
 In 1940 , the city bought the two private systems . Some elevated lines ceased service immediately while others closed soon after . Integration was slow , but several connections were built between the IND and BMT ; these now operate as one division called the B Division . Since the IRT tunnels , sharper curves , and stations are too small and therefore can not accommodate B Division cars , the IRT remains its own division , the A Division . However , many passenger transfers between stations of all three former companies have been created , allowing the entire network to be treated as a single unit . 
 The New York City Transit Authority ( NYCTA ) , a public authority presided by New York City , was created in 1953 to take over subway , bus , and streetcar operations from the city , and placed under control of the state @-@ level Metropolitan Transportation Authority in 1968 . 
 Organized in 1934 by transit workers of the BRT , IRT , and IND , the Transport Workers Union of America Local 100 remains the largest and most influential local of the labor unions . Since the union 's founding , there have been three union strikes over contract disputes with the MTA : 12 days in 1966 , 11 days in 1980 , and three days in 2005 . 
 By the 1970s and 1980s , the New York City Subway was at an all @-@ time low . Ridership had dropped to 1910s levels , and graffiti and crime were rampant on the subway ; in general , the subway was very poorly maintained during that time , and delays and track problems were common . Still , the NYCTA managed to open six new subway stations in the 1980s , make the current fleet of subway cars graffiti @-@ free , as well as order 1 @,@ 775 new subway cars . By the early 1990s , conditions had improved significantly , although maintenance backlogs accumulated during those 20 years are still being fixed today . 
 Entering the 21st century , progress continued despite several disasters . The September 11 attacks resulted in service disruptions on lines running through Lower Manhattan , particularly the IRT Broadway – Seventh Avenue Line , which ran directly underneath the World Trade Center . Sections of the tunnel , as well as the Cortlandt Street station , which was directly underneath the Twin Towers , were severely damaged . Rebuilding required the suspension of service on that line south of Chambers Street . Ten other nearby stations were closed for cleanup . By March 2002 , seven of those stations had reopened . The rest ( except for Cortlandt Street on the IRT Broadway – Seventh Avenue Line ) reopened on September 15 , 2002 , along with service south of Chambers Street . In 2012 , Hurricane Sandy wreaked havoc , flooding several underwater tunnels and other facilities near New York Harbor . The immediate damage was fixed within six months but long @-@ term resiliency and rehabilitation projects continue . 
 = = = Construction methods = = = 
 When the IRT subway debuted in 1904 , the typical tunnel construction method was cut @-@ and @-@ cover . The street was torn up to dig the tunnel below before being rebuilt from above . Traffic on the street above would be interrupted due to the digging up of the street . Temporary steel and wooden bridges carried surface traffic above the construction . 
 Contractors in this type of construction faced many obstacles , both natural and man @-@ made . They had to deal with rock formations , and ground water , which required pumps . Twelve miles of sewers , as well as water and gas mains , electric conduits , and steam pipes had to be rerouted . Street railways had to be torn up to allow the work . The foundations of tall buildings often ran near the subway construction , and in some cases needed underpinning to ensure stability . 
 This method worked well for digging soft dirt and gravel near the street surface . However , tunnelling shields were required for deeper sections , such as the Harlem and East River tunnels , which used cast @-@ iron tubes . Segments between 33rd and 42nd streets under Park Avenue , 116th Street and 120th Street under Broadway , and 145th Street and Dyckman Street ( Fort George ) under Broadway and Saint Nicholas Avenue as well as the tunnel from 96th Street to Central Park North – 110th Street & Lenox Avenue , used either rock or concrete @-@ lined tunnels . 
 About 40 % of the subway system runs on surface or elevated tracks , including steel or cast iron elevated structures , concrete viaducts , embankments , open cuts and surface routes . All of these construction methods are completely grade @-@ separated from road and pedestrian crossings , and most crossings of two subway tracks are grade @-@ separated with flying junctions . The sole exceptions of at @-@ grade junctions of two lines in regular service are the 142nd Street junction and the Myrtle Avenue junction , whose tracks both intersect at the same level . 
 The 7 @,@ 700 workers who built the original subway lines were mostly immigrants living in Manhattan . 
 More recent projects use tunnel boring machines , which increase the cost . They minimize disruption at street level and avoid already existing utilities . Examples of such projects include the extension of the IRT Flushing Line and the IND Second Avenue Line . 
 = = = Expansion = = = 
 Since the opening of the original New York City Subway line in 1904 , various official and planning agencies have proposed numerous extensions to the subway system . One of the more expansive proposals was the " IND Second System " , part of a plan to construct new subway lines in addition to taking over existing subway lines and railroad rights @-@ of @-@ way . The most grandiose IND Second Subway plan , conceived in 1929 , was to be part of the city @-@ operated IND , and was to comprise almost 1 ⁄ 3 of the current subway system . By 1939 , with unification planned , all three systems were included within the plan , which was ultimately never carried out . Many different plans were proposed over the years of the subway 's existence , but expansion of the subway system mostly stopped during World War II . 
 Though most of the routes proposed over the decades have never seen construction , discussion remains strong to develop some of these lines , to alleviate existing subway capacity constraints and overcrowding , the most notable being the Second Avenue Subway . Plans for new lines date back to the early 1910s , and expansion plans have been proposed during many years of the system 's existence . 
 After the IND Sixth Avenue Line was completed in 1940 , the city went into great debt , and only 29 new stations have been added to the system since . Five stations were on the abandoned New York , Westchester and Boston Railway @-@ operated IRT Dyre Avenue Line , fourteen stations were on the abandoned LIRR Rockaway Beach Branch ( now the IND Rockaway Line ) , six were on the Archer Avenue Lines and 63rd Street Lines ( built as part of a 1968 plan ) , two stations ( 57th Street and Grand Street ) were part of the Chrystie Street Connection , the Harlem – 148th Street terminal , and the 7 Subway Extension to the west side of Manhattan . 
 = = Lines and routes = = 
 Many rapid transit systems run relatively static routings , so that a train " line " is more or less synonymous with a train " route " . In New York City , however , routings change often because of changes in the availability of connections or the setup of service patterns . Within the nomenclature of the subway , the " line " describes the physical railroad track or series of tracks that a train " route " uses on its way from one terminal to another . " Routes " ( also called " services " ) are distinguished by a letter or a number and " Lines " have names . They are also designations for trains , as exemplified in the Billy Strayhorn song " Take the " A " Train " . 
 There are 24 train services in the subway system , including three short shuttles . Each route has a color and a local or express designation representing the Manhattan trunk line of the particular service . The color lime green is exclusively assigned to the Crosstown Line route , which operates entirely outside Manhattan , while the shuttles are all assigned dark slate gray . The lines and services are not referred to by color ( e.g. , Blue Line or Green Line ) by native New Yorkers or by most New York City residents , but out @-@ of @-@ towners and tourists often refer to the subway lines by color . 
 The 1 , 6 , 7 , C , G , L , M and R trains are fully local and make all stops . The 2 , 3 , 4 , 5 , < 6 > , < 7 > , A , B , D , E , F , N and Q trains have portions of express and local service . The J train normally operates local , but during rush hours it is joined by the Z train in the peak direction ; both the J and Z run local , express or skip @-@ stop on different parts of their shared route . The letter S is used for three shuttle services : Franklin Avenue Shuttle , Rockaway Park Shuttle , and 42nd Street Shuttle . 
 Though the subway system operates on a 24 @-@ hour basis , during late night hours some of the designated routes do not run , run as a shorter route ( often referred to as the ' shuttle train ' version of its full @-@ length counterpart ) or run with a different stopping pattern . These are usually indicated by smaller , secondary route signage on station platforms . Because there is no nightly system shutdown for maintenance , tracks and stations must be maintained while the system is operating . This work sometimes necessitates service changes during midday , overnight hours , and weekends . See also FASTRACK below . 
 When parts of lines are temporarily shut down for construction purposes , the transit authority can substitute free shuttle buses ( using MTA Regional Bus Operations bus fleet ) to replace the routes that would normally run on these lines . The transit authority announces planned service changes through its website , via placards that are posted on station and interior subway @-@ car walls , and through its Twitter page . 
 = = = Trunk lines = = = 
 = = = Subway map = = = 
 The current official transit maps of the New York City Subway are based on a 1979 design by Michael Hertz Associates . The maps are not geographically accurate due to the complexity of the system ( i.e. Manhattan being the smallest borough , but having the most services ) , but are known to help tourists navigate the city , as major city streets are shown alongside the subway stations serving them . The newest edition of the subway map , which took effect on June 27 , 2010 , reflects the latest service changes and also makes Manhattan bigger and Staten Island smaller . Part of the reason for the current incarnation is that earlier diagrams of the subway ( the first being produced in 1958 ) , while being more aesthetically pleasing , had the perception of being more geographically inaccurate than the diagrams today . The design of the subway map by Massimo Vignelli , published by the MTA between 1972 and 1979 , has since become recognized in design circles as a modern classic ; however , the MTA deemed the map flawed due to its placement of geographical elements . 
 A late night @-@ only version of the map was introduced on January 30 , 2012 . On September 16 , 2011 , the MTA introduced a Vignelli @-@ style interactive subway map , " The Weekender " , to its website ; as the title suggests , the map is a way for riders to get information about any planned work , from late Friday night to early Monday morning , that is going on either on a service ( s ) or station ( s ) of the subway during the weekend only . 
 There are several privately produced schematics which are available online or in published form , such as those by <unk> Map . Additionally , the New York City subway map has served as the subject of artistic endeavors . Among these are works by <unk> Design and by Alexander Chen . 
 = = Stations = = 
 Most of the 469 stations are served 24 hours a day . Underground stations in the New York City Subway are typically accessed by staircases going down from street level . Many of these staircases are painted in a common shade of green , with slight or significant variations in design . Other stations have unique entrances reflective of their location or date of construction . Several station entrance stairs , for example , are built into adjacent buildings . Nearly all station entrances feature color @-@ coded globe or square lamps signifying their status as an entrance . 
 Out of all the stations on the New York City Subway , 
 277 are fully underground 
 153 are elevated stations 
 29 are on an embankment 
 9 are open cut stations 
 This means that 61 % of the stations are below the surface ( 59 % being fully underground and about 2 % being sub @-@ surface stations ) . 39 % of stations are above the surface or overground . 
 = = = Concourse = = = 
 Many stations in the subway system have mezzanines . <unk> allow for passengers to enter from multiple locations at an intersection and proceed to the correct platform without having to cross the street before entering . Inside mezzanines are fare control areas , where passengers physically pay their fare to enter the subway system . In many older stations , the fare control area is at platform level with no mezzanine crossovers . Many elevated stations also have platform @-@ level fare control with no common station house between directions of service . 
 Upon entering a station , passengers may use station booths ( formerly known as token booths ) or vending machines to buy their fare , which is currently stored in a MetroCard . Each station has at least one booth , typically located at the busiest entrance . After swiping the card at a turnstile , customers enter the fare @-@ controlled area of the station and continue to the platforms . Inside fare control are " Off @-@ Hours Waiting Areas " , which consist of benches and are identified by a yellow sign . 
 = = = Platforms = = = 
 A typical subway station has waiting platforms ranging from 480 to 600 feet ( 150 to 180 m ) long , though some IND platforms may be as long as 660 to 745 feet ( 201 to 227 m ) long . Platforms of former commuter rail stations , such as those on the IND Rockaway Line , are even longer . Due to the large number of transit lines , one platform or set of platforms often serve more than one service . Passengers need to look at the overhead signs at the platform entrance steps and over each track to see which trains stop there and when , and at the arriving train to see which one it is . 
 There are a number of common platform configurations : 
 On a double track line , a station may have one center island platform used for trains in both directions , or 2 side platforms , one for a train in each direction . 
 For lines with three or four tracks with express service , local stops will have side platforms and the middle one or two tracks will not stop at the station . On these lines , express stations typically have two island platforms , one for the local and express in one direction , and another for the local and express in the other direction . Each island platform provides a cross @-@ platform interchange between local and express services . Some lines with four @-@ track express service have two tracks each on two levels and use both island and side platforms . 
 = = = Accessibility = = = 
 Since the majority of the system was built before 1990 , the year the Americans with Disabilities Act ( ADA ) went into effect , many New York City Subway stations were not designed to be handicapped @-@ accessible . Since then , elevators have been built in newly constructed stations to comply with the ADA . ( Most grade @-@ level stations required little modification to meet ADA standards . ) In addition , the MTA identified " key stations " , high @-@ traffic and / or geographically important stations , which must conform to the ADA when they are extensively renovated . As of March 2016 , there are 103 currently accessible stations ; many of them have <unk> access . Under the current MTA plans , the number of ADA accessible stations will go up to 144 by 2020 . The MTA has been sued by a disability rights group for not including an elevator during the $ 21 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 renovation of the Middletown Road subway station in the Bronx . Only 19 % of all of the subway system 's stations are fully accessible to people with disabilities . 
 = = Rolling stock = = 
 As of December 2015 , the New York City Subway has 6 @,@ 407 cars on the roster . A typical New York City Subway train consists of 8 to 11 cars , although shuttles can have as few as two , and the train can range from 150 to 600 feet ( 46 to 183 m ) in length . 
 The system maintains two separate fleets of cars , one for the A Division routes and another for the B Division routes . All B Division equipment is about 10 feet ( 3 @.@ 05 m ) wide and either 60 feet 6 inches ( 18 @.@ 44 m ) or 75 feet ( 22 @.@ 86 m ) long , whereas A Division equipment is approximately 8 feet 9 inches ( 2 @.@ 67 m ) wide and 51 feet 4 inches ( 15 @.@ 65 m ) long . There is also a special fleet of B Division cars that is used for operation in the BMT Eastern Division , where 75 @-@ foot ( 22 @.@ 86 m ) long cars are not permitted . 
 Cars purchased by the City of New York since the inception of the IND and the other divisions beginning in 1948 are identified by the letter " R " followed by a number ; e.g. : R32 . This number is the contract number under which the cars were purchased . Cars with nearby contract numbers ( e.g. : R1 through R9 , or <unk> through <unk> , or <unk> through <unk> ) may be relatively identical , despite being purchased under different contracts and possibly built by different manufacturers . 
 Since 1999 , the <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , and <unk> cars have been placed into service . These cars are collectively known as New Technology Trains ( <unk> ) due to modern innovations such as LED and LCD route signs and information screens , as well as recorded train announcements and the ability to facilitate Communication @-@ Based Train Control ( CBTC ) . Live conductor announcements can still be made . 
 On March 24 , 2012 , the MTA announced that it ordered 300 <unk> subway cars from Bombardier . The total price of the contract is US $ 599 million , with the first test train of ten cars arriving in June 2016 , due to ongoing delivery problems . 
 = = Fares = = 
 Riders pay a single fare to enter the subway system and may transfer between trains at no extra cost until they exit via station turnstiles ; the fare is a flat rate regardless of how far or how long the rider travels . Thus , riders must swipe their MetroCard upon entering the subway system , but not a second time upon leaving . 
 As of April 2016 , nearly all fares are paid by MetroCard ; the base fare is $ 2 @.@ 75 when purchased in the form of a reusable " pay per ride " MetroCard , with the last fare increase occurring on March 22 , 2015 . Single @-@ use cards may be purchased for $ 3 @.@ 00 , and 7 @-@ day and 30 @-@ day unlimited ride cards can lower the effective per @-@ ride fare significantly . Reduced fares are available for the elderly and people with disabilities . 
 Currency collected throughout the system is handled by the Money room . 
 = = = MetroCard = = = 
 In November 1993 , the subway system introduced a fare system called the MetroCard , which allows riders to use cards that store the value equal to the amount paid to a station booth clerk or vending machine . The MetroCard was enhanced in 1997 to allow passengers to make free transfers between subways and buses within two hours ; several MetroCard @-@ only transfers between subway stations were added in 2001 . With the addition of unlimited @-@ ride MetroCards in 1998 ( for 7 @-@ day and 30 @-@ day periods , later 1 @-@ day " Fun Pass " and 14 @-@ day periods , both of which have been discontinued ) , the New York City Transit system was the last major transit system in the United States with the exception of BART in San Francisco to introduce passes for unlimited bus and rapid transit travel . In January 2014 , the MTA stated that it wants to implement a contactless fare system to replace the MetroCard by 2019 . 
 = = Modernization = = 
 = = = FASTRACK = = = 
 In January 2012 , the MTA introduced a new maintenance program , FASTRACK , to speed up repair work . This program involves a more drastic approach than previous construction , and completely shuts down a major portion of a line for overnight work on four consecutive weeknights from 10 p.m. to 6 a.m. According to the MTA , this new program proved much more efficient and quicker than regular service changes , especially because it happened at night and not the weekend , when most transit closures had occurred before . In 2012 the program only closed lines in Midtown and Lower Manhattan , while in 2013 it expanded to other corridors requiring minimal shuttle buses and in 2014 to even more locations . There were corridors scheduled for 2014 during 24 weeks of the year , and in 2015 there were 12 corridors scheduled during 22 weeks . In 2016 , there are 13 corridors scheduled during 21 weeks . 
 = = = Technology = = = 
 = = = = Train arrival " countdown clocks " = = = = 
 In 2003 , the MTA signed a $ 160 million contract with Siemens Transportation Systems to install digital real @-@ time message boards ( officially Public Address Customer Information Screens , or PA / CIS ) at 158 of its IRT stations to display the number of minutes until the arrival of the next trains . Payments to the company were stopped in May 2006 following many technical problems and delays and MTA started to look for alternative suppliers and technologies . In January 2007 Siemens announced that the issues had been resolved and that screens would start appearing at 158 stations by the end of the year . In 2008 , the system @-@ wide roll @-@ out was pushed back again , to 2011 , with the MTA citing technical problems . 
 An in @-@ house simpler system developed by MTA for the L trains was operational by early 2009 and the first three displays of the larger Siemens system became operational at stations on the IRT Pelham Line ( 6 < 6 > trains ) in the Bronx in December 2009 . Siemens signs were in operation in 110 A Division stations by March 2011 and in 153 IRT mainline and 24 Canarsie Line stations by late 2011 . Simpler countdown clocks , which only announce the track on which the train is arriving and the number of stops the train is from the station , are used at 40 stations . This includes thirteen stations on the IND Queens Boulevard Line , nineteen stations on the IND Eighth Avenue Line , three stations on the BMT Broadway Line , and five stations on the BMT Astoria Line ; however , the clocks on the Broadway and Astoria Lines are no in use As of 2016 . The announcements are voiced by radio traffic reporter Bernie <unk> and Carolyn Hopkins . 
 In 2012 , real @-@ time station information for the 1 through 6 trains and the 42nd Street Shuttle was made available , through MTA 's ' Subway Time ' mobile app and as open data , to third party developers via a API . In early 2014 , data for the L train were also given to developers . 
 Displays at 22 IRT Flushing Line and the 5 IRT Dyre Avenue Line stations are not expected to be operational until the late 2010s , with the delay being attributed to upgrades to upgrading the signal system with CBTC for the IRT Flushing Line stations and to signal modernizations for IRT Dyre Avenue Line stations . Displays at 267 B Division stations will be installed as part of the 2015 – 2019 capital funding program . Upon the October 2015 approval of funding for the 2015 – 2019 capital program , full installation of the countdown clocks was deferred to beyond 2020 , with 320 out of 469 stations having countdown clocks by then . This was attributed to the rate of installation of wi @-@ fi and 3G systems in subway stations , which , among other things , makes countdown clocks viable . The B , D , and N were expected to get countdown clocks in 2016 ; the B and D would get the PA / CIS along their shared IND Concourse Line stations , the D along the BMT West End Line , and the N along the BMT Sea Beach Line . Meanwhile , the IRT Flushing Line ( 7 < 7 > ) was to get the clocks in 2018 , a delay from an earlier announced date of 2016 . The countdown clocks for the rest of the B Division will be installed as part of the Integrated Service Information and Management – B Division ( <unk> @-@ B ) project , which will upgrade signal towers and connect track circuits to a central database . 
 = = = = PayPass trials = = = = 
 The MTA signed a deal with MasterCard in the first few months of 2006 to test out a new RFID card payment scheme . Customers had to sign up at a special MasterCard website and use a MasterCard PayPass credit or debit card / tag to participate . Participating stations included IRT Lexington Avenue Line ( 4 5 6 < 6 > trains ) from the Third Avenue – 138th Street and 138th Street – Grand Concourse stations in the Bronx to Borough Hall in Brooklyn , as well as the Court Square – 23rd Street in Queens for the E M 7 < 7 > trains . Originally scheduled to end in December 2006 , the trial was extended into 2007 due to " overwhelming positive response " . 
 In light of the success of the first PayPass pilot project in 2006 , another trial was started by the MTA . This one started on June 1 , 2010 , and ended on November 30 , 2010 . The first two months started with the customer just using the MasterCard PayPass debit or credit card . However , this trial was the debut of having a rider use the VISA <unk> debit or credit card to enter the system , which started on August 1 , 2010 . For six months , a rider could use either a MasterCard <unk> or VISA <unk> credit / debit card to pay for a fare on an expanded list of subway and bus routes . 
 = = = = Help Point = = = = 
 The MTA set up another technology pilot project for the New York City Subway called " Help Point " on April 5 , 2011 . Help Point is a new digital @-@ audio communications system for use in case of an emergency or to obtain subway information for travel directions . The top button is labeled red for emergencies and connects to the Rail Control Center . The bottom button is labeled green and connects to a MTA station agent for any inquiries . All units are equipped with a microphone and speaker , and can optionally be installed with a camera . Also , the test units were equipped for the hearing impaired ( under ADA compliance ) . 
 The two subway stations that were part of this trial were on the IRT Lexington Avenue Line . They were the 23rd Street and the Brooklyn Bridge – City Hall stations . The Help Points at the Brooklyn Bridge – City Hall station were wireless , while those at the 23rd Street station ones were hard @-@ wired , to test which type of transmission is best for the subway . 
 After the Help Point test was successfully completed , the MTA started to install Help Points in all 469 subway stations to replace the existing Customer Assistance <unk> ( CAI ) units . The help points were to be installed in 139 stations by 2014 , and the remaining 333 stations would have Help Points by the end of 2019 . 
 = = = = On The Go ! Travel Station = = = = 
 On September 19 , 2011 , the MTA set up another pilot project , an online , interactive touchscreen computer program called " On The Go ! Travel Station " ( <unk> ) . It lists any planned work or service changes occurring on the subway as well as information to help travelers find landmarks or locales near the stations with an <unk> outlet , with advertisements as well . The first station to test this new technology was Bowling Green on the IRT Lexington Avenue Line . Other stations scheduled to participate in this program were Penn Station ( with the LIRR ) , Grand Central Terminal ( with Metro @-@ North ) , Atlantic Avenue – Barclays Center in Brooklyn , and Jackson Heights – Roosevelt Avenue / 74th Street – Broadway in Queens . 
 New and existing On the Go ! kiosks were to receive an interface overhaul as a result of the MTA 's partnership with Control Group , a technology and design consultancy firm . Control Group were adding route lookups , countdown to train arrivals , and service alerts . Between 47 and 90 interactive wayfinding kiosks were scheduled to be deployed in 2013 . As of January 2016 , there are 155 kiosks at 131 stations . 
 = = = = Cellular phone and wireless data = = = = 
 New York City Subway began to provide underground cellular phone with voice and data service , and free Wi @-@ Fi to passengers in 2011 at six stations . The new network was installed and owned by Transit Wireless as part of company 's $ 200 million investment . The company expanded the services to 30 more stations in 2013 and signed an agreement with all 4 major wireless network operators ( Verizon Wireless , AT & T , Sprint , and T @-@ Mobile ) to allow their cellular phone customers to use its network . The MTA and Transit Wireless are splitting the fees received from those wireless carriers for the usage of the network . The Wi @-@ Fi service , which operates using antennae , is operated by Boingo Wireless . 
 Transit Wireless expects to provide service to the remaining 241 underground stations by 2017 , including the three deep @-@ level subway stations under construction . The next 40 key stations ( 11 in midtown Manhattan and 29 in Queens ) have antennas that were in service by March 2014 . The wireless for these 40 underground stations were completed by October 2014 . Phase 3 of the project was completed in March 2015 and added service to the Flushing @-@ Main St station in Queens , as well as stations in Lower Manhattan , West Harlem and Washington Heights . Phase 4 of the project covered twenty underground stations in the Bronx and seventeen in Upper Manhattan ; this phase , completed in November 2015 , provided service to major stations such as Lexington Avenue – 53rd Street , Lexington Avenue – 59th Street , 149th Street – Grand Concourse , and 125th Street . Phases 6 and 7 of the Transit Wireless network build @-@ out will connect the 90 remaining Brooklyn and Manhattan underground stations in 2017 , about one year ahead of schedule . 
 = = = 2015 – 2019 Capital Program overhaul = = = 
 Under the 2015 – 2019 MTA Capital Plan , thirty @-@ one stations in all five boroughs will undergo a complete overhaul and would be entirely closed for up to 6 months at a time , according to Governor Andrew Cuomo . Updates would include cellular service , Wi @-@ Fi , charging stations , improved signage , subway countdown clocks , service alerts , neighborhood maps , new art , and improved station lighting . The stations would also include glass barriers near fare control areas ( rather than the current metal fences that separate the paid and unpaid areas of the station ) , as well as new tiled floors that are easy to clean . Minor component work , such as station signage , tiling , and lighting , would also be performed at over 170 other stations as part of the plan . 
 In addition , at least 1 @,@ 025 R211 subway cars are expected to be ordered under the plan . The <unk> would include 58 @-@ inch ( 150 cm ) wide doors , wider than the current MTA standard of 50 inches ( 130 cm ) , thereby projected to reduce station dwell time by 32 % . The new cars will have Wi @-@ Fi installed , USB chargers , digital advertisements , digital customer information displays , illuminated door opening alerts , and security cameras , unlike the current New Technology Trains , which lack these features . Some lines , like the IND Eighth Avenue Line , would get communications @-@ based train control as part of a larger plan to automate the system . These measures are all projected to help reduce overcrowding on the subway , which is prevalent . 
 = = Safety and security = = 
 Crime , train accidents , suicides and threats of terrorism all impact the subway system . 
 = = = Signalling = = = 
 = = = = Manual signalling = = = = 
 The system currently uses Automatic Block Signaling with fixed wayside signals and automatic train stops in order to provide safe train operation across the whole system . The New York City Subway system has , for the most part , used block signalling since its 1904 opening , and many portions of the signaling system were installed between the 1930s and 1960s . Some replacement parts must be custom built for the MTA , as they are no longer available from signaling suppliers . Additionally , some subway services have reached their train capacity limits and cannot operate extra trains with the current Automatic Block Signaling system . As of May 2014 , the system consists of about 14 @,@ 850 signal blocks , 3 @,@ 538 mainline switches , 183 major track junctions , 10 @,@ 104 automatic train stops , and 339 @,@ 191 signal relays . 
 These signals work by preventing trains from entering a " block " occupied by another train . Typically , the blocks are 1 @,@ 000 feet ( 300 m ) long . If no train is in the block , the signal will light up as green . When a train enters the block , the signal turns red , marking the block as occupied . The train 's maximum speed will depend on how many blocks are open in front of it . However , the signals do not register a train 's speed , nor where in the block the train is located . 
 Subway trains are stopped mechanically at all signals showing " stop " aspects by automatic train stops located alongside the tracks ; all cars are equipped with <unk> . Although this is a simple principle of train stops , that wayside trippers must not be moved to trip ( " stop " ) position until it is guaranteed that the train has fully passed the signal with all its cars . 
 Today , the majority of all subway delays are caused by signal problems . Whenever a signal stops working , all of the signals behind of it turn red , as it is uncertain whether there is a train in that section . 
 = = = = Automation = = = = 
 In the late 1990s and early 2000s , the MTA began automating the subway by Communication @-@ Based Train Control ( CBTC ) . Under CBTC , the fixed @-@ block signal system is removed . Instead , equipment aboard every train identifies the location of the train . The central control center uses this information to adjust speed for best use of the track . Trains , with CBTC , can then operate closer together . With the new system , signals and <unk> aren 't needed , their job being done better by trackside controllers , controllers on the train , and a control center . The location of the train is also used to inform passengers of arrival times . The MTA 's form of CBTC uses a reduced form of the old fixed @-@ block signaling system , requiring that both be maintained at high cost . 
 The BMT Canarsie Line , on which the L train runs , was chosen for pilot testing because it is a self @-@ contained line that does not operate in conjunction with other lines . CBTC became operational in February 2009 . Due to an unexpected ridership increase , the MTA ordered additional cars , and increased service from 15 trains to 26 trains per hour , an achievement beyond the capability of the block system . The total cost of the project was $ 340 million . 
 After the success of the BMT Canarsie Line automation , the IRT Flushing Line , carrying the 7 < 7 > trains , was next chosen to be outfitted with CBTC . Eventually , the MTA has plans to automate a much larger portion , using One Person Train Operation ( <unk> ) in conjunction with CBTC . Siemens Transportation Systems built the CBTC system on the Canarsie line . Thales is building the CBTC system for the Flushing Line . In late winter 2008 , the MTA embarked on a 5 @-@ week renovation and upgrade project on the 7 < 7 > trains between Flushing – Main Street and 61st Street – Woodside to upgrade signaling and tracks for CBTC . On February 27 , 2008 , the MTA issued an Accelerated Capital Program to continue funding the completion of CBTC for the 7 < 7 > trains and to begin on the IND Queens Boulevard Line ( E F trains ) . The proposed plan is estimated to cost US $ 1 @.@ 4 billion . At the current pace of installation , it would take 175 years for CBTC to be installed at a cost of $ 20 billion . 
 The New York City Subway uses a system known as Automatic Train Supervision ( ATS ) for dispatching and train routing on the A Division ( the Flushing line , and the trains used on the 7 < 7 > services , do not have ATS . ) ATS allows dispatchers in the Operations Control Center ( OCC ) to see where trains are in real time , and whether each individual train is running early or late . <unk> can hold trains for connections , re @-@ route trains , or short @-@ turn trains to provide better service when a disruption causes delays . 
 = = = Train accidents = = = 
 Despite the signal system , there have been at least 64 major train accidents since 1918 , when a train bound for South Ferry smashed into two trains halted near Jackson Avenue on the IRT White Plains Road Line in the Bronx . Several accidents resulted when the train operator ran through red signals and rear @-@ ended the subway train in front of it ; this resulted in the signaling practice of " keying by " , which allowed train operators to bypass red signals . The deadliest accident , the Malbone Street Wreck , occurred on November 1 , 1918 beneath the intersection of Flatbush Avenue , Ocean Avenue , and Malbone Street ( the latter of which is now Empire Boulevard ) near the Prospect Park station of the then @-@ BRT Brighton Line in Brooklyn , killing 93 people . As a result of accidents , such as the 1995 Williamsburg Bridge crash , timer signals were installed . These signals have resulted in reduced speeds across the system . Accidents such as derailments are also due to broken equipment , such as the rails and the train itself . 
 = = = Passenger safety = = = 
 = = = = Track safety and suicides = = = = 
 A portion of subway @-@ related deaths in New York consists of suicides committed by jumping in front of an oncoming train . Between 1990 and 2003 , 343 subway @-@ related suicides have been registered out of a citywide total of 7 @,@ 394 ( 4 @.@ 6 % ) and subway @-@ related suicides increased by 30 % , despite a decline in overall suicide numbers . 
 Due to increase in people hit by trains in 2013 , in late 2013 and early 2014 the MTA started a test program at one undisclosed station , with four systems and strategies to eliminate the number of people hit by trains . Closed @-@ circuit television cameras , a web of laser beams stretched across the tracks , radio frequencies transmitted across the tracks , and thermal imaging cameras focused on the station 's tracks were set to be installed at that station . At the unidentified station , which is rumored to be Rector Street , tests have gone so well at the testing site that these track protection systems will be installed <unk> as part of the 2015 – 2019 capital program . 
 The MTA also expressed interest in starting a pilot program to install platform edge doors . Several planned stations in the New York City Subway may possibly feature platform screen doors , possibly including future stations such as those part of the Second Avenue Subway . Currently , the MTA is planning a test program to install screen doors at a subway station on the BMT Canarsie Line . As part of the 2010 – 2014 capital program , the station was going to be Sixth Avenue , but it is uncertain whether or not that this will be the station chosen . 
 = = = = Crime = = = = 
 Crime rates have shown variations over time , with a drop starting in the 1990s and continuing today . In order to fight crime , various approaches have been used over the years , including an " If You See Something , Say Something " campaign and a new initiative to ban people who commit a crime in the subway system from entering the system for a certain length of time . 
 In order to fight crime , various approaches have been used . A new initiative by the MTA to prevent crime is to ban people who commit one in the subway system from entering it for a certain length of time . In the 1960s , for example , mayor Robert Wagner ordered an increase in the Transit Police force from 1 @,@ 219 to 3 @,@ 100 officers . During the hours at which crimes most frequently occurred ( between 8 : 00 p.m. and 4 : 00 a.m. ) , the officers went on patrol in all stations and trains . In response , crime rates decreased , as extensively reported by the press . In July 1985 , however , the Citizens Crime Commission of New York City published a study showing riders abandoning the subway , fearing the frequent robberies and generally bad circumstances . 
 To counter these developments , policy that was rooted in the late 1980s and early 1990s was implemented . In line with this Fixing Broken Windows philosophy , the New York City Transit Authority ( NYCTA ) began a five @-@ year program to eradicate graffiti from subway trains in 1984 . In 1993 , Mayor Rudy Giuliani took office and with Police Commissioner Howard Safir , the strategy was more widely deployed in New York under the rubrics of " zero tolerance " and " quality of life " . Crime rates in the subway and city dropped . Giuliani 's campaign credited the success to the zero tolerance policy . The extent to which his policies deserve the credit is disputed . 
 New York City Police Department Commissioner William J. Bratton and author of Fixing Broken Windows , George L. Kelling , however , stated the police played an " important , even central , role " in the declining crime rates . The trend continued and Giuliani 's successor , Michael Bloomberg , stated in a November 2004 press release : " Today , the subway system is safer than it has been at any time since we started tabulating subway crime statistics nearly 40 years ago . " 
 = = = = Photography = = = = 
 After the September 11 attacks in New York , the MTA exercised extreme caution regarding anyone taking photographs or recording video inside the system and proposed banning all photography and recording in a meeting around June 2004 . However , due to strong response from both the public and from civil rights groups , the rule of conduct was dropped . In November 2004 , the MTA again put this rule up for approval , but was again denied , though many police officers and transit workers still confront or harass people taking photographs or video . However , on April 3 , 2009 , the NYPD issued a directive to officers stating that it is legal to take pictures within the subway system so long as it is not accompanied with suspicious activity . 
 Currently , the MTA Rules of Conduct , Restricted Areas and Activities section states that anyone may take pictures or record video , provided that they do not use lights , reflectors or tripods . Lights , reflectors and tripods are permitted by members of the press who have identification issued by the NYPD . 
 = = = = Terrorism prevention = = = = 
 On July 22 , 2005 , in response to bombings in London , the New York City Transit Police introduced a new policy of randomly searching passengers ' bags as they approached turnstiles . The NYPD claimed that no form of racial profiling would be conducted when these searches actually took place . The NYPD has come under fire from some groups that claim purely random searches without any form of threat assessment would be ineffectual . Donna Lieberman , Executive Director of the <unk> , stated , " This NYPD bag search policy is unprecedented , unlawful and ineffective . It is essential that police be aggressive in maintaining security in public transportation . But our very real concerns about terrorism do not justify the NYPD subjecting millions of innocent people to <unk> searches in a way that does not identify any person seeking to engage in terrorist activity and is unlikely to have any meaningful deterrent effect on terrorist activity . " The searches were upheld by the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit in <unk> v. Kelly . 
 On April 11 , 2008 , MTA received a Ferrara Fire Apparatus Hazardous Materials Response Truck , which went into service three days later . It will be used in the case of a chemical or bioterrorist attack . 
 Najibullah <unk> and others were arrested in September 2009 and pleaded guilty in 2010 to being part of an al @-@ Qaeda plan to undertake suicide bombings on the New York City subway system . 
 = = Challenges = = 
 = = = 2009 – 2010 budget cuts = = = 
 The MTA faced a budget deficit of US $ 1 @.@ 2 billion in 2009 . This resulted in fare increases ( three times from 2008 to 2010 ) and service reductions ( including the elimination of two part @-@ time subway services , the V and W ) . Several other routes were modified as a result of the deficit . The N was made a full @-@ time local in Manhattan ( in contrast to being a weekend local / weekday express before 2010 ) , while the Q was extended nine stations north to Astoria – Ditmars Boulevard on weekdays , both to cover the discontinued W. The M was combined with the V , routing it over the Chrystie Street Connection , IND Sixth Avenue Line and IND Queens Boulevard Line to Forest Hills – 71st Avenue on weekdays instead of via the BMT Fourth Avenue Line and BMT West End Line to Bay Parkway . The G was truncated to Court Square full @-@ time . Construction headways on eleven routes were lengthened , and off @-@ peak service on seven routes were lengthened . 
 = = = Capacity constraints = = = 
 Several subway lines have reached their operational limits in terms of train frequency and passengers , according to data released by the Transit Authority . As of June 2007 , all of the A Division services except the 42nd Street Shuttle , as well as the E and L trains were beyond capacity , as well as portions of the N train . In April 2013 , New York magazine reported that the system was more crowded than it had been in the previous 66 years . The subway reached a daily ridership of 6 million for 29 days in 2014 , and was expected to record a similar ridership level for 55 days in 2015 ; by comparison , in 2013 , daily ridership never reached 6 million . In particular , the express tracks of the IRT Lexington Avenue Line and IND Queens Boulevard Line are noted for operating at full capacity during peak hours . The Long Island Rail Road East Side Access project is expected to bring many more commuters to the Lexington Avenue Line when it opens around the year 2022 , further overwhelming its capacity . 
 By early 2016 , delays as a result of overcrowding were up to more than 20 @,@ 000 every month , four times the amount in 2012 . The overcrowded trains have resulted in an increase of assaults because of tense commutes . With less platform space , more passengers are forced to be on the edge of the platform resulting in the increased possibility of passengers falling on the track . One possible solution that the MTA is considering is platform screen doors , which exist on the <unk> JFK to prevent passengers from falling onto the tracks . In order to prevent hitting passengers who could fall onto the tracks , train operators are being instructed to go into stations at lower speeds . The increased proximity of riders could result in the spread of contagious diseases . 
 = = = = Alleviation = = = = 
 The Second Avenue Subway , which will have communications @-@ based train control ( CBTC ) , will relieve pressure on the Lexington Avenue Line ( 4 5 6 < 6 > trains ) when the Second Avenue Subway 's first segment begins operating in December 2016 by shifting an estimated 225 @,@ 000 passengers , and CBTC installation on the Flushing Line is expected to increase the rate of trains per hour on the 7 < 7 > trains , but little relief will come to other crowded lines until later . The L trains , which are overcrowded during rush hours , already have CBTC operation . The installation of CBTC has reduced the L 's running time by 3 % . Even with CBTC , there are limits on the potential increased service . For L service to be increased further , a power upgrade as well as additional space for the L to turn around at its Manhattan terminus , Eighth Avenue are needed . The MTA is also seeking to implement CBTC on the IND Queens Boulevard Line . CBTC is to be installed on this line in five phases , with phase one ( 50th Street / 8th Avenue and 47th – 50th Streets – Rockefeller Center to Kew Gardens – Union Turnpike ) being included in the 2010 – 2014 capital budget . The $ 205 @.@ 8 million contract for the installment of phase one was awarded in 2015 to Siemens and Thales . Planning for phase one started in 2015 , with major engineering work to follow in 2017 . The total cost for the entire Queens Boulevard Line is estimated at over $ 900 million . Funding for CBTC on the IND Eighth Avenue Line is also provided in the 2015 – 2019 capital project . The MTA projects that 355 miles of track will receive CBTC signals by 2029 , including most of the IND , as well as the IRT Lexington Avenue Line and the BMT Broadway Line . The MTA also is planning to install CBTC equipment on the IND Crosstown Line , the BMT Fourth Avenue Line and the BMT Brighton Line before 2025 . As part of the installation of CBTC , the whole fleet of subway cars needs to be remodeled or replaced . 
 Due to an increase of ridership , the MTA has tried to increase capacity wherever possible by adding more frequent service , specifically during the evening hours . However , this increase will not likely keep up with the growth of subway ridership . Some lines have capacity for additional trains during peak times , but there are too few subway cars for this additional service to be operated . 
 As part of the R211 subway car order , the MTA is planning to test a train of 10 open @-@ gangway experimental prototype cars , which could increase capacity by up to 10 % by utilizing the space , that in previous models was the unused space between cars . 
 The MTA also hopes to test other , smaller ideas on some services . The F , 6 , and 7 trains are expected to get 100 more " station platform controllers " to manage the flow of passengers on and off crowded trains for maximum ridership during rush hours , for a total of 129 such employees ; these workers would also answer passengers ' questions about subway directions , rather than having conductors answering them and thus delaying the trains . Subway guards , the predecessors to the platform controllers , were used during the Great Depression and World War II . Shortened " next stop " announcements on trains are being tested on the 2 and 5 trains . " Step aside " signs on the platforms , reminding boarding passengers to let departing passengers off the train first , are being tested at Grand Central – 42nd Street , 51st Street , and 86th Street on the Lexington Avenue Line . Cameras would also be installed so the MTA could observe passenger overcrowding . 
 In systems like the London Underground , stations just simply get closed off when they are overcrowded , such as the busy Oxford Circus tube station , which had to close more than 100 times in a year . Currently , the restrictions are not yet necessary , according to MTA spokesman Kevin Ortiz . 
 = = = Subway flooding = = = 
 Service on the subway system is occasionally disrupted by flooding from rainstorms , even minor ones . Rainwater can disrupt signals underground and require the electrified third rail to be shut off . Every day , the MTA moves 13 million gallons of water when it is not raining . Since 1992 , $ 357 million has been used to improve 269 pump rooms . By August 2007 , $ 115 million was earmarked to upgrade the remaining 18 pump rooms . 
 Despite these improvements , the transit system continues to experience flooding problems . On August 8 , 2007 , after more than 3 inches ( 76 mm ) of rain fell within an hour , the subway system flooded , causing almost every subway service to either be disabled or seriously disrupted , effectively halting the morning rush . This was the third incident in 2007 in which rain disrupted service . The system was disrupted on this occasion because the pumps and drainage system can handle only a rainfall rate of 1 @.@ 75 inches ( 44 mm ) per hour ; the incident 's severity was aggravated by the scant warning as to the severity of the storm . 
 In addition , as part of a $ 130 million and an estimated 18 @-@ month project , the MTA began installing new subway grates in September 2008 in an attempt to prevent rain from overflowing into the subway system . The metallic structures , designed with the help of architectural firms and meant as a piece of public art , are placed atop existing grates but with a 3 @-@ to @-@ 4 @-@ inch ( 76 to 102 mm ) sleeve to prevent debris and rain from flooding the subway . The racks will at first be installed in the three most flood @-@ prone areas as determined by hydrologists : Jamaica , Tribeca , and the Upper West Side . Each neighborhood is scheduled to have its own distinct design , some featuring a wave @-@ like deck which increases in height and features seating ( Jamaica ) , others with a flatter deck that includes seating and a bike rack . 
 In October 2012 , Hurricane Sandy caused a lot of damage to New York City , and many subway tunnels were inundated with floodwater . The subway opened with limited service two days after the storm and was running at 80 percent capacity within five days ; however , some infrastructure needed years to repair . A year after the storm , MTA spokesperson Kevin Ortiz said , " This was unprecedented in terms of the amount of damage that we were seeing throughout the system . " The storm flooded nine of the system 's 14 underwater tunnels , many subway lines , and several subway yards , as well as completely destroying a portion of the IND Rockaway Line and much of the South Ferry terminal station . Reconstruction required many weekend closures on several lines , as well as several long @-@ term closures on the Greenpoint Tunnel , Montague Street Tunnel , Rockaway Line , and the South Ferry station , with a long @-@ term closure planned for the 14th Street Tunnel ; some reconstruction is expected to last until at least 2020 . 
 = = = Full and partial subway closures = = = 
 On August 27 , 2011 , due to the approach of Hurricane Irene , the MTA suspended subway service at noon in anticipation of heavy flooding on tracks and in tunnels . It was the first weather @-@ caused shutdown in the history of the system . Service was restored by August 29 . 
 On October 29 , 2012 , another full closure was ordered before the arrival of Hurricane Sandy . All services on the subway , the Long Island Rail Road and Metro @-@ North were gradually shut down that day at 7 : 00 P.M. , to protect passengers , employees and equipment from the coming storm . The storm caused serious damage to the system , especially the IND Rockaway Line , which had many sections between Howard Beach – JFK Airport and <unk> Wye on the Rockaway Peninsula heavily damaged , leaving it essentially isolated from the rest of the system . This required the NYCTA to truck in 20 R32 subway cars to the line to provide some interim service ( temporarily designated the H ) . Also , several of the system 's tunnels under the East River were flooded by the storm surge . South Ferry suffered serious water damage and did not reopen until April 4 , 2013 by restoring service to the older loop @-@ configured station that had been replaced in 2009 ; the stub @-@ end terminal tracks remain out of service pending extensive repairs and the new island @-@ <unk> station is not expected to reopen until 2017 . 
 On January 26 , 2015 , another full closure was ordered by New York Governor Andrew Cuomo due to the January 2015 nor 'easter , which was originally projected to leave New York City with 20 to 30 inches ( 51 to 76 cm ) of snow . The next day , the subway system was partially reopened . A number of New York City residents criticized Cuomo 's decision to shut down the subway system for the first time ever due to snow . The nor 'easter dropped much less snow in the city than originally expected , totaling only 9 @.@ 8 inches ( 25 cm ) in Central Park . 
 On January 23 , 2016 , a partial subway closure was ordered due to the January 2016 United States blizzard , wherein all aboveground stations were closed ; the underground lines remained open during the blizzard . Most of the subway resumed service the next day , with some lingering delays due to an average of 26 inches ( 66 cm ) of snow in the area . 
 = = = Litter and rodents = = = 
 Litter accumulation is a perennial problem in the subway system . In the 1970s and 1980s , dirty trains and platforms , as well as graffiti were a serious problem . The situation had improved since then , but the 2010 budget crisis , which caused over 100 of the cleaning staff to lose their jobs , threatened to curtail trash removal from the subway system . 
 The New York City Subway system is infested with rats . Rats are sometimes seen on platforms , and are commonly seen foraging through garbage thrown onto the tracks . They are believed to pose a health hazard , and on rare instances have been known to bite humans . Subway stations notorious for rat infestation include Chambers Street , Jay Street – MetroTech , West Fourth Street , Spring Street and 145th Street . 
 Decades of efforts to eradicate or simply thin the rat population in the system have been unsuccessful . In March 2009 , the Transit Authority announced a series of changes to its vermin control strategy , including new poison formulas and experimental trap designs . In October 2011 , the MTA announced a new initiative to clean 25 subway stations , along with their garbage rooms , of rat infestations . Also in October 2011 , the MTA announced a pilot program aimed at reducing levels of garbage in the subways by removing all garbage bins from the subway platforms . The initiative is being tested at the Eighth Street – New York University and Flushing – Main Street stations . As of March 2016 , stations along the BMT Jamaica Line , BMT Myrtle Avenue Line , and various other stations had their garbage cans removed due to the success of the program . There are also vacuum trains that are designed to remove trash off of the tracks , but are ineffective and often broken . A 2016 study by Travel Math had the New York City Subway listed as the dirtiest subway system in the country based on the number of viable bacteria cells . 
 = = = Noise = = = 
 Rolling stock on the New York City Subway produces high levels of noise that exceed guidelines set by the World Health Organization and the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency . In 2006 , Columbia University 's Mailman School of Public Health found noise levels averaged 95 decibel ( dB ) inside subway cars and 94 dB on platforms . Daily exposure to noise at such levels for as little as 30 minutes can lead to hearing loss . Noise on one in 10 platforms exceeded 100 dB . Under WHO and EPA guidelines , noise exposure at that level is limited to 1 @.@ 5 minutes . A subsequent study by Columbia and the University of Washington found higher average noise levels in the subway ( 80 @.@ 4 dB ) than on commuter trains including Port Authority Trans @-@ Hudson ( PATH ) ( 79 @.@ 4 dB ) , Metro @-@ North ( 75 @.@ 1 dB ) and Long Island Rail Road ( LIRR ) ( 74 @.@ 9 dB ) . Since the decibel scale is a logarithmic scale , sound at 95 dB is 10 times more intense than at 85 dB and 100 times more intense than at 75 dB , and so forth . In the second study , peak subway noise registered at 102 @.@ 1 dB . 
 Currently , the MTA , with the engineering firm Arup , is working to reduce the noise levels in stations . In order to reduce noise , the MTA is investing in low @-@ vibration track using ties encased in concrete @-@ covered rubber and neoprene pads . Continuously welded rail , which is also being installed , reduces the noise being made by the wheels of trains . The biggest change that is going to be made is in the design of stations . Current stations were built with tile and stone , which bounce sound everywhere , while newer stations will have the ceilings lined with absorbent fiberglass or mineral wool that will direct sound toward the train and not the platform . With less noise from the trains , platform announcements could be heard more clearly . They will be clearer with speakers spaced periodically on the platform , angled so that announcements could be heard by the riders . Some of these changes will be in place on the soon @-@ opening Second Avenue Subway . 
 = = Public relations = = 
 The Board of Transportation , and its successor , MTA New York City Transit , has had numerous events that promote increased ridership of their transit system . 
 = = = Miss Subways = = = 
 From 1941 to 1976 , the Board of Transportation / New York City Transit Authority sponsored the " Miss Subways " publicity campaign . In the musical On the Town , the character Miss <unk> is based on the Miss Subways campaign . The campaign was resurrected in 2004 , for one year , as " Ms. Subways " . It was part of the 100th anniversary celebrations . Featuring young models , entertainers and others , the monthly campaign , which included the winners ' photos and biographical blurbs on placards in subway cards , featured such winners as Mona Freeman and prominent New York City restaurateur Ellen Goodman . The winner of this contest was Caroline Sanchez @-@ Bernat , an actress from Morningside Heights . 
 = = = Subway Series = = = 
 Subway Series is a term applied to any series of baseball games between New York City teams , as opposing teams can travel to compete merely by using the subway system . Subway Series is a term long used in New York , going back to series between the Brooklyn Dodgers or New York Giants and the New York Yankees in the 1940s and 1950s . Today , the term is used to describe the rivalry between the Yankees and the New York Mets . During the 2000 World Series , cars on the 4 train ( which stopped at Yankee Stadium ) were painted with Yankee colors , while cars on the 7 train ( which stopped at Shea Stadium ) had Mets colors . The term could also be applied to the rivalry between the New York Knicks and the Brooklyn Nets of the National Basketball Association , or the New York Rangers and the New York Islanders of the National Hockey League ever since the Nets and the Islanders moved to the Barclays Center in Brooklyn . 
 = = = Holiday Train = = = 
 Since 2003 , the MTA has operated a Holiday Train on Sundays in November and December , from the first Sunday after Thanksgiving to the Sunday before Christmas Day . This train was made of cars from the R1 through R9 series . The route made all stops between Second Avenue in Manhattan and Queens Plaza in Queens via the IND Sixth Avenue Line and the IND Queens Boulevard Line . In 2011 , the train operated on Saturdays instead of Sundays . 
 The contract , car numbers ( and year built ) used were <unk> , specifically R1 100 ( 1930 ) , R1 381 ( 1931 ) , R4 401 ( 1932 ) , R4 484 ( 1932 ) – Bulls Eye lighting and a test P.A. system added in 1946 , R6 @-@ 3 1000 ( 1935 ) , R6 @-@ 1 1300 ( 1937 ) , <unk> 1575 ( 1938 ) – rebuilt in 1947 as a prototype for the R10 subway car , and R9 1802 ( 1940 ) . 
 = Luc Bourdon = 
 Joseph Luc Bourdon ( February 16 , 1987 – May 29 , 2008 ) was a Canadian professional ice hockey defenceman who played for the Vancouver Canucks of the National Hockey League ( NHL ) and their American Hockey League ( AHL ) affiliate , the Manitoba Moose , from 2006 until 2008 . After overcoming childhood arthritis , he was selected third overall in the 2003 Quebec Major Junior Hockey League ( QMJHL ) draft and played for the Val @-@ d 'Or Foreurs , Moncton Wildcats , and Cape Breton Screaming Eagles , spending four seasons in the QMJHL . The Canucks drafted Bourdon with their first selection , tenth overall , in the 2005 NHL Entry Draft . Noted as a strong defenceman who could contribute on offence , Bourdon represented Canada in three international tournaments , winning two gold medals at the IIHF World U20 Championship and a silver medal at the IIHF World U18 Championship . Bourdon died at the age of 21 near his hometown of Shippagan , New Brunswick , when his motorcycle collided with a tractor trailer . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Born on February 16 , 1987 , Bourdon was an only child raised by his mother , Suzanne Boucher , in the small French @-@ speaking community of Shippagan , New Brunswick . When he was nine , he was diagnosed with juvenile arthritis and needed to use a wheelchair , which he later overcame . As a teenager , he attended Marie @-@ Esther Secondary , where he was a straight @-@ A student . Growing up in a fishing town , he worked summers on his uncle 's crab fishing boat . 
 He played as a 13- and 14 @-@ year @-@ old with the <unk> <unk> Lynx , and with the Miramichi Rivermen from ages 15 – 16 , both local minor ice hockey teams . After being the third overall choice in the 2003 QMJHL draft , Bourdon left home when he was 16 , returning in the off @-@ season to live with his mother . Upon turning professional and signing his first contract , he anonymously donated C $ 10 @,@ 000 to the local minor hockey association for families who could not afford equipment . His donation was posthumously revealed by his former bantam hockey coach , Gilles Cormier , who managed the local arena at the time of Bourdon 's death . 
 = = Playing career = = 
 Bourdon joined the Val @-@ d 'Or Foreurs for the 2003 – 04 season , registering eight points in 64 regular season games and scoring one goal in seven playoff games . He appeared in all 70 games with the Foreurs in 2004 – 05 , scoring 13 goals and 19 assists , and participated in the CHL Top Prospects Game , an exhibition for draft @-@ eligible players . In June 2005 , Bourdon was the tenth pick overall , selected by the Vancouver Canucks , at the 2005 NHL Entry Draft . Ranked sixth overall for North American skaters coming into the draft , Bourdon was noted as a physical two @-@ way defenceman with significant offensive skills and a strong shot , as well as an excellent skater . He was the second Shippagan @-@ born hockey player to be drafted in the NHL , after goaltender <unk> <unk> was drafted by the Philadelphia Flyers in 1991 . 
 Invited to the Canucks training camp , Bourdon almost made the team as an 18 @-@ year @-@ old , but instead was returned to the QMJHL for further development . He began the 2005 – 06 season with the Foreurs , registering 20 points in 20 games , before being traded to the Moncton Wildcats , who were hosting the 2006 Memorial Cup . In exchange for Bourdon , the Wildcats sent Ian Mathieu @-@ Girard , Jean @-@ Sébastien Adam , a fourth @-@ round pick , and a first @-@ round selection in 2008 to Val @-@ d 'Or . Shortly after the trade , Bourdon injured his ankle , suffering a fractured fibula , high and low sprains , and a second @-@ degree ligament tear . Although he returned to join Moncton in the playoffs , doctors told him that it would take two years to fully recover . He managed a full recovery after one year , but his turning ability and backwards skating sometimes lagged . Competing in the Memorial Cup , he reached the Canadian Hockey League ( CHL ) final with the Wildcats , who lost 6 – 2 to the Quebec Remparts . 
 After signing a three @-@ year contract , worth $ 850 @,@ 000 per year with the Canucks on May 4 , 2006 , Bourdon earned a spot on the team 's 2006 – 07 opening roster . He played his first NHL game on October 10 , 2006 against the Minnesota Wild , but after playing nine games and scoring no points , he was sent again to the QMJHL for further development . On January 8 , 2007 , Bourdon was again traded in the QMJHL , with Moncton sending him to the Cape Breton Screaming Eagles in exchange for Mark <unk> and a first round selection in the 2007 QMJHL draft . As a Screaming Eagle , Bourdon lost in the QMJHL semi @-@ final against his former team , Val @-@ d 'Or . He finished the 2006 – 07 QMJHL season with 20 points in 36 games . When the Canucks did not qualify for the playoffs , they sent Bourdon to play five games for the Manitoba Moose , who were in the middle of the AHL playoffs . He was held pointless through five AHL playoff games . Including his participation in the 2007 World Junior Championships , Bourdon played for five different teams throughout the 2006 – 07 season . 
 Initially failing to make the Canucks starting roster out of training camp , Bourdon began the 2007 – 08 season with the Manitoba Moose ; however , because of a series of injuries among the Canucks ' defencemen throughout the season , Bourdon was called up on several occasions . Bourdon scored his first goal on November 16 , 2007 , against goaltender Niklas Bäckström in a 6 – 2 win over the Minnesota Wild . Bourdon finished the season on the Canucks roster , and was sent back to the Manitoba Moose for the AHL playoffs , playing in six playoff games for the Moose . He appeared in 27 games for the Canucks over the season , scoring two goals , as well as scoring 14 points during 41 games with the Moose . 
 As a young and promising defenceman , Bourdon was regularly mentioned in rumours of trades for more offence at the forward positions . Most significantly , he was speculated to be part of a package in exchange for Tampa Bay Lightning forward Brad Richards . Although Bourdon had a powerful shot , he did not play defence responsibly enough to earn a regular spot on the roster . He began to show signs of improvement and maturity as the Canucks used him more in the 2007 – 08 season . 
 = = = International play = = = 
 Bourdon made his international debut representing Team Canada in the 2005 World Under @-@ 18 Championships , held in the Czech Republic , earning one assist in a silver @-@ medal effort . 
 In the 2006 World Junior Ice Hockey Championships in British Columbia , Bourdon competed in his first of two consecutive World Junior Championships . He was named player of the game in round @-@ robin play after a scoring a goal and an assist in a 4 – 0 win against Norway . He finished the tournament leading all defencemen in scoring with six points in six games and was named to the tournament 's all @-@ star team . Upon winning gold , Bourdon returned to Shippagan and showcased his medal at the local arena to crowds of supporters . 
 At the 2007 World Junior Championships in <unk> and Mora , Sweden , Bourdon was awarded a second player of the game distinction after the first round @-@ robin contest against Sweden , in which he scored the game @-@ winning goal in a 2 – 0 victory . Later in the tournament , Bourdon scored the game @-@ tying goal in the third period of a 2 – 1 shootout win over the United States in the semi @-@ final . In total , Bourdon picked up two goals and two assists in six games , helping Canada to a second straight gold medal . 
 = = Death = = 
 Bourdon was killed instantly in a motorcycle collision in <unk> , New Brunswick , near his hometown of Shippagan on May 29 , 2008 , when he hit a tractor @-@ trailer after losing control of his 2009 Suzuki <unk> @-@ <unk> and crossing the centre line . Environment Canada showed winds gusting to more than 50 km / h ( 31 mph ) in the area at the time of the accident . The RCMP stated that Bourdon 's inexperience with motorcycles may have been a factor in the crash . 
 Bourdon 's agent , Kent Hughes , stated that he never knew about his client 's new hobby ( motorcycles ) . " I had no idea , " he explained to <unk> in Vancouver . " Another client of ours , Kris Letang , said Luc let him know he was riding his dad 's motorcycle with some friends a week or two ago . I have since been told — though I don 't know — that he actually bought a motorcycle two days ago " . Maryse Bourdon , Luc 's stepmother , said he had purchased the motorcycle about three weeks before . Letang , Bourdon 's close friend and former roommate from junior hockey , planned to buy a motorcycle after Bourdon told him about his ; because of the crash , he decided against it . 
 The American Hockey League , where Bourdon had played for the Manitoba Moose , observed a moment of silence in Bourdon 's honour prior to game one of the Calder Cup Finals between the Chicago Wolves and the Wilkes @-@ Barre / Scranton Penguins just hours after the accident , and on May 31 , the Pittsburgh Penguins and Detroit Red Wings observed a moment of silence before game four of the 2008 Stanley Cup Final . During the 2008 NHL Draft , the Canucks ' management wore guitar pins to remember Bourdon , because he was an avid guitarist . 
 At the Canucks ' 2008 – 09 NHL season home opener against the Calgary Flames , the Canucks honoured Bourdon with a brief pre @-@ game ceremony . Bourdon 's family was presented with his last game @-@ worn jersey , given by the fan who won the jersey during an annual charity event the previous season . Afterwards , Tom Cochrane and Red Rider performed " Big League " during the video tribute . Commemorative pins were handed out to fans attending the game and were worn throughout the season by General Motors Place hosts . The Canucks also wore " LB " on their helmets that season in memory of Bourdon . At General Motors Place , the Luc Bourdon Wall of Dreams was established to commemorate Bourdon . 
 The Manitoba Moose honoured Bourdon with a video tribute before their 2008 – 09 home opener on October 10 , 2008 . Moose players all wore # 4 Bourdon jerseys during the warmup , and " # 4 LB " patches were worn on the jerseys of players all season . A senior men 's ice hockey team in New Brunswick , the <unk> / Shippagan <unk> , also honoured him , wearing a " 28 Bourdon " patch on their jerseys over the course of the 2008 – 09 season . During the 2009 World Junior Ice Hockey Championships , Team Canada honoured Bourdon by wearing LB stickers in their opening game . In addition , no Canadian player wore the jersey number 6 , the number Bourdon wore with the national team , throughout the tournament . 
 In the 2008 @-@ 2009 season , the QMJHL Moncton Wildcats hockey club where Luc had played during the 2006 season paid tribute by having former New Brunswick professional musician Roland Gauvin from 1755 French musical group play " Le monde a bien change " along a video tribute . Also presented to the Bourdon family from the Wildcats Franchise Executives was Luc 's Moncton Wildcats Jersey as well as Flowers . The team wore the LB patch as well for the season . 
 = = Career statistics = = 
 = = = Regular season and playoffs = = = 
 = = = International = = = 
 All statistics taken from NHL.com 
 = SaGa Frontier 2 = 
 SaGa Frontier 2 ( <unk> <unk> 2 , Saga <unk> Tsū ) is a role @-@ playing video game developed by Square for the PlayStation . It is the eighth original game in their SaGa series . Initially released in Japan in April 1999 , an English version was made available in North America in January 2000 by Square Electronic Arts and in PAL regions the following March by Square . Development for the title was headed by series creator Akitoshi Kawazu , with music by Masashi Hamauzu . The game features an art style unique to the series at the time it was released , utilizing hand @-@ painted watercolor backdrops and characters to give the game a storybook feel . Like other SaGa games , gameplay is largely non @-@ linear , giving the player multiple paths to follow in order to complete the game . 
 Set in the fictional world of Sandail , the game 's plot , as well as location and character names , draw heavily from medieval Germanic and Anglo @-@ Saxon influence . The game 's plot is divided into two separate stories , with the player given the option to control either Gustave XIII , an exiled would @-@ be heir on a quest to reclaim his throne , or William Knights , a young man investigating the death of his parents , with both scenarios eventually intertwining in a larger plot involving the fate of the world . SaGa Frontier 2 was met with generally positive reviews , with the Japanese version receiving three re @-@ issues in June 2000 , March 2002 , and July 2006 respectively . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 SaGa Frontier 2 is a role @-@ playing video game featuring two @-@ dimensional character sprites on hand @-@ drawn backgrounds . Players advance through the game by completing story @-@ based missions and interacting with non @-@ player characters to move the plot forward . At the start of the game , the player is given the option of assuming the role of one of two heroes , each with their own individual stories and objectives . Like previous titles in the SaGa series , the game 's plot progresses in a mostly non @-@ linear fashion , with a heavier emphasis on exploration and battling than adhering strictly to the narrative . While the player is restricted by the basic flow of the story , they are free to travel to many parts of the game world whenever they choose , and must traverse harsh dungeon environments and defeat enemies to affect their current place in the story . 
 Battles in SaGa Frontier 2 utilize a turn @-@ based approach where the player must input specific commands for each character at the beginning of each combat round , with each action taking place in accordance with a character 's speed rating . In any given round , player may choose to attack an enemy with an equipped weapon , as well as use magic spells to cause harm to their opponent or aid their allies . By continually attacking an enemy with weapons , characters randomly learn special weapon skills that can deal more damage , as well as combine with other party member 's attack to form combo attacks . Combat scenarios are divided into three separate types , which are either selectable by the player or dictated automatically by the plot - Duel , which allows one @-@ on @-@ one combat ; Team , where up to four characters may take part against an entire enemy group ; or Strategic , which can contain a large number of characters in a strategy @-@ like scenario . Each character may equip up to two different kinds of weapons , and may become more specialized in a particular field of combat by assigning them " roles " , which increase their proficiency with certain weapon and spell combinations as well as give them additional abilities . By winning battles , characters may increase their statistics based on their actions in combat , thus becoming more powerful . 
 = = Plot = = 
 SaGa Frontier 2 has two separate storylines : one is the history of Gustave XIII of the country of Finney , and the other concerns a character named Wil Knights . The game takes place in the land of Sandail , with the games timeline spanning several decades . 
 Gustave XIII is the former prince of Thermes , the capital of Finney , and was intended to be the heir to the throne of his father , Gustave XII . The son is disinherited and exiled by his father when , at the age of 7 , he fails to manifest any magical abilities , known as Anima , during a ritual known as the Firebrand Ceremony . His mother , Queen Sophie , unsuccessfully tries to prevent Gustave XIII 's banishment . She and Gustave XIII are banished from the castle by Gustave XII and are forced to live in the slums of Thermes . Master <unk> , a magician as well as teacher and councilor to Gustave XIII assists both mother and son in escaping Thermes and seeking asylum in the city <unk> in the kingdom of Na . Despite being granted a mansion to live in my the king of Na , Gustave is still resentful of his rejection and lack of magical powers . 
 At age seventeen he apprentices as a blacksmith and learns to fight , and it is during his period his mother dies . He then moved to the city @-@ state of Wide where he insinuates himself with the ruler and overthrows him . Five years later , <unk> father dies , and at the behest of his best friend Kelvin decides to claim the throne . A war then breaks out between Gustave XIII and his half @-@ brother in which Gustave conquers Finney and becomes the ruler of all the surrounding kingdoms except Na . This one holdout is controlled by Phillip , <unk> brother , who blames Gustave for their mothers death . During the subsequent conflict , Gustave admits he lacks magical powers , and abdicates in favor of Phillip . Gustave then build a city of his own called Hahn Nova , but it is overrun by monsters and burned to the ground . The fate of Gustave and his friends is left a mystery . 
 The secondary playable storyline in the game is that of Wil Knights , who is a member of a rich family of " diggers " ; after the death of his parents , Wil relocated to the kingdom of <unk> . At the age of fifteen Wil sets out to become a famous digger : after hearing about a legendary object known as " The Egg " , Wil sets out to find it . After adventures in the Arctic region of <unk> , Wil becomes known as " Tycoon Wil " , though he continues to search for the Egg . Wil then has a son named Rich who goes in search of the Egg and finds a young woman named Misty in possession of it . And even though his wife announces their baby girl Ginny has been born , he becomes obsessed with the woman and the Egg , and never returns from his quest . 
 The final part of the story involves Ginny Knights following the path of her father and grandfather in searching for the legendary object . Upon hearing of the evil powers of the Egg , and its role in leading her father to his death , Ginny decides to find and destroy the object . She eventually discovers the Egg is now possessed by " Fake Gustave " , a pretender to the throne of Finney trying to take power in the wake of Gustave XII 's death . After Ginny defeats him , she then battles the powerful demonic object , and upon its defeat is revealed to be controlled by the demon <unk> and The Devil King . Their defeat by Ginny ends the objects evil influence and attempts to insidiously control the kingdoms of Sandail . 
 = = Development = = 
 SaGa Frontier 2 was first announced in a September 1998 issue of Japanese The PlayStation magazine , where Square claimed the game would be taking a stylistic departure from the original SaGa Frontier released one year earlier , as well as confirming the title 's release for spring 1999 . A representative from the company stated that they would be abandoning the CG full @-@ motion videos and computer @-@ style graphics of the previous title to focus on a more traditional , hand @-@ drawn look . The game 's art style was achieved by using hand @-@ drawn and painted artwork produced on a canvas that would be scanned and digitized to produce the game 's backgrounds and character sprites . Many of the game 's towns , locations , and characters draw heavily from medieval Germanic influence , with much of the story taking place within a fictional time @-@ frame similar to the 13th century . New features not seen in the previous SaGa Frontier title include compatibility with the PlayStation 's DualShock analog controller and PocketStation peripheral device for accessing additional content . 
 The North American version was announced at the 1999 Electronic Entertainment Expo in Los Angeles by Square . In January 2000 , the game was released in that region by Square Electronic Arts , and was made available in PAL regions the following March . A promotional movie for SaGa Frontier 2 was included on the <unk> 2000 Collector 's CD Vol . 3 , which was packaged with the initial North American release of Vagrant Story . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 While Kenji Ito served as composer for most of the previous SaGa games , the music for SaGa Frontier 2 was written by series newcomer Masashi Hamauzu , who had previously provided the soundtrack for Square 's Chocobo no Fushigina Dungeon two years earlier . SaGa Frontier 2 's music was recorded at Sunrise Studio in Tokyo , and on April 21 , 1999 , Square released the three @-@ disc SaGa Frontier II Original Soundtrack in Japan courtesy of publisher DigiCube . The soundtrack features German track names to keep with the game 's eastern European theme , and was popular enough to be re @-@ issued on the Square Enix Music label in February 2006 . In July 1999 , an album called Piano Pieces " SF2 " was released featuring piano renditions of music from the game , featuring arrangements from Hamauzu himself along with Naoko Endo , Daisuke Hara , Mikiko Saiki , Daisuke <unk> , and Michiko Minakata . 
 = = Reception = = 
 SaGa Frontier 2 was a bestseller in Japan . The game has sold over 675 @,@ 000 copies in Japan as of December 2004 . Like SaGa Frontier , the game has been re @-@ released several times over the years , once in 2000 as part of the Square Millennium Collection , again in 2002 as part of the PSone Books best @-@ seller range , and again in 2004 as a part of the Square Enix Ultimate Hits line . 
 The game maintains a 74 % average score from aggregate review website GameRankings based on 26 reviews , and received generally positive reviews from western publications . GameSpot praised the game 's art design in a time when three @-@ dimensional computer graphics were becoming more prominent , stating " [ t ] he title 's relaxed and flowing tones are a pleasant breeze of creativity when compared with most titles ' CG , polygons , and pixel @-@ perfect graphics . The unique presentation is SaGa Frontier 2s greatest strength , triumphantly stating : There is still a place for two @-@ dimensional graphics . " However , the website felt that the game may alienate fans of the original SaGa Frontier for taking too many liberties with gameplay and style , and that while players were still free to explore scenarios at their own pace , the game 's story itself was more linear than the average SaGa title . SaGa Frontier 2 's graphics were also praised by IGN who called the game " beautiful " with a " romantic soundtrack that is of the utmost quality . But it isn 't too memorable . " IGN 's biggest problem with the title was its low replay value and weak presentation , which the website felt didn 't take full advantage of the PlayStation 's CD format by including an opening movie or character voices , ultimately calling it a " slightly above average game " . GamePro magazine called attention to the game 's " well organized " menu system and responsive control which took advantage of the PlayStation 's DualShock analog control sticks , as well as " a solid story that is sure to please role @-@ players and strategy fans alike . " 
 = Office Olympics = 
 " Office Olympics " is the third episode of the second season of the television series The Office , and the show 's ninth episode overall . It was written by Michael Schur and directed by Paul Feig . It originally aired on October 5 , 2005 on NBC . The episode guest starred Nancy Walls , the real @-@ life wife of series star Steve Carell , as Carol Stills . 
 The series depicts the everyday lives of office employees in the Scranton , Pennsylvania branch of the fictional Dunder Mifflin Paper Company . In the episode , Michael Scott ( Steve Carell ) and Dwight Schrute ( Rainn Wilson ) leave the office to buy a condo . Meanwhile , Jim Halpert ( John Krasinski ) , along with Pam Beesly ( Jenna Fischer ) , organizes office games and gets his co @-@ workers to play them . 
 " Office Olympics " was inspired by The King of the Hill Office Olympics , which were created and ran by members of the television show King of the Hill . After the episode aired , other " Office Olympics " were organized in actual offices across the country . The episode marks the first appearance of Mose , Dwight 's Amish cousin , played by writer Mike Schur . Mose was based on an actual person , with the same name , on the UPN reality show Amish in the City . The episode contained several cultural references , with many alluding to the actual Olympic games . " Office Olympics " received largely positive reviews from critics . The episode earned a Nielsen rating of 3 @.@ 9 in the 18 – 49 demographic and was viewed by 8 @.@ 3 million viewers . 
 = = Plot = = 
 While Michael Scott ( Steve Carell ) leaves with Dwight Schrute ( Rainn Wilson ) to sign closing papers for his new condominium , the staff fills out their expense reports . Jim Halpert ( John Krasinski ) " dies " of boredom , and Pam Beesly ( Jenna Fischer ) revives him by calling him to the reception desk and throwing objects into Dwight 's coffee mug . Jim discovers that his co @-@ workers have their own office games , such as Toby 's " <unk> " , and Kevin and Oscar 's " paper football flicking and hitting " game . Jim and Pam organize the Games of the First Dunder @-@ Mifflin Olympiad , competing for hand @-@ made medals constructed from yogurt lids and paper clips . 
 At the condominium signing , Michael discusses the deal with his realtor , Carol Stills ( Nancy Walls ) . Dwight finds a variety of things wrong with the condominium , and , at the very end of the deal , Michael gets cold feet but relents when he learns that backing out of the deal will cost him a substantial amount of money . 
 When Michael and Dwight return , the coffee cup race quickly dissolves , and the office returns to normal . Michael isolates himself in his office , still upset over the closure of his condo . When Ryan Howard ( B.J. Novak ) attempts to throw away his gold medal , Jim and Pam organize the " closing ceremonies " , believing them important to the office staff , and they award Michael the gold medal for closing on his condo . They also award Dwight the silver medal for unknown reasons . Michael feels touched by this and thanks everyone for the honor . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Office Olympics " was written by Michael Schur . This episode was the first episode of the series directed by Paul Feig . Producer Greg Daniels said the idea for the actual Office Olympics stemmed from The King of the Hill Office Olympics , which were created and ran by Daniel 's former assistant Tim Croston and the show 's two production assistants at the time : Tony Gennaro and <unk> Manoogian . The games were held in the King of the Hill offices , where Daniel served as executive producer . Daniels later elaborated on the types of games they played , stating " Like , who ’ s going to get off the elevator first and races in chairs . The funny thing is then it became a TV episode and it has now gone full circle and I hear offices are doing it all over . " After the episode aired , other " Office Olympics " were organized in actual offices across the country . The Chicago Tribune organized an interview with a majority of The Office cast members who — in character — explained the rules to the various games . The Yogurt Lid Medals reappear in the third season finale , " The Job " : Receiving the lid and a note from Pam is the catalyst for Jim 's decision between Pam and Karen . 
 This episode establishes the use of cold openings in The Office , a practice which continues for the rest of the series . The first shot of Steve Carell in the title sequence is also updated . 
 When choosing Michael 's car for the episode , producer Kent Zbornak brought in pictures of various cars and had the writers choose which one they thought Michael would most likely own . The writers ended up choosing a Chrysler Sebring convertible , because according to B. J. Novak " we figured it 's the showiest car that he could afford " . While shooting the scene in Michael 's car , cameraman Randall Einhorn accidentally broke the back window , which ended up costing $ 859 to replace . 
 Writer Mike Schur made a cameo appearance in the episode , appearing in a photograph as Dwight 's Amish cousin Mose . The idea for Schur to be Dwight 's Amish cousin had been a joke among the writers since the first season . Mose was based on an actual participant , with the same name , on the UPN reality show Amish in the City . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 After telling Ryan he can take his pants off and run around the office , Michael makes a direct reference to the 1983 teen comedy @-@ drama film Risky Business . Dwight compares his friendship to Michael , using the analogy that Michael is " like Mozart , and I 'm like ... Mozart 's friend . No . I 'm like Butch Cassidy and Michael is like ... Mozart . " When Michael asks Pam if she had his magazine subscriptions changed to his new address , he mentions Small Businessman , American Way , Maxim , Cracked , and the fictitious Fine Arts <unk> Monthly . When touring his condo , Michael makes a Mr. Bill joke to the head of the condo association , whose name is Mr. Bill . The jokes are a reference to the clay figurine star of a parody of children 's shows that was part of Saturday Night Live . 
 Due to the nature of the episode , several explicit references are made to the Olympic Games . When Jim starts the Office Olympics by lighting the " Torch " , he hums " Olympic Fanfare and Theme " by John Williams , one of the themes for the actual Olympic games . When the games are finished , the employees play a recording of " The Star Spangled Banner " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 " Office Olympics " originally aired on NBC in the United States on October 4 , 2005 . The episode was viewed by 8 @.@ 3 million viewers and received a 3 @.@ 9 rating / 9 % share among adults between the ages of 18 and 49 . This means that it was seen by 3 @.@ 9 % of all 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ olds , and 9 % of all 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ olds watching television at the time of the broadcast . An encore presentation of the episode , on April 25 , 2006 , received 1 @.@ 8 rating / 6 % share and was viewed by over 4 @.@ 3 million viewers . 
 " Office Olympics " received mostly positive reviews . Michael Sciannamea of TV Squad wrote that " The Office has turned the corner into separating itself from the British version . " Sciannamea went on to say that " although Michael still garners the most attention , the other characters are beginning to break out . " His only criticism of the episode was that " Dwight is too creepy " , Sciannamea suggested that the writers " tone down his insanity a bit " . " Miss Alli " of Television Without Pity graded the episode with a " A- " . Erik Adams of The A.V. Club awarded the episode an " A " and called it the show 's " first truly classic episode " , due to the added " verve " of both plots . Adams praised the way the main story and Jim and Pam 's stories were intercut with each other , so that both could play off of each other ; he wrote that " Michael Schur ’ s a great writer , and Paul Feig knows how to let superb comedic performances flow from his actors , but the stitch @-@ up job here makes the two halves of the episodes complementary when they could ’ ve rocketed in opposite directions and ripped ' Office Olympics ' apart . " 
 Entertainment Weekly named Dwight 's line comparing his relationship with Michael to Mozart and Butch Cassidy as one of " TV 's funniest lines " for the week ending October 10 , 2005 . When Pam tries to get Angela to play the games with her fellow employees , Angela <unk> reveals that she plays a game called " Pam Pong " , where she counts how many times Jim goes to talk to Pam at her reception desk . Pop punk band Sweet Diss and the Comebacks later named one of their songs — a " [ Pam ] Beesly tribute " — after the game . 
 = Arizona State Route 72 = 
 State Route 72 ( SR 72 ) is a 36 @.@ 74 @-@ mile @-@ long ( 59 @.@ 13 km ) state highway in the U.S. state of Arizona . It runs from SR 95 near Parker southeast to U.S. Route 60 ( US 60 ) in Hope . Along its route , the highway is mostly parallel to the Arizona and California Railroad and runs through the community of Bouse in desert terrain . The route was established in 1930 from its current eastern terminus all the way to the California state line , but was truncated in 1965 . The route was completely paved by 1940 . 
 = = Route description = = 
 SR 72 begins at a T @-@ intersection at which SR 95 turns from north – south to east – west south of Parker . The highway heads eastward into desert terrain . Turning southeastward , the route enters the town of Bouse , running parallel to the Arizona and California Railroad . SR 72 enters Bouse as Broadway Avenue . As it runs through the community , the railroad to its northeast cuts most of the town in half , with a commercial areas both southwest and northeast of the roadway , but none along the railroad . Exiting Bouse , the highway enters an area dotted with farms spread among the desert , passing the communities of McVay and <unk> . SR 72 crosses over the Central Arizona Project aqueduct southeast of McVay . Near a junction with Vicksburg Road in Vicksburg , the railroad turns away from SR 72 as the roadway heads southeast . The route ends at a junction with US 60 near Hope . 
 The highway is maintained by the Arizona Department of Transportation ( ADOT ) , which is responsible for constructing and maintaining highways in the state . As part of this role , ADOT surveys volumes of traffic on their highways . These surveys are most often presented in the form of annual average daily traffic ( AADT ) , which is the number of vehicles that travel a road during an average day during the year . In 2009 , ADOT calculated that around 2 @,@ 600 vehicles used the road daily near Bouse , and around 2 @,@ 000 daily near Vicksburg . No part of the highway has been listed in the National Highway System , a system of roads in the United States important to the nation 's economy , defense , and mobility . 
 = = History = = 
 SR 72 was first established in 1930 from US 60 through Bouse to the California state boundary along the Colorado River at Parker . At the time , it was a dirt road . Between 1935 and 1939 , the section of the route from Parker to Bouse had been paved , as was a section slightly north of Vicksburg . The rest of the highway had been graveled at the time , and was paved the next year . Between 1951 and 1958 , SR 72 was removed from the SR 95 junction near the southern city limit of Parker to the California state line . This section was added as part of a northern extension of SR 95 . A section of the highway just east of the western terminus was widened in 2008 . A new traffic signal was installed at the SR 95 junction in 2010 . 
 = = Junction list = = 
 The entire route is in La Paz County . 
 = Tropical Storm Olga ( 2007 ) = 
 Tropical Storm Olga was the fifteenth named storm of the 2007 Atlantic hurricane season . In the second week of December , after the official end of the hurricane season , a low developed east of the northernmost Lesser Antilles . It slowly acquired tropical characteristics , and late on December 10 , the NHC declared it Subtropical Storm Olga while just north of Puerto Rico . It is the first post @-@ season storm since Tropical Storm Zeta in the 2005 season , making the 2007 season one of the few with activity both before and after the official bounds of the hurricane season . Olga was only one of a few out of season tropical cyclones to make landfall . The storm made landfall on December 11 on the eastern tip of the Dominican Republic . Later that evening , Olga transitioned into a tropical storm just after making landfall . Olga tracked over Hispaniola and emerged in the Caribbean Sea . Strong wind shear and dry air caused Olga to weaken into a remnant low early on December 13 . 
 The storm impacted many areas affected by Tropical Storm Noel a month earlier . In Puerto Rico , moderate rainfall caused one death . 37 fatalities were confirmed in the Dominican Republic , including twenty deaths due to the release of floodgates at a dam in Santiago Province . Two deaths were also reported in Haiti . Olga killed a total of 40 people throughout its existence . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 In the first week of December , a westward @-@ moving upper @-@ level low led to the formation of a broad surface trough well to the east of the northern Lesser Antilles . With a strong ridge to its northeast , the trough tracked slowly westward , producing scattered convection and some cyclonic turning . On December 8 convection began to persist in association with the trough and an upper @-@ level low . Early on December 9 , officials at the Tropical Prediction Center began classifying the system using the Hebert @-@ Poteat technique , and several tropical cyclone forecast models anticipated its development of tropical characteristics . The system , which consisted of a sharp trough with an area of gale force winds to its north , continued westward through an area of moderately warm sea surface temperatures . On December 10 a low @-@ level circulation developed within the system , though its convection had become disorganized and well @-@ removed from the center . Southerly wind shear left the structure asymmetric , and convection steadily increased closer to the center . With an upper @-@ level low situated just south of the center , the National Hurricane Center classified it as Subtropical Storm Olga at 0300 UTC on December 11 while located about 55 miles ( 85 km ) east of San Juan , Puerto Rico . 
 Upon being classified as a subtropical cyclone , Olga maintained well @-@ defined outflow , and located to the southeast of a strong ridge over the western Atlantic Ocean , the cyclone tracked west @-@ southwestward . The storm strengthened slightly while paralleling the north coast of Puerto Rico , and after an increase in convection near the center , Olga made landfall near Punta Cana , Dominican Republic at 1800 UTC on December 11 . A Hurricane Hunters flight into the storm reported a tighter wind gradient and peak winds of 60 mph ( 95 km / h ) , and at 0000 UTC on December 12 the National Hurricane Center reclassified Olga as a tropical cyclone while it was still inland . Convection rapidly weakened as the storm crossed central Hispaniola , and upon reaching the Caribbean Sea the system lacked the convection required for the classification of a tropical cyclone ; rainbands well to its northeast maintained stronger winds , though the center became ill @-@ defined with dry air and strong wind shear . Late on December 12 , convection increased slightly over the center , though by that time the cyclone weakened to tropical depression status . As significant convection failed to persist , the National Hurricane Center discontinued advisories on Olga earlier on December 13 while located about 80 miles ( 130 km ) northwest of Kingston . 
 Its remnants continued west @-@ northwestward with a clear low @-@ level circulation , producing scattered thunderstorms over Cuba and the Cayman Islands with its moisture extending northward into southern Florida . A small cluster of deep convection developed just east of the center , and the low @-@ level circulation remained well @-@ defined as it approached the coast of the Yucatán Peninsula . The remnants of Olga turned northward into the Gulf of Mexico as a cold front approached the center from the northwest . Late on December 16 and early on December 17 , the low intensified as it approached the west coast of Florida , with sustained winds of tropical storm force , and gusts to hurricane force , being reported at Clearwater Beach . Ultimately , the approaching cold front absorbed the low as it moved across the Florida peninsula . The cold front was associated with a powerful winter storm that affected much of Eastern America during that weekend and killed at least 25 across six US states and three Canadian provinces tapped Olga 's moisture , drawing it northeastward mainly offshore the East Coast . 
 = = Preparations = = 
 On December 10 , the Tropical Prediction Center issued a gale warning for waters north of the Lesser Antilles , Puerto Rico , and the Dominican Republic , in association with the precursor disturbance to Olga . Upon it being classified as a subtropical cyclone , the government of the Dominican Republic issued a tropical storm warning from Cabo Engaño along the north coast to its border with Haiti ; a tropical storm watch was also issued along the southern coastline to near Santo Domingo . Because winds were well to the north of its center , a tropical storm warning was not issued for Puerto Rico . Prior to it moving ashore , the government of Haiti issued a tropical storm warning for its northern coastline , and later a tropical storm warning was issued for the Turks and Caicos Islands , as well as the southeastern Bahamas . 
 The San Juan National Weather Service office issued a flood watch for all of Puerto Rico , including the islands of Culebra and Vieques . Extended periods of heavy rainfall also resulted in flash flood warnings for portions across the island . Ferry service between Fajardo and the islands of Culebra and Vieques was temporarily suspended during the passage of the storm . In the Dominican Republic , officials opened shelters in 15 provinces , with citizens in low @-@ lying areas recommended to stay elsewhere during the passage of the storm ; citizens in 22 communities were evacuated . 
 = = Impact = = 
 The cyclone dropped light to moderate precipitation across Puerto Rico , peaking at 11 @.@ 13 inches ( 283 mm ) near Ponce . The rainfall increased levels along several rivers across the island , including the Arecibo Big River which was reported at several feet above flood stage . Its passage left about 79 @,@ 000 people without power and 144 @,@ 000 without water . In the northern portion of the island , the rainfall caused a mudslides that buried an automobile , which killed its driver . 
 Heavy rainfall fell across the Dominican Republic , with isolated totals of 10 inches ( 250 mm ) expected . The rainfall caused flooding along the <unk> del Norte River , and initially there appeared to be a threat that the Tavera Dam along the river would fail , potentially killing thousands in Santiago Province . Officials instead opted to open all six floodgates at 0400 UTC on December 12 , which released about 1 @.@ 6 million gallons ( 6 @.@ 1 million liters ) of water into the river every second . The deluge created a 66 foot ( 20 m ) wave of water that caught many off guard due to the time of night and only about 15 minutes to prepare , according to eyewitnesses who criticized the decision ; the flooding killed at least 35 people and left homes in seven towns flooded . Two other deaths were reported elsewhere in the country , and more than 34 @,@ 000 people fled their homes due to the storm ; more than 7 @,@ 500 houses were damaged . Damage in the country was estimated at $ 1 @.@ 5 billion ( 2007 DOP , $ 45 million 2007 USD ) . In neighboring Haiti , two deaths were reported in the northern portion of the country . On December 11 , a station in the Turks and Caicos Islands recorded sustained winds of 36 mph ( 58 km / h ) . 
 While still moving through the western Caribbean sea , heavy rains fell along a trough in its northeast quadrant beginning on December 14 , with a total of 7 @.@ 08 inches / 179 @.@ 8 mm falling at Nettles Island , Florida . The remnant low intensified due to occasional convection forming near and northeast of the center as it approached the Sunshine State . Clearwater Beach recorded a pressure as low as 1002 mb as well as sustained winds reaching 45 mph ( 72 km / h ) , with gusts to 78 mph ( 126 km / h ) between 4 and 5 on the morning of December 16 . As a cold front approached , the low pressure area became ill @-@ defined and dissipated before reaching Florida 's Space Coast . 
 = Great Britain at the 2010 Winter Olympics = 
 The United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland competed as Great Britain in the 2010 Winter Olympics held in Vancouver , British Columbia , Canada . The United Kingdom was represented by the British Olympic Association ( BOA ) , and the team of selected athletes was officially known as Team GB . The team was made up of athletes from the whole United Kingdom including Northern Ireland , whose athletes may elect to hold Irish citizenship , allowing them to represent either Great Britain or Ireland . Additionally some British overseas territories compete separately from Britain in Olympic competition . 
 Great Britain sent a delegation of fifty athletes to compete in eleven sports and were led by Andy Hunt as Chef de Mission , but despite being set a target of three medals by UK Sport , the team won just one , Amy Williams ' gold in the women 's skeleton , and finished 19th in the medal table . 
 = = Medalists = = 
 The following British competitors won medals at the Games . In the discipline sections below , medalists ' names are in bold . All results are taken from the official Vancouver 2010 website . 
 = = Targets = = 
 UK Sport , the organisation responsible for distributing National Lottery funding to elite sport , set Team GB a target of winning three medals , of any colour , at the Vancouver Games ; two more than the single silver medal won in Turin by Shelley Rudman . If achieved this would have been the best performance by a British Winter Olympics team since 1936 when a gold , silver and bronze medal were won . The target was set following £ 6 @.@ 5 million of funding in the four years leading up to the Games . Whilst no particular events were targeted as potential sources of medals , the success of British athletes in the previous four years was taken into account when setting the target ; the men 's curling team and the two @-@ woman bobsleigh team , Nicola Minichiello and Gillian Cooke , won world championships , and in 2008 Kristan Bromley became the first man in the history of bob skeleton to win the World Championship , European Championship and World Cup in the same year . 
 The preparations of Britain 's skiers and snowboarders for the Games were hampered by the financial problems of the British Ski and Snowboard Federation ( BSSF ) , operating under the name Snowsport GB , which was responsible for administering the lottery funds received through UK Sport . In August 2009 the <unk> was £ 300 @,@ 000 in debt and a number of British skiers , including medal hope Chemmy Alcott , were forced to fund their own summer training camps in New Zealand and Chile . On 5 February 2010 , just a week before the opening ceremony of the Games , it was announced that BSSF had entered administration after the Royal Bank of Scotland withdrew the organisation 's overdraft facility . This put the participation of British skiers in doubt , as a governing body is a necessity for Olympic competition , but the British Olympic Association ( BOA ) revived a subsidiary company to take over . The financial difficulties suffered by Alcott , partly as a result of the BSSF collapse , led her to consider her future in the sport at the end of the Games . 
 On 25 February , having finished 19th overall in the medal table , and 14th out of European countries , head of Team GB Andy Hunt said that despite not reaching UK Sport 's target the team " have achieved what we set out to do " by bettering their performance in the 2006 Games . This was in reference to Amy Williams ' gold in the women 's skeleton , which was the sole medal won by the team . 
 Steve Redgrave , vice @-@ president of the BOA , added " I don 't think there is a sense of disappointment – I think there is a sense of celebration of winning that gold medal . I would take one gold medal over five bronze medals any day . " Hunt also announced that the BOA would conduct a strategic review of funding and may support the channeling of more funds towards realistic medal hopes . 
 = = Alpine skiing = = 
 Four British athletes competed in alpine skiing events at the Games . Andy Noble and David <unk> qualified for two events each whilst Ed Drake and Chemmy Alcott , taking part in her third Olympics , qualified for all five variants . The preparations of Britain 's skiers were disrupted by the collapse of Snowsport GB , but all athletes were able to enter the games after the intervention of the British Olympic Association . Alcott , considered a realistic contender for a medal , achieved the squad 's best finish coming eleventh in the women 's combined . 
 Men 
 Women 
 = = Biathlon = = 
 Britain sent a single biathlete to the Games ; Lee @-@ Steve Jackson was the first British competitor to qualify for the Olympic pursuit and finished in 56th position . He also took part in the individual and sprint events . 
 = = Bobsleigh = = 
 Britain sent eight athletes to compete in the bobsleigh events with entries in the two @-@ man , four @-@ man and two @-@ woman competitions . Allyn Condon competed in the four @-@ man event having previously taken part in the 4 x 100 m relay at the 2000 Summer Olympics in Sydney ; the first Briton to take part in both a Summer and Winter Games since Marcus Adam . In the two @-@ man the British pairing of Dan Money and John Jackson suffered a crash on their first run ; they escaped serious injury , but were disqualified for failing to complete the run . 
