 Wail al @-@ Shehri and his younger brother Waleed were from Khamis Mushait in the Asir province , which is an impoverished area in southwestern Saudi Arabia , along the Yemeni border . Shehri was born in <unk> , and grew up in the Um <unk> neighborhood in Khamis Mushait . He had ten brothers and one sister . Several of Shehri 's brothers joined the Saudi military , while his uncle may have been a major in the army and director of logistics . Shehri 's father , Mohammed Ali <unk> Al Shehri , worked as a car dealer . On weekends , the family often spent time together at the Red Sea . The family strictly adhered to the Wahabi school of Islam , which forbids many elements of modernity . As such , the Shehri family did not have satellite television or Internet , nor did his parents permit music or contact with girls . Some of Wail al @-@ Shehri 's elder brothers had visited the United States and could speak English ; however , Wail knew little English . 
 During high school and college , Shehri was deeply religious and attended Al @-@ <unk> Mosque , which his family had built as the local mosque . Shehri also frequented government @-@ supported religious camps in Saudi Arabia . At this time , there were strong religious feelings in Saudi Arabia , especially in the Asir region . Many young people in the region idolized Osama bin Laden , who had family ties to the area . Wail 's father was a friend of Bin Laden 's father , Mohammed bin Awad bin Laden . Ahmed al @-@ Nami and Saeed al @-@ Ghamdi , who were both hijackers on United Airlines Flight 93 , came from the same area in Saudi Arabia as the Shehri family . 
 After graduating from <unk> teachers college in 1999 , Wail al @-@ Shehri took a job as an elementary school physical education teacher at the Khamis Mushait airbase . Five months into the job , Shehri took leave due to mental illness and depression . Rather than conventional therapy , Wail sought consultation with Muslim clerics , and hoped that a visit to Medina would help . His treatment involved verses from the Qur 'an read to him by a sheikh . He traveled to Medina together with Waleed . After the September 11 attacks , others recalled seeing the Shehri brothers in Medina . 
 = = Afghanistan = = 
 Wail and Waleed al @-@ Shehri disappeared after going to Medina , calling their father just once ; in the conversation , the brothers were vague about when they would return . Both had expressed interest in joining the jihad in Chechnya , though may have been diverted to Afghanistan . Before disappearing , the Shehri brothers went to Al @-@ <unk> Mosque to swear an oath and commitment to jihad , as did Ahmed al @-@ Nami and Saeed al @-@ Ghamdi . Wail presided over the ceremony , dubbing himself Abu <unk> al @-@ <unk> after one of Muhammad 's companions . 
 In March 2000 , he left for Pakistan with Waleed and Ahmed al @-@ Nami ; later , they went on to Afghanistan . Wail al @-@ Shehri followed the standard path for new al @-@ Qaeda recruits in Afghanistan , spending time in the <unk> training camp and then Al Farouq training camp near Kandahar . Details on how the non @-@ pilot ( " muscle " ) hijackers were chosen for the September 11 attacks are vague , though the hijackers appear to have been selected by senior al @-@ Qaeda leaders in 2000 from the thousands of recruits at training camps in Afghanistan . The most capable and motivated volunteers were at al @-@ Farouq , and Saudi citizens were good candidates , since it would be easy for them to obtain visas to travel to the United States . Central Intelligence Agency ( CIA ) director George Tenet later said that the muscle hijackers were probably told little about their mission in the United States . 
 Once Wail and the other muscle hijackers completed their training in Afghanistan , they received $ 2 @,@ 000 so they could return to Saudi Arabia to obtain new passports and visas . The Shehri brothers may have been assisted by a relative who worked in the Saudi passport office . Wail and Waleed al @-@ Shehri received passports on October 3 , 2000 , and then obtained United States visas on October 24 . On his visa application , Wail al @-@ Shehri provided vague information , stating his employer / school as " South City " , and his destination as " <unk> " . Wail indicated his occupation as " teacher " , and that he would be traveling with his brother on a four @-@ to @-@ six month vacation , which would be paid for with Wail 's teacher salary . Although he would not be working while on vacation , consular officials nonetheless did not question if the Shehri brothers had the financial means to support themselves while in the United States . 
 In late 2000 , Wail traveled to the United Arab Emirates , where he purchased traveler 's checks , presumed to have been paid for by Mustafa Ahmed al @-@ <unk> . Five other hijackers passed through the United Arab Emirates and purchased traveler 's checks , including Majed Moqed , Saeed al @-@ Ghamdi , Hamza al @-@ Ghamdi , Ahmed al @-@ Haznawi and Ahmed al @-@ Nami . The 9 / 11 Commission believes that three of the future muscle hijackers , including Wail and Waleed , traveled in a group from Saudi Arabia to Beirut and then onward to Iran where they could travel through to Afghanistan without getting their passports stamped . An associate of a senior Hezbollah operative is thought to have been on the same flight , although this may have been a coincidence . 
 Wail al @-@ Shehri appeared together with hijackers Ahmed al @-@ Nami , Hamza al @-@ Ghamdi , and Ahmed al @-@ Ghamdi on a video recorded in March 2001 , and aired on Al Jazeera in September 2002 . Shehri was seen studying maps and flight manuals , but he did not speak in the video ; it also included a segment of Abdulaziz al @-@ Omari reading his last will and testament . While in Afghanistan , another video was recorded that showed Shehri reading his last will and testament . This video was released on September 7 , 2006 . 
 = = United States = = 
 On June 5 , 2001 , Wail obtained an International Driving Permit , which was issued in Sharjah in the United Arab Emirates . Wail al @-@ Shehri arrived together with fellow al @-@ Qaeda member Ahmed al @-@ Haznawi at Miami International Airport , via London , from Dubai on June 8 . Both were admitted as tourists for six months . Shehri opened a bank account at SunTrust Bank in Florida on June 18 , with a deposit of $ 8 @,@ 000 that came from American Express traveler 's cheques purchased on June 7 in the United Arab Emirates . 
 Shehri moved into the Homing Inn , a budget motel in Boynton Beach , on June 21 , 2001 , sharing a room with his brother Waleed , and Satam al @-@ Suqami . Wail and Suqami both used this hotel as their address when they received Florida state non @-@ driver identifications on July 3 . Shehri checked into the Panther Motel & Apartments , in Deerfield Beach , with his brother and Suqami on August 2 , staying there until August 10 . While in Florida , Wail was a member of the World Gym in Boynton Beach , where he trained with Waleed and Suqami . During the summer of 2001 , Wail regularly used computers at the Delray Beach Public Library . 
 On August 28 , 2001 , Wail and Waleed al @-@ Shehri made reservations on American Airlines Flight 11 , using the Mail Boxes Etc. in Hollywood , Florida as their address . The Shehri brothers contacted American Airlines on September 3 by telephone to change their first @-@ class seat assignments for American Airlines Flight 11 , selecting seats on the side of the aircraft that offered a direct view of the cockpit . Wail and Waleed al @-@ Shehri left Florida for Boston on September 5 , traveling together on Delta Air Lines Flight <unk> . 
 Wail checked in together with Waleed at the Park Inn Hotel in Chestnut Hill , Massachusetts on September 5 , 2001 , staying in room 432 . While staying at the Park Inn , Wail and Waleed al @-@ Shehri may have called a prostitute . Wail al @-@ Shehri accompanied his brother on September 9 to the <unk> at Logan International Airport , where Waleed attempted to wire $ 5 @,@ 000 to the United Arab Emirates . Waleed had insufficient documentation , so Wail and Waleed returned the next day to complete the transaction . Mustafa Muhammad Ahmad received the funds on September 11 at Al @-@ Ansari Exchange in Sharjah . <unk> Abdulaziz al @-@ Omari possibly spent a night at the Park Inn before leaving with Mohamed Atta for Portland , Maine on September 10 . When Wail and Waleed al @-@ Shehri checked out on September 11 , they left a sheet of instructions for flying a jet behind in their hotel room . 
 = = Attacks = = 
 Wail al @-@ Shehri , his brother Waleed , and Satam al @-@ Suqami arrived together at Logan Airport at 06 : 45 on the morning of September 11 , 2001 . Upon check @-@ in , all three men were selected by the Computer Assisted Passenger Prescreening System ( CAPPS ) for further screening of their checked baggage . As the CAPPS was only for luggage , the three hijackers did not undergo any extra scrutiny at the passenger security checkpoint . One of the five Globe Aviation security screeners on @-@ duty later reported that either Wail or Waleed had been using a crutch when they passed through security , and that the crutch had been X @-@ rayed as per regulations . 
 By 07 : 40 , all five hijackers were aboard the flight , which was scheduled to depart at 07 : 45 . Wail and Waleed al @-@ Shehri sat together in first class in seats 2A and 2B respectively . The aircraft taxied away from Gate 26 , and departed Logan International Airport at 07 : 59 , following a 14 @-@ minute delay . Flight 11 was hijacked at approximately 08 : 14 , which is when the pilot stopped responding to air traffic control . Once the hijacking began , the brothers are suspected of having stabbed two flight attendants . At 08 : 46 : 40 , Mohamed Atta deliberately crashed Flight 11 into the northern facade of the North Tower ( Tower 1 ) of the World Trade Center . The immediate damage destroyed any means of escape from above the impact zone , trapping 1 @,@ 344 people . The North Tower collapsed at 10 : 28 , after burning for 102 minutes . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Waleed al @-@ Shehri was reported to have been found alive by a BBC News article on September 23 , 2001 , and other news reports in the aftermath of the September 11 attacks . Reports said that the Shehri brothers were the sons of a Saudi diplomat stationed in New Delhi , Ahmed al @-@ Shehri . The diplomat 's son was trained as a pilot at Embry @-@ Riddle Aeronautical University in Daytona Beach , Florida , and was working as a pilot for Saudi Arabian Airlines . At the time of the attacks , he was in Morocco for a training program . There were also reports that Wail al @-@ Shehri was a trained pilot . In the aftermath of the September 11 attacks , Saudi officials suggested that Wail and Waleed al @-@ Shehri were victims of identity theft , but the diplomat 's son was the victim of mistaken identity . 
 Jamal Khashoggi , of Al @-@ Watan and <unk> in Saudi Arabia , spoke with Muhammad Ali al @-@ Shehri in Khamis Mushait , who said his sons Wail and Waleed had been missing for months . Wail al @-@ Shehri 's father denied reports that Wail had an aeronautics degree , as some news reports said , " My son Wail was 25 years old and had a BA in physical education from the <unk> Teacher ’ s College . He was mentally ill and had gone to numerous clerics for assistance in overcoming this instability . He had asked the school , where he taught , for a 6 @-@ month leave to go to Madinah . " His father also told reporters that he dreaded having to believe that Wail and Waleed were involved in the September 11 attacks , " If that turns out to be the truth , then I 'll never , never accept it from them . I 'll never forgive them for that . " Family members said that Wail and Waleed became very religious in the months before they disappeared , had expressed interest in going to Chechnya , and hoped for martyrdom . In a report entitled " A Saudi Apology " for Dateline NBC aired on August 25 , 2002 , John <unk> traveled to Asir , where he interviewed Shehri 's brother , Salah , who agreed that Wail and Waleed were deceased . Salah described them as not very religious , and suggested they had been brainwashed . 
 Saudi officials later stated that the names of the hijackers were in fact correct , and that 15 of the 19 hijackers were Saudi . In response to 9 / 11 conspiracy theories surrounding its original news story suggesting hijackers were still alive , the BBC issued a response in 2006 , saying that later reports on the hijackers superseded the original story . The BBC also explained that confusion arose with the Arabic names that were common . 
 = Red Headed Stranger = 
 Red Headed Stranger is a 1975 album by American outlaw country singer Willie Nelson . After the wide success of his recordings with Atlantic Records , coupled with the negotiating skills of his manager , Neil Reshen , Nelson signed a contract with Columbia Records , a label that gave him total creative control over his works . The concept for the album was inspired by the " Tale of the Red Headed Stranger " , a song that Nelson used to play as a disk jockey on his program in Fort Worth , Texas . After signing with Columbia he decided to record the song , and arranged the details during his return to Austin , Texas , from a trip to Colorado . It was recorded at low cost at Autumn Sound Studios in Garland , Texas . The songs featured sparse arrangements , largely limited to Nelson 's guitar , piano and drums . Nelson presented the finished material to Columbia executives , who were dubious about releasing an album that they at first thought was a demo . However , Nelson had creative control , so no further production was added . 
 A concept album , Red Headed Stranger is about a fugitive on the run from the law after killing his wife and her lover . The content consists of songs with brief poetic lyrics and arrangements of older material such as Fred Rose 's " Blue Eyes Crying in the Rain " , Wolfe Gilbert 's " Down Yonder " and Juventino Rosas ' " O 'er the Waves " . Despite Columbia 's doubts and the limited instrumentation , Red Headed Stranger was a blockbuster among country music and mainstream audiences . It was certified multi @-@ platinum , and made Nelson one of the most recognized artists in country music . The cover of " Blue Eyes Crying in the Rain " , released as a single previous to the album full release became Nelson 's first number one hit . The title of the album would become a lasting nickname for Nelson . It was ranked # 183 on Rolling Stone 's list of the 500 Greatest Albums of All Time , and number one on CMT 's 40 Greatest Albums in Country Music . In 2010 it was inducted to the National Recording Registry . 
 In 1986 Nelson starred as the Red Headed Stranger in a movie of the same name , based on the story of the album . The album has had a strong cultural impact ; the song " Time of the Preacher " has been used often in the series Edge of Darkness , and its lyrics were used as well in the first issue of the comic Preacher . 
 = = Background and recording = = 
 In 1973 Nelson signed a contract for US $ 25 @,@ 000 per year with Atlantic Records , the first country artist signed by the label . His first album with Atlantic was the critically acclaimed Shotgun Willie , which was followed by one of the first concept albums in country music , Phases and Stages . Due to the success of these recordings , Nelson signed with Columbia Records , and was given complete creative control . 
 During his return to Austin after a ski trip in Colorado , Nelson was inspired by his then @-@ wife , Connie Koepke , to write a western concept album . Koepke suggested the inclusion of Arthur " Guitar Boogie " Smith 's " Tale of the Red Headed Stranger " , which Nelson sang during his radio shows on KCNC in Fort Worth and previously , to his children at bedtime . Nelson decided to write a complete story that included details of events prior to the ones described in the song . As he spontaneously composed the songs , Koepke wrote down the lyrics . With his original writings , Nelson included on the story , Fred Rose 's " Blue Eyes Crying in the Rain " , Wolfe Gilbert 's " Down Yonder " , Juventino Rosas ' " O 'er the Waves " , Hank Cochran 's " Can I Sleep in Your Arms ? " , Eddy Arnold 's " I Couldn 't Believe it Was True " , and Billy Callery 's " Hands on the Wheel " . When he arrived in Austin , Nelson recorded a demo of the songs on a tape recorder accompanied with his guitar at his ranch in Fitzhugh Road . 
 Nelson started to look for a studio in Texas to record his new material , to avoid the modifications that they did to his recordings in his previous sessions . Engineer Phil York , who was hired free @-@ lance by the recently opened Autumn Sound Studios in Garland , Texas , heard about his need . York , an acquaintance of Nelson 's harmonicist Mickey Raphael , offered Nelson a day of free recording to boost the popularity of the studio . Nelson and his band went to the trial session during January , and recorded five songs . Later , <unk> called back York , announcing that Nelson would record the entire album there . After hearing the tapes by Nelson , the band started to improvise to the song " Blue Eyes Crying in the Rain " . Disliking the result , Nelson decided to strip down the instrumentation . Nelson also instructed York to undo the equalization he performed on the tracks , remarking that it was the method his producers used in Nashville . The recording took five days , with an additional day for the mixing , that summed up to US $ 4 @,@ 000 in studio <unk> <unk> costs took the total to US $ 20 @,@ 000 . 
 Nelson featured arrangements of acoustic guitar , accompanied by piano , played by his sister , Bobbie , as well complementary arrangements of drums , harmonica and mandolin . The sparsely instrumented acoustic arrangements caused Columbia directors to doubt the wisdom of releasing the album as presented , feeling it was under @-@ produced and no more than a demo . However , Nelson had complete creative control , and it was released without any further modifications . 
 = = Concept = = 
 The story begins with " Time of the Preacher " , where the character evokes his love for his wife , whom he suspects is unfaithful . In the following song , " I Couldn 't Believe It Was True " , the infidelity is revealed . This leads to a short version of " Time of the Preacher , " wherein the singer ends with the line " Now the lesson is over , and the killing 's begun " . The reaction of the husband is depicted by Nelson in a medley of " Blue Rock , Montana " and " Red Headed Stranger " . The first song describes the double murder of the unfaithful woman and her lover by the Stranger , who states " And they died with a smile on their faces . " This leads to the second song of the medley , which describes the grief of the Stranger . This section is followed by Nelson 's cover of the 1947 Fred Rose , song " Blue Eyes Crying in the Rain " , where the fugitive laments the loss of his wife . In " Red Headed Stranger , " the protagonist commits a subsequent murder — he kills a woman he believes is stealing his horse . The horse , to which he undoubtedly holds a sentimental attachment , had belonged to the Stranger 's wife . 
 The story continues with the Stranger traveling south . In the song " Denver , " the character falls in love with a woman he meets in a bar in town . One of the lines from " Blue Rock Montana " is repeated , with a variation : " And they danced with a smile on their faces " . The following song , " Can I Sleep in Your Arms ? " , shows the desire of the Stranger for redemption and love . Next is " Remember Me " , where he announces that his vows to his deceased wife are broken and he is free to love . The story ends with " Hands on the Wheel " , which depicts the Stranger as an old man who is accompanied by a child , presumably his grandson , and his new love . The song marks the end of the sorrow of the Stranger , and his redemption years later . The album ends with the instrumental song " Bandera " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Chart performance and critical reception = = = 
 Red Headed Stranger reached number one on the Billboard chart for Top Country Albums , and number 28 during a 43 @-@ week stay in the Top LPs & Tapes chart . On March 11 , 1976 , it was certified gold by the Recording Industry Association of America , and on November 21 , 1986 , it was certified double @-@ platinum . 
 Rolling Stone writer Paul Nelson wrote : " Red Headed Stranger is extraordinarily ambitious , cool , tightly controlled .... Hemingway , who perfected an art of sharp outlines and clipped phrases , used to say that the full power of his composition was accessible only between the lines ; and Nelson , on this LP , ties precise , evocative lyrics to not quite remembered , never really forgotten folk melodies to create a similar effect , haunting yet utterly unsentimental . That he did not write much of the material makes his accomplishment no less singular . " Meanwhile , critic Robert Christgau wrote , " Some of the individual pieces are quite nice , but the gestalt is the concept album at its most counterproductive — the lyrics render the nostalgic instrumental parts unnecessarily ironic and lose additional charm in narrative context . " 
 Music critic Chet Flippo wrote in a Texas Monthly article entitled " Mathew , Mark , Luke and Willie : Willie Nelson 's latest album is more than a good country music ; it 's almost Gospel " : " The difference between Nelson 's Red Headed Stranger and any current C & W album , and especially what passes for a soundtrack for Nashville , is astounding . What Nelson has done is simply unclassifiable ; it is the only record I have heard that strikes me as otherworldly . Red Headed Stranger conjures up such strange emotions and works on so many levels that listening to it becomes totally obsessing " . 
 Billboard described the album as " lots of instrumental work , with particularly fine piano by Bobbie Nelson , and the usual highly stylized Willie Nelson vocals " . Mother Jones wrote : " Texans have known for 15 years what Red Headed Stranger finally revealed to the world – that Nelson is simply too brilliant a songwriter , interpreter , and singer – just too damn universal – to be defined as merely a country artist " . 
 In 1996 CMJ New Music Monthly wrote : " His Red Headed Stranger was the Sgt. Pepper 's of country music , the first record to follow a coherent theme instead of merely compiling radio singles " . AllMusic described Red Headed Stranger as " really elusive , as the themes get a little muddled and the tunes themselves are a bit bare . It 's undoubtedly distinctive – and it sounds more distinctive with each passing year – but it 's strictly an intellectual triumph and , after a pair of albums that were musically and intellectually sound , it 's a bit of a letdown , no matter how successful it was " . In 2003 it was included among the top 1 @,@ 000 albums of Zagat Survey magazine , and was rated five stars out of five . The magazine wrote , " Supporters ( of the album ) spread the gospel that it 's just a quintessential outlaw recording , but perhaps the greatest country album ever with a spare style that changed the way C & W was played " . 
 Sputnikmusic wrote : " The Red Headed Stranger is simple and bare . Following the story of a preacher man that kills his cheating wife and her lover , ol ' Willie spins the tale with a laid back nonchalance that just seems to ooze out of him , his aching chords and somber melodies encapsulating the futility and pain of his character 's situation [ ... ] The Red Headed Stranger is timeless . Willie Nelson 's captivating story telling , and the minimalist majesty of his music fills a well worn grove in the hearts of those that enjoy the folk roots of the United States . " 
 Red Headed Stranger 's critical success cemented Nelson 's outlaw image , and made him one of the most recognized artists in country music . The title of the album became a long lasting nickname for him . The cover of Fred Rose 's 1945 song " Blue Eyes Crying in the Rain " , that had been released as a single previous to the album , became his first number one hit as a singer . In 2004 the album was ranked at number 184 on Rolling Stone 's list of the 500 Greatest Albums of All Time , and number one in CMT 's 40 Greatest Albums in Country Music in 2006 . In 2009 it was adopted into the National Recording Registry because Red Headed Stranger is " culturally , historically , or aesthetically important , and / or informs or reflects life in the United States . " 
 = = = Movie = = = 
 At an appearance at the Armadillo World Headquarters , a music venue in Austin , Texas , Nelson met publisher and screenwriter William D. Wittliff . Because of the success of the album , Wittliff decided to write a script for Nelson based on the story of the Red Headed Stranger . In 1979 Wittliff finished a draft of the project , which was turned over to Universal Studios . The studio budgeted the film at $ 14 million and sent the script to Robert Redford , who turned it down . The movie project was tabled , and Wittliff and Nelson had to buy the script back from Universal . The script then went to HBO , who assigned the project a budget of $ 5 million , but this project was not completed either . Finally , Nelson and Wittliff decided to finance the film themselves . Nelson portrayed the role of the stranger , and the movie was released in 1986 . 
 = = = In popular culture = = = 
 The first track , " Time of the Preacher " , was used in Bob Dylan 's 1978 film Renaldo and Clara and episodes of the 1985 television drama Edge of Darkness . The lyrics to " Time of the Preacher " were used in the opening pages of the first issue of the Vertigo comic book Preacher , with the song being used in the opening of the premiere of the TV series based on the comic . 
 The complete album was performed and recorded by Carla <unk> in 2003 . The Red Headed Stranger included a guest appearance by Nelson . A first season episode of the dramedy series Monk is entitled " Mr. Monk and the Red @-@ Headed Stranger , " and guest @-@ stars Willie Nelson . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = = = Original release = = = 
 = = = Reissue ( 2000 ) = = = 
 The album was reissued by Columbia / Legacy in 2000 . The new issue features remastered sound , as well as the inclusion of previously unreleased songs . 
 = = Credits = = 
 = = Chart positions = = 
 = = = Album = = = 
 = = = Singles = = = 
 = Flag of West Virginia = 
 The flag of West Virginia is the official flag of the U.S. state of West Virginia and was officially adopted by the West Virginia Legislature on March 7 , 1863 . The present flag consists of a pure white field bordered by a blue stripe with the coat of arms of West Virginia in the center , wreathed by Rhododendron maximum and topped by an unfurled red ribbon reading " State of West Virginia . " 
 The first flags to represent West Virginia following statehood were battle flags utilized by West Virginia regiments during the American Civil War . West Virginia 's first official state flag was adopted in 1905 , based upon the flag designed and used by the West Virginia State Commission at the Louisiana Purchase Exposition in 1904 . This flag was altered in 1907 for the Jamestown Exposition and featured the coat of arms on the obverse and a sprig of Rhododendron maximum on the reverse . In order to reproduce the flag more inexpensively , the West Virginia Legislature ratified the current flag with the state 's coat of arms integrated with the rhododendron , which appears on both the obverse and the reverse . The " Pledge of Allegiance to the West Virginia State Flag " was unanimously adopted by the office of the Secretary of State of West Virginia in 1977 . 
 = = Design = = 
 The current state flag of West Virginia consists of a pure white field bordered on four sides by a stripe of blue . The white of the field symbolizes purity , while the blue border represents the Union . The center of the state flag is emblazoned with the state 's Coat of Arms , a stylized version of the Great Seal of West Virginia . The lower half of the state flag is wreathed by two tethered swags of Rhododendron maximum , the state flower of West Virginia . Across the top of the state flag is an unfurled red ribbon with the constitutional designation " State of West Virginia " , and across the bottom of the state flag is a tied red ribbon with the state 's Latin motto Montani Semper Liberi ( English : " mountaineers are always free " ) . 
 The state 's coat of arms in the center of the flag symbolizes the principal pursuits and resources of West Virginia . In the center is an ivy @-@ draped boulder that has been inscribed " June 20 , 1863 , " the date of West Virginia 's admission to the Union as a state . In front of the boulder lie two crossed hunting rifles and a Phrygian cap ( or " Cap of Liberty " ) to illustrate the importance of the state 's fight for liberty . Two men , a farmer and a miner , stand on either side of the boulder and represent agriculture and industry . The farmer stands on the left with an ax and plow before a <unk> . The miner stands on the right with a <unk> and , behind him , an anvil and sledge hammer . 
 The state flag 's proportions are identical to those of the flag of the United States . When utilized for parade purposes , all but the staff side of the state flag are to be trimmed with gold fringe . When used concurrently with the flag of the United States during ceremonial occasions , the state flag is trimmed and mounted like the United States flag with regard to fringe , cord , tassels , and mounting . 
 = = History = = 
 Prior to the adoption of the current state flag of West Virginia , the state had been represented by a number of flags since attaining statehood in 1863 , all of which proved impractical . The first West Virginia Legislature commissioned Joseph H. Diss Debar of Doddridge County to design the Great Seal of West Virginia in 1863 . On September 26 , 1863 , the West Virginia Legislature officially adopted the seal designed by Diss Debar , a stylized version of which was also designated the state 's coat of arms . Despite the adoption of an official seal , the state did not decide upon an official state flag until 1905 . 
 = = = American Civil War = = = 
 Prior to West Virginia 's separation from Virginia on June 20 , 1863 , pro @-@ Union supporters in western Virginia created unique flags to show their support for the Union cause . In January 1861 , the residents of Kingwood erected a flagpole measuring about 105 feet ( 32 m ) in height , and on it they hoisted a handmade streamer with the word " UNION " prior to Virginia 's secession . During the war , western Virginia regiments in the Union Army carried flags handmade by supportive women , as was the case with the Fifth Regiment Virginia Volunteer Infantry who carried a flag bearing the legend " 5th Va . Regiment " in 1861 . 
 In January 1864 , the West Virginia Legislature approved a flag for the Fourth Regiment West Virginia Volunteer Infantry to acknowledge the regiment 's battles at Charleston , Vicksburg , Jackson , and Missionary Ridge , all four of which were listed on the flag . This was the first among many battle flags to represent West Virginia after statehood which were utilized by soldiers of West Virginia regiments throughout the war . State battle flags were presented to each of West Virginia 's Union regiments during the course of the war . These early state flags were squares of silk cloth measuring 6 feet ( 1 @.@ 8 m ) , and were dark blue and trimmed with golden fringe . The obverse side of these flags were painted with the state 's newly minted seal within an oval , along with the name of the respective West Virginia regiment and the names and dates of the battles in which they had participated . On the reverse side , the United States national emblem was painted and consisted of a bald eagle with its wings outstretched , clutching a bundle of 13 arrows in its right talon and an olive branch in its left , and a tricolor shield placed across its breast . In its beak , the eagle clutched a scroll with the national Latin motto E pluribus unum ( English : " Out of Many , One " ) . Following the conclusion of the American Civil War , the state of West Virginia had no official flag , and the matter was not taken up until the early 20th century . 
 = = = 1905 flag = = = 
 The need for an official state flag arose in 1904 when the West Virginia State Commission to the Louisiana Purchase Exposition in St. Louis reported that the state required a flag or ensign to represent and distinguish itself among the other U.S. states at the exposition . In lieu of an official state flag , the commission adopted and used a state flag of its own design at the West Virginia building at the exposition , which was a " sprig of mountain laurel upon an immaculate white field with a pale blue border " . 
 In its report to the West Virginia Legislature , the West Virginia State Commission recommended the adoption of their flag design as the official state flag . On February 24 , 1905 , the West Virginia Legislature ratified the commission 's flag design following its passage of Joint Resolution Number 16 during the gubernatorial administration of Albert B. White . The legislature adopted the commission 's flag design , with the addition of a fringe or border of carmine red . The state flag was approved by the legislature to be employed on occasions where a special display of the state 's individuality was necessary or regarded as appropriate . According to the 1905 joint resolution : 
 Said state flag shall be in length and breadth in the proportion of nine to thirteen , this being the same as the flag of the great American Republic of which West Virginia forms a part ; the field thereof shall be pure white , upon the center of which shall be a sprig of the rhododendron maximum or " big laurel , " having flowers and leaves ; and on the reverse side shall be the state coat @-@ of @-@ arms and the motto ; the field of pure white shall be bordered by a band or strip of blue , and this in turn shall be bordered by a strip of fringe of carmine red ; and said flag shall be regarded and used as the West Virginia state flag on all occasions where a special display of the state 's individuality shall become necessary , or be regarded as appropriate . 
 Following its formal adoption by the legislature , schools and other institutions throughout West Virginia began flying the new state flag . The teachers and students at the schools in <unk> purchased the new state flag in June 1906 , which measured 5 @.@ 5 feet ( 1 @.@ 7 m ) in length , and used it along with the United States flag for salutes and patriotic exercises . 
 = = = 1907 flag = = = 
 By 1907 , the West Virginia Legislature found the 1905 state flag design to be completely unfeasible due to the lettering on one side reading toward the staff , and the differing colors on each respective side showing through the opposite side of the flag 's white field of cloth . The state legislature found that this destroyed " the distinctive features of the banner and leaving the state without a prescribed official flag " . The West Virginia Legislature sought to remedy the state flag 's design flaws in 1907 so that the state could be properly represented at the Jamestown Exposition in Norfolk . On February 25 , 1907 , during the administration of Governor William M. O. Dawson , the West Virginia Legislature passed Joint Resolution 2 , which amended the flag by removing the seal and motto from the reverse side and changing the color of the bordering fringe from carmine red to old gold . Instead of the seal and motto , the reverse of the flag was changed to consist of " a spring or sprig of the rhododendron maximum " . According to the 1907 joint resolution : 
 Said state flag shall be in length and breadth in proportion the same as the flag of the great American Republic of which West Virginia forms a part ; the field thereof shall be pure white , upon the center of which on the observe side shall be the great seal or coat of arms of the state , beneath which shall appear the legend " State of West Virginia , " in a scroll ; on the reverse side shall appear a sprig or sprigs of the rhododendron maximum , or big laurel , our state flower , having blossoms and leaves ; the field of pure white shall be bordered by a band or strip of blue , and this in turn shall be bordered by a strip or fringe of old gold ; and said flag shall be regarded and used as the West Virginia state flag on all occasions where a special display of the state 's individuality shall become necessary , or be regarded as appropriate . 
 = = = 1929 flag = = = 
 The flag design ratified in 1907 remained the state 's official flag until 1929 . The state of West Virginia sought a flag design that could be produced inexpensively so that the state flag could be mass @-@ produced for the state 's public schools . The 1907 flag proved to be more costly to reproduce due to the two different symbols on each side of the banner , the state 's coat of arms on the obverse and the state 's flower on the reverse . The West Virginia Legislature decided the state flag should be stamped with a design that would integrate both the coat of arms and the state flower on both sides . The design of the present state flag was officially adopted by the West Virginia Legislature on March 7 , 1929 , by West Virginia Senate Joint Resolution Number 18 . According to the joint resolution : 
 The proportions of the flag of the State of West Virginia shall be the same as those of the United States ensign ; the field shall be pure white , upon the center of which shall be emblazoned in proper colors , the coat @-@ of arms of the State of West Virginia upon which appears the date of the admission of the State into the Union , also with the motto , ' Montani Semper Liberi ' ( Mountaineers Are Always Free ) . Above the coat @-@ of @-@ arms of the State of West Virginia there shall be a ribbon lettered , ' State of West Virginia , ' and arranged appropriately around the lower part of the coat @-@ of @-@ arms of the State of West Virginia a wreath of Rhododendron maximum in proper colors . The field of pure white shall be bordered by a strip of blue on four sides . The flag of the State of West Virginia when used for parade purposes shall be trimmed with gold colored fringe on three sides and when used on ceremonial occasions with the United States ensign , shall be trimmed and mounted in similar fashion to the United States flag as regards fringe , cord , tassels , and mounting . 
 In 2001 , the North American Vexillological Association surveyed its members and other flag enthusiasts on the designs of the 72 U.S. state , U.S. territorial , and Canadian provincial flags . Members ranked the West Virginia state flag at 51 out of the 72 flags surveyed . U.S. state flags with state seals on solid @-@ color fields , like the West Virginia state flag , proved unpopular in the survey . 
 = = Usage and protocol = = 
 The West Virginia Legislature has passed a series of laws in the West Virginia Code governing the usage of the West Virginia state flag . The state flag is not permitted to be placed above , or if on the same level , to the right of the United States flag . Both the United States and West Virginia state flags are to be flown over the West Virginia State Capitol building year @-@ round . Any United States or West Virginia state flag purchased with state funds must be manufactured in the United States ; and West Virginia county boards of education must only purchase state flags manufactured in the United States if board building funds are used . To honor the death of law @-@ enforcement officers within the state , the West Virginia Code permits the draping of the state flag over the coffin at no cost , upon the request of the next @-@ of @-@ kin . 
 = = = Half @-@ mast protocol = = = 
 Effective July 18 , 2013 , the office of West Virginia Governor Earl Ray Tomblin established guidelines in accordance with the United States Code and West Virginia precedent and customs regarding the half @-@ mast display of United States and West Virginia state flags on West Virginia state properties . Both the United States and West Virginia state flags are to be hoisted to full @-@ mast , before being lowered to the half @-@ mast position ; likewise both flags are to be hoisted full @-@ mast prior to being lowered for the day . Both flags are only to be displayed in the half @-@ mast position in accordance with Federal law on the following occasions : 
 Memorial Day ( the last Monday in May ) : flags are displayed at half @-@ mast from sunrise until noon , then raised to full @-@ mast . 
 Peace Officers Memorial Day ( May 15 ) : flags are displayed at half @-@ mast for the entire day , unless that day is also Armed Forces Day ( the third Saturday in May ) . 
 Patriot Day ( September 11 ) : flags are displayed at half @-@ mast for the entire day . 
 National Pearl Harbor Remembrance Day ( December 7 ) : flags are displayed at half @-@ mast for the entire day . 
 Flags are displayed at half @-@ mast for 30 days following the day of death of either a current or former President of the United States . 
 Flags are displayed at half @-@ mast for ten days following the day of death of the Vice President of the United States , the Chief Justice or retired Chief Justice of the Supreme Court of the United States , or the Speaker of the United States House of Representatives . 
 Flags are displayed at half @-@ mast from the day of death until the day of interment of a former Vice President , an Associate Justice of the Supreme Court , a Secretary of an executive or military department of the United States , or a Governor of a U.S. state , territory , or possession . 
 Flags are displayed at half @-@ mast on the day of death and the following day for a member of the United States Congress . 
 Flags displayed at half @-@ mast on state properties following a proclamation by the Governor of West Virginia during other unique instances outlined in the 2013 guidelines . 
 = = = Desecration = = = 
 According to West Virginia state law , the desecration of either the flag of the United States or the West Virginia state flag is an offense punishable as a misdemeanor and upon conviction , a guilty verdict can result in a fine " not less than five nor more than one hundred dollars , " or confinement in jail " for a period not exceeding thirty days " at " the discretion of the court or justice trying the case . " 
 However , such laws are unenforceable as the United States Supreme Court in Texas v. Johnson , 491 U.S. 397 ( 1989 ) , and reaffirmed in U.S. v. <unk> , 496 U.S. 310 ( 1990 ) , has ruled that due to the First Amendment to the United States Constitution , it is unconstitutional for a government ( whether federal , state , or municipality ) to prohibit the desecration of a flag , due to its status as " symbolic speech . " 
 = = Pledge of allegiance = = 
 On February 8 , 1977 , the office of the Secretary of State of West Virginia unanimously adopted the " Pledge of Allegiance to the West Virginia State Flag . " The motion to adopt the pledge was made by Charles S. Smith and seconded by Carol J. Calvert . The pledge reads as follows : 
 I pledge allegiance to the flag of West Virginia , which serves as a constant reminder that " Mountaineers Are Always Free , " which stands as a symbol of her majestic mountains , fertile forests , rich veins of coal , and the pride of her people . 
 = Battle of Goliad = 
 The Battle of Goliad was the second skirmish of the Texas Revolution . In the early @-@ morning hours of October 9 , 1835 , Texas settlers attacked the Mexican Army soldiers garrisoned at Presidio La Bahía , a fort near the Mexican Texas settlement of Goliad . La Bahía lay halfway between the only other large garrison of Mexican soldiers ( at Presidio San Antonio de Bexar ) and the then @-@ important Texas port of Copano . 
 In September , Texians began plotting to kidnap Mexican General Martín Perfecto de Cos , who was en route to Goliad to attempt to quell the unrest in Texas . The plan was initially dismissed by the central committee coordinating the rebellion . However , within days of the Texian victory at the Battle of Gonzales , Captain George Collinsworth and members of the Texian militia in Matagorda began marching towards Goliad . The Texians soon learned that Cos and his men had already departed for San Antonio de Béxar but continued their march . 
 The garrison at La Bahía was understaffed and could not mount an effective defense of the fort 's perimeter . Using axes borrowed from townspeople , Texians were able to chop through a door and enter the complex before the bulk of the soldiers were aware of their presence . After a 30 @-@ minute battle , the Mexican garrison , under Colonel Juan López Sandoval , surrendered . One Mexican soldier had been killed and three others wounded , while only one Texian had been injured . The majority of the Mexican soldiers were instructed to leave Texas , and the Texians confiscated $ 10 @,@ 000 worth of provisions and several cannons , which they soon transported to the Texian Army for use in the Siege of Béxar . The victory isolated Cos 's men in Béxar from the coast , forcing them to rely on a long overland march to request or receive reinforcements or supplies . 
 = = Background = = 
 In 1835 , Mexico operated two major garrisons within its Texas territory , the Alamo at San Antonio de Béxar and Presidio La Bahía near Goliad . Béxar was the political center of Texas , and Goliad laid halfway between it and the major Texas port of Copano . Military and civilian supplies and military personnel were usually sent by sea from the Mexican interior to Copano Bay and then could be transported overland to the Texas settlements . 
 In early 1835 , as the Mexican government transitioned from a federalist model to centralism , wary colonists in Texas began forming Committees of Correspondence and Safety . A central committee in San Felipe de Austin coordinated their activities . The Texians staged a minor revolt against customs duties in June ; these Anahuac Disturbances prompted Mexican President Antonio López de Santa Anna to send additional troops to Texas . In July , Colonel Nicolas <unk> , led 200 men to reinforce Presidio La Bahía . The following month , a contingent of soldiers arrived in Béxar with Colonel Domingo de Ugartechea . Fearing that stronger measures were needed to quell the unrest , Santa Anna ordered his brother @-@ in @-@ law , General Martín Perfecto de Cos to " repress with strong arm all those who , forgetting their duties to the nation which has adopted them as her children , are pushing forward with a desire to live at their own option without subjection to the laws " . Cos landed at Copano Bay on September 20 with approximately 500 soldiers . Cos briefly toured the port at Copano Bay and the small garrison at nearby Refugio and left small groups of soldiers to reinforce each of these locations . The main body of soldiers arrived in Goliad on October 2 . 
 Unbeknownst to Cos , as early as September 18 , several Texians , including James Fannin , Philip Dimmitt , and John Linn , had independently begun advocating a plan to seize Cos at either Copano or Goliad . As soon as Cos 's warships were spotted approaching Copano Bay , Refugio colonists sent messengers to San Felipe de Austin and Matagorda to inform the other settlements of Cos 's imminent arrival . Concerned that a lack of artillery would make the presidio at Goliad impossible to capture , the central committee chose not to order an assault . 
 Although Fannin , Dimmitt , and Linn continued to push for an attack on Goliad , Texian attention soon shifted towards Gonzales , where a small group of Texians were refusing to obey orders from Ugartechea . Colonists eagerly rushed to assist , and on October 2 the Battle of Gonzales officially opened the Texas Revolution . After learning of the Texian victory , Cos made haste for Béxar . He left with the bulk of his soldiers on October 5 , but because he was unable to find adequate transportation most of his supplies remained at La Bahía . 
 = = Prelude = = 
 On October 6 , members of the Texian militia in Matagorda convened at the home of Sylvanus Hatch . As their first order of business they elected George Collinsworth as their captain ; Dr. William Carleton was then named first lieutenant and D.C. Collinsworth became the unit 's second lieutenant . After appointing their leaders , the men decided to march on La Bahía . They intended to kidnap Cos and , if possible , steal the estimated $ 50 @,@ 000 that was rumored to accompany him . The Texians sent messengers to alert nearby settlements of their quest . By afternoon , 50 Texians were ready to march from Matagorda . During the march , for unknown reasons the men fired Carleton and appointed James W. Moore as the new first lieutenant . 
 The following day the expedition stopped at Victoria , where they were soon joined by English @-@ speaking settlers from other settlements and 30 Tejanos led by Plácido Benavides . Although no accurate muster rolls were kept , historian Stephen Hardin estimated that the Texian ranks swelled to 125 men . Forty @-@ nine of them signed a " Compact of Volunteers under Collinsworth " on October 9 . These men pledged that they were loyal to the Mexican federal government and would harm no one who remained loyal to the federalist cause . 
 One of the new arrivals , merchant Philip Dimmitt , received a missive from the Goliad customs agent with news that Cos and his war chest had already departed La Bahía to travel to San Antonio de Béxar . Undeterred , the group marched out on October 9 . Ira Ingram led the vanguard , which halted 1 mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) outside Goliad . The events that follow are not very clear . According to the memoirs of Mexican General Vicente Filisola , who was not in Texas in 1835 , the Texians plotted to draw the presidio commander , Colonel Juan López Sandoval , and his officers from the fort . The Texians allegedly planned a dance in Goliad on October 9 and invited the Mexican officers . Although Sandoval , Captain Manuel Sabriego , and Lieutenant Jesus de la Garza briefly attended the dance , they suspected mischief and returned to the fort . No Texian source mentions such a plot . Several of the Texians , including Dimmitt , did enter the town that evening to try to find guides and support for the effort . Dimmitt 's efforts were successful , and several of the Tejanos who lived near Goliad joined the Texian force . They reported that Sandoval commanded only 50 men — far fewer than the number necessary to defend the entire perimeter of the fort — and provided directions to the fort . 
 The main body of Texian soldiers , under Collinsworth , became disoriented in the dark and wandered from the road . They were soon tangled in a mesquite thicket . While working their way back towards the road , the Texians met Ben Milam , a Texas colonist who had recently escaped from prison in Monterrey . Milam joined the militia as a private , and the group soon rejoined the vanguard . 
 = = Battle = = 
 As the combined Texian force prepared for battle , they sent a messenger to instruct the alcalde of the city to surrender . At 11 pm , the <unk> responded that the town would remain neutral , neither surrendering nor fighting . Several of the locals did , however , supply axes to the Texian militia . The Texians divided themselves into four groups , each assigned a different approach to the presidio . In the pre @-@ dawn hours of October 10 , the Texians attacked . The lone sentinel managed to give the alarm but was immediately shot dead . The Texians quickly hacked through a door on the north wall of the fortress and ran to the interior courtyard . Hearing the commotion , the Mexican soldiers had lined the walls to defend the fort . 
 The Mexican soldiers opened fire , hitting Samuel McCulloch , a former slave whom George Collinsworth had freed , in the shoulder . Texians returned fire for approximately 30 minutes . During a pause in the fighting , a Texian spokesman yelled out that they would " massacre everyone of you , unless you come out immediately and surrender " . The Mexican garrison immediately surrendered . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 McCulloch was the only Texian soldier to be wounded , and he later claimed to be the " first whose blood was shed in the Texas War for Independence " . This distinction earned him a permanent home ; a later law prohibited any freed slave from residing in the Republic of Texas , but in 1840 the Texas legislature specifically excluded McCulloch , his family , and his descendants from its enforcement . The exclusion was reward for McCulloch 's service and his injury . 
 Estimates of Mexican casualties range from one to three soldiers killed and from three to seven wounded . Approximately 20 soldiers escaped . They warned the garrisons at Copano and Refugio of the advancing Texians ; those garrisons abandoned their posts and joined the soldiers at Fort Lipantitlán . Milam escorted the remaining Mexican soldiers to Gonzales , where the newly formed Texian Army was located . The Texian Army commander , Stephen F. Austin , later released all of the men , on the condition that they leave Texas and vow to stop fighting Texas residents . One wounded Mexican soldier was allowed to remain in Goliad , as was Captain Manuel Sabriego , who was married to a local woman . In secret , Sabriego began organizing a group of settlers in the Goliad area who sympathized with Mexico . 
 Texian troops confiscated the provisions they found at the fort . Although they found 300 muskets , most of them were broken and unable to be repaired . Dimmitt hired two gunsmiths who were able to bring the remaining weapons into service . The food , clothing , blankets , and other provisions were valued at US $ 10 @,@ 000 . The new quartermaster at the fort , John J. Linn , reported that 175 barrels of flour were confiscated , along with a large supply of sugar , coffee , whiskey , and rum . For the next three months , the provisions were parceled out among companies in the Texian Army . The Texians also gained control of several cannons . 
 Over the next several days , more Texian settlers joined the group at La Bahía . Many of them were from Refugio , a sprawling settlement that was furthest from Matagorda . Historian Hobart Huson speculates that these men were the last to receive word of the planned attack . Austin ordered that 100 men remain at Goliad , under the command of Dimmitt , while the rest should join the Texian Army in marching on Cos 's troops in Béxar . Collinsworth returned to Matagorda to recruit additional soldiers , but on October 14 the remaining Texians at Goliad began the march towards Béxar . 
 The loss of Goliad meant that Cos lost his means of communicating with Copano Bay , the closest port to Béxar . The Mexican troops garrisoned at Béxar would now need to get supplies and reinforcements overland . 
 = Noise in music = 
 In music , noise is variously described as unpitched , indeterminate , uncontrolled , loud , unmusical , or unwanted sound . Noise is an important component of the sound of the human voice and all musical instruments , particularly in unpitched percussion instruments and electric guitars ( using distortion ) . Electronic instruments create various colours of noise . Traditional uses of noise are unrestricted , using all the frequencies associated with pitch and timbre , such as the white noise component of a drum roll on a snare drum , or the transients present in the prefix of the sounds of some organ pipes . 
 The influence of modernism in the early 20th century lead composers such as Edgar Varese to explore the use of noise @-@ based sonorities in an orchestral setting . In the same period the Italian Futurist Luigi Russolo created a " noise orchestra " using instruments he called intonarumori . Later in the 20th century the term noise music came to refer to works consisting primarily of noise @-@ based sound . 
 In more general usage , noise is any unwanted sound or signal . In this sense , even sounds that would be perceived as musically ordinary in another context become noise if they interfere with the reception of a message desired by the receiver . Prevention and reduction of unwanted sound , from tape hiss to squeaking bass drum pedals , is important in many musical pursuits , but noise is also used creatively in many ways , and in some way in nearly all genres . 
 = = Definition of noise = = 
 In conventional musical practices sounds that are considered unmusical tend to be treated as noise . Oscillations and Waves defines noise as irregular vibrations of an object , in contrast to the periodical , patterned structure of music . More broadly , electrical engineering professor Bart <unk> in the introductory chapter of his book Noise defines noise as a " signal we don 't like . " Paul Hegarty , a lecturer and noise musician , likewise assigns a subjective value to noise , writing that " noise is a judgment , a social one , based on <unk> , the breaking of norms and a fear of violence . " Composer and music educator R. Murray Schafer divided noise into four categories : Unwanted noise , unmusical sound , any loud system , and a disturbance in any signaling system . 
 In regard to what is noise as opposed to music , Robert Fink in The Origin of Music : A Theory of the Universal Development of Music claims that while cultural theories view the difference between noise and music as purely the result of social forces , habit , and custom , " everywhere in history we see man making some selections of some sounds as noise , certain other sounds as music , and in the overall development of all cultures , this distinction is made around the same sounds . " However , musicologist Jean @-@ Jacques <unk> considers the difference between noise and music nebulous , explaining that " The border between music and noise is always culturally defined — which implies that , even within a single society , this border does not always pass through the same place ; in short , there is rarely a consensus ... By all accounts there is no single and intercultural universal concept defining what music might be . " 
 = = Noise as a feature of music = = 
 Musical tones produced by the human voice and all acoustical musical instruments incorporate noises in varying degrees . Most consonants in human speech ( e.g. , the sounds of f , v , s , z , both voiced and unvoiced th , Scottish and German ch ) are characterised by distinctive noises , and even vowels are not entirely noise free . Wind instruments include the whizzing or hissing sounds of air breaking against the edges of the mouthpiece , while bowed instruments produce audible rubbing noises that contribute , when the instrument is poor or the player <unk> , to what is perceived as a poor tone . When they are not excessive , listeners " make themselves deaf " to these noises by ignoring them . 
 = = = Unpitched percussion = = = 
 Many unpitched percussion instruments , such as the snare drum or maracas , make use of the presence of random sounds or noise to produce a sound without any perceived pitch . See timbre . Unpitched percussion is typically used to maintain a rhythm or to provide accents , and its sounds are unrelated to the melody and harmony of the music . Within the orchestra unpitched percussion is termed auxiliary percussion , and this subsection of the percussion section includes all unpitched instruments of the orchestra no matter how they are played , for example the pea whistle and siren . 
 = = = Traditional music = = = 
 = = = = Antiquity = = = = 
 Although percussion instruments were generally rather unimportant in ancient Greek music , two exceptions were in dance music and ritual music of orgiastic cults . The former required instruments providing a sharply defined rhythm , particularly <unk> ( clappers with a dry , <unk> sound ) and <unk> ( similar to finger @-@ cymbals ) . The cult rituals required more exciting noises , such as those produced by drums , cymbals , jingles , and the <unk> ( bull @-@ <unk> ) , which produced a demonic roaring noise particularly important to the ceremonies of the priests of Cybele . Athenaeus ( The <unk> <unk> ) quotes a passage from a now @-@ lost play , Semele , by Diogenes the <unk> , describing an all @-@ percussion accompaniment to some of these rites : 
 And now I hear the turban @-@ wearing women , 
 <unk> of th ' Asiatic Cybele , 
 The wealthy Phrygians ' daughters , loudly sounding 
 With drums , and rhombs , and brazen @-@ clashing cymbals , 
 Their hands in concert striking on each other , 
 Pour forth a wise and healing hymn to the gods . 
 An altogether darker picture of the function of this noise music is painted by Livy in Ab <unk> condita <unk> – 10 , written in the late first century BC . He describes " a Greek of mean condition ... a low operator in sacrifices , and a soothsayer ... a teacher of secret mysteries " who imported to Etruria and then to Rome a Dionysian cult which attracted a large following . All manner of debaucheries were practised by this cult , including rape and 
 secret murders ... [ where ] the bodies could not even be found for burial . Many of their audacious deeds were brought about by treachery , but most of them by force , and this force was concealed by loud shouting , and the noise of drums and cymbals , so that none of the cries uttered by the persons suffering violation or murder could be heard abroad . 
 = = = = Polynesia = = = = 
 A Tahitian traditional dance genre dating back to before the first contact with European explorers is <unk> , danced by a group of men accompanied solely by a drum ensemble . The drums consist of a slit @-@ log drum called tō ‘ ere ( which provides the main rhythmic pattern ) , a single @-@ headed upright drum called fa ‘ <unk> , a single @-@ headed hand drum called <unk> <unk> ‘ i rima , and a double @-@ headed bass drum called <unk> . 
 = = = = Asia = = = = 
 In Shaanxi in the north of China , drum ensembles accompany <unk> dance , and in the Tianjin area there are ritual percussion ensembles such as the <unk> hui Dharma @-@ drumming associations , often consisting of dozens of musicians . In Korea , a style of folk music called <unk> ( farmers ' music ) or <unk> has been performed for many hundred years , both by local players and by professional touring bands at concerts and festivals . It is loud music meant for outdoor performance , played on percussion instruments such as the drums called <unk> and <unk> , and the gongs ching and <unk> . It originated in simple work rhythms to assist repetitive tasks carried out by field workers . 
 South Asian music places a special emphasis on drumming , which is freed from the primary time @-@ keeping function of drumming found in other part of the world . In North India , secular processional bands play an important role in civic festival parades and the <unk> processions leading a groom 's wedding party to the bride 's home or the hall where a wedding is held . These bands vary in makeup , depending on the means of the families employing them and according to changing fashions over time , but the core instrumentation is a small group of percussionists , usually playing a frame drum ( <unk> ) , a gong , and a pair of kettledrums ( <unk> ) . Better @-@ off families will add shawms ( shehnai ) to the percussion , while the most affluent who also prefer a more modern or fashionable image may replace the traditional ensemble with a brass band . The Karnatic music of southern India includes a tradition of instrumental temple music in the state of Kerala , called <unk> <unk> . It includes three main genres , all focussed on rhythm and featuring unpitched percussion . <unk> in particular is a virtuoso genre for unpitched percussion only : a solo double @-@ headed cylindrical drum called chenda , played with a pair of sticks , and accompanied by other chenda and <unk> ( pairs of cymbals ) . The other two genres , <unk> and <unk> melam add wind instruments to the ensemble , but only as accompaniment to the primary drums and cymbals . A <unk> piece typically lasts about an hour , while a <unk> melam performance may be as long as four hours . 
 = = = = Turkey = = = = 
 The Turkish janissaries military corps had included since the 14th century bands called <unk> or <unk> which , like many other earlier military bands in Asia featured a high proportion of drums , cymbals , and gongs , along with trumpets and shawms . The high level of noise was pertinent to their function of playing on the battlefield to inspire the soldiers . The focus in these bands was on percussion . A full <unk> could include several bass drums , multiple pairs of cymbals , small kettledrums , triangles , tambourines , and one or more Turkish crescents . 
 = = = = Europe = = = = 
 Through Turkish ambassadorial visits and other contacts , Europeans gained a fascination with the " barbarous " , noisy sound of these bands , and a number of European courts established " Turkish " military ensembles in the late @-@ 17th and early 18th centuries . The music played by these ensembles , however , were not authentically Turkish music , but rather compositions in the prevalent European manner . The general enthusiasm quickly spread to opera and concert orchestras , where the combination of bass drum , cymbals , tambourines , and triangles were collectively referred to as " Turkish music " . The best @-@ known examples include Haydn 's Symphony No. 100 , which acquired its nickname , " The Military " , from its use of these instruments , and three of Beethoven 's works : the " alla <unk> " section from the finale of his Symphony No. 9 ( an early sketch reads : " end of the Symphony with Turkish music " ) , his " Wellington 's Victory " — or Battle Symphony — with picturesque sound effects ( the bass drums are designated as " cannons " , side drums represent opposing troops of soldiers , and ratchets the sound of rifle fire ) , and the " Turkish March " ( with the expected bass drum , cymbals , and triangle ) and the " Chorus of Dervishes " from his incidental music to The Ruins of Athens , where he calls for the use of every available noisy instrument : castanets , cymbals , and so forth . By the end of the 18th century , the batterie <unk> had become so fashionable that keyboard instruments were fitted with devices to simulate the bass drum ( a mallet with a padded head hitting the back of the sounding board ) , cymbals ( strips of brass striking the lower strings ) , and the triangle and bells ( small metal objects struck by rods ) . Even when percussion instruments were not actually employed , certain alla <unk> " tricks " were used to imitate these percussive effects . Examples include the " Rondo alla <unk> " from Mozart 's Piano Sonata , K. 331 , and part of the finale of his Violin Concerto , K. 219 . 
 = = = = = Harpsichord , piano , and organ = = = = = 
 At about the same time that " Turkish music " was coming into vogue in Europe , a fashion for programmatic keyboard music opened the way for the introduction of another kind of noise in the form of the keyboard cluster , played with the fist , flat of the hand , forearm , or even an auxiliary object placed on the keyboard . On the harpsichord and piano , this device was found mainly in " battle " pieces , where it was used to represent cannon fire . The earliest instance was by Jean @-@ François <unk> , in Les Caractères de la guerre ( 1724 ) , and for the next hundred years it remained predominantly a French feature , with examples by Michel Corrette ( La Victoire d 'un combat naval , <unk> par une frégate contre plusieurs <unk> <unk> , 1780 ) , Claude @-@ <unk> <unk> ( March des Marseillois , 1793 ) , Pierre Antoine César ( La Battaille de <unk> , ou la prise de Mons , ca . 1794 ) , and Jacques @-@ Marie <unk> @-@ Charpentier ( Battaille d 'Austerlitz , 1805 ) . In 1800 , Bernard <unk> introduced the sound to chamber music , in the keyboard part of a piano trio titled La Bataille de <unk> , pièce militaire et historique . The last time this pianistic " cannon " effect was used before the 20th century was in 1861 , in a depiction of the then @-@ recent The Battle of Manassas in a piece by the black American piano virtuoso " Blind Tom " Bethune , a piece that also feature vocalised sound @-@ effect noises . 
 Clusters were also used on the organ , where they proved more versatile ( or their composers more imaginative ) . Their most frequent use on this instrument was to evoke the sound of thunder , but also to portray sounds of battle , storms at sea , earthquakes , and Biblical scenes such as the fall of the walls of Jericho and visions of the apocalypse . The noisy sound nevertheless remained a special sound effect , and was not integrated into the general texture of the music . The earliest examples of " organ thunder " are from descriptions of improvisations by Abbé Vogler in the last quarter of the 18th century . His example was soon imitated by Justin Heinrich Knecht ( Die durch ein <unk> [ sic ] <unk> <unk> , 1794 ) , Michel Corrette ( who employed a length of wood on the pedal board and his elbow on the lowest notes of the keyboard during some improvisations ) , and also in composed works by Guillaume <unk> ( Te Deum : " Judex <unk> " , 1786 ) , <unk> <unk> ( A Concert on a Lake , Interrupted by a Thunderstorm ) , Louis James Alfred Lefébure @-@ Wély ( Scène pastorale , 1867 ) , Jacques Vogt ( Fantaisie pastorale et <unk> dans les Alpes , ca . 1830 ) , and Jules Blanc ( La procession , 1859 ) . The most notable 19th @-@ composer to use such organ clusters was Giuseppe Verdi . The storm music which opens his opera Otello ( 1887 ) includes an organ cluster ( C , C ♯ , D ) that is also the longest notated duration of any scored musical texture . 
 = = = = = Bowed strings = = = = = 
 Percussive effects in imitation of drumming had been introduced to bowed @-@ string instruments by early in the 17th century . The earliest known use of col legno ( tapping on the strings with the back of the bow ) is found in Tobias Hume 's First Part of Ayres for unaccompanied viola da gamba ( 1605 ) , in a piece titled Harke , Harke . Carlo Farina , an Italian violinist active in Germany , also used col legno to mimic the sound of a drum in his Capriccio <unk> for four stringed instruments ( 1627 ) , where he also used devices such as glissando , tremolo , pizzicato , and sul <unk> to imitate the noises of barnyard animals ( cat , dog , chicken ) . Later in the century , Heinrich Ignaz Franz Biber , in certain movements of Battalia ( 1673 ) , added to these effects the device of placing a sheet of paper under the A string of the double bass , in order to imitate the dry rattle of a snare drum , and in " Die <unk> Gesellschaft von <unk> Humor " from the same programmatic battle piece , superimposed eight different melodies in different keys , producing in places dense orchestral clusters . He also uses the percussive snap of fortissimo pizzicato to represent gunshots . 
 An important aspect of all of these examples of noise in European keyboard and string music before the 19th century is that they are used as sound effects in programme music . Sounds that would likely cause offense in other musical contexts are made acceptable by their illustrative function . Over time , their evocative effect was weakened as at the same time they became incorporated more generally into abstract musical contexts . 
 = = = = = Orchestras = = = = = 
 Orchestras continued to use noise in the form of a percussion section , which expanded though the 19th century : Berlioz was perhaps the first composer to thoroughly investigate the effects of different mallets on the tone color of timpani . However , before the 20th century , percussion instruments played a very small role in orchestral music and mostly served for punctuation , to highlight passages , or for novelty . But by the 1940s , some composers were influenced by non @-@ Western music as well as jazz and popular music , and began incorporating marimbas , vibraphones , xylophones , bells , gongs , cymbals , and drums . 
 = = = = = Vocal music = = = = = 
 In vocal music , noisy nonsense syllables were used to imitate battle drums and cannon fire long before Clément <unk> made these devices famous in his programmatic chanson La bataille ( The Battle ) in 1528 . Unpitched or semi @-@ pitched performance was introduced to formal composition in 1897 by Engelbert Humperdinck , in the first version of his melodrama , <unk> . This style of performance is believed to have been used previously by singers of lieder and popular songs . The technique is best known , however , from somewhat later compositions by Arnold Schoenberg , who introduced it for solo voices in his <unk> ( 1900 – 11 ) , Pierrot Lunaire ( 1913 ) , and the opera Moses und Aron ( 1930 – 32 ) , and for chorus in Die <unk> Hand ( 1910 – 13 ) . Later composers who have made prominent use of the device include Pierre Boulez , Luciano Berio , Benjamin Britten ( in Death in Venice , 1973 ) , Mauricio Kagel , and Wolfgang Rihm ( in his opera Jakob Lenz , 1977 – 78 , amongst other works ) . A well @-@ known example of this style of performance in popular music was Rex Harrison 's portrayal of Professor Henry Higgins in My Fair Lady . Another form of unpitched vocal music is the speaking chorus , prominently represented by Ernst <unk> 's 1930 Geographical Fugue , an example of the <unk> fashionable in Germany at that time . 
 = = = = = Machine music = = = = = 
 In the 1920s a fashion emerged for composing what was called " machine music " — the depiction in music of the sounds of factories , locomotives , steamships , dynamos , and other aspects of recent technology that both reflected modern , urban life and appealed to the then @-@ prevalent spirit of objectivity , detachment , and directness . Representative works in this style , which features motoric and insistent rhythms , a high level of dissonance , and often large percussion batteries , are George Antheil 's Ballet <unk> ( 1923 – 25 ) , Arthur Honegger 's Pacific 231 ( 1923 ) , Sergei Prokofiev 's ballet Le pas d 'acier ( The Steel Leap , 1925 – 26 ) , Alexander <unk> 's Iron Foundry ( an orchestral episode from his ballet Steel , 1926 – 27 ) , and Carlos Chávez 's ballet Caballos de vapor , also titled HP ( Horsepower , 1926 – 32 ) . This trend reached its apex in the music of Edgard Varèse , who composed Ionisation in 1931 , a " study in pure sonority and rhythm " for an ensemble of thirty @-@ five unpitched percussion instruments . 
 = = = = = Percussion ensembles = = = = = 
 Following Varèse 's example , a number of other important works for percussion ensemble were composed in the 1930s and 40s : Henry Cowell 's <unk> <unk> ( 1934 ) combines Latin American , European , and Asian percussion instruments ; John Cage 's First Construction ( in Metal ) ( 1939 ) employs differently pitched thunder sheets , brake drums , gongs , and a water gong ; Carlos Chávez 's Toccata for Percussion ( 1943 ) requires six performers to play a large number of European and Latin @-@ American drums and other unpitched percussion together with a few tuned instruments such as xylophone , tubular chimes , and glockenspiel ; Lou Harrison , in works such as the Canticles nos . 1 and 3 ( 1940 and 1942 ) , Song of <unk> ( 1941 ) , Suite for Percussion ( 1942 ) , and — in collaboration with John Cage — Double Music ( 1941 ) explored the use of " found " instruments , such as brake drums , <unk> , and metal pipes . In all of these works , elements such as timbre , texture , and rhythm take precedence over the usual Western concepts of harmony and melody . 
 = = = Experimental and avant @-@ garde music = = = 
 Use of noise was central to the development of experimental music and avant @-@ garde music in the mid 20th century . Noise was used in important , new ways . 
 Edgard Varèse challenged traditional conceptions of musical and non @-@ musical sound and instead incorporated noise based sonorities into his compositional work , what he referred to as " organised sound . " Varèse stated that " to stubbornly conditioned ears , anything new in music has always been called noise " , and he posed the question , " what is music but organized noises ? " . 
 In the years immediately following the First World War , Henry Cowell composed a number of piano pieces featuring tone clusters and direct manipulation of the piano 's strings . One of these , titled The Banshee ( 1925 ) , features sliding and shrieking sounds suggesting the terrifying cry of the banshee from Irish folklore . 
 In 1938 for a dance composition titled Bacchanale , John Cage invented the prepared piano , producing both transformed pitches and colorful unpitched sounds from the piano . Many variations , such as prepared guitar , have followed . In 1952 , Cage wrote 4 ′ 33 ″ , in which there is no deliberate sound at all , but only whatever background noise occurs during the performance . 
 Karlheinz Stockhausen employed noise in vocal compositions , such as Momente ( 1962 – 64 / 69 ) , in which the four choirs clap their hands , talk , and shuffle their feet , in order to mediate between instrumental and vocal sounds as well as to incorporate sounds normally made by audiences into those produced by the performers . 
 Robert Ashley used audio feedback in his avant @-@ garde piece The Wolfman ( 1964 ) by setting up a howl between the microphone and loudspeaker and then singing into the microphone in way that modulated the feedback with his voice . 
 = = = Electronic music = = = 
 Noise is used as basic tonal material in electronic music . 
 When pure @-@ frequency sine tones were first synthesised into complex timbres , starting in 1953 , combinations using <unk> relationships ( noises ) were used far more often than harmonic ones ( tones ) . Tones were seen as analogous to vowels , and noises to consonants in human speech , and because traditional music had emphasised tones almost exclusively , composers of electronic music saw scope for exploration along the continuum stretching from single , pure ( sine ) tones to white noise ( the densest superimposition of all audible frequencies ) — that is , from entirely periodic to entirely aperiodic sound phenomena . In a process opposite to the building up of sine tones into complexes , white noise could be filtered to produce sounds with different bandwidths , called " coloured noises " , such as the speech sounds represented in English by sh , f , s , or ch . An early example of an electronic composition composed entirely by filtering white noise in this way is Henri <unk> 's <unk> ( Exchanges ) , realised at the Studio di <unk> in Milan in 1957 . 
 In the 1980s , electronic white noise machines became commercially available . These are used alone to provide a pleasant background noise and to mask unpleasant noise , a similar role to conventional background music . This usage can have health applications in the case of individuals struggling with over @-@ stimulation or sensory processing disorder . Also , white noise is sometimes used to mask sudden noise in facilities with research animals . 
 = = = Rock music = = = 
 While the electric guitar was originally designed to be simply amplified in order to reproduce its sound at a higher volume , guitarists quickly discovered the creative possibilities of using the amplifier to modify the sound , particularly by extreme settings of tone and volume controls . 
 Distortion was at first produced by simply overloading the amplifier to induce clipping , resulting in a tone rich in harmonics and also in noise , and also producing dynamic range compression and therefore sustain ( and sometimes destroying the amplifier ) . Dave Davies of The Kinks took this technique to its logical conclusion by feeding the output from a 60 watt guitar amplifier directly into the guitar input of a second amplifier . The popularity of these techniques quickly resulted in the development of electronic devices such as the fuzz box to produce similar but more controlled effects and in greater variety . Distortion devices also developed into vocal enhancers , effects units that electronically enhance a vocal performance , including adding air ( noise or distortion , or both ) . Guitar distortion is often accomplished through use of feedback , overdrive , fuzz , and distortion pedals . Distortion pedals produce a crunchier and grittier tone than an overdrive pedal . 
 As well as distortion , rock musicians have used audio feedback , which is normally undesirable . The use of feedback was pioneered by musicians such as John Lennon of The Beatles , Jeff Beck of The Yardbirds , Pete Townshend of The Who , and Jimi Hendrix . Hendrix was able to control feedback and turn it into a musical quality , and his use of noise has been described as " sculpted - liquid and fire expertly shaped in mid @-@ air as if by a glass blower . " Other techniques used by Hendrix include distortion , wah , fuzz , dissonance , and loud volume . 
 = = = Jazz = = = 
 In the mid @-@ 1960s , jazz began incorporating elements of rock music , and began using distortion and feedback , partially due to the efforts of Jimi Hendrix , who had strong links with jazz . The proto @-@ punk band MC5 also used feedback and loudness and was inspired by the avant @-@ garde jazz movement . Jazz musicians who have incorporated noise elements , feedback and distortion include Bill Frisell , David Krakauer Cecil Taylor , Gábor Szabó , Garnett Brown , <unk> Moncur III , Jackie McLean , John Abercrombie , John McLaughlin , Joseph Bowie , Larry Coryell , <unk> Tyner , Ornette Coleman , Pat Metheny , Phil Minton , Roswell Rudd , and Scott Henderson . 
 = = = Hip hop = = = 
 Since its origins in the Bronx during the 1970s , hip hop music has been associated with noise . Author Mark Katz explains that " for the pioneering hip @-@ hop DJs , merely to exist in the Bronx was to experience near @-@ constant noise . But DJs did more than experience noise , they created it , and through their massive sound systems , they indelibly shaped the Bronx soundscape . " According to Katz , the use of loud , extravagant sound systems communicated power and territorial control . Furthermore , techniques such as scratching are an expression of transgression . As scratching a record damages it , scratching , like the visual art of graffiti , is a form of vandalism . " It is a celebration of noise , " writes Katz , " and no doubt part of the pleasure it brought to DJs came from the knowledge that it annoyed the older generation . " Scholar William Jelani Cobb states that " though the genre will always be dismissed by many as brash , monotonous noise , the truth is that hip hop has undergone an astounding array of lyrical and musical transformations . " Scholar Ronald Radano writes that " no term in the modern lexicon conveys more vividly African @-@ American music 's powers of authenticity and resistance than the figure of ' noise ' . In hip @-@ hop parlance , ' noise , ' specifically ' black noise ' , is that special insight from the inside , the anti @-@ philosophy that emerges front and center through the sound attack of rap . " Radano finds the appearance of " black noise " nearly everywhere in the " transnational repetitions of rap opposition , " but stresses that despite its global nature , black noise still conforms to American racial structures . Radano states that " rather than radicalizing the stable binaries of race , noise inverts them ; it transforms prior signs of European musical mastery — harmony , melody , song — into all that is <unk> ' , kickin ' , and black . " 
 The hip hop group Public Enemy in particular has been noted for its use of noise in its music . The group 's second album , It Takes a Nation of Millions to Hold Us Back , was backed by the production team The Bomb Squad , who helped craft the album 's layered , anti @-@ harmonic , anarchic noise . Michael Eric Dyson describes the album as a " powerful mix of music , beats , screams , noise , and rhythms from the streets " , and considers it an example of the revival of black radical and nationalist thought . Public Enemy member Chuck D acknowledges that the group 's use of noise was an intentional attempt to blur the boundaries between popular music and the noise of everyday life , a decision which writer Jason W. Buel says " ran directly counter to the values of mainstream music of the time . " He explains that " without a doubt " this intentional use of noise influenced not only the next decade of hip @-@ hop , but of rock as well . Furthermore , notes Buel , the incorporation of noise served a political function , elevating the ordinary and thus suggesting that common , ordinary people should consider themselves on the same footing as their political and cultural leaders . 
 = = Noise as a type of music = = 
 Noise music ( also referred to simply as noise ) has been represented by many genres during the 20th century and subsequently . Some of its proponents reject the attempt to classify it as a single overall genre , preferring to call noise music a non @-@ genre , an aesthetic , or a collection of genres . Even among those who regard it as a genre , its scope is unclear . Some commentators use the phrase " noise music " ( or " noise " ) to refer specifically to Japanese noise music , while others instead use the term Japanoise . 
 While noise music is often nowadays associated with extreme volume and distortion and produced by electronic amplification , the tradition dates back at least to the Futurist Luigi Russolo , who rejected melody , constructed original instruments known as intonarumori and assembled a " noise orchestra " in 1917 . It was not well received . In his 1913 manifesto The Art of Noises he observes : 
 At first the art of music sought purity , <unk> and sweetness of sound . Then different sounds were amalgamated , care being taken , however , to caress the ear with gentle harmonies . Today music , as it becomes continually more complicated , strives to amalgamate the most dissonant , strange and harsh sounds . In this way we come ever closer to noise @-@ sound . 
 = = = Some types of noise music = = = 
 Noise music , abandoning melody , harmony , and sometimes even pulse and rhythm 
 Industrial music ( 1970s ) 
 Noise rock and noise pop ( 1980s ) 
 Japanoise ( late 1970s - current ) 
 Glitch ( 1990s ) 
 = = Noise reduction = = 
 Most often , musicians are concerned not to produce noise , but to minimise it . Noise reduction is of particular concern in sound recording . This is accomplished by many techniques , including use of low noise components and proprietary noise reducing technologies such as Dolby . 
 In both recording and in live musical sound reinforcement , the key to noise minimisation is headroom . Headroom can be used either to reduce distortion and audio feedback by keeping signal levels low , or to reduce interference , both from outside sources and from the Johnson @-@ Nyquist noise produced in the equipment , by keeping signal levels high . Most proprietary noise reducing technologies also introduce low levels of distortion . Noise minimisation therefore becomes a compromise between interference and distortion , both in recording and in live music , and between interference and feedback in live amplification . The work of Bart <unk> and Sanya <unk> has also demonstrated that stochastic resonance can be used as a technique in noise minimisation and signal improvement in non @-@ linear dynamical systems , as the addition of noise to a signal can improve the signal @-@ to @-@ noise ratio . 
 Noise created by mobile phones has become a particular concern in live performances , particularly those being recorded . In one notable incident , maestro Alan Gilbert halted the New York Philharmonic in a performance of Gustav Mahler 's Symphony No. 9 until an audience member 's iPhone was silenced . 
 = = Noise as excessive volume = = 
 Music played at excessive volumes is often considered a form of noise pollution . Governments such as that of the United Kingdom have local procedures for dealing with noise pollution , including loud music . 
 Noise as high volume is common for musicians from classical orchestras to rock groups as they are exposed to high decibel ranges . Although some rock musicians experience noise @-@ induced hearing loss from their music , it is still debated as to whether classical musicians are exposed to enough high @-@ intensity sound to cause hearing impairments . Nevertheless , in 2008 Trygve <unk> , the manager of the Bavarian Radio Symphony Orchestra , invoked new EU rules forbidding more than 85 decibels in the workplace , as a reason for dropping the planned world premiere of Dror <unk> 's composition <unk> Hisar ( State of Siege ) because it was " adverse to the health " of the musicians . The twenty @-@ minute piece begins with a burst of machine @-@ gun fire , and gets louder . Readings taken during rehearsals measured at least 130 decibels , and some members of the orchestra reported suffering headaches and permanent <unk> after sustained exposure for three hours during rehearsals . <unk> for the musicians were suggested , but they objected they could not hear each other and the composer also rejected the idea , adding that his composition was " no louder than anything by Shostakovich or Wagner " . 
 Music @-@ induced hearing loss is still a controversial topic for hearing researchers . While some studies have shown that the risk for hearing loss increases as music exposure increases , other studies found little to no correlation between the two . 
 Many bands , primarily in the rock genre , use excessive volumes intentionally . Several bands have set records as the loudest band in the world , with Deep Purple , The Who , and Manowar having received entries in the Guinness Book of World Records . Other claimants to the title include Motörhead , Led Zeppelin , Blue Cheer , Gallows , Bob Dylan 's 1965 backing electric band , Grand Funk Railroad , Canned Heat , and the largely fictional parody group Spinal Tap . My Bloody Valentine are known for their " legendarily high " volume concerts , and Sunn O ) ) ) are described as surpassing them . The sound levels at Sunn O ) ) ) concerts are intentionally loud enough that they are noted for having physical effects on their audience . 
 = = = Noise in general = = = 
 Noise ( disambiguation ) for a list of other articles related to noise 
 Noise ( electronics ) 
 = = = Relating noise to music = = = 
 The definition of music , detailed discussions 
 <unk> for the aesthetics of sound , and particularly what is meant by cacophony 
 Aesthetics of music 
 <unk> , one of the factors causing a sound to be perceived as unpitched 
 Consonance and dissonance # Dissonance for discussion of the nature and usage of discords in melody and harmony and similar devices in rhythm and metre 
 <unk> listening 
 = = = Related types = = = 
 Free jazz 
 Percussion ensemble 
 = = = Related types of music = = = 
 Category : Noise music for an automated list of articles related to noise as a type of music 
 = = = Perception and use of noise in music = = = 
 <unk> , James . 2001 . How We Hear Music : The Relationship Between Music and the Hearing Mechanism . Suffolk : Boydell & Brewer . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ <unk> @-@ <unk> @-@ 9 . 
 Demers , Joanna . 2010 . Listening through the Noise : The Aesthetics of Experimental Electronic Music . Oxford : Oxford University Press . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 1997 @-@ 7448 @-@ 7 . 
 Kahn , Douglas . 1999 . Noise , Water , Meat : A History of Sound in the Arts . Cambridge , Massachusetts : MIT Press . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ <unk> @-@ 1243 @-@ 7 . 
 Moravcsik , Michael J. 2001 . Musical Sound : An Introduction to the Physics of Music . New York : Springer Science + Business Media . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ <unk> @-@ <unk> @-@ 3 . 
 Priest , Gail . 2009 . Experimental Music : Audio Explorations in Australia . Kensington , New South Wales : University of New South Wales Press . ISBN 978 @-@ 1 @-@ <unk> @-@ 1007 @-@ 9 . 
 Rodgers , Tara , editor . 2010 . Pink Noises : Women on Electronic Music and Sound . Durham , North Carolina : Duke University Press . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 8223 @-@ <unk> @-@ 0 . 
 Voegelin , Salome . 2010 . Listening to Noise and Silence : Towards a Philosophy of Sound Art . London : Bloomsbury Publishing . 978 @-@ 1 @-@ <unk> @-@ <unk> @-@ 6 . 
 Waksman , Steve . 1999 . Instruments of Desire : The Electric Guitar and the Shaping of Musical Experience . Cambridge , Massachusetts : Harvard University Press . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ <unk> @-@ <unk> @-@ 1 . 
 Washburne , Christopher , <unk> <unk> . 2004 . Bad Music : The Music We Love to Hate . New York : Routledge . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ <unk> @-@ <unk> @-@ 9 . 
 = = = Noise reduction = = = 
 Collins , Mike . 2004 . Pro Tools for Music Production : Recording , Editing and Mixing . Waltham , Massachusetts : Focal Press . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ <unk> @-@ 1943 @-@ 2 . 
 <unk> , Brent . 1988 . Multi @-@ Track Recording for Musicians . Van Nuys : Alfred Music . ISBN 978 @-@ 1 @-@ <unk> @-@ <unk> @-@ 7 . 
 <unk> , Uno . 2010 . Noise Reduction Analysis . Burlington , Massachusetts : Jones & Bartlett Learning . ISBN 978 @-@ 1 @-@ 9340 @-@ 1531 @-@ 5 . 
 <unk> , Rick . 2012 . The Dance Music Manual : Tools , Toys and Techniques . Waltham , Massachusetts : Focal Press . ISBN 978 @-@ 1 @-@ 1361 @-@ 1557 @-@ 8 . 
 <unk> , Saeed . 2008 . Advanced Digital Signal Processing and Noise Reduction . Hoboken : John Wiley & Sons . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ <unk> @-@ 4016 @-@ 3 . 
 = 2012 – 13 Michigan Wolverines men 's basketball team = 
 The 2012 – 13 Michigan Wolverines men 's basketball team represented the University of Michigan during the 2012 – 13 NCAA Division I men 's basketball season . For the 46th consecutive year , the Michigan Wolverines men 's basketball team played its home games in Ann Arbor , Michigan , at the Crisler Center . This season marked the team 's 96th consecutive year as a member of the Big Ten Conference , and it is occasionally referred to as " Team 96 " . The team was led by sixth @-@ year head coach John Beilein . As the defending 2011 – 12 Big Ten Conference men 's basketball season regular season co @-@ champions , the Wolverines finished fourth in the conference in 2012 – 13 and as National Runner @-@ up in the 2013 NCAA Men 's Division I Basketball Tournament after losing in the championship game to Louisville . The team achieved a 31 – 8 record , the most wins by the program in 20 seasons . 
 Following the 2011 @-@ 12 season , the team lost graduating senior captains Zack Novak and Stu Douglass , who moved on to professional basketball careers in Europe . The incoming class of Mitch McGary , Glenn Robinson III and Nik Stauskas was ranked among the best classes in the nation by the media . With its new lineup , the team matched the greatest starts in school history . Starting the season with 11 consecutive wins matched the best start since the last Michigan national champions , the 1988 – 89 team . At 16 – 0 , Michigan matched its best start since the last repeat Big Ten Regular season championship , the 1985 – 86 team , tying a school record . Reaching 19 – 1 set a record for the best start in school history . The team also reached the number one position in the AP Poll for the first time since the Fab Five 1992 – 93 team . The team entered February with a 20 – 1 record ( 7 – 1 Big Ten ) , but with an injury to eventual B1G All @-@ Defensive selection Jordan Morgan and a stretch of games against its strongest conference opponents , Michigan lost three out of four games . The team closed the season with a 5 – 5 run to finish tied for fourth in the conference and won one game in the Big Ten Tournament before being eliminated . 
 The team was led by 2013 national player of the year , Big Ten Player of the Year and 2013 Consensus All @-@ American Trey Burke and three additional All @-@ Conference honorees . Tim Hardaway , Jr. was named to the 2012 – 13 All @-@ Big Ten first team by the coaches and to the second team by the media ; Robinson was named an honorable mention All @-@ Big Ten by the media , and Morgan was an All @-@ Big Ten Defensive team selection . Stauskas and McGary earned multiple Big Ten Freshman of the Week recognitions during the season . Burke was the second National Player of the Year and eighth first @-@ team consensus All @-@ American in Michigan basketball history . 
 Michigan entered the 2013 NCAA Men 's Division I Basketball Tournament as the youngest team in the field . The team made its first Sweet Sixteen appearance since the 1993 – 94 team did so . The Wolverines appeared in the national championship game for the first time since 1989 – appearances in 1992 and 1993 were vacated due to a scandal . Following the season , at the 2013 NBA Draft , Burke and Hardaway were selected ninth and twenty @-@ fourth , respectively , becoming the first pair of first @-@ round NBA draft choices from Michigan since the 1994 NBA Draft . 
 = = Preseason roster changes = = 
 = = = Departures = = = 
 The team lost both of its captains from the prior season to graduation after they completed their eligibility . Senior two @-@ time captain Douglass turned pro , joining Basket Navarra Club of the Liga Española de Baloncesto . Senior three @-@ time captain Novak graduated to play for <unk> <unk> in the Dutch Basketball League . In addition to the loss of senior co @-@ captains , the team lost three players who decided to transfer : Evan Smotrycz , Carlton <unk> and Colton Christian . Smotrycz , who transferred to Maryland , had started in 42 of the 69 games he played during his first two years . He left the program as the fifth @-@ best all @-@ time three @-@ point shooter with a percentage of 40 @.@ 5 . <unk> transferred to Detroit and Christian transferred to Florida International . The program also announced the departure of walk @-@ on Sai <unk> and the return of walk @-@ on Corey Person for a fifth year . 
 = = = 2012 – 13 team recruits = = = 
 Glenn Robinson III , son of former first overall NBA draft pick Glenn Robinson , verbally committed on September 14 , 2010 as the first commitment in Michigan ’ s class of 2012 . On March 26 , 2011 , Michigan received its second verbal commitment of the class of 2012 from Canadian wing guard Nik Stauskas . On November 3 , Mitch McGary , who was ranked as the number two prospect in the nation at the time , announced his verbal commitment to Michigan . Within hours of the commitment , ESPN announced that Michigan ranked as the fifth best class in the nation . Each of the three signed a National Letter of Intent with the team on November 9 . After several other schools announced their commitments , the signing of McGary moved Michigan from outside the top 25 at the end of October to the number 7 class in the nation by mid @-@ November , according to ESPN . That November , McGary , Robinson and Stauskas ranked 3 , 34 , and 79 , respectively , in the Rivals.com Class of 2012 Top 150 . 
 All three recruits had playoff success : McGary was a member of Brewster Academy 's National Prep Championship team . Stauskas earned the championship game MVP of the NEPSAC Class AA Championship after leading St. Mark 's to victory . Robinson led Lake Central to its first Indiana High School Athletic Association sectional title in 15 years . He earned the Post @-@ Tribune 's Boys basketball player of the year award for Northwest Indiana and the state MVP from the Indiana Basketball News . 
 McGary was invited to participate in the four @-@ team April 1 , 2012 All @-@ American Championship , along with future teammate Robinson in New Orleans . Robinson was awarded the ESPNHS All @-@ American Championship Player of the Game for his 16 @-@ point , 4 @-@ rebound performance , which included 5 dunks among his 6 @-@ for @-@ 7 shooting night . McGary was also selected to represent USA Basketball at the fifteenth annual Nike Hoops Summit on April 7 as part of the 2012 USA Junior National Select Team . 
 Michael " Spike " Albrecht committed to Michigan on April 6 , 2012 . Albrecht led Northfield Mount Hermon School to the 2012 NEPSAC Class AAA Boys ' Basketball Tournament , defeating McGary 's Brewster Academy in the semifinals . Albrecht was MVP of the tournament . Albrecht was a former AAU teammate of McGary and Robinson . Albrecht 's and outgoing captain Novak 's fathers were collegiate teammates . Albrecht was a 2011 graduate of Crown Point High School . After most of the big signings announced their decisions on the April 11 signing day , Michigan was ranked as the early number 5 preseason selection as a team by ESPN . 
 = = 2013 – 14 team recruits = = 
 Zak Irvin was named 2013 Indiana Mr. Basketball , giving Hamilton Southeastern High School the state 's first back @-@ to @-@ back winners ( Gary Harris ) from the same high school . Derrick Walton was runner up in the 2013 Mr. Basketball of Michigan by a 2130 – 2086 margin to Iowa State signee Monte Morris despite having one more first place vote . Both Walton and Irvin were 2013 Parade All @-@ American honorees and were named state Boys Basketball Gatorade Player of the Year . 
 = = Roster = = 
 = = Preseason = = 
 Michigan basketball hosted its on campus media day press conference on October 10 , 2012 at Crisler Center . The team was represented by Burke , Hardaway , Morgan and Beilein at the Big Ten Conference Basketball Media Day press conference on October 24 in Rosemont , Illinois . When the 24 @-@ person Big Ten Media poll was announced , Michigan was predicted to finish second to Indiana . Burke was a preseason All @-@ Conference selection by the same media . 
 Michigan enjoyed high expectations from the national media as well during the preseason . Sporting News named them to the number 5 position in its preseason poll , while conference foes Indiana and Ohio State were ranked number 1 and 3 , respectively . Michigan also earned the number 5 ranking in both the preseason Coaches ' Poll and preseason Associated Press poll , but behind Indiana ( # 1 ) and Ohio State ( # 4 ) in both . This was Michigan 's highest preseason ranking since the 1992 – 93 team . Sports Illustrated ranked Michigan number 9 in its October preseason power rankings , again behind Indiana ( # 1 ) and Ohio State ( # 6 ) , but when it printed its November preseason poll listed Michigan at number 6 ahead of Ohio State ( # 7 ) , but behind Indiana ( # 1 ) . Prior to the first exhibition game on November 1 , senior Josh Bartelstein was named team captain . 
 ESPN 's Eamonn Brennan noted that Michigan was a perimeter oriented team with possibly the best one @-@ two guard combination in the country . Burke and Hardaway were both preseason John R. Wooden Award top 50 selections . Burke was a preseason All @-@ American ( Associated Press first team , CBS Sports second team , Sports Illustrated second team , ESPN second team , Sporting News third team ) as well as a preseason Naismith Award top 50 selection . 
 = = Slogans , nicknames and emblems = = 
 = = = WE ON = = = 
 The acronym " WE ON " was the slogan for the whole team for the 2012 – 13 season . The team and coaching staff selected it at the beginning of the season as another way for Michigan to say Bo Schembechler 's famous quote , " the Team , the Team , the Team . " The acronym " WE ON " stands for " When Everyone Operates N <unk> . " Michigan assistant coach Bacari Alexander even tweeted that the acronym summarizes this team @-@ focused mindset . According to David Brandon , assistant coach LaVall Jordan and director of basketball operations Travis Conlan guided the team to develop the slogan . 
 Adidas warm up shirts were created and were first worn on November 21 , 2012 , before Michigan 's NIT Season Tip @-@ Off game against the Pittsburgh Panthers . The shirts use the school colors with blue with maize lettering . On February 12 , 2013 , when Michigan played the first of two regularly scheduled rivalry games against Michigan State , students in the <unk> at the Breslin Center wore T @-@ shirts with " YOU OFF " printed in Spartan colors ( green and white ) . Michigan State went on to win the game by 23 points . 
 " WE " – WE is also an acronym for " Wolverine Excellence " , which is chiefly used by the team . Wolverine Excellence calls for players and managers to focus on its five core values : integrity , unity , passion , diligence and appreciation . 
 " ON " – ON represented each player 's individual commitment to season @-@ long improvement . There was a " U @-@ M Fuse Box " ( mock @-@ University of Michigan set of switches ) in the Men 's Basketball locker room in Crisler Center . Each player had selected one word on which to focus during the season and before every practice and game , each player flipped their switch " on . " This represented each player 's commitment to improvement every day . 
 = = = Fresh Five = = = 
 Prior to the season , the five freshman were dubbed the " Fresh Five " , a moniker hearkening remembrance of the incoming freshman class of 1991 , known as the Fab Five , that led Michigan to back @-@ to @-@ back Championship games while starting the majority of games . However , the nickname and its expectations were downplayed most of the season by the team . Nonetheless , during the final two weeks of the regular season The New York Times ran a feature story on the team that reinvigorated the nickname while noting that the current five were the supporting cast rather than the stars of the team like the original five . 
 = = = Canadian flag = = = 
 ESPN 's Chantel Jennings tweeted a picture of a Flag of Canada redone in Michigan 's team colors of maize and blue at Crisler Arena on December 4 . One of her followers noted that the big version on the wall was a general Stauskas fan flag and that a little version of the flag was added next to it for each three @-@ pointer Canadian Stauskas made in the game . By mid @-@ December of his freshman season , the students in the Maize Rage ( Michigan student section at Crisler Arena ) had begun cheering Stauskas on with such a flag . The Michigan Public & Media Relations office started mentioning the flag before Christmas . The flag was mentioned widely in the press as he continued his hot shooting into January . Through the first week of January , Stauskas was shooting 53 @.@ 7 % on three @-@ point shots as the team held a 15 – 0 record . 
 = = = 96 = = = 
 The team , which represented Michigan Basketball for the ninety @-@ sixth season in the Big Ten Conference , is sometimes referred to as Team 96 or Squad 96 . Although this team represented Michigan for the ninety @-@ sixth consecutive year , there was controversy as to whether the team should in fact be marketed as Team 96 because the 1908 – 09 Michigan Wolverines men 's basketball team was not properly accounted for among the prior teams . The subsequent team was marketed as Team 98 . 
 = = Schedule = = 
 = = = Regular season = = = 
 = = = = November = = = = 
 Hardaway began the season with his fourth career double @-@ double by scoring 25 points ( including 5 @-@ for @-@ 5 three @-@ point shooting ) and adding 10 rebounds in a 100 – 62 win over Slippery Rock ; this earned him his second career Big Ten Player of the Week award . The 100 @-@ point November 9 performance was Michigan 's first since the 2007 – 08 team posted 103 points against Oakland on December 12 , 2007 . 
 Michigan hosted games for the first two rounds of the 2012 NIT Season Tip @-@ Off . The team 's first game of the tournament , a November 12 contest against the IUPUI Jaguars , resulted in a 91 – 54 Michigan victory . The win also gave Michigan its first consecutive 90 @-@ point performances since the 2000 – 01 team recorded three consecutive 90 @-@ point games . The following night , Michigan defeated Cleveland State by a 77 – 47 margin , marking the first time the school opened the season with three consecutive 30 @-@ point victories . The win also marked the first time Michigan had posted three consecutive 30 @-@ point wins since the 1988 – 89 Wolverines team ( the 1989 national champion ) won five consecutive 30 @-@ point games . 
 In the championship rounds of the NIT Season Tip @-@ Off tournament at Madison Square Garden on November 21 and November 23 , Michigan defeated Pittsburgh and Kansas State , respectively , to win the tournament . Hardaway , who totaled 39 points at the Garden , was the tournament MVP and was joined on the all @-@ tournament team by Burke , who contributed 27 points and 10 assists . Stauskas earned Big Ten Freshman of the Week honors for his NIT tournament performance in which he averaged 12 @.@ 5 points and 4 @.@ 5 rebounds . On November 27 , Michigan raised its Big Ten championship banner from the season before . Then , the team defeated its first ranked opponent of the season – NC State ( # 18 AP / # 18 Coaches ) – in the ACC – Big Ten Challenge . The win was supported by Burke 's first career double @-@ double which included a career @-@ high 11 assists , no turnovers and 18 points as well as a career @-@ high 20 points from Stauskas in a 79 – 72 victory . 
 = = = = December = = = = 
 Ranked third in both polls , Michigan established a record as the highest ranked visiting team in the history of Carver Arena on December 1 . Giving Stauskas his first career start , Michigan emerged victorious over Bradley . It was the third game of the season that Michigan never trailed in . Stauskas repeated as Big Ten Freshman of the Week on December 3 for his back @-@ to @-@ back 20 @-@ point performances . 
 On December 4 , Michigan defeated Western Michigan 73 – 41 , giving the team its first 8 – 0 start since the 1996 – 97 team ; the team never trailed in the game . Michigan defeated Arkansas 80 – 67 in its December 8 matchup . It marked the fourth 9 – 0 start in school history ( 1988 – 89 , 1985 – 86 and 1926 – 27 ) and the third consecutive game that Michigan never trailed . Michigan went to 10 – 0 on December 11 by defeating Binghamton 67 – 39 . 
 Michigan traveled to play in the December 15 Brooklyn Hoops Winter Festival at the Barclays Center , where they defeated West Virginia ( coach Beilein 's previous employer ) 81 – 66 to move to 11 – 0 for the third time in school history ( 1985 – 86 and 1988 – 89 ) . The team never trailed in the contest . For averaging 23 @.@ 0 points , 6 @.@ 5 assists , 4 @.@ 5 rebounds and 2 @.@ 0 steals with only 1 @.@ 0 turnover in the games against Binghamton and West Virginia , Burke earned Player of the Week on December 17 . 
 On December 20 , the team became the second in school in history ( 1985 – 86 went 16 – 0 ) to reach 12 – 0 when it beat Eastern Michigan . After recording his first career double @-@ double in the game with only 18 minutes of play , McGary was recognized as Big Ten Freshman of the Week . Hardaway suffered an ankle injury that caused him to miss the December 29 game against Central Michigan and that broke his 81 consecutive games played streak that went back to the beginning of his Michigan career . The game also marked the team 's second game without Jon Horford , who dislocated his knee during the West Virginia game . In Hardaway 's absence , Burke posted his second career double @-@ double with 22 points and a career @-@ high tying 11 assists and Robinson posted his second career 20 @-@ point game . Stauskas added career highs with 5 three @-@ pointers and 7 rebounds and earned his third Big Ten Freshman of the Week award on December 31 . The thirteenth win clinched Michigan 's ninth perfect non @-@ conference regular season record . The team never trailed in the contest . 
 = = = = January = = = = 
 On January 3 , Michigan opened the 2012 – 13 Big Ten conference schedule with a 94 – 66 win over Northwestern to move to 14 – 0 . Burke had 23 points , 5 assists and a career high 4 steals , while Hardaway added 21 points , Morgan posted a double @-@ double with 12 points and 13 rebounds , while Stauskas and Robinson added 10 points each . Burke and Robinson both posted their third and first career double @-@ doubles , respectively , in a 95 – 67 victory against Iowa on January 6 . It marked the first time that the team scored 90 points in back @-@ to @-@ back conference games since the 1999 – 2000 team and tied for the most points in a conference game since the 1997 – 98 team . On January 7 , Burke was recognized as Big Ten Conference Player of the Week and Robinson was recognized as Conference Freshman of the Week . 
 The team tied the school record for best start by defeating Nebraska for its 16th straight victory to start the season on January 9 . The victory also marked Beilein 's 400th Division I coaching victory . On January 13 , the team lost to Ohio State ( # 15 AP / # 14 Coaches ) snapping their winning streak . Horford returned to the lineup after missing 5 games . Michigan had been the only remaining unbeaten team and was expected to be ranked # 1 if they had won . The loss was Michigan 's 9th straight in Columbus . 
 Michigan defeated Minnesota ( # 9 AP / # 12 Coaches ) at Williams Arena on January 17 , marking the first time Michigan defeated a top @-@ 10 team on the road since a December 6 , 1996 , victory by the 1996 – 97 team over Duke . After his performance , in which he scored 21 points while making 7 of 8 shots and 4 of 5 three @-@ point shots , in addition to recording 5 rebounds , 3 assists , 3 steals and 2 blocks , Hardaway earned a second Big Ten Player of the Week Award . 
 Michigan defeated Purdue 68 – 53 on January 24 and Illinois 74 – 60 on January 27 . This gave Michigan the first 19 – 1 start in school history . Robinson earned his second Big Ten Freshman of the Week award on January 28 for a pair of 12 @-@ point performances during a week in which he averaged 8 rebounds while maintaining 71 @.@ 4 % field goal percentage . Later that day , Michigan was ranked number one in the AP Poll with 51 of the 65 first place votes . It marked the first time Michigan ranked atop the AP Poll since the Fab Five 1992 – 93 team did so on December 5 , 1992 . 
 Michigan concluded January by beating Northwestern a second time on January 30 , becoming the first team in the country to reach 20 wins . After enduring an injured ankle against Illinois , starting center Jordan Morgan missed his first game since redshirting a full season for the 2009 – 10 Wolverines when he sat out the Northwestern game . Horford started in his place . 
 = = = = February = = = = 
 On February 2 , 2013 , Michigan ( # 1 AP / # 2 Coaches ) appeared on ESPN 's College GameDay against Indiana ( # 3 AP / # 3 Coaches ) who hosted the game at Assembly Hall . Michigan lost 81 – 73 , but the television broadcast of the game on ESPN set a Big Ten record for viewership with 4 @.@ 035 million viewers . Morgan only played two minutes behind replacement starter Horford . Michigan then defeated Ohio State ( # 10 AP / # 10 Coaches ) in overtime in the rematch at home on February 5 . Starting center Morgan only played 4 minutes . Coach Beilein noted that Morgan 's absence affected the team 's ability to match up defensively and substitute as it desired . 
 Michigan lost to Wisconsin on February 9 in overtime following a half @-@ court buzzer beater by Wisconsin that tied the game in regulation It marked Michigan 's eleventh consecutive loss against Wisconsin on the road . Morgan did not play , but McGary played 32 minutes , totaling 12 points , 3 steals and 8 rebounds . However , dramatically increased play in Morgan 's absence enabled McGary to earn his second Big Ten Freshman of the Week honor on February 11 . 
 On February 12 , Michigan lost 75 – 52 in its rivalry game against ( # 8 AP / # 8 Coaches ) Michigan State . Among those in attendance were Rick Snyder , Matthew Stafford , Mark Dantonio , Brady Hoke , and Lloyd Carr . It marked the first time both teams were ranked in the top ten of the AP Poll , and resulted in Michigan losing back @-@ to @-@ back games and three consecutive road games for the first time since the 2010 – 11 team did so . Burke 's 18 points , 4 assists and 3 steals were one of Michigan 's few bright spots in their February 12 contest . 
 On February 17 against Penn State , Burke posted a season @-@ high 29 points along with 5 assists , 3 rebounds and two steals . As a result of his efforts , Burke won his third player of the week award of the season and fourth of his career on February 18 . Morgan returned to the starting lineup in the Penn State contest , but he only played 7 minutes . 
 After playing only 22 total minutes since January 27 , Morgan played more minutes ( 17 ) than the other low post players ( McGary , Horford , and Max Bielfeldt ) for the first time on February 24 against Illinois . Michigan defeated Illinois 71 – 58 behind 26 points and 8 assists from Burke . In the game , Burke became the seventh Wolverine sophomore to reach 1000 career points . On February 27 , Michigan surrendered a 15 @-@ point second @-@ half lead to give Penn State its only conference win of the season . Following the game , the team called a rare players @-@ only meeting at the Pizza House , with fifth @-@ year reserve Corey Person doing most of the talking . 
 = = = = March = = = = 
 On March 3 , Michigan defeated Michigan State ( # 9 AP / # 10 Coaches ) in the Ann Arbor rematch of their rivalry series as Trey Burke made 2 steals in the final 30 seconds to secure the 58 – 57 victory . Michigan snapped a 453 @-@ game streak with at least one made three @-@ point shot and became the first team since February 2009 to defeat a top ten opponent without making one . On March 6 , with its Big 10 Conference Championship destiny in its own hands , Michigan defeated Purdue to set up a championship showdown with Indiana on March 10 . Michigan concluded its road schedule with a 5 – 5 record . 
 Michigan closed out the season by losing to Indiana ( # 2 AP / # 2 Coaches ) on March 10 , failing its pursuit of defense of its conference co @-@ championship . Michigan led by 5 with 52 seconds to go , but then missed 3 free throws , including the first attempt during 2 one @-@ and @-@ one situations . Burke and Morgan also missed last @-@ second shots at the rim . Michigan wound down its regular season with its fifteenth sellout and five seniors on the roster : Eso Akunne , Josh Bartelstein , Blake McLimans , Corey Person , and Matt Vogrich . The loss kept Michigan from its first undefeated home season since the 1976 – 77 team . 
 = = = Postseason = = = 
 Michigan participated in the 2013 Big Ten Conference Men 's Basketball Tournament at the United Center in Chicago . As the # 5 seed , they defeated Penn State in the opening round on March 14 by an 83 – 66 margin . In the second round , the team lost to Wisconsin , 68 – 59 . Prior to the 2013 NCAA Men 's Division I Basketball Tournament , Jeff Goodman of CBSSports.com named Michigan first among tournament teams in terms of having the most future NBA talent on its roster ( in the absence of Kentucky , which was left to accept an invitation to the 2013 National Invitation Tournament ) . Among Michigan 's starting lineup , Burke , Robinson , Hardaway , and McGary were all expected to be likely NBA Draft choices , while Stauskas had the potential to be one . 
 Despite its highly touted lineup , Michigan entered the tournament as the sixth youngest team in the country and the youngest team in the field of 68 teams according to Sports Illustrated , based on weighted minutes played . The game marked Michigan 's first NCAA Championship Monday appearance since 1989 . Some sources claim 1993 as the school 's last appearance , but those results have been vacated by the NCAA due to the University of Michigan basketball scandal . 
 Michigan was entered in the tournament 's South region where it would play its first two games at The Palace of Auburn Hills in nearby Auburn Hills , Michigan . As a number four seed , Michigan opened the tournament by defeating South Dakota State 71 – 56 , giving the team its most wins in 20 years and matching Beilein 's career high as it raised its record to 27 – 7 . Michigan then ousted 5th @-@ seeded VCU by a 78 – 53 margin . That gave Michigan its first Sweet Sixteen appearance since the 1993 – 94 team went to the 1994 NCAA Men 's Division I Basketball Tournament . 
 = = = = Sweet Sixteen = = = = 
 The regional championship rounds for Michigan were at AT & T Stadium in Arlington , Texas . On March 29 against Kansas , Michigan overcame a 14 @-@ point deficit with 6 : 50 remaining and a 10 @-@ point deficit with 2 : 52 remaining to force overtime before an eventual victory . Burke scored eight points in the final 1 : 15 of regulation time , including a game @-@ tying long three @-@ pointer with 4 @.@ 2 seconds remaining . McGary ( 25 points and 14 rebounds ) and Burke ( 23 points and 10 assists ) both posted double @-@ doubles . 
 In the regional finals on March 31 against Florida , Michigan built a 13 – 0 lead and never led by less than 10 the rest of the game . Several players had career @-@ highs in the game : Stauskas with 6 three @-@ point shots , Burke 8 rebounds , McGary 5 steals and off the bench Albrecht 7 points and 3 steals . Eight of McGary 's 11 points came as Michigan built the initial 13 – 0 lead and 5 of Stauskas ' 6 three @-@ pointers came as Michigan built a 41 – 17 lead and closed the half with a 47 – 30 lead . Burke was named South Regional Tournament Most Outstanding Player . McGary and Stauskas joined Burke on the five @-@ man South All @-@ Regional team . Following the regional championship postgame prayer and with Mrs. Beilein 's consent , McGary and Hardaway gave Beilein a Gatorade shower . 
 = = = = Final four = = = = 
 The national championship rounds were held at the Georgia Dome in Atlanta , Georgia . In the April 6 national semifinal against Syracuse , Michigan emerged with its thirty @-@ first victory , the most since the 1992 – 93 team went 31 – 5 . McGary posted 10 points , 12 rebounds and 6 assists , while the bench contributed 22 points , including 6 from Albrecht , who raised his NCAA tournament total to 5 @-@ for @-@ 5 on three @-@ point shots . 
 Michigan lost the April 8 national championship game against Midwest number one seed Louisville by an 82 – 76 score . Albrecht scored 17 first @-@ half points on 4 @-@ for @-@ 4 three @-@ point shooting . Burke scored 24 points in the championship game and made the seven @-@ man All @-@ Tournament team ( which was revised multiple times ) along with teammates McGary and Albrecht . The turning point of the game was described as a missed call by the referees when , as Michigan trailed 67 – 64 with 5 minutes left , Burke pinned Peyton Siva 's dunk attempt with a clean , all @-@ ball block , but was called for a foul , resulting in two made free throws by Silva . Michigan never got closer than 4 points the rest of the game . 
 = = = Results = = = 
 = = Statistics = = 
 Statistics come from the team 's website : 
 Burke 's 260 assists set a school single @-@ season record . He also finished his sophomore season with 1 @,@ 231 career points , surpassing the former school record for sophomore season career point total of 1 @,@ 218 by Chris Webber . Stauskas reached a total of 80 made three @-@ point shots , which surpassed Hardaway 's 2 @-@ year @-@ old school freshman season record of 76 . 
 = = Rankings = = 
 = = Watchlists and awards = = 
 = = = Preseason = = = 
 = = = In @-@ season = = = 
 Stauskas also earned recognition from Sports Illustrated 's Seth Davis as National Freshman of the Week on December 3 . On January 9 , Burke earned the Oscar Robertson National Player of the Week from the United States Basketball Writers Association ( USBWA ) . Burke also earned ESPN.com Player of the Week recognition on April 1 . 
 The Wooden Award midseason top 25 list , which included Burke , was announced on January 10 . On January 31 , Burke was named to the Oscar Robertson Trophy ( USBWA National Player of the Year ) midseason top 12 list , while Stuaskas and Robinson were named to the Wayman Tisdale Award ( USBWA National Freshman of the Year ) top 12 midseason list . Burke was one of six Big Ten players named among the top 30 finalists for the Naismith Award when the list was announced on February 26 . Burke was among four Big Ten Players on the March 4 14 @-@ man Robertson watchlist . On March 9 , Burke was named among the top 15 Wooden Award finalists . On March 11 , Burke was named one of five finalists for the Cousy Award . Burke was named one of four finalists for the Naismith Award on March 24 . 
 Burke was named a first @-@ team All @-@ American by Sporting News on March 11 , the USBWA on March 18 , Sports Illustrated on March 19 , CBSSports.com on March 20 , the National Association of Basketball Coaches ( NABC ) on March 28 , and the Associated Press on April 1 . Burke was one of four Big Ten players named to the 10 @-@ man Wooden All @-@ American team of finalists for the Wooden Award on April 1 . On April 1 , Robinson was one of two Big Ten players ( Harris ) named to the 21 @-@ man 2013 Kyle Macy Freshman All @-@ America team . Burke became the fifth Consensus All @-@ American ( Cazzie Russell , Rickey Green , Gary Grant and Webber ) in school history . 
 SI also named Burke National Player of the Year , making him the second ( Russell , 1966 ) National Player of the Year in school history . On April 4 , Burke won the Bob Cousy Award and was named Associated Press College Basketball Player of the Year . Burke won both the Oscar Robertson Trophy from the USBWA as well as the John R. Wooden Award on April 5 . On April 7 , he won the NABC Player of the Year and Naismith College Player of the Year awards , giving him a sweep of the four major player of the year awards . 
 Burke earned Big Ten Conference Men 's Basketball Player of the Year in 2013 and was a unanimous 2012 – 13 All @-@ Big Ten 1st team selection . Hardaway was a 1st team selection by the coaches and second team by the media . Robinson was an honorable mention All @-@ Conference selection and All @-@ freshman honoree by the coaches . Morgan was a coaches All @-@ defensive team selection . On March 12 , the USBWA named Burke and Hardaway to its 2012 – 13 Men 's All @-@ District V ( OH , IN , IL , MI , MN , WI ) Team , based upon voting from its national membership . Burke was recognized as District V Player of the Year . Burke and Hardaway were selected to the NABC Division I All ‐ District 7 first team on March 26 , as selected and voted on by member coaches of the NABC , making them eligible for the State Farm Coaches ’ Division I All @-@ America team . On that same day , Burke was selected to the 21 @-@ man 2013 Lute Olson All @-@ America Team . 
 John Beilein was selected as an assistant coach for the 2013 World University Games . Seniors Josh Bartelstein and Matt Vogrich were among the 38 Big Ten men 's basketball players recognized as Winter Academic All @-@ Big Ten for maintaining 3 @.@ 0 averages . Trey Burke was named team MVP . 
 = = 2013 NBA Draft = = 
 Prior to the final four , McGary stated that he would not enter the 2013 NBA Draft , but a few days later said he had been caught off guard and would prefer to respond after he had time to reflect on his season . 
 At 12 : 30 PM ET on April 4 , Forbes sports business reporter Darren <unk> tweeted that Burke and teammate Hardaway would declare for the 2013 NBA Draft . According to Heiter , one of Burke 's potential sports agents was Alonzo Shavers , who had known Burke since his birth . Burke 's mother responded at 2 : 15 PM that same day that " He has not made any decision " about going pro , according to Yahoo ! Sports reporter Eric Adelson . At 2 : 23 PM , <unk> tweeted that Hardaway , Sr. said his son was undecided . 
 On April 9 before boarding the airplane to return from the NCAA Final Four , Beilein met with Burke , Hardaway , Robinson and McGary to direct them to seek the advice of the NBA advisory committee . The draft board had until April 15 to develop each individual report and the players had until April 28 to enter the draft . On that same date , ESPN 's Jason King predicted that if all four players had left for the NBA draft , the 2013 – 14 team would have begun the season unranked . USA Today projected on April 9 that if one of the four possible 2013 NBA draft entrants returned , Michigan could have been ranked number twenty @-@ four , and that if they all returned , Michigan would have been preseason number one . ESPN journalist Myron Medcalf predicted on April 12 that Burke and Hardaway would enter the draft and that McGary and Robinson were on the borderline of doing so . 
 On April 13 , reports surfaced that Burke would announce that he would enter the NBA Draft at a press conference the following day . He entered the 2013 NBA Draft on April 14 . On April 17 , Hardaway declared for the NBA Draft . McGary and Robinson announced on April 18 that they had decided not to enter their names in the NBA Draft . 
 On June 27 , 2013 Burke was selected ninth in the 2013 NBA Draft by the Milwaukee Bucks and then traded to the Utah Jazz for the fourteenth and twenty @-@ first picks , which were used to select Shabazz Muhammad and Gorgui Dieng . Hardaway was drafted twenty @-@ fourth by the New York Knicks . Burke and Hardaway became the first Michigan duo selected in the first round since Juwan Howard and Jalen Rose in the 1994 NBA Draft . Burke became the first top @-@ 10 Wolverine selection since Jamal Crawford in the 2000 NBA Draft , and joined Victor Oladipo and Cody Zeller , who were selected second and fourth , respectively , to give the Big Ten its first top ten trio since the 1990 NBA Draft . Hardaway joined his father , who was picked fourteenth in 1989 NBA Draft , as a first round selection . 
 = = = Team players drafted into the NBA = = = 
 Every player that started in the 2013 national championship game was drafted either in the 2013 or 2014 NBA draft . 
 Sources : 
 = = Postseason roster changes = = 
 Following the season the team lost five seniors from the roster : guard Eso Akunne , guard Josh Bartelstein ( captain ) , forward Blake McLimans , guard Corey Person and guard Matt Vogrich . The team 's required 10 @-@ year dissociation with players implicated in the University of Michigan basketball scandal ended on May 8 , 2013 . Bartelstein blogged for the team from October 15 , 2010 , until April 11 , 2013 . His blogs from this season were turned into an ebook about the season entitled We On : Behind the Scenes of Michigan 's Final Four Run . 
 = Prosperity theology = 
 Prosperity theology ( sometimes referred to as the prosperity gospel , the health and wealth gospel , or the gospel of success ) is a religious belief among some Christians that financial blessing is the will of God for them , and that faith , positive speech , and donations ( possibly to Christian ministries ) will increase one 's material wealth . They are based on interpretations of the Bible traditional in Judaism ( with respect to the Hebrew Bible ) , though less so in Christianity . Prosperity theology views the Bible as a contract between God and humans : if humans have faith in God , he will deliver his promises of security and prosperity . Confessing these promises to be true is perceived as an act of faith , which God will honor . 
 The doctrine emphasizes the importance of personal empowerment , proposing that it is God 's will for his people to be happy . The atonement ( reconciliation with God ) is interpreted to include the alleviation of sickness and poverty , which are viewed as curses to be broken by faith . This is believed to be achieved through donations of money , visualization , and positive confession , and is often taught in mechanical and contractual terms . 
 It was during the Healing Revivals of the 1950s that prosperity theology first came to prominence in the United States , although commentators have linked the origins of its theology to the New Thought movement which began in the 19th century . The prosperity teaching later figured prominently in the Word of Faith movement and 1980s televangelism . In the 1990s and 2000s , it was adopted by influential leaders in the Charismatic Movement and promoted by Christian missionaries throughout the world , sometimes leading to the establishment of mega @-@ churches . Prominent leaders in the development of prosperity theology include E. W. Kenyon , Oral Roberts , TD Jakes , A. A. Allen , Robert Tilton , T. L. Osborn , Joel Osteen , Creflo Dollar , Kenneth Copeland , Reverend Ike and Kenneth Hagin . 
 Prosperity theology has been criticized by leaders in the Pentecostal and Charismatic movements , as well as other Christian denominations . These leaders maintain that it is irresponsible , promotes idolatry , and is contrary to scripture . Some critics have proposed that prosperity theology cultivates authoritarian organizations , with the leaders controlling the lives of the adherents . The doctrine has also become popular in South Korea ; academics have attributed some of its success to its parallels with the traditional shamanistic culture . Prosperity theology has drawn followers from the American middle class and poor , and has been likened to the cargo cult phenomenon , traditional African religion , and black liberation theology . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Late 19th and early 20th @-@ century background = = = 
 According to historian Kate Bowler , the prosperity gospel was formed from the intersection of three different ideologies : Pentecostalism , New Thought , and " an American gospel of pragmatism , individualism , and upward mobility . " This " American gospel " was best exemplified by Andrew Carnegie 's Gospel of Wealth and Russell Conwell 's famous sermon " Acres of Diamonds " , in which Conwell equated poverty with sin and asserted that anyone could become rich through hard work . This gospel of wealth , however , was an expression of Muscular Christianity and understood success to be the result of personal effort rather than divine intervention . 
 The New Thought movement , which emerged in the 1880s , was responsible for popularizing belief in the power of the mind to achieve prosperity . While initially focused on achieving mental and physical health , New Thought teachers such as Charles Fillmore made material success a major emphasis of the movement . By the 20th century , New Thought concepts had saturated American popular culture , being common features of both self @-@ help literature and popular psychology . 
 E. W. Kenyon , a Baptist minister and adherent of the Higher Life movement , is credited with introducing mind @-@ power teachings into early Pentecostalism . In the 1890s , Kenyon attended Emerson College of Oratory where he was exposed to the New Thought movement . Kenyon later became connected with well @-@ known Pentecostal leaders and wrote about supernatural revelation and positive declarations . His writing influenced leaders of the nascent prosperity movement during the post @-@ war American healing revival . Kenyon and later leaders in the prosperity movement have denied that he was influenced by the New Thought movement . Anthropologist Simon Coleman argues that there are " obvious parallels " between Kenyon 's teachings and New Thought . 
 Kenyon taught that Christ 's substitutionary atonement secured for believers a right to divine healing . This was attained through positive , faith @-@ filled speech ; the spoken word of God allowed believers to appropriate the same spiritual power that God used to create the world and attain the provisions promised in Christ 's death and resurrection . Prayer was understood to be a binding , legal act . Rather than asking , Kenyon taught believers to demand healing since they were already legally entitled to receive it . 
 Kenyon 's blend of evangelical religion and mind @-@ power beliefs — what he termed " overcoming faith " — resonated with a small but influential segment of the Pentecostal movement . Pentecostals had always been committed to faith healing , and the movement also possessed a strong belief in the power of speech ( in particular speaking in tongues and the use of the names of God , especially the name of Jesus ) . Kenyon 's ideas would be reflected in the teachings of Pentecostal evangelists F. F. Bosworth and John G. Lake ( who co @-@ led a congregation with New Thought author Albert C. Grier prior to 1915 ) . 
 = = = Postwar Healing Revivals = = = 
 While Kenyon 's teachings on overcoming faith laid the groundwork for the prosperity gospel , the first generation of Pentecostals influenced by him and other figures , such as Bosworth , did not view faith as a means to attain material prosperity . In fact , early Pentecostals tended to view prosperity as a threat to a person 's spiritual well @-@ being . By the 1940s and 1950s , however , a recognizable form of the doctrine began to take shape within the Pentecostal movement through the teachings of deliverance and healing evangelists . Combining prosperity teaching with revivalism and faith healing , these evangelists taught " the laws of faith ( ' ask and ye shall receive ' ) and the laws of divine reciprocity ( ' give and it will be given back unto you ' ) " . 
 Oral Roberts began teaching prosperity theology in 1947 . He explained the laws of faith as a " blessing pact " in which God would return donations " seven fold " , promising that donors would receive back from unexpected sources the money they donated to him . Roberts offered to return any donation that did not lead to an equivalent unexpected payment . In the 1970s , Roberts characterized his blessing pact teaching as the " seed faith " doctrine : donations were a form of " seed " which would grow in value and be returned to the donor . Roberts began recruiting " partners " , wealthy donors who received exclusive conference invitations and ministry access in exchange for support . 
 In 1953 , faith healer A. A. Allen published The Secret to Scriptural Financial Success and promoted merchandise such as " miracle tent shavings " and prayer cloths anointed with " miracle oil " . In the late 1950s , Allen increasingly focused on prosperity . He taught that faith could miraculously solve financial problems and claimed to have had a miraculous experience in which God supernaturally changed one @-@ dollar bills into twenty @-@ dollar bills to allow him to pay his debts . Allen taught the " word of faith " or the power to speak something into being . 
 In the 1960s , prosperity became a primary focus in healing revivals . T. L. Osborn began emphasizing prosperity in the 1960s and became known for his often ostentatious displays of personal wealth . During that decade , Roberts and William <unk> criticized other prosperity ministries , arguing that their fund @-@ raising tactics unfairly pressured attendees . These tactics were prompted in part by the expense of developing nationwide radio networks and campaign schedules . At the same time , leaders of the Pentecostal Assemblies of God denomination often criticized the focus on prosperity taken by independent healing evangelists . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 During the 1960s , prosperity gospel teachers embraced televangelism and came to dominate religious programming in the United States . Oral Roberts led the way , developing a syndicated weekly program that became the most watched religious show in the United States . By 1968 , television had supplanted the tent meeting in his ministry . 
 Reverend Ike , a pastor from New York City , began preaching about prosperity in the late 1960s . He soon had widely aired radio and television programs and became distinguished for his flashy style . His openness about love for material possessions and teachings about the " Science of the Mind " led many evangelists to distance themselves from him . 
 In the 1980s , public attention in the United States was drawn to prosperity theology through the influence of prominent televangelists such as Jim Bakker . Bakker 's influence waned , however , after he was implicated in a high @-@ profile scandal . In the aftermath , Trinity Broadcasting Network ( TBN ) emerged as the dominant force in prosperity televangelism , having brought Robert Tilton and Benny Hinn to prominence . 
 = = = Word of Faith = = = 
 Although nearly all of the healing evangelists of the 1940s and ' 50s taught that faith could bring financial rewards , a new prosperity @-@ oriented teaching developed in the 1970s that differed from the one taught by Pentecostal evangelists of the 1950s . This " Positive Confession " or " Word of Faith " movement taught that a Christian with faith can speak into existence anything consistent with the will of God . 
 Kenneth Hagin was credited with a key role in the expansion of prosperity theology . He founded the <unk> Bible Training Center in 1974 , and over the next 20 years , the school trained more than 10 @,@ 000 students in his theology . As is true of other prosperity movements , there is no theological governing body for the Word of Faith movement , and well @-@ known ministries differ on some theological issues . The teachings of Kenneth Hagin have been described by Candy Gunther Brown of Indiana University as the most " orthodox " form of Word of Faith prosperity teaching . 
 = = = Recent U.S. history = = = 
 The Neo @-@ Pentecostal movement has been characterized in part by an emphasis on prosperity theology , which gained greater acceptance within charismatic Christianity during the late 1990s . By 2006 , three of the four largest congregations in the United States were teaching prosperity theology , and Joel Osteen has been credited with spreading it outside of the Pentecostal and Charismatic movement through his books , which have sold over 4 million copies . Bruce Wilkinson 's The Prayer of Jabez also sold millions of copies and invited readers to seek prosperity . 
 By the 2000s , adherents of prosperity theology in the United States were most common in the Sun Belt . In the late 2000s , proponents claimed that tens of millions of Christians had accepted prosperity theology . A 2006 poll by Time reported that 17 percent of Christians in America said they identified with the movement . There is no official governing body for the movement , though many ministries are unofficially linked . 
 In 2007 , U.S. Senator Chuck Grassley opened a probe into the finances of six televangelism ministries that promoted prosperity theology : Kenneth Copeland Ministries , Creflo Dollar Ministries , Benny Hinn Ministries , Bishop Eddie Long Ministries , Joyce Meyer Ministries , and Paula White Ministries . In January 2011 , Grassley concluded his investigation stating that he believed self @-@ regulation by religious organizations was preferable to government action . Only the ministries led by Meyer and Hinn cooperated fully with Grassley 's investigation . 
 = = Theology = = 
 Prosperity theology teaches that Christians are entitled to well @-@ being and , because physical and spiritual realities are seen as one inseparable reality , this is interpreted as physical health and economic prosperity . Teachers of the doctrine focus on personal empowerment , promoting a positive view of the spirit and body . They maintain that Christians have been given power over creation because they are made in the image of God and teach that positive confession allows Christians to exercise dominion over their souls and material objects around them . Leaders of the movement view the atonement as providing for the alleviation of sickness , poverty , and spiritual corruption ; poverty and illness are cast as curses which can be broken by faith and righteous actions . There are , however , some prosperity churches which seek a more moderate or reformed paradigm of prosperity . <unk> Caldwell , pastor of a Methodist mega @-@ church , supports a theology of abundant life , teaching prosperity for the whole human being , which he sees as a path to combating poverty . 
 Wealth is interpreted in prosperity theology as a blessing from God , obtained through a spiritual law of positive confession , visualization , and donations . This process is often taught in almost mechanical terms ; Kenneth Copeland , an American author and televangelist , argues that prosperity is governed by laws , while other teachers portray the process <unk> . Journalists David van <unk> and Jeff Chu of Time have described Word of Faith pastor Creflo Dollar 's teachings about prosperity as an inviolable contract between God and humanity . 
 The prosperity theology teaching of positive confession stems from its proponents ' view of scripture . The Bible is seen as a faith contract between God and believers ; God is understood to be faithful and just , so believers must fulfill their end of the contract to receive God 's promises . This leads to a belief in positive confession , the doctrine that believers may claim whatever they desire from God , simply by speaking it . Prosperity theology teaches that the Bible has promised prosperity for believers , so positive confession means that believers are speaking in faith what God has already spoken about them . Positive confession is practiced to bring about what is already believed in ; faith itself is a confession , and speaking it brings it into reality . 
 The teaching is often based on non @-@ traditional interpretations of Bible verses , the Book of Malachi often being given special attention . While Malachi has generally been celebrated by Christians for its passages about the messiah , teachers of prosperity theology usually draw attention to its descriptions of physical wealth . Frequently quoted verses include : 
 Malachi 3 : 10 : " Bring to the storehouse a full tenth of what you earn so there will be food in my house . Test me in this , " says the Lord All @-@ Powerful . " I will open the windows of heaven for you and pour out all the blessings you need " ( <unk> ) . 
 Matthew 25 : 14 – 30 : the Parable of the talents 
 John 10 : 10 : " I am come that they might have life , and that they might have it more abundantly " ( KJV ) . 
 Philippians 4 : 19 : " My God shall supply all your need according to his riches in glory by Christ Jesus " ( KJV ) . 
 3 John 1 : 2 : " Beloved , I wish above all things that thou <unk> prosper and be in health , even as thy soul <unk> " ( KJV ) . 
 Prosperity theology casts itself as the reclamation of true doctrine and thus part of a path to Christian dominion over secular society . It contends that God 's promises of prosperity and victory to Israel in the Old Testament apply to New @-@ Covenant Christians today , and that faith and holy actions release this prosperity . C. Peter Wagner , a leader of the New Apostolic Reformation , has argued that if Christians take dominion over aspects of society , the Earth will experience " peace and prosperity " . Some Latin Americans who have embraced prosperity theology argue that Christianity has historically placed an unnecessary focus on suffering . They often view this as a Roman Catholic doctrine that should be discarded and replaced with an emphasis on prosperity . Prosperity theology advocates also argue that biblical promises of blessings awaiting the poor have been unnecessarily <unk> , and should be understood literally . 
 = = = Practices = = = 
 Prosperity churches place a strong emphasis on the importance of giving . Some services include a teaching time focused on giving and prosperity , including Biblical references to tithing ; and then a sermon on another topic which follows the offering . Prosperity church leaders often claim a specific blessing can be exchanged for the money being donated to their ministry ; some have been reported to instruct worshipers to hold their donations above their heads during the prayer . 
 Congregants in prosperity churches are encouraged to speak positive statements about aspects of their lives that they wish to see improved . These statements , known as positive confessions , ( distinct from confessions of sin ) are said to miraculously change aspects of people 's lives if spoken with faith . Prosperity churches also encourage people to " live without limits " and cultivate optimism about their lives . T. D. Jakes , pastor of The Potter 's House non @-@ denominational mega @-@ church , has argued in favor of prosperity , rejecting what he sees as the demonization of success . He views poverty as a barrier to living a Christian life , suggesting that it is easier to make a positive impact on society when one is affluent . 
 While some prosperity churches have a reputation for manipulating and alienating the poor , many are involved in social programs . Underlying these programs is a theology of empowerment and human flourishing with the goal of releasing people from a " welfare " or " victim " mentality . Many prosperity churches hold seminars on financial responsibility . Kate Bowler , an academic who studies prosperity theology , has criticized such seminars , arguing that though they contain some sound advice the seminars often emphasize the purchase of expensive possessions . Hanna Rosin of The Atlantic argues that prosperity theology contributed to the housing bubble that caused the late @-@ 2000s financial crisis . She maintains that home ownership was heavily emphasized in prosperity churches , based on reliance on divine financial intervention that led to unwise choices based on actual financial ability . 
 = = = International growth = = = 
 In the 2000s , churches teaching prosperity theology saw significant growth in the Third World . According to Philip Jenkins of Pennsylvania State University , poor citizens of impoverished countries often find the doctrine appealing because of their economic powerlessness and the doctrine 's emphasis on miracles . One region seeing explosive growth is Western Africa , particularly Nigeria . In the Philippines , the El Shaddai movement , part of the Catholic Charismatic Renewal , has spread prosperity theology outside Protestant Christianity . One South Korean prosperity church , Yoido Full Gospel Church , gained attention in the 1990s by claiming to be the world 's largest congregation . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Socioeconomic analysis = = = 
 Most churches in the prosperity movement are non @-@ denominational and independent , though some groups have formed networks . Prosperity churches typically reject Presbyterian polity ( or governance ) and the idea that a pastor should be accountable to elders ; it is common for pastors of prosperity churches to be the highest organizational authority figure . Critics , including Sarah Posner and Joe <unk> , maintain that prosperity teachers cultivate authoritarian organizations . They argue that leaders attempt to control the lives of adherents by claiming divinely bestowed authority . Jenkins contends that prosperity theology is used as a tool to justify the high salaries of pastors . 
 In the United States , the movement has drawn many followers from the middle class and is most popular in commuter towns and urban areas . In Exporting the American Gospel : Global Christian Fundamentalism Steve Brouwer , Paul Gifford , and Susan Rose speculate that the movement was fueled by a prevailing disdain for social liberalism in the United States that began in the 1970s . Rosin argues that prosperity theology emerged because of broader trends , particularly American economic optimism in the 1950s and 1990s . Tony Lin of the University of Virginia has also compared the teaching to manifest destiny , the 19th @-@ century belief that the United States was entitled to the West . Marvin Harris argues that the doctrine 's focus on the material world is a symptom of the secularization of American religion . He sees it as an attempt to fulfill the American Dream by using supernatural power . 
 Prosperity theology has become popular among poor Americans , particularly those who seek personal and social advancement . It has seen significant growth in black and Hispanic churches and is particularly popular among immigrants . <unk> for the movement note its ethnic diversity and argue that it encompasses a variety of views . Joel Robbins of Cambridge University notes that most anthropologists attribute the theology 's appeal to the poor — especially in the Global South — to the fact that it promises security and helps explain capitalism . Simon Coleman developed a theory based on the doctrine 's rhetoric and the feeling of belonging it gave parishioners . In a study of the Swedish Word of Life Church , he noted that members felt part of a complex gift @-@ exchange system , giving to God and then awaiting a gift in return ( either from God directly or through another church member ) . Hillsong Church , the largest congregation in Australia , teaches a form of prosperity theology that emphasizes personal success . Marion Maddox has argued that this message has drawn a significant number of upwardly mobile Australians . 
 In a 1998 interview in Christianity Today , Bong Rin Ro of the Asia Graduate School of Theology suggested that the growth in popularity of prosperity theology in South Korea reflects a strong " shamanistic influence " . Bong pointed to parallels between the tradition of paying shamans for healing and the prosperity theology 's contractual doctrine about giving and blessings . Asia 's economic problems , he argued , encouraged the growth of the doctrine in South Korea , though he claims it ignores the poor and needy . During the interview , he stated that he saw the problem beginning to be reversed , citing calls for renewed faith and other practices . Cho Yong @-@ gi , pastor of Yoido Full Gospel Church in Seoul , has been criticized for <unk> Christianity . This criticism has focused on his healing and exorcism ministries and his promise of material blessings . Malaysian Christian writer Hwa Yung has defended Cho 's healing and exorcism ministries , arguing that he successfully contextualized the gospel in a culture where shamanism was still prevalent . However , Hwa criticizes Cho 's teaching of earthly blessings for not reflecting a trust in God 's daily provision and for their heavy focus on earthly wealth . 
 = = = Comparisons with other movements = = = 
 Historian Carter Lindberg of Boston University has drawn parallels between contemporary prosperity theology and the medieval indulgence trade . Coleman notes that several pre @-@ 20th century Christian movements in the United States taught that a holy lifestyle was a path to prosperity and that God @-@ ordained hard work would bring blessing . 
 Coleman has speculated that modern @-@ day prosperity theology borrows heavily from the New Thought movement , though he admits that the connection is sometimes unclear . Jenkins notes that critics draw a parallel between prosperity theology and the cargo cult phenomenon . While citing the popularity of prosperity theology in agrarian African communities , he argues that it can also bear similarities to traditional African religious rituals . J. Matthew Wilson of Southern Methodist University compares the movement to Black liberation theology owing to its focus on uplifting oppressed groups , though he notes that it differs in its concentration on individual success rather than corporate political change . 
 = = = Criticism = = = 
 Mainstream evangelicalism has consistently opposed prosperity theology as heresy and prosperity ministries have frequently come into conflict with other Christian groups , including those within the Pentecostal and Charismatic movements . Critics , such as Evangelical pastor Michael Catt , have argued that prosperity theology has little in common with traditional Christian theology . Prominent evangelical leaders , such as Rick Warren , Ben Witherington III , and Jerry Falwell , have harshly criticized the movement , sometimes denouncing it as heretical . Warren proposes that prosperity theology promotes the idolatry of money , and others argue that Jesus ' teachings indicate a disdain for material wealth . In Mark : Jesus , Servant and Savior , R. Kent Hughes notes that some 1st @-@ century rabbis portrayed material blessings as a sign of God 's favor . He cites Jesus ' statement in Mark 10 : 25 that " It is easier for a camel to go through the eye of a needle , than for a rich man to enter into the kingdom of God " ( KJV ) as evidence to oppose such thinking . 
 Other critics of the movement assail promises made by its leaders , arguing that the broad freedom from problems they promise is irresponsible . <unk> are often criticized for abusing the faith of their listeners by enriching themselves through large donations . Prosperity theology has been opposed for not adequately explaining the poverty of the Apostles . For instance , some theologians believe that the life and writings of Paul the Apostle , who is believed to have experienced significant suffering during his ministry , are particularly in conflict with prosperity theology . Cathleen <unk> , religion writer in an opinion piece in the Washington Post , points to the conflict with basic Christian teachings " Jesus was born poor , and he died poor . During his earthly tenure , he spoke time and again about the importance of spiritual wealth and health . When he talked about material wealth , it was usually part of a cautionary tale . " 
 In their book Health , Wealth and Happiness , theologians David Jones and Russell Woodbridge characterize the doctrine as poor theology . They suggest that righteousness cannot be earned and that the Bible does not promise an easy life . They argue that it is inconsistent with the gospel of Jesus and propose that the central message of the gospel should be Jesus ' life , death , and resurrection . Jones and Woodbridge see Jesus ' importance as vital , criticizing the prosperity gospel for marginalizing him in favor of a focus on human need . In another article , Jones criticizes the prosperity theology interpretation of the Abrahamic covenant , God 's promise to bless Abraham 's descendants , arguing that this blessing is spiritual and should already apply to all Christians . He also argues that the proponents of the doctrine misconstrue the atonement , criticizing their teaching that Jesus ' death took away poverty as well as sin . He believes that this teaching is drawn from a misunderstanding of Jesus ' life and criticizes John <unk> 's teaching that Jesus was wealthy as a misrepresentation , noting that Paul often taught Christians to give up their material possessions . Although he accepts giving as " praiseworthy " , he questions the motives of prosperity theology and criticizes the " Law of Compensation " , which teaches that when Christians give generously , God will give back more in return . Rather , Jones cites Jesus ' teaching to " give , hoping for nothing in return . " Jones and Woodbridge also note that Jesus instructed followers to focus on spiritual rewards , citing his command in Matthew 6 : 19 – 20 " Lay not up for yourselves treasures upon earth ... But lay up for yourselves treasures in heaven " ( KJV ) . Jones criticizes the doctrine 's view of faith : he does not believe that it should be used as a spiritual force for material gain but seen as selfless acceptance of God . 
 In 1980 , the General Council of the Assemblies of God criticized the doctrine of positive confession , noting examples of negative confessions in the Bible ( where Biblical figures express fears and doubts ) that had positive results and contrasting these examples with the focus on positive confessions taught by prosperity theology . The Council argues that the biblical Greek word often translated as " confess " literally translates as " to speak the same thing " , and refers to both positive and negative confessions . The statement also criticizes the doctrine for failing to recognize the will of God : God 's will should have precedence over the will of man , including their desires for wealth , and Christians should " recognize the sovereignty of God " . The statement further criticizes prosperity theology for overlooking the importance of prayer , arguing that prayer should be used for all requests , not simply positive confession . The Council noted that Christians should expect suffering in this life . They urge readers to apply practical tests to positive confession , arguing that the doctrine appeals to those who are already in affluent societies but that many Christians in other societies are impoverished or imprisoned . Finally , the paper criticizes the distinction made by advocates of prosperity theology in the two Greek words that mean " speaking " , arguing that the distinction is false and that they are used interchangeably in the Greek text . The Council accused prosperity theology of taking passages out of context to fulfill its own needs , with the result that doctrine of positive confession is contradictory to the holistic message of the Bible . 
 On the August 16 , 2015 episode of his HBO weekly series Last Week Tonight , John Oliver satirized prosperity theology by announcing that he had established his own tax @-@ exempt church , called Our Lady of Perpetual Exemption . In a lengthy segment , Oliver focused on what he characterized as the predatory conduct of televangelists who appeal for repeated gifts from people in financial distress or personal crises , and he criticized the very loose requirements for entities to obtain tax exempt status as churches under U.S. tax law . Oliver said that he would ultimately donate any money collected by the church to Doctors Without Borders . 
 = = Notable works advocating prosperity theology = = 
 Notable works that advocate prosperity theology include : 
 Oral Roberts ; Montgomery , G. H. ( 1966 ) . God 's Formula for Success and Prosperity . Abundant Life Publication . OCLC <unk> . 
 Gordon Lindsay ( 1960 ) . God 's Master Key to Prosperity . Christ For The Nations . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ <unk> @-@ 001 @-@ 6 . 
 Bruce Wilkinson ; Kopp , David ( 2000 ) . The Prayer of Jabez : Breaking Through to the Blessed Life . Multnomah Books . ISBN 978 @-@ 1 @-@ 57673 @-@ 733 @-@ 0 . 
 Joel Osteen ( 2004 ) . Your Best Life Now : 7 Steps to Living at Your Full Potential . <unk> . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 446 @-@ <unk> @-@ 4 . 
 Zig Ziglar ( 1975 ) . See You at the Top . Gretna : Pelican Pub . Co . ISBN 0 @-@ <unk> @-@ 126 @-@ X. 
 Zig Ziglar ( 2006 ) . Better Than Good : Creating a Life You Can 't Wait to Live . Nashville : Thomas Nelson Publishers . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 7852 @-@ <unk> @-@ 7 . 
 Zig Ziglar ; Tom Ziglar ( 2012 ) . Born to Win : Find Your Success Code . Dallas : SUCCESS Media . ISBN <unk> . 
 = Newton House , Llandeilo = 
 Newton House is a Grade II * listed country house situated just to the west of the market town of Llandeilo in Carmarthenshire , Wales . It is owned and maintained by the National Trust and lies within Dinefwr Park ( sometimes anglicised as " Dynevor " ) and the grounds of Dinefwr Castle . The original house was built during the Medieval period on a site which has been occupied for at least two millennia . The current house was built by Edward Rice in the Jacobean style in 1660 , though extensive changes were made in the 1850s in the Venetian Gothic style . The house played a role in the Rebecca Riots of 1843 , when the occupant of the house at the time , Colonel George Rice , received a death threat with an empty grave dug in the ground . After 1956 the property fell into turbulent times when two owners died within the space of a few years . It was sold in 1974 , and later fell into disrepair ; it was occupied by squatters and thieves who removed beams and furniture . 
 The house , along with Dinefwr Castle , have since been restored by the National Trust and Cadw respectively . It is a three @-@ storey castellated structure , built from grey stone , with four tall towers in each corner , with sloping slate roofs . The front features a grand central porch . Two rooms are open to the public , including a tearoom and exhibition in the basement and ground floor which contain numerous displays related to the history of the estate and occupants . The deer park which surrounds the property was landscaped by Capability Brown in 1775 . The surrounding woodland consists mainly of oak and wych elm . Newton House is cited as one of the most haunted houses in Wales , noted in particular for its ghost of Walter the Butler , a former employee whose tobacco smoke purportedly wafts through the air . 
 = = History = = 
 Dinefwr Park has a history of occupation spanning at least two millennia . A polished stone axe dated to the Neolithic period was unearthed on the site in 1976 , and during the Iron Age , a farm existed on the property . The Romans later built a pair of forts here , with one partly overlying the other . There are traces of Roman roads and tracks , some of which may have been part of the Carmarthen @-@ Llandovery Roman road . A Roman milestone and a coin hoard were unearthed near Dinefwr Castle , and pieces of amphorae and Samian items have been excavated near Dinefwr Farm . 
 During the 12th century , Dinefwr Castle was built by Lord Rhys . The castle and grounds were seized by Henry VIII in 1531 , and the estate owners , who changed their family surname to Rice , subsequently had to buy back their property from the Crown . The family were elevated to the peerage of Great Britain as Baron Dynevor . Mary I is documented to have restored some of the land back to the Rhys family , but it was not until the reign of Charles I that the family fully regained their properties . 
 Newton House was originally built during the medieval period at some distance from the castle . It is documented to have been later modified in 1595 and 1603 . The current Newton House was completed in 1660 under the command of Edward Rice . In the late 1700s , George Rice and his wife Cecil began the construction of a landscape garden , and hired eminent architect Capability Brown in 1775 to assume responsibility for the development . Turrets and battlements were added between 1760 and 1780 , giving the property a more romanticised appearance . During the Rebecca Riots of 1843 , Colonel George Rice was awoken one night in September and found an empty grave dug in the grounds , warning him that he would be buried in it by October 10 . 
 Newton House fell into a turbulent period after the death of the 7th Baron Dynevor in 1956 . His son Charles Arthur <unk> , the 8th Baron , died just six years later , and most of the estate and a number of family 's assets had to be sold off to pay duties . In 1974 , the property was sold by the current Baron Dynevor , and later fell into disrepair : it was occupied by squatters and thieves who removed beams and furniture . The house , along with Dinefwr Castle , have since been restored by Cadw and the National Trust respectively . The National Trust acquired the deer park in 1987 and Newton House three years later . 
 = = Architecture = = 
 Edward Rice ordered the construction of a Jacobean house on the site of an earlier medieval mansion in 1659 , and it was completed the following year . Turrets and battlements were added between 1760 and 1780 . Though the property remains Jacobean , around 1856 , there were significant changes made in the Venetian Gothic style , which today emanate the ambiance of the Victorian period . The tower was added , and alterations were made by R.K. Penson of Oswestry . The National Trust writes of it : " Most of what you see of the grand building today dates back to the 1850s , when it was given a fashionable Gothic facelift , with stone cladding and four impressive turrets " . A limestone refacing occurred at the same time . Newton House is a Grade II * listed property , as are its summer house and the inner and outer courtyard ranges . The nearby dairy cottage , ha @-@ ha , dovecote , fountain , deer abattoir , icehouse , home farmhouse , corn barn and byre / stable range are Grade II listed in their own right . 
 Newton House is a three @-@ storey castellated structure , built from grey stone , with four tall towers in each corner , with sloping slate roofs . The front features a grand central porch . The authors of Carmarthenshire and Ceredigion consider the heavily decorated late 17th @-@ century ceilings of the house to be " the finest single architectural legacy among the country houses of the region " . As in Plas <unk> and several other country houses in the county , the ceilings are panelled , with " thick moulded beams and wreaths in the panels and winged cherubs ' heads in the corners " . The entrance hall contains a columned Doric screen with a 19th @-@ century ribbed and bossed ceiling . The old dining room to the right of this features a coffered ceiling dated to the 17th century , containing " low plaster relief mouldings including <unk> , acanthus and egg and dart " . The chimney piece has been removed . The drawing room to rear of the property also features a richly adorned coffered ceiling with " frieze bearing rosette bands " and a " centre oval with bay leaf design " . The 17th @-@ century staircase features thick balusters and prominent finials , with foliage patterns ingrained in the plasterwork of the handrail . A billiard room was added to the house in 1896 . A strongroom with 18 @-@ inch @-@ thick ( 46 cm ) walls and heavy steel fire @-@ proof doors was added in 1914 , for the <unk> to keep their important documents and valuables . On the upper floors are rooms with 18th @-@ century fittings , including " panelled dados , lugged architraves , low relief plaster ceilings and closets within angled turrets " . The bedroom on the northeast of the house features a particularly detailed coffered ceiling with floral patterns . 
 The house contains several paintings of note , including William Powell Frith 's Mary , Queen of Scots Bidding Farewell to France ( 1561 ) and Godfrey Kneller 's portrait of the Bishop of Salisbury , William Talbot , dated to 1718 . Two showrooms at the house are open to the public . Aside from the tearoom , the exhibition in the basement and ground floor contains numerous displays related to the Rhys family , the history of the estate and World War II , and is designed as if the year is 1912 . 
 = = Park and garden = = 
 The house is surrounded by a deer park which was landscaped by Capability Brown from 1775 . He established a winding path , known as Capability Brown path , through the park and planted deciduous trees in key places to frame the house and castle . The deer park contains notable herds of rare White Park cattle and fallow deer . A small garden behind the house , overlooking the deer park , Moorish in style with a central fountain , has been restored to its former glory . Brown 's beech clumps survive in the present day . 
 Writing in 1862 , Benjamin <unk> considered the park to exhibit " perhaps a richer display of varied landscape than any spot of similar size in the kingdom " . He notes that the surface in the upper area of the park is " diversified by gentle undulations and has been planted with great judgment and taste " and that the River Towy flows in the vicinity . The Wildlife Trust West Wales acquired the nearby woodland in 1979 . The BBC 's Peter Crawford wrote of it in his book , The Living Isles : " The woodland is primarily oak and wych elm , " he writes . " The shrubs and ground cover are outstanding with cherry , holly , spindle , dog violet and the parasitic <unk> . Lichen communities are of importance and include the rare lungwort . Overlooked by the romantic Castle of Dinefwr the fine old parkland has a herd of fallow deer . The mature trees attract woodpecker , redstarts and pied flycatchers . In winter , the water meadows draw large numbers of ducks " . 
 = = Haunting = = 
 The National Trust states that Newton House is " thought to be one of the most haunted houses in Britain " , and Wales Online cites it as one of the most notable ghostly houses of Wales . Over the years , many ghost sightings or paranormal activity have been allegedly witnessed at the house . The servants ' basement is one of the purported centres of activity , with numerous sightings , particularly of a ghost known as Walter the Butler who worked at the house . People have reported smelling his tobacco smoke in the room , muffled voices and lights eerily turning on and off on their own accord . Visitors have reported feeling as if they are being choked when walking up and down the cantilever staircase ; this is believed to be related to the strangling of Lady Elinor Cavendish , the cousin of the lady of Newton House in the 1720s , by a lover whom she had rejected . The alleged hauntings at the property began to be investigated by television journalists in the 1980s , and on one occasion crewmen mysteriously fell ill one after the other while shooting there . During one investigation , the spectre of a young , beautiful girl was said to have glided across the room and disappeared through the cupboard door . The house was later the subject of an investigation in the 11th and 15th series of the Most Haunted programme . 
 = Codex Zacynthius = 
 Codex Zacynthius ( designated by siglum Ξ or 040 in the Gregory @-@ Aland numbering ; A1 in von Soden ) is a Greek New Testament codex , dated <unk> to the 6th century . First thought to have been written in the 8th century , it is a palimpsest — the original ( lower ) text was washed off its vellum pages and overwritten in the 12th or 13th century . The upper text of the palimpsest contains weekday Gospel lessons ; the lower text contains portions of the Gospel of Luke , deciphered by biblical scholar and <unk> Tregelles in 1861 . The lower text is of most interest to scholars . 
 The manuscript came from Zakynthos , a Greek island , and has survived in a fragmentary condition . It was brought to England in 1821 and transferred to Cambridge University in 1985 . It is often cited in critical editions of the Greek New Testament . 
 = = Description = = 
 The lower text of the manuscript contains fragments of the chapters 1 : 1 @-@ 11 : 33 of the Gospel of Luke . The codex comprises 86 thick , coarse parchment leaves and three partial leaves ; it measures 36 x 29 cm . The text was written in a single column with well @-@ formed uncial script . The letters are large , round and narrow , without spiritus asper , spiritus lenis , or accents . The manuscript was written by two scribes . 
 <unk> are rarely used in the codex . The handwriting is very close to that of the Rossano Gospels . The errors of itacism occur , but not so often as in Codex Sinaiticus and Codex Vaticanus . It uses grammatical forms typical of the ancient manuscripts ( e.g. <unk> , <unk> , <unk> ) , which are not used in later medieval manuscripts . 
 The codex uses a peculiar system of chapter divisions , which it shares with Codex Vaticanus and Minuscule 579 . A more common system divides chapters according to their titles . The capital letters at the beginnings of sections stand out in the margin as in the <unk> Alexandrinus and Ephraemi . 
 The text is surrounded by a marginal commentary ; it is the only codex that has both text and commentary in uncial script . The commentary is a <unk> of quotations of nine church fathers : Origen , Eusebius , Titus of Bostra , Basil , Isidore of Pelusium , Cyril of Alexandria , Sever from Antioch , Victor from Antioch , and Chrysostom . The commentary surrounds the single @-@ column text of Luke on three sides . Patristic text is written in small uncial letters . Most of the quotations are those of <unk> of Alexandria ( 93 scholia ) ; next comes Titus of Bostra ( 45 scholia ) . The commentary was written in a different kind of uncial script than the biblical text . 
 = = = Contents = = = 
 The book contains the following chapters and verses of the Gospel of Luke : 1 : 1 @-@ 9 @,@ 19 @-@ 23 @,@ 27 @-@ 28 @,@ 30 @-@ 32 @,@ 36 @-@ 60 @,@ 77 ; 2 : 19 @,@ 21 @-@ 22 @,@ 33 @-@ 3 ; 3 : 5 @-@ 8 @,@ 11 @-@ 20 ; 4 : 1 @-@ 2 @,@ 6 @-@ 20 @,@ 32 @-@ 43 ; 5 : 17 @-@ 36 ; 6 : 21 ; 7 : 6 @,@ 11 @-@ 37 @,@ 39 @-@ 47 ; 8 : 4 @-@ 21 @,@ 25 @-@ 35 @,@ 43 @-@ 50 ; 9 : 1 @-@ 28 @,@ 32 @-@ 33 @,@ 35 ; 9 : 41 ; 10 : 18 @,@ 21 @-@ 40 ; 11 : 1 @-@ 4 @,@ 24 @-@ 33 . 
 = = = = Variations and omissions = = = = 
 Luke 9 : <unk> @-@ <unk> — καὶ <unk> , <unk> <unk> <unk> πνεύματος <unk> <unk> ; <unk> <unk> <unk> τοῦ <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> ( and He said : " You do not know what manner of spirit you are of ; for the Son of man came not to destroy men 's lives but to save them ) is omitted , typical of Alexandrian text @-@ type , as in codices Sinaiticus B C Θ L 33 700 892 1241 syr , and copbo . 
 Luke 4 : 17 it has the textual variant καὶ ἀνοίξας τὸ βιβλίον ( and opened the book ) together with the manuscripts A , B , L , W , 33 , 892 , 1195 , 1241 , ℓ 547 , syrs , h , pal , and copsa , bo , against variant καὶ ἀναπτύξας τὸ βιβλίον ( and unrolled the book ) supported by א , Dc , K , Δ , Θ , Π , Ψ , f1 , f13 , 28 , 565 , 700 , 1009 , and 1010 . 
 Luke 9 : 10 it has the textual variant εις πολιν <unk> <unk> ( to a city called <unk> ) , as do codices B , L , and 33 ; but later hand @-@ written in the margin εις <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> ( into a deserted place belonging to the city called <unk> ) . 
 = = Text @-@ type = = 
 The textual character of the codex is representative of the late Alexandrian text @-@ type , and is similar to the Codex Regius . Kurt and Barbara Aland gave the following textual profile of it : 21 , 82 , 21 / 2 , 3s . This means the text of the codex agrees with the Byzantine standard text 2 times , it agrees 8 times with the original text against the Byzantine and it agrees both with the Byzantine and original text 2 times . There are 3 independent or distinctive readings . On the basis of this profile Alands considered the quality of the text to suit his Category III . According to the Claremont Profile Method , it represents the Alexandrian text in Luke 10 and mixed Byzantine text @-@ type in Luke 1 , which probably indicates sporadic Byzantine corrections . 
 = = Palimpsest = = 
 The codex is a palimpsest , meaning that the original text was scraped off and overwritten and the parchment leaves folded in half . The upper text was written by a minuscule hand and contains lectionary 299 ( ℓ 299 ) from the 12th or 13th century , though the lectionary text is not complete ; it is written on 176 leaves ( 28 @.@ 7 cm by 18 @.@ 2 cm ) , in one column per page , 33 @-@ 36 lines per page . Three folios are only the lower halves of leaves , one folio was supplied with paper ( folio LXVIII ) . The manuscript contains weekday Gospel lessons ( <unk> ) , but is lacunose . Tregelles did not collate its text because of its secondary value . Scrivener designated it by siglum 200 , Gregory by 299 . 
 <unk> 299 in Mark 6 : 33 has textual reading <unk> καὶ <unk> <unk> along with Codex Sinaiticus , Codex Vaticanus , <unk> ( omit <unk> ) , 892 , ℓ 49 , ℓ 69 , ℓ 70 , ℓ 303 , ℓ 333 , ℓ 1579 , ( ℓ 950 <unk> ) , <unk> , vg , ( copsa , bo ) . 
 The text of the lectionary is cited in some critical editions of the Greek New Testament ( UBS3 ) in the following places : Matthew 10 : 4 ; 11 : 17 ; 12 : 47 ; 13 : 13 ; 14 : 22 ; 18 : 10 ; 22 : 30 ; 26 : 27 ; 28 : 9 ; Mark 1 : 27 ; 2 : 10 @.@ 26 ; 4 : 16 @.@ 20 ; 6 : 2 @.@ 2 @.@ 3 @.@ 33 . It is not cited in UBS4 . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Dating = = = 
 Tregelles dated the manuscript to the 8th century . Tregelles was aware that the handwriting is typical for the 6th century , but the handwriting of the commentary is much older . The letters <unk> are round , high , and narrow , and could not have been written before the 8th century . C. R. Gregory supported Tregelles 's point of view . According to Nicholas Pocock , the manuscript could not have been written before the 6th century nor after the 8th century . 
 William Hatch in 1937 , on the basis of palaeographical data , suggested that the codex should be dated to the 6th century . It does not use breathings and accents and the text of the commentary is written in uncial script . Aland supported Hatch 's point of view . This date is accepted by the majority of scholars . 
 David C. Parker in 2004 argued that manuscript was written later the 6th century , because it has a small number of square letters , and the handwriting is not typical for the 6th century . Some letters were compressed ( Μ , Δ , Ε ) , the bar over the letter <unk> is short and the letter <unk> is written in several ways . According to Parker the manuscript should be dated to the 7th century . 
 Currently it is dated by the INTF to the 6th century . 
 = = = Discovery and further research = = = 
 The early history of the manuscript is unknown . In 1821 it was brought by general Colin Macaulay to England from the Greek island Zakynthos in the Ionian Sea . The manuscript was placed in the library of the British and Foreign Bible Society ( <unk> 24 ) in London . 
 Scholz saw the manuscript in 1845 , and Paul de Lagarde in 1853 , but they did not decipher it . The lower text of the codex was deciphered , transcribed , and edited by Tregelles in 1861 . Tregelles used types originally cast for printing the Codex Alexandrinus , which only approximately represented the shape of the letters of the codex . The hand @-@ written letters are smaller than the type . Tregelles included one page of typographical facsimile in this edition . He did not decipher the small Patristic writing and doubted that it could be read without chemical restoration . 
 Nicholas Pocock found errors in Tregelles ' edition , but William Hatch thought it satisfactory . J. Harold Greenlee corrected Tregelles ' errors and edited the list of corrections in 1957 , which was examined by William Hatch . In 1959 Greenlee published a commentary . The codex probably needs another examination with modern technology . 
 Tischendorf cited the codex in his Editio Octava Critica Maior in 564 places . It is often cited in the critical editions of the Greek New Testament ( UBS3 , UBS4 , NA26 , NA27 ) . 
 In 1985 it was moved to the Cambridge University Library ( BFBS Ms 213 ) . In December 2013 , the Bible Society announced plans to sell some manuscripts , among them the Codex Zacynthius , to raise funds for a Visitors Centre in Wales . The University was given right of first refusal and has until February 2014 to raise the money to acquire the codex . 
 = Ernest Deane = 
 Ernest Cotton Deane MC ( 4 May 1887 – 25 September 1915 ) was a medical officer of the British Indian Army and an Irish international rugby player . Born in the city of Limerick , Ireland , he went to school in Kingstown ( present day Dún Laoghaire ) in County Dublin and then studied medicine at the Royal College of Surgeons in Ireland ( RCSI ) , graduating in 1909 . He was selected to play rugby for Ireland in one match , against England in February 1909 . His rugby career was cut short when he broke his leg in a match against Oxford University . 
 Deane was commissioned into the Royal Army Medical Corps in 1911 , after a period as house surgeon at the Adelaide Hospital , Dublin . In 1913 , he was posted to India and served in Burma . He was stationed in Meerut at the start of the First World War . From there , he travelled to France with the Garhwal Brigade of the Indian Expeditionary Force , landing in Marseille in September 1914 . He was deployed immediately to the Western Front , where he served first with the 20th Field Ambulance and then as medical officer of the 2nd Battalion , The Royal Leicestershire Regiment . His unit saw much active service . On 22 August 1915 , he was awarded the Military Cross after running out under machine gun fire to rescue four men who had been wounded by artillery fire . A month later , his regiment participated in the Battle of Loos , and was almost entirely obliterated . He was shot dead after going to help some injured soldiers : his action earned him a mention in despatches . Deane was one of 60 RCSI doctors to receive the Military Cross in the First World War , and one of 17 to be killed in action . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Ernest Deane , born in the city of Limerick , Ireland on 4 May 1887 , was the third of the four sons of Thomas and Aileen Deane of Kingstown ( present day Dún Laoghaire ) , County Dublin . He went to Corrig School , Kingstown , from 1901 to 1904 then went on to study medicine at the Royal College of Surgeons in Ireland from 1904 to 1909 . He became house surgeon at the Adelaide Hospital , Dublin . 
 = = = Rugby = = = 
 Deane was an all @-@ round sportsman , skilled in golf , lawn tennis , horse @-@ riding and shooting . Furthermore , at Corrig , Deane was captain of the school 's rugby XV , and later he captained the Adelaide Hospital XV , and the Monkstown XV . He was selected to play wing for Ireland in the match against England at Lansdowne Road , Dublin , on 13 February 1909 , which Ireland lost 5 – 11 . It was England 's first victory on Irish soil since 1895 . Deane 's opposite number that day was the New Zealand @-@ born Alexander Palmer of London Hospital FC , whose speed allowed him to get around Deane , and to score two of England 's three tries , and a conversion . 
 At the start of the next season , on 29 November 1909 , Deane was part of the Monkstown team to play Oxford University . During the game , he collided with Robert Bourne , breaking his own leg and bringing his rugby career to an end . 
 International appearance 
 = = Military service = = 
 At the start of the 20th century , many Irish doctors joined the British armed forces . Deane himself was commissioned temporary lieutenant in the Royal Army Medical Corps ( RAMC ) on 28 July 1911 , confirmed 9 February 1912 . In October 1913 , he went to India and served in Burma . He was stationed at Meerut when the First World War broke out . He went to France with the Garhwal Brigade of the 7th ( Meerut ) Division of the Indian Expeditionary Force , arriving in Marseilles on 26 September 1914 . He was attached to the 20th Field Ambulance , and later served as medical officer of the 2nd Battalion , The Royal Leicestershire Regiment , in active service on the Western Front . 
 A few days before he died , Deane was awarded the Military Cross , one of 60 awarded to RCSI doctors in the war . Frederick Conway Dwyer , president of the RCSI , proudly read out Deane 's citation in an address to students of the college , and commended recent <unk> to enter the RAMC . The citation in the Gazette said : 
 For conspicuous gallantry on 22nd August 1915 , near <unk> . A standing patrol 120 yards in front of our line was bombed by the enemy at about 10 p.m. , the only notification being two loud bomb explosions . Captain Deane , without any knowledge of the enemy 's strength , at once got over the parapet and ran by himself to the spot under rifle and machine gun fire . Finding four wounded men he returned for stretchers and got them back into safety . This is not the first time that Captain Deane 's gallantry under fire has been brought to notice . 
 On 25 September , Deane 's battalion , the 2nd Leicesters , took part in the Battle of Loos , in a diversionary attack by the Indian Corps to draw away German reserves from the main attack . According to the personal account of George Wilfred Grossmith , after the battle , the battalion ceased to exist , and most of the other regiments of the Meerut Division were decimated . The artillery bombardment prior to the infantry assault had failed to destroy all of the German barbed wire defences , and some men got caught up in them . Deane went to help . Returning across the open , he was killed instantly by a bullet to the head . His Colonel , who was himself badly wounded , wrote to his family saying : 
 He was the most gallant fellow I ever met , and we all loved him in the regiment , both officers and men . He was just a part of us , and the few of us left mourn his loss very deeply . We had a big battle on the 25th , and your son went out to try and help some wounded in and got killed . I believe his death was instantaneous , but I am not sure , as I was wounded myself , and had to be taken back . His body was recovered and was buried by our Padre , and I will give you exact location of cemetery afterwards . Everyone knew Deane as one of the bravest of the brave , and it was only the other day that he got one of the best deserved and gallantly won honours , when he was awarded the Military Cross . 
 Following this action , he was mentioned in despatches . 
 Captain Ernest Deane was one of 17 RCSI doctors killed in action during the war . He is buried at the Rue @-@ du @-@ <unk> No 1 Military Cemetery ( Grave <unk> ) , Laventie , France . 
 = Kechewaishke = 
 Chief Buffalo ( Ojibwe : Ke @-@ che @-@ <unk> @-@ ke / Gichi @-@ <unk> – " Great @-@ renewer " or <unk> / Bizhiki – " Buffalo " ; also French , Le Boeuf ) ( 1759 ? – September 7 , 1855 ) was a major Ojibwa leader born at La Pointe in the Apostle Islands group of Lake Superior , in what is now northern Wisconsin , USA . 
 Recognized as the principal chief of the Lake Superior Chippewa ( Ojibwa ) for nearly a half @-@ century until his death in 1855 , he led his nation into a treaty relationship with the United States Government . He signed treaties in 1825 , 1826 , 1837 , 1842 , 1847 , and 1854 . He was instrumental in resisting the efforts of the United States to remove the Chippewa to western areas and secured permanent Indian reservations for his people near Lake Superior . 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = Political structure of the Lake Superior Ojibwa = = = 
 Kechewaishke was born around the year 1759 at La Pointe on Madeline Island ( <unk> ) in the <unk> region . Now part of Wisconsin , La Pointe was a key Ojibwa village and trading center for the empire of New France , which was engaged in the Seven Years ' War with Great Britain at the time of Kechewaishke 's birth . Throughout the 18th century , the Ojibwa spread out from La Pointe into lands conquered from the Dakota people , and settled several village sites . These bands in the western Lake Superior and Mississippi River regions regarded La Pointe as their " ancient capital " and center for spirituality . It had also become a center of trade . 
 Traditional Ojibwa government and society centers around kinship clans , each of which was symbolized by animal doodem . Each doodem had a traditional responsibility within the tribe . Kechewaishke , or Buffalo as he was known to Europeans , belonged to the Loon clan . 
 The Loon Clan were said to have been rising in prominence in the middle of the 18th @-@ century due to the efforts of his grandfather Andaigweos ( Ojibwe : <unk> , " Crow 's Meat " ) . Andaigweos was born in the <unk> region , son to a man described as " a Canadian Indian " ( i.e. a Saulteaux from Sault Ste . Marie , a key Ojibwa village at the eastern end of Lake Superior ) . At the time of first French contact in the mid @-@ 17th century , men of the Crane doodem held the positions of hereditary peace chiefs of Chippewa communities at both Sault Ste . Marie and La Pointe . Andaigweos was a skilled orator and favorite of the French officials and voyageurs . In that period , leaders of the Cranes were concerned more with internal matters . By the 19th century , it was Buffalo 's clan the Loons , rather than the Cranes , who were recognized as principal chiefs at La Pointe . 
 Although the Loons were afforded respect as principal peace chiefs , this status was not permanent . The Cranes , led in Buffalo 's time by his sub @-@ chief <unk> , maintained that they were the hereditary chiefs . They said the Loons ' status as spokesmen hinged upon recognition by the Cranes . A chief 's power in Ojibwa society was based on persuasion and consensus ; it was contingent , holding only as long as the community of elders , including the women , chose to respect and follow the chief 's lead . 
 = = = Personal life = = = 
 Sources conflict as to the identity of Buffalo 's father , who may also have been named Andaigweos . He appears to have been a descendant or relative of the famous war chief <unk> . When he was about 10 , Buffalo and his parents moved from La Pointe to the vicinity of what now is Buffalo , New York , and lived there until about he was about 12 . The family then relocated to the Mackinac Island area for a while before returning to La Pointe . In his youth , he was admired as a skilled hunter and athlete . 
 Like many Anishinaabe people , Buffalo was known by more than one Ojibwe name : <unk> ( Bizhiki : " the Buffalo " ) , and Kechewaishke ( Gichi @-@ <unk> : " the Great @-@ renewer " ) . This has caused confusion in records of his life not only because he carried two names , but also because both names were very similar to those of other prominent contemporaries . Bizhiki was the name of a chief from the St. Croix Band , and also of a warrior of the <unk> Chippewa Band ( see <unk> ) . Additionally , a leading individual of the Caribou doodem , and a son of <unk> , in the Sault Ste . Marie area was known by the name of <unk> ( <unk> ) . Scholars have mistakenly attributed aspects of the lives of all three of these individuals to Buffalo of La Pointe . 
 In his long life , Buffalo had five wives and numerous children , many of whom became prominent Ojibwa leaders in the reservation era . He practiced the Midewiwin religion . He converted to Roman Catholicism on his death bed . 
 = = = Views on international relations = = = 
 Details on Buffalo 's early life are sparse . Although he appears to have been favored by British traders and decorated by British authorities , few Ojibwa from Lake Superior fought in either the American Revolution or the War of 1812 . There is no record of Buffalo participating . 
 When Tecumseh 's War broke out , Buffalo and a number of other young warriors from the La Pointe area abandoned the Midewiwin for a time to follow the teachings of the Shawnee prophet Tenskwatawa . While en route to Prophetstown to join the attack on the Americans , they were stopped by Michel <unk> , the respected Métis fur trader from La Pointe . <unk> convinced Buffalo and the others that it would be fruitless to fight the Americans . 
 After that incident , Buffalo is recorded as using only peaceful tactics in his relations with the United States , though he often opposed US Indian policy . He also drew a contrast between himself and his contemporaries <unk> @-@ ke @-@ bah @-@ ke @-@ ko @-@ <unk> and Hole in the Day , two Ojibwa chiefs from present @-@ day Minnesota , who carried out a long war against the Dakota Sioux people . Although Armstrong records Buffalo winning a large victory over the Dakota in the 1842 Battle of the Brule , 20th @-@ century historians have cast doubt on his account . That year Buffalo was recorded as saying he " never took a scalp in his life , though he had taken prisoners whom he fed and well @-@ treated . " Overall , he seems to have supported efforts at peace between the Ojibwa and Dakota . 
 Buffalo inherited not only the status afforded his family , but also had skills praised in his grandfather Andaigweos . Noted for his abilities in hunting and battle , it was through his speaking abilities that Buffalo was recognized as chief by his people . By the time the Ojibwa of Wisconsin and Minnesota started treaty negotiations with the US Government , Buffalo was recognized as one of the primary spokesmen for all the bands , not just for the Ojibwa from La Pointe . 
 = = Treaties of 1825 and 1826 = = 
 In 1825 , Buffalo was one of forty @-@ one Ojibwa leaders to sign the Treaty of Prairie du Chien , his name recorded as " <unk> <unk> " or La Boeuf . He is listed third after <unk> , who was recognized as head of the Crane doodem at Sault Ste . Marie , and therefore of the whole Ojibwa nation ; and chief " <unk> <unk> " . The treaty , which the US Government advanced as a pretext to end hostilities between the Dakota and their neighbors , required all American Indian tribes and bands in and around Wisconsin and Iowa to delineate where their territories began and ended . Although the treaty did not state this goal , the US used information acquired to negotiate to gain Indian lands and remove the nations westward . 
 A year later , the Treaty of Fond du Lac was signed at a meeting at the western edge of Lake Superior . The signatories were listed by band , and Buffalo , recorded as <unk> , signed as the first chief from La Pointe . The treaty , mainly dealing with mineral rights for Ojibwa lands in what is now Michigan , had little immediate effect but foreshadowed future treaties . Buffalo did not speak on the copper issue . He praised the US officials for their ability to keep their young people under their control ; he asked for whiskey to accomplish the same ends among the younger members of his band . When the agent presented him with a silver medal as a symbol of his chieftainship , he explained that his power stemmed from his clan and reputation , and not from anything received from the U.S. Government . 
 Shortly after the treaties , Henry Rowe Schoolcraft , acting in his capacity as US Indian agent , visited La Pointe . He reprimanded Buffalo for not stopping the continuing sporadic warfare between the Ojibwa and Dakota . Buffalo replied that he was unable to stop the young men of Lac <unk> <unk> , St. Croix , Lac du Flambeau or other bands beyond La Pointe from going against the Dakota . Historians take this to mean that while he was regarded as the head spokesman of the Ojibwa in Wisconsin , he could not control the day @-@ to @-@ day affairs of all the bands , which were highly decentralized , particularly about warfare . Buffalo also said that , unlike the British before the War of 1812 , the U.S. Government had not done enough to help maintain the peace among the tribes . 
 = = Treaties of 1837 and 1842 = = 
 In the next decades , there was pressure from Americans who wanted to exploit the mineral and timber resources of Ojibwa country , and the US government sought to acquire control of the territory through treaties . The Treaties of 1837 and 1842 covered La Pointe and territories held by other bands over which Buffalo held considerable influence . In both treaties , Americans recognized Buffalo 's position as the principal chief of all the Lake Superior Chippewa . 
 = = = " Pine Tree " Treaty = = = 
 In the Treaty of St. Peters ( 1837 ) , the government sought the pine timber resources on Ojibwa lands . They intended to float the harvested timber southwest into the Mississippi River . The negotiations took place at Fort Snelling , near present @-@ day Minneapolis . The delegations from Minnesota and the St. Croix area arrived first and began discussions on July 20 . The assembled chiefs awaited the judgment of Buffalo before deciding to approve the treaty . Despite the impatience of the territorial governor , Henry Dodge , the negotiations were delayed for five days as the assembled bands waited for Buffalo to arrive . While other chiefs spoke about the terms of mineral rights and annuity amounts , Buffalo discussed treatment of the mixed @-@ blood traders , stating : 
 I am an Indian and do not know the value of money , but the half @-@ breeds do , for which reason we wish you pay them their share in money . You have good judgment in what you do , and if you do not act yourself , you will appoint someone else to divide it between the half breeds . ... I have good reasons for saying to you what I have just said ; for at a certain Treaty held heretofore , there were some who got rich while others received nothing . 
 Once the terms were agreed to , Buffalo marked and was recorded as Pe @-@ <unk> @-@ ke , head of the La Pointe delegation . Although Buffalo and the other Lake Superior chiefs signed , they were said to be relatively silent compared with the Mississippi Chippewa chiefs during the negotiations . Historian <unk> says this symbolized disagreement rather than acceptance of the terms of the treaty . Lyman Warren , a trader and interpreter from La Pointe , later complained that the <unk> ( bands from present @-@ day Minnesota ) had been bribed into selling the lands rightfully belonging to the Wisconsin bands . 
 Buffalo expressed his misgivings over the treaty negotiations in a letter to Dodge stating , 
 " The Indians acted like children ; they tried to cheat each other and got cheated themselves . When it comes my turn to sell my land , I do not think I shall give it up as they did . " Regarding possible future land cessions , he said : " Father I speak for my people , not for myself . I am an old man . My fire is almost out — there is but little smoke . When I sit in my wigwam & smoke my pipe , I think of what has past and what is to come , and it makes my heart shake . When business comes before us , we will try and act like Chiefs . If any thing is to be done , it had better be done straight . " 
 = = = " Copper " Treaty = = = 
 Five years later , Buffalo was presented with the Treaty of La Pointe covering his lands . Acting Superintendent of Indian Affairs Henry Stuart , who was promoting development of the Lake Superior copper industry , led the negotiations for the US government . No record of the negotiations was made . But materials written by missionaries , traders , and the Ojibwa through their agent indicated that Stuart used bullying and outright deception to force the Ojibwa to accept the terms . 
 Buffalo signed and was recorded as Gichi <unk> , 1st chief of La Pointe . Writing in 1855 , Morse describes Buffalo 's " voice so potent at the treaty of ' 42 . " However , three months after the treaty , Buffalo dictated a letter to the government in Washington D.C. , saying he was " ashamed " of the way the treaty was conducted . He said that Stuart had refused to listen to any objections by the Ojibwa , and that Buffalo wanted to add a provision to ensure permanent reservations for the Ojibwe in Wisconsin . 
 The interpretation of the 1837 and 1842 treaties remains ambiguous , as the US government claimed the Ojibwa ceded title to the lands , and the Ojibwa claiming they ceded only resource rights . The government had stated that the lands of the Ojibwa were unsuitable for farming and white settlement . The Ojibwa did obtain annuity payments to be paid each year at La Pointe , and reserved the right to hunt , fish , gather , and move across any lands outlined in the treaties . They obtained the promise that the nation would not be removed across the Mississippi River , unless they somehow " misbehaved . " 
 = = Threats of removal = = 
 In 1830 , President Andrew Jackson had signed the Indian Removal Act , which authorized the government to remove any Indian nations east of the Mississippi River across to the western side and offer land in exchange . As northern Wisconsin was not then under pressure for development by white settlers , as occurred in the Southeast , the Ojibwa were not among the first targets of the act . They watched closely as the government used the territorial claims defined by tribes in 1825 to force numerous tribes in Indiana , southern Michigan and southern Wisconsin to move west to Kansas , Iowa , Minnesota , and Indian Territory , present @-@ day Oklahoma . These included the Odawa and Potawatomi , two Anishinaabe tribes closely related to and allied with the Ojibwa . 
 In 1848 , Wisconsin achieved statehood ; Indian nations were under increased pressure for removal and marginalization . Corrupt US Indian agents controlled annuity payments , sometimes underpaying tribes , and took authority not granted them by the bands . They allowed white settlers to move onto Ojibwa lands and refused the Ojibwe the rights reserved by treaties . The Ojibwa complained to the President about the mistreatment and broken promises , but politicians were more apt to listen to western land speculators , who saw possibilities for profit in removing the Ojibwa to Minnesota . 
 Even with the treaties of 1837 and 1842 , leaders worried about Ojibwa removal . Buffalo kept in constant contact with the other bands to ensure the Ojibwa upheld their obligations . He sent runners to all the bands to report back on any conduct by the Ojibwa that could construed as grounds for removal . Nothing was reported . But , President Zachary Taylor signed the removal order on February 6 , 1850 , under corrupt circumstances , claiming to be protecting the Ojibwa from " injurious " whites . The Wisconsin legislature resisted the order and put aside plans for removal . Alexander Ramsey , the territorial governor of Minnesota , and Indian sub @-@ agent John Watrous conspired on a plan to force the Ojibwa to Minnesota anyway , as the two men stood to gain personal economic and political benefits from removal . 
 = = Sandy Lake Tragedy = = 
 To force the Ojibwa to comply , the <unk> Watrous announced he would pay future annuities only at Sandy Lake , Minnesota instead of La Pointe , where they had been paid previously . This change resulted in the Sandy Lake Tragedy , when hundreds of Ojibwas starved or died of exposure in Minnesota and on the journey home because the promised annuity supplies were late , contaminated or inadequate . 
 In a later letter , Buffalo described the conditions : 
 And when a message was sent to me by our Indian agent to come and get our pay , I lost no time in arising & complying with my Agents voice and when I reached my point of destination , verily my Agent fed me with very bad flour it resembled green clay . Soon I became sick and many of my fellow <unk> also were taken sick , and soon the results were manifested by the death of over two hundred persons of my tribe , for this calamity , I laid blame to the provisions issued to us ... 
 Back in La Pointe , Buffalo took several actions to forestall and prevent removal . He and other leaders petitioned the US government for the next two years to no avail . They did win considerable sympathy from whites who learned of the debacle in Sandy Lake . Newspapers throughout the Lake Superior region ran editorials condemning the removal effort . Buffalo sent two of his sons to St. Paul , the state capital , where they obtained a portion of the annuities still owed . 
 Ramsey and Watrous continued to work to remove the Ojibwa to Sandy Lake . Watrous said they considered Sandy Lake a " graveyard , " but he still tried to move all the bands to Fond du Lac . Young Ojibwa men in Wisconsin were outraged at these developments and the threat of violent revolt grew . Buffalo called on the services of his well @-@ spoken sub @-@ chief <unk> , and son @-@ in @-@ law Benjamin Armstrong , a literate white interpreter married to Buffalo 's daughter . He drew up a petition that the 92 @-@ year @-@ old Buffalo would personally deliver to the president in Washington . 
 = = Trip to Washington = = 
 After spring thaw in 1852 , the elderly Buffalo , <unk> , Armstrong , and four others set out from La Pointe for Washington , D.C. by birch bark canoe . Along the way , they stopped in towns and mining camps along the Michigan shore of Lake Superior , securing hundreds of signatures in support of their cause . At Sault Ste . Marie , they were held by the US Indian agent , who told them that no unauthorized Ojibwa delegations could go to Washington and they had to turn back . The men pleaded the urgency of their case and traveled to Detroit by steamship . There another Indian agent tried to stop them . Once allowed to proceed , they sailed to Buffalo , New York and then on to Albany and New York City . 
 In New York City , the Ojibwe attracted attention , gaining publicity and money for their cause . In Washington , however , they were turned away by Indian Affairs , and told they should never have come in the first place . Luckily , they drew the attention of the Whig Congressman Briggs from New York , who was scheduled a meeting with President Millard Fillmore the next day . At the meeting , Buffalo rose first . He performed the pipe ceremony with a pipe made especially for the occasion . He had the younger chief <unk> speak for more than an hour about the broken treaty promises and the disastrous attempt at removal . Fillmore agreed to consider the issues . The next day , he announced that the removal order would be canceled , annuity payments would be made at La Pointe , and another treaty would set up permanent reservations for the Ojibwe in Wisconsin . 
 The delegation traveled back to Wisconsin by rail , spreading the good news to the various Ojibwa bands as they went . Buffalo also announced that all the tribal representatives should gather at La Pointe for payments the next summer ( 1853 ) , and he would reveal the specifics of the agreement . 
 = = 1854 Treaty and Buffalo estate = = 
 As promised by Fillmore , treaty commissioners arrived in La Pointe in 1854 to conclude a final treaty . Recalling the experiences of 1837 and 1842 , the Ojibwa leaders sought to control the negotiations in 1854 . Ambiguity in those treaties had been partially to blame for ensuing problems , so Buffalo insisted he would accept no interpreter other than Armstrong , whom he referred to as his adopted son . The Ojibwa insisted on a guarantee of the right to hunt , fish , and gather on all the ceded territory , and on the establishment on several reservations across western Upper Michigan , northern Wisconsin , and northeastern <unk> in his mid @-@ nineties and in failing health , Buffalo directed the negotiations but left most of the speaking to other chiefs . He entrusted Armstrong with taking care of the details in the written version . 
 The reservations in Wisconsin were named the Lac <unk> <unk> Indian Reservation , Lac du Flambeau Indian Reservation . The La Pointe Band was given a reservation at Bad River around the Band 's traditional wild <unk> grounds , and some reserved land for fishing grounds at the eastern tip of Madeline Island . In Minnesota , the reservations for the Fond du Lac and the Grand Portage bands were established , with pending negotiations promised for the Bois Forte Band . In Michigan , reservations for the Lac Vieux Desert , Ontonagon and L 'Anse bands were established . The St. Croix and <unk> bands left the negotiations in protest and were excluded from the agreement . 
 A small tract of land was also set aside for Chief Buffalo and his family at Buffalo Bay on the mainland across from Madeline Island at a place called <unk> ( red rocks or cliffs ) . Many of the Catholic and mixed @-@ blooded members of the La Pointe Band elected to settle there around their chief rather than at Bad River . In 1855 , this settlement at the " Buffalo Estate " was acknowledged ; it was extended by executive order into what is now called the Red Cliff Indian Reservation . 
 = = Death and legacy = = 
 Chief Buffalo was too ill to participate in the speeches at the time of the annuity payments in summer 1855 . Tensions continued , as the Ojibwe accused US officials of corruption , threats of violence were made by members of the American Fur Company , and infighting erupted among the Ojibwa bands . Morse records that these conflicts worsened Buffalo 's condition . He died of heart disease on September 7 , 1855 , at La Pointe . Members of his band blamed his death on the conduct of the government officials . 
 He was described as " head and the chief of the Chippewa Nation " and a man respected " for his rare integrity , wisdom in council , power as an orator , and magnanimity as a warrior . " In his final hours he requested that his tobacco pouch and pipe be carried to Washington , D.C. and given to the government . His funeral was conducted in military fashion , with volleys fired at intervals in his honor . 
 Great Chief Buffalo is regarded a hero of the Lake Superior Ojibwe . Those at Red Cliff also remember him as a founding figure of the community . His life is celebrated during commemorations of the treaty signings and the Sandy Lake Tragedy . Missionary Edmund Ely identified Ojibwe chief John Little Wolf , or <unk> , as one of Buffalo 's sons . He is buried in the La Pointe Indian Cemetery , near the deep , cold waters of Ojibwe <unk> ( Lake Superior ) , the " great freshwater @-@ sea of the Ojibwa " . His descendants , many going by the surname " Buffalo , " are widespread in Red Cliff and Bad River . During the series of late 20th @-@ century treaty conflicts that have been called the Wisconsin Walleye War , beginning in 1983 , his name was frequently invoked as one who refused to give up his homeland and tribal sovereignty . 
 = Captive Heart ( song ) = 
 " Captive Heart " is a song by American Tejano pop singer Selena . It was the second promotional single released from Dreaming of You ( 1995 ) , behind " God 's Child ( Baila Conmigo ) " . It was written by Mark Goldenberg and Kit Hain , and was produced by Guy Roche . Recording sessions took place at Selena 's father , Abraham Quintanilla , Jr . ' s recording studio Q @-@ Productions and at several other locations . The song was given mixed reviews by music critics . " Captive Heart " is an electropop song performed in a rhythmical pop groove . 
 = = Production and composition = = 
 " Captive Heart " was recorded at <unk> Studios in Burbank , California in January 1995 , Q @-@ Productions in Corpus Christi , Texas and at Conway Studios in North Hollywood . It was written by Mark Goldenberg and Kit Hain , and was produced by Guy Roche . It was mixed by Nathaniel " Mick " <unk> , engineered by Mario Lucy , Brian " Red " Moore and Mona <unk> who also was credited at the assistant engineer . American singer Donna De Lory was the backing vocalist for " Captive Heart " . Recording sessions had taken nearly less than a week to complete the song . 
 " Captive Heart " is an <unk> song performed in a rhythmical R & B pop groove . It draws influences from synthpop , fast rock , dance @-@ pop and electronic dance music . According to the sheet music published at Musicnotes.com by EMI Music Publishing , the song is composed in the key of D major with a time signature in common time , and with a moderate groove of 91 beats per minute . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Vibe editor Ed Morales compared both Evelyn " Champagne " King and " Wherever You Are " ( duet with the Barrio Boyzz ) with the song " Captive Heart " . While , according to the Chicago Tribune , " Captive Heart " was destined for urban @-@ contemporary radio . Leonard Charles of Miami Today , commented on " Captive Heart " ' s lack of impact on the Hot 100 , stating that the song would have been stronger if EMI Records had promoted the single extensively . Charles also commented that he believes that the record company didn 't put in much effort on the song but believed that EMI had only put in effort on singles " Dreaming of You " and " I Could Fall in Love " . Benson Ramos of The Gaston Gazette believed " Captive Heart " wasn 't " crossover potential " . Steven Washington of Aurora Sentinel praised the song 's " electronic feels " and " Latin flavors " that it brings to the song . Sabrina Moore of Corsicana Daily Sun , disliked the song because it felt " unoriginal " but commented that Selena could have done better in another Latin flavored ballad . 
 The Daily Vault believed Selena made a mistake with " Captive Heart " , stating that " the song was a surprising and painful flaw , because it showcases a mistake of exerting too much throat , which many popular singers currently do " . The Daily Vault instated that it was a one @-@ way ticket to voice destruction . Mario Tarradell of The Dallas Morning News stated while reviewing " I 'm Getting Used To You " that the songs " are a bit more uptempo , bordering on that New Jill Swing sound popularized by Mary J. Blige and Jade " . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 U.S. Promo Single ( 1995 ) 
 " Captive Heart " – 4 : 23 @-@ 4 ; 18 
 U.S. Cassette Single ( 1995 ) 
 " Captive Heart " – 4 : 23 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 = Clive Mantle = 
 Clive Andrew Mantle ( born 3 June 1957 ) is an English actor . He is best known for playing general surgeon Dr Mike Barrett in the BBC hospital drama series Casualty and Holby City in the 1990s , and is also noted for his role as Little John in the cult 1980s fantasy series Robin of Sherwood . 
 Mantle was educated at Kimbolton School , Cambridgeshire between 1970 and 1975 and at the Royal Academy of Dramatic Art ( RADA ) between 1978 and 1980 . He appeared in 11 productions of the National Youth Theatre in five seasons between 1974 and 1978 , and began carving a successful career as a stage actor in the 1980s , alongside various television roles . In 1984 he was nominated for an Olivier Award and was joint Best Newcomer in the Plays and Players Awards for his performance as Lennie in Of Mice and Men . In 1984 he was also cast as Little John in the cult 1980s fantasy series Robin of Sherwood , a role which he considers the most enjoyable of his career and which has remained one of his best @-@ known roles . He was to appear as the first Nuclear Man in Superman IV : The Quest for Peace in 1987 , but his scenes were cut from the film ; they were later included with other deleted scenes when the film was released on DVD . 
 After playing several minor roles in other Hollywood films such as White Hunter Black Heart ( 1990 ) and Alien 3 ( 1992 ) , Mantle was cast as consultant Dr Mike Barrett in the BBC television hospital drama series Casualty . He became one of its most popular characters , renowned for his convincing and authoritative portrayal and " dishy doc " persona . He left Casualty in 1996 after appearing in 85 episodes between October 1992 and November 1996 , but after struggling with his acting career , he returned to the role in 1999 in Holby City , and appeared in another 32 episodes until 2001 . 
 On stage , Mantle has appeared in plays such as Coming Clean , A Streetcar Named Desire , and Educating Rita , and has continued his successful stage career since departing from Holby City . In 2003 he appeared in Rattle of a Simple Man ; in 2006 he played the part of The Narrator in The Rocky Horror Show ; and over the Christmas and New Year period of 2007 – 2008 , he portrayed the villain <unk> in a pantomime production of Aladdin at the Theatre Royal in Bath . In 2010 he portrayed comedian Tommy Cooper in the stage entertainment show Jus ' Like That ! A Night Out with Tommy Cooper ; it was one of his most challenging roles , due to the various skills the performance required . More recently , Mantle has become known for his roles on television as Lord Greatjon Umber in HBO 's Game of Thrones and as Tony Curry , Ollie 's ( Will Mellor 's ) father , in the BBC 's White Van Man . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Mantle was born in Barnet , then in Hertfordshire , in 1957 . He was the cousin of John Hallam and was a keen supporter of Chelsea Football Club from a young age . Mantle studied at the boarding school Kimbolton School in Kimbolton , Huntingdonshire between 1970 and 1975 , and was a chorister in the Choir of St John 's College , Cambridge for four years . He first worked on a farm in Cambridgeshire during his studies and soon became interested in theatre . He appeared in 11 productions of the National Youth Theatre in five seasons between 1974 and 1978 . 
 As a student , Mantle lived in a basement flat in Islington . He trained at the Royal Academy of Dramatic Art ( RADA ) between 1978 and 1980 , where he initially found his towering height of 6 ' 5 ½ " ( 1 @.@ 97 m ) to be a hindrance to the sort of roles he could convincingly perform in his acting . He said that he was discouraged early on by people who said , " You 'll never work , you 're too tall to be an actor . " 
 He later said about his height : 
 Height is a very strange thing . If you 're literally playing the milkman or the butler or something like that , they 'll all think , " Now why is the butler so big ? There must be a reason – ah , he 's gonna come back later and kill somebody . " Then , you don 't . It worries an audience in a strange way if someone my height is playing a small part . I was an actor who needed drama school . I used to be so excited about being on stage that I would just run down to the front and shout ; they had to knock that out of me . Physically , just being six @-@ foot @-@ five @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half , I 'm not one of life 's gazelles . But having said that , I was made aware that I can be gazelle @-@ like if I so choose . If I hadn 't been to drama school , I would have just slouched around and bent over double and apologized for my height . 
 = = Career = = 
 = = = 1980s = = = 
 In 1980 , Mantle debuted on the screen with a small role as Ewen in Christian <unk> 's short thriller feature The Orchard End Murder . In 1981 , he appeared in the National Tours of The Ideal Gnome Expedition for David Wood 's <unk> Theatre and Deborah Warner 's play , <unk> , which showed at the University Theatre during the Edinburgh Festival . In 1982 , he appeared in an episode of the TV series Minder , before taking on the voice of Private Smith in the animated military comedy series Jane . From 3 November 1982 , Mantle portrayed Jurgen opposite Eamon Boland , C. J. Allen , Philip Donaghy and Ian <unk> in David Hayman 's award winning stage production of Coming Clean at the Bush Theatre in London . 
 In 1983 , Mantle was cast most notably in the cult fantasy series Robin of Sherwood as " Little John " , a legendary fellow outlaw of Robin Hood , who was said to be Robin 's chief lieutenant and second @-@ in @-@ command of the Merry Men , in a cast which included Michael Praed as " Robin Hood " , Peter Llewellyn Williams as " Much " , Ray Winstone as " Will Scarlet " , and Judi Trott as " Maid Marian " . Footage for the series was shot in rural Somerset and Wiltshire , with the Saxon Tithe Barn in Bradford @-@ on Avon functioning as the great hall of Nottingham Castle , Great <unk> Manor in Melksham doubling as Maid Marion 's family home , and numerous battles were shot at <unk> Grange and Nettleton Mill near Castle Combe , locations which Mantle considered to be " wonderfully realised and breathtaking " . The waterfall scene for the quarterstaff battle between Robin and Little John in the first episode 
 " Robin Hood and the Sorcerer " was shot at Bowood House . Helen Phillips said of his performance as Little John , " excellently played by Clive Mantle , the series ' John at first appears to conform to a , by then , <unk> established stereotype . " Mantle has said of his role : 
 It is the job I 've enjoyed doing more than anything else on TV . I have the greatest memories of beautiful , halcyon days @-@ out filming on location and we had such a great , fun crew working on the show . We still get together once a year . Not just the cast but also the directors , producer , props guys , it 's like a family ! I think the key to part of the series ' success was that this great camaraderie came across on screen . 
 In 1984 he was nominated for an Olivier Award and was joint Best Newcomer in the Plays and Players Awards for his performance as Lennie in Of Mice and Men . Following the success of the play , it was transferred from the Nuffield Theatre in Southampton to the Mermaid Theatre in London . He went on to tour extensively as Lennie in Of Mice and Men , and has appeared in 6 different productions of the play . He also played Little John in the theatrical production of Robin Hood at the Young Vic Theatre ; and Mitch in Tim Albery 's production of A Streetcar Named Desire at the Crucible Theatre in Sheffield . Other theatrical credits include The Relapse ; The Red Devil Battery Sign ; King John ; Johnny Johnson ; The Ideal Gnome Expedition ; East ; Blood on the Neck of the Cat and Bedroom Farce . He has also appeared as the guest star at the Wyndham 's Theatre and Theatre Royal Bath , in the award winning production of The Play What I Wrote . In 1984 , Mantle was one of four in the live BBC radio comedy show In One <unk> with Nick Wilton , Helen Lederer and Steve Brown . He transferred to TV with a version of it in 1987 called Hello Mum which was also live . In 1986 , Mantle replaced Alan Rickman as Achilles in Howard Davies 's Royal Shakespeare Company production of Troilus and Cressida at the Barbican Theatre in London . London Theatre Record said that Mantle " gives a curious performance : virtually a mirror @-@ image of Ajax in his nasal , bovine stolidity . " He continued with minor screen roles as a ruffian on a bus in Ronald Neame 's film Foreign Body and as " Big Ben " Davis in Dempsey and Makepeace in 1986 . He was to appear as the first Nuclear Man in Superman IV : The Quest for Peace ( 1987 ) , but the role was left on the cutting room floor . Some of his deleted footage from Superman IV was released on DVD in a Special Edition as part of Superman Ultimate Collector 's Edition in November 2006 . The footage was included as " Additional Scenes " but was not reincorporated into the main feature . In 1987 – 1998 he appeared in two episodes of Smith & Jones , and in 1989 played a policeman in the TV series The Return of Shelley and had a small role as Johnny Ladder in the Menahem Golan @-@ directed film Mack the Knife , a 19th @-@ century set crime comedy which starred Raúl Juliá , Richard Harris , and Julia <unk> in the leading roles . He also appeared in the radio plays Farewell , My Lovely ; Frozen Assets ; and The Rise and Fall of the Romanov Autocracy . 
 = = = 1990s = = = 
 In 1990 , Mantle had a small role as an electric meter reader in the One Foot in the Grave episode " The Return of the Speckled Band " , and played Harry , a man who " gave Clint Eastwood a pounding " in White Hunter Black Heart . In 1991 , Mantle played an irate husband whose wife is chatted up by Richie ( Rik Mayall ) in the first episode of Bottom , " Smells " , and also had a role as a police inspector in an episode of Drop the Dead Donkey . In 1991 – 92 he played Dave in Sandi Toksvig 's The Pocket Dream at the Nottingham Playhouse and Albery Theatre in London . In 1992 he played a minor character as a bald monk in the film Alien 3 , in which he had to shave his head for the role . In applying for the film , Mantle sent off photographs of himself from a RADA play he had once starred in , sporting a similar shaven look . In an interview at the time , he spoke of his role in Alien 3 : 
 I 'm playing a heinous criminal . In fact , there are about 12 or 15 of us , the last remaining prisoners on a prison asteroid , which is hurtling through space . It was a hard labour prison , which is about the best place to send all your hardened , nastiest pieces of work . We 're not nice people . 
 Also in 1992 , he starred in the CITV series <unk> . 
 Mantle is best known for his long stint as general surgeon Dr Mike Barrett in 85 episodes of the TV series Casualty from October 1992 to November 1996 , and 32 episodes of Holby City between 1999 and 2001 . He previously appeared in Casualty as the brother of a patient in 1988 . Mantle received much acclaim for his role and was one of the show 's most popular characters . He was praised for being entirely convincing as a hospital consultant and very dominant and authoritative in his role , " shouting orders in incomprehensible hospital @-@ speak . " Daily Mirror described him as a " heart @-@ throb consultant " and said that the role brought him " an army of female fans " . A 2001 poll by the Scottish Sunday Mail voted him 7th on a list of Top " 10 heart @-@ throb <unk> on the box " in a list which included the likes of George Clooney and Goran Višnjić . Mantle has said that during his role as the doctor he received a lot of fan mail , some of which were medically related and asking for his advice , believing him to be a real doctor , but professed that he couldn 't even stand the sight of real blood . He has said , " It 's funny because people always treat me like a doctor . Not a day goes by without someone coming up to me and asking me for advice . " In 1996 , he turned down an offer of £ 250 @,@ 000 to continue playing the character , and last appeared in Casualty in November 1996 . He said of his departure : 
 I 've had a great time , but I 'm frightened that , if I stick around too long , I 'll end up unable to do anything else . It 's not about money , it 's about doing other things and not wanting Mike to pale into insignificance . 
 In 1995 , Mantle was honoured with a surprise This Is Your Life edition , presented by Michael Aspel ; the title theme drew upon the " Robin of Sherwood " , after his role as Little John . During the life tribute , Mantle met his heroes from Worcestershire County Cricket Club , and the Chelsea FA Cup winners from 1970 . 
 In 1994 he played a prophet in Jo Brand Through the <unk> , and in 1995 he performed on stage as Frank in Educating Rita , a No.1 National Tour . In 1996 he visited Ghana on an eight @-@ day tour for the charity Save The Children . Mantle was a friend of Jill Dando , and played the prosecuting barrister in a TV dramatisation of the trial of Barry George in a Tonight With Trevor McDonald special , Nothing But The Truth . 
 In 1997 , Mantle was cast opposite Sarah Lancashire as Jack Deakin in the comedy series Bloomin ' Marvellous , written by playwright John Godber , described as " a comedy about a couple who decide to start a family . " The series was panned by most critics , and Mantle sarcastically remarked that " I 've seen murderers and rapists get a better press than we did . " However , several critics , such as Brian Viner of The Mail on Sunday , said that Bloomin ' Marvellous had " charm , top @-@ notch acting and a reasonable sprinkling of laughs , none of which are certainties in television comedy – especially the laughs . " 
 In 1998 , he appeared in Stephen Daldry 's production of The Ragged <unk> <unk> at the Liverpool Playhouse and the Theatre Royal Stratford East theatres . In 1998 @-@ 9 he portrayed Simon Horton , younger brother of David Horton in the British sitcom The Vicar of Dibley for two episodes ; <unk> Colgan said that his imposing height was " used to great comic effect " in this role when he became the love interest of 5 ' 0 " ( 1 @.@ 52 m ) tall Reverend Geraldine Granger ( Dawn French ) . From March 1999 , Mantle played Victor in Jan Sargent 's production of The Price at the Bristol Old Vic . Ian Shuttleworth of the Financial Times describes Mantle 's Victor as a character who " sacrificed a promising academic career in science to become a cop on the beat simply in order to keep his shattered father " and said that " Clive Mantle expresses his obstinacy through gritted teeth and cold , civil smiles rather than letting it loose " , also remarking that both he and his wife Esther ( played by Susan Wooldridge ) seemed several years too young for their roles . In May 1999 , Mantle , a cricket fan , agreed to participate in a celebrity international cricket tournament with the likes of Caprice <unk> , Rory Bremner , Ainsley Harriott , Lawrence Dallaglio , Lesley Garrett , Barry Norman , and Robbie Earle , and played Sri Lanka on 14 May 1999 . 
 = = = 2000s = = = 
 After experiencing mixed fortunes in his acting career after leaving Casualty , Mantle agreed to return to the role as Dr Mike Barrett in Holby City in 1999 . His abilities as a dramatic actor were praised by Christopher Matthew of the Daily Mail who said in 2000 , " Even the great Mike Barratt ( Clive Mantle ) , a dynamo in his Casualty days , manages to make eating a yoghurt seem like high drama . " Claire Stoker of Liverpool Echo said that " Clive will always be the best consultant Holby had ever had . " Mantle finally left his role in Holby City after 32 episodes in 2001 . That year , Mantle participated in a charity trek of the Annapurna circuit in the Himalayas and to Everest Base Camp , reaching 18 @,@ 420 ft in aid of Hope and Homes for Children . In 2002 , Mantle appeared in an episode of Heartbeat . 
 In 2003 , Mantle played Maynard in Ben Bolt 's TV movie , Second Nature , which starred Alec Baldwin in the leading role , and appeared in the first episode of the series <unk> . He portrayed Percy , described as a " big , bashful Northern mill @-@ worker who lives with his mum " , in Patrick Sanford 's stage production of Rattle of a Simple Man at the Clwyd Theatr Cymru in Mold , Flintshire . Gail Cooper of the Western Mail praised his performance and said : 
 Mantle , better known as dishy and confident consultant Mike Barrett in Casualty , is cast completely against type as Percy , the 42 @-@ year @-@ old virgin who admits to being only 35 . His body language is superb : awkward , self @-@ effacing , obsessively tidy – Coronation Street fans should think Roy Cropper if they want to imagine the sort of man Percy is . 
 In 2003 , Mantle began filming The Bingo Club , one of five specially commissioned one @-@ hour plays which were screened in January 2004 on BBC1 . Co @-@ starring Paula Wilcox and John McArdle , The Bingo Tales relates the story of three women facing romantic hardship and growing old . During production , Mantle fell on his face while shooting a fencing scene and was rushed to Selly Oak Hospital with a ruptured ligament in his leg . 
 In 2004 , Mantle appeared in an episode of The Afternoon Play , and in 2005 appeared in John Putch 's two @-@ part TV movie The Poseidon Adventure , opposite Adam Baldwin , Steve Guttenberg and Rutger Hauer . The film was dismissed by one critic as " criminally unimaginative " . He also appeared in an episode of Doctors . In 2006 , he guest @-@ starred in the Doctor Who audio drama The Settling by Big Finish Productions , and had a role in Simon Shore 's TV movie about a boy with autism , After Thomas , He toured as " The Narrator " in The Rocky Horror Show , and also played Brauner opposite Robin Hood 's Michael Praed in Haymarket Productions 's National Tour of Brian Stewart 's Killing Castro . The play was performed at the Festival Theatre in Malvern in June 2006 , and was described by the Birmingham Mail as an " acclaimed comedy " which " chronicles the more bizarre of America 's attempts to kill the Cuban leader Fidel Castro – including filling his shoes with poison and inventing an exploding cigar . " Over the Christmas and New Year period of 2007 and 2008 , Mantle portrayed the villain <unk> in a pantomime production of Aladdin at the Theatre Royal in Bath , described as an attempt by a theatre spokesman for Mantle to " throw off his gentle giant persona and transform himself into a classic panto baddie for the audience to boo and hiss wildly . " He performed in 64 shows over the duration of five and a half weeks . In 2008 , he appeared in an episode of The Invisibles , opposite Anthony Head , Warren Clarke and Jenny Agutter . In 2009 , Mantle had minor roles in Lucy <unk> 's Morris dancing comedy Morris : A Life with Bells On and in the Thaddeus O 'Sullivan historical biopic of Sir Winston Churchill , Into the Storm , co @-@ starring Iain Glen , Brendan Gleeson , and James D 'Arcy . 
 = = = 2010s = = = 
 In 2010 , Mantle portrayed Tommy Cooper in the successful stage entertainment show Jus ' Like That ! A Night Out With Tommy Cooper , which appeared at the Edinburgh Festival . To train for the role , Mantle mastered many of Cooper 's magic tricks , studying under Geoffrey Durham for several months . Mantle was thrilled to take on the role as Cooper is his ultimate comic hero , saying " It 's such a big privilege playing Tommy – I genuinely love the man . He is one of the funniest comedians this country has ever produced . So this whole tour for me is just an immense thrill . " Mantle considered the role highly challenging , given that he had to combine several aspects of skill , from the magic tricks to the joke @-@ telling , the physical comedy , and emulating the distinctive voice . Some people initially questioned the suitability of Mantle for the character , given that he was well known for playing a solemn doctor in Casualty , but he and the play were warmly received by critics . South Wales Echo called it a " compelling , funny and moving play " and said " Clive , best known for his role as Dr Mike Barratt in Casualty , has had to get used to wearing a fez and conjuring up some magic for his title role of Jus ' Like That ! A Night Out With Tommy Cooper . " 
 In 2011 he took a supporting role in the TV series White Van Man as Tony Curry , father of the central character , Ollie " Rogan " Josh Curry , played by Will Mellor . He also has an ongoing role in HBO 's Game of Thrones as Lord Greatjon Umber , a close ally of Robb Stark , and has provided the voice to the audio editions of Andy McNab 's Nick Stone thrillers . In 2012 , Mantle appeared in the Sherlock episode " The Hounds of Baskerville " as Dr Frankland . 
 In 2013 , Mantle performed in the black comedy The Ladykillers , playing the part of Major Courtney . He was forced to withdraw from the touring production in March 2013 after he was attacked at the Travelodge hotel in Newcastle . On the night of Saturday 23 March , he became involved in a brawl after asking a group of fellow guests to keep the noise down , during which part of his right ear was bitten off . He had to have emergency surgery at the Royal Victoria Infirmary hospital to have it sewn back on . A 32 @-@ year @-@ old man from Hamilton , South Lanarkshire was charged over the incident and appeared before a magistrate in April 2013 , and another man was released on bail in connection to the incident ; a third man has been released without charge . In June 2014 the two accused were found not guilty of all charges . 
 In 2014 Mantle supplied the voice of Gator in the eighteenth season of the British children 's television series Thomas & Friends as well as its sixth CGI animated film Tale of the Brave . He voiced Gator in both British and American dubbed versions . 
 = = Filmography = = 
 = Otome wa Boku ni Koishiteru = 
 Otome wa Boku ni Koishiteru ( <unk> , lit . The Maidens Are Falling in Love with Me ) , commonly known as Otoboku ( <unk> ) , is a Japanese adult visual novel developed by Caramel Box and released on January 28 , 2005 playable on Windows PCs . The game was later ported to the PlayStation 2 and PlayStation Portable ( PSP ) with the adult content removed . The Windows version was released in English by MangaGamer in 2012 . The story follows the life of Mizuho Miyanokouji , an androgynous male high school student , who transfers into an all @-@ girls school due to his grandfather 's will . 
 The gameplay in Otoboku follows a branching plot line which offers pre @-@ determined scenarios with courses of interaction , and focuses on the appeal of the six female main characters by the player character . The game ranked as the second best @-@ selling PC game sold in Japan for the time of its release , and charted in the national top 50 several more times afterwards . Caramel Box went on to produce two fan discs released in 2005 and 2007 in Caramel Box Yarukibako and Caramel Box Yarukibako 2 , respectively . Caramel Box later produced a sequel to Otoboku titled Otome wa Boku ni Koishiteru : Futari no Elder released on June 30 , 2010 playable on Windows PCs . Futari no Elder was ported to the PSP with the adult content removed . The story follows Chihaya Kisakinomiya , an androgynous male , who transfers into the all @-@ girls school that was the setting of Otoboku . 
 A manga adaptation of Otoboku was serialized in ASCII Media Works ' Dengeki Daioh , and a manga adaptation of Futari no Elder was serialized in Kadokawa Shoten 's Comp Ace . Comic anthologies , light novels and art books were also published , as were audio dramas and several music albums . A 12 @-@ episode Otoboku anime produced by Feel aired in Japanese between October and December 2006 , and an extra original video animation ( OVA ) episode was released in April 2007 . Media Blasters licensed the anime and released the series in three DVD volumes . The Otoboku anime was generally panned in reviews at Anime News Network where the series was described as " cruelly unimaginative " with " obnoxious quirks and technical shortcomings . " In a review of the anime by Mania Entertainment , the series is thought to be " very predictable and bland . " A three @-@ episode OVA adaptation of Futari no Elder produced by Silver Link was released between August and October 2012 . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Otome wa Boku ni Koishiteru is a romance visual novel in which the player assumes the role of Mizuho Miyanokouji . Its gameplay requires little player interaction as much of the game 's duration is spent on reading the text that appears on the screen , which represents the story 's narrative and dialogue . Otoboku follows a branching plot line with multiple endings , and depending on the decisions that the player makes during the game , the plot will progress in a specific direction . 
 There are six main plot lines that the player will have the chance to experience , one for each of the heroines in the story . Every so often , the player will come to a point where he or she is given the chance to choose from multiple options . Text progression pauses at these points until a choice is made . To view all plot lines in their entirety , the player will have to replay the game multiple times and choose different choices to further the plot to an alternate direction . Each scenario is divided into eight episodes , one interlude episode and an epilogue . At the end of an episode , an announcement of the next episode appears showing a preview of what is to consist in the next episode . Each episode takes place within the span of one month between June and March from episode one through the epilogue . The interlude episode is placed between the second and third episodes . 
 In the adult versions of the game , there are scenes with sexual CGs depicting Mizuho and a given heroine having sex . When the game was ported to the PlayStation 2 ( PS2 ) console , the gameplay was somewhat altered . The PS2 version , and later the PlayStation Portable ( PSP ) version , both had the sexual content removed , and in these versions there is no evidence that physical relationships actually take place between any of the students . 
 There are ten additional sub episodes and a special sub episode . The CD and DVD Windows editions contain four sub episodes , the fan disc Caramel Box Yarukibako contains four sub episodes and a special episode , Caramel Box Yarukibako 2 contains two sub episodes , and the PS2 version contains six sub episodes , though the order in which they appeared was altered . 
 In Otome wa Boku ni Koishiteru : Futari no Elder , the player assumes the roles of the main protagonist Chihaya Kisakinomiya and the secondary character Kaoruko Nanahara . There are six main plot lines that the player will have the chance to experience , one for each of the heroines in the story . In the adult versions of Futari no Elder , there are scenes with sexual CGs depicting Chihaya and a given heroine having sex . The gameplay is somewhat altered in the PSP version . The PSP version has the sexual content removed , the scenarios of Utano Sasou and Kaori <unk> that appeared in the Windows version are removed , and it contains newly added scenarios of You Kashiwagi and Hatsune Minase . There are three additional sub episodes in the Windows version of Futari no Elder . 
 = = Plot = = 
 = = = Setting = = = 
 The primary setting is at a private all @-@ girls school named Seio Girls ' Academy , also called Seio Jogakuin Christian Education , which was founded in 1886 by Mizuho 's ancestor . Seio was originally named <unk> Girls ' Academy ( <unk> , <unk> Jogakuin ) , which was used in original Windows version , the drama CD of the visual novel , and for the Caramel Box Yarukibako fan disc . This name was later ascertained to be similar to a name of an actual school , and the school 's name was changed to Seio Girls ' Academy ( <unk> , <unk> Jogakuin , <unk> as written in PlayStation 2 version ) . Seio is used in the PlayStation 2 version , DVD Windows edition , Caramel Box Yarukibako <unk> @-@ ban and anime series . The secondary setting is at a dormitory building named Sakura @-@ yakata ( <unk> ) , which Mizuho , Mariya , Yukari and Kana are boarding at . There are four other former dormitories named Tsubaki @-@ yakata , <unk> @-@ yakata , <unk> @-@ yakata and Hiiragi @-@ yakata . 
 = = = Main characters = = = 
 The player assumes the role of Mizuho Miyanokouji , the protagonist of Otome wa Boku ni Koishiteru . He is a kind high school student who impersonates a girl at an all @-@ girls school , which he transfers into per his grandfather 's will . He spends his time with many fellow attendees , some of which live in the nearby dormitory , and enjoys helping them with any problems they may have . His childhood friend Mariya Mikado attends the school with him , and helps in his female transition . She has a spirited personality with a bit of a temper , and has been a support for Mizuho in the past . Mizuho meets a classmate named Shion Jujo who has a silent voice and demeanor ; she quickly figures out that Mizuho is actually a boy , but tells no one . The previous year , she had to be hospitalized soon after she was elected as the Elder due to an illness . 
 At the dormitory lives an energetic first @-@ year student named Yukari Kamioka . She is on the track and field team along with Mariya , who is her Oneesama ( お姉さま , meaning " Older sister " ) , and has low confidence in her ability to run . Another first @-@ year at the dormitory named Kana Suoin meets Mizuho on the day he moves in , and soon after Mizuho becomes her Oneesama . Kana is more than happy to serve Mizuho any way she can , since she admires him immensely . A hyperactive ghost resides in Mizuho 's room named Ichiko Takashima and is shown to speak very fast when excited . She says that Mizuho looks very much like her previous Elder love interest , who turns out to be Mizuho 's deceased mother . The student council president at Seio is Takako Itsukushima who tends to have a serious personality . 
 = = = Story = = = 
 Otome wa Boku ni Koishiteru revolves around the main protagonist Mizuho Miyanokouji , a male high school student . After Mizuho 's grandfather dies , his will is reviewed , which explains his desire to have his grandson transfer to Seio Girls ' Academy , the same one his own mother attended and his ancestors founded . Abiding by the will , Mizuho cross @-@ dresses to attend the school . The headmistress , the deputy head teacher ( visual novel only ) , Mizuho 's homeroom teacher Hisako Kajiura and Mariya Mikado initially know his secret ; Shion Jujo and Ichiko Takashima also eventually find this out . Mizuho is very popular among the other students , who often talk about how pretty , nice , and athletic Mizuho is . This rampant popularity escalates to him even being nominated against his will to join in on the Elder election . By these terms , the current student council president , Takako Itsukushima , runs against Mizuho . 
 The Elder election is an old tradition at Seio Girls ' Academy where every June one of the students is elected by her peers to be the " Elder " , who is seen as the number one " Elder Sister " in the school . Until her graduation , she is referred to by her peers as <unk> @-@ sama ( お姉さま ) . To become an Elder , a candidate must gain at least 75 % of the votes . If none of the candidates get at least 75 % in the first round of voting , one of the candidates hands over her votes to another candidate , and the candidate who finally obtains at least 75 % of the votes becomes the Elder . If there is no one else in the election , the current year 's student council president becomes the Elder . In Otoboku , Mizuho gains 82 % of the votes in the first round , effectively becoming the 72nd Elder in the school 's history . After becoming Elder , Mizuho progressively gets more popular among the student body since he is now a symbol of the school 's excellence . In the following months , Mizuho starts to get to know some of the girls better and helps them with their problems . 
 = = = = Futari no Elder = = = = 
 Otome wa Boku ni Koishiteru : Futari no Elder is written from the viewpoints of main character Chihaya Kisakinomiya and secondary character Kaoruko Nanahara . Futari no Elder begins about two years after Mizuho 's graduation . The main protagonist Chihaya Mikado was truant at his school because of harassment in the school and of a distrust in men . His mother cannot bear to watch him be in trouble , so she makes him transfer to Seio Girls ' Academy , her old school . He dresses as a girl and introduces himself as Chihaya Kisakinomiya . Chihaya meets another protagonist Kaoruko Nanahara , who once rescued him from a playboy , and he begins to live in the dormitory building . He becomes the focus of public attention due to his attractive face and figure , and due to high grades at studies . 
 In the 75th Elder election , there are four finalists ; Hatsune Minase hands over her votes to Kaoruko and <unk> <unk> hands over her votes to Chihaya . Then Chihaya and Kaoruko gain the same votes of 368 together . Though a candidate which gains 75 % or more of the votes becomes the Elder , Hatsune , as the student council president , proposes that both Chihaya and Kaoruko become the Elders ; the motion is adopted unanimously . This is the first time there have been two Elders in the history of Seio Girls ' Academy . 
 = = Development = = 
 Otome wa Boku ni Koishiteru is the fourth visual novel developed by Caramel Box . The scenario is written by Aya Takaya , and this was the first time Takaya was staffed on a Caramel Box game . Art direction and character design is done by Norita , who was staffed on Caramel Box 's debut release Blue as an artist . The super deformed illustrations featured in Otoboku were drawn by the game illustrator Yoda . The music was composed by the music team Zizz Studio . 
 The original title uses the kanji <unk> ( <unk> ) , which means " virgin " , but is very close to the word for " young lady " , shōjo . The creators added furigana subscript to indicate they wanted it read " otome " meaning " young maiden " . Additionally , furigana was added above お姉さま ( <unk> @-@ sama ) to indicate that they wanted it read " boku " . Despite the different kanji , the official reading is " Otome wa Boku ni Koishiteru " . When the game was ported to the PlayStation 2 , it was rewritten as <unk> with the same pronunciation of " Otome wa Boku ni Koishiteru " , which uses the actual " otome " ( <unk> ) kanji . The latter name was kept for the manga and anime releases . 
 = = = Release history = = = 
 A free game demo of Otome wa Boku ni Koishiteru can be downloaded at the game 's official website . The game was released as an adult game on January 28 , 2005 as a limited edition , playable on a Windows PC as a 2 @-@ disc CD @-@ ROM set . The limited edition came bundled with a special story book entitled <unk> . The regular edition was released on February 18 , 2005 , and one select lot of this version contained a limited edition sticker . An updated version with full voice acting was released on April 28 , 2006 as a DVD . Another updated version compatible for Windows Vista / 7 was released on May 27 , 2011 . The Windows version of Otoboku was released in English by MangaGamer on November 23 , 2012 . 
 Caramel Box released a fan disc of Otoboku on June 24 , 2005 in a collection called Caramel Box Yarukibako , which contained additional scenarios that furthered the story from the original visual novel ; the fan disc came with a small figurine . The collection was re @-@ released under the title Caramel Box Yarukibako <unk> @-@ ban on January 26 , 2007 . A second fan disc was released on October 19 , 2007 in the collection Caramel Box Yarukibako 2 , which again contained additional scenarios . Alchemist released a PlayStation 2 port on December 29 , 2005 , which removed the adult elements of the game . Additional scenarios were included in the PS2 version written by Kiichi Kanō . A version of the adult game featuring only Sion 's scenario playable on iOS devices was released in six volumes between March 29 and June 4 , 2010 . A PlayStation Portable ( PSP ) version titled Otome wa Boku ni Koishiteru Portable was released on April 29 , 2010 by Alchemist . 
 = = = Sequel = = = 
 A sequel to the visual novel titled Otome wa Boku ni Koishiteru : Futari no Elder ( <unk> ～ <unk> ～ ) was released as an adult game on June 30 , 2010 as a limited edition , playable on a Windows PC as a DVD . The same staff that worked on Otoboku returned for the sequel . The limited edition came bundled with a 96 @-@ page guide book , an original card from the Lycèe Trading Card Game , and an original pouch . A free game demo of Futari no Elder can be downloaded at the game 's official website . The regular edition was released on July 30 , 2010 . Settings and characters from Sakura no Sono no Étoile , a novel written by the scriptwriter of Otoboku as a sequel to Takako 's story , appear in Futari no Elder . Also , the release date of June 30 coincides in @-@ story with the day of the election day of the 75th Elder sister . A PSP version titled Otome wa Boku ni Koishiteru Portable : Futari no Elder was released on April 28 , 2011 by Alchemist . A downloadable version of the PSP release via the PlayStation Store was released by Alchemist on December 1 , 2011 . 
 = = Related media = = 
 = = = Novels = = = 
 Two novels written based on the original game written by Saki Murakami and published by Paradigm were released in Japan in June and August 2005 . The first released was <unk> no <unk> : Sion @-@ hen ( <unk> ～ <unk> ～ , Imprisoned Princess : Sion Chapter ) centering on Sion , with the second entitled <unk> Juliet : Takako @-@ hen ( <unk> ～ <unk> ～ , Perplexed Juliet : Takako Chapter ) centering on Takako . These novels contain erotic content . A single volume titled Otome wa Boku ni Koishiteru written by Chihiro Minagawa with accompanying illustrations by Ume Aoi was published by Jive in August 2005 , and centers on Takako 's scenario . Sion 's scenario was ported to the iPhone as an e @-@ book between March 29 and June 4 , 2010 by DML . A semi official dōjin novel was written by the original scenario writer for the game , Aya Takaya , called Sakura no Sono no Étoile ( <unk> , lit . Étoile in the Cherry Orchard ) , with illustrations by the original game artist Norita . The novel contains a two short stories that is a sequel of Takako 's scenario , and Kana and Yukari have little sisters . The revised and completed edition of the dōjin novel was published as an official novel by Enterbrain on December 25 , 2007 . 
 Three volumes based on Futari no Elder were written by Tasuku Saiga and published by Paradigm between September 30 , 2010 and January 19 , 2011 . The first volume centers on Kaoruko Nanahara , the second is around Kaori <unk> , and the third centers on Utano Sasou . A single volume written by Reiji Mai titled Knight no Kimi no Love Romance ( <unk> , Love Affair of You , the Knight ) was published by Kill Time Communication on December 3 , 2010 . These four novels contain erotic content . Three volumes written by Aya Takaya were released by SoftBank Creative between December 15 , 2010 and January 15 , 2012 . The first volume titled Futari no Elder ( <unk> ) is the story until Chihaya Kisakinomiya and Kaoruko Nanahara are elected as Elders ; the second titled <unk> no <unk> ( <unk> , The Stranger Through the Window ) is the story until the end of first term and it mainly focuses Kaoruko Nanahara , You Kashiwagi and Hatsune Minase ; and the third titled Kin no Ori , Ibara no <unk> ( <unk> <unk> , lit . The Golden Cage , The Birdcage of Thorns ) is the story between summer vacation and September and it mainly focuses <unk> Reizei and Utano Sasou . There were five novels published by Multi Bunko between June 30 , 2011 and March 29 , 2012 : three volumes written by Tasuku Saiga are around Utano Sasou , Fumi <unk> and <unk> Reizei ; one volume written by Ricotta is around Kaoruko Nanahara ; and a volume written by Mitsuru <unk> is not dependent on any heroine 's scenario . These eight novels are not erotic . 
 = = = Manga = = = 
 A manga adaptation is illustrated by <unk> Araki and was serialized in ASCII Media Works ' magazine Dengeki Daioh between the November 2006 and August 2008 issues in Japan . Two tankōbon volumes were released under ASCII Media Works ' Dengeki Comics imprint , the first on August 27 , 2007 and the second on September 27 , 2008 . A four panel comic strip manga was published by Enterbrain in 12 comics anthologies released between March 26 , 2007 and March 25 , 2009 . 
 A manga adaptation of Futari no Elder illustrated by <unk> <unk> was serialized between the July 2010 and February 2012 issues of Kadokawa Shoten 's Comp Ace . Three volumes were published between November 26 , 2010 and January 26 , 2012 . Three volumes of a four panel , comic strip manga of Futari no Elder were published by Enterbrain between September 26 , 2010 and January 29 , 2011 . Two comic anthologies were released by Ichijinsha between October 25 and November 25 , 2010 . 
 = = = Internet radio show = = = 
 An Internet radio show to promote the anime series was broadcast between October 5 , 2006 and March 27 , 2008 called the Seio Girls ' Academy Broadcasting Station ( <unk> , <unk> Jogakuin <unk> ) . It aired every Thursday hosted by Miyu Matsuki and Yuko Goto who played Sion Jujo and Ichiko Takashima in the anime , respectively ; it was produced by Animate TV . There are thirteen corners , or parts , to the program which correspond to the general life of the characters in the story , and 74 episodes were produced . There were several guests to the show such as Chiaki Takahashi in episodes six and seven as Takako Itsukushima , Akemi Kanda in episodes eleven and twelve as Kana Suoin , Ayano Matsumoto in episodes fifteen and sixteen as Yukari Kamioka , and Madoka Kimura in episodes nineteen and twenty as <unk> Sugawara . The radio show episodes were released on four CDs released between May 9 , 2007 and February 6 , 2008 . 
 = = = Anime = = = 
 An anime adaptation is produced by the animation studio Feel , directed by <unk> Nawa , written by Katsumi Hasegawa , and features character design by Noriko <unk> who based the designs on Norita 's original concept . The anime contained twelve episodes which aired between October 6 and December 24 , 2006 on several UHF networks including TV Kanagawa and Chiba TV . The episodes were released on four DVD compilations released in Japan as limited and regular editions . A single original video animation ( OVA ) episode was released on the final limited edition DVD on April 4 , 2007 . Media Blasters released the series , including the OVA , as English @-@ subtitled DVDs between June 24 and October 7 , 2008 under the title Otoboku : Maidens Are Falling For Me ! . 
 A three @-@ episode OVA adaptation of Futari no Elder is produced by the animation studio Silver Link , directed by Shin 'ya <unk> , written by Michiko Yokote , and features character design by Keiichi Sano who based the designs on Norita 's original concept . The episodes were released on three Blu @-@ ray Disc / DVD volumes between August 29 and October 24 , 2012 . 
 = = = Music and audio CDs = = = 
 The Otome wa Boku ni Koishiteru visual novel has three theme songs : the opening theme " You Make My Day ! " by Yuria , the ending theme " <unk> <unk> " ( <unk> ) by Yui Sakakibara , and " Sayonara no <unk> " ( <unk> ) by Sakakibara as an insert song . The original soundtrack for the visual novel titled Maiden 's Rest was released in Japan on February 25 , 2005 by <unk> . The Futari no Elder visual novel has four theme songs : an opening theme , an ending theme , and two insert songs . For the Windows version of Futari no Elder , the opening theme is " <unk> Girl " ( <unk> ・ ガール ) by Yuria , and the ending theme is " Hidamari no Naka e " ( <unk> ) by Aki Misato . For the PSP version of Futari no Elder , the opening theme is " Crystal Wish " by Miyuki Hashimoto , and the ending theme is " <unk> , <unk> " ( <unk> 、 <unk> 。 ) by Shiori . The insert songs , both sung by Sakakibara , are " <unk> Hana no <unk> " ( <unk> ) and " Kimi no Mama de " ( <unk> ) . An album was released containing the theme songs for the Windows version of Futari no Elder on May 26 , 2010 by Lantis . A single was released containing the theme songs for the PSP version of Futari no Elder on April 27 , 2011 by Lantis . 
 Two singles were released for the opening and ending themes for the anime adaptation . The first called " Love Power " by <unk> contained the opening theme of the same name . The other single entitled " Again " by Yui Sakakibara contained the ending theme entitled " Beautiful Day " . The A @-@ side track from that single entitled " Again " was used as an insert song in episode eleven . Both singles were released on October 25 , 2006 by King Records . The soundtrack for the anime was released on November 22 , 2006 by King Records . Three character image song albums were released sung by voice actors from the anime adaptation . The first album was by Yui Horie as Mizuho Miyanokouji , Miyu Matsuki as Sion Jujo and Masumi Asano as Mariya Mikado . The second album featured Ayano Matsumoto as Yukari Kamioka , Akemi Kanda as Kana Suoin and Yuko Goto as Ichiko Takashima . The third album was recorded by Chiaki Takahashi as Takako Itsukushima , Madoka Kimura as <unk> Sugawara and Yui Sakakibara as Hisako Kajiura . These CDs were released between July 26 and September 21 , 2006 . 
 Seven drama CDs based on Otoboku have also been produced . The first was based on the visual novel and was released on September 22 , 2005 . Four more based on the Otoboku anime adaptation were released between October 25 , 2006 and April 11 , 2007 . A drama CD based on the novel Sakura no Sono no Étoile was released on January 29 , 2010 . The last one was based on a special episode contained in the fan disc Caramel Box Yarukibako with voice actors from anime adaptation released on January 29 , 2010 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 According to a national ranking of how well bishōjo games sold nationally in Japan , the Otome wa Boku ni Koishiteru limited edition Windows release premiered at number two in the rankings . The limited edition achieved a ranking of four out of 50 in the ranking for the next two weeks . The regular edition Windows release premiered at number six in the rankings , and stayed in the top 50 for a month and a half until mid @-@ April 2005 . The regular edition was again in the rankings for May 2005 , managing to rank in at 38 and 49 . The Otome wa Boku ni Koishiteru Windows edition playable as a DVD premiered at number 13 in the rankings and stayed at that rank for the next listing . The DVD edition ranked twice more over the next month : the first at 43 and the last at 33 . From May to June 2010 , Otome wa Boku ni Koishiteru : Futari no Elder ranked third in national PC game pre @-@ orders in Japan . Futari no Elder ranked second in terms of national sales of PC games in Japan in June 2010 . 
 The first two anime DVD volumes released by Media Blasters were reviewed by Anime News Network . In the review of the first DVD , the reviewer Carl Kimlinger generally panned the volume , commenting how the three episodes were " cruelly unimaginative " where " afterwards it 's one long slide into a torturous hell of girls ' school tripe where not even humor or romance can pierce the veil of pain . " The Catholic girl 's school premise is likened to Maria @-@ sama ga Miteru and Strawberry Panic ! , and is considered to be used " merely as visual spice . " For the second DVD volume , Kimlinger wrote that " while the onslaught of squealing , caffeinated moe @-@ bait has abated somewhat in its ferocity , a sagging of the already listlessly undirected plot ensures that the series ' sophomore outing is only marginally more tolerable than the first . " Further , the series is described as having " obnoxious quirks and technical shortcomings . " 
 The first two anime DVD volumes released by Media Blasters were also reviewed by Mania Entertainment . In the review of the first DVD , the reviewer Chris Beveridge felt the anime reminded him of " parts of Princess Princess , especially when it came to the Elder status piece . It 's even reminiscent of Strawberry Panic in this way . " The series is described as " all about the " moe " factor , bringing about an atmosphere that makes you like the characters , care about them and feel good about seeing them interact . It does it well even if it doesn ’ t have an amazing hook . " For the second DVD volume , Beveridge commented that the series continues to be " very predictable and bland " which is " at this point fun but entirely forgettable . " Beveridge also wrote how " the characters are all pleasant , nicely designed and with mildly interesting personalities that could lead to something more but never does . " 
 = Atlantis : The Lost Empire = 
 Atlantis : The Lost Empire is a 2001 American animated action @-@ adventure film created by Walt Disney Feature Animation — the first science fiction film in Disney 's animated features canon and the 41st overall . Written by Tab Murphy , directed by Gary Trousdale and Kirk Wise , and produced by Don Hahn , the film features an ensemble cast with the voices of Michael J. Fox , Cree Summer , James Garner , Leonard Nimoy , Don Novello , Phil Morris , Claudia Christian , Jacqueline Obradors , and Jim Varney in his final role before his death . Set in 1914 , the film tells the story of a young man who gains possession of a sacred book , which he believes will guide him and a crew of mercenaries to the lost city of Atlantis . 
 Development of the film began after production had finished on The Hunchback of Notre Dame ( 1996 ) . Instead of another musical , the production team decided to do an action @-@ adventure film inspired by the works of Jules Verne . Atlantis was notable for adopting the distinctive visual style of comic book creator Mike Mignola . At the time of its release , the film had made greater use of computer @-@ generated imagery ( CGI ) than any of Disney 's previous animated features ; it remains one of the few to have been shot in anamorphic format . Linguist Marc Okrand created a language specifically for use in Atlantis , while James Newton Howard provided the score . The film was released at a time when audience interest in animated films was shifting away from hand @-@ drawn animation toward films with full CGI . 
 Atlantis : The Lost Empire premiered at the El Capitan Theatre in Hollywood , California on June 3 , 2001 , and went into general release on June 15 . Released by Walt Disney Pictures , Atlantis performed modestly at the box office . Budgeted at $ 100 million , the film grossed over $ 186 million worldwide , $ 84 million of which was earned in North America . Due to the film 's lackluster box office performance , Disney quietly canceled both a spin @-@ off television series and an underwater attraction at its Disneyland theme park . Some critics praised it as a unique departure from typical Disney animated features , while others disliked it due to the unclear target audience and absence of songs . Atlantis was nominated for a number of awards , including seven Annie Awards , and won Best Sound Editing at the 2002 Golden Reel Awards . The film was released on VHS and DVD on January 29 , 2002 ; the Blu @-@ ray released on June 11 , 2013 . Atlantis is considered to be a cult favorite , due in part to Mignola 's unique artistic influence . A direct @-@ to @-@ video sequel , Atlantis : Milo 's Return , was released in 2003 . 
 = = Plot = = 
 A large tidal wave triggered by a distant explosion threatens to drown the island of Atlantis . In the midst of an evacuation from the capital city , the Queen of Atlantis is caught by a strange , hypnotic blue light and lifted up into the " Heart of Atlantis " , a powerful crystal protecting the city . The crystal consumes her and creates a dome barrier that protects the city 's innermost district . She leaves behind a young daughter , Princess Kida , as the island sinks beneath the ocean . 
 Thousands of years later in 1914 , Milo Thatch , a cartographer and linguist at the Smithsonian Institution who is marginalized for his research on Atlantis , believes that he has found The Shepherd 's Journal , an ancient manuscript that contains directions to the lost island . After the museum board declines his proposal to search for the journal , a mysterious woman , Helga Sinclair , introduces Milo to Preston B. Whitmore , an eccentric millionaire . Whitmore has already funded a successful effort to retrieve the journal as repayment of a debt to Milo 's grandfather , and recruits Milo to lead an expedition to Atlantis as soon as he receives it . 
 The expedition departs with a team of specialists led by Commander Lyle Rourke , who also led the journal recovery expedition . The crew includes Vinny Santorini , a demolitions expert ; Mole Molière , a geologist ; Dr. Joshua Sweet , a medical officer ; Audrey Ramirez , a mechanic ; Mrs. Wilhelmina Packard , a radio operator ; and Cookie Farnsworth , a mess cook . They set out in the " Ulysses " , a massive submarine . During the journey , they are attacked by the monstrous Leviathan , a robotic lobster @-@ like creature that guards Atlantis ' entrance . The " Ulysses " is subsequently destroyed , but Milo , Rourke , and part of the crew escape by making their way to an underground cavern , described in the journal as the entrance to Atlantis . 
 After traveling through a network of caves and a dormant volcano , the team reaches the outskirts of Atlantis . They are greeted by Kida who resembles a young woman and discover that the Atlantean language is the basis of many existing languages . Kida enlists Milo 's aid in deciphering the Atlantean written language , long forgotten by the natives . By swimming deep within the city 's submerged ruins and translating underwater murals , Milo helps Kida uncover the nature of the Heart of Atlantis : it supplies the Atlanteans with power and longevity through the crystals worn around their necks . He is surprised this is not mentioned in the journal , but upon examination realizes a page is missing . 
 Returning to the surface with Kida , Milo discovers Rourke has the missing page . Rourke and the crew betray Milo , intending to bring the crystal to the surface and sell it . Rourke mortally wounds the King of Atlantis while trying to extract information about the crystal 's location , but finds its location for himself hidden beneath the King 's throne room . The crystal detects a threat before merging with Kida . Rourke and the mercenaries lock Kida in a crate and prepare to leave the city . Knowing that when the crystal is gone the Atlanteans will die , Milo berates his friends for betraying their consciences and ultimately convinces them to leave Rourke and remain in Atlantis . The King explains to Milo that the crystal has developed a consciousness – it thrives on the collective emotions of the Atlanteans and provides power , protection and longevity in return . It will find a royal host when Atlantis is in danger . He then reveals that the sinking of Atlantis was caused when he attempted to use it as a weapon of war . As he dies he gives his crystal to Milo , telling him to save Atlantis and Kida . Encouraged by Sweet , Milo rallies the crew and the Atlanteans to stop Rourke . 
 In the ensuing battle inside the volcano , Helga and the other mercenaries including Rourke are all killed . Milo and the others successfully fly the crystal back to the city , as the volcano erupts . With lava flowing towards the city , Kida ( in her crystal form ) rises into the air and creates a protective shield . The lava breaks away harmlessly , showing a restored Atlantis , and the crystal returns Kida to Milo . The surviving crew members return to the surface and promise to keep the discovery of Atlantis a secret . Having fallen in love with Kida , Milo stays behind to help her rebuild the lost empire . 
 = = Cast = = 
