 = = = Qualifying = = = 
 The field for the main event consisted only of 30 trucks instead of the usual 36 , with the top 20 trucks in the owner 's points standings guaranteed a spot . To determine the field , two @-@ lap qualifying runs were held , which determined the starting grids for five heat races of eight laps each . The top five fastest qualifiers started on the pole for the heats , and the highest non @-@ locked @-@ in truck were transferred in to the main event until there were 25 trucks in the field . For drivers that did not qualify via the heats , the top four in a last @-@ chance qualifier advance , with the final spot reserved for the most recent series champion , and if that spot is vacant , the fifth @-@ place finisher in the LCQ would qualify for the main event . 
 Qualifying was held at 5 : 05 P.M. Ken Schrader won the pole with a lap time of 19 @.@ 709 seconds and a speed of 91 @.@ 329 mph ( 146 @.@ 980 km / h ) for his first Truck Series pole since 2004 , and became the oldest pole @-@ sitter in NASCAR history at 58 years of age , passing Dick Trickle , who won the pole at Dover International Speedway in the Busch Series ' MBNA Platinum 200 in 1999 . 
 The heat races began at 7 : 00 P.M. , with each heat race occurring after 15 minutes of the previous heat 's start . The last chance qualifier was held at 8 : 45 P.M. Schrader eventually won his heat race after leading all 8 laps . In Heat 2 , the first caution flag of the day was flown for Darrell Wallace Jr . ' s spin with three laps remaining , and Jared Landers prevented a comeback by Matt Crafton to win . The next heat was dominated by Timothy Peters , who led all eight laps ; Heats 4 and 5 were won by Kenny Wallace and Jeb Burton , respectively , the two drivers leading every lap . In the last chance qualifier , J. R. Heffner , who started first in the race , failed to finish the race after completing one lap . Ultimately , Brennan Newberry led all fifteen laps to win , followed by Jeff Babcock , Jason Bowles and Justin Jennings . Norm Benning clinched the fifth and final transfer spot after holding off Clay Greenfield , who nearly wrecked him three times ; in response , Benning gave Greenfield the finger after the race concluded . Because they did not finish in the top five , Greenfield , Jimmy Weller , Bryan Silas , Joe Cobb and Heffner did not qualify for the event . When asked about the duel with Greenfield , Benning stated Tony Stewart had him that he " singlehandedly made the show a success " . 
 = = = = Qualifying results = = = = 
 = = = = = Heat races = = = = = 
 = = = = = = Heat Race # 1 = = = = = = 
 = = = = = = Heat Race # 2 = = = = = = 
 = = = = = = Heat Race # 3 = = = = = = 
 = = = = = = Heat Race # 4 = = = = = = 
 = = = = = = Heat Race # 5 = = = = = = 
 = = = = Last Chance Qualifier = = = = 
 = = Race = = 
 The race started at 9 : 35 P.M. EST and televised live on Speed , while being broadcast on radio by Motor Racing Network . Krista Voda hosted Speed 's <unk> show , while Rick Allen , Phil Parsons and Michael Waltrip called the race from the booth ; the network 's pit reporters for the event were Ray Dunlap , Hermie Sadler and Bob <unk> . 1 @.@ 4 million people viewed the race on television , the tenth @-@ most viewed Truck race in series history , and the highest @-@ watched event of the day ; the race also had a Nielsen rating of 1 @.@ 20 . The weather for the race was mostly clear with a temperature of 68 ° F ( 20 ° C ) . The St. Henry High School band performed the national anthem , while the parade lap featured a four @-@ wide salute by the trucks to the fans . 
 Due to the lack of a pit road , the race was split into three segments of 60 , 50 and 40 laps so teams can make pit stops and adjustments between each segment , and there would be no positions gained nor lost during stops . In segment 1 , Timothy Peters took the lead from pole @-@ sitter Ken Schrader on lap 15 , and led for 23 laps until Kyle Larson took the lead on lap 39 , who led for the remainder of the segment . In the final five laps of the segment , the first caution of the race flew for debris , and the beneficiary was Max Gresham , who was the first driver at least a lap down , which allowed him to regain a lap . In the second segment , Larson continued to lead for a total of 50 laps until Austin Dillon passed him on lap 89 after the former collided with Germán Quiroga . One lap later , another caution was flown for debris , and Gresham was again the beneficiary . On lap 116 , Jared Landers ' truck became loose in turn 2 , collected Ty Dillon and made contact with Johnny Sauter . Quiroga was the beneficiary on the resulting caution . Larson and Austin Dillon dueled for the remainder of the race , with Dillon allowing Larson to pass on lap 122 , but Dillon managed to get past Larson on the following lap . Two more cautions for debris ( first on the front stretch , the second in turn 4 ) were eventually flown , and a green – white – checker finish was initiated due to debris in turn 4 on lap 149 . Dillon retained the lead on the <unk> to win , beating Larson by 1 @.@ 197 seconds . Behind Dillon and Larson , Ryan Newman finished third , followed by Joey Coulter , Brendan Gaughan , Timothy Peters , Darrell Wallace Jr . , Matt Crafton , Dave Blaney and Max Gresham . Sauter ( accident ) and Jeff Babcock ( engine ) failed to finish the race . 
 The race concluded with four different leaders , eight lead changes , and six cautions . Dillon led the most laps with 64 , followed by Larson ( 51 ) , Peters ( 23 ) and Schrader ( 15 ) . Despite winning the race , Dillon , along with six other drivers , did not receive Truck Series points due to a rule that allowed drivers to compete in only one series ' drivers championship . The win was Dillon 's first of 2013 and fifth Truck Series victory in 53 starts . It was also the 29th Truck Series win for owner Richard Childress and Richard Childress Racing 's second Truck win of 2013 . 
 In August , Dillon 's truck , his winner 's trophy and a jar of dirt he shoveled at the start / finish line were placed on display in the NASCAR Hall of Fame . 
 = = Results = = 
 = = = Standings after the race = = = 
 = Around the World ( Christina Aguilera song ) = 
 " Around the World " is a song by American recording artist Christina Aguilera from her seventh studio album , Lotus ( 2012 ) . It was written by Aguilera and Ali Tamposi and was co @-@ written and produced by Supa Dups and Jason Gilbert . The song is an uptempo pop track , with crashing drums and a thumping bassline . The song is about how Aguilera wants to make love in different countries around the world with her lover . It also refers to her 2001 single " Lady Marmalade " , where she whispers the lyrics " Voulez @-@ vous coucher avec moi , se soir ? " . " Around the World " received mixed reviews from music critics ; some thought it was fun , while others felt it was faceless . Upon the release of Lotus , the song debuted and peaked at number 158 on the South Korean International singles chart . 
 = = Background = = 
 Following the release of her sixth studio album , Bionic ( 2010 ) , Aguilera filed for divorce from her husband Jordan Bratman , starred in her first feature film , Burlesque and recorded the accompanying soundtrack . She then became a coach on NBC 's singing competition show The Voice and appeared as a featured artist on Maroon 5 's single " Moves like Jagger " ( 2011 ) , which spent four weeks atop the US Billboard Hot 100 chart . Following these events , Aguilera announced that had plans to begin production of her seventh album , stating that she wanted high quality and " personal " songs for the record . Regarding the creative direction , she revealed that the album would be a " culmination of everything I 've experienced up until this point ... I 've been through a lot since the release of my last album , being on ( ' The Voice ' ) , having had a divorce ... This is all sort of a free rebirth for me . " She further said " I 'm embracing many different things , but it 's all feel @-@ good , super @-@ expressive [ and ] super @-@ vulnerable . " Aguilera continued to say that the album would be about " self – expression and freedom " because of the personal struggles she had overcome during the last couple of years . Speaking about her new material during an interview on The Tonight Show with Jay Leno in 2012 , Aguilera said that the recording process for Lotus was taking a while because " I don 't like to just get songs from producers . I like them to come from a personal place ... I 'm very excited . It 's fun , exciting , introspective , it 's going to be great " . 
 = = Recording and composition = = 
 " Around the World " was co @-@ written by Aguilera with Dwayne Chin @-@ Quee , Jason Gilbert and Ali Thompson . It was produced by Supa Dups and it was co @-@ produced by Gilbert . Aguilera 's vocals were recorded at The Red Lips Room in Beverly Hills , California by Oscar Ramirez . It is a pop song with a ragga flavour , and runs for a duration of three minutes and 24 seconds . Its instrumentation contains crashing drums and " a thumping bassline " . According to Chris Younie from 4Music , the song 's chorus is " insanely catchy " . Lyrically , it talks about Christina wanting to have sexual intercourse with someone in different locations around the world , including Hollywood and Japan . The track also refers to her 2001 hit " Lady Marmalade " , where Aguilera whispers the lyrics " Voulez @-@ vous coucher avec moi , ce soir ? " . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 " Around the World " received generally mixed reviews from music critics . Chris Younie of 4Music gave the song a favorable review , calling it a " party @-@ like song of lust and desire " and has " an insanely catchy chorus " . The Scotsman critic Fiona <unk> wrote that the song has " the most resounding chorus on the album " . Mike Wass of Idolator gave it a mix review , writing it is " another inoffensive adventure that scores extra points for quoting lyrics from ' Lady Marmalade ' " , however it " lacks the big pop hook need to wreak havoc on the charts " . Writing on behalf of The New York Times , Jon Caramanica called it " gauche and aesthetically vulgar in the way Ms. Aguilera once proudly was " . 
 Andrew Hampp of Billboard was mixed , writing that , " Sadly , the second @-@ verse reference to ' Lady Marmalade ' remains one of the few moments of fun on this otherwise tepid track " . Michael Gallucci of PopCrush called it " a faceless dance track built around another solid beat " , but also commenting , " Aguilera 's insistence on singing part of the song with Lionel Richie 's ' All Night Long ( All Night ) ' island accent is totally misguided " . Sam Hine of Popjustice called it " pop filler " and " it prompts his headache to really kick in " . Several critics compared " Around the World " to songs performed by Barbadian recording artist Rihanna . Kitty Empire of The Observer called it a " come @-@ hither tune " , also writing that it is a " Rihanna @-@ copping " . T 'cha Dunlevy , a writer for the Montreal Gazette , agreed with <unk> 's sentiments , calling it " a blatant Rihanna ripoff " . Annie <unk> of The A.V. Club echoed the same thought , calling it a " Rihanna reject " . 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Recording 
 Vocals recorded at The Red Lips Room , Beverly Hills , California 
 Personnel 
 Songwriting – Christina Aguilera , <unk> Chin @-@ Quee , Jason Gilbert , Ali Tamposi 
 Production – Dwayne " Supa Dups " Chin @-@ Quee , Jason " JG " Gilbert ( co @-@ producer ) 
 Vocal recording – Oscar Ramirez 
 Credits adapted from the liner notes of Lotus , RCA Records . 
 = = Charts = = 
 Upon the release of Lotus , " Around the World " debuted on the South Korean International download singles chart at number 158 during the week of November 11 to 17 , 2012 , due to digital download sales of 1 @,@ 958 . 
 = The Sound of Silence ( Grey 's Anatomy ) = 
 " The Sound of Silence " is the ninth episode , serving as a mid @-@ season premiere of the twelfth season of the American medical drama television series Grey 's Anatomy , and is the 254th overall episode , which aired on ABC on February 11 , 2016 . The episode was written by Stacy McKee and directed by Denzel Washington . At the time of its initial release , the episode was watched by 8 @.@ 28 million viewers and received critical acclaim with the television critics praising Washington 's directing , Ellen Pompeo 's performance , and Stacy McKee ’ s writing . 
 Grey 's Anatomy centers around a group of physicians struggling to balance their professional lives with their personal lives . " The Sound of Silence " revolves around Meredith Grey ( Pompeo ) who is brutally attacked by a patient , and sustains numerous injuries . The doctors of Grey Sloan Memorial rush to help her recover from the injuries and remain by her side in the harrowing aftermath . Further storylines include the aftermath of Alex Karev ( Justin Chambers ) proposing to his girlfriend Jo Wilson ( Camilla Luddington ) and Jackson Avery serving divorce papers to his wife April Kepner ( Sarah Drew ) . 
 = = Plot = = 
 " The Sound of Silence " opens with Dr. Meredith Grey ( Ellen Pompeo ) teaching her anatomy class . The episode jumps back to Meredith , Maggie , and Alex as they are carpooling to work , stuck in a traffic jam that turns out to be the result of a road accident . Upon arrival at the hospital , the doctors get to work treating the people who were injured in accident . Meredith is working with Dr. Penny Blake ( Samantha Sloyan ) and Dr. Ben Warren ( Jason George ) on Lou , a patient who needs a neurological consult . Ben asks Dr. Amelia Shepherd ( Caterina Scorsone ) , but she chooses to assist Dr. Owen Hunt ( Kevin McKidd ) instead , because of her previous fight with Meredith . Meanwhile , Meredith is left alone with the patient . The patient becomes violent as the result of post @-@ seizure <unk> and assaults Meredith , leaving her battered and barely conscious on the floor . 
 Penny finds Meredith and calls for help . The doctors rush to save Meredith 's life , in the face of her injuries . As Dr. Richard Webber ( James Pickens Jr . ) , Dr. April Kepner ( Sarah Drew ) , Ben , Dr. Callie Torres ( Sara Ramirez ) , Owen , Dr. Maggie Pierce ( Kelly McCreary ) , Dr. Jackson Avery ( Jesse Williams ) and Dr. Alex Karev ( Justin Chambers ) address the injuries , Meredith realizes she is unable to speak . They soon discover that she 's lost her hearing as a result of the beating she endured . The episode then draws into silence as it 's shown from Meredith 's perspective , who is unable to hear , or speak . Her jaw is wired shut and she relies on her other senses to interpret the situation . 
 Alex visits Meredith during her recovery and attempts to cheer her up . Alex realizes Meredith ’ s hearing has returned after she laughs at one of his jokes . Later Dr. Miranda Bailey ( Chandra Wilson ) informs Meredith that Lou underwent surgery and was discharged . He 's asked to see her to apologize , but Meredith refuses . Dr. Arizona Robbins ( Jessica Capshaw ) helps her prepare for a visit with her children . On arriving they are terrified when their mother in the condition and leave . Meredith has a panic attack , and Penny steps up to help , removing the wires holding her jaw shut . Jackson reprimands Penny for jeopardising the healing process . 
 Amelia visits Meredith to apologize for her prior behavior and discuss her sobriety . Amelia confides in Meredith that she is scared to lose her , but Meredith responds that she is not ready to forgive her . Webber takes Meredith out for some fresh air , and gives her a talk about the power of forgiveness . He encourages her to forgive Amelia , Penny , Derek , and most importantly herself . She agrees to meet Lou . He introduces his wife and two daughters and then offers a sincere apology for what happened . Meredith , still unable to speak , takes his hand as a way of conveying her forgiveness . 
 After Meredith finally heals from her injuries and is discharged from the hospital , Alex helps her get settled back at home . She thanks him for his support , but points out that Dr. Jo Wilson ( Camilla Luddington ) loves him and needs him more than she does . In the final scenes , Meredith reunites with her kids . 
 = = Production = = 
 Running for approximately 43 minutes , the episode was written by Stacy McKee and directed by Denzel Washington . The episode featured the songs " My Girl " , " I Surrender " . In October 2015 , it was announced by TVLine that two @-@ time Academy Awards winner Washington was to direct the ninth episode of the season , which would be Washington 's first time at directing television . He had previously directed the films Antwone Fisher and The Great Debaters . The table read for this episode took place on October 14 , 2015 and shooting began on October 20 . Before the release of the episode a video was leaked from the set where Washington could be seen passing behind Chandra Wilson , as she pushes Pompeo around in a wheelchair , wearing full arm and leg casts . The video substantiated Washington ’ s involvement with the show and speculated Meredith ’ s injuries . " 
 During the winter hiatus , Lesley Goldberg of The Hollywood Reporter confirmed Giacomo <unk> ’ s promotion to series regular over the winter hiatus . He had first appeared as Dr. Andrew DeLuca towards the end of Season 11 as a part of the new set of interns at the hospital . 
 The episode was heavily advertised and hyped by the ABC network before its release . In the preview of the show 's return , Meredith is suffering from a long list of wounds , ranging from bruising on both her left chest and left knee to collapsed veins . In a sneak @-@ peek clip from the episode , a patient is seen attacking Meredith , but it wasn 't disclosed why the patient went after the Grey Sloan surgeon . The Daily Beast wrote , " Footage of Ellen Pompeo 's Dr. Meredith Grey being beat up by a patient and left for dead on a hospital room floor has been promoted with the admirable aggression of , well , a network promoting an event episode . There 's a cheapness to stunt TV , sure . But there 's also a crass beauty to it . " 
 Pompeo spoke with Entertainment Weekly about the episode and said , “ It ’ s for sure the [ best ] thing I ’ ve ever done on the show . " On working with Washington she said , " We ’ ve never had anybody of his caliber come and direct our show ever . His charisma , he changes the energy in the room completely . Everybody is just at the top of their game . [ He ’ s ] amazing . Let ’ s just say I ’ m a huge fan . It ’ s a total dream come true . ” In an interview with Entertainment Weekly , executive producer Shonda Rhimes called the episode “ extraordinary and very , very powerful , ” noting the hour “ puts us on a path for the beginning of the second half of the season when it comes to Meredith ’ s evolution . " 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 " The Sound of Silence " was originally broadcast on February 11 , 2016 on American Broadcasting Company ( ABC ) in the United States . It served as the mid @-@ season premiere for the twelfth season of the show . On its initial release the episode was watched by a total of 8 @.@ 28 million viewers and scored a 2 @.@ 4 / 8 in the key 18 @-@ 49 demographic in the Nielsen ratings , which was a decrease from the previous episode " Things We Lost in the Fire " watched by 8 @.@ 50 million viewers and received a 2 @.@ 5 / 8 ratings / share The episode was ranked 17th in overall viewership rank and 6th in 18 @-@ 49 demographic . The episode was the third @-@ most watched drama of the night . 
 = = = Critical Reception = = = 
 The episode received critical acclaim , with critics highlighting Ellen Pompeo 's performance , Washington 's direction and McKee 's writing . TV Line gave Pompeo 's performance the most praise , called it " visceral " and wrote , " If a picture really says a thousand words , this review is superfluous : Any image ' we publish of Pompeo ’ s stricken face from this week ’ s Grey ’ s will tell you all you need to know about her " Praising McKee the site called the episode a " stunner " . The site added , " We long ago gave up predicting what the Emmy Awards will do . But we will still say that , if there ’ s any justice , Pompeo ’ s transcendent work ought to get the leading lady at very least the nomination for which she is so long overdue . " 
 Maggie Fremont of Vulture described Pompeo as giving the same kind of " powerhouse performance " seen in all the time times " Shonda continues to throw horrible situations at Meredith " . Gwen <unk> of The A.V. Club praising both Pompeo and Washington called them the , " saving grace " from being a typical Meredith martyr <unk> . She added that Washington , " hit it out of the park " , and called Pompeo , the key player saying that , " Told only from her perspective , it ’ s a powerhouse episode for her . " <unk> Samson of BuddyTV highlighted Pompeo and deemed her as " excellent " , while calling the episode a " showcase for her " . 
 <unk> <unk> of Moviepilot called the episode an " emotional roller coaster " and added that it was " the perfect return to the series " . She also lauded Pompeo 's performance saying , " Ellen Pompeo is an absolute pro at pulling at our heart strings . " Ashley Bissette <unk> of TV Fanatic rated the episode 4 / 5 and praised the character development of Grey , " it still stands as a unique story that allows Meredith 's character to continue to develop . " She added that episode as a stand @-@ alone , " was really phenomenal " and that the ten minutes of silence from the episode blew her mind . She praised Pompeo saying , " Please give Ellen Pompeo an Emmy ! " Spoiler TV also lauded the episode calling it " a worthy and effective mid season opener " , praising Pompeo 's " frighteningly realistic job " , Justin Chambers 's " most sensitive performance " , and adding that McKee was at the " writing helm " . 
 Ariana <unk> also praised the episode when she wrote in Entertainment Weekly labeling it as " a damn good hour " . She added that Meredith , " has gone through so much that she ’ s earned an entire hour of TV completely focused on just her . " Furthermore , the site praised Washington noting the portion of the episode , that goes on in complete silence as seen through Meredith ’ s point of view , calling it " especially powerful because of the lack of sound " . Lauren Hoffman from Cosmopolitan lauded the episode for its " amazingly effective storytelling " and enjoyed the chemistry between Meredith and Alex . She further wrote that , " if nothing else , Grey 's reminds us that there 's no upper limit to the amount of suffering a single person can go through , so just grab your people and get ready to roll with it " Praising Washington she noted that , " Denzel and Grey 's despite being disparate , could bring each other to new creative heights . " 
 = The Quatermass Memoirs = 
 The Quatermass Memoirs is a British radio drama @-@ documentary , originally broadcast in five episodes on BBC Radio 3 in March 1996 . Written by Nigel Kneale , it was born out of his Quatermass series of films and television serials , which had first been broadcast in the 1950s . The idea for the show appeared as BBC radio intended to create a season of programming looking back at the 1950s , and it was the final piece of writing Kneale completed relating to the character . 
 The show is centered on the character of Professor Bernard Quatermass who , albeit older than in the previous series , is " the same very concerned scientist " but worried about his previous decisions . Andrew Keir , who had played Quatermass in the 1967 Quatermass and the Pit , was chosen to voice the character . Later , Nigel Kneale himself became dismissive of the serial , but critics gave the production relatively positive reviews . 
 = = Overview = = 
 The series mixes three different strands : a new monologue by Kneale in which he discusses the genesis and development of the Quatermass serials and their main character ; archival material from the television productions , and from documentary and newsreel coverage of key events of the times in which they were made , such as the Cold War , the advent of nuclear weapons and the embryonic Space Race ; and the dramatised strand , in which the Professor discloses his reasons for reclusion and discusses his demons with a persistent reporter who invades his hermitage ( and ultimately becomes his friend ) . This third element is set several years after the events of the third serial , Quatermass and the Pit ( 1958 – 59 ) , and shortly before those of the fourth and final serial , Quatermass ( 1979 ) . Continuity is maintained with the 1979 serial by presenting Quatermass living in seclusion in the Scottish Highlands , while the final episode reveals that the social collapse foreshadowing the events of the final story has already begun . 
 = = Production = = 
 Kneale had brought Quatermass 's story to a close in the 1979 serial Quatermass , and for many years saw no reason to revisit the character . However , in 1995 he was approached by BBC radio producer Paul Quinn with an idea for creating a drama @-@ documentary about the character as part of a season of BBC radio programming looking back at the 1950s . Quinn told Dreamwatch magazine , " For many people who remember the seminal experience of hiding behind the sofa when the Quatermass serials came on the television , Quatermass was the 1950s . His adventures [ ... ] have gone down in popular cultural history . " Kneale was intrigued by the idea , and agreed to write new dramatic material of Quatermass relating his memories which Quinn could then combine with archive clips from the existing episodes of the various Quatermass television serials . Kneale saw the older Quatermass of this new serial as " the same very concerned scientist who is now , in retrospect , horribly worried about what he may have done to the world through his encounters with various lifeforms that were better not contacted " . It was Kneale 's first radio work since he had written the play You Must Listen for the BBC in 1952 , and his first work for the BBC in any medium since the mid @-@ 1970s . 
 The programme was commissioned in July 1995 , with the original working title of Quatermass and the Ultimate Conspiracy . When Quinn discovered that some of the soundtracks of the Quatermass episodes were considered to be of too poor a quality to use , the idea for the series was re @-@ shaped to add the new elements of Kneale 's monologue and archive news reports . Kneale , however , later denied that any of the news stories which The Quatermass Memoirs suggested had inspired parts of his work had ever been in his mind at the time . He said that he had used a degree of creative licence when " explaining " these apparent inspirations in his monologue sections . 
 A further problem for Quinn was that none of the actors who had played Quatermass for BBC Television in the 1950s were still alive . This was solved by employing Andrew Keir , who had played Quatermass in the Hammer Film Productions version of Quatermass and the Pit in 1967 , a performance which Kneale had liked . Keir was happy to take the part , but somewhat concerned about only being used as a " link man " and not in a fully dramatic role . The clips that were used from the original BBC episodes were all carefully edited so that the actors playing Quatermass were never heard , and thus the differences between their voices and Keir 's would not confuse the audience . Also in the cast were Emma Gregory as the journalist , Mandy , and Zulema Dene as Quatermass 's housekeeper , Maire . 
 The five episodes , each of approximately twenty minutes , were broadcast across one week from 4 to 8 March 1996 , as part of The Fifties season of programming . The serial was promoted in listings magazine Radio Times with an article by Kneale about Quatermass and his opinion of other science fiction programmes . Episode one was transmitted at <unk> on the Monday ( originally scheduled for <unk> but delayed by a live concert broadcast beforehand ) ; episode two at 9.30pm on the Tuesday ; episode three <unk> on Wednesday , episode four <unk> on Thursday and episode five at <unk> on the Friday . The production was made and transmitted in stereo . It was Andrew Keir 's final professional performance ; he died the following year . 
 The digital radio station BBC7 repeated the series on several occasions from October 2003 . In 2006 it was released on CD by BBC Audio as part of their Classic Radio Sci @-@ Fi range , with cover artwork by Chris <unk> . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Nigel Kneale himself was largely dismissive of the serial in the years following its broadcast ; " God knows it wasn 't a very important sort of thing , " he told his biographer . " The BBC didn 't care <unk> about what they were doing , because they really don 't know what they 're doing , certainly not in radio ... [ Andrew Keir ] must have been pretty ill when this nonsense was going on . " 
 Reviewing the first episodes of both The Quatermass Memoirs and In the Fifties — another programme running as part of The Fifties season — The Times 's reviewer Peter Barnard was impressed . Despite thinking that such a season of programming was " a necessarily premature commemoration " , he felt that both series had " demonstrated how radio 's better moments often take conventional pegs and hang some original clothing on them " . 
 The Independent 's radio critic Robert Hanks was unimpressed with Kneale 's script for the dramatic sections , but praised the performance of Andrew Keir in the title role . " Lesser actors would treat Kneale 's downbeat script with a certain detachment , but Keir is prepared to charge even the most banal lines with a terror that 's both a treat and a lesson . " Hanks also felt that The Fifties season as a whole , as demonstrated by The Quatermass Memoirs , had a somewhat misleading focus . " You get the sense that a vogue for science fiction is being interpreted as the spirit of the Fifties , with emphasis being put on a handful of sci @-@ fi films . If you really wanted to read the age through its movies , you 'd have to include Dean Martin and Jerry Lewis , late Ealing and early Norman Wisdom , Marilyn Monroe and Elvis Presley . It 's a lot to accommodate ; perhaps sticking to terror is just less intimidating . " 
 = When You Believe = 
 " When You Believe " is a song from the 1998 DreamWorks musical animated feature The Prince of Egypt . It was written and composed by Stephen Schwartz . A pop single version of " When You Believe " , with additional music and lyrics by writer @-@ producer Babyface , was also recorded for the film by American singers Whitney Houston and Mariah Carey for the film 's end credits and its soundtrack album . Additionally , the song was featured on Houston 's fourth studio album , My Love Is Your Love and Carey 's first compilation album , # 1 's . The original version of the song , featured in the narrative portion of the film , is performed by Sally Dworsky , Michelle Pfeiffer , and a children 's choir . " When You Believe " is described as a big ballad , with meaningful and inspirational lyrics , describing the ability each person has to achieve miracles when they reach out to God and believe . 
 The song received generally mixed reviews from music critics and experienced moderate success , peaking at number 15 on the Billboard Hot 100 , despite heavy media attention and live promotion . It achieved better charting throughout Europe and other nations , peaking within the top five in Belgium , France , Italy , the Netherlands , Norway , Spain , Sweden , Switzerland and the United Kingdom . " When You Believe " was awarded the Academy Award for Best Original Song at the 71st annual ceremony on March 21 , 1999 . Prior to their performance of the song that night , Schwartz left Babyface 's name off the nomination submission sheet . He felt that because the additions Babyface added to the song were not featured in the actual film version , he did not deserve writing credits . However , while Babyface did not receive the Oscar , Carey and Houston performed his version of the song , because they were more familiar with it than the one in the film . Prior to their performance at the Academy Awards , they sang it on November 26 , 1998 on The Oprah Winfrey Show , promoting the song , as well as both their albums . 
 The song featured two music videos . The first and most commonly seen video was filmed at Brooklyn Academy of Music performing arts center . The video features both singers , and begins with Houston and Carey performing in a large auditorium , giving the illusion of a concert . Towards the end of the video , clips of the film are projected onto a large screen at the concert , while they belt out the final verse . The alternate video was only released on NBC 's special , When You Believe : Music Inspired by the Prince of Egypt , broadcast on December 13 , 1998 . It features a similar synopsis , with both singers performing on a large stage of an old Egyptian pyramid . 
 = = Background and recording = = 
 When Carey compiled her first compilation effort # 1 's , " When You Believe " was included in the track listing . According to Carey , the song was included because she felt it was " a miracle " that she and Houston collaborated on a record . During the development of All That Glitters ( a film Carey was working on at the time , later known as Glitter ) , she had been introduced to DreamWorks co @-@ owner Jeffrey Katzenberg , who asked her if she would record the song " When You Believe " for the soundtrack of the animated film The Prince of Egypt . Houston , on the other hand , was introduced to the project through Kenneth " Babyface " Edmonds , with whom she had been collaborating on her album , My Love Is Your Love . After they were shown the film separately , both became very enthusiastic about participating in the project . 
 The song was co @-@ written by Stephen Schwartz and Babyface , who also produced the song . Babyface expressed how he went through more than one version of the song and described its production as a beautiful movie ballad , something different from anything he , Carey or Houston had ever previously recorded . In an interview with Vibe , Carey said that she " liked [ the song ] the way it was " . She had characterised it as " a very big ballad but in an inspirational way " and denied speculation that there had been past rivalry or animosity between her and Houston prior to its recording : " I never even really talked to her until this . We never had any issues between us . The media and everybody made it an issue . " In an interview with Ebony , Houston spoke about her relationship with Carey : 
 I enjoyed working with her very much . Mariah and I got along very great . We had never talked and never sang together before . We just had a chance for camaraderie , singer @-@ to @-@ singer , artist @-@ to @-@ artist , that kind of thing . We just laughed and talked and laughed and talked and sang in between that ... It 's good to know that two ladies of soul can still be friends . We talked about doing other things together , enterprise @-@ wise , which is cool , because she 's got a good , vivid mind , that girl . She 's a smart lady . I really like Mariah . 
 While the pair continued to express their positive feelings for one another , tabloids began writing the opposite . There were claims that the two bore ill will against each other , and that they had to record the song separately due to constant tension . While media speculation grew as the film 's release date drew near , both singers maintained that they had become close friends , and had only the most positive things to say about each other . 
 = = Lyrical content = = 
 The Prince of Egypt is an adaptation of the Biblical story of The Exodus . " When You Believe " is sung in the film by characters Tzipporah and Miriam , and a chorus of people departing from the slavery of Egypt to the Red Sea and the Promised Land . The protagonists of this ballad recall tough times that have caused them to question their own faith : they have prayed for many nights to God , but those prayers have seemed to remain unanswered , and now they wonder if their faith has been only a waste of time . Nevertheless , the main characters realize that although the times may be difficult , their faith should remain strong . The original draft of the song used the lyric " you can do miracles when you believe " , but this seemed to imply that the believer , not God , was responsible for performing miracles ; the lyric was later changed to " there can be miracles when you believe " . 
 Houston had sung in a church choir while growing up , and Carey had always connected to her faith through music , especially during any difficult times . This song became one of the many reasons that both singers were so interested in the project . They each felt that spreading faith in God was an important and honorable aspect of their career . While describing the song 's lyrics and message , Houston said the following in an interview with ' Ebony : 
 A powerful ballad ; [ songwriter ] Stephen Schwartz is a genius . You have to be a child of God to understand the depth of this song . Mariah and I did it as we felt it . We both felt very connected to the song because of our background . What can I say ? ( It is ) Just a beautiful song . What a lyric ! I can 't talk about it — just listen to it . 
 = = Composition = = 
 Originally , Schwartz composed the film version of " When You Believe " , which was sung in the film by the characters of Tzipporah ( Michelle Pfeiffer ) and Miriam ( Sally Dworsky ) . It featured some different instrumentation from the original , and used a children 's choir as well as some lines in Hebrew . However , in order to give the song a wider radio and pop appeal , Edmonds changed some of the song 's instrumentals and replaced the children 's choir with a gospel one . His version was considered more " commercial " and would make the song " help sell the movie " . Schwartz 's original version was titled " When You Believe " , while Edmonds ' enhanced version was titled " The Prince of Egypt ( When You Believe ) " . " When You Believe " is a slow tempo ballad , which incorporates pop and contemporary R & B genres . Houston and Carey 's parts in the song are written in different keys , both musically and vocally . During the last bridge and chorus , gospel inspired background singers join the song , giving it a " layered sound " while Houston and Carey 's voice switch off belting the bridge . After " When You Believe " was written , Babyface added additional instrumentation , as well as a final bridge . 
 The song is set in signature common time . Houston 's verses and chorus are written in the key of B minor and features a basic chord progression of A ♭ -G ♭ 1 . Her vocals in the song range from the note of F ♯ 3 to F ♯ 5 . Carey 's chorus are set in the higher key of E major and is set in common time as well . Her vocal range in the song spans from the low note of G3 to the high note of G6 , spanning more octaves than Houston 's voice in the song . The song 's climax rise to the last chorus which is set even higher in the key of F @-@ sharp major . Steve Jones from USA Today called the song a " soaring duet " and felt that the song would be able to appeal to many types of listeners and " cross all genres . " 
 = = Reception and accolades = = 
 " When You Believe " received a mixed review from David Browne , an editor from Entertainment Weekly . He gave it a C- , and wrote " [ the song has ] so much sap , maple trees will be jealous . " He called the song 's religious aspect " insipid " and felt its inspirational message felt forced and generic . While Stephen Thomas Erlewine of Allmusic was reviewing Prince Of Egypt OST , he called this duet " unexpected -- and unexpectedly dull . " Paul Verna of Billboard called " When You Believe " a " high @-@ powered " duet , and later highlighted the song while reviewing Houston 's album . 
 " When You Believe " won the Academy Award for Best Song at the 1999 Academy Awards , and the Broadcast Film Critics Association Award for Best Song at the 4th Critics ' Choice Awards . It was also nominated for Best Original Song ( in a Motion Picture ) at the 1999 Golden Globes , and Best Song Written Specifically for a Motion Picture or Television at the 2000 Grammy Awards . 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 The song performed moderately in the United States , despite a performance of The Oprah Winfrey Show and the 71st annual Academy Awards . It peaked at number 15 on the Hot 100 and number three on Billboard 's Adult Contemporary Chart . On March 24 , 1999 , after fluctuating in the US charts , the song was certified gold by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) , denoting shipments of over 500 @,@ 000 units . In Canada , the song debuted on the RPM Singles Chart at number 66 on the RPM issue dated December 7 , 1998 , and peaked at number 20 on the chart issue dated January 25 , 1999 . It was present on the chart for a total of ten weeks . 
 The song performed moderately in Australia , where it entered at number 25 on the ARIA Singles Chart during the week of December 6 , 1998 . It remained on the chart for 14 weeks , spending its last week on the chart at number 50 ; it was certified gold by the Australian Recording Industry Association ( ARIA ) , denoting shipments of over 35 @,@ 000 units . In New Zealand , it peaked at number eight on the singles chart , and spent nine weeks fluctuating in the singles chart . " When You Believe " experienced its highest charting in Europe . In Belgium , it reached number five on the Flanders Ultratop 50 , and peaked at number four and spent 20 weeks on the Wallonian Ultratop 40 . During the week of December 5 , 1998 , " When You Believe " entered the Dutch Top 40 at number fifty @-@ four . The song spent twenty @-@ one weeks on the singles chart and was peaked at number four . Due to strong single sales , the song entered the Finnish Singles Chart at number 10 , however , it only spent one week in the chart . In France , the song entered the French Singles Chart at number 14 on December 5 , 1998 and eventually peaked at number five . After spending 20 weeks fluctuating in the singles chart , it was certified silver by the Syndicat National de l 'Édition Phonographique ( SNEP ) . In Germany , it peaked at number eight on the German Singles Chart and was certified gold by the Bundesverband Musikindustrie , denoting shipments of over 250 @,@ 000 units . The song peaked at number seven in Ireland , where it spent 11 weeks in the Irish Singles Chart . 
 In Norway , " When You Believe " entered at number three on the VG @-@ lista chart and peaked at number two , spending three consecutive weeks at the position . It was certified platinum by the International Federation of the Phonographic Industry ( IFPI ) and spent 15 weeks on the chart . The song peaked at number two in Sweden and Switzerland , spending 20 and 24 weeks on the singles charts , respectively . The IFPI certified the song platinum in Sweden and gold in Switzerland . " When You Believe " experienced high charting in the United Kingdom . It peaked at number four on the UK Singles Chart during the week of December 19 , 1998 and spent 14 weeks on the chart . As of 2010 , sales of the song in the UK are estimated at 260 @,@ 000 units . 
 = = Music videos = = 
 The single 's music video was filmed at the Brooklyn Academy of Music during the fall of 1998 . The video begins with Houston entering a small arena as she begins to sing the song 's first verse . As she finishes her part , Carey appears on the stage as well , performing the second verse and chorus . The video is set in a dark studio accented by Egyptian settings , backdrops , and scenes inspired by The Prince of Egypt . An audience is on hand to emulate a concert @-@ like @-@ setting , cheering on both singers . Occasionally , home video clips of Carey and Houston appear throughout the video , as well as clips of the final moments of the film , during the splitting of the Red Sea . The video ends as the room is illuminated , and the two singers are joined by a large choir . As they complete the song , Carey and Houston receive a standing ovation from the crowd , and exit the studio together , walking side by side as they disappear in the distance . For the video , Carey and Houston both donned similar low @-@ cut black gowns , while Carey sported a long straight hairstyle , and Houston a pixie cut . 
 The song 's alternate video features a similar synopsis , where Houston begins the song on a large stone altar in the middle of an auditorium . As she finishes her verse , Carey is seen walking up the ramp in the background , joining Houston for her verse . They continue the song together , standing side by side and holding hands . After completing the song , both singer exit the auditorium together as in the first video , simulating two friends enjoying time with each other . Both videos are very similar , only the alternate version does not feature an audience , choir or images , only the duo singing together atop the stone altar . In this version of the video , Houston wears a long brown strapless gown , and features a shoulder length bob haircut . Carey on the other hand , features long cascading curls and dons an olive green gown . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 The duo performed the song live on The Oprah Winfrey Show on November 26 , 1998 . Aside from the joint performance , Houston and Carey sang their own singles at the time , " I Learned from the Best " and " I Still Believe " , respectively . Additionally , they sang the song live at the 71st Annual Academy Awards on March 21 , 1999 . Before the performance , they were due to rehearse together a few days before their scheduled appearance . Houston however , called in sick and had to miss the rehearsal . Reportedly , her excuse was not taken well , with academy executives calling it a " bullshit story . " Conti , the academy 's musical arranger , found a young female singer to take Houston 's place , Janis <unk> . Before the performance , Carey walked down the stage in a white top and jeans , while choreographer Debbie Allen led the background singers . As they began the performance , Carey forgot the lyrics and stopped , as <unk> began singing in a " theatricality and gusto " . Her boastful performance was not taken well by the directors , who called it " inappropriate and unnerving " . After she was removed from the stage , a new date was chosen for the rehearsal , one that would accommodate both Houston and Carey . 
 The next night , after they began the rehearsal , both singers had trouble performing the film version of the song . After hours of practice and confusion , they reached a compromise ; they would sing a mash @-@ up of the film and single versions , which featured an additional bridge and instrumentation by Edmonds . For the awards ceremony on the twenty first , Houston and Carey wore matching white gowns , symbolizing " humbleness and simplicity . " Houston entered the arena , performing her verse , followed by Carey . As the song 's finale drew near , a full gospel choir joined the performance from large suspending golden scaffolding , all wearing large white tunics . After the original was nominated for the Academy Award , Schwartz refused to give Edmonds writing credits in nomination forms submitted to the academy . 
 = = Charts and certifications = = 
 = = Cover versions = = 
 " When You Believe " was performed by American Idol contestant and winner Candice Glover on the twelfth season of the show . A studio recording of the song was also released as a single on iTunes . Glover performed " When You Believe " on American Idol on the " Divas " theme night on April 17 , 2013 . Glover 's performance was met with praise from the show 's judges and it was generally considered the best performance of the night . Rolling Stone wrote that Glover " got judges on their feet " with her " impeccable " performance . Mariah Carey was moved to tears by the performance and complimented Glover for doing the song justice . Nicki Minaj <unk> at the end of the performance that " And that is how you do a Mariah Carey / Whitney Houston song " . Likewise , Billboard called Glover 's performance " best single showing of the night " and commented on the vocal delivery that " she knows precisely when to hit the sweet spot of a song , building up to that point with masterful restraint " . MTV News commented that Glover " positively slay [ ed ] " the song . 
 The song was recorded by Irish musical <unk> Celtic Woman and released as a single from their fifth studio album Celtic Woman : Songs from the Heart ( 2010 ) . The song also appears on the Japanese release of their seventh studio album Celtic Woman : Believe ( 2011 ) . The song features vocals from one of the group 's singers Chloë Agnew . In an interview for Chicago Music Magazine , Chloë Agnew described the lyrics of the song as " really incredible " . She stated that " It is a songs that I listen to and wish I had written . It ’ s really so special . I think a lot of people have found strength and hope in the lyrics . It 's been really rewarding to meet and talk to people at our meet and greet events come up and tell me how much that song means to them and how it has helped them " . Irish singer Chloë Agnew recorded the track for her debut album Chloë ( 2002 ) . 
 = = Leon Jackson version = = 
 " When You Believe " was recorded by The X Factor winner Leon Jackson in December 2007 . The single was available to download from midnight after the result of the show on December 15 , 2007 , and a CD was rush @-@ released mid @-@ week , on December 19 , 2007 . This is unusual as most new singles are released on a Monday to gain maximum sales for the UK Singles Chart the following Sunday . Exceptions included the previous two X Factor winners whose were singles released in this fashion , in order for them to compete to be the Christmas number @-@ one single , which they all became . A video for the single was made by each of the final four of the series ; Jackson , Rhydian Roberts , Same Difference and Niki Evans . However , only the winner 's version of the song and video was released . 
 The song ended 2007 as the year 's fourth biggest @-@ selling single in the UK and remained number one into 2008 . However , it only managed to stay in the top 40 for seven weeks , despite being atop the chart for three weeks . It also soon disappeared from the top 100 , and was gone by late February . 
 = = = Music video = = = 
 The music video , like previous X Factor winners singles , is very simple , with Jackson singing the song in front of a large projection , with swooping shots of various landscapes behind him . It also features several clips from his time in The X Factor , from his first audition to the moment he was announced the winner and performed his single to close the series . Simon Cowell , Sharon Osbourne , Dannii Minogue , Louis Walsh , Dermot O 'Leary and runner @-@ up Rhydian Roberts all feature within the clips . 
 = = = Chart performance = = = 
 On December 23 , 2007 , it debuted at number one on the UK Singles Chart , making it the coveted Christmas number one with sales of over 275 @,@ 000 copies . It stayed at number one for three weeks until it fell down to number five on its fourth week and then fell another ten places to number fifteen in its fifth week . According to The Official Charts Company , the song has sold 506 @,@ 000 copies in the UK as of December 2012 . Additionally , It also spent three weeks at the top of the Irish Singles Chart . 
 = = = Charts and certifications = = = 
 = = = = Weekly charts = = = = 
 = = = = Year @-@ end charts = = = = 
 = = = = Certifications = = = = 
 = Ambulance = 
 An ambulance is a vehicle for transportation of sick or injured people to , from or between places of treatment for an illness or injury , and in some instances will also provide out of hospital medical care to the patient . The word is often associated with road going emergency ambulances which form part of an emergency medical service , administering emergency care to those with acute medical problems . 
 The term ambulance does , however , extend to a wider range of vehicles other than those with flashing warning lights and sirens . The term also includes a large number of non @-@ urgent ambulances which are for transport of patients without an urgent acute condition ( see below : Functional types ) and a wide range of urgent and non @-@ urgent vehicles including trucks , vans , bicycles , motorbikes , station wagons , buses , helicopters , fixed @-@ wing aircraft , boats , and even hospital ships ( see below : Vehicle types ) . 
 The term ambulance comes from the Latin word " <unk> " as meaning " to walk or move about " which is a reference to early medical care where patients were moved by lifting or wheeling . The word originally meant a moving hospital , which follows an army in its movements . During the American Civil War vehicles for conveying the wounded off the field of battle were called ambulance wagons . Field hospitals were still called ambulances during the Franco @-@ Prussian War of 1870 and in the Serbo @-@ Turkish war of 1876 even though the wagons were first referred to as ambulances about 1854 during the Crimean War . 
 There are other types of ambulance , with the most common being the patient transport ambulance ( sometimes called an <unk> ) . These vehicles are not usually ( although there are exceptions ) equipped with life @-@ support equipment , and are usually crewed by staff with fewer qualifications than the crew of emergency ambulances . Their purpose is simply to transport patients to , from or between places of treatment . In most countries , these are not equipped with flashing lights or sirens . In some jurisdictions there is a modified form of the ambulance used , that only carries one member of ambulance crew to the scene to provide care , but is not used to transport the patient . Such vehicles are called fly @-@ cars . In these cases a patient who requires transportation to hospital will require a patient @-@ carrying ambulance to attend in addition to the fast responder . 
 = = History = = 
 The history of the ambulance begins in ancient times , with the use of carts to transport incurable patients by force . Ambulances were first used for emergency transport in 1487 by the Spanish , and civilian variants were put into operation during the 1830s . Advances in technology throughout the 19th and 20th centuries led to the modern self @-@ powered ambulances . 
 = = Functional types = = 
 Ambulances can be grouped into types depending on whether or not they transport patients , and under what conditions . In some cases , ambulances may fulfil more than one function ( such as combining emergency ambulance care with patient transport ) . 
 Emergency ambulance – The most common type of ambulance , which provide care to patients with an acute illness or injury . These can be road @-@ going vans , boats , helicopters , fixed @-@ wing aircraft ( known as air ambulances ) or even converted vehicles such as golf carts . 
 Patient transport ambulance – A vehicle , which has the job of transporting patients to , from or between places of medical treatment , such as hospital or dialysis center , for non @-@ urgent care . These can be vans , buses or other vehicles . 
 Response unit – Also known as a fly @-@ car or a [ Quick Response Vehicle ] , which is a vehicle which is used to reach an acutely ill patient quickly , and provide on scene care , but lacks the capacity to transport the patient from the scene . Response units may be backed up by an emergency ambulance which can transport the patient , or may deal with the problem on scene , with no requirement for a transport ambulance . These can be a wide variety of vehicles , from standard cars , to modified vans , motorcycles , pedal cycles , quad bikes or horses . These units can function as a vehicle for officers or supervisors ( similar to a fire chief 's vehicle , but for ambulance services ) . Fire & Rescue services in North America often staff EMTs or Paramedics to their apparatuses to provide medical care without the need to wait for an ambulance . 
 Charity ambulance – A special type of patient transport ambulance is provided by a charity for the purpose of taking sick children or adults on trips or vacations away from hospitals , hospices or care homes where they are in long term care . Examples include the United Kingdom 's ' <unk> ' project . These are usually based on a bus . 
 Bariatric ambulance – A special type of patient transport ambulance designed for extremely obese patients equipped with the appropriate tools to move and manage these patients . 
 = = Vehicle types = = 
 In the US , there are four types of ambulances . There are Type I , Type II , Type III and Type IV . Type I is based upon a heavy truck chassis and is used primarily for Advanced Life Support and rescue work . Type II is a van based ambulance with little modifications except for a raised roof . Its use is for basic life support and transfer of patients . The Type III is a van chassis but with a custom made rear compartment and has the same use as Type I ambulances . Type IV 's are nomenclature for smaller ad hoc patient transfer using smaller utility vehicles where passenger vehicles and trucks would have difficulty in traversing , such as large industrial complexes , commercial venues , and special events with large crowds . These do not , generally , fall under Federal Regulations . 
 Ambulances can be based on many types of vehicle , although emergency and disaster conditions may lead to other vehicles serving as makeshift ambulances : 
 Van or pickup truck – A typical ambulance is based on either the chassis of a van ( <unk> ) or pickup truck . This chassis is then modified to the designs and specifications of the purchaser . 
 Car / SUV – Used either as a fly @-@ car for rapid response or for patients who can sit , these are standard car models adapted to the requirements of the service using them . Some cars are capable of taking a stretcher with a recumbent patient , but this often requires the removal of the front passenger seat , or the use of a particularly long car . This was often the case with early ambulances , which were converted ( or even serving ) hearses , as these were some of the few vehicles able to accept a human body in a supine position . 
 Motorcycle – In developed areas , these are used for rapid response in an emergency as they can travel through heavy traffic much faster than a car or van . Trailers or sidecars can make these patient transporting units . See also motorcycle ambulance . 
 Bicycle – Used for response , but usually in pedestrian @-@ only areas where large vehicles find access difficult . Like the motorcycle ambulance , a bicycle may be connected to a trailer for patient transport , most often in the developing world . See also cycle responder . 
 All @-@ terrain vehicle ( ATV ) – for example quad bikes ; these are used for response off road , especially at events . ATVs can be modified to carry a stretcher , and are used for tasks such as mountain rescue in inaccessible areas . 
 Golf cart or Neighborhood Electric Vehicle – Used for rapid response at events or on campuses . These function similarly to ATVs , with less rough terrain capability , but with less noise . 
 Helicopter – Usually used for emergency care , either in places inaccessible by road , or in areas where speed is of the essence , as they are able to travel significantly faster than a road ambulance . Helicopter and fixed @-@ wing ambulances are discussed in greater detail at air ambulance . 
 Fixed @-@ wing aircraft – These can be used for either acute emergency care in remote areas ( such as in Australia , with the ' Flying Doctors ' ) , for patient transport over long distances ( e.g. a re @-@ patriation following an illness or injury in a foreign country ) , or transportation between distant hospitals . Helicopter and fixed @-@ wing ambulances are discussed in greater detail at air ambulance . 
 Boat – Boats can be used to serve as ambulances , especially in island areas or in areas with a large number of canals , such as the Venetian water ambulances . Some lifeboats or lifeguard vessels may fit the description of an ambulance as they are used to transport a casualty . 
 Ship – Ships can be used as hospital ships , mostly operated by national military services , although some ships are operated by charities . They can meet the definition of ambulances as they provide transport to the sick and wounded ( along with treatment ) . They are often sent to disaster or war zones to provide care for the casualties of these events . 
 Bus – In some cases , buses can be used for multiple casualty transport , either for the purposes of taking patients on journeys , in the context of major incidents , or to deal with specific problems such as drunken patients in town centres . Ambulance busses are discussed at greater length in their own article . 
 Trailer – In some instances a trailer , which can be towed behind a self @-@ propelled vehicle can be used . This permits flexibility in areas with minimal access to vehicles , such as on small islands . 
 Horse and cart – Especially in developing world areas , more traditional methods of transport include transport such as horse and cart , used in much the same way as motorcycle or bicycle stretcher units to transport to a local clinic . 
 Hospital train – Early hospital trains functioned to carry large numbers of wounded soldiers . Similar to other ambulance types , as Western medicine developed , hospital trains gained the ability to provide treatment . In some rural locations , hospital trains now function as mobile hospitals , traveling by rail from one location to the next , then parking on a siding to provide hospital services to the local population . Hospital trains also find use in disaster response 
 Fire Engine - Fire services ( especially in North America ) often train Firefighters in emergency medicine and most apparatuses carry at least basic medical supplies . By design , apparatuses cannot transport patients . 
 = = = Vehicle type gallery = = = 
 = = Design and construction = = 
 Ambulance design must take into account local conditions and infrastructure . Maintained roads are necessary for road going ambulances to arrive on scene and then transport the patient to a hospital , though in rugged areas four @-@ wheel drive or all @-@ terrain vehicles can be used . Fuel must be available and service facilities are necessary to maintain the vehicle . 
 Methods of summoning ( e.g. telephone ) and dispatching ambulances usually rely on electronic equipment , which itself often relies on an intact power grid . Similarly , modern ambulances are equipped with two @-@ way radios or cellular telephones to enable them to contact hospitals , either to notify the appropriate hospital of the ambulance 's pending arrival , or , in cases where physicians do not form part of the ambulance 's crew , to confer with a physician for medical oversight . 
 Ambulances often have two manufacturers . The first is frequently a manufacturer of light trucks or full @-@ size vans ( or previously , cars ) such as Mercedes @-@ Benz , Nissan , Toyota , or Ford . The second manufacturer ( known as second stage manufacturer ) purchases the vehicle ( which is sometimes purchased incomplete , having no body or interior behind the driver 's seat ) and turns it into an ambulance by adding bodywork , emergency vehicle equipment , and interior fittings . This is done by one of two methods – either <unk> , where the modifications are started from scratch and built on to the vehicle , or using a modular system , where a pre @-@ built ' box ' is put on to the empty chassis of the ambulance , and then finished off . 
 Modern ambulances are typically powered by internal combustion engines , which can be powered by any conventional fuel , including diesel , gasoline or liquefied petroleum gas , depending on the preference of the operator and the availability of different options . Colder regions often use gasoline powered engines , as diesels can be difficult to start when they are cold . Warmer regions may favor diesel engines , as they are thought to be more efficient and more durable . Diesel power is sometimes chosen due to safety concerns , after a series of fires involving gasoline powered ambulances during the 1980s . These fires were ultimately attributed in part to gasoline 's higher volatility in comparison to diesel fuel . The type of engine may be determined by the manufacturer : in the past two decades , Ford would only sell vehicles for ambulance conversion if they are diesel powered . Beginning in 2010 , Ford will sell its ambulance chassis with a gasoline engine in order to meet emissions requirements . 
 = = = Standards = = = 
 Many regions have prescribed standards which ambulances should , or must , meet in order to be used for their role . These standards may have different levels which reflect the type of patient which the ambulance is expected to transport ( for instance specifying a different standard for routine patient transport than high dependency ) , or may base standards on the size of vehicle . 
 For instance , in Europe , the European Committee for Standardization publishes the standard CEN 1789 , which specifies minimum compliance levels across the build of ambulance , including crash resistance , equipment levels , and exterior marking . In the United States , standards for ambulance design have existed since 1976 , where the standard is published by the General Services Administration and known as KKK @-@ 1822 @-@ A. This standard has been revised several times , and is currently in version ' F ' , known as KKK @-@ 1822 @-@ F , although not all states have adopted this version . The National Fire Protection Association has also published a design standard , NFPA 1917 , which some administrations are considering switching to when KKK @-@ 1822 is withdrawn in 2015 . 
 The move towards standardisation is now reaching countries without a history of prescriptive codes , such as India , which approved its first national standard for ambulance construction in 2013 . 
 = = = Safety = = = 
 Ambulances , like other emergency vehicles , are required to operate in all weather conditions , including those during which civilian drivers often elect to stay off the road . Also , the ambulance crew 's responsibilities to their patient often preclude their use of safety devices such as seat belts . Research has shown that ambulances are more likely to be involved in motor vehicle collisions resulting in injury or death than either fire trucks or police cars . <unk> occupants , particularly those riding in the patient @-@ care compartment , are particularly vulnerable . When compared to civilian vehicles of similar size , one study found that on a per @-@ accident basis , ambulance collisions tend to involve more people , and result in more injuries . An 11 @-@ year retrospective study concluded in 2001 found that although most fatal ambulance crashes occurred during emergency runs , they typically occurred on improved , straight , dry roads , during clear weather . Furthermore , paramedics are also at risk in ambulances while helping patients , as 27 paramedics died during ambulance trips in the US between 1991 and 2006 . 
 = = = Equipment = = = 
 In addition to the equipment directly used for the treatment of patients , ambulances may be fitted with a range of additional equipment which is used in order to facilitate patient care . This could include : 
 Two @-@ way radio – One of the most important pieces of equipment in modern emergency medical services as it allows for the issuing of jobs to the ambulance , and can allow the crew to pass information back to control or to the hospital ( for example a priority <unk> message to alert the hospital of the impending arrival of a critical patient . ) More recently many services worldwide have moved from traditional analog UHF / VHF sets , which can be monitored externally , to more secure digital systems , such as those working on a GSM system , such as TETRA . 
 Mobile data terminal – Some ambulances are fitted with Mobile data terminals ( or <unk> ) , which are connected wirelessly to a central computer , usually at the control center . These terminals can function instead of or alongside the two @-@ way radio and can be used to pass details of jobs to the crew , and can log the time the crew was mobile to a patient , arrived , and left scene , or fulfill any other computer based function . 
 Evidence gathering CCTV – Some ambulances are now being fitted with video cameras used to record activity either inside or outside the vehicle . They may also be fitted with sound recording facilities . This can be used as a form of protection from violence against ambulance crews , or in some cases ( dependent on local laws ) to prove or disprove cases where a member of crew stands accused of malpractice . 
 Tail lift or ramp – Ambulances can be fitted with a tail lift or ramp in order to facilitate loading a patient without having to undertake any lifting . This is especially important where the patient is obese or specialty care transports that require large , bulky equipment such as a neonatal incubator or hospital beds . There may also be equipment linked to this such as winches which are designed to pull heavy patients into the vehicle . 
 Trauma lighting – In addition to normal working lighting , ambulances can be fitted with special lighting ( often blue or red ) which is used when the patient becomes photosensitive . 
 Air conditioning – Ambulances are often fitted with a separate air conditioning system to serve the working area from that which serves the cab . This helps to maintain an appropriate temperature for any patients being treated , but may also feature additional features such as filtering against airborne pathogens . 
 Data Recorders – These are often placed in ambulances to record such information as speed , braking power and time , activation of active emergency warnings such as lights and sirens , as well as seat belt usage . These are often used in coordination with GPS units . 
 = = = Intermediate technology = = = 
 In parts of the world which lack a high level of infrastructure , ambulances are designed to meet local conditions , being built using intermediate technology . Ambulances can also be trailers , which are pulled by bicycles , motorcycles , tractors , or animals . Animal @-@ powered ambulances can be particularly useful in regions that are subject to flooding . Motorcycles fitted with sidecars ( or motorcycle ambulances ) are also used , though they are subject to some of the same limitations as more traditional over @-@ the @-@ road ambulances . The level of care provided by these ambulances varies between merely providing transport to a medical clinic to providing on @-@ scene and continuing care during transport . 
 The design of intermediate technology ambulances must take into account not only the operation and maintenance of the ambulance , but its construction as well . The robustness of the design becomes more important , as does the nature of the skills required to properly operate the vehicle . Cost @-@ effectiveness can be a high priority . 
 = = Appearance and markings = = 
 Emergency ambulances are highly likely to be involved in hazardous situations , including incidents such as a road traffic collision , as these emergencies create people who are likely to be in need of treatment . They are required to gain access to patients as quickly as possible , and in many countries , are given dispensation from obeying certain traffic laws . For instance , they may be able to treat a red traffic light or stop sign as a yield sign ( ' give way ' ) , or be permitted to break the speed limit . Generally , the priority of the response to the call will be assigned by the dispatcher , but the priority of the return will be decided by the ambulance crew based on the severity of the patient 's illness or injury . Patients in significant danger to life and limb ( as determined by triage ) require urgent treatment by advanced medical personnel , and because of this need , emergency ambulances are often fitted with passive and active visual and / or audible warnings to alert road users . 
 = = = Passive visual warnings = = = 
 The passive visual warnings are usually part of the design of the vehicle , and involve the use of high contrast patterns . Older ambulances ( and those in developing countries ) are more likely to have their pattern painted on , whereas modern ambulances generally carry retro @-@ reflective designs , which reflects light from car headlights or torches . Popular patterns include ' checker board ' ( alternate coloured squares , sometimes called ' <unk> ' , named after a type of cake ) , chevrons ( arrowheads – often pointed towards the front of the vehicle if on the side , or pointing vertically upwards on the rear ) or stripes along the side ( these were the first type of retro @-@ reflective device introduced , as the original reflective material , invented by 3M , only came in tape form ) . In addition to retro @-@ reflective markings , some services now have the vehicles painted in a bright ( sometimes fluorescent ) yellow or orange for maximum visual impact . Fire Department @-@ operated Ambulances are often painted similarly to their apparatuses for ease of identification and the fact that bright red is a very striking color appropriate for this type of vehicle . 
 Another passive marking form is the word ambulance ( or local language variant ) spelled out in reverse on the front of the vehicle . This enables drivers of other vehicles to more easily identify an approaching ambulance in their rear view mirrors . Ambulances may display the name of their owner or operator , and an emergency telephone number for the ambulance service . 
 Ambulances may also carry an emblem ( either as part of the passive warning markings or not ) , such as a Red Cross , Red Crescent or Red Crystal ( collective known as the Protective Symbols ) . These are symbols laid down by the Geneva Convention , and all countries signatory to it agree to restrict their use to either ( 1 ) Military Ambulances or ( 2 ) the national Red Cross or Red Crescent society . Use by any other person , organization or agency is in breach of international law . The protective symbols are designed to indicate to all people ( especially combatants in the case of war ) that the vehicle is neutral and is not to be fired upon , hence giving protection to the medics and their casualties , although this has not always been adhered to . In Israel , Magen David Adom , the Red Cross member organization use a red Star of David , but this does not have recognition beyond Israeli borders , where they must use the Red Crystal . 
 The Star of Life is widely used , and was originally designed and governed by the U.S. National Highway Traffic Safety Administration , because the Red Cross symbol is legally protected by both National and international law . It indicates that the vehicle 's operators can render their given level of care represented on the six pointed star . 
 Ambulance services that have historical origins such as the Order of St John , the Order of Malta Ambulance Corps and <unk> International often use the Maltese cross to identify their ambulances . This is especially important in countries such as Australia , where St. John Ambulance operate one state and one territory ambulance service , and all of Australia 's other ambulance services use variations on a red Maltese cross . 
 Fire service operated ambulances may display the Cross of St. Florian ( often incorrectly called a Maltese cross ) as this cross is frequently used as a fire department logo ( St. Florian being the patron saint of firefighters ) . 
 = = = Active visual warnings = = = 
 The active visual warnings are usually in the form of flashing lights . These flash in order to attract the attention of other road users as the ambulance approaches , or to provide warning to motorists approaching a stopped ambulance in a dangerous position on the road . Common colours for ambulance warning beacons are blue , red , amber , and white ( clear ) . However the colours may vary by country and sometimes by operator . 
 There are several technologies in use to achieve the flashing effect . These include flashing a light bulb or LED , flashing or rotating halogen , and strobe lights , which are usually brighter than incandescent lights . Each of these can be programmed to flash singly or in groups , and can be programmed to flash in patterns ( such as a left - > right pattern for use when the ambulance is parked on the left hand side of the road , indicating to other road users that they should move to the right ( away from the ambulance ) ) . Incandescent and LED lights may also be programmed to burn steadily , without flashing , which is required in some provinces . 
 Emergency lights may be housed in special fittings , such as in a lightbar , or may be hidden in a host light ( such as a headlamp ) by drilling a hole in the host light 's reflector and inserting the emergency light . These hidden lights may not be apparent until they are activated . Additionally , some of the standard lights fitted to an ambulance ( e.g. headlamps , tail lamps ) may be programmed to flash . Flashing headlights ( typically the high beams , flashed alternately ) are known as a wig @-@ wag . 
 In order to increase safety , it is best practice to have 360 ° coverage with the active warnings , improving the chance of the vehicle being seen from all sides . In some countries , such as the United States , this may be mandatory . 
 See also Emergency vehicle equipment . 
 = = = Audible warnings = = = 
 In addition to visual warnings , ambulances can be fitted with audible warnings , sometimes known as sirens , which can alert people and vehicles to the presence of an ambulance before they can be seen . The first audible warnings were mechanical bells , mounted to either the front or roof of the ambulance . Most modern ambulances are now fitted with electronic sirens , producing a range of different noises which ambulance operators can use to attract more attention to themselves , particularly when proceeding through an intersection or in heavy traffic . 
 The speakers for modern sirens can be integral to the lightbar , or they may be hidden in or flush to the grill to reduce noise inside the ambulance that may interfere with patient care and radio communications . Ambulances can additionally be fitted with <unk> audible warnings to augment the effectiveness of the siren system . 
 A recent development is the use of the RDS system of car radios . The ambulance is fitted with a short range FM transmitter , set to RDS code 31 , which interrupts the radio of all cars within range , in the manner of a traffic broadcast , but in such a way that the user of the receiving radio is unable to opt out of the message ( as with traffic broadcasts ) . This feature is built into every RDS radio for use in national emergency broadcast systems , but short range units on emergency vehicles can prove an effective means of alerting traffic to their presence . It is , however , unlikely that this system could replace audible warnings , as it is unable to alert pedestrians , those not using a compatible radio or even have it turned off . 
 = = Service providers = = 
 Some countries closely regulate the industry ( and may require anyone working on an ambulance to be qualified to a set level ) , whereas others allow quite wide differences between types of operator . 
 Government Ambulance Service – Operating separately from ( although alongside ) the fire and police service of the area , these ambulances are funded by local or national government . In some countries , these only tend to be found in big cities , whereas in countries such as Great Britain almost all emergency ambulances are part of a nationwide system under the National Health Service . In Canada ambulance services are normally operated by local municipalities or provincial health agencies as a separate entity from fire or police services . 
 Fire or Police Linked Service – In countries such as the United States , Japan , Hong Kong and France ambulances can be operated by the local fire or police service , more commonly the fire service due to overlapping calls . This is particularly common in rural areas , where maintaining a separate service is not necessarily cost effective , or by service preference such as in LA where the <unk> prefers to handle all parts of emergency medicine in @-@ house . In some cases this can lead to an illness or injury being attended by a vehicle other than an ambulance , such as a fire truck . 
 Volunteer Ambulance Service – Charities or non @-@ profit companies operate ambulances , both in an emergency and patient transport function . This may be along similar lines to volunteer fire companies , providing the main service for an area , and either community or privately owned . They may be linked to a voluntary fire department , with volunteers providing both services . There are charities who focus on providing ambulances for the community , or for cover at private events ( sports etc . ) . The Red Cross provides this service across the world on a volunteer basis . ( and in others as a Private Ambulance Service ) , as do other organisations such as St John Ambulance and the Order of Malta Ambulance Corps . These volunteer ambulances may be seen providing support to the full @-@ time ambulance crews during times of emergency . In some cases the volunteer charity may employ paid members of staff alongside volunteers to operate a full @-@ time ambulance service , such in some parts of Australia and in Ireland and New Zealand . 
 Private Ambulance Service – Normal commercial companies with paid employees , but often on contract to the local or national government . Private companies may provide only the patient transport elements of ambulance care ( i.e. <unk> or ambulatory transport ) , but in some places , they are contracted to provide emergency care , or to form a ' second tier ' response . In many areas private services cover all emergency transport functions and government agencies do not provide this service . Companies such as Falck , Acadian Ambulance , and American Medical Response are some of the larger companies that provide such services . These organisations may also provide services known as ' Stand @-@ by ' cover at industrial sites or at special events . From April 2011 all private ambulance services in the UK must be Care Quality Commission ( CQC ) registered . Private services in Canada operate non @-@ emergency patient transfers or for private functions only . 
 Combined Emergency Service – these are full service emergency service agencies , which may be found in places such as airports or large colleges and universities . Their key feature is that all personnel are trained not only in ambulance ( EMT ) care , but as a firefighter and a peace officer ( police function ) . They may be found in smaller towns and cities , where size or budget does not warrant separate services . This multi @-@ functionality allows to make the most of limited resource or budget , but having a single team respond to any emergency . 
 Hospital Based Service – Hospitals may provide their own ambulance service as a service to the community , or where ambulance care is unreliable or chargeable . Their use would be dependent on using the services of the providing hospital . 
 Charity Ambulance – This special type of ambulance is provided by a charity for the purpose of taking sick children or adults on trips or vacations away from hospitals , hospices or care homes where they are in long term care . Examples include the UK 's ' <unk> ' project . 
 Company Ambulance – Many large factories and other industrial centres , such as chemical plants , oil refineries , breweries and distilleries , have ambulance services provided by employers as a means of protecting their interests and the welfare of their staff . These are often used as first response vehicles in the event of a fire or explosion . 
 = = Costs = = 
 The cost of an ambulance ride may be paid for from several sources , and this will depend on the type of service being provided , by whom , and possibly who to . 
 Government funded service – The full or the majority of the cost of transport by ambulance is borne by the local , regional , or national government ( through their normal taxation ) . 
 Privately funded service – Transport by ambulance is paid for by the patient themselves , or through their insurance company . This may be at the point of care ( i.e. payment or guarantee must be made before treatment or transport ) , although this may be an issue with critically injured patients , unable to provide such details , or via a system of billing later on . 
 Charity funded service – Transport by ambulance may be provided free of charge to patients by a charity , although donations may be sought for services received . 
 Hospital funded service – Hospitals may provide the ambulance transport free of charge , on the condition that patients use the hospital 's services ( which they may have to pay for ) . 
 = = <unk> = = 
 There are differing levels of qualification that the ambulance crew may hold , from holding no formal qualification to having a fully qualified doctor on board . Most ambulance services require at least two crew members to be on every ambulance ( one to drive , and one to attend the patient ) , although response cars may have a sole crew member , possibly backed up by another double @-@ crewed ambulance . It may be the case that only the attendant need be qualified , and the driver might have no medical training . In some locations , an advanced life support ambulance may be crewed by one paramedic and one EMT @-@ Basic . 
 Common ambulance crew qualifications are : 
 First responder – A person who arrives first at the scene of an incident , and whose job is to provide early critical care such as cardiopulmonary resuscitation ( CPR ) or using an automated external defibrillator ( AED ) . First responders may be dispatched by the ambulance service , may be passers @-@ by , or may be dispatched to the scene from other agencies , such as the police or fire departments . 
 Ambulance Driver – Some services employ staff with no medical qualification ( or just a first aid certificate ) whose job is to simply drive the patients from place to place . In some emergency ambulance contexts this term is a pejorative toward qualified providers implying that they perform no function but driving , although it may be acceptable for patient transport or community operations . In some areas , these drivers would survey and study the local network of routes for better performance of service , as some road routes may be blocked , and the driver must know another route to the patient or to the hospital . The driver would gather the local weather and traffic status reports before and in @-@ between emergencies . They may also have training in using the radio and knowing where medical supplies are stored in the ambulance . 
 Ambulance Care Assistant – Have varying levels of training across the world , but these staff are usually only required to perform patient transport duties ( which can include stretcher or wheelchair cases ) , rather than acute care . Dependent on provider , they may be trained in first aid or extended skills such as use of an AED , oxygen therapy and other lifesaving or palliative skills . They may provide emergency cover when other units are not available , or when accompanied by a fully qualified technician or paramedic . 
 Emergency Care Assistant / Emergency Care Support Workers – Also known as ECA / <unk> are members of a frontline ambulance that drive the vehicles under both emergency and non @-@ emergency conditions to incidents . Their role is to assist the clinician that they are working with either a Technician or Paramedic in there duties whether that be drawing up drugs , setting up fluids ( but not attaching ) , doing basic observations or performing 12 lead ECG assessments . 
 Emergency medical technician – Also known as Ambulance Technician . Technicians are usually able to perform a wide range of emergency care skills , such as defibrillation , spinal immobilization , bleeding control , <unk> of suspected fractures , assisting the patient with certain medications , and oxygen therapy . Some countries split this term into levels ( such as in the US , where there is EMT @-@ Basic and EMT @-@ Intermediate ) . 
 Registered nurse ( RN ) – Nurses can be involved in ambulance work dependent on the jurisdiction , and as with doctors , this is mostly as air @-@ medical rescuers often in conjunction with a technician or paramedic . They may bring different skills to the care of the patient , especially those who may be critically ill or injured in locations that do not enjoy close proximity to a high level of definitive care such as trauma , cardiac , or stroke centers . 
 Paramedic – This is a high level of medical training and usually involves key skills not permissible for technicians , such as <unk> ( and with it the ability to administer a range of drugs such as morphine ) , tracheal intubation and other skills such as performing a cricothyrotomy . Dependent on jurisdiction , the title " paramedic " can be a protected title , and use of it without the relevant qualification may result in criminal prosecution . 
 Emergency Care Practitioner – This position , sometimes called ' Super Paramedic ' in the media , is designed to bridge the link between ambulance care and the care of a general practitioner . <unk> are already qualified paramedics who have undergone further training , and are trained to prescribe medicines for longer term care , such as antibiotics , as well as being trained in a range of additional diagnostic techniques . 
 Doctor – Doctors are present on some ambulances – most notably air ambulances – will employ physicians to attend on the ambulances , bringing a full range of additional skills such as use of prescription medicines . 
 = = Military use = = 
 Military ambulances have historically included vehicles based on civilian designs and at times also included armored , but unarmed , vehicles ambulances based upon armoured personnel carriers ( APCs ) . In the Second World War vehicles such as the <unk> Sd <unk> 251 halftrack were pressed into service as ad hoc ambulances , and in more recent times purpose built AFVs such as the U.S. <unk> Medical Evacuation Vehicle serve the exclusive purpose of armored medical vehicles . Civilian based designs may be painted in appropriate colours , depending on the operational requirements ( i.e. camouflage for field use , white for United Nations peacekeeping , etc . ) . For example , the British Royal Army Medical Corps has a fleet of white ambulances , based on production trucks . Military helicopters have also served both as ad hoc and purpose @-@ built air ambulances , since they are extremely useful for <unk> . 
 Since laws of war demand ambulances be marked with one of the Emblems of the Red Cross not to mount offensive weapons , military ambulances are often unarmed . It is a generally accepted practice in most countries to classify the personnel attached to military vehicles marked as ambulances as non @-@ combatants ; however , this application does not always exempt medical personnel from catching enemy fire — accidental or deliberate . As a result , medics and other medical personnel attached to military ambulances are usually put through basic military training , on the assumption that they may have to use a weapon . The laws of war do allow non @-@ combatant military personnel to carry individual weapons for protecting themselves and casualties . However , not all militaries exercise this right to their personnel . 
 Recently , Israel has modified a number of its Merkava main battle tanks with ambulance features in order to allow rescue operations to take place under heavy fire in urban warfare . The modifications were made following a failed rescue attempt in which Palestinian gunmen killed two soldiers who were providing aid for a Palestinian woman in Rafah . Since M @-@ 113 armored personnel carriers and regular up @-@ armored ambulances are not sufficiently protected against anti @-@ tank weapons and improvised explosive devices , it was decided to use the heavily armored Merkava tank . Its rear door enables the evacuation of critically wounded soldiers . Israel did not remove the Merkava 's weaponry , claiming that weapons were more effective protection than emblems since Palestinian militants would disregard any symbols of protection and fire at ambulances anyway . For use as ground ambulances and treatment & evacuation vehicles , the United States military currently employs the M113 , the <unk> , the <unk> Stryker Medical Evacuation Vehicle ( MEV ) , and the RG @-@ 33 Heavily Armored Ground Ambulance ( <unk> ) as treatment and evacuation vehicles , with contracts to incorporate the newly designed <unk> Armored Medical Evacuation Vehicle ( <unk> ) , a variant of the M2 Bradley Fighting Vehicle ( formerly known as the <unk> ) . 
 Some navies operate ocean @-@ going hospital ships to lend medical assistance in high casualty situations like wars or natural disasters . These hospital ships fulfill the criteria of an ambulance ( transporting the sick or injured ) , although the capabilities of a hospital ship are more on par with a Mobile Army Surgical Hospital . In line with the laws of war , these ships can display a prominent Red Cross or Red Crescent to confer protection under the appropriate Geneva convention . However , this designation has not always protected hospital ships from enemy fire . 
 = = Reuse of retired ambulances = = 
 When an ambulance is retired , it may be donated or sold to another EMS provider . Alternately , it may be adapted into a storage and transport vehicle for crime scene identification equipment , a command post at community events , or support vehicle , such as a logistics unit . Others are refurbished and resold , or may just have their emergency equipment removed to be sold to private businesses or individuals , who then can use them as small recreational vehicles . 
 Toronto 's City Council has begun a " Caravan of Hope " project to provide retired Toronto ambulances a second life by donating them to the people of El Salvador . Since the Province of Ontario requires that ambulances be retired after just four and a half years in service in Ontario , the City of Toronto <unk> and auctions 28 ambulances each year . 
 = RKO Pictures = 
 RKO ( Radio @-@ Keith @-@ Orpheum ) Pictures ( also known as RKO Productions , Radio Pictures , RKO Radio Pictures , RKO Teleradio Pictures and , for a short time , RKO Pathé ) was an American film production and distribution company . It was one of the Big Five studios of Hollywood 's Golden Age . The business was formed after the Keith @-@ Albee @-@ Orpheum ( KAO ) vaudeville theatre circuit and Joseph P. Kennedy 's Film Booking Offices of America ( FBO ) studio were brought together under the control of the Radio Corporation of America ( RCA ) in October 1928 . RCA chief David Sarnoff engineered the merger to create a market for the company 's sound @-@ on @-@ film technology , RCA Photophone . By the mid @-@ 1940s , the studio was under the control of investor Floyd Odlum . 
 RKO has long been celebrated for its series of musicals starring Fred Astaire and Ginger Rogers in the mid @-@ to @-@ late 1930s . Actors Katharine Hepburn and , later , Robert Mitchum had their first major successes at the studio . Cary Grant was a mainstay for years . The work of producer Val Lewton 's low @-@ budget horror unit and RKO 's many ventures into the field now known as film noir have been acclaimed , largely after the fact , by film critics and historians . The studio produced two of the most famous films in motion picture history : King Kong and Citizen Kane . 
 Maverick industrialist Howard Hughes took over RKO in 1948 . After years of turmoil and decline under his control , Hughes sold the troubled studio to General Tire and Rubber Company in 1955 . The original RKO Pictures ceased production in 1957 and was effectively dissolved two years later . In 1981 , broadcaster RKO General , the corporate heir , revived it as a production subsidiary , RKO Pictures Inc . In 1989 , this business with its few remaining assets , the trademarks and remake rights to many classic RKO films , was sold to new owners , who now operate the small independent company RKO Pictures LLC . 
 = = Origin of company = = 
 In October 1927 , Warner Bros. released The Jazz Singer , the first feature @-@ length talking picture . Its success prompted Hollywood to convert from silent to sound film production en masse . The Radio Corporation of America ( RCA ) controlled an advanced optical sound @-@ on @-@ film system , RCA Photophone , recently developed by General Electric . However , its hopes of joining in the anticipated boom in sound movies faced a major hurdle : Warner Bros. and Fox , Hollywood 's other vanguard sound studios , were already financially and technologically aligned with ERPI , a subsidiary of AT & T 's Western Electric division . The industry 's two largest companies , Paramount and Loew 's / MGM , with two other major studios , Universal and First National , were poised to contract with ERPI for sound conversion as well . 
 Seeking a customer for Photophone , in late 1927 David Sarnoff , then general manager of RCA , approached Joseph P. Kennedy about using the system for Kennedy 's modest @-@ sized studio , Film Booking Offices of America ( FBO ) . Negotiations resulted in General Electric acquiring a substantial interest in FBO — Sarnoff had apparently already conceived of a plan for the company to attain a central position in the film industry , maximizing Photophone revenue . Next on the agenda was securing a string of exhibition venues like those the leading Hollywood production companies owned . Kennedy began investigating the possibility of such a purchase . Around that time , the large Keith @-@ Albee @-@ Orpheum ( KAO ) circuit of theaters , built around the then @-@ fading medium of live vaudeville , was attempting a transition to the movie business . In mid @-@ 1927 , the filmmaking operations of Pathé Exchange and Cecil B. De Mille 's Producers Distributing Corporation ( PDC ) had united under KAO 's control . Early in 1928 , KAO general manager John J. Murdock , who had assumed the presidency of Pathé , turned to Kennedy as an adviser in consolidating the studio with De Mille 's company , PDC . This was the relationship Sarnoff and Kennedy sought . 
 After an aborted attempt by Kennedy to bring yet another studio that had turned to him for help , First National Pictures , into the Photophone fold , RCA was ready to step back in : the company acquired Kennedy 's stock in both FBO and the KAO theater business . On October 23 , 1928 , RCA announced the creation of the Radio @-@ Keith @-@ Orpheum holding company , with Sarnoff as chairman of the board . Kennedy , who withdrew from his executive positions in the merged companies , kept Pathé separate from RKO and under his personal control . RCA owned the governing stock interest in RKO , 22 percent ; in the early 1930s , RCA 's share of stock in the company rose as high as 60 percent . The company 's production and distribution arm , presided over by former FBO vice @-@ president Joseph I. Schnitzer , was incorporated early in 1929 as Radio Pictures . Looking to get out of the film business the following year , Kennedy arranged in late 1930 for RKO to purchase Pathé from him . 
 On January 29 , 1931 , Pathé , with its contract players , well @-@ regarded newsreel operation , and Culver Studios along with its associated backlot , located more or less next door to the vastly larger MGM lot was merged into RKO proper as Kennedy sold off the last of his stock in the company he had been instrumental in creating . 
 = = Golden Age studio = = 
 = = = Early years = = = 
 Declaring that it would make only all @-@ talking films , RKO began shooting at the small facility FBO shared with Pathé in New York City while the main FBO studio in Hollywood was technologically refitted . In charge of production was William LeBaron , who had held the same position at FBO . The new company 's two initial releases were musicals : The melodramatic Syncopation premiered on March 29 , 1929 . The comedic Street Girl debuted July 30 . This was billed as RKO 's first " official " production — first to follow the formal incorporation of Radio Pictures , first to be made in Hollywood . A few nonsinging pictures followed , but the studio 's first major hit was again a musical . RKO spent heavily on the lavish Rio Rita , including a number of Technicolor sequences . Opening in September to rave reviews , it was named one of the ten best pictures of the year by Film Daily . Cinema historian Richard Barrios credits it with initiating the " first age of the filmed Broadway musical " . By the end of the year , RKO was making use of an additional production facility — five hundred acres that had been acquired near Encino in the San Fernando Valley as a backlot for exteriors and large @-@ scale standing sets . 
 RKO released a limited slate of twelve features in its first year ; in 1930 , that figure more than doubled to twenty @-@ nine . Originally organized as the distinct business entities RKO Productions Inc. and RKO Distributing Corp. , by July the studio was making a transition to the new , unified RKO Radio Pictures Inc . Encouraged by Rio Rita 's success , RKO produced several costly musicals incorporating Technicolor sequences , among them <unk> and Hit the Deck , both scripted and directed , like Rio Rita , by Luther Reed . Following the example of the other major studios , RKO had planned to create its own musical revue , Radio Revels . Promoted as the studio 's most extravagant production to date , it was to be photographed entirely in Technicolor . The project was abandoned , however , as the public 's taste for musicals temporarily subsided . From a total of more than sixty Hollywood musicals in 1929 and over eighty the following year , the number dropped to eleven in 1931 . RKO was left in a bind : it still had a contract with Technicolor to produce two more features with its system . Complicating matters , audiences had come to associate color with the momentarily out @-@ of @-@ favor musical genre due to a glut of such productions from the major Hollywood studios . Fulfilling its obligations , RKO produced two all @-@ Technicolor pictures , The Runaround and Fanny Foley Herself ( both 1931 ) , containing no musical sequences . Neither was a success . 
 Even as the U.S. economy foundered , RKO had gone on a spending spree , buying up theater after theater to add to its exhibition chain . In October 1930 , the company purchased a 50 percent stake in the New York 's Van Beuren studio , which specialized in cartoons and live shorts . RKO 's production schedule soon surpassed forty features a year , released under the names " Radio Pictures " and , for a short time after the 1931 merger , " RKO Pathé " . Cimarron ( 1931 ) , produced by LeBaron himself , would become the only RKO production to win the Academy Award for Best Picture ; nonetheless , having cost a profligate $ 1 @.@ 4 million to make , it was a money @-@ loser on original domestic release . The most popular RKO star of this pre @-@ Code era was Irene Dunne , who made her debut as the lead in the 1930 musical <unk> and was a headliner at the studio for the entire decade . Other major performers included Joel McCrea , Ricardo Cortez , Dolores del Río , and Mary Astor . Richard Dix , Oscar @-@ nominated for his lead performance in Cimarron , would serve as RKO 's standby B @-@ movie star until the early 1940s . The comedy team of Bert Wheeler and Robert Woolsey , often wrangling over ingenue Dorothy Lee , was a bankable mainstay for years . Constance Bennett , Ann Harding , and Helen <unk> came over with Pathé . The Pathé acquisition , though a defensible investment in the long term for its physical facilities , was yet another major expense borne by the fledgling RKO , particularly as Pathé 's stock price had been artificially inflated by some <unk> <unk> . After little more than a year of semiautonomous operation within RKO , Pathé was dissolved as a feature production unit . 
 = = = Success under Selznick = = = 
 Exceptions like Cimarron and Rio Rita aside , RKO 's product was largely regarded as mediocre , so in October , 1931 , twenty @-@ nine @-@ year @-@ old David O. Selznick visited Sarnoff in New York and convinced him to replace LeBaron as production chief . As the new studio chief Selznick implemented rigorous cost @-@ control measures , championed the unit production system , which gave the producers of individual movies much greater independence than they had under the prevailing central producer system . " Under the factory system of production you rob the director of his individualism " , said Selznick , " and this being a creative industry that is harmful to the quality of the product made " ( even though Selznick earned a sour reputation for meddling in director output ) . Instituting unit production , he predicted , would also result in cost savings of 30 – 40 percent . To make films under the new system , Selznick recruited prize behind @-@ the @-@ camera personnel , such as director George Cukor and producer / director Merian C. Cooper , and gave producer Pandro S. Berman , aged twenty @-@ six , increasingly important projects . Selznick discovered and signed a young actress who would become a star created by RKO , Katharine Hepburn . Also enlisted was established star John Barrymore for a few memorable performances . From September 1932 on , print advertising for the company 's features displayed the revised name " RKO Radio Pictures " ; the Pathé name was used only for newsreels and documentaries . That same year , the New York City – based corporate headquarters moved into the new RKO Building , an Art Deco skyscraper rising high above RCA controlled Radio City Music Hall that was one of the first Rockefeller Center structures to open . 
 Selznick worked fifteen months as RKO production chief before resigning over a dispute with new corporate president Merlin Aylesworth , and then moved up to MGM to work for his powerful father @-@ in @-@ law , Louis B. Mayer . One of his last acts at RKO was to approve a screen test for a thirty @-@ three @-@ year @-@ old , balding Broadway song @-@ and @-@ dance man named Fred Astaire . In a memo , Selznick wrote , " I feel , in spite of his enormous ears and bad chin line , that his charm is ... tremendous " . Selznick 's tenure was widely considered a success : In 1931 , before he arrived , the studio had produced forty @-@ two features for $ 16 million in total budgets ( an average cost of $ 380 @,@ 000 per picture ) . In 1932 , under Selznick , forty @-@ one features were made for only $ 10 @.@ 2 million ( an average budget of $ 268 @,@ 000 per feature ) , yet with improvement in polish and popularity . He backed several major successes , including A Bill of Divorcement ( 1932 ) , with Cukor directing Hepburn 's debut , and the monumental King Kong ( 1933 ) — largely Merian Cooper 's brainchild , brought to life by the astonishing special effects work of Willis O 'Brien . Still , shaky finances and excesses that marked the company 's pre @-@ Selznick days had not left RKO in good enough shape to withstand the Depression ; the movie studio sank into receivership in early 1933 , from which it did not emerge until 1940 . 
 = = = Cooper at the helm = = = 
 Cooper took over as production head after Selznick 's departure and oversaw two hits starring Hepburn : Morning Glory ( 1933 ) , for which she won her first Oscar , and Little Women ( 1933 ) , director Cukor 's second collaboration with the actress . Among the studio 's in @-@ house productions , the latter was the biggest box @-@ office success of the decade . Ginger Rogers had already made several minor films for RKO when Cooper signed her to a seven @-@ year contract and cast her in the big @-@ budget musical Flying Down to Rio ( 1933 ) . Rogers was paired with Astaire , making his movie debut . Billed fourth and fifth respectively , the picture turned them into stars . Hermes Pan , assistant to the film 's dance director , would become one of Hollywood 's leading choreographers through his subsequent work with Astaire . 
 Along with Columbia Pictures , RKO became one of the primary homes of the screwball comedy . As film historian James Harvey describes , compared to their richer competition , the two studios were " more receptive to experiment , more tolerant of chaos on the set . It was at these two lesser ' majors ' ... that nearly all the preeminent screwball directors did their important films — [ Howard ] Hawks and [ Gregory ] La Cava and [ Leo ] McCarey and [ George ] Stevens . " The relatively unheralded William A. Seiter directed the studio 's first significant contribution to the genre , The Richest Girl in the World ( 1934 ) . The drama Of Human Bondage ( 1934 ) , directed by John Cromwell , was Bette Davis 's first great success . Stevens 's Alice Adams and director John Ford 's The Informer were each nominated for the 1935 Best Picture Oscar — the Best Director statuette won by Ford was the only one ever given for an RKO production . The Informer 's star , Victor McLaglen , also took home an Academy Award ; he would appear in a dozen movies for the studio over a span of two decades . 
 Lacking the financial resources of industry leaders MGM , Paramount , Warner Bros. / First National and Fox , RKO turned out many pictures during the era that made up for it with high style in an Art Deco mode , exemplified by such Astaire – Rogers musicals as The Gay Divorcee ( 1934 ) , their first pairing as leads , and Top Hat ( 1935 ) . One of the figures most responsible for this was creative Van Nest Polglase , chief of RKO 's highly regarded design department for almost a decade . Film historian James Naremore has described RKO as " chiefly a designer 's studio . It never had a stable of important actors , writers , or directors , but ... it was rich in artists and special @-@ effects technicians . As a result , its most distinctive pictures contained a strong element of fantasy — not so much the fantasy of horror , which during the thirties was the province of Universal , but the fantasy of the marvelous and adventurous . " 
 As a group , the studio 's craft divisions were among the strongest in the industry . <unk> Walter Plunkett , who worked with the company from the close of the FBO era through the end of 1939 , was known as the top period <unk> in the business . Sidney Saunders , innovative head of the studio 's paint department , was responsible for significant progress in rear projection quality . On June 13 , 1935 , RKO premiered the first feature film shot entirely in advanced three @-@ strip Technicolor , Becky Sharp . The movie was coproduced with Pioneer Pictures , founded by Cooper — who departed RKO after two years helming production — and John Hay " Jock " Whitney , who brought in his cousin Cornelius Vanderbilt Whitney ; Cooper had successfully encouraged the <unk> to purchase a major share of the Technicolor business as well . Though judged by critics a failure as drama , Becky Sharp was widely lauded for its visual brilliance and technical expertise . RKO also employed some of the industry 's leading artists and craftsmen whose work was never seen . From the studio 's earliest days through late 1935 , Max Steiner , regarded by many historians as the most influential composer of the early years of sound cinema , made music for over 100 RKO films . Murray Spivack , head of the studio 's audio special effects department , made important advances in the use of rerecording technology first heard in King Kong . 
 = = = Briskin and Berman = = = 
 In October 1935 the ownership team expanded , with financier Floyd Odlum leading a syndicate that bought 50 percent of RCA 's stake in the company ; the Rockefeller brothers , also major stockholders , increasingly became involved in the business . While RKO made a concerted effort to promote Katharine Hepburn 's career , her box office record while at the studio was checkered . Barbara Stanwyck joined the studio 's roster — though Stanwyck would have little success during her few years there while Ann Sothern enjoyed a career boost . Between 1935 and 1937 Miss Sothern was paired five time with Gene Raymond out of her seven RKO films . Then , in 1939 MGM finally found a replacement for the deceased Jean Harlow when they hired Sothern . Cary Grant regularly appeared in RKO films for some years , but was one of the first leading men of the sound era to work extensively as a freelancer , under <unk> studio deals . 
 Soon after the appointment of a new production chief , Samuel J. Briskin , in late 1935 , RKO entered into an important distribution deal with animator Walt Disney ( Van Beuren consequently folded its cartoon operations ) . From 1936 to 1954 , the studio released Disney features and shorts ; Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs ( 1937 ) was the highest grossing movie in the period between The Birth of a Nation ( 1915 ) and Gone with the Wind ( 1939 ) . Following the change in print branding a few years earlier , the opening and closing logos on RKO movies , other than the Pathé nonfiction line , were changed from " Radio Pictures " to " RKO Radio Pictures " in 1936 . In February 1937 , Selznick , now an independent producer , leased RKO 's Culver City studio and Forty Acres backlot . In addition to its central Hollywood studio , RKO productions now revolved around its vast Encino movie ranch . Modern sources state that Briskin 's departure in late 1937 was due to a decline in the quality of RKO 's product , although admitting that the Disney association was beneficial . However , contemporary sources point to a contractual rift between Briskin and Spitz , and Briskin had been offered a three @-@ year contract extension , but had declined . 
 Pandro Berman — who had filled in on three previous occasions — accepted the position of production chief on a <unk> basis . As it turned out , he would leave the job before the decade 's turn , but his brief tenure resulted in some of the most notable films in studio history , including Gunga Din , with Grant and McLaglen ; Love Affair , starring Dunne and Charles Boyer ; and The Hunchback of Notre Dame ( all 1939 ) . Charles Laughton , who gave a now fabled performance as Quasimodo in the latter , returned periodically to the studio , headlining six more RKO features . For Maureen O 'Hara , who made her American screen debut in the film , it was the first of ten pictures she would make for RKO through 1952 . After co @-@ starring with Ginger Rogers for the eighth time in The Story of Vernon and Irene Castle ( 1939 ) , Fred Astaire departed the studio . 
 The studio 's B Western star of the period was George O 'Brien , who made eighteen RKO pictures , sixteen between 1938 and 1940 . The Saint in New York ( 1938 ) successfully launched a B detective series featuring the character Simon Templar that would run through 1943 . The Wheeler and Woolsey comedy series ended in 1937 when Woolsey became ill ( he died the following year ) . RKO filled the void by releasing independently produced features such as the Dr. Christian series and the Laurel and Hardy comedy The Flying Deuces ( 1939 ) . The studio soon had its own new B comedy star in Lupe Vélez : The Girl from Mexico ( 1939 ) was followed by seven frantic installments of the Mexican Spitfire series , all featuring Leon Errol , between 1940 and 1943 . The studio 's technical departments maintained their reputation as industry leaders ; Vernon Walker 's special effects unit became famous for its sophisticated use of the optical printer and lifelike matte work , an art that would reach its apex with 1941 's Citizen Kane . 
 = = = Kane and Schaefer 's troubles = = = 
 Pan Berman had received his first screen credit in 1925 as a nineteen @-@ year @-@ old assistant director on FBO 's Midnight Molly . He departed RKO in December 1939 after policy clashes with studio president George J. Schaefer , handpicked the previous year by the Rockefellers and backed by Sarnoff . With Berman gone , Schaefer became in effect production chief , though other men — including the former head of the industry censorship board , Joseph I. Breen — nominally filled the role . Schaefer , announcing his philosophy with a new studio slogan , " Quality Pictures at a Premium Price " , was keen on signing up independent producers whose films RKO would distribute . In 1941 , the studio landed one of the most prestigious independents in Hollywood when it arranged to handle Samuel Goldwyn 's productions . The first two Goldwyn pictures released by the studio were highly successful : The Little Foxes , directed by William Wyler and starring Bette Davis , garnered four Oscar nominations , while the Howard Hawks – directed Ball of Fire at last brought Barbara Stanwyck a hit under the RKO banner . However , Schaefer agreed to terms so favorable to Goldwyn that it was next to impossible for the studio to make money off his films . David O. Selznick loaned out his leading contracted director for two RKO pictures in 1941 : Alfred Hitchcock 's Mr. and Mrs. Smith was a modest success and Suspicion a more substantial one , with an Oscar @-@ winning turn by Joan Fontaine . 
 That May , RKO released Citizen Kane , <unk> with director Orson Welles 's Mercury Productions . While it opened to strong reviews and would go on to be hailed as one of the greatest movies ever made , it lost money at the time and brought down the wrath of the Hearst newspaper chain on RKO . The next year saw the commercial failure of Welles 's The Magnificent Ambersons — like Kane , critically lauded and overbudget — and the expensive embarrassment of his aborted documentary It 's All True . The three Mercury productions combined to drain $ 2 million from the RKO coffers , major money for a corporation that had reported an overall deficit of $ 1 million in 1940 and a nominal profit of a bit more than $ 500 @,@ 000 in 1941 . Many of RKO 's other artistically ambitious pictures were also dying at the box office and it was losing its last exclusive deal with a major star as well . Rogers , after winning an Oscar in 1941 for her performance in the previous year 's Kitty Foyle , held out for a freelance contract like Grant 's ; after 1943 , she would appear in just one more RKO production , thirteen years later . On June 17 , 1942 , Schaefer tendered his resignation . He departed a weakened and troubled studio , but RKO was about to turn the corner . Propelled by the box @-@ office boom of World War II and guided by new management , RKO would make a strong comeback over the next half @-@ decade . 
 = = = Rebound under Koerner = = = 
 By the end of June 1942 , Floyd Odlum had taken over a controlling interest in the company via his Atlas Corporation , edging aside the Rockefellers and Sarnoff . Charles Koerner , former head of the RKO theater chain and allied with Odlum , had assumed the title of production chief some time prior to Schaefer 's departure . With Schaefer gone , Koerner could actually do the job . He announced a new corporate motto , " Showmanship In Place of Genius : A New Deal at RKO " , a snipe at Schaefer 's artistic ambitions in general and his sponsorship of Welles in particular . He brought the studio much @-@ needed stability until his death in February 1946 . The change in RKO 's fortunes was virtually immediate : corporate profits rose from $ 736 @,@ 241 in 1942 ( the theatrical division compensating for the studio 's $ 2 @.@ 34 million deficit ) to $ 6 @.@ 96 million the following year . The Rockefellers sold off their stock and , early in 1943 , RCA dispensed with the last of its holdings in the company as well , cutting David Sarnoff 's ties to the studio that was largely his conception . In June 1944 , RKO created a television production subsidiary , RKO Television Corporation , to provide content for the new medium . RKO became the first major studio to produce for television with Talk Fast , Mister , a one @-@ hour drama filmed at RKO @-@ Pathé studios in New York and broadcast by the DuMont network 's New York station , WABD , on December 18 , 1944 . In collaboration with Mexican businessman Emilio <unk> <unk> , RKO established Estudios Churubusco in Mexico City in 1945 . 
 With RKO on increasingly secure ground , Koerner sought to increase its output of handsomely budgeted , star @-@ driven features . However , the studio 's only remaining major stars under anything like extended contracts were Grant , whose services were shared with Columbia Pictures , and O 'Hara , shared with Twentieth Century @-@ Fox . Lacking in @-@ house stars , Koerner and his successors under Odlum arranged with the other studios to loan out their biggest names or signed one of the growing number of freelance performers to short @-@ term , " pay or play " deals . Thus RKO pictures of the mid- and late forties offered Bing Crosby , Henry Fonda , and others who were out of the studio 's price range for extended contracts . John Wayne appeared in 1943 's A Lady Takes a Chance while on loan from Republic Pictures ; he was soon working regularly with RKO , making nine more movies for the studio . Gary Cooper appeared in RKO releases produced by Goldwyn and , later , the startup International Pictures , and Claudette Colbert starred in a number of RKO <unk> . Ingrid Bergman appeared under a variety of hats : on loan out from Selznick in The Bells of St. Mary 's ( 1945 ) , the biggest hit of any in @-@ house RKO production during the 1940s ; in the <unk> Notorious ( 1946 ) and Stromboli ( 1950 ) ; and in the independently produced Joan of Arc ( 1948 ) . <unk> Randolph Scott appeared in one major RKO release annually from 1943 through 1948 . 
 In similar fashion , many leading directors made one or more films at RKO during this era , including Alfred Hitchcock once more , with Notorious , and Jean Renoir , with This Land Is Mine ( 1943 ) , reuniting Laughton and O 'Hara , and The Woman on the Beach ( 1947 ) . John Ford 's The Fugitive ( 1947 ) and Fort Apache ( 1948 ) , which appeared right before studio ownership changed hands again , were followed by She Wore a Yellow Ribbon ( 1949 ) and Wagon Master ( 1950 ) ; all four were co @-@ productions between RKO and Argosy Pictures , the company run by Ford and RKO alumnus Merian C. Cooper . Of the directors under long @-@ term contract to RKO in the 1940s , the best known was Edward Dmytryk , who first came to notice with the remarkably profitable Hitler 's Children ( 1943 ) . Shot on a $ 205 @,@ 000 budget placing it in the bottom quartile of Big Five studio productions , it was one of the ten biggest Hollywood hits of the year . Another low @-@ cost war @-@ themed film directed by Dmytryk , Behind the Rising Sun , released a few months later , was similarly profitable . 
 = = = Focus on B movies = = = 
 Much more than the other Big Five studios , RKO relied on B pictures to fill up its schedule . Of the thirty @-@ one features released by RKO in 1944 , for instance , ten were budgeted below $ 200 @,@ 000 , twelve were in the $ 200 @,@ 000 to $ 500 @,@ 000 range , and only nine cost more . In contrast , a clear majority of the features put out by the other top four studios were budgeted at over a half a million dollars . A focus on B pictures limited the studio 's financial risk ; while it also limited the potential for reward ( Dmytryk 's extraordinary coups aside ) , RKO had a history of making better profits with its run @-@ of @-@ the @-@ mill and low @-@ cost product than with its A movies . The studio 's low @-@ budget films offered training opportunities for new directors , as well , among them Jacques Tourneur , Mark Robson , Robert Wise , and Anthony Mann . Robson and Wise received their first directing assignments with producer Val Lewton , whose specialized B horror unit also included the more experienced director Jacques Tourneur . The Lewton unit 's moody , atmospheric work — represented by films such as Cat People ( 1942 ) , I Walked with a Zombie ( 1943 ) , and The Body Snatcher ( 1945 ) — is now highly regarded . Richard Dix concluded his lengthy RKO career with the 1943 Lewton production The Ghost Ship . Tim Holt was RKO 's cowboy star of the era , appearing in forty @-@ six B Westerns and more than fifty movies altogether for the studio . In 1940 , Chester <unk> and Norris Goff brought their famous comic characters Lum and Abner from radio to RKO for a six @-@ film run . The Falcon detective series began in 1941 ; the Saint and the Falcon were so similar that Saint creator Leslie Charteris sued RKO . The Falcon was first played by George Sanders , who had appeared five times as the Saint . He bowed out after four Falcon films and was replaced by his brother , Tom Conway . Conway had a nine @-@ film run in the part before the series ended in 1946 . Johnny Weissmuller starred in six Tarzan pictures for RKO between 1943 and 1948 before being replaced by Lex Barker . 
 Film noir , to which lower budgets lent themselves , became something of a house style at the studio , indeed , the RKO B Stranger on the Third Floor ( 1940 ) is widely seen as initiating noir 's classic period . Its cinematographer , Nicholas Musuraca , who began at FBO in the 1920s and stayed with RKO through 1954 , is a central figure in creating the look of classic noir . Design chief Albert D 'Agostino — another long @-@ <unk> , who succeeded Van Nest Polglase in 1941 — and art director Walter Keller , along with others in the department , such as art directors Carroll Clark and Jack Okey and set decorator Darrell Silvera , are similarly credited . The studio 's 1940s list of contract players was filled with noir regulars : Robert Mitchum ( who graduated to major star status ) and Robert Ryan each made no fewer than ten film noirs for RKO . Gloria Grahame , Jane Greer , and Lawrence Tierney were also notable studio players in the field . Freelancer George Raft starred in two noir hits : Johnny Angel ( 1945 ) and Nocturne ( 1946 ) . Tourneur , Musuraca , Mitchum , and Greer , along with D 'Agostino 's design group , joined to make the A @-@ budgeted Out of the Past ( 1947 ) , now considered one of the greatest of all film noirs . Nicholas Ray began his directing career with the noir They Live by Night ( 1948 ) , the first of a number of well @-@ received films he made for RKO . A big money maker were the dark and moody Dick Tracy detective film series ; Dick Tracy , Detective ( 1945 ) , Dick Tracy vs. <unk> ( 1946 ) ( as " Filthy Flora " , character actress Esther Howard chewed up the scenery in this one ) , Dick Tracy 's Dilemma ( 1947 ) , and Dick Tracy Meets Gruesome ( 1947 ) , ( RKO wanted to title this feature " Dick Tracy vs Karloff " , but Boris Karloff nixed that idea , even though he did play the part of Gruesome ) . 
 = = = HUAC and Howard Hughes = = = 
 RKO , and the movie industry as a whole , had its most profitable year ever in 1946 . A Goldwyn production released by RKO , The Best Years of Our Lives , was the most successful Hollywood film of the decade . But the legal status of the industry 's reigning business model was increasingly being called into doubt : the U.S. Supreme Court ruled in Bigelow v. RKO that the company was liable for damages under antitrust statutes for having denied an independent movie house access to first run films — a common practice among all of the Big Five . With profits at a high point , Floyd Odlum cashed in by selling off about 40 percent of his shares in the company to a group of investment firms . After Koerner 's death , Radio @-@ Keith @-@ Orpheum president N. Peter Rathvon and RKO Radio Pictures president Ned Depinet had exchanged positions , with Depinet moving to the corporate offices in New York and Rathvon relocating to Hollywood and doubling as production chief while a permanent replacement was sought for Koerner . On the first day of 1947 , producer and Oscar @-@ winning screenwriter Dore Schary , who had been working at the studio on loan from Selznick , took over the role . 
 RKO appeared in good shape to build on its recent successes , but the year brought a number of unpleasant harbingers for all of Hollywood . The British government imposed a 75 percent tax on films produced abroad ; along with similarly <unk> taxes and quota laws enacted by other countries , this led to a sharp decline in foreign revenues . The postwar attendance boom peaked sooner than expected and television emerged as a competitor for audience interest . Across the board , profits fell — a 27 percent drop for the Hollywood studios from 1946 to 1947 . The phenomenon that would become known as McCarthyism was building strength , and in October , the House Un @-@ American Activities Committee ( HUAC ) began hearings into Communism in the motion picture industry . Two of RKO 's top talents , Dmytryk and producer Adrian Scott , refused to cooperate . As a consequence , they were fired by RKO per the terms of the Waldorf Statement , the major studios ' pledge to " eliminate any subversives " . Scott , Dmytryk , and eight others who also defied HUAC — dubbed the Hollywood Ten — were blacklisted across the industry . Ironically , the studio 's major success of the year was Crossfire , a Scott – Dmytryk film . Odlum concluded it was time to exit the film business , and he put his remaining RKO shares — approximately 25 percent of the outstanding stock — on the market . Before the turn of the year , the Pathé @-@ branded newsreel was sold to Warner Bros. For her performance in The Farmer 's Daughter ( 1947 ) , a coproduction with Selznick 's Vanguard Films , Loretta Young won the Best Actress Oscar the following March . It would turn out to be the last major Academy Award for an RKO picture . 
 In May 1948 , eccentric aviation tycoon and occasional movie producer Howard Hughes gained control of the company , beating out British film magnate J. Arthur Rank as the buyer of Odlum 's interest . During Hughes 's tenure , RKO suffered its worst years since the early 1930s , as his capricious management style took a heavy toll . Production chief Schary quit almost immediately due to his new boss 's interference and Rathvon soon followed . Within weeks of taking over , Hughes had dismissed three @-@ fourths of the work force ; production was virtually shut down for six months as the conservative Hughes shelved or canceled several of the " message pictures " that Schary had backed . Once shooting picked up again , Hughes quickly became notorious for meddling in minute production matters , particularly the presentation of actresses he favored . All of the Big Five saw their profits dwindle in 1948 — from Fox , down 11 percent , to Loew 's / MGM , down 62 percent — but at RKO they virtually vanished : from $ 5 @.@ 1 million in 1947 to $ 0 @.@ 5 million , a drop of 90 percent . The production @-@ distribution end of the RKO business , now deep in the red , would never make a profit again . 
 Offscreen , Robert Mitchum 's arrest and conviction for marijuana possession — he would serve two months in jail — was widely assumed to mean career death for RKO 's most promising young star , but Hughes surprised the industry by announcing that his contract was not endangered . Of much broader significance , Hughes decided to get the jump on his Big Five competitors by being the first to settle the federal government 's antitrust suit against the major studios , which had won a crucial Supreme Court ruling in United States v. Paramount Pictures , Inc . Under the consent decree he signed , Hughes agreed to dissolve the old parent company , Radio @-@ Keith @-@ Orpheum Corp. , and split RKO 's production @-@ distribution business and its exhibition chain into two entirely separate corporations — RKO Pictures Corp. and RKO Theatres Corp. — with the obligation to promptly sell off one or the other . While Hughes delayed the <unk> procedure until December 1950 and didn 't actually sell his stock in the theater company for another three years , his decision to acquiesce was one of the crucial steps in the collapse of classical Hollywood 's studio system . 
 = = = Turmoil under Hughes = = = 
 While Hughes 's time at RKO was marked by dwindling production and a slew of expensive flops , the studio continued to turn out some well @-@ received films under production chiefs Sid <unk> and Sam Bischoff , though both became fed up with Hughes 's meddling and quit after less than two years . ( Bischoff would be the last man to hold the job under Hughes . ) There were B noirs such as The Window ( 1949 ) , which turned into a hit , and The Set @-@ Up ( 1949 ) , directed by Robert Wise and starring Robert Ryan , which won the Critic 's Prize at the Cannes Film Festival . The Thing from Another World ( 1951 ) , a science @-@ fiction drama coproduced with Howard Hawks 's Winchester Pictures , is seen as a classic of the genre . In 1952 , RKO put out two films directed by Fritz Lang , Rancho Notorious and Clash by Night . The latter was a project of the renowned Jerry Wald – Norman Krasna production team , lured by Hughes from Warner Bros. with great fanfare in August 1950 . 
 The company also began a close working relationship with Ida Lupino . She starred in two suspense films with Robert Ryan — Nicholas Ray 's On Dangerous Ground ( 1952 , though shooting had been completed two years earlier ) and Beware , My Lovely ( 1952 ) , a coproduction between RKO and Lupino 's company , The Filmakers . Of more historic note , Lupino was Hollywood 's only female director during the period ; of the five pictures The Filmakers made with RKO , Lupino directed three , including her now celebrated The Hitch @-@ Hiker ( 1953 ) . Exposing many moviegoers to Asian cinema for the first time , RKO distributed Akira Kurosawa 's epochal Rashomon in the United States , sixteen months after its original 1950 Japanese release . The only smash hits released by RKO in the 1950s came out during this period , but neither was an in @-@ house production : Goldwyn 's Hans Christian Andersen ( 1952 ) was followed by Disney 's Peter Pan ( 1953 ) . 
 In early 1952 , Hughes fought off a lawsuit by screenwriter Paul <unk> , who had been caught up in the latest round of HUAC hearings — Hughes had fired him and removed his name from the credits of a recent release . The studio owner subsequently ordered 100 RKO employees on " leave of absence " while he established a " security office " to oversee an ideological vetting system . " We are going to screen everyone in a creative or executive capacity " , he declared . " The work of Communist sympathizers will not be used . " As more credits were expunged , some in the industry began to question whether Hughes 's hunt for subversives served primarily as a convenient rationale for further curtailing production and trimming expenses . 
 In September , Hughes and his corporate president , Ned E. Depinet , sold their RKO studio stock to a Chicago @-@ based syndicate with no experience in the movie business . Once Hughes learned that said company had connections to organized crime , he gained near @-@ total control of the studio in February 1953 at a cost of $ 23 @.@ 5 million , becoming the first virtual sole owner of a studio since Hollywood 's pioneer days . The studio 's net loss in 1952 was over $ 10 million , and shooting had taken place for just a single in @-@ house production over the last five months of the year . During the turmoil , Samuel Goldwyn ended his 11 @-@ year @-@ long distribution deal with RKO . Wald and Krasna escaped their contracts and the studio as well . The deal that brought the team to RKO had called for them to produce sixty features over five years ; in just shy of half that time , they succeeded in making four . The RKO Encino movie ranch shut down permanently in 1954 and the property was sold off . Jack Webb 's NBC television series Dragnet was the last project to film on the rundown movie ranch for an episode entitled " The Big Producer " , where the lot played the part of a crumbling " Westside Studios " . In November , Hughes finally fulfilled his obligations under the 1948 consent decree , divesting RKO Theatres ; Albert A. List purchased the controlling interest in the business and renamed it List Industries . Hughes soon found himself the target of no less than five separate lawsuits filed by minority shareholders in RKO , accusing him of malfeasance in his dealings with the Chicago group and a wide array of acts of mismanagement . " RKO 's contract list is down to three actors and 127 lawyers " , quipped Dick Powell . 
 Looking to forestall the impending legal imbroglio , in early 1954 Hughes offered to buy out all of RKO 's other stockholders . Convinced that the studio was sinking , Walt Disney ended his arrangement with RKO and set up his own distribution firm , Buena Vista Pictures . Virtual , but not quite actual . Floyd Odlum reemerged to block Hughes from acquiring the 95 percent ownership of RKO stock he needed to write off the company 's losses against his earnings elsewhere . Hughes had reneged on his promise to give Odlum first option on buying the RKO theater chain when he divested it and was now paying the price . With negotiations between the two at a stalemate , in July 1955 , Hughes turned around and sold RKO pictures to the General Tire and Rubber Company for $ 25 million . For Hughes , this was the effective end of a quarter @-@ century 's involvement in the movie business . Historian Betty Lasky describes Hughes 's relationship with RKO as a " systematic seven @-@ year rape . " 
 = = = General Tire and studio 's demise = = = 
 In taking control of the studio , General Tire restored RKO 's links to broadcasting . General Tire had bought the Yankee Network , a New England regional radio network , in 1943 . In 1950 , it purchased the West Coast regional Don Lee Broadcasting System , and two years later , the Bamberger Broadcasting Service , owner of the WOR TV and radio stations in New York City . The latter acquisition gave General Tire majority control of the Mutual Broadcasting System , one of America 's leading radio networks . General Tire then merged its broadcasting interests into a new division , General Teleradio . 
 Thomas O 'Neil , son of General Tire 's founder William O 'Neil and chairman of the broadcasting group , saw that the company 's new television stations , indeed all TV outlets , were in need of programming . They sought to acquire the RKO library , but Hughes would not sell to General Tire unless they purchased the studio outright . With the purchase of RKO , the studio 's library was his , and rights to the 742 films to which RKO retained clear title were quickly put up for sale . C & C Television Corp. , a subsidiary of beverage maker Cantrell & Cochrane , won the bidding in December 1955 . It was soon offering the films to independent stations in a package called " <unk> USA " . RKO Teleradio Pictures — the new company created from the merger of General Teleradio and the RKO studio — retained the broadcast rights for the cities where it owned TV stations . By 1956 , RKO 's classic movies were playing widely on television , allowing many to see such films as Citizen Kane for the first time . The $ 15 @.@ 2 million RKO made on the deal convinced the other major studios that their libraries held profit potential — a turning point in the way Hollywood did business . 
 The new owners of RKO made an initial effort to revive the studio , hiring veteran producer William Dozier to head production . A needed cash infusion was realized in 1954 when the 89 acre RKO Encino movie ranch was sold off to make way for a new tract home development . During the first half of 1956 , the production facilities were as busy as they had been in a half @-@ decade . RKO Teleradio Pictures released Fritz Lang 's final two American films , While the City Sleeps and Beyond a Reasonable Doubt ( both 1956 ) , but years of mismanagement had driven away many directors , producers , and stars . Other films included Bundle of Joy , a remake of the Ginger Rogers @-@ starring Bachelor Mother which was re @-@ tooled as a vehicle for star couple Eddie Fisher and Debbie Reynolds . Rogers herself would make a film for the new RKO ( The First Traveling <unk> ) and would later comment that " coming back to RKO was like coming back to a picnic you 've been on last week , and pick up the bones all around and see what the ants have taken from the lunch that you left . " The studio was also saddled with the last of the inflated B movies such as Pearl of the South Pacific ( 1955 ) and The Conqueror ( 1956 ) that enchanted Hughes . The latter , starring John Wayne , was the biggest hit produced at the studio during the decade , but its $ 4 @.@ 5 million in North American rentals did not come close to covering its $ 6 million cost . 
 After a year and a half without a notable success , General Tire abruptly closed down production at RKO for good at the end of January 1957 , and three productions already in progress were never completed . The Hollywood and Culver City facilities were sold later that year for $ 6 @.@ 15 million to Desilu Productions , owned by Desi Arnaz and Lucille Ball , who had been an RKO contract player from 1935 to 1942 . Desilu would be acquired by Gulf and Western Industries in 1967 and merged into G + W 's other production company , Paramount Pictures ; the former RKO Hollywood studio became home to Paramount Television ( now CBS Television Studios ) , which it remains to this day . The renovated Culver City studio is now owned and operated as an independent production facility . Forty Acres , the Culver City backlot , was razed in the mid @-@ 1970s . List Industries , the former RKO Theatres Corp. , was acquired by Glen Alden Corp. in 1959 . After Glen Alden 's 1967 acquisition of the Stanley Warner theater group , the two chains were merged into RKO – Stanley Warner Theatres . Cinerama purchased the exhibition circuit from Glen Alden in 1971 . 
 With the closing down of production , RKO also shut its distribution exchanges ; from 1957 forward , remaining pictures were released through other companies , primarily Universal @-@ International . The final RKO film , <unk> ! , a coproduction with director Samuel Fuller 's Globe Enterprises , was released by Columbia Pictures in March 1959 . That same year , " Pictures " was stripped from the corporate identity ; the holding company for General Tire 's broadcasting operation and the few remaining motion picture assets was renamed RKO General . In the words of scholar Richard B. Jewell , " The supreme irony of RKO 's existence is that the studio earned a position of lasting importance in cinema history largely because of its extraordinarily unstable history . Since it was the weakling of Hollywood 's ' majors , ' RKO welcomed a diverse group of individualistic creators and provided them ... with an extraordinary degree of freedom to express their artistic idiosyncrasies .... [ I ] t never became predictable and it never became a factory . " 
 = = RKO General = = 
 One of North America 's major radio and television broadcasters from the 1950s through the late 1980s , RKO General traces its roots to the 1943 purchase of the Yankee Network by General Tire . In 1952 , the company united its newly expanded broadcasting interests into a division dubbed General Teleradio . With the tire manufacturer 's acquisition of the RKO film studio in 1955 , its media businesses were brought together under the rubric of RKO Teleradio Pictures . In 1959 , following the breakup of the movie studio , the media division was given the name it would operate under for the next three decades , RKO General . In addition to its broadcasting activities , RKO General was also the holding company for many of General Tire 's ( and , after its parent company 's reorganization , GenCorp 's ) other <unk> businesses , including soft @-@ drink bottling , Muzak ( <unk> store and elevator piped @-@ in ) music , Video Independent Theatre ( 135 theatres strong ) Circuit , hotel enterprises , and , for seventeen years , the original Frontier Airlines . 
 The RKO General radio lineup included some of the highest rated , most influential popular music stations in North America . In May 1965 , KHJ ( AM ) in Los Angeles introduced the Boss Radio variation of the top 40 format . The restrictive programming style was soon adopted by many of RKO 's other stations and imitated by non @-@ RKO broadcasters around the country . RKO 's FM station in New York pioneered numerous formats under a variety of call letters , including WOR and <unk> ( " <unk> " ) ; in 1983 , as <unk> ( " 98 @.@ 7 Kiss FM " ) , it became one of the first major stations to regularly program rap music . In 1979 , RKO General created the RKO Radio Network , reportedly the first broadcasting web linked via satellite . 
 The company 's television stations , for the most part non – network affiliated , were known for showing classic films ( both RKO productions and many others ) under the banner of Million Dollar Movie , launched by New York 's WOR @-@ TV in 1954 . In June 1962 , RKO General and Zenith Electronics initiated what became the first extended venture into subscription television service : through early 1969 , Hartford , Connecticut 's <unk> @-@ TV aired movies , sports , classical and pop music concerts , and other live performances without commercials , generating income from <unk> installation and weekly rental fees as well as individual program charges . However , RKO General 's most notable legacy is what may be the longest licensing dispute in television history . It began in 1965 , when General Tire was accused of obliging vendors to buy advertising with one of its stations if they wanted to keep their contracts . More than two decades ' worth of legal actions ensued , eventually forcing GenCorp ( the parent company since 1983 of both General Tire and RKO General ) to sell off its broadcast holdings under FCC pressure . RKO General exited the media business permanently in 1991 . 
 = = Later incarnations = = 
 Beginning with 1981 's Carbon Copy , RKO General became involved in the coproduction of a number of feature films and TV projects through a subsidiary created three years earlier , RKO Pictures Inc . In collaboration with Universal Studios , RKO put out five films over the next three years . Though the studio frequently worked with major names — including Burt Reynolds and Dolly Parton in The Best Little Whorehouse in Texas , Jack Nicholson in The Border , and <unk> Kinski in Cat People ( all 1982 ) — it met with little success . Starting with the Meryl Streep vehicle Plenty ( 1985 ) , RKO took on more projects as sole studio backer . Films such as the erotic thriller Half Moon Street ( 1986 ) and the Vietnam War drama Hamburger Hill ( 1987 ) followed , but production ended as GenCorp underwent a massive reorganization following an attempted hostile takeover . With RKO General dismantling its broadcast business , RKO Pictures Inc . , along with the original RKO studio 's trademark , remake rights , and other remaining assets , was spun off and put up for sale . After a bid by RKO Pictures ' own managers failed , it was acquired in late 1987 by Wesray Capital Corporation — under the control of former U.S. Secretary of the Treasury William E. Simon and Ray Chambers — and linked with their Six Flags amusement parks to form RKO / Six Flags Entertainment Inc . 
 In 1989 , RKO Pictures , which had produced no films while under Wesray control , was spun off yet again . Actress and Post Cereals heiress Dina Merrill and her husband , producer Ted Hartley , acquired a majority interest and merged the company with their Pavilion Communications . After a brief period as RKO / Pavilion , the business was reorganized as RKO Pictures LLC . With the inaugural RKO production under Hartley and Merrill 's ownership , False Identity ( 1990 ) , the company also stepped into the distribution business . In 1992 , it handled the well @-@ regarded independent production Laws of Gravity , directed by Nick Gomez . RKO 's next significant release came in 1998 with Mighty Joe Young , a remake of a 1949 RKO movie that was itself something of a King Kong redux . In the early 2000s , the company was involved as a coproducer on TV movies and modestly budgeted features at the rate of about one annually . In 2003 , RKO coproduced a Broadway stage version of the 1936 Astaire – Rogers vehicle Swing Time , under the title Never Gonna Dance . 
 In 2003 , as well , RKO Pictures entered into a legal battle with Wall Street Financial Associates ( WSFA ) . Hartley and Merrill claimed that the owners of WSFA fraudulently induced them into signing an acquisition agreement by concealing their " cynical and rapacious " plans to purchase RKO with the intention only of dismantling it . WSFA sought a preliminary injunction prohibiting RKO 's majority owners from selling their interests in the company to any third parties . The WSFA motion was denied in July 2003 , freeing RKO to deal with another potential purchaser , <unk> In 2004 , that planned sale fell through when <unk> apparently folded . The company 's minimal involvement in new film production continues to focus on its remake rights : Are We Done Yet ? , based on Mr. Blandings Builds His Dream House ( 1948 ) , was released in April 2007 to dismal reviews . Later in the year , RKO launched a horror division , <unk> Movie Company . As of early 2010 , <unk> 's mission had expanded , according to the RKO website , to encompass the " popular horror / thriller genre ... youth @-@ oriented feature @-@ length motion pictures that are edgy , sensuous , scary and commercial . " The most recent RKO release are Beyond a Reasonable Doubt ( 2009 ) , a remake of a 1956 RKO film directed by Fritz Lang and A Late Quartet ( 2012 ) . A stage version of Top Hat toured Great Britain in the second half of 2011 . In 2015 RKO released Barely Lethal . 
 = = Studio library = = 
 RKO Pictures LLC is the owner of all the trademarks and logos connected with RKO Radio Pictures Inc . , as well as the rights concerning stories , screenplays ( including 800 to 900 unproduced scripts ) , remakes , sequels , and prequels connected with the RKO library . The television , home entertainment , and theatrical distribution rights , however , are in other hands : The U.S. and Canadian theatrical , television — and subsequently , video — rights to the bulk of the RKO film library were sold at auction in 1971 after the holders , <unk> ( a corporate descendant of C & C Television ) , went bankrupt . The auctioned rights were split between United Artists and Marian B. Inc . ( MBI ) . In 1984 , MBI created a subsidiary , Marian Pictures Inc . ( MBP ) , to which it transferred its share of the RKO rights . Two years later GenCorp 's subsidiaries , RKO General and RKO Pictures , repurchased the rights then controlled by MBP . In the meantime , United Artists had been acquired by MGM . In 1986 , MGM / UA 's considerable library , including its RKO rights , was bought by Turner Broadcasting System for its new Turner Entertainment division . Ted Turner planned on colorizing the films , but RKO initially filed a lawsuit claiming copyright infringement , which was eventually resolved . In December 1987 , Wesray licensed the worldwide rights to the RKO library to Turner ; they included the films previously distributed by MBP and C & C. In October 1996 , Turner Broadcasting was merged into Time Warner , the parent company of Warner Bros .. Today both Warner Bros. and Turner Entertainment control and distribute the majority of the RKO library in the Americas and Australia , although RKO Pictures still retains the copyright . 
 International ownership of theatrical , television and home video distribution rights to RKO 's library is divided on a virtual country @-@ by @-@ country basis : In the UK , many of the RKO rights are currently held by Universal Studios . In 1981 , RAI , the public broadcasting service , acquired the Italian rights to the RKO library , which it now shares with Silvio Berlusconi 's <unk> . In France , the rights are held by Ariès , in Spain are held by a company called Manga Films . The German rights were acquired in 1969 by <unk> on behalf of its KirchMedia division , which went bankrupt in 2002 . EOS Entertainment 's Beta Film purchased many of KirchMedia 's rights in 2004 , and the library is now distributed by <unk> , created in 2005 as a Beta Film – KirchMedia joint venture . In Japan as of 2009 all the RKO films are in the public domain under Japanese copyright law and have been distributed through various distributors . 
 Howard Hughes retained ownership of The Conqueror and Jet Pilot ; those films are now owned by Universal . 
 = = RKO Encino Ranch = = 
 RKO Radio Pictures ' Encino , California movie ranch consisted of 89 acres ( 360 @,@ 000 m2 ) located on the outskirts of the Los Angeles district of Encino , in the San Fernando Valley , near the Los Angeles River and west of Sepulveda Basin Recreation Area on Burbank Boulevard . RKO Radio Pictures purchased this property as a location to film its epic motion picture Cimarron ( 1931 ) , ( winner of three Academy Awards for Best Picture , Best Writing , and Best Art Direction ) . Art Director Max Ree won an Oscar for his creative design of the very first theme sets constructed on the movie ranch , which consisted of a complete Western town and a three @-@ block modern main street built as the fictional Oklahoma town of Osage . 
 In addition to Cimarron scenery , RKO continued to create a vast array of diverse sets for its ever @-@ expanding movie ranch that included a New York avenue , brownstone street , English row houses , slum district , small town square , residential neighborhood , three working train depots , mansion estate , New England farm , Western ranch , a mammoth medieval City of Paris , European marketplace , Russian village , Yukon mining camp , ocean tank with sky backdrop , Moorish <unk> , Mexican outpost , Sahara Desert fort , plaster mountain range diorama , and a football field @-@ sized United States map , which Fred Astaire and Ginger Rogers danced across in The Story of Vernon and Irene Castle ( 1939 ) . Also available were scene docks , carpentry shop , prop storage , greenhouse , and three fully equipped soundstages with an average of more than 11 @,@ 000 square feet each . 
 A short list of classic movies that contain scenes shot on the RKO Pictures Ranch includes What Price Hollywood ? ( 1932 ) , King Kong ( 1933 ) , Of Human Bondage ( 1934 ) , Becky Sharp ( 1935 ) , Walking on Air ( 1936 ) , Stage Door ( 1937 ) , Kitty Foyle ( 1940 ) , Citizen Kane ( 1941 ) , Cat People ( 1942 ) , Murder , My Sweet ( 1944 ) , Dick Tracy film noir series ( 1945 @-@ 1947 ) , and They Live by Night ( 1948 ) , among others . 
 In 1953 Dragnet was the last project to film on RKO 's movie ranch for a 1954 NBC broadcast of an episode titled " The Big Producer " in which the crumbling lot played the part of a fictitious " Westside Studio . " Standing sets exhibited on this particular Dragnet program were a cocktail lounge on modern street , a ranch entry gate with a church and house facades ( ' George Bailey ' wrecked his car there during a snow storm in It 's a Wonderful Life in 1946 ) , plaster desert mountain range , ocean tank & sky backdrop used for Sinbad the Sailor ( 1947 ) , Notre Dame de Paris Carre built for The Hunchback of Notre Dame ( 1939 ) , and ( the very first sets ever built on the ranch ) the award @-@ winning Western town from Cimarron ( 1931 ) . 
 After all those unique themed sets were bulldozed under in 1954 , the ' Encino Village ' subdivision was built on the property with modern home designs by architect Martin Stern , Jr . 
 = = Logos and historical documentary TV series = = 
 Most Radio Pictures Inc. and RKO Radio Pictures Inc. films produced between 1929 and 1957 have an opening logo displaying the studio 's famous trademark , the spinning globe and radio tower , nicknamed the " Transmitter . " It was inspired by a two @-@ hundred @-@ foot tower built in Colorado for a giant electrical amplifier , or Tesla coil , created by inventor Nikola Tesla . Orson Welles referred to the design as his " favorite among the old logos , not just because it was so often a reliable portent . ... It reminds us to listen . " The studio 's closing logo , a triangle enclosing a thunderbolt , was also a well @-@ known trademark . Instead of the Transmitter , however , many Disney and Goldwyn films released by the studio originally appeared with colorful versions of the RKO closing logo as part of the main title sequence . For decades , re @-@ releases of these films had Disney / Buena Vista ( Disney RKO films ) , Pixar and MGM / Goldwyn ( Goldwyn films ) logos replacing the RKO insignia , but the originals have been restored in many recent Blu @-@ ray and DVD editions . The Hartley – Merrill RKO Pictures has created new versions of the Transmitter and the closing thunderbolt logo . 
 In 1986 , the British Broadcasting Company ( BBC ) commissioned the production of a six @-@ hour documentary series on the history of the RKO studios and their films . Edward Asner started as the series host and narrator . Many surviving RKO stars and technical people were interviewed and numerous extended clips from many RKO movies were included . The six @-@ episode series was aired on the PBS network in the late 1980s . No official VHS tapes or DVDs of this series have been released in the American @-@ Canadian NTSC video format , but reasonably decent copies are available on NTSC DVD by various indie distributors made from VHS tapes that were recorded off @-@ the air during their PBS broadcasts . 
 = Curtis Granderson = 
 Curtis Granderson , Jr . ( born March 16 , 1981 ) is an American professional baseball outfielder for the New York Mets of Major League Baseball ( MLB ) . He has also played in MLB for the Detroit Tigers ( 2004 – 2009 ) and the New York Yankees ( 2010 – 2013 ) . He throws right handed and bats left handed . While primarily a center fielder throughout his career , Granderson transitioned to right field in 2014 for the Mets . 
 Granderson played college baseball at the University of Illinois @-@ Chicago , and was selected by the Tigers in the 2002 MLB draft . He made his MLB debut with the Tigers in 2004 , and signed a contract extension with Detroit in 2008 . After the 2009 season , he was traded to the Yankees . After his contract expired following the 2013 season , he signed a contract with the Mets . 
 Granderson is a three @-@ time MLB All @-@ Star ( 2009 , 2011 – 2012 ) . He won the Silver Slugger Award in 2011 . Off the field , Granderson is recognized for his commitment to the community through outreach and charity work . Many of his charitable endeavors support inner @-@ city children . He has also served as an ambassador for MLB abroad . Granderson won the Marvin Miller Man of the Year Award in 2009 for his on @-@ field performance and contributions in the community . 
 = = Early years = = 
 Granderson grew up in Blue Island , Illinois , a south suburb of Chicago . His father , Curtis , Sr. , was a dean and physical education teacher at Nathan Hale Elementary School in Chicago . His mother , Mary , taught chemistry at Curie Metropolitan High School in Chicago . Granderson 's half @-@ sister , Monica , is an English professor at Jackson State University . 
 As a child , Granderson grew up a fan of the Atlanta Braves , choosing not to root for the hometown Chicago Cubs because he often rushed home from school to watch Saved by the Bell and was disappointed when a Cubs game was on instead . Granderson attended Thornton Fractional South High School ( T.F. South ) in Lansing , where he played baseball and basketball . During his high school baseball career , Granderson batted .369 with 11 home runs and 88 runs batted in ( RBI ) , and was named an All @-@ State selection his senior year . Granderson wore # 14 at T.F. South , choosing the number because his father wore it while playing softball . T.F. South honored Granderson by retiring his jersey in a December 2011 ceremony . 
 = = College career = = 
 Granderson was recruited by a number of college baseball programs , and he chose the University of Illinois @-@ Chicago ( UIC ) , in part because they allowed him to play basketball in addition to baseball . However , Granderson quit basketball two weeks into his freshman year in order to concentrate on baseball . 
 As a freshman at UIC in 2000 , Granderson led the UIC Flames baseball team with seven home runs and 45 walks . He followed that by hitting .304 as a sophomore , leading the team in runs , home runs , and walks . After his sophomore year , Granderson played in a summer collegiate league for the Mankato <unk> , now known as the <unk> , of the Northwoods League , where he batted .328 in 44 games , with eight doubles , two triples , one home run , 17 RBI , 28 runs scored , and 15 stolen bases . 
 During his junior season at UIC , Granderson batted .483 , second in the nation to Rickie Weeks . Granderson was named Second @-@ Team All @-@ American by Baseball America and USA Today 's Baseball Weekly and a Third @-@ Team Louisville Slugger NCAA Division I All @-@ American . He graduated from UIC with a double major in business administration and business marketing . On February 6 , 2013 Granderson had his number 28 retired by UIC . 
 = = Professional career = = 
 = = = Minor leagues = = = 
 The Detroit Tigers selected Granderson in the third round of the 2002 Major League Baseball draft . The Tigers assigned Granderson to the Oneonta Tigers , their minor league baseball affiliate in Class @-@ A. With Oneonta , Granderson batted .344 in 52 games . Determined to complete his college education , though the fall semester began before the minor league season ended , Granderson made arrangements to begin his senior year at UIC via internet courses . 
 The Tigers assigned Granderson to the Class @-@ A Advanced Lakeland Tigers in 2003 and the Class @-@ AA Erie Seawolves in 2004 . With the Seawolves , Granderson hit .303 with 21 home runs and 93 RBI . Baseball America named Granderson the Tigers ' minor league player of the year and top prospect after the 2004 season . 
 Prior to the 2005 season , Baseball America rated Granderson as the 57th best prospect in baseball . Granderson competed for the role as the Tigers ' starting center fielder in 2005 spring training , but the organization decided he needed more seasoning , and assigned him to the Class @-@ AAA Toledo Mud Hens . With Toledo , he hit .290 with 15 home runs , 65 RBIs and 22 stolen bases . 
 = = = Major leagues = = = 
 = = = = Detroit Tigers = = = = 
 = = = = = 2004 – 2005 = = = = = 
 The Tigers promoted Granderson to the majors for the first time in September 2004 . He made his major league debut on September 13 against the Minnesota Twins . He received his second promotion to the majors in July 2005 , and he appeared in six games . After his third promotion to the majors , in August , he remained in the majors permanently . Granderson had his first career inside @-@ the @-@ park home run on September 15 , a five @-@ hit game September 18 and a walk @-@ off home run on September 26 against the Chicago White Sox . 
 = = = = = 2006 = = = = = 
 Granderson became the Tigers starting center fielder for the 2006 season after beating out Nook Logan for the position during spring training . From the start of his major league career in 2004 , Granderson began a 151 @-@ game errorless streak , the longest by a position player to start his career since Dave Roberts went errorless in 205 games . Granderson hit two home runs during the 2006 American League Division Series and one in the 2006 American League Championship Series , but struggled in the 2006 World Series , batting <unk> , as the Cardinals defeated the Tigers . 
 Through June , Granderson ranked first among American League ( AL ) outfielders in triples ( 14 ) , third in doubles ( 22 ) , tied for fourth in runs ( 58 ) and tied for 10th in homers ( 11 ) with a .289 batting average in the 2007 season . Although Granderson was not listed on the 2007 All @-@ Star Game ballot , due to the Tigers ' decision to put Gary Sheffield as an outfielder on the ballot , he still received 376 @,@ 033 write @-@ in votes , the most write @-@ in votes for any player . Granderson was named the AL Player of the Week on July 16 , the first time he had won the award , as he hit .500 ( 8 for 16 ) with two doubles , a triple , and a home run during that week . Granderson slugged .938 , drove in two runs , scored seven runs , and had fifteen total bases during Detroit 's four @-@ game series against the Seattle Mariners . 
 On August 7 , Granderson became the second player in franchise history to have at least 30 doubles , 15 triples , 15 home runs , and ten stolen bases in a single season when he hit a double in a game against the Tampa Bay Devil Rays . The other Tiger to accomplish this feat was Charlie Gehringer in 1930 . He became the sixth member of baseball 's 20 – 20 – 20 club on September 7 , joining the Kansas City Royals ' George Brett ( 1979 ) , Willie Mays of the New York Giants ( 1957 ) , Cleveland 's Jeff Heath ( 1941 ) , St. Louis ' Jim Bottomley ( 1928 ) , and Frank Schulte of the Chicago Cubs ( 1911 ) . Granderson stole his 20th base of the season on September 9 , joining Mays and Schulte as the only players in major league history to reach 20 doubles , 20 triples , 20 home runs , and 20 stolen bases in a season , a feat accomplished by the Philadelphia Phillies ' Jimmy Rollins 21 days later . 
 Granderson hit .302 with 23 home runs for the season , and was 26 for 27 in stolen base attempts . He also improved his plate discipline , as he finished seventh in the AL in strikeouts with 141 . He was one of only six batters in the AL to have at least 20 home runs and 20 stolen bases , along with teammate Gary Sheffield , Ian Kinsler , Alex Rodriguez , Grady Sizemore and B. J. Upton . 
 = = = = = 2007 = = = = = 
 During the 2007 season , Granderson accumulated 23 triples , which led all of baseball . The American League and Detroit Tigers record is 26 triples , a feat achieved by the all @-@ time triples king , Sam Crawford , in 1914 . Granderson is the first player since 1949 to manage at least 23 in a single season . Only ten of his triples were at home despite the fact Comerica Park has seen more triples since it opened in 2000 than any other ballpark in baseball . Granderson joined the 20 @-@ 20 @-@ 30 @-@ 20 club , having more than 20 triples , 20 home runs , 30 doubles , and 20 stolen bases . The last player to accomplish the feat was Wildfire Schulte in 1911 . Granderson 's 23 triples were as much or more than six entire teams managed in 2007 , the Chicago White Sox , Cincinnati Reds , Los Angeles Angels of Anaheim , Oakland Athletics , Seattle Mariners and St. Louis Cardinals all had no more than 23 team triples . 
 = = = = = 2008 – 2009 = = = = = 
 Prior to the start of the 2008 season , the Tigers signed Granderson to a five @-@ year , US $ 30 @.@ 25 million contract with a club option for 2013 . Granderson continued hitting well during the 2008 regular season , finishing with a .280 batting average , 13 triples and 22 home runs . He continued to improve his plate discipline , striking out only 111 times ( versus 141 in 2007 and 174 in 2006 ) and drawing a career @-@ high 71 walks . During August , he hit six triples , including two in consecutive innings during a game against the Texas Rangers . 
 With the Tigers failing to make the playoffs in 2007 and 2008 , TBS employed Granderson as a commentator alongside Cal Ripken , Jr . , Dennis Eckersley and Frank Thomas for its coverage of the 2007 and 2008 postseasons . 
 Granderson was chosen to appear in the 2009 MLB All @-@ Star Game . It was his first All Star appearance . In the game , he hit a triple in the top of the 8th inning and scored the winning run . 
 = = = = New York Yankees = = = = 
 = = = = = 2010 = = = = = 
 After the 2009 season , the Tigers began shopping Granderson to other franchises in an effort to reduce their payroll . The Yankees acquired Granderson in a three @-@ team trade on December 9 . In the deal , the Yankees received Granderson while sending Phil Coke and centerfielder Austin Jackson to Detroit . Also , the Arizona Diamondbacks received Yankees pitcher Ian Kennedy and Tigers pitcher Edwin Jackson in return for young pitchers Max Scherzer and Daniel <unk> , who joined the Tigers . 
 Granderson hit a home run in his first Yankee at bat on April 4 , 2010 , becoming the twelfth player to do so . Although he missed some games due to a strained groin , Granderson finished the season with 136 games played , a .247 batting average , and 24 home runs . Granderson , who struggled against left @-@ handed pitching throughout his career , also put up subpar numbers against right @-@ handed pitchers , causing Granderson to revamp his swing with the help of hitting coach Kevin Long in August 2010 . 
 = = = = = 2011 = = = = = 
 Granderson 's work with Long was credited as a reason for his strong 2011 campaign . Granderson received over 6 @.@ 6 million votes for the 2011 MLB All @-@ Star Game . In August 2011 , Granderson and Mark Teixeira became the first Yankees teammates to hit 30 home runs in 115 games since Roger Maris and Mickey Mantle in 1961 . On August 10 , Granderson hit two home runs against the Los Angeles Angels of Anaheim to tally a career @-@ high 31 home runs . Granderson , Robinson Canó , and Russell Martin all hit grand slams in a game against the Oakland Athletics on August 25 , the first time a team had three grand slams in one game . Granderson was named American League Player of the Month for August 2011 , in which he batted .286 , with a .423 on @-@ base percentage , slugged <unk> , hit ten home runs , recorded 29 RBI , and scored 29 runs . He became the first player to record 40 home runs , 10 triples and 25 stolen bases in one season . Granderson finished fourth in balloting for the American League Most Valuable Player Award . 
 = = = = = 2012 = = = = = 
 On May 6 , 2012 , Curtis achieved his 1,000th hit against the Kansas City Royals . On August 26 , 2012 , Granderson hit his 200th career home run against the Cleveland Indians . He finished the 2012 season with a .232 batting average , 43 home runs , 106 RBI , and set a new Yankees season record by striking out 195 times . 
 = = = = = 2013 = = = = = 
 On October 19 , the Yankees exercised Granderson 's club option for 2013 . Originally worth $ 13 million , it became a $ 15 million option after he placed 4th in the MVP voting in 2011 . In his spring training debut against the Toronto Blue Jays on February 24 , 2013 , Granderson was hit by a pitch from J. A. Happ that fractured his right forearm . He was placed on the 15 @-@ day disabled list to begin the 2013 season . He returned to the Yankees on May 14 . On May 18 , 2013 , Granderson made his first start at right field . May 24 , 2013 , Granderson broke the knuckle of his left pinkie finger after getting hit by Tampa Bay 's Cesar Ramos ' pitch in the 5th inning . He was again placed on the 15 @-@ day disabled list . On May 29 , 2013 , Granderson underwent surgery in which a pin was inserted to the knuckle to stabilize the fracture . On August 2 , 2013 , Granderson was activated from the disabled list . Granderson was limited to only 61 games in 2013 batting .229 with 7 home runs and 15 RBI . He became a free agent for the first time of his career after the season . 
 = = = = New York Mets = = = = 
 = = = = = 2014 = = = = = 
 Granderson agreed to terms with the New York Mets on a four @-@ year contract worth $ 60 million on December 6 , 2013 . Granderson 's salaries were set at $ 13 million in 2014 , $ 16 million in 2015 and 2016 , and $ 15 million in 2017 . The Mets played Granderson as their right fielder . He started 148 games with 130 in right field . 
 = = = = = 2015 = = = = = 
 In 2015 , he became the team 's primary leadoff hitter . He went on to lead the team in games played , runs scored , hits , stolen bases , walks , on @-@ base percentage and total bases en route to a National League East division title . In the third game of the National League Division Series , Granderson picked up five RBI – this tied a Mets single game postseason record previously set by Carlos Delgado in the 2006 National League Championship Series , Edgardo Alfonzo in the 1999 NLCS and Rusty Staub in the 1973 World Series . After beating the Los Angeles Dodgers in five games in the NLDS , the Mets went on to sweep the Chicago Cubs in four games in the NLCS and advance to their first World Series since 2000 . 
 Granderson and Daniel Murphy were the two most productive hitters in the Mets lineup during their 2015 postseason run to the World Series . While Murphy cooled off in the World Series against the Kansas City Royals , Granderson continued to be a consistent threat for the Mets out of the leadoff spot and also had three home runs and five RBIs in that World Series . In Game 1 , after the Royals tied the game in the ninth inning with a home run off Mets closer Jeurys Familia , Granderson made an excellent leaping catch with nobody out in the bottom of the 11th inning , off the bat of the Royals fastest runner Jarrod Dyson , preventing what would have at least been a lead off triple and likely saving the game at the time , though the Royals would go on to win the game anyway in the bottom of the 14th inning on a sacrifice fly by Eric Hosmer . Throughout the series , playing right field , Granderson played the most consistent and solid defense of any Mets fielder . 
 = = = = = 2016 = = = = = 
 On May 27 , 2016 , Granderson hit a walk off home run against the Los Angeles Dodgers . He was the first batter up in the bottom of the 9th inning . As of June 16 , 2016 , Granderson had hit 17 lead @-@ off homers since joining the Mets in 2014 , a franchise record . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Granderson is an avid fan of WWE , and attended WrestleMania 23 in Detroit . He considers The Ultimate Warrior , The Undertaker , Junkyard Dog , " Macho Man " Randy Savage , and Hulk Hogan to be his favorite wrestlers . He is also an avid fan of college basketball and of the Kansas Jayhawks . 
 Off the field , Granderson has served as an ambassador for Major League Baseball International . He has traveled to England , Italy , the Netherlands , France , South Africa , China , New Zealand , South Korea and Japan to promote baseball . In appreciation for his efforts , Commissioner Bud Selig penned a thank @-@ you letter to Granderson which read in part , " There are so many fine young men playing Major League baseball today , but I can think of no one who is better suited to represent our national pastime than you . " He has also served as something of an unofficial baseball ambassador to the African @-@ American community , often participating in and initiating dialogue about the lack of black players at all levels of the sport . When he endorsed Nike , Inc . , Louisville Slugger and Rawlings , he asked them to donate money to his foundation or equipment to inner @-@ city baseball programs rather than pay him . 
 His foundation , Grand Kids Foundation , has raised money to benefit the educations of inner @-@ city children around the country . Granderson wrote a children 's book , All You Can Be : Dream It , Draw It , Become It ! , which was published in August 2009 . The book is illustrated by students of the New York City public school system . In February 2010 , Granderson represented MLB at a White House function announcing Let 's Move ! , a childhood anti @-@ obesity effort sponsored by First Lady of the United States Michelle Obama . Granderson paid $ 5 million to help UIC build a new baseball stadium in 2013 . 
 Granderson has been involved in the Major League Baseball Players Association ( MLBPA ) since 2006 . He has taken part in negotiations of the labor contract . Granderson was chosen as the 2009 Marvin Miller Man of the Year by the MLBPA for his off @-@ field work . 
 In 2011 , Granderson was also voted one of the friendliest players in the Major Leagues , according to a poll conducted by Sports Illustrated to 290 players . Granderson wears his socks high to honor players from the Negro leagues . 
 = = Publications = = 
 Granderson , Curtis ( 2009 ) . All You Can Be : Dream It , Draw It , Become It ! . Triumph Books . ISBN 1 @-@ <unk> @-@ 247 @-@ 7 . Retrieved December 13 , 2011 . 
 = Pendle witches = 
 The trials of the Pendle witches in 1612 are among the most famous witch trials in English history , and some of the best recorded of the 17th century . The twelve accused lived in the area around Pendle Hill in Lancashire , and were charged with the murders of ten people by the use of witchcraft . All but two were tried at Lancaster Assizes on 18 – 19 August 1612 , along with the Samlesbury witches and others , in a series of trials that have become known as the Lancashire witch trials . One was tried at York Assizes on 27 July 1612 , and another died in prison . Of the eleven who went to trial – nine women and two men – ten were found guilty and executed by hanging ; one was found not guilty . 
 The official publication of the proceedings by the clerk to the court , Thomas Potts , in his The Wonderfull Discoverie of Witches in the Countie of Lancaster , and the number of witches hanged together – nine at Lancaster and one at York – make the trials unusual for England at that time . It has been estimated that all the English witch trials between the early 15th and early 18th centuries resulted in fewer than 500 executions ; this series of trials accounts for more than two per cent of that total . 
 Six of the Pendle witches came from one of two families , each at the time headed by a woman in her eighties : Elizabeth Southerns ( aka Demdike ) , her daughter Elizabeth Device , and her grandchildren James and Alizon Device ; Anne Whittle ( aka Chattox ) , and her daughter Anne Redferne . The others accused were Jane Bulcock and her son John Bulcock , Alice Nutter , Katherine Hewitt , Alice Gray , and Jennet Preston . The outbreaks of witchcraft in and around Pendle may demonstrate the extent to which people could make a living by posing as witches . Many of the allegations resulted from accusations that members of the Demdike and Chattox families made against each other , perhaps because they were in competition , both trying to make a living from healing , begging , and extortion . 
 = = Religious and political background = = 
 The accused witches lived in the area around Pendle Hill in Lancashire , a county which , at the end of the 16th century , was regarded by the authorities as a wild and lawless region : an area " fabled for its theft , violence and sexual laxity , where the church was honoured without much understanding of its doctrines by the common people " . The nearby Cistercian abbey at Whalley had been dissolved by Henry VIII in 1537 , a move strongly resisted by the local people , over whose lives the abbey had until then exerted a powerful influence . Despite the abbey 's closure , and the execution of its abbot , the people of Pendle remained largely faithful to their Roman Catholic beliefs and were quick to revert to Catholicism on Queen Mary 's accession to the throne in 1553 . 
 When Mary 's Protestant half @-@ sister Elizabeth came to the throne in 1558 Catholic priests once again had to go into hiding , but in remote areas such as Pendle they continued to celebrate Mass in secret . In 1562 , early in her reign , Elizabeth passed a law in the form of An Act Against <unk> , <unk> and <unk> ( 5 <unk> . I c . 16 ) . This demanded the death penalty , but only where harm had been caused ; lesser offences were punishable by a term of imprisonment . The Act provided that anyone who should " use , practise , or exercise any Witchcraft , Enchantment , Charm , or Sorcery , whereby any person shall happen to be killed or destroyed " , was guilty of a felony without benefit of clergy , and was to be put to death . 
 On Elizabeth 's death in 1603 she was succeeded by James I. Strongly influenced by Scotland 's separation from the Catholic Church during the Scottish Reformation , James was intensely interested in Protestant theology , focusing much of his curiosity on the theology of witchcraft . By the early 1590s he had become convinced that he was being plotted against by Scottish witches . After a visit to Denmark , he had attended the trial in 1590 of the North Berwick witches , who were convicted of using witchcraft to send a storm against the ship that carried James and his wife Anne back to Scotland . In 1597 he wrote a book , Daemonologie , instructing his followers that they must denounce and prosecute any supporters or practitioners of witchcraft . One year after James acceded to the English throne , a law was enacted imposing the death penalty in cases where it was proven that harm had been caused through the use of magic , or corpses had been exhumed for magical purposes . James was , however , sceptical of the evidence presented in witch trials , even to the extent of personally exposing discrepancies in the testimonies presented against some accused witches . 
 In early 1612 , the year of the trials , every justice of the peace ( JP ) in Lancashire was ordered to compile a list of recusants in their area , i.e. those who refused to attend the English Church and to take communion , a criminal offence at that time . Roger Nowell of Read Hall , on the edge of Pendle Forest , was the JP for Pendle . It was against this background of seeking out religious nonconformists that , in March 1612 , Nowell investigated a complaint made to him by the family of John Law , a pedlar , who claimed to have been injured by witchcraft . Many of those who subsequently became implicated as the investigation progressed did indeed consider themselves to be witches , in the sense of being village healers who practised magic , probably in return for payment , but such men and women were common in 16th @-@ century rural England , an accepted part of village life . 
 It was perhaps difficult for the judges charged with hearing the trials – Sir James Altham and Sir Edward Bromley – to understand King James 's attitude towards witchcraft . The king was head of the judiciary , and Bromley was hoping for promotion to a circuit nearer London . Altham was nearing the end of his judicial career , but he had recently been accused of a miscarriage of justice at the York Assizes , which had resulted in a woman being sentenced to death by hanging for witchcraft . The judges may have been uncertain whether the best way to gain the king 's favour was by encouraging convictions , or by " sceptically testing the witnesses to destruction " . 
 = = Events leading up to the trials = = 
 One of the accused , Demdike , had been regarded in the area as a witch for fifty years , and some of the deaths the witches were accused of had happened many years before Roger Nowell started to take an interest in 1612 . The event that seems to have triggered Nowell 's investigation , culminating in the Pendle witch trials , occurred on 21 March 1612 . 
 On her way to <unk> Forest , Demdike 's granddaughter , Alizon Device , encountered John Law , a pedlar from Halifax , and asked him for some pins . Seventeenth @-@ century metal pins were handmade and relatively expensive , but they were frequently needed for magical purposes , such as in healing – particularly for treating warts – divination , and for love magic , which may have been why Alizon was so keen to get hold of them and why Law was so reluctant to sell them to her . Whether she meant to buy them , as she claimed , and Law refused to undo his pack for such a small transaction , or whether she had no money and was begging for them , as Law 's son Abraham claimed , is unclear . A few minutes after their encounter Alizon saw Law stumble and fall , perhaps because he suffered a stroke ; he managed to regain his feet and reach a nearby inn . Initially Law made no accusations against Alizon , but she appears to have been convinced of her own powers ; when Abraham Law took her to visit his father a few days after the incident , she reportedly confessed and asked for his forgiveness . 
 Alizon Device , her mother Elizabeth , and her brother James were summoned to appear before Nowell on 30 March 1612 . Alizon confessed that she had sold her soul to the Devil , and that she had told him to lame John Law after he had called her a thief . Her brother , James , stated that his sister had also confessed to bewitching a local child . Elizabeth was more reticent , admitting only that her mother , Demdike , had a mark on her body , something that many , including Nowell , would have regarded as having been left by the Devil after he had sucked her blood . When questioned about Anne Whittle ( Chattox ) , the matriarch of the other family reputedly involved in witchcraft in and around Pendle , Alizon perhaps saw an opportunity for revenge . There may have been bad blood between the two families , possibly dating from 1601 , when a member of Chattox 's family broke into Malkin Tower , the home of the Devices , and stole goods worth about £ 1 , equivalent to about £ 100 as of 2008 . Alizon accused Chattox of murdering four men by witchcraft , and of killing her father , John Device , who had died in 1601 . She claimed that her father had been so frightened of Old Chattox that he had agreed to give her 8 pounds ( 3 @.@ 6 kg ) of oatmeal each year in return for her promise not to hurt his family . The meal was handed over annually until the year before John 's death ; on his deathbed John claimed that his sickness had been caused by Chattox because they had not paid for protection . 
 On 2 April 1612 , Demdike , Chattox , and Chattox 's daughter Anne Redferne , were summoned to appear before Nowell . Both Demdike and Chattox were by then blind and in their eighties , and both provided Nowell with damaging confessions . Demdike claimed that she had given her soul to the Devil 20 years previously , and Chattox that she had given her soul to " a Thing like a Christian man " , on his promise that " she would not lack anything and would get any revenge she desired " . Although Anne Redferne made no confession , Demdike said that she had seen her making clay figures . Margaret Crooke , another witness seen by Nowell that day , claimed that her brother had fallen sick and died after having had a disagreement with Redferne , and that he had frequently blamed her for his illness Based on the evidence and confessions he had obtained , Nowell committed Demdike , Chattox , Anne Redferne and Alizon Device to Lancaster Gaol , to be tried for maleficium – causing harm by witchcraft – at the next assizes . 
 = = = Meeting at Malkin Tower = = = 
 The committal and subsequent trial of the four women might have been the end of the matter , had it not been for a meeting organised by Elizabeth Device at Malkin Tower , the home of the <unk> , held on Good Friday 10 April 1612 . To feed the party , James Device stole a neighbour 's sheep . 
 Friends and others sympathetic to the family attended , and when word of it reached Roger Nowell , he decided to investigate . On 27 April 1612 , an inquiry was held before Nowell and another magistrate , Nicholas Bannister , to determine the purpose of the meeting at Malkin Tower , who had attended , and what had happened there . As a result of the inquiry , eight more people were accused of witchcraft and committed for trial : Elizabeth Device , James Device , Alice Nutter , Katherine Hewitt , John Bulcock , Jane Bulcock , Alice Gray and Jennet Preston . Preston lived across the border in Yorkshire , so she was sent for trial at York Assizes ; the others were sent to Lancaster Gaol , to join the four already imprisoned there . 
 Malkin Tower is believed to have been near the village of Newchurch in Pendle , or possibly in Blacko on the site of present @-@ day Malkin Tower Farm , and to have been demolished soon after the trials . 
 = = Trials = = 
 The Pendle witches were tried in a group that also included the Samlesbury witches , Jane Southworth , Jennet Brierley , and Ellen Brierley , the charges against whom included child murder and cannibalism ; Margaret Pearson , the so @-@ called Padiham witch , who was facing her third trial for witchcraft , this time for killing a horse ; and Isobel Robey from Windle , accused of using witchcraft to cause sickness . 
 Some of the accused Pendle witches , such as Alizon Device , seem to have genuinely believed in their guilt , but others protested their innocence to the end . Jennet Preston was the first to be tried , at York Assizes . 
 = = = York Assizes , 27 July 1612 = = = 
 Jennet Preston lived in Gisburn , which was then in Yorkshire , so she was sent to York Assizes for trial . Her judges were Sir James Altham and Sir Edward Bromley . Jennet was charged with the murder by witchcraft of a local landowner , Thomas Lister of Westby Hall , to which she pleaded not guilty . She had already appeared before Bromley in 1611 , accused of murdering a child by witchcraft , but had been found not guilty . The most damning evidence given against her was that when she had been taken to see Lister 's body , the corpse " bled fresh <unk> presently , in the presence of all that were there present " after she touched it . According to a statement made to Nowell by James Device on 27 April , Jennet had attended the Malkin Tower meeting to seek help with Lister 's murder . She was found guilty and sentenced to death by hanging ; her execution took place on 29 July on the Knavesmire , the present site of York Racecourse . 
 = = = Lancaster Assizes , 18 – 19 August 1612 = = = 
 All the other accused lived in Lancashire , so they were sent to Lancaster Assizes for trial , where the judges were once again Altham and Bromley . The prosecutor was local magistrate Roger Nowell , who had been responsible for collecting the various statements and confessions from the accused . Nine @-@ year @-@ old Jennet Device was a key witness for the prosecution , something that would not have been permitted in many other 17th @-@ century criminal trials . However , King James had made a case for suspending the normal rules of evidence for witchcraft trials in his Daemonologie . As well as identifying those who had attended the Malkin Tower meeting , Jennet also gave evidence against her mother , brother , and sister . 
 Nine of the accused – Alizon Device , Elizabeth Device , James Device , Anne Whittle , Anne Redferne , Alice Nutter , Katherine Hewitt , John Bulcock and Jane Bulcock – were found guilty during the two @-@ day trial and hanged at Gallows Hill in Lancaster on 20 August 1612 ; Elizabeth Southerns died while awaiting trial . Only one of the accused , Alice Grey , was found not guilty . 
 18 August 
 Anne Whittle ( Chattox ) was accused of the murder of Robert Nutter . She pleaded not guilty , but the confession she had made to Roger Nowell was read out in court , and evidence against her was presented by James Robinson , who had lived with the Chattox family 20 years earlier . He claimed to remember that Nutter had accused Chattox of turning his beer sour , and that she was commonly believed to be a witch . Chattox broke down and admitted her guilt , calling on God for forgiveness and the judges to be merciful to her daughter , Anne Redferne . 
 Elizabeth Device was charged with the murders of James Robinson , John Robinson and , together with Alice Nutter and Demdike , the murder of Henry Mitton . Potts records that " this odious witch " suffered from a facial deformity resulting in her left eye being set lower than her right . The main witness against Device was her daughter , Jennet , who was about nine years old . When Jennet was asked to stand up and give evidence against her mother , Elizabeth began to scream and curse her daughter , forcing the judges to have her removed from the courtroom before the evidence could be heard . Jennet was placed on a table and stated that she believed her mother had been a witch for three or four years . She also said her mother had a familiar called Ball , who appeared in the shape of a brown dog . Jennet claimed to have witnessed conversations between Ball and her mother , in which Ball had been asked to help with various murders . James Device also gave evidence against his mother , saying he had seen her making a clay figure of one of her victims , John Robinson . Elizabeth Device was found guilty . 
 James Device pleaded not guilty to the murders by witchcraft of Anne Townley and John Duckworth . However he , like Chattox , had earlier made a confession to Nowell , which was read out in court . That , and the evidence presented against him by his sister Jennet , who said that she had seen her brother asking a black dog he had conjured up to help him kill Townley , was sufficient to persuade the jury to find him guilty . 
 19 August 
 The trials of the three Samlesbury witches were heard before Anne Redferne 's first appearance in court , late in the afternoon , charged with the murder of Robert Nutter . The evidence against her was considered unsatisfactory , and she was acquitted . 
 Anne Redferne was not so fortunate the following day , when she faced her second trial , for the murder of Robert Nutter 's father , Christopher , to which she pleaded not guilty . Demdike 's statement to Nowell , which accused Anne of having made clay figures of the Nutter family , was read out in court . Witnesses were called to testify that Anne was a witch " more dangerous than her Mother " . But she refused to admit her guilt to the end , and had given no evidence against any others of the accused . Anne Redferne was found guilty . 
 Jane Bulcock and her son John Bulcock , both from Newchurch in Pendle , were accused and found guilty of the murder by witchcraft of Jennet Deane . Both denied that they had attended the meeting at Malkin Tower , but Jennet Device identified Jane as having been one of those present , and John as having turned the spit to roast the stolen sheep , the centrepiece of the Good Friday meeting at the Demdike 's home . 
 Alice Nutter was unusual among the accused in being comparatively wealthy , the widow of a tenant yeoman farmer . She made no statement either before or during her trial , except to enter her plea of not guilty to the charge of murdering Henry Mitton by witchcraft . The prosecution alleged that she , together with Demdike and Elizabeth Device , had caused Mitton 's death after he had refused to give Demdike a penny she had begged from him . The only evidence against Alice seems to have been that James Device claimed Demdike had told him of the murder , and Jennet Device in her statement said that Alice had been present at the Malkin Tower meeting . Alice may have called in on the meeting at Malkin Tower on her way to a secret ( and illegal ) Good Friday Catholic service , and refused to speak for fear of incriminating her fellow Catholics . Many of the Nutter family were Catholics , and two had been executed as Jesuit priests , John Nutter in 1584 and his brother Robert in 1600 . Alice Nutter was found guilty . 
 Katherine Hewitt ( aka Mould @-@ <unk> ) was charged and found guilty of the murder of Anne Foulds . She was the wife of a clothier from Colne , and had attended the meeting at Malkin Tower with Alice Grey . According to the evidence given by James Device , both Hewitt and Grey told the others at that meeting that they had killed a child from Colne , Anne Foulds . Jennet Device also picked Katherine out of a line @-@ up , and confirmed her attendance at the Malkin Tower meeting . 
 Alice Gray was accused with Katherine Hewitt of the murder of Anne Foulds . Potts does not provide an account of Alice Gray 's trial , simply recording her as one of the Samlesbury witches – which she was not , as she was one of those identified as having been at the Malkin Tower meeting – and naming her in the list of those found not guilty . 
 Alizon Device , whose encounter with John Law had triggered the events leading up to the trials , was charged with causing harm by witchcraft . Uniquely among the accused , Alizon was confronted in court by her alleged victim , John Law . She seems to have genuinely believed in her own guilt ; when Law was brought into court Alizon fell to her knees in tears and confessed . She was found guilty . 
 = = The Wonderfull Discoverie of Witches in the Countie of Lancaster = = 
 Almost everything that is known about the trials comes from a report of the proceedings written by Thomas Potts , the clerk to the Lancaster Assizes . Potts was instructed to write his account by the trial judges , and had completed the work by 16 November 1612 , when he submitted it for review . Bromley revised and corrected the manuscript before its publication in 1613 , declaring it to be " truly reported " and " fit and worthie to be published " . 
 Although written as an apparently verbatim account , The Wonderfull Discoverie is not a report of what was actually said at the trial but is instead reflecting what happened . Nevertheless , Potts " seems to give a generally trustworthy , although not comprehensive , account of an Assize witchcraft trial , provided that the reader is constantly aware of his use of written material instead of verbatim reports " . 
 The trials took place not quite seven years after the Gunpowder Plot to blow up the Houses of Parliament in an attempt to kill King James and the Protestant aristocracy had been foiled . It was alleged that the Pendle witches had hatched their own gunpowder plot to blow up Lancaster Castle , although historian Stephen Pumfrey has suggested that the " preposterous scheme " was invented by the examining magistrates and simply agreed to by James Device in his witness statement . It may therefore be significant that Potts dedicated The Wonderfull Discoverie to Thomas Knyvet and his wife Elizabeth ; Knyvet was the man credited with apprehending Guy Fawkes and thus saving the king . 
 = = Modern interpretation = = 
 It has been estimated that all the English witch trials between the early 15th and early 18th centuries resulted in fewer than 500 executions , so this one series of trials in July and August 1612 accounts for more than two per cent of that total . Court records show that Lancashire was unusual in the north of England for the frequency of its witch trials . Neighbouring Cheshire , for instance , also suffered from economic problems and religious activists , but there only 47 people were indicted for causing harm by witchcraft between 1589 and 1675 , of whom 11 were found guilty . 
 Pendle was part of the parish of Whalley , an area covering 180 square miles ( 470 km2 ) , too large to be effective in preaching and teaching the doctrines of the Church of England : both the survival of Catholicism and the upsurge of witchcraft in Lancashire have been attributed to its over @-@ stretched parochial structure . Until its dissolution , the spiritual needs of the people of Pendle and surrounding districts had been served by nearby Whalley Abbey , but its closure in 1537 left a moral vacuum . 
 Many of the allegations made in the Pendle witch trials resulted from members of the Demdike and Chattox families making accusations against each other . Historian John Swain has said that the outbreaks of witchcraft in and around Pendle demonstrate the extent to which people could make a living either by posing as a witch , or by accusing or threatening to accuse others of being a witch . Although it is implicit in much of the literature on witchcraft that the accused were victims , often mentally or physically abnormal , for some at least , it may have been a trade like any other , albeit one with significant risks . There may have been bad blood between the Demdike and Chattox families because they were in competition with each other , trying to make a living from healing , begging , and extortion . The <unk> are believed to have lived close to Newchurch in Pendle , and the Chattox family about 2 miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) away , near the village of Fence . 
 = = Aftermath and legacy = = 
 Altham continued with his judicial career until his death in 1617 , and Bromley achieved his desired promotion to the Midlands Circuit in 1616 . Potts was given the <unk> of <unk> Park by James in 1615 , to breed and train the king 's hounds . In 1618 , he was given responsibility for " collecting the forfeitures on the laws concerning sewers , for twenty @-@ one years " . Having played her part in the deaths of her mother , brother , and sister , Jennet Device may eventually have found herself accused of witchcraft . A woman with that name was listed in a group of 20 tried at Lancaster Assizes on 24 March 1634 , although it cannot be certain that it was the same Jennet Device . The charge against her was the murder of Isabel Nutter , William Nutter 's wife . In that series of trials the chief prosecution witness was a ten @-@ year @-@ old boy , Edmund Robinson . All but one of the accused were found guilty , but the judges refused to pass death sentences , deciding instead to refer the case to the king , Charles I. Under cross @-@ examination in London , Robinson admitted that he had fabricated his evidence , but even though four of the accused were eventually pardoned , they all remained incarcerated in Lancaster Gaol , where it is likely that they died . An official record dated 22 August 1636 lists Jennet Device as one of those still held in the prison . These later Lancashire witchcraft trials were the subject of a contemporary play written by Thomas Heywood and Richard Brome , The Late Lancashire Witches . 
 In modern times the witches have become the inspiration for Pendle 's tourism and heritage industries , with local shops selling a variety of witch @-@ motif gifts . Burnley 's Moorhouse 's produces a beer called Pendle Witches Brew , and there is a Pendle Witch Trail running from Pendle Heritage Centre to Lancaster Castle , where the accused witches were held before their trial . The X43 bus route run by Transdev in Burnley & Pendle has been branded The Witch Way , with some of the vehicles operating on it named after the witches in the trial . Pendle Hill , which dominates the landscape of the area , continues to be associated with witchcraft , and hosts a hilltop gathering every Halloween . 
 A petition was presented to UK Home Secretary Jack Straw in 1998 asking for the witches to be pardoned , but it was decided that their convictions should stand . Ten years later another petition was organised in an attempt to obtain pardons for Chattox and Demdike . It followed the Swiss government 's pardon earlier that year of Anna <unk> , beheaded in 1782 , thought to be the last person in Europe to be executed as a witch . 
 = = Literary adaptations and other media = = 
 William Harrison Ainsworth , a Victorian novelist considered in his day the equal of Dickens , wrote a romanticised account of the Pendle witches published in 1849 . The Lancashire Witches is the only one of his 40 novels never to have been out of print . The British writer Robert Neill dramatised the events of 1612 in his novel Mist over Pendle , first published in 1951 . The writer and poet Blake Morrison treated the subject in his suite of poems Pendle Witches , published in 1996 , and in 2011 poet Simon Armitage narrated a documentary on BBC Four , The Pendle Witch Child . 
 = = = 2012 anniversary = = = 
 Events to mark the 400th anniversary of the trials in 2012 included an exhibition , " A Wonderful Discoverie : Lancashire Witches 1612 – 2012 " , at Gawthorpe Hall staged by Lancashire County Council . The Fate of Chattox , a piece by David Lloyd @-@ Mostyn for clarinet and piano , taking its theme from the events leading to Chattox 's demise , was performed by Aquilon at the Chorlton Arts Festival . 
 A life @-@ size statue of Alice Nutter , by sculptor David Palmer , was unveiled in her home village , <unk> . In August , a world record for the largest group dressed as witches was set by 482 people who walked up Pendle Hill , on which the date " 1612 " had been installed in 400 @-@ foot @-@ tall numbers by artist Philippe Handford using horticultural fleece . The Bishop of Burnley , the Rt Rev John Goddard , expressed concern about marking the anniversary on the side of the hill . 
 Publications in 2012 inspired by the trials include two novellas , The Daylight Gate by Jeanette Winterson and Malkin Child by Livi Michael . Blake Morrison published a volume of poetry , A Discoverie of Witches . 
 = History of private equity and venture capital = 
 The history of private equity and venture capital and the development of these asset classes has occurred through a series of boom and bust cycles since the middle of the 20th century . Within the broader private equity industry , two distinct sub @-@ industries , leveraged buyouts and venture capital experienced growth along parallel , although interrelated tracks . 
 Since the origins of the modern private equity industry in 1946 , there have been four major epochs marked by three boom and bust cycles . The early history of private equity — from 1946 through 1981 — was characterized by relatively small volumes of private equity investment , rudimentary firm organizations and limited awareness of and familiarity with the private equity industry . The first boom and bust cycle , from 1982 through 1993 , was characterized by the dramatic surge in leveraged buyout activity financed by junk bonds and culminating in the massive buyout of RJR Nabisco before the near collapse of the leveraged buyout industry in the late 1980s and early 1990s . The second boom and bust cycle ( from 1992 through 2002 ) emerged from the ashes of the savings and loan crisis , the insider trading scandals , the real estate market collapse and the recession of the early 1990s . This period saw the emergence of more institutionalized private equity firms , ultimately culminating in the massive Dot @-@ com bubble in 1999 and 2000 . The third boom and bust cycle ( from 2003 through 2007 ) came in the wake of the collapse of the Dot @-@ com bubble — leveraged buyouts reach unparalleled size and the institutionalization of private equity firms is exemplified by the Blackstone Group 's 2007 initial public offering . 
 In its early years through roughly the year 2000 , the history of the private equity and venture capital asset classes is best described through a narrative of developments in the United States as private equity in Europe consistently lagged behind the North American industry . With the second private equity boom in the mid @-@ 1990s and liberalization of regulation for institutional investors in Europe , the emergence of a mature European private equity market has occurred . 
 = = Pre @-@ history = = 
 Investors have been acquiring businesses and making minority investments in privately held companies since the dawn of the industrial revolution . Merchant bankers in London and Paris financed industrial concerns in the 1850s ; most notably Crédit Mobilier , founded in 1854 by Jacob and Isaac <unk> , who together with New York @-@ based Jay Cooke financed the United States Transcontinental Railroad . 
 Later , J. Pierpont Morgan 's J.P. Morgan & Co. would finance railroads and other industrial companies throughout the United States . In certain respects , J. Pierpont Morgan 's 1901 acquisition of Carnegie Steel Company from Andrew Carnegie and Henry Phipps for $ 480 million represents the first true major buyout as they are thought of today . 
 Due to structural restrictions imposed on American banks under the Glass – Steagall Act and other regulations in the 1930s , there was no private merchant banking industry in the United States , a situation that was quite exceptional in developed nations . As late as the 1980s , Lester <unk> , a noted economist , decried the inability of the financial regulation framework in the United States to support merchant banks . US investment banks were confined primarily to advisory businesses , handling mergers and acquisitions transactions and placements of equity and debt securities . Investment banks would later enter the space , however long after independent firms had become well established . 
 With few exceptions , private equity in the first half of the 20th century was the domain of wealthy individuals and families . The Vanderbilts , <unk> , Rockefellers and <unk> were notable investors in private companies in the first half of the century . In 1938 , Laurance S. Rockefeller helped finance the creation of both Eastern Air Lines and Douglas Aircraft and the Rockefeller family had vast holdings in a variety of companies . Eric M. Warburg founded E.M. Warburg & Co. in 1938 , which would ultimately become Warburg Pincus , with investments in both leveraged buyouts and venture capital . 
 = = Origins of modern private equity = = 
 It was not until after World War II that what is considered today to be true private equity investments began to emerge marked by the founding of the first two venture capital firms in 1946 : American Research and Development Corporation . ( ARDC ) and J.H. Whitney & Company . 
 ARDC was founded by Georges Doriot , the " father of venture capitalism " ( founder of INSEAD and former dean of Harvard Business School ) , with Ralph Flanders and Karl Compton ( former president of MIT ) , to encourage private sector investments in businesses run by soldiers who were returning from World War II . ARDC 's significance was primarily that it was the first institutional private equity investment firm that raised capital from sources other than wealthy families although it had several notable investment successes as well . ARDC is credited with the first major venture capital success story when its 1957 investment of $ 70 @,@ 000 in Digital Equipment Corporation ( DEC ) would be valued at over $ 35 @.@ 5 million after the company 's initial public offering in 1968 ( representing a return of over 500 times on its investment and an annualized rate of return of 101 % ) . Former employees of ARDC went on to found several prominent venture capital firms including Greylock Partners ( founded in 1965 by Charlie Waite and Bill <unk> ) and Morgan , Holland Ventures , the predecessor of Flagship Ventures ( founded in 1982 by James Morgan ) . ARDC continued investing until 1971 with the retirement of Doriot . In 1972 , Doriot merged ARDC with Textron after having invested in over 150 companies . 
 J.H. Whitney & Company was founded by John Hay Whitney and his partner Benno Schmidt . Whitney had been investing since the 1930s , founding Pioneer Pictures in 1933 and acquiring a 15 % interest in Technicolor Corporation with his cousin Cornelius Vanderbilt Whitney . By far , Whitney 's most famous investment was in Florida Foods Corporation . The company , having developed an innovative method for delivering nutrition to American soldiers , later came to be known as Minute Maid orange juice and was sold to The Coca @-@ Cola Company in 1960 . J.H. Whitney & Company continues to make investments in leveraged buyout transactions and raised $ 750 million for its sixth institutional private equity fund in 2005 . 
 Before World War II , venture capital investments ( originally known as " development capital " ) were primarily the domain of wealthy individuals and families . One of the first steps toward a professionally managed venture capital industry was the passage of the Small Business Investment Act of 1958 . The 1958 Act officially allowed the U.S. Small Business Administration ( SBA ) to license private " Small Business Investment Companies " ( SBICs ) to help the financing and management of the small entrepreneurial businesses in the United States . Passage of the Act addressed concerns raised in a Federal Reserve Board report to Congress that concluded that a major gap existed in the capital markets for long @-@ term funding for growth @-@ oriented small businesses . Additionally , it was thought that fostering entrepreneurial companies would spur technological advances to compete against the Soviet Union . Facilitating the flow of capital through the economy up to the pioneering small concerns in order to stimulate the U.S. economy was and still is the main goal of the <unk> program today . The 1958 Act provided venture capital firms structured either as SBICs or Minority Enterprise Small Business Investment Companies ( <unk> ) access to federal funds which could be leveraged at a ratio of up to 4 : 1 against privately raised investment funds . The success of the Small Business Administration 's efforts are viewed primarily in terms of the pool of professional private equity investors that the program developed as the rigid regulatory limitations imposed by the program minimized the role of SBICs . In 2005 , the SBA significantly reduced its <unk> program , though SBICs continue to make private equity investments . 
 The real growth in Private Equity surged in 1984 to 1991 period when Institutional Investors , e.g. Pension Plans , Foundations and Endowment Funds such as the Shell Pension Plan , the Oregon State Pension Plan , the Ford Foundation and the Harvard Endowment Fund started investing a small part of their trillion dollars portfolios into Private Investments - particularly venture capital and Leverage Buyout Funds 
 = = Early venture capital and the growth of Silicon Valley ( 1959 – 1981 ) = = 
 During the 1960s and 1970s , venture capital firms focused their investment activity primarily on starting and expanding companies . More often than not , these companies were exploiting breakthroughs in electronic , medical or data @-@ processing technology . As a result , venture capital came to be almost synonymous with technology finance . 
 It is commonly noted that the first venture @-@ backed startup was Fairchild Semiconductor ( which produced the first commercially practicable integrated circuit ) , funded in late 1957 by a loan from Sherman Fairchild 's Fairchild Camera with the help Arthur Rock , an early venture capitalist with the firm of Hayden Stone in New York ( which received 20 % of the equity of the newly formed company ) . Another early VC firm was <unk> Associates . <unk> was founded in 1969 by Laurance S. Rockefeller , the fourth of John D. Rockefeller 's six children as a way to allow other Rockefeller children to develop exposure to venture capital investments . 
 It was also in the 1960s that the common form of private equity fund , still in use today , emerged . Private equity firms organized limited partnerships to hold investments in which the investment professionals served as general partner and the investors , who were passive limited partners , put up the capital . The compensation structure , still in use today , also emerged with limited partners paying an annual management fee of 1 – 2 % and a carried interest typically representing up to 20 % of the profits of the partnership . 
 An early West Coast venture capital company was Draper and Johnson Investment Company , formed in 1962 by William Henry Draper III and Franklin P. Johnson , Jr . In 1964 Bill Draper and Paul <unk> founded Sutter Hill Ventures , and Pitch Johnson formed Asset Management Company . 
 The growth of the venture capital industry was fueled by the emergence of the independent investment firms on Sand Hill Road , beginning with Kleiner , Perkins , Caufield & Byers and Sequoia Capital in 1972 . Located in Menlo Park , CA , Kleiner Perkins , Sequoia and later venture capital firms would have access to the burgeoning technology industries in the area . By the early 1970s , there were many semiconductor companies based in the Santa Clara Valley as well as early computer firms using their devices and programming and service companies . Throughout the 1970s , a group of private equity firms , focused primarily on venture capital investments , would be founded that would become the model for later leveraged buyout and venture capital investment firms . In 1973 , with the number of new venture capital firms increasing , leading venture capitalists formed the National Venture Capital Association ( <unk> ) . The <unk> was to serve as the industry trade group for the venture capital industry . Venture capital firms suffered a temporary downturn in 1974 , when the stock market crashed and investors were naturally wary of this new kind of investment fund . It was not until 1978 that venture capital experienced its first major fundraising year , as the industry raised approximately $ 750 million . During this period , the number of venture firms also increased . Among the firms founded in this period , in addition to Kleiner Perkins and Sequoia , that continue to invest actively are AEA Investors , TA Associates , Mayfield Fund , <unk> Partners , New Enterprise Associates , Oak Investment Partners and Sevin Rosen Funds . 
 Venture capital played an instrumental role in developing many of the major technology companies of the 1980s . Some of the most notable venture capital investments were made in firms that include : Tandem Computers , Genentech , Apple Inc . , Electronic Arts , Compaq , Federal Express and LSI Corporation . 
 = = Early history of leveraged buyouts ( 1955 – 1981 ) = = 
 = = = McLean Industries and public holding companies = = = 
 Although not strictly private equity , and certainly not labeled so at the time , the first leveraged buyout may have been the purchase by Malcolm McLean 's McLean Industries , Inc. of Pan @-@ Atlantic Steamship Company in January 1955 and Waterman Steamship Corporation in May 1955 . Under the terms of the transactions , McLean borrowed $ 42 million and raised an additional $ 7 million through an issue of preferred stock . When the deal closed , $ 20 million of Waterman cash and assets were used to retire $ 20 million of the loan debt . The newly elected board of Waterman then voted to pay an immediate dividend of $ 25 million to McLean Industries . 
 Similar to the approach employed in the McLean transaction , the use of publicly traded holding companies as investment vehicles to acquire portfolios of investments in corporate assets would become a new trend in the 1960s popularized by the likes of Warren Buffett ( Berkshire Hathaway ) and Victor Posner ( DWG Corporation ) and later adopted by Nelson Peltz ( Triarc ) , Saul Steinberg ( Reliance Insurance ) and Gerry Schwartz ( <unk> Corporation ) . These investment vehicles would utilize a number of the same tactics and target the same type of companies as more traditional leveraged buyouts and in many ways could be considered a forerunner of the later private equity firms . In fact , it is Posner who is often credited with coining the term " leveraged buyout " or " LBO " 
 Posner , who had made a fortune in real estate investments in the 1930s and 1940s acquired a major stake in DWG Corporation in 1966 . Having gained control of the company , he used it as an investment vehicle that could execute takeovers of other companies . Posner and DWG are perhaps best known for the hostile takeover of Sharon Steel Corporation in 1969 , one of the earliest such takeovers in the United States . Posner 's investments were typically motivated by attractive valuations , balance sheets and cash flow characteristics . Because of its high debt load , Posner 's DWG would generate attractive but highly volatile returns and would ultimately land the company in financial difficulty . In 1987 , Sharon Steel sought Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection . 
 Warren Buffett , who is typically described as a stock market investor rather than a private equity investor , employed many of the same techniques in the creation on his Berkshire Hathaway conglomerate as Posner 's DWG Corporation and in later years by more traditional private equity investors . In 1965 , with the support of the company 's board of directors , Buffett assumed control of Berkshire Hathaway . At the time of Buffett 's investment , Berkshire Hathaway was a textile company , however , Buffett used Berkshire Hathaway as an investment vehicle to make acquisitions and minority investments in dozens of the insurance and reinsurance industries ( GEICO ) and varied companies including : American Express , The Buffalo News , the Coca @-@ Cola Company , Fruit of the Loom , Nebraska Furniture Mart and See 's Candies . Buffett 's value investing approach and focus on earnings and cash flows are characteristic of later private equity investors . Buffett would distinguish himself relative to more traditional leveraged buyout practitioners through his reluctance to use leverage and hostile techniques in his investments . 
 = = = KKR and the pioneers of private equity = = = 
 The industry that is today described as private equity was conceived by a number of corporate financiers , most notably Jerome Kohlberg , Jr. and later his protégé , Henry Kravis . Working for Bear Stearns at the time , Kohlberg and Kravis along with Kravis ' cousin George Roberts began a series of what they described as " bootstrap " investments . They targeted family @-@ owned businesses , many of which had been founded in the years following World War II and by the 1960s and 1970s were facing succession issues . Many of these companies lacked a viable or attractive exit for their founders as they were too small to be taken public and the founders were reluctant to sell out to competitors , making a sale to a financial buyer potentially attractive . Their acquisition of <unk> Exterminating Company in 1964 is among the first significant leveraged buyout transactions . In the following years , the three Bear Stearns bankers would complete a series of buyouts including Stern Metals ( 1965 ) , <unk> ( a division of Rockwood International , 1971 ) , Cobblers Industries ( 1971 ) and Boren Clay ( 1973 ) as well as Thompson Wire , Eagle Motors and Barrows through their investment in Stern Metals . Although they had a number of highly successful investments , the $ 27 million investment in Cobblers ended in bankruptcy . 
 By 1976 , tensions had built up between Bear Stearns and Kohlberg , Kravis and Roberts leading to their departure and the formation of Kohlberg Kravis Roberts in that year . Most notably , Bear Stearns executive Cy Lewis had rejected repeated proposals to form a dedicated investment fund within Bear Stearns and Lewis took exception to the amount of time spent on outside activities . Early investors included the Hillman Family By 1978 , with the revision of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act regulations , the nascent KKR was successful in raising its first institutional fund with approximately $ 30 million of investor commitments . That year , the firm signed a precedent @-@ setting deal to buy the publicly traded <unk> Industries , which made industrial pipes , for $ 380 million . It was by far the largest take @-@ private at the time . 
 Meanwhile , in 1974 , Thomas H. Lee founded a new investment firm to focus on acquiring companies through leveraged buyout transactions , one of the earliest independent private equity firms to focus on leveraged buyouts of more mature companies rather than venture capital investments in growth companies . Lee 's firm , Thomas H. Lee Partners , while initially generating less fanfare than other entrants in the 1980s , would emerge as one of the largest private equity firms globally by the end of the 1990s . 
 The second half of the 1970s and the first years of the 1980s saw the emergence of several private equity firms that would survive the various cycles both in leveraged buyouts and venture capital . Among the firms founded during these years were : <unk> , Forstmann Little & Company , Welsh , Carson , Anderson & Stowe , Candover , and <unk> . 
 Management buyouts also came into existence in the late 1970s and early 1980s . One of the most notable early management buyout transactions was the acquisition of Harley @-@ Davidson . A group of managers at Harley @-@ Davidson , the motorcycle manufacturer , bought the company from AMF in a leveraged buyout in 1981 , but racked up big losses the following year and had to ask for protection from Japanese competitors . 
 = = = Regulatory and tax changes impact the boom = = = 
 The advent of the boom in leveraged buyouts in the 1980s was supported by three major legal and regulatory events : 
 Failure of the Carter tax plan of 1977 – In his first year in office , Jimmy Carter put forth a revision to the corporate tax system that would have , among other results , reduced the disparity in treatment of interest paid to bondholders and dividends paid to stockholders . Carter 's proposals did not achieve support from the business community or Congress and were not enacted . Because of the different tax treatment , the use of leverage to reduce taxes was popular among private equity investors and would become increasingly popular with the reduction of the capital gains tax rate . 
 Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 ( ERISA ) – With the passage of ERISA in 1974 , corporate pension funds were prohibited from holding certain risky investments including many investments in privately held companies . In 1975 , fundraising for private equity investments cratered , according to the Venture Capital Institute , totaling only $ 10 million during the course of the year . In 1978 , the US Labor Department relaxed certain parts of the ERISA restrictions , under the " prudent man rule , " thus allowing corporate pension funds to invest in private equity resulting in a major source of capital available to invest in venture capital and other private equity . Time reported in 1978 that fund raising had increased from $ 39 million in 1977 to $ 570 million just one year later . Additionally , many of these same corporate pension investors would become active buyers of the high yield bonds ( or junk bonds ) that were necessary to complete leveraged buyout transactions . 
 Economic Recovery Tax Act of 1981 ( <unk> ) – On August 15 , 1981 , Ronald Reagan signed the Kemp @-@ Roth bill , officially known as the Economic Recovery Tax Act of 1981 , into law , lowering of the top capital gains tax rate from 28 percent to 20 percent , and making high risk investments even more attractive . 
 In the years that would follow these events , private equity would experience its first major boom , acquiring some of the famed brands and major industrial powers of American business . 
 = = The first private equity boom ( 1982 – 1993 ) = = 
 The decade of the 1980s is perhaps more closely associated with the leveraged buyout than any decade before or since . For the first time , the public became aware of the ability of private equity to affect mainstream companies and " corporate raiders " and " hostile takeovers " entered the public consciousness . The decade would see one of the largest booms in private equity culminating in the 1989 leveraged buyout of RJR Nabisco , which would reign as the largest leveraged buyout transaction for nearly 17 years . In 1980 , the private equity industry would raise approximately $ 2 @.@ 4 billion of annual investor commitments and by the end of the decade in 1989 that figure stood at $ 21 @.@ 9 billion marking the tremendous growth experienced . 
 = = = Beginning of the LBO boom = = = 
 The beginning of the first boom period in private equity would be marked by the well @-@ publicized success of the Gibson Greetings acquisition in 1982 and would roar ahead through 1983 and 1984 with the soaring stock market driving profitable exits for private equity investors . 
 In January 1982 , former US Secretary of the Treasury William E. Simon , Ray Chambers and a group of investors , which would later come to be known as Wesray Capital Corporation , acquired Gibson Greetings , a producer of greeting cards . The purchase price for Gibson was $ 80 million , of which only $ 1 million was rumored to have been contributed by the investors . By mid @-@ 1983 , just sixteen months after the original deal , Gibson completed a $ 290 million IPO and Simon made approximately $ 66 million . Simon and Wesray would later complete the $ 71 @.@ 6 million acquisition of Atlas Van Lines . The success of the Gibson Greetings investment attracted the attention of the wider media to the nascent boom in leveraged buyouts . 
 Between 1979 and 1989 , it was estimated that there were over 2 @,@ 000 leveraged buyouts valued in excess of $ 250 million Notable buyouts of this period ( not described elsewhere in this article ) include : Malone & Hyde ( 1984 ) , <unk> Enterprises ( 1984 ) , Beatrice Companies ( 1985 ) , Sterling Jewelers ( 1985 ) , Revco Drug Stores ( 1986 ) , Safeway ( 1986 ) , Southland Corporation ( 1987 ) , Jim Walter Corp ( later Walter Industries , Inc . , 1987 ) , BlackRock ( 1988 ) , Federated Department Stores ( 1988 ) , Marvel Entertainment ( 1988 ) , Uniroyal Goodrich Tire Company ( 1988 ) and Hospital Corporation of America ( 1989 ) . 
 Because of the high leverage on many of the transactions of the 1980s , failed deals occurred regularly , however the promise of attractive returns on successful investments attracted more capital . With the increased leveraged buyout activity and investor interest , the mid @-@ 1980s saw a major proliferation of private equity firms . Among the major firms founded in this period were : Bain Capital , Chemical Venture Partners , Hellman & Friedman , Hicks & Haas , ( later Hicks Muse Tate & Furst ) , The Blackstone Group , Doughty Hanson , BC Partners , and The Carlyle Group . 
 Additionally , as the market developed , new niches within the private equity industry began to emerge . In 1982 , Venture Capital Fund of America , the first private equity firm focused on acquiring secondary market interests in existing private equity funds was founded and then , two years later in 1984 , First Reserve Corporation , the first private equity firm focused on the energy sector , was founded . 
 = = = Venture capital in the 1980s = = = 
 The public successes of the venture capital industry in the 1970s and early 1980s ( e.g. , DEC , Apple , Genentech ) gave rise to a major proliferation of venture capital investment firms . From just a few dozen firms at the start of the decade , there were over 650 firms by the end of the 1980s , each searching for the next major " home run " . While the number of firms multiplied , the capital managed by these firms increased only 11 % from $ 28 billion to $ 31 billion over the course of the decade . 
 The growth the industry was hampered by sharply declining returns and certain venture firms began posting losses for the first time . In addition to the increased competition among firms , several other factors impacted returns . The market for initial public offerings cooled in the mid @-@ 1980s before collapsing after the stock market crash in 1987 and foreign corporations , particularly from Japan and Korea , flooded early stage companies with capital . 
 In response to the changing conditions , corporations that had sponsored in @-@ house venture investment arms , including General Electric and Paine Webber either sold off or closed these venture capital units . Additionally , venture capital units within Chemical Bank ( today <unk> Capital ) and Continental Illinois National Bank ( today CIVC Partners ) , among others , began shifting their focus from funding early stage companies toward investments in more mature companies . Even industry founders J.H. Whitney & Company and Warburg Pincus began to transition toward leveraged buyouts and growth capital investments . Many of these venture capital firms attempted to stay close to their areas of expertise in the technology industry by acquiring companies in the industry that had reached certain levels of maturity . In 1989 , Prime Computer was acquired in a $ 1 @.@ 3 billion leveraged buyout by J.H. Whitney & Company in what would prove to be a disastrous transaction . Whitney 's investment in Prime proved to be nearly a total loss with the bulk of the proceeds from the company 's liquidation paid to the company 's creditors . 
 Although lower profile than their buyout counterparts , new leading venture capital firms were also formed including Draper Fisher <unk> ( originally Draper Associates ) in 1985 and Canaan Partners in 1987 among others . 
 = = = Corporate raiders , hostile takeovers and greenmail = = = 
 Although buyout firms generally had different aims and methods , they were often lumped in with the " corporate raiders " who came on the scene in the 1980s . The raiders were best known for hostile bids — takeover attempts that were opposed by management . By contrast , private equity firms generally attempted to strike deals with boards and CEOs , though in many cases in the 1980s they allied with managements that were already under pressure from raiders . But both groups bought companies through leveraged buyouts ; both relied heavily on junk bond financing ; and under both types of owners in many cases major assets were sold , costs were slashed and employees were laid off . Hence , in the public mind , they were lumped together . 
 Management of many large publicly traded corporations reacted negatively to the threat of potential hostile takeover or corporate raid and pursued drastic defensive measures including poison pills , golden parachutes and increasing debt levels on the company 's balance sheet . Additionally , the threat of the corporate raid would lead to the practice of " greenmail " , where a corporate raider or other party would acquire a significant stake in the stock of a company and receive an incentive payment ( effectively a bribe ) from the company in order to avoid pursuing a hostile takeover of the company . <unk> represented a transfer payment from a company 's existing shareholders to a third party investor and provided no value to existing shareholders but did benefit existing managers . The practice of " greenmail " is not typically considered a tactic of private equity investors and is not condoned by market participants . 
 Among the most notable corporate raiders of the 1980s were Carl Icahn , Victor Posner , Nelson Peltz , Robert M. Bass , T. Boone Pickens , Harold Clark Simmons , Kirk Kerkorian , Sir James Goldsmith , Saul Steinberg and Asher Edelman . Carl Icahn developed a reputation as a ruthless corporate raider after his hostile takeover of TWA in 1985 . The result of that takeover was Icahn systematically selling TWA 's assets to repay the debt he used to purchase the company , which was described as asset stripping . In 1985 , Pickens was profiled on the cover of Time magazine as " one of the most famous and controversial businessmen in the U.S. " for his pursuit of Unocal , Gulf Oil and Cities Services . In later years , many of the corporate raiders would be re @-@ characterized as " Activist shareholders " . 
 Many of the corporate raiders were onetime clients of Michael Milken , whose investment banking firm Drexel Burnham Lambert helped raise blind pools of capital with which corporate raiders could make a legitimate attempt to take over a company and provided high @-@ yield debt financing of the buyouts . 
 Drexel Burnham raised a $ 100 million blind pool in 1984 for Nelson Peltz and his holding company Triangle Industries ( later Triarc ) to give credibility for takeovers , representing the first major blind pool raised for this purpose . Two years later , in 1986 , Wickes Companies , a holding company run by Sanford <unk> raised a $ 1 @.@ 2 billion blind pool . 
 In 1985 , Milken raised $ 750 million for a similar blind pool for Ronald Perelman which would ultimately prove instrumental in acquiring his biggest target : The Revlon Corporation . In 1980 , Ronald Perelman , the son of a wealthy Philadelphia businessman , and future " corporate raider " having made several small but successful buyouts , acquired MacAndrews & Forbes , a distributor of licorice extract and chocolate that Perelman 's father had tried and failed to acquire 10 years earlier . Perelman would ultimately divest the company 's core business and use MacAndrews & Forbes as a holding company investment vehicle for subsequent leveraged buyouts including Technicolor , Inc . , Pantry Pride and Revlon . Using the Pantry Pride subsidiary of his holding company , MacAndrews & Forbes Holdings , Perelman 's overtures were rebuffed . Repeatedly rejected by the company 's board and management , Perelman continued to press forward with a hostile takeover raising his offer from an initial bid of $ 47 @.@ 50 per share until it reached $ 53 @.@ 00 per share . After receiving a higher offer from a white knight , private equity firm Forstmann Little & Company , Perelman 's Pantry Pride finally was able to make a successful bid for Revlon , valuing the company at $ 2 @.@ 7 billion . The buyout would prove troubling , burdened by a heavy debt load . Under Perelman 's control , Revlon sold four divisions : two were sold for $ 1 billion , its vision care division was sold for $ 574 million and its National Health Laboratories division was spun out to the public market in 1988 . Revlon also made acquisitions including Max Factor in 1987 and <unk> in 1989 later selling them to Procter & Gamble in 1991 . Perelman exited the bulk of his holdings in Revlon through an IPO in 1996 and subsequent sales of stock . As of December 31 , 2007 , Perelman still retains a minority ownership interest in Revlon . The Revlon takeover , because of its well @-@ known brand , was profiled widely by the media and brought new attention to the emerging boom in leveraged buyout activity . 
 In later years , Milken and Drexel would shy away from certain of the more " notorious " corporate raiders as Drexel and the private equity industry attempted to move upscale . 
 = = = RJR Nabisco and the Barbarians at the Gate = = = 
 Leveraged buyouts in the 1980s including Perelman 's takeover of Revlon came to epitomize the " ruthless capitalism " and " greed " popularly seen to be pervading Wall Street at the time . One of the final major buyouts of the 1980s proved to be its most ambitious and marked both a high @-@ water mark and a sign of the beginning of the end of the boom that had begun nearly a decade earlier . In 1989 , KKR closed on a $ 31 @.@ 1 billion takeover of RJR Nabisco . It was , at that time and for over 17 years , the largest leverage buyout in history . The event was chronicled in the book , Barbarians at the Gate : The Fall of RJR Nabisco , and later made into a television movie starring James Garner . 
 F. Ross Johnson was the President and CEO of RJR Nabisco at the time of the leveraged buyout and Henry Kravis was a general partner at Kohlberg Kravis Roberts . The leveraged buyout was in the amount of $ 25 billion ( plus assumed debt ) , and the battle for control took place between October and November 1988 . KKR would eventually prevail in acquiring RJR Nabisco at $ 109 per share marking a dramatic increase from the original announcement that Shearson Lehman Hutton would take RJR Nabisco private at $ 75 per share . A fierce series of negotiations and horse @-@ trading ensued which pitted KKR against Shearson Lehman Hutton and later Forstmann Little & Co . Many of the major banking players of the day , including Morgan Stanley , Goldman Sachs , Salomon Brothers , and Merrill Lynch were actively involved in advising and financing the parties . 
 After Shearson Lehman 's original bid , KKR quickly introduced a tender offer to obtain RJR Nabisco for $ 90 per share — a price that enabled it to proceed without the approval of RJR Nabisco 's management . RJR 's management team , working with Shearson Lehman and Salomon Brothers , submitted a bid of $ 112 , a figure they felt certain would enable them to outflank any response by Kravis 's team . KKR 's final bid of $ 109 , while a lower dollar figure , was ultimately accepted by the board of directors of RJR Nabisco . KKR 's offer was guaranteed , whereas the management offer ( backed by Shearson Lehman and Salomon ) lacked a " reset " , meaning that the final share price might have been lower than their stated $ 112 per share . Additionally , many in RJR 's board of directors had grown concerned at recent disclosures of Ross Johnson ' unprecedented golden parachute deal . TIME magazine featured Ross Johnson on the cover of their December 1988 issue along with the headline , " A Game of Greed : This man could pocket $ 100 million from the largest corporate takeover in history . Has the buyout craze gone too far ? " . KKR 's offer was welcomed by the board , and , to some observers , it appeared that their elevation of the reset issue as a deal @-@ breaker in KKR 's favor was little more than an excuse to reject Ross Johnson 's higher payout of $ 112 per share . F. Ross Johnson received $ 53 million from the buyout . 
 At $ 31 @.@ 1 billion of transaction value , RJR Nabisco was by far the largest leveraged buyouts in history . In 2006 and 2007 , a number of leveraged buyout transactions were completed that for the first time surpassed the RJR Nabisco leveraged buyout in terms of nominal purchase price . However , adjusted for inflation , none of the leveraged buyouts of the 2006 – 2007 period would surpass RJR Nabisco . Unfortunately for KKR , size would not equate with success as the high purchase price and debt load would burden the performance of the investment . It had to pump additional equity into the company a year after the buyout closed and years later , when it sold the last of its investment , it had chalked up a $ 700 million loss . 
 Interestingly , two years earlier , in 1987 , Jerome Kohlberg , Jr. resigned from Kohlberg Kravis Roberts & Co. over differences in strategy . Kohlberg did not favor the larger buyouts ( including Beatrice Companies ( 1985 ) and Safeway ( 1986 ) and would later likely have included the 1989 takeover of RJR Nabisco ) , highly leveraged transactions or hostile takeovers being pursued increasingly by KKR . The split would ultimately prove acrimonious as Kohlberg sued Kravis and Roberts for what he alleged were improper business tactics . The case was later settled out of court . Instead , Kohlberg chose to return to his roots , acquiring smaller , middle @-@ market companies and in 1987 , he would found a new private equity firm Kohlberg & Company along with his son James A. Kohlberg , at the time a KKR executive . Jerome Kohlberg would continue investing successfully for another seven years before retiring from Kohlberg & Company in 1994 and turning his firm over to his son . 
 As the market reached its peak in 1988 and 1989 , new private equity firms were founded which would emerge as major investors in the years to follow , including : <unk> Partners , <unk> Capital , Landmark Partners , Leonard Green & Partners and Providence Equity Partners . 
 = = LBO bust ( 1990 – 1992 ) = = 
 By the end of the 1980s the excesses of the buyout market were beginning to show , with the bankruptcy of several large buyouts including Robert <unk> 's 1988 buyout of Federated Department Stores , the 1986 buyout of the Revco drug stores , Walter Industries , <unk> Trucking and Eaton Leonard . Additionally , the RJR Nabisco deal was showing signs of strain , leading to a recapitalization in 1990 that involved the contribution of $ 1 @.@ 7 billion of new equity from KKR . Additionally , in response to the threat of unwelcome LBOs , certain companies adopted a number of techniques , such as the poison pill , to protect them against hostile takeovers by effectively self @-@ destructing the company if it were to be taken over ( these practices are increasingly discredited ) . 
 = = = The collapse of Drexel Burnham Lambert = = = 
 Drexel Burnham Lambert was the investment bank most responsible for the boom in private equity during the 1980s due to its leadership in the issuance of high @-@ yield debt . The firm was first rocked by scandal on May 12 , 1986 , when Dennis Levine , a Drexel managing director and investment banker , was charged with insider trading . Levine pleaded guilty to four felonies , and implicated one of his recent partners , arbitrageur Ivan Boesky . Largely based on information Boesky promised to provide about his dealings with Milken , the Securities and Exchange Commission initiated an investigation of Drexel on November 17 . Two days later , Rudy Giuliani , the United States Attorney for the Southern District of New York , launched his own investigation . 
 For two years , Drexel steadfastly denied any wrongdoing , claiming that the criminal and SEC cases were based almost entirely on the statements of an admitted felon looking to reduce his sentence . However , it was not enough to keep the SEC from suing Drexel in September 1988 for insider trading , stock manipulation , defrauding its clients and stock parking ( buying stocks for the benefit of another ) . All of the transactions involved Milken and his department . Giuliani began seriously considering indicting Drexel under the powerful Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt Organizations Act ( RICO ) , under the doctrine that companies are responsible for an employee 's crimes . 
 The threat of a RICO indictment , which would have required the firm to put up a performance bond of as much as $ 1 billion in lieu of having its assets frozen , unnerved many at Drexel . Most of Drexel 's capital was borrowed money , as is common with most investment banks and it is difficult to receive credit for firms under a RICO indictment . Drexel 's CEO , Fred Joseph said that he had been told that if Drexel were indicted under RICO , it would only survive a month at most . 
 With literally minutes to go before being indicted , Drexel reached an agreement with the government in which it pleaded nolo contendere ( no contest ) to six felonies – three counts of stock parking and three counts of stock manipulation . It also agreed to pay a fine of $ 650 million – at the time , the largest fine ever levied under securities laws . Milken left the firm after his own indictment in March 1989 . Effectively , Drexel was now a convicted felon . 
 In April 1989 , Drexel settled with the SEC , agreeing to stricter safeguards on its oversight procedures . Later that month , the firm eliminated 5 @,@ 000 jobs by shuttering three departments – including the retail brokerage operation . 
 Meanwhile , the high @-@ yield debt markets had begun to shut down in 1989 , a slowdown that accelerated into 1990 . On February 13 , 1990 after being advised by United States Secretary of the Treasury Nicholas F. Brady , the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission ( SEC ) , the New York Stock Exchange ( NYSE ) and the Federal Reserve System , Drexel Burnham Lambert officially filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection . 
 = = = S & L and the shutdown of the Junk Bond Market = = = 
 In the 1980s , the boom in private equity transactions , specifically leveraged buyouts , was driven by the availability of financing , particularly high @-@ yield debt , also known as " junk bonds " . The collapse of the high yield market in 1989 and 1990 would signal the end of the LBO boom . At that time , many market observers were pronouncing the junk bond market “ finished . ” This collapse would be due largely to three factors : 
 The collapse of Drexel Burnham Lambert , the foremost underwriter of junk bonds ( discussed above ) . 
 The dramatic increase in default rates among junk bond issuing companies . The historical default rate for high yield bonds from 1978 to 1988 was approximately 2 @.@ 2 % of total issuance . In 1989 , defaults increased dramatically to 4 @.@ 3 % of the then $ 190 billion market and an additional 2 @.@ 6 % of issuance defaulted in the first half of 1990 . As a result of the higher perceived risk , the differential in yield of the junk bond market over U.S. treasuries ( known as the " spread " ) had also increased by 700 basis points ( 7 percentage points ) . This made the cost of debt in the high yield market significantly more expensive than it had been previously . The market shut down altogether for lower rated issuers . 
 The mandated withdrawal of savings and loans from the high yield market . In August 1989 , the U.S. Congress enacted the Financial Institutions Reform , Recovery and Enforcement Act of 1989 as a response to the savings and loan crisis of the 1980s . Under the law , savings and loans ( S & Ls ) could no longer invest in bonds that were rated below investment grade . Additionally , S & Ls were mandated to sell their holdings by the end of 1993 creating a huge supply of low priced assets that helped freeze the new issuance market . 
 Despite the adverse market conditions , several of the largest private equity firms were founded in this period including : Apollo Management , Madison Dearborn and TPG Capital . 
 = = The second private equity boom and the origins of modern private equity = = 
 Beginning roughly in 1992 , three years after the RJR Nabisco buyout , and continuing through the end of the decade the private equity industry once again experienced a tremendous boom , both in venture capital ( as will be discussed below ) and leveraged buyouts with the emergence of brand name firms managing multibillion @-@ dollar sized funds . After declining from 1990 through 1992 , the private equity industry began to increase in size raising approximately $ 20 @.@ 8 billion of investor commitments in 1992 and reaching a high @-@ water mark in 2000 of $ 305 @.@ 7 billion , outpacing the growth of almost every other asset class . 
 = = = Resurgence of leveraged buyouts = = = 
 Private equity in the 1980s was a controversial topic , commonly associated with corporate raids , hostile takeovers , asset stripping , layoffs , plant closings and outsized profits to investors . As private equity reemerged in the 1990s it began to earn a new degree of legitimacy and respectability . Although in the 1980s , many of the acquisitions made were unsolicited and unwelcome , private equity firms in the 1990s focused on making buyouts attractive propositions for management and shareholders . According to The Economist , “ [ B ] ig companies that would once have turned up their noses at an approach from a private @-@ equity firm are now pleased to do business with them . ” Additionally , private equity investors became increasingly focused on the long term development of companies they acquired , using less leverage in the acquisition . In the 1980s leverage would routinely represent 85 % to 95 % of the purchase price of a company as compared to average debt levels between 20 % and 40 % in leveraged buyouts in the 1990s and the first decade of the 21st century . KKR 's 1986 acquisition of Safeway , for example , was completed with 97 % leverage and 3 % equity contributed by KKR , whereas KKR 's acquisition of TXU in 2007 was completed with approximately 19 % equity contributed ( $ 8 @.@ 5 billion of equity out of a total purchase price of $ 45 billion ) . Additionally , private equity firms are more likely to make investments in capital expenditures and provide incentives for management to build long @-@ term value . 
 The Thomas H. Lee Partners acquisition of Snapple Beverages , in 1992 , is often described as the deal that marked the resurrection of the leveraged buyout after several dormant years . Only eight months after buying the company , Lee took Snapple Beverages public and in 1994 , only two years after the original acquisition , Lee sold the company to Quaker Oats for $ 1 @.@ 7 billion . Lee was estimated to have made $ 900 million for himself and his investors from the sale . Quaker Oats would subsequently sell the company , which performed poorly under new management , three years later for only $ 300 million to Nelson Peltz 's Triarc . As a result of the Snapple deal , Thomas H. Lee , who had begun investing in private equity in 1974 , would find new prominence in the private equity industry and catapult his Boston @-@ based Thomas H. Lee Partners to the ranks of the largest private equity firms . 
 It was also in this timeframe that the capital markets would start to open up again for private equity transactions . During the 1990 – 1993 period , Chemical Bank established its position as a key lender to private equity firms under the auspices of pioneering investment banker , James B. Lee , Jr . ( known as Jimmy Lee , not related to Thomas H. Lee ) . By the mid @-@ 1990s , under Jimmy Lee , Chemical had established itself as the largest lender in the financing of leveraged buyouts . Lee built a syndicated leveraged finance business and related advisory businesses including the first dedicated financial sponsor coverage group , which covered private equity firms in much the same way that investment banks had traditionally covered various industry sectors . 
 The following year , David Bonderman and James Coulter , who had worked for Robert M. Bass during the 1980s completed a buyout of Continental Airlines in 1993 , through their nascent Texas Pacific Group , ( today TPG Capital ) . TPG was virtually alone in its conviction that there was an investment opportunity with the airline . The plan included bringing in a new management team , improving aircraft utilization and focusing on lucrative routes . By 1998 , TPG had generated an annual internal rate of return of 55 % on its investment . Unlike Carl Icahn 's hostile takeover of TWA in 1985 . , Bonderman and Texas Pacific Group were widely hailed as saviors of the airline , marking the change in tone from the 1980s . The buyout of Continental Airlines would be one of the few successes for the private equity industry which has suffered several major failures , including the 2008 bankruptcies of ATA Airlines , Aloha Airlines and Eos Airlines . 
 Among the most notable buyouts of the mid @-@ to @-@ late 1990s included : Duane Reade ( 1990 ( 1997 ) , Sealy Corporation ( 1997 ) , <unk> Learning Centers ( 1997 ) , J. Crew ( 1997 ) , Domino 's Pizza ( 1998 ) , Regal Entertainment Group ( 1998 ) , Oxford Health Plans ( 1998 ) and Petco ( 2000 ) . 
 As the market for private equity matured , so too did its investor base . The Institutional Limited Partner Association was initially founded as an informal networking group for limited partner investors in private equity funds in the early 1990s . However the organization would evolve into an advocacy organization for private equity investors with more than 200 member organizations from 10 countries . As of the end of 2007 , <unk> members had total assets under management in excess of $ 5 trillion with more than $ 850 billion of capital commitments to private equity investments . 
 = = = The venture capital boom and the Internet Bubble ( 1995 – 2000 ) = = = 
 In the 1980s , FedEx and Apple Inc. were able to grow because of private equity or venture funding , as were Cisco , Genentech , Microsoft and Avis . However , by the end of the 1980s , venture capital returns were relatively low , particularly in comparison with their emerging leveraged buyout cousins , due in part to the competition for hot startups , excess supply of IPOs and the inexperience of many venture capital fund managers . Unlike the leveraged buyout industry , after total capital raised increased to $ 3 billion in 1983 , growth in the venture capital industry remained limited through the 1980s and the first half of the 1990s increasing to just over $ 4 billion more than a decade later in 1994 . 
 After a shakeout of venture capital managers , the more successful firms retrenched , focusing increasingly on improving operations at their portfolio companies rather than continuously making new investments . Results would begin to turn very attractive , successful and would ultimately generate the venture capital boom of the 1990s . Former Wharton Professor Andrew <unk> refers to these first 15 years of the modern venture capital industry beginning in 1980 as the " pre @-@ boom period " in anticipation of the boom that would begin in 1995 and last through the bursting of the Internet bubble in 2000 . 
 The late 1990s were a boom time for the venture capital , as firms on Sand Hill Road in Menlo Park and Silicon Valley benefited from a huge surge of interest in the nascent Internet and other computer technologies . Initial public offerings of stock for technology and other growth companies were in abundance and venture firms were reaping large windfalls . Among the highest profile technology companies with venture capital backing were Amazon.com , America Online , E @-@ bay , Intuit , Macromedia , Netscape , Sun Microsystems and Yahoo ! . 
 = = The bursting of the Internet Bubble and the private equity crash ( 2000 – 2003 ) = = 
 The Nasdaq crash and technology slump that started in March 2000 shook virtually the entire venture capital industry as valuations for startup technology companies collapsed . Over the next two years , many venture firms had been forced to write @-@ off large proportions of their investments and many funds were significantly " under water " ( the values of the fund 's investments were below the amount of capital invested ) . Venture capital investors sought to reduce size of commitments they had made to venture capital funds and in numerous instances , investors sought to unload existing commitments for cents on the dollar in the secondary market . By mid @-@ 2003 , the venture capital industry had shriveled to about half its 2001 capacity . Nevertheless , PricewaterhouseCoopers ' <unk> Survey shows that total venture capital investments held steady at 2003 levels through the second quarter of 2005 . 
 Although the post @-@ boom years represent just a small fraction of the peak levels of venture investment reached in 2000 , they still represent an increase over the levels of investment from 1980 through 1995 . As a percentage of GDP , venture investment was 0 @.@ 058 % percent in 1994 , peaked at 1 @.@ 087 % ( nearly <unk> the 1994 level ) in 2000 and ranged from 0 @.@ 164 % to 0 @.@ 182 % in 2003 and 2004 . The revival of an Internet @-@ driven environment ( thanks to deals such as eBay 's purchase of Skype , the News Corporation 's purchase of <unk> , and the very successful <unk> and Salesforce.com IPOs ) have helped to revive the venture capital environment . However , as a percentage of the overall private equity market , venture capital has still not reached its mid @-@ 1990s level , let alone its peak in 2000 . 
 = = = Stagnation in the LBO market = = = 
 Meanwhile , as the venture sector collapsed , the activity in the leveraged buyout market also declined significantly . Leveraged buyout firms had invested heavily in the telecommunications sector from 1996 to 2000 and profited from the boom which suddenly fizzled in 2001 . In that year at least 27 major telecommunications companies , ( i.e. , with $ 100 million of liabilities or greater ) filed for bankruptcy protection . Telecommunications , which made up a large portion of the overall high yield universe of issuers , dragged down the entire high yield market . Overall corporate default rates surged to levels unseen since the 1990 market collapse rising to 6 @.@ 3 % of high yield issuance in 2000 and 8 @.@ 9 % of issuance in 2001 . Default rates on junk bonds peaked at 10 @.@ 7 percent in January 2002 according to Moody 's . As a result , leveraged buyout activity ground to a halt . The major collapses of former high @-@ fliers including WorldCom , Adelphia Communications , Global Crossing and <unk> Communications were among the most notable defaults in the market . In addition to the high rate of default , many investors lamented the low recovery rates achieved through restructuring or bankruptcy . 
 Among the most affected by the bursting of the internet and telecom bubbles were two of the largest and most active private equity firms of the 1990s : Tom Hicks ' Hicks Muse Tate & Furst and Ted Forstmann 's Forstmann Little & Company . These firms were often cited as the highest profile private equity casualties , having invested heavily in technology and telecommunications companies . Hicks Muse 's reputation and market position were both damaged by the loss of over $ 1 billion from minority investments in six telecommunications and 13 Internet companies at the peak of the 1990s stock market bubble . Similarly , Forstmann suffered major losses from investments in <unk> and XO Communications . Tom Hicks resigned from Hicks Muse at the end of 2004 and Forstmann Little was unable to raise a new fund . The treasure of the State of Connecticut , sued Forstmann Little to return the state 's $ 96 million investment to that point and to cancel the commitment it made to take its total investment to $ 200 million . The humbling of these private equity titans could hardly have been predicted by their investors in the 1990s and forced fund investors to conduct due diligence on fund managers more carefully and include greater controls on investments in partnership agreements . 
 Deals completed during this period tended to be smaller and financed less with high yield debt than in other periods . Private equity firms had to cobble together financing made up of bank loans and mezzanine debt , often with higher equity contributions than had been seen . Private equity firms benefited from the lower valuation multiples . As a result , despite the relatively limited activity , those funds that invested during the adverse market conditions delivered attractive returns to investors . Meanwhile , in Europe LBO activity began to increase as the market continued to mature . In 2001 , for the first time , European buyout activity exceeded US activity with $ 44 billion of deals completed in Europe as compared with just $ 10 @.@ 7 billion of deals completed in the US . This was a function of the fact that just six LBOs in excess of $ 500 million were completed in 2001 , against 27 in 2000 . 
 As investors sought to reduce their exposure to the private equity asset class , an area of private equity that was increasingly active in these years was the nascent secondary market for private equity interests . Secondary transaction volume increased from historical levels of 2 % or 3 % of private equity commitments to 5 % of the addressable market in the early years of the new decade . Many of the largest financial institutions ( e.g. , Deutsche Bank , Abbey National , UBS AG ) sold portfolios of direct investments and “ pay @-@ to @-@ play ” funds portfolios that were typically used as a means to gain entry to lucrative leveraged finance and [ [ mergers and acquisitions ] ] assignments but had created hundreds of millions of dollars of losses . Some of the most notable financial institutions to complete publicly disclosed secondary transactions during this period include : Chase Capital Partners ( 2000 ) , National Westminster Bank ( 2000 ) , UBS AG ( 2003 ) , Deutsche Bank ( <unk> Partners ) ( 2003 ) Abbey National ( 2004 ) and Bank One ( 2004 ) . 
 = = The third private equity boom and the Golden Age of Private Equity ( 2003 – 2007 ) = = 
 As 2002 ended and 2003 began , the private equity sector , had spent the previous three two and a half years reeling from major losses in telecommunications and technology companies and had been severely constrained by tight credit markets . As 2003 got underway , private equity began a five @-@ year resurgence that would ultimately result in the completion of 13 of the 15 largest leveraged buyout transactions in history , unprecedented levels of investment activity and investor commitments and a major expansion and maturation of the leading private equity firms . 
 The combination of decreasing interest rates , loosening lending standards and regulatory changes for publicly traded companies would set the stage for the largest boom private equity had seen . The Sarbanes Oxley legislation , officially the Public Company Accounting Reform and Investor Protection Act , passed in 2002 , in the wake of corporate scandals at Enron , WorldCom , Tyco , Adelphia , Peregrine Systems and Global Crossing among others , would create a new regime of rules and regulations for publicly traded corporations . In addition to the existing focus on short term earnings rather than long term value creation , many public company executives lamented the extra cost and bureaucracy associated with Sarbanes @-@ Oxley compliance . For the first time , many large corporations saw private equity ownership as potentially more attractive than remaining public . Sarbanes @-@ Oxley would have the opposite effect on the venture capital industry . The increased compliance costs would make it nearly impossible for venture capitalists to bring young companies to the public markets and dramatically reduced the opportunities for exits via IPO . Instead , venture capitalists have been forced increasingly to rely on sales to strategic buyers for an exit of their investment . 
 Interest rates , which began a major series of decreases in 2002 would reduce the cost of borrowing and increase the ability of private equity firms to finance large acquisitions . Lower interest rates would encourage investors to return to relatively dormant high @-@ yield debt and leveraged loan markets , making debt more readily available to finance buyouts . Additionally , alternative investments also became increasingly important as investors focused on yields despite increases in risk . This search for higher yielding investments would fuel larger funds , allowing larger deals , never before thought possible , to become reality . 
 Certain buyouts were completed in 2001 and early 2002 , particularly in Europe where financing was more readily available . In 2001 , for example , BT Group agreed to sell its international yellow pages directories business ( Yell Group ) to <unk> Partners and Hicks , Muse , Tate & Furst for £ 2 @.@ 14 billion ( approximately $ 3 @.@ 5 billion at the time ) , making it then the largest non @-@ corporate LBO in European history . Yell later bought US directories publisher <unk> for about $ 600 million , and floated on London 's FTSE in 2003 . 
 = = = Resurgence of the large buyout = = = 
 Marked by the two @-@ stage buyout of Dex Media at the end of 2002 and 2003 , large multibillion @-@ dollar U.S. buyouts could once again obtain significant high yield debt financing and larger transactions could be completed . The Carlyle Group , Welsh , Carson , Anderson & Stowe , along with other private investors , led a $ 7 @.@ 5 billion buyout of <unk> . The buyout was the third largest corporate buyout since 1989 . <unk> 's purchase occurred in two stages : a $ 2 @.@ 75 billion acquisition of assets known as Dex Media East in November 2002 and a $ 4 @.@ 30 billion acquisition of assets known as Dex Media West in 2003 . R. H. Donnelley Corporation acquired Dex Media in 2006 . Shortly after Dex Media , other larger buyouts would be completed signaling the resurgence in private equity was underway . The acquisitions included Burger King ( by Bain Capital ) , Jefferson Smurfit ( by Madison Dearborn ) , Houghton Mifflin ( by Bain Capital , the Blackstone Group and Thomas H. Lee Partners ) and TRW Automotive by the Blackstone Group . 
 In 2006 USA Today reported retrospectively on the revival of private equity : 
 LBOs are back , only they 've rebranded themselves private equity and vow a happier ending . The firms say this time it 's completely different . Instead of buying companies and dismantling them , as was their rap in the ' 80s , private equity firms … squeeze more profit out of underperforming companies . 
 But whether today 's private equity firms are simply a regurgitation of their counterparts in the 1980s … or a kinder , gentler version , one thing remains clear : private equity is now enjoying a " Golden Age . " And with returns that triple the S & P 500 , it 's no wonder they are challenging the public markets for supremacy . 
 By 2004 and 2005 , major buyouts were once again becoming common and market observers were stunned by the leverage levels and financing terms obtained by financial sponsors in their buyouts . Some of the notable buyouts of this period include : <unk> ( 2004 ) , Toys " R " Us ( 2004 ) , The Hertz Corporation ( 2005 ) , Metro @-@ Goldwyn @-@ Mayer ( 2005 ) and SunGard ( 2005 ) . 
 = = = Age of the mega @-@ buyout = = = 
 As 2005 ended and 2006 began , new " largest buyout " records were set and surpassed several times with nine of the top ten buyouts at the end of 2007 having been announced in an 18 @-@ month window from the beginning of 2006 through the middle of 2007 . Additionally , the buyout boom was not limited to the United States as industrialized countries in Europe and the Asia @-@ Pacific region also saw new records set . In 2006 , private equity firms bought 654 U.S. companies for $ 375 billion , representing 18 times the level of transactions closed in 2003 . Additionally , U.S. based private equity firms raised $ 215 @.@ 4 billion in investor commitments to 322 funds , surpassing the previous record set in 2000 by 22 % and 33 % higher than the 2005 fundraising total . However , venture capital funds , which were responsible for much of the fundraising volume in 2000 ( the height of the dot @-@ com bubble ) , raised only $ 25 @.@ 1 billion in 2006 , a 2 % percent decline from 2005 and a significant decline from its peak . The following year , despite the onset of turmoil in the credit markets in the summer , saw yet another record year of fundraising with $ 302 billion of investor commitments to 415 funds . 
 Among the largest buyouts of this period included : Georgia @-@ Pacific Corp ( 2005 ) , Albertson 's ( 2006 ) , Equity Office Properties ( 2006 ) , Freescale Semiconductor ( 2006 ) , GMAC ( 2006 ) , HCA ( 2006 ) , Kinder Morgan ( 2006 ) , Harrah 's Entertainment ( 2006 ) , TDC A / S ( 2006 ) , Sabre Holdings ( 2006 ) , <unk> ( 2006 ) , Alliance Boots ( 2007 ) , <unk> ( 2007 ) , Chrysler ( 2007 ) , First Data ( 2007 ) and TXU ( 2007 ) . 
 = = = Publicly traded private equity = = = 
 Although there had previously been certain instances of publicly traded private equity vehicles , the convergence of private equity and the public equity markets attracted significantly greater attention when several of the largest private equity firms pursued various options through the public markets . Taking private equity firms and private equity funds public appeared an unusual move since private equity funds often buy public companies listed on exchange and then take them private . Private equity firms are rarely subject to the quarterly reporting requirements of the public markets and tout this independence to prospective sellers as a key advantage of going private . Nevertheless , there are fundamentally two separate opportunities that private equity firms pursued in the public markets . These options involved a public listing of either : 
 A private equity firm ( the management company ) , which provides shareholders an opportunity to gain exposure to the management fees and carried interest earned by the investment professionals and managers of the private equity firm . The most notable example of this public listing was completed by The Blackstone Group in 2007 
 A private equity fund or similar investment vehicle , which allows investors that would otherwise be unable to invest in a traditional private equity limited partnership to gain exposure to a portfolio of private equity investments . 
 In May 2006 , Kohlberg Kravis Roberts raised $ 5 billion in an initial public offering for a new permanent investment vehicle ( KKR Private Equity Investors or KPE ) listing it on the Euronext exchange in Amsterdam ( <unk> : KPE ) . KKR raised more than three times what it had expected at the outset as many of the investors in KPE were hedge funds that sought exposure to private equity but that could not make long term commitments to private equity funds . Because private equity had been booming in the preceding years , the proposition of investing in a KKR fund appeared attractive to certain investors . KPE 's first @-@ day performance was lackluster , trading down 1 @.@ 7 % and trading volume was limited . Initially , a handful of other private equity firms , including Blackstone , and hedge funds had planned to follow KKR 's lead but when KPE was increased to $ 5 billion , it soaked up all the demand . That , together with the slump of KPE 's shares , caused the other firms to shelve their plans . KPE 's stock declined from an IPO price of € 25 per share to € 18 @.@ 16 ( a 27 % decline ) at the end of 2007 and a low of € 11 @.@ 45 ( a 54 @.@ 2 % decline ) per share in Q1 2008 . KPE disclosed in May 2008 that it had completed approximately $ 300 million of secondary sales of selected limited partnership interests in and <unk> commitments to certain KKR @-@ managed funds in order to generate liquidity and repay borrowings . 
 On March 22 , 2007 , after nine months of secret preparations , the Blackstone Group filed with the SEC to raise $ 4 billion in an initial public offering . On June 21 , Blackstone sold a 12 @.@ 3 % stake in its ownership to the public for $ 4 @.@ 13 billion in the largest U.S. IPO since 2002 . Traded on the New York Stock Exchange under the ticker symbol BX , Blackstone priced at $ 31 per share on June 22 , 2007 . 
 Less than two weeks after the Blackstone Group IPO , rival firm Kohlberg Kravis Roberts filed with the SEC in July 2007 to raise $ 1 @.@ 25 billion by selling an ownership interest in its management company . KKR had previously listed its KKR Private Equity Investors ( KPE ) private equity fund vehicle in 2006 . The onset of the credit crunch and the shutdown of the IPO market would dampen the prospects of obtaining a valuation that would be attractive to KKR and the flotation was repeatedly postponed . 
 Meanwhile , other private equity investors were seeking to realize a portion of the value locked into their firms . In September 2007 , the Carlyle Group sold a 7 @.@ 5 % interest in its management company to Mubadala Development Company , which is owned by the Abu Dhabi Investment Authority ( <unk> ) for $ 1 @.@ 35 billion , which valued Carlyle at approximately $ 20 billion . Similarly , in January 2008 , Silver Lake Partners sold a 9 @.@ 9 % stake in its management company to the California Public Employees ' Retirement System ( CalPERS ) for $ 275 million . 
 Additionally , Apollo Management completed a private placement of shares in its management company in July 2007 . By pursuing a private placement rather than a public offering , Apollo would be able to avoid much of the public scrutiny applied to Blackstone and KKR . In April 2008 , Apollo filed with the SEC to permit some holders of its privately traded stock to sell their shares on the New York Stock Exchange . In April 2004 , Apollo raised $ 930 million for a listed business development company , Apollo Investment Corporation ( NASDAQ : <unk> ) , to invest primarily in middle @-@ market companies in the form of mezzanine debt and senior secured loans , as well as by making direct equity investments in companies . The Company also invests in the securities of public companies . 
 Historically , in the United States , there had been a group of publicly traded private equity firms that were registered as business development companies ( BDCs ) under the Investment Company Act of 1940 . Typically , BDCs are structured similar to real estate investment trusts ( REITs ) in that the BDC structure reduces or eliminates corporate income tax . In return , REITs are required to distribute 90 % of their income , which may be taxable to its investors . As of the end of 2007 , among the largest BDCs ( by market value , excluding Apollo Investment Corp , discussed earlier ) are : American Capital Strategies ( NASDAQ : <unk> ) , Allied Capital Corp ( NASDAQ : ALD ) , Ares Capital Corporation ( NASDAQ : ARCC ) , Gladstone Investment Corp ( NASDAQ : <unk> ) and Kohlberg Capital Corp ( NASDAQ : <unk> ) . 
 = = = Secondary market and the evolution of the private equity asset class = = = 
 In the wake of the collapse of the equity markets in 2000 , many investors in private equity sought an early exit from their outstanding commitments . The surge in activity in the secondary market , which had previously been a relatively small niche of the private equity industry , prompted new entrants to the market , however the market was still characterized by limited liquidity and distressed prices with private equity funds trading at significant discounts to fair value . 
 Beginning in 2004 and extending through 2007 , the secondary market transformed into a more efficient market in which assets for the first time traded at or above their estimated fair values and liquidity increased dramatically . During these years , the secondary market transitioned from a niche sub @-@ category in which the majority of sellers were distressed to an active market with ample supply of assets and numerous market participants . By 2006 active portfolio management had become far more common in the increasingly developed secondary market and an increasing number of investors had begun to pursue secondary sales to rebalance their private equity portfolios . The continued evolution of the private equity secondary market reflected the maturation and evolution of the larger private equity industry . Among the most notable publicly disclosed secondary transactions ( it is estimated that over two @-@ thirds of secondary market activity is never disclosed publicly ) : CalPERS ( 2008 ) , Ohio Bureau of Workers ' Compensation ( 2007 ) , MetLife ( 2007 ) , Bank of America ( 2006 and 2007 ) , Mellon Financial Corporation ( 2006 ) , American Capital Strategies ( 2006 ) , JPMorgan Chase , Temasek Holdings , Dresdner Bank and Dayton Power & Light . 
 = = The Credit Crunch and post @-@ modern private equity ( 2007 – 2008 ) = = 
 In July 2007 , turmoil that had been affecting the mortgage markets , spilled over into the leveraged finance and high @-@ yield debt markets . The markets had been highly robust during the first six months of 2007 , with highly issuer friendly developments including PIK and PIK <unk> ( interest is " <unk> In Kind " ) and covenant light debt widely available to finance large leveraged buyouts . July and August saw a notable slowdown in issuance levels in the high yield and leveraged loan markets with only few issuers accessing the market . Uncertain market conditions led to a significant widening of yield spreads , which coupled with the typical summer slowdown led to many companies and investment banks to put their plans to issue debt on hold until the autumn . However , the expected rebound in the market after Labor Day 2007 did not materialize and the lack of market confidence prevented deals from pricing . By the end of September , the full extent of the credit situation became obvious as major lenders including Citigroup and UBS AG announced major <unk> due to credit losses . The leveraged finance markets came to a near standstill . As a result of the sudden change in the market , buyers would begin to withdraw from or renegotiate the deals completed at the top of the market , most notably in transactions involving : Harman International ( announced and withdrawn 2007 ) , Sallie Mae ( announced 2007 but withdrawn 2008 ) , Clear Channel Communications ( 2007 ) and BCE ( 2007 ) . 
 Additionally , the credit crunch has prompted buyout firms to pursue a new group of transactions in order to deploy their massive investment funds . These transactions have included Private Investment in Public Equity ( or PIPE ) transactions as well as purchases of debt in existing leveraged buyout transactions . Some of the most notable of these transactions completed in the depths of the credit crunch include Apollo Management 's acquisition of the Citigroup Loan Portfolio ( 2008 ) and TPG Capital 's PIPE investment in Washington Mutual ( 2008 ) . According to investors and fund managers , the consensus among industry members in late 2009 was that private equity firms will need to become more like asset managers , offering buyouts as just part of their portfolio , or else focus tightly on specific sectors in order to prosper . The industry must also become better in adding value by turning businesses around rather than pure financial engineering . 
 = = Responses to private equity = = 
 = = = 1980s reflections of private equity = = = 
 Although private equity rarely received a thorough treatment in popular culture , several films did feature stereotypical " corporate raiders " prominently . Among the most notable examples of private equity featured in motion pictures included : 
 Wall Street ( 1987 ) – The notorious " corporate raider " and " <unk> " Gordon Gekko , representing a synthesis of the worst features of various famous private equity figures , intends to manipulate an ambitious young stockbroker to take over a failing but decent airline . Although Gekko makes a pretense of caring about the airline , his intentions prove to be to destroy the airline , strip its assets and lay off its employees before raiding the corporate pension fund . Gekko would become a symbol in popular culture for unrestrained greed ( with the signature line , " Greed , for lack of a better word , is good " ) that would be attached to the private equity industry . 
 Other People 's Money ( 1991 ) – A self @-@ absorbed corporate raider " Larry the Liquidator " ( Danny DeVito ) , sets his sights on New England Wire and Cable , a small @-@ town business run by family patriarch Gregory Peck who is principally interested in protecting his employees and the town . 
 Pretty Woman ( 1990 ) – Although Richard Gere 's profession is incidental to the plot , the selection of the corporate raider who intends to destroy the hard work of a family @-@ run business by acquiring the company in a hostile takeover and then selling off the company 's parts for a profit ( compared in the movie to an illegal chop shop ) . Ultimately , the corporate raider is won over and chooses not to pursue his original plans for the company . 
 Two other works were pivotal in framing the image of buyout firms . Barbarians at the Gate , the 1990 best seller about the fight over RJR Nabisco linked private equity to hostile takeovers and assaults on management . A blistering story on the front page of the Wall Street Journal the same year about KKR 's buyout of the Safeway supermarket chain painted a much more damaging picture . The piece , which later won a Pulitzer Prize , began with the suicide of a Safeway worker in Texas who had been laid off and went on to chronicle how KKR had sold off hundreds of stores after the buyout and slashed jobs . 
 = = = Contemporary reflections of private equity and private equity controversies = = = 
 Carlyle group featured prominently in Michael Moore 's 2003 film Fahrenheit 9 @-@ 11 . The film suggested that The Carlyle Group exerted tremendous influence on U.S. government policy and contracts through their relationship with the president ’ s father , George H. W. Bush , a former senior adviser to the Carlyle Group . Additionally , Moore cited relationships with the Bin Laden family . The movie quotes author Dan <unk> claiming that the Carlyle Group " gained " from September 11 because it owned United Defense , a military contractor , although the firm ’ s $ 11 billion Crusader artillery rocket system developed for the U.S. Army is one of the few weapons systems canceled by the Bush administration . 
 Over the next few years , attention intensified on private equity as the size of transactions and profile of the companies increased . The attention would increase significantly following a series of events involving The Blackstone Group : the firm 's initial public offering and the birthday celebration of its CEO . The Wall Street Journal observing Blackstone Group 's Steve Schwarzman 's 60th birthday celebration in February 2007 described the event as follows : 
 The Armory 's entrance hung with banners painted to replicate Mr. Schwarzman 's sprawling Park Avenue apartment . A brass band and children clad in military uniforms ushered in guests . A huge portrait of Mr. Schwarzman , which usually hangs in his living room , was shipped in for the occasion . The affair was <unk> by comedian Martin Short . Rod Stewart performed . Composer Marvin Hamlisch did a number from " A Chorus Line . " Singer Patti LaBelle led the Abyssinian Baptist Church choir in a tune about Mr. Schwarzman . Attendees included Colin Powell and New York Mayor Michael Bloomberg . The menu included lobster , baked Alaska and a 2004 Maison Louis <unk> Chassagne <unk> , among other fine wines . 
 Schwarzman received a severe backlash from both critics of the private equity industry and fellow investors in private equity . The lavish event which reminded many of the excesses of notorious executives including Bernie <unk> ( WorldCom ) and Dennis Kozlowski ( Tyco International ) . David Bonderman , the founder of TPG Capital remarked , " We have all wanted to be private – at least until now . When Steve Schwarzman 's biography with all the dollar signs is posted on the web site none of us will like the furor that results – and that 's even if you like Rod Stewart . " As the IPO drew closer , there were moves by a number of congressman and senators to block the stock offering and to raise taxes on private equity firms and / or their partners — proposals many attributed in part to the extravagance of the party . 
 David Rubenstein 's fears would be confirmed when in 2007 , the Service Employees International Union launched a campaign against private equity firms , specifically the largest buyout firms through public events , protests as well as leafleting and web campaigns . A number of leading private equity executives were targeted by the union members however the SEIU 's campaign was non nearly as effective at slowing the buyout boom as the credit crunch of 2007 and 2008 would ultimately prove to be . 
 In 2008 , the SEIU would shift part of its focus from attacking private equity firms directly toward the highlighting the role of sovereign wealth funds in private equity . The SEIU pushed legislation in California that would disallow investments by state agencies ( particularly CalPERS and <unk> ) in firms with ties to certain sovereign wealth funds . Additionally , the SEIU has attempted to criticize the treatment of taxation of carried interest . The SEIU , and other critics , point out that many wealthy private equity investors pay taxes at lower rates ( because the majority of their income is derived from carried interest , payments received from the profits on a private equity fund 's investments ) than many of the rank and file employees of a private equity firm 's portfolio companies . 
 = Matthew Deady = 
 Matthew Paul Deady ( May 12 , 1824 – March 24 , 1893 ) was a politician and jurist in the Oregon Territory and the state of Oregon of the United States . He served on the Oregon Supreme Court from 1853 to 1859 , at which time he was appointed to the newly created federal court of the state . He remained on this federal trial level court , the United States District Court for the District of Oregon in Portland , Oregon , as the sole judge until his death in 1893 . While on the court he presided over the trial that led to the United States Supreme Court decision of Pennoyer v. Neff concerning personal jurisdiction . 
 Prior to joining the court , Deady served in the legislature of the Oregon Territory , including time served as the President of the Council , and was elected as President of the Oregon Constitutional Convention in 1857 . A native of the state of Maryland , his first profession was as a blacksmith . He would also spend time as a teacher in both Ohio and Oregon . Deady read law in Ohio and practiced law for a time in that state before immigrating to the Oregon Territory via the Oregon Trail . In Oregon , he helped codify the laws of the state and assisted in the foundation of the Multnomah County Library in Portland . He also was president of the University of Oregon 's board of regents . The university renamed Deady Hall in his honor after his death . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Matthew Deady was born near Easton , Talbot County , Maryland , on May 12 , 1824 . His parents were Daniel Deady and the former Mary Ann McSweeny . His father was born in Ireland on September 25 , 1794 , and married McSweeny on June 10 , 1823 . Matthew was the oldest of five children in the family . He began his education at the school where his father was a teacher , remaining at that school until the age of twelve . In 1828 , the family relocated from the Baltimore , Maryland , area to Wheeling Virginia now ( West Virginia ) . The <unk> also lived for brief periods of time in Cincinnati , Ohio , Rodney , Missouri , and Covington , Kentucky . 
 In Wheeling , his father was employed as a teacher and principal at the Lancasterian Academy . On May 31 , 1834 , his mother died while the family was living in Wheeling . Deady ’ s family was split up , with Matthew sent back to Baltimore for two years . In Baltimore , he lived with an uncle and grandfather while working in a store . Deady then returned to Wheeling to live with his father while attending school and working in a local music shop . In the Spring of 1837 he moved just across the Ohio River to the state of Ohio where his father had purchased a farm in Beaver Township . 
 Matthew Deady spent the next four years working for his father on the family farm , engaged in manual labor , while also reading extensively in his spare time . On February 17 , 1841 , he left home after a disagreement with his father and moved to Barnesville , Ohio . For four years he lived with the family of John Kelly , working as a blacksmith ’ s apprentice . Beginning in 1843 , Deady attended Barnesville Academy , continuing his education there until four months beyond the time that his blacksmith apprenticeship ended . The apprenticeship had paid for the first six months of school . At the school he earned a certificate that allowed him to become a teacher on July 7 , 1845 , from his instructor Nathan R. Smith . 
 After graduating , Deady began teaching to pay off a debt incurred for his education , and began to read law . He read law in St. <unk> , Ohio , under the guidance of judge and former Congressman William Kennon . Deady passed the Ohio bar on October 26 , 1847 , and began practicing law in St. <unk> at the office of Henry Kennon . He remained there until on April 17 , 1849 , he began his overland journey over the Oregon Trail to the newly created Oregon Territory . 
 = = Oregon = = 
 Deady originally was to travel with a government designated Indian agent and the agent 's family . At Fort Leavenworth the agent remained , and Deady continued his journey in the company of a United States Army regiment bound for Fort Vancouver . Taking the Oregon Trail , he arrived where Portland , Oregon , now stands on November 14 , 1849 . The next day he went to neighboring Oregon City , and then a few days later west to Lafayette , Oregon . At that city , the county seat of Yamhill County at that time , the red @-@ haired Deady began teaching as his occupation to make ends meet . He first worked for room and board , but for the second term of the school year he was paid $ 75 per month . 
 While teaching he was consulted by the county commissioner and helped to set up the courts and laws in Yamhill County . In March 1850 , he began practicing law in Oregon , appearing for three cases before judge Orville C. Pratt held at a local tavern . After receiving payment for his services , he sent $ 100 back to Ohio to Henry Kennon to pay off some debt . That summer he worked for Peter H. Burnett ’ s brother , Elder Glen Burnett , running his store while Burnett was in California acquiring supplies . While working at the store he sold many supplies to the local Native Americans and learned some Chinook jargon from them . 
 On June 24 , 1852 , Deady married Lucy A. Henderson , with whom he would have three children who survived childbirth . Lucy came to Oregon in 1846 with her parents Robert Henderson and Rhoda Holman from Kentucky . The Deady ’ s children were three sons ; Edward Nesmith ( born 1853 ) , Paul Robert ( born 1856 ) , and Henderson Brooke ( born 1869 ) . Henderson studied medicine , while Paul and Edward became attorneys like their father . Matthew Geoffrey ( born 1860 ) and Mary ( born 1866 ) died at birth . 
 While practicing law at Lafayette he represented Adam Wimple of neighboring Polk County after Wimple had been charged for murdering his wife . Deady represented him at trial and was to receive as payment Wimple ’ s land claim via his will . Wimple was convicted of the murder and sentenced to death , but was only hung after being recaptured from a jail break . In 1852 , Deady was among many legal minds and politicians in the territory such as Joseph C. Avery and Robert Moore that signed a petition asking Governor John P. Gaines to pardon Nimrod O 'Kelly after O 'Kelly 's controversial conviction for murder . O 'Kelly was eventually spared from the gallows . 
 = = Political career = = 
 Deady was elected to the Oregon Territorial Legislature in 1850 , where he represented Yamhill County as a Democrat in the lower chamber House of Representatives . He attended the session held in Oregon City beginning in December , where he met James W. Nesmith and Asahel Bush for the first time . Those three would become influential leaders of the Democratic Party in the Oregon Territory , and later the state of Oregon . Deady was an early member of the Democratic Party in the territory . 
 During his initial session in the territorial legislature in 1850 , Deady served on the judicial committee and helped draft many of the laws in the territory . The Oregon Territory had just been created by the United States Congress in 1848 , with the territorial government taking control in early 1849 . Following the 1850 to 1851 session , the secretary of the territory , Edward D. Hamilton , asked Deady to assist in publishing the laws passed by the legislature for all previous sessions of the legislative assembly . Deady helped with this process , in what became the first volume of laws published in Oregon . 
 In 1851 , Deady was elected to the upper chamber Council , and the following session served as President of that chamber . During the 1851 session he served as chairman of the Council ’ s judiciary committee . In all , Deady attended two regular sessions and one special session of the legislature from 1851 to 1853 . 
 = = = Judicial career = = = 
 Matthew Deady was then appointed as an associate justice of the Territorial Supreme Court in 1853 by United States President Franklin Pierce . Pierce appointed him to a second term in 1857 . At this time justices of the court also rode circuit , presiding over trials in designated counties in addition to serving as an appellate court judge for the Supreme Court . Deady was assigned to the southern counties of the territory , holding court in each county twice per year . 
 During this time on the court , in the Spring of 1853 , he moved south to a farm in the Umpqua River valley . After paying a squatter $ 100 for the land on Campas Swale , Deady filed for a land claim under the Donation Land Claim Act and moved the family there in the fall , naming it Fair Oaks . While on the court , he helped to establish the court systems in four of the counties in Southern Oregon , and traveled around 1 @,@ 500 miles ( 2 @,@ 400 km ) each year to hold court . He won election to a full term in 1858 to take effect once Oregon became a state , but resigned before taking office in 1859 . 
 In 1857 , Deady was elected as a delegate to the Oregon Constitutional Convention . The convention was held in the territorial capital of Salem to prepare the territory for statehood . He became president of the body and was influential in shaping the new state constitution , which outlawed slavery but excluded African @-@ Americans from settling in the new state . Deady successfully advocated for provisions in the document to set six @-@ year terms for judges , four @-@ year terms for state officers , and biennial sessions for the legislature . He also led the southern party , which opposed state education in all forms . During the debates Deady also advocated for discrimination towards Chinese immigrants and Blacks , as well as in favor for slavery in Oregon . 
 On March 7 , 1859 , he was nominated as U.S. District Judge for the District of Oregon by President James Buchanan . Two days later the United States Senate confirmed the nomination and Deady received his commission to the court that had been created once Oregon became the 33rd state on February 14 , 1859 . Deady held the first session of the court on September 12 , 1859 , in Salem , but had the court relocated to Portland by the start of the September session of 1860 . Deady then moved to Portland where he helped to found the Multnomah County Library . He would serve as president of that organization for a number of years . In Portland , he wrote the articles of incorporation for the city , which became the standard in the state for other cities . At first Portland did not have a courthouse for Deady to use , so he rented two rooms from Benjamin Stark on what is now Water Street until a federal courthouse was built beginning in 1869 . That courthouse was first named the United States Building , and is now named the Pioneer Courthouse , with Deady moving into the building when it was finished in 1875 . 
 In 1867 , United States Supreme Court justice Stephen Johnson Field assigned Deady to serve as a circuit court judge for the United States circuit court located in San Francisco , California . Deady did the same in 1868 and 1869 since there was no circuit court judge assigned to the West Coast at that time , spending three months in San Francisco each year . This was a common practice during this period , as United States Supreme Court justices still rode circuit , and often assigned federal district court judges to serve on the appellate level circuit courts . The Judiciary Act of 1869 reduced much of this process , as did the Judiciary Act of 1891 that established the current United States courts of appeals with Oregon in the Ninth Circuit . While serving on the district court , Deady served as president of the Board of Regents of the State University ( later University of Oregon ) from 1873 to 1893 . He also designed the university ’ s seal , which is still used by the school . 
 In 1874 , in a district court case , Deady ruled in favor of Marcus Neff in a lawsuit against Sylvester Pennoyer concerning unpaid legal fees to John H. Mitchell and a sheriff 's auction of Neff 's land to Pennoyer . The case would become the landmark U.S. Supreme Court decision of Pennoyer v. Neff that helped define the law of personal jurisdiction . In 1885 , Deady admitted Mary Leonard to the federal bar , the first woman admitted to practice in Oregon , though the Oregon Supreme Court at first denied her admittance to the state bar on technical grounds . Later that year the Oregon legislature resolved the technical issue in the statute and the state high court admitted Leonard into the state bar . 
 Among Deady 's work is the General Laws of Oregon , which he compiled and annotated in 1866 . This work consisted of a Code of Civil Procedure , a Penal Code , and a Code of Criminal Procedure . In this role he not only codified existing laws , but also made new laws . Deady often drafted the legislation that led to state statutes , thus playing a crucial role in the lawmaking process in the state of Oregon between 1859 and 1872 . In 1874 , Deady and fellow code commissioner and later U.S. Representative Lafayette Lane updated Deady ’ s earlier compilation of the state ’ s laws . His criminal laws remained largely in effect in Oregon until the legislature revised much of those laws in 1971 . Deady also was the author of the state 's business incorporation act . The act was the first in the country to place all business corporations on the same level by requiring a minimum of three people to incorporate as a business . Regarding Deady 's contributions to Oregon , former Oregon Supreme Court justice and United States Attorney General George Henry Williams said : " No hand has been so strongly and deeply impressed upon the legislative and judicial history of Oregon as that of Judge Deady . " 
 = = Later years and legacy = = 
 As a prominent figure in Portland he continually worked to raise funds for the library he supported . He would also rely on financial help from his associates in order to supplement his small salary as a federal judge . This allowed him to keep his personal appearance inline with what was expected of prominent citizens . In contravention to his earlier stances during the Oregon Constitutional Convention , Deady later denounced violence against Chinese Americans during the 1870s and 1880s , even convening a grand jury to examine charging anti @-@ Chinese crowds with criminal acts . These crowds were threatening violence against these minorities in an attempt to expel the immigrants from the state . 
 In Portland , Deady helped establish the University of Oregon ’ s law school . As the first public law school in the state , the University of Oregon School of Law opened in 1884 with an address by Deady . The school later moved to the main campus in Eugene . 
 From his work in California , the state bar in that state passed a resolution of thanks for Deady ’ s work . He was also named as a regent to Stanford University by then United States Senator Leland Stanford . Deady gave many public speeches and was a prolific writer on the law and other subjects , in addition to his national reputation in the legal field . 
 In 1878 , Matthew 's father Daniel died . In October 1892 , he suffered a stroke , but continued to preside over the courtroom . Matthew Paul Deady died in Portland on March 24 , 1893 , at the age of 68 . In 1893 , the first building at the University of Oregon was renamed in Deady 's honor . Built in 1876 , Deady Hall joined the National Register of Historic Places in 1972 and was designated a National Historic Landmark in 1977 . Matthew ’ s wife Lucy died in 1923 , followed by son Henderson in 1933 . The eldest son Edward died in 1914 , with middle son Paul ’ s death coming in 1920 . 
 Due to continued political pressure from the University of Oregon community , Deady Hall has been the target of a renaming effort . On May 6 , 2016 , President of the University , Michael H. <unk> set forth a collection of criteria that will determine Deady 's Hall potential <unk> . 
 = = Works authored = = 
 Matthew Deady authored more than ten different works in addition to his court opinions . 
 The Code of Civil Procedure and Other General Statutes of Oregon : Enacted by the Legislative Assembly at the Session Commencing September 8 , A.D. 1862 . With A. C. Gibbs and James K. Kelly . Asahel Bush , State Printer : Salem , Or . ( 1863 ) . 
 The Organic and Other General Laws of Oregon , Together with the National Constitution and Other Public Acts and Statutes of the United States . 1845 @-@ 1864 . H.L. Pittock , State Printer : Portland . ( 1866 ) . 
 Reports of Cases Determined in the Circuit and District Courts of the United States of Oregon and California . A.L. Bancroft : San Francisco . ( 1872 ) . 
 The Organic and Other General Laws of Oregon , Together with the National Constitution and Other Public Acts and Statutes of the United States : 1843 @-@ 1872 . With Lafayette Lane . E. Semple , State Printer : Portland . ( 1874 ) . 
 History and Progress of Oregon After 1845 : In Continuation of the History of Oregon Before 1845 , as Given in Deady 's Address to the Pioneers at Salem in 1875 . With Hubert Howe Bancroft . 
 <unk> or Willamette . G.H. Himes : Portland . ( 1875 ) . 
 An Address to the Graduating Class of <unk> University . Geo . H. Himes ' Steam Printing Establishment : Portland . ( 1876 ) . 
 " Annual Address to the Oregon Pioneer Association . ( 1876 ) . 
 Oration Delivered at Roseburg . Committee of Arrangements : Roseburg , Or . ( 1877 ) . 
 An Address to the Graduating Class of the University of Oregon . G.H. Himes : Portland . ( 1878 ) . 
 The Dallas Methodist Mission Cases . Opinion of the Court . Himes . ( 1879 ) . 
 " To be or to have " : 1879 : An Address to the Graduating Class of the University of Oregon . Published by order of the Board of Regents : Portland . ( 1879 ) . 
 Commencement Address Delivered at St. Helen 's Hall , Portland , Oregon . Portland . ( 1880 ) . 
 Oration Delivered at Portland by Matthew P. Deady ... July 4 , 1885 . A. G. Walling : Portland . ( 1885 ) . 
 " Towns and cities " : University of Oregon Commencement 1886 Address . Published by order of the Board of Regents : Portland . ( 1886 ) . 
 Addresses by Matthew P. Deady , U. S. District Judge : Centennial Celebration Washington 's Inauguration , Portland , Oregon , April 30 , 1889 , and Fourth of July , Vancouver , Washington , 1889 . Himes Printing Co . : Portland . ( 1890 ) . 
 Pharisee Among Philistines : The Diary of Judge Matthew P. Deady , 1871 @-@ 1892 . Oregon Historical Society : Portland . ( 1975 ) . 
 = Christopher Nolan = 
 Christopher Edward Nolan ( / <unk> / ; born July 30 , 1970 ) is an English @-@ American film director , screenwriter , and producer . He is one of the highest @-@ grossing directors in history , and among the most successful and acclaimed filmmakers of the 21st century . 
 Having made his directorial debut with Following ( 1998 ) , Nolan gained considerable attention for his second feature , Memento ( 2000 ) . The acclaim of these independent films gave Nolan the opportunity to make the big @-@ budget thriller Insomnia ( 2002 ) , and the mystery drama The Prestige ( 2006 ) . He found further popular and critical success with the The Dark Knight Trilogy ( 2005 – 2012 ) , Inception ( 2010 ) and Interstellar ( 2014 ) . His nine films have grossed over US $ 4 @.@ 2 billion worldwide and garnered a total of 26 Oscar nominations and seven awards . Nolan has co @-@ written several of his films with his younger brother , Jonathan Nolan , and runs the production company Syncopy Inc. with his wife Emma Thomas . 
 Nolan 's films are rooted in philosophical , sociological and ethical concepts , exploring human morality , the construction of time , and the malleable nature of memory and personal identity . His body of work is permeated by <unk> elements , temporal shifts , solipsistic perspectives , nonlinear storytelling , practical special effects , and analogous relationships between visual language and narrative elements . 
 = = Life and career = = 
 = = = Early life and career beginnings : 1970 – 97 = = = 
 Nolan was born in London . His English father , Brendan James Nolan , was an advertising executive , and his American mother , Christina ( née Jensen ) , worked as a flight attendant and an English teacher . His childhood was split between London and Chicago , and he has both British and American citizenship . He has an older brother , Matthew , and a younger brother , Jonathan . He began making films at age seven , borrowing his father 's Super 8 camera and shooting short films with his action figures . Growing up , Nolan was a great admirer of Star Wars ( 1977 ) , and around the age of eight he made a stop motion animation homage called Space Wars . His uncle who worked at NASA , building guidance systems for the Apollo rockets , sent him some launch footage . " I re @-@ filmed them off the screen and cut them in , thinking no @-@ one would notice , " Nolan later remarked . From the age of 11 , he aspired to be a professional filmmaker . When Nolan 's family relocated to Chicago during his formative years , he started making films with Adrien and Roko <unk> . He has continued his collaboration with the brothers , receiving a credit for his editorial assistance on their Oscar @-@ nominated documentary Genghis Blues ( 1999 ) . Nolan also worked alongside Roko ( and future Pulitzer Prize winner Jeffrey <unk> ) on documenting a safari across four African countries , organized by the late photojournalist Dan Eldon in the early 1990s . 
 Nolan was educated at Haileybury and Imperial Service College , an independent school in Hertford Heath , Hertfordshire , and later read English literature at University College London ( UCL ) . He chose UCL specifically for its filmmaking facilities , which comprised a Steenbeck editing suite and 16 mm film cameras . Nolan was president of the Union 's Film Society , and with Emma Thomas ( his girlfriend and future producer ) he screened 35 mm feature films during the school year and used the money earned to produce 16 mm films over the summers . During his college years , Nolan made two short films . The first was the surreal 8 mm <unk> ( 1989 ) , which was shown on Image Union ( an independent film and video showcase on the Public Broadcasting Service ) . The second was Larceny ( 1995 ) , filmed over a weekend in black and white with a limited cast , crew , and equipment . Funded by Nolan and shot with the society 's equipment , it appeared at the Cambridge Film Festival in 1996 and is considered one of UCL 's best shorts . After graduation , Nolan directed corporate videos and industrial films . He also made a third short , <unk> ( 1997 ) , about a man chasing an insect around a flat with a shoe , only to discover when killing it that it is a miniature of himself . During this period of his career , Nolan had little or no success getting his projects off the ground ; he later recalled the " stack of rejection letters " that greeted his early forays into making films , adding " there 's a very limited pool of finance in the UK . To be honest , it 's a very clubby kind of place ... Never had any support whatsoever from the British film industry . " 
 = = = Breakthrough : 1998 – 2004 = = = 
 In 1998 Nolan directed his first feature , which he personally funded and filmed with friends . Following depicts an unemployed young writer ( Jeremy Theobald ) who trails strangers through London , hoping they will provide material for his first novel , but is drawn into a criminal underworld when he fails to keep his distance . The film was inspired by Nolan 's experience of living in London and having his flat burgled : " There is an interesting connection between a stranger going through your possessions and the concept of following people at random through a crowd – both take you beyond the boundaries of ordinary social relations " . Following was made on a modest budget of £ 3 @,@ 000 , and was shot on weekends over the course of a year . To conserve film stock , each scene in the film was rehearsed extensively to ensure that the first or second take could be used in the final edit . Co @-@ produced with Emma Thomas and Jeremy Theobald , Nolan wrote , photographed and edited the film himself . Following won several awards during its festival run and was well received by critics ; The New Yorker wrote that it " echoed Hitchcock classics " , but was " leaner and meaner " . On 11 December 2012 , it was released on DVD and Blu @-@ ray as part of the Criterion Collection . 
 As a result of Following 's success , Nolan was afforded the opportunity to make his breakthrough hit Memento ( 2000 ) . During a road trip from Chicago to Los Angeles , his brother Jonathan pitched the idea for " Memento Mori " , about a man with anterograde amnesia who uses notes and tattoos to hunt for his wife 's murderer . Nolan developed a screenplay that told the story in reverse ; Aaron Ryder , an executive for Newmarket Films , said it was " perhaps the most innovative script I had ever seen " . The film was optioned and given a budget of $ 4 @.@ 5 million . Memento , starring Guy Pearce and Carrie @-@ Anne Moss , premiered in September 2000 at the Venice International Film Festival to critical acclaim . Joe Morgenstern of The Wall Street Journal wrote in his review , " I can 't remember when a movie has seemed so clever , strangely affecting and slyly funny at the very same time . " Basil Smith , in the book The Philosophy of Neo @-@ Noir , draws a comparison with John Locke 's An Essay Concerning Human Understanding which argues that conscious memories constitute our identities , a theme which Nolan explores in the film . The film was a box @-@ office success and received a number of accolades , including Academy Award and Golden Globe Award nominations for its screenplay , Independent Spirit Awards for Best Director and Best Screenplay , and a Directors Guild of America ( DGA ) Award nomination . Memento was considered by numerous critics to be one of the best films of the 2000s . 
 Impressed by his work on Memento , Steven Soderbergh recruited Nolan to direct the psychological thriller Insomnia ( 2002 ) , starring Academy Award winners Al Pacino , Robin Williams and Hilary Swank . Warner Bros. initially wanted a more seasoned director , but Soderbergh and his Section Eight Productions fought for Nolan , as well as his choice of cinematographer ( Wally Pfister ) and editor ( Dody Dorn ) . With a $ 46 million budget , it was described as " a much more conventional Hollywood film than anything the director has done before " . A remake of the 1997 Norwegian film of the same name , Insomnia is about two Los Angeles detectives sent to a northern Alaskan town to investigate the methodical murder of a local teenager . It received positive reviews from critics and performed well at the box office , earning $ 113 million worldwide . Film critic Roger Ebert praised the film for introducing new perspectives and ideas on the issues of morality and guilt . " Unlike most remakes , the Nolan Insomnia is not a pale retread , but a re @-@ examination of the material , like a new production of a good play . " Erik <unk> , the director of the original film , was satisfied with Nolan 's version , calling it a " well crafted , smart film ... with a really good director handling it " . Richard Schickel of Time deemed Insomnia a " worthy successor " to Memento , and " a triumph of atmosphere over a none @-@ too @-@ mysterious mystery . " After Insomnia , Nolan planned a Howard Hughes biographical film starring Jim Carrey . He had written a screenplay , but when he learned that Martin Scorsese was making a Hughes biopic ( 2004 's The Aviator ) he reluctantly tabled his script and moved on to other projects . Having turned down an offer to direct the historical epic Troy ( 2004 ) , Nolan worked on adapting Ruth Rendell 's crime novel The Keys to the Street into a screenplay which he planned to direct for Fox Searchlight Pictures , but eventually left the project citing the similarities to his previous films . 
 = = = The Dark Knight Trilogy and mainstream success : 2005 – 13 = = = 
 In early 2003 , Nolan approached Warner Bros. with the idea to make a new Batman film . Fascinated by the character and story , he wanted to make a film grounded in a " relatable " world more reminiscent of a classical drama than a comic @-@ book fantasy . Batman Begins , the biggest project Nolan had undertaken to that point , premiered in June 2005 to both critical acclaim and commercial success . Starring Christian Bale in the title role , along with Michael Caine , Gary Oldman , Morgan Freeman , and Liam Neeson , the film revived the franchise , heralding a trend towards darker films which rebooted ( or retold ) backstories . It tells the origin story of the character from Bruce Wayne 's initial fear of bats , the death of his parents , his journey to become Batman , and his fight against Ra 's al Ghul 's plot to destroy Gotham City . Praised for its psychological depth and contemporary relevance , Kyle Smith of The New York Post called it " a wake @-@ up call to the people who keep giving us cute capers about men in tights . It wipes the smirk off the face of the superhero movie . " Batman Begins was the eighth @-@ highest @-@ grossing film of 2005 in the United States and the year 's ninth @-@ highest @-@ grossing film worldwide . It was nominated for the Academy Award for Best Cinematography and three BAFTA awards . On its 10th anniversary , Forbes published an article describing the film 's influence : " Reboot became part of our modern vocabulary , and superhero origin stories became increasingly en vogue for the genre . The phrase " dark and gritty " likewise joined the cinematic lexicon , influencing our perception of different approaches to storytelling not only in the comic book film genre but in all sorts of other genres as well . " 
 Before returning to the Batman franchise , Nolan directed , co @-@ wrote and produced The Prestige ( 2006 ) , an adaptation of the Christopher Priest novel about two rival 19th @-@ century magicians . In 2001 , when Nolan was in post @-@ production for Insomnia , he asked his brother Jonathan to help write the script for the film . The screenplay was an intermittent , five @-@ year collaboration between the brothers . Nolan initially intended to make the film as early as 2003 , postponing the project after agreeing to make Batman Begins . Starring Christian Bale and Hugh Jackman in the lead roles , The Prestige received critical acclaim ( including Oscar nominations for Best Cinematography and Best Art Direction ) , and earned over $ 109 million worldwide . With a dark and twisting tale , Roger Ebert described it as " quite a movie — atmospheric , obsessive , almost satanic . " Kenneth Turan of the Los Angeles Times called it an ambitious , unnerving melodrama , noting that the film is about " the price that must be paid for immortality in any creative field , about the risk and sacrifice that superlative magic demands . " Following the release of The Prestige , he was considering to direct a feature film adaptation of the British television series The Prisoner ( 1967 ) , but later dropped out of the project . 
 In July 2006 Nolan announced that the follow @-@ up to Batman Begins would be called The Dark Knight . Approaching the sequel , Nolan wanted to expand on the noirish quality of the first film by broadening the canvas and taking on " the dynamic of a story of the city , a large crime story ... where you 're looking at the police , the justice system , the vigilante , the poor people , the rich people , the criminals . " Released in 2008 , to great critical acclaim , The Dark Knight has been cited as one of the best films of the 2000s and one of the best superhero films ever made . Manohla Dargis of The New York Times found the film to be of higher artistic merit than many Hollywood blockbusters : " Pitched at the divide between art and industry , poetry and entertainment , it goes darker and deeper than any Hollywood movie of its comic @-@ book kind . " Ebert expressed a similar point of view , describing it as a " haunted film that leaps beyond its origins and becomes an engrossing tragedy . " The film set a number of box @-@ office records during its theatrical run , earning $ 534 @,@ 858 @,@ 444 in North America and $ 469 @,@ 700 @,@ 000 abroad , for a worldwide total of $ 1 @,@ 004 @,@ 558 @,@ 444 . The Dark Knight is the first feature film shot partially in the 15 / 70 mm IMAX format . At the 81st Academy Awards the film was nominated for eight Oscars , winning two : the Academy Award for Best Sound Editing and a posthumous Academy Award for Best Supporting Actor for Heath Ledger . Nolan was recognised by his peers with nominations from the DGA , Writers Guild of America ( WGA ) , and Producers Guild of America ( PGA ) . 
 After The Dark Knight 's success , Warner Bros. signed Nolan to direct Inception . Nolan also wrote and co @-@ produced the film , described as " a contemporary sci @-@ fi actioner set within the architecture of the mind " . Before being released in theaters , critics like Peter Travers and Lou Lumenick wondered if Nolan 's faith in moviegoers ' intelligence would cost him at the box office . Starring a large ensemble cast led by Leonardo DiCaprio , the film was released on 16 July 2010 , and was a critical and commercial success . Richard Roeper of the Chicago Sun @-@ Times , awarded the film a perfect score of " A + " and called it " one of the best movies of the [ 21st ] century . " Mark Kermode named it the best film of 2010 , stating " Inception is proof that people are not stupid , that cinema is not trash , and that it is possible for blockbusters and art to be the same thing . " Veteran producer John Davis speculated that its success could inspire studios to make more original content ; " I can promise you that heads of studios are already going into production meetings saying we need fresh ideas for summer movies , we want original concepts like Inception that are big and bold enough to carry themselves " . The film ended up grossing over $ 820 million worldwide and was nominated for eight Oscars , including Best Picture ; it won Best Cinematography , Best Sound Mixing , Best Sound Editing and Best Visual Effects . Nolan also received BAFTA , Golden Globe , DGA and PGA Award nominations , as well as a WGA Award for his work on the film . While in post @-@ production on Inception , Nolan gave an interview for These Amazing Shadows ( 2011 ) , a documentary spotlighting film appreciation and preservation by the National Film Registry . He also appeared in Side by Side ( 2012 ) , a documentary about the history , process and workflow of both digital and photochemical film creation . 
 In 2012 , Nolan directed his third and final Batman film , The Dark Knight Rises . Although he was initially hesitant about returning to the series , he agreed to come back after developing a story with his brother and David S. Goyer which he felt would end the series on a high note . The Dark Knight Rises was released on 20 July 2012 to critical acclaim ; Andrew O 'Hehir of Salon called it " arguably the biggest , darkest , most thrilling and disturbing and utterly balls @-@ out spectacle ever created for the screen " , further describing the work as " auteurist spectacle on a scale never before possible and never before attempted " . Christy Lemire of The Associated Press wrote in her review that Nolan concluded his trilogy in a " typically spectacular , ambitious fashion " , but disliked the " overloaded " story and excessive grimness ; " This is the problem when you 're an exceptional , visionary filmmaker . When you give people something extraordinary , they expect it every time . Anything short of that feels like a letdown . " Like its predecessor it performed well at the box office , becoming the thirteenth film in the world to gross over $ 1 @-@ billion . During a midnight showing of the film at the Century 16 cinema in Aurora , Colorado , a gunman opened fire inside the theater , killing 12 people and injuring 58 others . Nolan released a statement to the press expressing his condolences for the victims of what he described as a senseless tragedy . During story discussions for The Dark Knight Rises in 2010 , Goyer told Nolan of his idea to present Superman in a modern context . Impressed with Goyer 's concept , Nolan pitched the idea for Man of Steel ( 2013 ) to Warner Bros , who hired Nolan to produce and Goyer to write . Nolan offered Zack Snyder to direct the film , based on his stylized adaptations of 300 ( 2007 ) and Watchmen ( 2009 ) and his " innate aptitude for dealing with superheroes as real characters " . Starring Henry Cavill , Amy Adams , Kevin Costner , Russell Crowe and Michael Shannon , Man of Steel grossed more than $ 660 million at the worldwide box office , but garnered a divided critical reaction . 
 = = = Large @-@ scale epics : 2014 – present = = = 
 Nolan and Thomas served as executive producers on Transcendence ( 2014 ) , the directorial debut of Nolan 's longtime cinematographer Wally Pfister . Based on a script by Jack Paglen , the film revolves around two scientists who work toward creating a machine that possesses sentience and collective intelligence . Starring Johnny Depp , Rebecca Hall and Paul Bettany , Transcendence was released in theaters on 18 April 2014 to mostly unfavorable reviews . A. A. Dowd of The A.V. Club gave the film a C- rating , pointing out that " [ Pfister ] lacks Nolan 's talent for weaving grand pop spectacle out of cultural anxieties . " 
 In January 2013 it was announced that Nolan would direct , write and produce a science @-@ fiction film entitled Interstellar . The first drafts of the script were written by Jonathan Nolan , and it was originally to be directed by Steven Spielberg . Based on the scientific theories of renowned theoretical physicist Kip Thorne , the film depicted " a heroic interstellar voyage to the farthest borders of our scientific understanding " . Interstellar starred Matthew McConaughey , Anne Hathaway , Jessica Chastain , Bill Irwin , Michael Caine and Ellen Burstyn , and was notably Nolan 's first collaboration with cinematographer Hoyte van Hoytema . Paramount Pictures and Warner Bros. co @-@ financed and co @-@ distributed the project , released on 5 November 2014 to positive reviews and strong box office results , grossing over $ 670 million worldwide . A. O. Scott wrote , in his review for The New York Times , " Interstellar , full of visual dazzle , thematic ambition ... is a sweeping , futuristic adventure driven by grief , dread and regret . " The film was particularly praised for its scientific accuracy , which led to the publication of two scientific papers and the American Journal of Physics calling for it to be shown in school science lessons . Interstellar was named one of the best films of the year by The American Film Institute ( AFI ) . At the 87th Academy Awards , the film won the Best Visual Effects and received four other nominations — Best Original Score , Best Sound Mixing , Best Sound Editing and Best Production Design . Nolan curated the short film <unk> : A Time Capsule From the People of Earth ( 2015 ) . It was specifically inspired by the themes of Interstellar , and " attempts to capture and celebrate the human experience on Earth " . 
 In 2015 , Nolan 's production company Syncopy formed a joint venture with Zeitgeist Films , to release Blu @-@ ray editions of Zeitgeist 's prestige titles . Their first project was Elena ( 2011 ) from director Andrey <unk> . As part of a Blu @-@ ray release of the Quay Brothers animated work , Nolan directed the documentary short Quay ( 2015 ) . He also initiated a theatrical tour , showcasing the Quay 's In Absentia , The Comb and Street of Crocodiles . The program and Nolan 's short received critical acclaim , with Indiewire writing in their review that the brothers " will undoubtedly have hundreds , if not thousands more fans because of Nolan , and for that The Quay Brothers in 35mm will always be one of latter 's most important contributions to cinema " . In 2015 , Nolan also joined The Film Foundation 's board of directors , a non @-@ profit organization dedicated to film preservation . On 7 May , it was announced that Nolan and Martin Scorsese had been appointed by the Library of Congress to serve on the National Film Preservation Board ( <unk> ) as DGA representatives . Nolan and Thomas served as executive producers on Batman v Superman : Dawn of Justice ( 2016 ) , the sequel to Man of Steel and the second installment of the DC Extended Universe . Nolan was involved with the production in an " advisory capacity " . The film was a box office success but received mostly negative reviews from critics . 
 In December 2015 , it was announced that Nolan would direct and produce a film based on World War II , titled Dunkirk , based on his own original screenplay . The film is scheduled to be released on 21 July 2017 . Fionn Whitehead , Tom Hardy , Cillian Murphy , Mark Rylance , Kenneth Branagh , Harry Styles , Jack Lowden and Aneurin Barnard have been confirmed as part of the cast . 
 = = Filmmaking = = 
 = = = Style = = = 
 Regarded an auteur and postmodern filmmaker , Nolan 's visual style often emphasises urban settings , men in suits , muted colors , dialogue scenes framed in wide close @-@ up with a shallow depth of field and modern locations and architecture . He has noted that all of his films are heavily influenced by film noir . Aesthetically , the director favours deep , evocative shadows , documentary @-@ style lighting and natural settings . 
 Nolan has continuously experimented with <unk> elements , temporal shifts , elliptical cutting , solipsistic perspectives , nonlinear storytelling and the merging of style and form . Discussing The Tree of Life ( 2011 ) , Nolan spoke of Terrence Malick 's work and how it has influenced his own approach to style , " When you think of a visual style , when you think of the visual language of a film , there tends to be a natural separation of the visual style and the narrative elements . But with the greats , whether it 's Stanley Kubrick or Terrence Malick or Hitchcock , what you 're seeing is an inseparable , a vital relationship between the image and the story it 's telling " . 
 Drawing attention to the intrinsically manipulative nature of the medium , Nolan uses narrative and stylistic techniques ( notably mise en <unk> and <unk> ) to stimulate the viewer to ask themselves why his films are put together in such ways and why the films provoke particular responses . He often uses editing as a way to represent the characters ' psychological states , merging their subjectivity with that of the audience . For example , in Memento the fragmented sequential order of scenes is to put the audience into a similar experience of Leonard 's defective ability to create new long @-@ term memories . In The Prestige , the series of magic tricks and themes of duality and deception mirror the structural narrative of the film . 
 The protagonists of Nolan 's films are usually psychologically damaged , obsessively seeking vengeance for the death of a loved one . They are often driven by philosophical beliefs , and their fate is ambiguous . In many of his films the protagonist and antagonist are mirror images of each other , a point which is made to the protagonist by the antagonist . Through these <unk> of ideologies , Nolan highlights the ambivalent nature of truth . His writing style incorporates a number of storytelling techniques such as flashbacks , shifting points of view and unreliable narrators . Scenes are often interrupted by the unconventional editing style of cutting away quickly from the money shot ( or nearly cutting off characters ' dialogue ) and crosscutting several scenes of parallel action to build to a climax . Nolan has also stressed the importance of establishing a clear point of view in his films , and makes frequent use of " the shot that walks into a room behind a character , because ... that takes [ the viewer ] inside the way that the character enters " . Nolan uses cinéma @-@ vérité techniques ( such as hand @-@ held camera work ) to convey realism . In an interview at the Film Society of Lincoln Center , he explained his emphasis on realism in The Dark Knight trilogy : " You try and get the audience to invest in cinematic reality . When I talk about reality in these films , it 's often misconstrued as a direct reality , but it 's really about a cinematic reality . " 
 In collaboration with composer David Julyan , Nolan 's films featured slow and atmospheric scores with minimalistic expressions and ambient textures . In the mid @-@ 2000s , starting with Batman Begins , Nolan began working with Hans Zimmer , who is known for integrating electronic music with traditional orchestral arrangements . With Zimmer , the soundscape in Nolan 's films evolved into becoming increasingly more lush and kinetic . For Interstellar , Zimmer and Nolan wanted to move in a new direction : " We had this sort of conversation about — you know nine years we spent in our Batman world . The textures , the music , and the sounds , and the thing we sort of created has sort of seeped into other people 's movies a bit , so it 's time to reinvent . " 
 = = = Method = = = 
 Nolan has described his filmmaking process as a combination of intuition and geometry . " I draw a lot of diagrams when I work . I do a lot of thinking about etchings by Escher , for instance . That frees me , finding a mathematical model or a scientific model . I 'll draw pictures and diagrams that illustrate the movement or the rhythm that I 'm after . " Caltech physicist Kip Thorne compared Nolan 's " deep " intuition to scientists such as Albert Einstein , noting that the director intuitively grasped things non @-@ scientists rarely understand . Nolan deliberately works under a tight schedule during the early stages of the editing process , forcing himself and his editor to work more spontaneously . " I always think of editing as instinctive or impressionist . Not to think too much , in a way , and feel it more . " Nolan also avoids using temp music while cutting his films . 
 He prefers shooting on film to digital video , and opposes the use of digital intermediates and digital cinematography , which he feels are less reliable and offer inferior image quality to film . In particular , the director advocates for the use of higher @-@ quality , larger @-@ format film stock such as anamorphic 35 mm , VistaVision , 65 mm and IMAX . Nolan uses multi @-@ camera for stunts and single @-@ camera for all the dramatic action , from which he will then watch dailies every night ; " Shooting single @-@ camera means I 've already seen every frame as it 's gone through the gate because my attention isn 't divided to multi @-@ cameras . " 
 When working with actors , Nolan prefers giving them the time to perform as many takes of a given scene as they want . " I 've come to realize that the lighting and camera setups , the technical things , take all the time , but running another take generally only adds a couple of minutes . ... If an actor tells me they can do something more with a scene , I give them the chance , because it 's not going to cost that much time . It can 't all be about the technical issues . " Gary Oldman praised the director for providing a relaxed atmosphere on set , adding " I 've never seen him raise his voice to anyone " . He also observed that Nolan would give the actors space to " find things in the scene " , and not just give direction for direction 's sake . 
 Nolan chooses to minimize the amount of computer @-@ generated imagery for special effects in his films , preferring to use practical effects whenever possible , only using CGI to enhance elements which he has photographed in camera . For instance his films Batman Begins , Inception and Interstellar featured 620 , 500 and 850 visual @-@ effects shots , respectively , which is considered minor when compared with contemporary visual @-@ effects epics which may have upwards of 1 @,@ 500 to 2 @,@ 000 VFX shots : " I believe in an absolute difference between animation and photography . However sophisticated your computer @-@ generated imagery is , if it 's been created from no physical elements and you haven 't shot anything , it 's going to feel like animation . There are usually two different goals in a visual effects movie . One is to fool the audience into seeing something seamless , and that 's how I try to use it . The other is to impress the audience with the amount of money spent on the spectacle of the visual effect , and that , I have no interest in " . 
 Nolan shoots the entirety of his films with one unit , rather than using a second unit for action sequences . In that way Nolan keeps his personality and point of view in every aspect of the film . " If I don 't need to be directing the shots that go in the movie , why do I need to be there at all ? The screen is the same size for every shot ... Many action films embrace a second unit taking on all of the action . For me , that 's odd because then why did you want to do an action film ? " A famously secretive filmmaker , Nolan is also known for his tight security on scripts , even going as far as telling the actors of The Dark Knight Rises the ending of the film verbally to avoid any leaks and also keeping the Interstellar plot secret from his composer Hans Zimmer . 
 = = = Themes = = = 
 Nolan 's work explores existential , ethical and epistemological themes such as subjective experience , distortion of memory , human morality , the nature of time , and construction of personal identity . " I 'm fascinated by our subjective perception of reality , that we are all stuck in a very singular point of view , a singular perspective on what we all agree to be an objective reality , and movies are one of the ways in which we try to see things from the same point of view " . Film critic Tom Shone described Nolan 's films as " epistemological thrillers whose protagonists , gripped by the desire for definitive answers , must negotiate mazy environments in which the truth is always beyond their reach . " 
 His characters are often emotionally disturbed and morally ambiguous , facing the fears and anxieties of loneliness , guilt , jealousy , and greed ; in addition to the larger themes of corruption and conspiracy . By grounding " everyday neurosis – our everyday sort of fears and hopes for ourselves " in a heightened reality , Nolan makes them more accessible to a universal audience . Nolan uses his real @-@ life experiences as an inspiration in his work , " From a creative point of view , the process of growing up , the process of maturing , getting married , having kids , I 've tried to use that in my work . I 've tried to just always be driven by the things that were important to me . " Writing for The Playlist , Oliver Lyttelton singled out parenthood as a signature theme in Nolan 's work , adding ; " the director avoids talking about his private life , but fatherhood has been at the emotional heart of almost everything he 's made , at least from Batman Begins onwards ( previous films , it should be said , pre @-@ dated the birth of his kids ) . " While promoting Interstellar , Jessica Chastain said , " At the heart of it , it 's about love ; it 's about a father and daughter ... I think for Chris , being a father , this story was very close to him . " 
 Nolan 's most prominent recurring theme is the concept of time . The director has identified that all of his films " have had some odd relationship with time , usually in just a structural sense , in that I have always been interested in the subjectivity of time . " Writing for Film Philosophy , Emma Bell points out that the characters in Inception do not literally time @-@ travel , " rather they escape time by being stricken in it – building the delusion that time has not passed , and is not passing now . They feel time grievously : willingly and knowingly destroying their experience by creating multiple simultaneous existences . " In Interstellar , Nolan explored the laws of physics as represented in Einstein 's theory of general relativity , identifying time as the film 's antagonist . In Nolan 's films reality is often an abstract and fragile concept . Alec Price and M. Dawson of Left Field Cinema , noted that the existential crises of conflicted male figures " struggling with the slippery nature of identity " is a prevalent theme in Nolan 's work . The actual ( or objective ) world is of less importance than the way in which we absorb and remember , and it is this created ( or subjective ) reality that truly matters . " It is solely in the mind and the heart where any sense of permanency or equilibrium can ever be found . " According to film theorist Todd McGowan , these " created realities " also reveal the ethical and political importance of creating fictions and falsehoods . Nolan 's films typically deceive spectators about the events that occur and the motivations of the characters , but they do not abandon the idea of truth altogether . Instead , " They show us how truth must emerge out of the lie if it is not to lead us entirely astray . " McGowan further argues that Nolan is the first filmmaker to devote himself entirely to the illusion of the medium , calling him a Hegelian filmmaker . 
 The Dark Knight trilogy explored themes of chaos , terrorism , escalation of violence , financial manipulation , utilitarianism , mass surveillance , and class conflicts . Batman 's arc of rising ( philosophically ) from a man to " more than just a man " , is similar to the <unk> Übermensch . The films also explore ideas akin to Jean @-@ Jacques Rousseau 's philosophical glorification of a simpler , more @-@ primitive way of life and the concept of general will . Theorist Douglas Kellner saw the series as a critical allegory about the Bush @-@ Cheney era , highlighting the theme of government corruption and failure to solve social problems , as well as the cinematic spectacle and iconography related to 9 / 11 . 
 In Inception , Nolan was inspired by lucid dreaming and dream incubation . The film 's characters try to embed an idea in a person 's mind without their knowledge , similar to Freud 's theories that the unconscious influences one 's behavior without their knowledge . Most of the film takes place in interconnected dream worlds ; this creates a framework where actions in the real ( or dream ) worlds ripple across others . The dream is always in a state of emergence , shifting across levels as the characters navigate it . Inception , like Memento and The Prestige , uses <unk> storytelling devices and follows Nolan 's " auteur affinity of converting , moreover , converging narrative and cognitive values into and within a fictional story . " Nolan has said movies are " suited towards addressing paradox , <unk> , and worlds @-@ within @-@ worlds " . 
 = = = Influences = = = 
 Nolan has cited Stanley Kubrick , Terrence Malick , Orson Welles , Fritz Lang , Nicolas Roeg , Sidney Lumet , David Lean , Ridley Scott , Terry Gilliam , and John Frankenheimer as influences . Nolan 's personal favorite films include Blade Runner ( 1982 ) , Star Wars ( 1977 ) , The Man Who Would Be King ( 1975 ) , Lawrence of Arabia ( 1962 ) , Chinatown ( 1974 ) , and 2001 : A Space Odyssey ( 1968 ) . In 2013 , Criterion Collection released a list of Nolan 's ten favorite films from its catalog , which included The Hit ( 1984 ) , 12 Angry Men ( 1957 ) , The Thin Red Line ( 1998 ) , The Testament of Dr. Mabuse ( 1933 ) , Bad Timing ( 1980 ) , Merry Christmas Mr. Lawrence ( 1983 ) , For All Mankind ( 1989 ) , Koyaanisqatsi ( 1982 ) , Mr. Arkadin ( 1955 ) , and Erich von Stroheim 's Greed ( 1924 ) ( unavailable on Criterion ) . 
