 Nolan 's habit for employing non @-@ linear storylines was particularly influenced by the Graham Swift novel Waterland , which he felt " did incredible things with parallel timelines , and told a story in different dimensions that was extremely coherent " . He was also influenced by the visual language of the film Pink Floyd – The Wall ( 1982 ) and the structure of Pulp Fiction ( 1994 ) , stating that he was " fascinated with what Tarantino had done " . Dante 's Inferno , the Labyrinth and the Minotaur served as influences for Inception . For Interstellar he mentioned a number of literary influences , including Flatland by Edwin Abbott Abbott , The Wasp Factory by Iain Banks , and Madeleine L 'Engle 's A Wrinkle in Time . Other influences Nolan has cited include figurative painter Francis Bacon , architect Ludwig Mies van der Rohe , graphic artist M. C. Escher and authors Raymond Chandler , James Ellroy , Jim Thompson , Jorge Luis Borges , and Charles Dickens ( A Tale of Two Cities was a major influence on The Dark Knight Rises ) . 
 = = Views on the film industry = = 
 Christopher Nolan is a vocal proponent for the continued use of film stock over digital recording and projection formats , summing up his beliefs as , " I am not committed to film out of nostalgia . I am in favor of any kind of technical innovation but it needs to exceed what has gone before and so far nothing has exceeded anything that 's come before " . Nolan 's major concern is that the film industry 's adoption of digital formats has been driven purely by economic factors as opposed to digital being a superior medium to film , saying : " I think , truthfully , it boils down to the economic interest of manufacturers and [ a production ] industry that makes more money through change rather than through maintaining the status quo . " 
 Shortly before Christmas of 2011 , Nolan invited several prominent directors , including , Edgar Wright , Michael Bay , Bryan Singer , Jon Favreau , Eli Roth , Duncan Jones and Stephen Daldry , to Universal CityWalk 's IMAX theatre for a private screening of the first six minutes of The Dark Knight Rises , which had been shot on IMAX film and edited from the original camera negative . Nolan used this screening in an attempt to showcase the superiority of the IMAX format over digital , and warn the filmmakers that unless they continued to assert their choice to use film in their productions , Hollywood movie studios would begin to phase out the use of film in favor of digital . Nolan explained ; " I wanted to give them a chance to see the potential , because I think IMAX is the best film format that was ever invented . It 's the gold standard and what any other technology has to match up to , but none have , in my opinion . The message I wanted to put out there was that no one is taking anyone 's digital cameras away . But if we want film to continue as an option , and someone is working on a big studio movie with the resources and the power to insist [ on ] film , they should say so . I felt as if I didn 't say anything , and then we started to lose that option , it would be a shame . When I look at a digitally acquired and projected image , it looks inferior against an original negative anamorphic print or an IMAX one . " In 2015 , Nolan and <unk> Dean invited over 30 representatives from leading American film archives , labs and presenting institutions to participate in an informal summit entitled <unk> the Future of Film at the J. Paul Getty Museum . 
 Nolan is also an advocate for the importance of films being shown in large screened cinema theaters as opposed to home video formats , as he believes that , " The theatrical window is to the movie business what live concerts are to the music business — and no one goes to a concert to be played an MP3 on a bare stage . " 
 In 2014 , Christopher Nolan wrote an article for The Wall Street Journal where he expressed concern that as the film industry transitions away from photochemical film towards digital formats , the difference between seeing films in theaters versus on other formats will become trivialized , leaving audiences no incentive to seek out a theatrical experience . Nolan further expressed concern that with content digitized , theaters of the future will be able to track best @-@ selling films and adjust their programming accordingly ; a process that favors large heavily marketed studio films , but will marginalize smaller innovative and unconventional pictures . In order to combat this , Nolan believes the industry needs to focus on improving the theatrical experience with bigger and more beautiful presentation formats that cannot be accessed or reproduced in the home , as well as embracing the new generation of aspiring young innovative filmmakers . 
 = = Recurring collaborators = = 
 Emma Thomas has co @-@ produced all of his films ( including Memento , in which she is credited as an associate producer ) . He regularly works with his brother , screenwriter and producer Jonathan Nolan ( creator of Person of Interest and Westworld ) , who describes their working relationship in the production notes for The Prestige : " I 've always suspected that it has something to do with the fact that he 's left @-@ handed and I 'm right @-@ handed , because he 's somehow able to look at my ideas and flip them around in a way that 's just a little bit more twisted and interesting . It 's great to be able to work with him like that " . The brothers have said they always bounce ideas off each other , even when working on separate projects . 
 The director has worked with screenwriter David S. Goyer on all his comic @-@ book adaptations . Nolan 's former assistant and frequent collaborator , Jordan Goldberg , has executive produced every Nolan @-@ directed film since The Prestige . Wally Pfister was the cinematographer for all of Nolan 's films from Memento to The Dark Knight Rises . He spoke of his relationship with the director : " Mine and Chris ' working relationship is defined , quite simply , by the great respect we have for each other . I 've learned so much from him in terms of him pushing me to find beauty in a simpler method of photography . We 're also very like @-@ minded , we share a sense of humor , and from the beginning I trust his judgement . " 
 Lee Smith has been Nolan 's editor since Batman Begins , with Dody Dorn editing Memento and Insomnia . David Julyan composed the music for Nolan 's early work , while Hans Zimmer and James Newton Howard provided the music for Batman Begins and The Dark Knight . Zimmer scored The Dark Knight Rises , and has worked with Nolan on his subsequent films . Zimmer has said his creative relationship with Nolan is highly collaborative , and that he views Nolan as " the co @-@ creator of the score " . The director has worked with sound designer Richard King and sound mixer Ed Novick since The Prestige . Nolan has frequently collaborated with special @-@ effects supervisor Chris Corbould , stunt coordinator Tom Struthers first assistant director Nilo Otero , and visual effects supervisor Paul Franklin . Production designer Nathan Crowley has worked with him since Insomnia ( except for Inception ) . Nolan has called Crowley one of his closest and most inspiring creative collaborators . Casting director John <unk> has worked on all of Nolan 's films , except Following and Insomnia . 
 Christian Bale , Michael Caine and Cillian Murphy have been frequent collaborators since Batman Begins . Caine is Nolan 's most prolific collaborator , having appeared in six of his films , and is regarded by Nolan to be his " good luck charm " . In return , Caine has described Nolan as " one of cinema 's greatest directors " , comparing him favorably with the likes of David Lean , John Huston and Joseph L. Mankiewicz . Nolan is also known for casting stars from the 1980s in his films , i.e. Rutger Hauer ( Batman Begins ) , Eric Roberts ( The Dark Knight ) , Tom Berenger ( Inception ) , and Matthew Modine ( The Dark Knight Rises ) . Modine said of working with Nolan : " There are no chairs on a Nolan set , he gets out of his car and goes to the set . And he stands up until lunchtime . And then he stands up until they say ' Wrap ' . He 's fully engaged – in every aspect of the film . " 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Nolan is married to Emma Thomas , whom he met at University College London when he was 19 . She has worked as a producer on all of his films , and together they founded the production company Syncopy Inc . The couple have four children and reside in Los Angeles . Protective of his private life , he rarely discusses his personal life in interviews . 
 Nolan prefers not to use a cell phone or an email address , saying " It 's not that I 'm a Luddite and don 't like technology ; I 've just never been interested [ ... ] When I moved to Los Angeles in 1997 , nobody really had cell phones , and I just never went down that path . " He also prohibits use of phones on set . 
 = = Recognition = = 
 Having made some of the most influential and popular films of his time , Nolan 's work has been as " intensely embraced , analyzed and debated by ordinary film fans as by critics and film academics " . According to The Wall Street Journal , his " ability to combine box @-@ office success with artistic ambition has given him an extraordinary amount of clout in the industry . " Geoff Andrew of the British Film Institute ( BFI ) and regular contributor to the Sight & Sound magazine , called Nolan " a persuasively inventive storyteller " , singling him out as one of few contemporary filmmakers producing highly personal films within the Hollywood mainstream . He also pointed out that Nolan 's films are as notable for their " considerable technical virtuosity and visual flair " as for their " brilliant narrative ingenuity and their unusually adult interest in complex philosophical questions . " Scott Foundas of Variety declared him " the premier big @-@ canvas storyteller of his generation . " 
 The filmmaker has been praised by many of his contemporaries , and some have cited his work as influencing their own . Rupert Wyatt , director of Rise of the Planet of the Apes ( 2011 ) , said in an interview that he thinks of Nolan as a " trailblazer ... he is to be hugely admired as a master filmmaker , but also someone who has given others behind him a stick to beat back the naysayers who never thought a modern mass audience would be willing to embrace story and character as much as spectacle " . Michael Mann complimented Nolan for his " singular vision " and called him " a complete auteur " . Nicolas Roeg said of Nolan , " [ His ] films have a magic to them ... People talk about ' commercial art ' and the term is usually self @-@ negating ; Nolan works in the commercial arena and yet there 's something very poetic about his work . " Discussing the difference between art films and big @-@ studio films , Steven Spielberg referred to Nolan 's Dark Knight series as an example of both ; he has described Memento and Inception as " masterworks " . Nolan has also been commended by James Cameron , Guillermo del Toro , Danny Boyle , Wong Kar @-@ Wai , Steven Soderbergh , Sam Mendes , Martin Scorsese , Werner Herzog , Matthew Vaughn , Paul Thomas Anderson , Paul Greengrass , Rian Johnson , and others . Noted film critic Mark Kermode complimented the director for bringing " the discipline and ethics of art @-@ house independent moviemaking " to Hollywood blockbusters , calling him " [ The ] living proof that you don 't have to appeal to the lowest common denominator to be profitable " . 
 In 2007 , Total Film named Nolan the 32nd greatest director of all time , and in 2012 , The Guardian ranked him # 14 on their list of " The 23 Best Film Directors in the World " The following year , Entertainment Weekly named him the 12th greatest working director , writing that " Nolan is the rare director determined to make you , the moviegoer , walk out of the theater after his film and gasp , ' I 've never seen anything like that before . ' His movies are full of twists and riddles , and even his popcorn fare is stuffed with enough brain candy to fill up a graduate school syllabus . " He was ranked No. 2 on the same list in 2011 . A survey of 17 academics held in 2013 , regarding which filmmakers had been referenced the most in essays and dissertations marked over the last five years , showed that Nolan was the second @-@ most studied director in the UK after Quentin Tarantino and ahead of Alfred Hitchcock , Martin Scorsese and Steven Spielberg . In 2015 , Time featured him as one of the " 100 Most Influential People in the World " . 
 Nolan 's work has also been recognised as an influence on video games . In 2013 , the official Xbox magazine named Nolan among the 100 most important people in games , writing that " video games have started to look a bit like his films : gritty and complex " . 
 = = = Awards and honors = = = 
 As a writer and director of a number of science fiction and action films , Nolan has been honored with awards and nominations from the World Science Fiction Society ( Hugo Awards ) , the Science Fiction and Fantasy Writers of America ( Nebula Awards ) , and the Academy of Science Fiction , Fantasy & Horror Films ( Saturn Awards ) . 
 Nolan screened Following at the 1999 Slamdance Film Festival , and won the Black & White Award . In 2014 , he received the first @-@ ever Founder 's Award from the Festival . " Throughout his incredible successes , Christopher Nolan has stood firmly behind the Slamdance filmmaking community . We are honored to present him with Slamdance 's inaugural Founder 's Award , " said Slamdance president and co @-@ founder Peter Baxter . At the 2001 Sundance Film Festival , Nolan and his brother Jonathan won the Waldo Salt Screenwriting Award for Memento , and in 2003 , Nolan received the Sonny Bono Visionary Award from the Palm Springs International Film Festival . Festival executive director Mitch Levine said , " Nolan had in his brief time as a feature film director , redefined and advanced the very language of cinema " . He was named an Honorary Fellow of UCL in 2006 ; a title given out to individuals " who have attained distinction in the arts , literature , science , business or public life " . 
 In 2009 , the director received the Board of the Governors Award from the American Society of Cinematographers . ASC president <unk> Okada said , " Chris Nolan is infused with talent with which he masterfully uses to collaboratively create memorable motion pictures ... his quest for superlative images to tell stories has earned the admiration of our members " . In 2011 , Nolan received the Britannia Award for Artistic Excellence in Directing from the British Academy of Film and Television Arts and the ACE Golden Eddie Filmmaker of the Year Award from American Cinema Editors . That year he also received the Modern Master Award , the highest honor presented by the Santa Barbara International Film Festival . The executive director of the festival Roger Durling stated : " Every one of Nolan 's films has set a new standard for the film community , with Inception being the latest example " . In addition , Nolan was the recipient of the inaugural VES Visionary Award from the Visual Effects Society . In July 2012 he became the youngest director to be honored with a hand @-@ and @-@ footprint ceremony at Grauman 's Chinese Theatre in Los Angeles . 
 The Art Directors Guild ( ADG ) selected Nolan as the recipient of its Cinematic Imagery Award in 2015 , an honor given to those whose body of work has " richly enhanced the visual aspects of the movie @-@ going experience . " He was selected as the 2015 Class Day speaker at Princeton University . " Nolan , more than a film producer , is a thinker and visionary in our age and we are thrilled to have him deliver the keynote address , " said Class Day co @-@ chair Hanna Kim . Nolan was awarded the Empire Inspiration Award at the 20th Empire Awards . The director was also honored with a retrospective at the Walker Art Center in Minneapolis . 
 = = Filmography = = 
 = = = Directorial work = = = 
 ^ I Credited as editor . ^ II Credited as cinematographer . ^ III Credited as composer 
 = = = Other projects = = = 
 = David Morrow ( sports ) = 
 David K. Morrow is an entrepreneur , businessman , and former lacrosse defenseman . He starred as a member of the Princeton Tigers men 's lacrosse team from 1990 through 1993 . He was a three @-@ time United States Intercollegiate Lacrosse Association ( USILA ) All @-@ American ( two @-@ time first team ) . He is a co @-@ founder of the Major League Lacrosse ( MLL ) and an innovator of the titanium lacrosse stick and hockey stick . 
 He is the most recent defenseman to earn the NCAA Lacrosse player of the year award and a two @-@ time NCAA Lacrosse defenseman of the year . He was a three @-@ time first team All @-@ Ivy League selection . In his four @-@ year college career , Princeton won the school 's first NCAA tournament Championship , two Ivy League Championships and earned the school 's first four NCAA Men 's Lacrosse Championship tournament invitations . Following college , he represented Team USA in the 1994 and 1998 World Lacrosse Championships and was named to the 1998 All @-@ World Team . 
 His equipment company , Warrior Sports , is a leading equipment provider to professional , collegiate and interscholastic teams and players . It provides a variety of equipment and has propagated the interest in titanium material for use in lacrosse and ice hockey equipment . He has expanded professional lacrosse from box lacrosse to field lacrosse by co @-@ founding the MLL . 
 = = Background = = 
 Morrow was raised in Troy , Michigan , a suburb of Detroit , where his father operated a tubing shop . He was a defenseman in both lacrosse and hockey . He attended Brother Rice High School in the nearby Bloomfield Township in Oakland County . 
 = = College career = = 
 In his first year at Princeton , he nearly quit the lacrosse team when he realized that , because of his background , he was behind the other players in his understanding of the game . He felt he might be better off focusing on ice hockey . Princeton head coach Bill Tierney convinced him to use his speed to run with the offensive players and to keep his stick in front of them , which encouraged him to adapt his natural speed to the sport . He earned his first start as a sophomore in 1991 . 
 In one season , Morrow broke or bent 25 aluminum lacrosse sticks . After tinkering with the lacrosse stick design at his father 's shop , Morrow introduced a titanium version of the stick in the 1992 NCAA Division I Men 's Lacrosse Championship tournament . Morrow scored two goals in the 16 – 14 semifinals victory over North Carolina in the first game using the titanium stick . Princeton went on to win the tournament , its first NCAA national championship . During the 1993 NCAA Division I Men 's Lacrosse Championship tournament , Morrow shut down Loyola 's Kevin Beach , who had 6 goals in the first round game . He was selected to the All @-@ tournament team that year . During his four years , Princeton earned its first four berths in the NCAA Men 's Lacrosse Championship . The 1992 and 1993 teams were undefeated 6 – 0 outright Ivy League champions . 
 Morrow was a first team USILA All @-@ American Team selection in 1992 and 1993 and a third team selection in 1991 . He was a three @-@ time first team All @-@ Ivy League selection ( 1991 , 1992 and 1993 ) . Morrow is one of only two and the most recent defenseman to earn the Lt. Raymond <unk> Award as the NCAA Lacrosse player of the year award . He twice earned the Schmeisser Award ( 1992 , 1993 ) as the NCAA Lacrosse defenseman of the year . Morrow was selected to the NCAA Lacrosse Silver Anniversary team in 1995 . Morrow was drafted by the Philadelphia Wings during the 1994 National Lacrosse League Entry Draft . He won gold medals at the 1994 and 1998 World Lacrosse Championships and was named to the 1998 World Lacrosse Championship All @-@ World team . 
 = = Professional career = = 
 In 1991 , one of his father 's customers was attempting to modernize the snowshoe with experimental materials such as titanium . At the time , lacrosse sticks were made of aluminum that could get bent during the game . Morrow was breaking and bending sticks at a rapid rate . Morrow noticed titanium was lighter and more durable than aluminum . Thus , at his father 's suggestion , he incorporated it into the lacrosse stick the following year . A year later , he began his own business , selling his first sticks in February 1993 . In 1993 , he was affiliated with the Philadelphia Wings but became a free agent . Morrow was selected for Team USA that would compete at the 1994 World Lacrosse Championship . After being named to the 1998 All World team following the 1998 World Lacrosse Championship , he retired from competitive lacrosse to focus on the business . 
 Today , lacrosse sticks by all manufacturers use titanium , and players at all levels use titanium sticks . Morrow 's idea led to his own business venture , Warrior Lacrosse , which is named after the Brother Rice High School Warriors whom he played for in high school . Morrow sold controlling interest of his company to New Balance in January 2004 but continues to be the President and CEO of Warrior Sports . As of 2001 , Warrior and its 50 employees were the official equipment supplier of the U.S. Men 's National Teams program and the MLL . As of 2007 , Warrior Sports held a 40 % market share in the lacrosse industry . The company had several divisions including Warrior Lacrosse , Brine Sports , and Warrior Sports Canada . In 2005 Warrior sports acquired Innovative Hockey and As of 2007 , it had 600 employees and over 150 National Hockey League players using their composite hockey sticks . Warrior sports sponsors over 200 youth programs , tournaments , and camps each year . It also sponsors professional and intercollegiate teams . In addition , the company puts on clinics and demonstrations around the world . 
 Morrow founded the MLL along with Jake Steinfeld , Timothy Robertson and Jim Davis . He originally served on the prospective league 's advisory committee . In 2001 , Morrow 's newly opened six @-@ team MLL opened as a professional field lacrosse complement to the box lacrosse National Lacrosse League . It opened on June 7 at Homewood Field in Baltimore near the National Lacrosse Hall of Fame . The league has been successful and has been televised on ESPN2 since 2003 . It is under contract to be televised on the network until 2016 . 
 = = Personal = = 
 As of March 2007 , he and his wife Christine , who is also a Princeton alumna , had three young children : three @-@ year @-@ old Samantha , two @-@ year @-@ old Kevin and newborn Jessica . Christine <unk> , a member of Princeton 's Class of 1992 , was a geochemist in Boulder , Colorado when she moved to Detroit to work for Morrow . 
 = Green and golden bell frog = 
 The green and golden bell frog ( Litoria aurea ) , also named the green bell frog , green and golden swamp frog and green frog , is a ground @-@ dwelling tree frog native to eastern Australia . Despite its classification and climbing abilities , it does not live in trees and spends almost all of its time close to ground level . It can reach up to 11 cm ( 4 @.@ 5 in ) in length , making it one of Australia 's largest frogs . 
 Coloured gold and green , the frogs are voracious eaters of insects , but will also eat larger prey , such as worms and mice . Unlike most frogs , they are active at day , although this is mostly to warm in the sun . They tend to be less active in winter except in warmer or wetter periods , and breed in the warmer months . Males reach maturity after around 9 months , while for the larger females , this does not occur until they are two years old . The frogs can engage in cannibalism , and males frequently attack and injure one another if they infringe on one another 's space . 
 Many populations , particularly in the Sydney region , inhabit areas of infrequent disturbance , such as golf courses , disused industrial land , brick pits , and landfill areas . Though once one of the most common frogs in south @-@ east Australia , the green and golden bell frog has endured major population declines , particularly in highland areas , leading to its current classification as globally vulnerable . Its numbers have continued to fall and are threatened by habitat loss and degradation , pollution , introduced species , and parasites and pathogens , including the chytrid Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis . As most of the remaining populations live on private land , the logistics of the conservation effort can be complicated . Despite the situation in Australia , some frog populations have survived with more success in New Zealand and several other Pacific islands , where it has been introduced . However , unfortunately even in these areas the population of green and golden bell has been rapidly declining in the past few decades . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 The common name , " green and golden bell frog " , was first adopted by Harold <unk> in his 1975 book Reptiles and Amphibians of Australia . Before this , its common names were " golden frog " and " golden tree frog " . The green and golden bell frog has many physical and behavioural characteristics representative of ranids , hence its original classification as Rana . It has a pointy snout , long legs , and almost complete toe webbing ; the tympanum is large and distinct ; and the overall body shape is similar to many Rana species . Like many frogs in the Rana genus , green and golden bell frogs are mostly aquatic , and only travel over land during periods of rainfall . It was removed from the genus because of anatomical differences with the family Ranidae . The bone and cartilage structural formations of the green and golden bell frog are closest to those of species in the family Hylidae ; it was therefore reclassified . 
 The green and golden bell frog was first described as Rana aurea by Lesson in 1827 . It has changed classification 20 times ; it was first named Litoria aurea in 1844 by Günther , and changed another 9 times before being named again as Litoria aurea . The specific epithet aurea derived from the Latin aureus for ' golden ' . The species is now classified within the Litoria aurea complex , a closely related group of frogs in the Litoria genus . This complex is scattered throughout Australia : three species occur in south @-@ east Australia , one in northern Australia , and two in Southwest Australia . The complex consists of the green and golden bell frog ( L. aurea ) , growling grass frog ( L. raniformis ) , yellow @-@ spotted bell frog ( L. castanea ) , Dahl 's aquatic frog ( L. <unk> ) , spotted @-@ thighed frog ( L. <unk> ) and the motorbike frog ( L. moorei ) . The ranges of L. raniformis and L. castanea overlap with the green and golden bell frog ; this , as well as physical similarities , may make it difficult to distinguish between the species , and until 1972 , L. raniformis and the green and golden bell frog were regarded as the same , when electrophoretic studies proved them to be distinct . The tablelands bell frog has not been seen since 1980 and may now be extinct , although the large yellow spots present on its thighs help distinguish it from the green and golden bell frog . The growling grass frog , which is very similar to the green and golden bell frog , can only be readily distinguished by raised bumps on the dorsal surface . It has also been proposed that some populations of L. aurea located near <unk> , New South Wales , be a separate subspecies , L. a. <unk> , but this was not accepted . 
 <unk> aurea is equally and most closely related to <unk> <unk> and L. <unk> . A <unk> fixation technique using serum <unk> has indicated the species closest to L. aurea is L. <unk> . <unk> immunological distance data suggest no differentiation between the two , and the green and golden bell frog <unk> separated from the other two species about 1 @.@ 1 million years ago . A 1995 study of protein variations showed four of 19 protein systems had variation and only two had differentiation . Scientists believe the different species can still hybridise , as their distribution areas still overlap , and both L. raniformis and L. aurea have been seen sharing ponds in the Gippsland area of Victoria . However , little evidence of hybridisation actually occurring has been found . Although there have been reports of frogs of mixed appearance in Gippsland , analysis of proteins and sera of the frogs showed two distinct species . Samples in other area of distribution have shown no evidence of hybridisation in spite of cohabitation . 
 = = Distribution = = 
 The green and golden bell frog is native to south @-@ eastern Australia . Before its decline in population , its distribution ranged from Brunswick Heads , in northern New South Wales , to East Gippsland , in Victoria , and west to Bathurst , Tumut and the Australian Capital Territory . 
 The bell frog 's current distribution now ranges from Byron Bay , in northern New South Wales , to East Gippsland , in Victoria ; populations mostly occur along the coast . In New South Wales , it has declined severely in range and abundance since the 1960s , although no similar declines have been reported in Victoria . In New South Wales , it has disappeared from highland areas above 250 m ( 820 ft ) , except for a population in Captains Flat . A study of populations along coastal New South Wales indicated many populations were very small , usually of fewer than 20 adults . According to a 1996 study , six populations of more than 300 frogs are known : two in the Sydney metropolitan area , two in the Shoalhaven , and two in the New South Wales mid @-@ north coast . There are now approximately only 40 sites in total where it is found , most of which are in the Sydney area . The green and golden bell frog has disappeared from an estimated 90 % of its former range . Some specimens were apparently found in Armidale , but it turned out to be a misidentification of L. castanea . The declines in Victoria have been more modest and mostly in at inland areas where habitats have disappeared . 
 The green and golden bell frog survives in some areas of Sydney , such as the <unk> at Sydney Olympic Park ( the proposed site for the tennis courts for the 2000 Sydney Olympics ) . When the green and golden bell frog was found there , the tennis courts were built elsewhere , and the population has since been monitored . This frog has become an unofficial mascot for the Homebush Bay area . It has also been introduced to places in Sydney in its natural habitat , without much success . 
 The green and golden bell frog occurs on three islands off the east coast of Australia : <unk> and Broughton Islands off Port Stephens , and Bowen Island at Jervis Bay . It was introduced to New Zealand in the 1860s , and it is now common on the part of North Island north of Rotorua . In most places , it is the only frog species in the vicinity . However , recent declines have been reported , suspected to be due to predatory fish . It was also introduced to the Pacific island countries of New Caledonia and Vanuatu in the 19th century , and has since become common there . 
 No discernible variation in size or appearance in green and golden bell frogs between different geographic areas is found . Fluctuations in size and appearance between different populations are outweighed by variations within the populations themselves . Females are more likely to be found away from breeding sites , while the opposite applies for males . <unk> are divided in roughly equal numbers between males and females , while juvenile frogs are observed less often than their mature counterparts , although scientists are not sure whether this is due to lower abundance or increased reclusiveness . 
 = = Description = = 
 The green and golden bell frog is a large , stout frog ; adults range from 4 @.@ 5 to 11 cm ( 1 @.@ 8 to 4 @.@ 3 in ) in length ; typical specimens measure 6 to 8 cm ( 2 @.@ 5 to 3 in ) . The green and golden bell frog is therefore one of the largest Australian frogs . Mature males are generally smaller than mature females , and the colour on their dorsal surfaces differ greatly from females . It may be almost completely green , of shades from dark pea @-@ green to bright emerald , green with metallic , brassy , dull copper @-@ brown , or gold markings ; or almost completely bronze . Generally , females tend to have more green patches than males . During the cooler months ( May – August ) , when the frogs are inactive , colouration may darken almost to black . They can also darken in this way by simply staying in a dark place for a few minutes , and the colour can also change during the frogs ' lifetimes . 
 A creamy @-@ white or pale yellow stripe , bordered above with gold and below with black , extends from behind the eye , across the typically copper @-@ coloured tympanum to the groin . This stripe rises to form a dorsolateral fold towards the groin . Another stripe of the same colour begins below the eye and continues to the shoulder . The abdomen is cream or white , and has a coarsely granular texture . The legs are green , bronze , or a combination of both , and the inside thigh and groin are blue @-@ green . Mature males develop a yellowish colouration to the vocal sacs on their throats . The tympanum is distinct and ovular in shape , and the species has enlarged toe discs to aid in climbing . As this species is often found in water , the fingers are free from webbing , while the toes are almost completely webbed . When in breeding condition , males develop nuptial pads on their thumbs , which are used to grip females during mating . These are coloured brown during the breeding season , but are inconspicuous and paler during the rest of the year . During the breeding season , females develop a blueish hue on their feet , while males ' legs turn rusty orange . 
 = = Ecology and behaviour = = 
 As a member of the tree frog family , the green and golden bell frog spends much time basking in the sun on vegetation , rocks , and reeds , usually near water , or hopping around between such places . Unlike most frog species , it is often active during the day . When handled , this species secretes a slimy acrid mucus , which consists of 17 <unk> peptides . Thirteen of these show broad @-@ spectrum antibiotic and anticancer activity . The secretion makes the frog slippery and hard to grip , and is poisonous to some other species of frogs , so it is a useful defensive tool for green and golden bell frogs . Males often fight one another if they come within 1 m of each other , frequently leading to injuries . 
 The green and golden bell frog has been detected in a wide range of habitats . It is generally associated with coastal swamps , wetlands , marshes , dams , ditches , small rivers , woodlands , and forests , but populations have also been found at former industrial sites ( for instance , the <unk> ) . It has even been found in human vessels such as bathtubs . The requirements of its habitat have been difficult to determine , for it has been found in a wide range of water bodies except fast @-@ flowing streams . It is most typically found in short @-@ lived freshwater ponds that are still , shallow , unshaded , and unpolluted , and it tends to avoid waters that contain predatory fish , whether native or introduced . However , it is most often found in areas that have been affected by human habitation . The frog prefers water bodies that support emergent vegetation , such as reeds and bullrushes , for basking , and winter habitats consist of available shelters around the breeding site , which can be vegetation , rocks , rubbish , or human debris and discarded building materials . Grassy habitats are usually close at hand to provide suitable terrestrial feeding grounds . It prefers waterways with a substrate of sand , rock , or clay , and can tolerate a wide range of water <unk> , pH and oxygen levels , and temperatures , although these can hamper physical growth . Although its legs provide much grip , the frog does not choose to climb trees or live up them to any significant extent . It spends most of its time within 10 cm of the ground and rarely ventures more than a metre above the ground . The green and golden bell frog also has the ability to sit still for several minutes . 
 The green and golden bell frog can travel far in a single day or night ; distances of 1 @.@ 0 to 1 @.@ 5 km have been recorded . Tagging experiments have shown that some can move up to 3 km in total , and that some travel several kilometres from the closest breeding habitat . However , the species evidently tends to return to or remain at an identified site , provided the habitat stays appropriate for its needs , or else it will move away . The green and golden bell frog also favours areas with the greatest habitat complexity , and as such , this is a core component of habitat @-@ based strategies to protect the species . In general , the frogs stay within areas of 100 – 700 m2 The frog is well equipped for survival on land . It can rehydrate by absorbing moisture through its ventral skin , and evaporative water loss occurs at a rate , indicative of a watertight <unk> very low Some have been observed up to 400 m from the nearest body of water . 
 During the winter months , the frog tends to be inactive , staying in one place , whereas it moves around during the warmer months to search for food and mating partners . During winter , the frog does become active for brief periods during warm or wet weather . In cold conditions , the frogs are thought to hibernate , based on observations of some being uncovered in a " torpid " state , but this has yet to be proven with rigorous physiological studies . Although the frog is active during the day , this is restricted to leaving its shelter to sunbathe . It tends to not actively feed or forage during the day , hunting insects only if they move into its vicinity . 
 The green and golden bell frog 's reproduction depends on salinity and water temperature . Salinity affects tadpoles ' development and metamorphosis , and breeding is significantly slowed for ponds that measure 20 ° C ( 68 ° F ) or below . The tadpoles can tolerate salinity levels of six parts per thousand ( ppt ) without any apparent effects , while salinity of 8 ppt or higher decreases growth rates and increases mortality rates . On the other hand , salinity levels of at least 1 – 2 ppt can be beneficial to the green and golden bell frog because this kills pathogens such as the chytrid fungus . The pH of the pond is not found to affect the likelihood of the eggs to hatch for values between 4 and 10 . 
 = = = Diet and predators = = = 
 The voracious adults have very broad diets , including insects such as crickets , larvae , mosquito <unk> , dragonflies , earthworms , cockroaches , flies , and grasshoppers . They are also known to eat freshwater crayfish and slugs , and other frogs , even of the same species . They have a strong tendency for cannibalism , and frequently these in the same enclosure devour each other . Studies and trials in the wild have shown cannibalism also occurs in the wild . 
 The tadpoles feed on detritus , algae , and bacteria . Tadpoles in more advanced phases of development may show a preference for vegetable matter , but also scavenge or become carnivorous on aquatic life . Captive tadpoles have eaten boiled lettuce and pet food in pellet form . If population density is high , tadpoles have cannibalised one another . 
 In captivity the green and golden bell frog is known to feed on crickets , fruit flies , maggots , silkworms , domestic flies , beetles , mealworms , larvae , slaters , cockroaches , molluscs , plague locusts , spiders , water snails , earthworms , and mice . A case of a small tiger snake being eaten has also been reported . Captive frogs have a habit of not responding to stationary food items , which has helped to form the belief that the frog will eat most things that move . 
 The hunting habits of the frogs change depending on their growth phase and thus physical size . Smaller , still @-@ growing green and golden bell frogs tend to hunt small , especially flying , insects , often jumping to catch their prey . Adult frogs appear to show a distinct preference for larger , land @-@ based insects and frogs , although they also eat aquatic prey , such as tadpoles and other aquatic organisms . Recently metamorphosed individuals have also been seen enter to shallow water to capture mosquito <unk> . The relative proportion that various prey make up in the frog 's diet is not known . In observed studies of captive frogs , they eat less in cooler periods of the year , and frogs in the wild ate less during breeding periods . Younger frogs were also seen to forage longer into the warmer months to build up food stocks than fully matured frogs . 
 Natural predators include wading birds , such as reef egrets , white @-@ faced herons , white ibises and swamp harriers . Other predators include snakes , skinks , red foxes , tortoises , and eels and other fish , such as redfin perch and European carp , several varieties of gudgeon , and a range of invertebrate predators , such as the large brown mantis . Predation on adult frogs has been recorded for the red @-@ bellied black snake , tiger snake , laughing kookaburra , and sacred kingfisher ; wading birds and other snakes , such as the green tree snake and the copperhead snake , are also believed to be predators of the frog . The relative magnitude of the various predatorial threats to the frog and its tadpoles is not known . Before the frog became rare , and when subsistence lifestyles were more common , it was hunted and eaten by Australian Aborigines . It was also used in dissection demonstrations in biology classes , and caught by humans for feeding pet reptiles . 
 = = = Reproduction = = = 
 The green and golden bell frog breeds in the warmer months from October to March , although some cases have been recorded earlier at the end of winter . Reproduction appears to be influenced by geography . More southerly and highland populations appear to have a shorter window for breeding than their more northerly and lowland counterparts . The latter appear commence breeding earlier and end later than the former group . During the breeding season , males call , usually while floating in the water , but sometimes on vegetation at the side of a pond , mainly at night . They do so with a deep growl that has been described as a four @-@ part " walk @-@ walk sound " — likened to the sound of a motorbike changing gears . Males have been found to respond to recordings of the call , and this is why entire groups of males will then call in unison . Males are also more likely to call under certain temperature ranges , 16 – 23 ° C for water temperature , and 14 – 25 ° C in the air . Calling is also more likely immediately after rain has occurred . 
 Males appear to reach maturity at around 45 – 50 mm , at between 9 and 12 months , and at this size begin to develop a grey to brownish yellow wash beneath the chin . This indicates the development of a vocal sac and thus an ability to commence calling behaviour . Females reach sexual maturity at two years ; those smaller than 65 mm are not seen in amplexus ; this length is not reached until the second season after metamorphosis . The frog is not of a type that only breeds once . Females can shed up to 26 % of their weight when spawning , while males have also been seen to lose weight during breeding , because they are eating less . The weight lost during the breeding season is typically regained from January to September . 
 <unk> between the male and female occurs mainly in water , but sometimes at substantial distances away on dry land . Observations of breeding sites have shown the males linger around the courting area for much longer times , while females mostly stay at other places to find food before meeting the males there . During amplexus , the males grab the females near their armpits after climbing on their backs . In the wild , amplexus usually takes between 10 minutes and five days . Artificially induced amplexus in the laboratory has been observed to last 50 hours , but there have been reports of five days . Sometimes , amplexus will not result in eggs being laid . 
 The frogs may move up to 100 m during amplexus before the female lays her eggs . During the laying of the eggs , the pair of frogs remain in amplexus and the male is assumed to fertilise the eggs with his sperm . Males are also seen to paddle their rear legs during this time , which is speculated to accelerate fertilisation . The egg @-@ laying and fertilisation process takes around five minutes . An average of 5 @,@ 000 eggs are deposited amongst aquatic vegetation in a gelatinous mass ; however , a clump of 11 @,@ 682 has been recorded . The female moves around while depositing , leaving a trail of eggs that sometimes entangles upon itself . Initially , the mass floats , but sinks up to 12 hours after laying , or when disturbed . The eggs are distinct from those of other frog species ; they are 2 – 2 @.@ 5 mm wide upon deposition and are bicoloured , black at one end and white at the other . They immediately begin to expand , quickly reaching around 4 mm across , before sinking . When first laid , they float with the black pointing up , but after sinking , the orientation becomes disordered . Two to five days later , the tadpoles hatch out , but the process can take only a few hours on occasions . The hatching rate varies between 46 and 77 % , and peaks at 22 ° C. Hatching is less likely in acidic waters , although alkaline conditions do not lead to a lower rate compared to neutral conditions . Given the large number of eggs that hatch per female and given the scarcity of mature frogs , tadpole survival rates are believed to be very low . 
 Upon hatching , the tadpoles are around 2 @.@ 5 – 3 mm in snout @-@ vent length ( SVL ) and about 5 – 6 mm including the tail . Tadpoles in captivity increase exponentially over time in total length ; their SVL increases from about 3 to about 9 mm within five weeks , and it triples again in the next five weeks . In all , the growth rate is 0 @.@ 2 mm per day in the first five weeks . The tadpoles of the green and golden bell frog are large , reaching 80 mm ( 3 @.@ 1 in ) in length , but size varies greatly and most are much shorter . The body is usually as wide across as it is deep . The fin has a yellow tinge and is considerably arched . The musculature is moderate and tapers to a fine point , as does the fin . The body wall is translucent yellow with darker areas over the abdomen . Just before its limbs form , the tadpole begins to develop the greenish colouration of the adult . Tadpoles usually swim within 30 cm of the water surface , or remain stationary at the bottom . They often move together in groups akin to schools of fish . 
 Towards the end of the tadpole phase , hind legs appear , followed by front limbs , and the phase ends when the front limbs are developed . This normally occurs between October and April due to the breeding season , but tadpoles been observed in the wild throughout the year , suggesting some tadpoles overwinter ; this has been seen to occur for captive tadpoles . The length of the tadpole stage , in the wild and in captivity , is usually between 10 and 12 weeks , but can range from five weeks to a year . The slower @-@ growing tadpoles usually progress during winter , as there is a positive correlation between growth rates and temperatures . Variation in growth rate across pH values of 4 , 7 and 9 was insignificant . In the first four weeks , there was no significant dependence of the growth rate across the 18 – 26 ° C range , but from this point on , growth was significantly hindered at 18 ° C. At the beginning of the <unk> stage , all limbs are present and developed , along with a tail . During this phase , the tail is resorbed , and the only other visible change is the spiracle closing . <unk> tadpoles typically have a SVL of 22 – 28 mm , and will complete metamorphosis between two and 11 months , depending on the temperature of the water and available food . The process is slowed at low temperatures , but generally takes between three and eight days after the tadpole stage is complete . Breeding occurs in a significantly higher proportion of sites where no predatory fish are present , and water bodies are ephemeral rather than permanent . Populations in Victoria , however , have been recorded as breeding in permanent ponds as readily as they do in ephemeral ponds . 
 <unk> resemble the adults and average about 2 @.@ 6 cm ( 1 @.@ 0 in ) in length . Recently metamorphosed frogs have been observed to rapidly leave the breeding site , especially when foraging habitat is nearby , and less so if food is not available away from the area . The tendency to migrate is often attributed to cannibalism practised by larger frogs on those that are still developing . After metamorphosis is complete , the frog is around the same length . The juveniles initially grow rapidly , reaching 45 mm within two months , 50 – 60 mm within half a year , before growth <unk> months , and increase in length more slowly after that . Once sexual maturity is reached , the frogs ' physical growth is very slow . 
 <unk> weigh about 2 g , while the largest adults can reach 50 g . Individual frogs can vary substantially in body weight due to changes in the amount of stored fat , recent eating , and egg formation . While it is known to live 10 – 15 years in captivity , the frog 's lifespan in the wild is not well understood . 
 = = Conservation status = = 
 The numbers of green and golden bell frogs are estimated to have declined by more than 30 % in the past 10 years . It is listed as globally and nationally vulnerable , and as endangered under the New South Wales Threatened Species Conservation Act , 1995 . Although it is only classified as vulnerable at national level , the National Frog Action Plan classifies the green and golden bell frog as endangered . In contrast to Australia , the frogs are abundant in New Zealand and classified as feral and unprotected . 
 Many factors are thought to be responsible for the dramatic decline of this species in Australia , including habitat fragmentation , erosion and sedimentation of soil , insecticides and fertilisers contaminating water systems , the introduction of predatory fish , and alteration of drainage regimes . Population declines are closely related to the introduction of the eastern mosquitofish ( <unk> <unk> ) , a species native to North America that was introduced to control mosquito larvae . Laboratory studies have demonstrated the eggs and tadpoles of the green and golden bell frog are extremely susceptible to predation by this fish , and in 77 of the 93 sites in New South Wales where the green and golden bell frog was known to have disappeared before 1990 , eastern mosquitofish were found to be present . The frogs have been known to inhabit waters containing the fish , but breeding is rarely successful there , pointing to the fish 's voracious eating of eggs and tadpoles . The fish are not yet present in eastern Victoria , where green and golden bell frog numbers have remained solid , but the fish likely will spread to rivers there , possibly inflicting heavy losses on the frogs . 
 Other factors thought to affect this species include predation by introduced mammals , such as cats and foxes , changes to water quality at breeding sites , herbicide use , and loss of habitat through the destruction of wetlands . The amphibian chytrid fungus appears to have led to at least some of the decline in numbers , but the relative importance of the various factors is unclear . The frogs may have become more susceptible to chytrid rather than the fungus being more common . The genetic pool of the frogs has been found to be relatively small , attributed to habitat destruction , which has confined the smaller groups of frogs to isolated pockets and increased the incidence of inbreeding . This has led to proposals for frog populations to be mixed by human intervention in an attempt to reduce negative genetic effects and boost survival rates . 
 The cannibalism of the frog has been speculated to cause its decline in some areas , because the smaller tadpoles can be toxic . Other postulated causes of the decline include increased ultraviolet radiation due to the hole in the ozone layer , global warming , and increased drought . The first theory was tested and the results were inconclusive . Global warming is not thought to be a credible cause , as the extremities of the frog 's range have not changed , while declines in population have occurred in both dry and wetter areas . 
 The green and golden bell frog has been the subject of much research and monitoring , important to improving its conservation . Research focuses on the development of management measures to keep the introduced mosquitofish under control . These include poisoning the fish , but the waterways are large and trials have given mixed results . Predators of the mosquitofish have also been tried . Other strategies may allow for the development and improvement of suitable habitat , and to increase the reproductive success of the species . Parallel to these measures , community awareness programmes have also been proposed . One difficulty in protecting the frog is that only 20 % of the known populations in New South Wales since 1990 occur in conservation parks . Of the eight populations that occur in conservation parks , only five are wholly located within them and one of these is not breeding . There have been calls for legislation to be introduced to stop habitat degradation on private land to prevent detrimental effects to the frogs . Many proposed developments have been subjected to legal action to protect the habitat , and some communities have started " Friends of the Green and Golden Bell Frog " action groups . As public awareness has increased , documentary and news segments on the deteriorating situation have become more frequent and references to the frog in environmental logos and artworks have increased . The effort to increase public consciousness of the green and golden bell frog has also been aided because its colours are the same as the national colours . Restrictions on logging close to areas inhabited by the frogs have been put in place . As green and golden bell frogs are mostly observed in environments disturbed by humans , targeted environmental interference is seen as a possible means of enhancing habitats . 
 In 1998 , a captive @-@ breeding program was set up by the herpetofauna staff at Taronga Zoo in Sydney , sponsored by the <unk> Frog Focus . The purpose of the program was to help preserve declining populations of green and golden bell frogs in the Sydney region . It involved the captive breeding of wild frogs and releasing large numbers of tadpoles back into the wild , habitat restoration , and monitoring after releases . The program was initially titled " Frog Focus Botany " , as Botany was the original focus site . Thousands of tadpoles were released into a site in Sir Joseph Banks Reserve and postrelease monitoring was done by the local community . It was also the first time that school students had been involved with endangered species monitoring . The program has since branched off into several other areas . Between 1998 and 2004 , tadpoles were released into specially designed ponds and dams on Long Reef Golf Course at Collaroy in northern Sydney , with little success . Although green and golden bell frogs had previously been located in the area , the population had since been lost . Mature male bell frogs are occasionally found there ; however , a permanent breeding population has yet to be established . An attempted reintroduction at Marrickville in inner @-@ Sydney has failed due to chytridiomycosis . 
 = Cairanoolithus = 
 Cairanoolithus is an oogenus of dinosaur egg which is found in Southwestern Europe . The eggs are large ( 15 – 19 centimetres or 5 @.@ 9 – 7 @.@ 5 inches in diameter ) and spherical . Their outer surface is either smooth , or covered with a subdued pattern of ridges interspersed with pits and grooves . Multiple fossil egg clutches are known but the nest structure is unclear . 
 The parent of Cairanoolithus is probably some kind of non @-@ ornithopod ornithischian , possibly the nodosaurid Struthiosaurus . 
 The eggs were first named in 1994 , when the two oospecies were classified in distinct oogenera as Cairanoolithus dughii and Dughioolithus roussetensis . They are now considered to belong in a single oogenus , possibly even a single oospecies . Though it has been classified as a <unk> , Cairanoolithus is usually placed in its own oofamily , Cairanoolithidae . 
 = = Description = = 
 Cairanoolithus eggs are spherical and fairly large , measuring 15 – 19 cm ( 5 @.@ 9 – 7 @.@ 5 in ) in diameter . The outer surface is smooth or covered with a subdued netlike pattern of ridges , interspersed with pits and grooves ( <unk> ornamentation ) . The eggshells are made up of partially interlocking column @-@ shaped shell units and range from 1 @.@ 10 to 2 @.@ 65 mm ( 0 @.@ 043 to 0 @.@ 104 in ) thick . 
 Several egg clutches of C. dughii are known , containing as many as 25 fossilized eggs . Unfortunately , taphonomical alterations ( changes during the fossilization process ) make it difficult to determine the original structure of the nest . Cousin ( 2002 ) hypothesized that Cairanoolithus eggs were laid on the surface of the ground , possibly buried beneath a mound of plant matter . Tanaka et al . ( 2015 ) noted that the shell had a high rate of water vapor conductance . Therefore , they concluded that Cairanoolithus nests were covered by organic or inorganic material , similar to modern eggs with high vapor conductance . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 Two oospecies of Cairanoolithus have been described : 
 Cairanoolithus dughii is the type oospecies . At 1 @.@ 57 – 2 @.@ 41 mm ( 0 @.@ 062 – 0 @.@ 095 in ) , its eggshell is slightly thicker than that of C. roussetensis . It has slender , partially fused columnar eggshell units . Their outer surface is almost without ornamentation , and the inner surface is covered with hollows once filled by organic cores . C. dughii 's eggshell exhibits an angusticanaliculate pore system , i.e. its pores are long , narrow , and straight . 
 Cairanoolithus roussetensis , which was formerly classified in its own oogenus , Dughioolithus , can be distinguished from C. dughii by its thinner eggshell ( measuring 1 @.@ 11 – 1 @.@ 77 mm or 0 @.@ 044 – 0 @.@ 070 in thick ) , its broader eggshell units , and the relative prominence of its ornamentation . Like C. dughii , C. roussetensis typically has an angusticanaliculate pore system , though some specimens have <unk> pores , meaning they have variable diameter across their length . 
 Some authors consider the two oospecies to be synonymous . Cousin ( 2002 ) argued that the differences between them were due to intraspecific variation or due to taphonomy . He also described several eggshell fragments that possibly belong to an additional distinct oospecies of Cairanoolithus , however these specimens were referred to C. roussetensis by Selles and Galobart ( 2015 ) . 
 = = Classification = = 
 While it was formerly considered a <unk> , Cairanoolithus is now considered to belong its own monotypic oofamily , Cairanoolithidae . It belongs to the <unk> @-@ <unk> basic type , a group including sauropod eggs and ornithischian eggs , but <unk> excluding theropod eggs . 
 The cladistic analysis done by Selles and Galobart in 2015 recovered Cairanoolithus as a sister taxon to the clade of ornithopod eggs <unk> , <unk> , and <unk> . Therefore , they considered it likely that Cairanoolithus belongs to a non @-@ ornithopod ornithischian dinosaur . 
 = = = Parentage = = = 
 Since embryos are unknown in <unk> eggs , the identity of their parent is uncertain . They have long been considered to be eggs of titanosaurs or ornithopods ( like Rhabdodon ) . However , numerous characteristics distinguish Cairanoolithus from sauropod eggs ( <unk> <unk> and <unk> ) , even though they bear superficial similarities in size and shape . Cairanoolithus 's columnar eggshell units are quite unlike the fan @-@ shaped ones seen in <unk> , <unk> , or <unk> . Also , its subdued ornamentation contrasts strongly with the heavily sculpted eggshells of sauropod eggs , and it has a different pore system . Eggs of ornithopods ( <unk> and <unk> ) , on the other hand , show much closer similarity to <unk> in ornamentation and pore system . However , ornithopod eggs are typically much smaller , and the crystal structure of their eggshell units is distinct . 
 The cladistic analysis by <unk> and Galobart in 2015 supported an ornithischian parentage . Late Cretaceous ornithischians from Southwestern Europe are restricted to <unk> and the nodosaurid Struthiosaurus . When <unk> and Galobart analyzed the <unk> of Rhabdodon ( the largest known <unk> ) and Struthiosaurus , they found that Rhabdodon could not have laid eggs as big as Cairanoolithus . On the other hand , even though Struthiosaurus was relatively small , the unique orientation of its ischia would have easily allowed it to lay eggs as large as a 19 cm ( 7 @.@ 5 in ) <unk> egg . However , interpreting Cairanoolithus as the eggs of a nodosaur does raise the question of why Cairanoolithus or similar eggs have not been found in areas with a greater nodosaur abundance . 
 = = Distribution = = 
 Cairanoolithus is native to Southwestern Europe , including southern France and northern Iberia . Its fossils date to the late Campanian to early Maastrichtian . They are usually found in the Aix @-@ en @-@ Provence Basin below the <unk> Limestone . C. dughii is from the La <unk> site in Bouches du Rhône , France , from <unk> @-@ Grand <unk> and from the <unk> Basin . C. roussetensis is found in the northern part of Iberia and from southern France ( in Rousset Village , <unk> @-@ Crete du <unk> , the <unk> Basin , and <unk> @-@ <unk> ) . 
 = = Paleoecology = = 
 The Late Cretaceous ecosystems of Europe ( which was then an island archipelago ) show complex mixing of taxa originating from Africa , Asia , and North America . In Southwestern Europe , Cairanoolithus co @-@ occurs with numerous other types of fossil eggs ; <unk> is particularly common , but theropod eggs such as <unk> and the ornithopod egg <unk> are also present . Dinosaur body fossils are also common , including nodosaurids , <unk> , titanosaurs , dromaeosaurids , basal iguanodontians , hadrosaurids , <unk> , and coelurosaurs . Other vertebrates include bony fish , squamates , <unk> turtles , <unk> , and mammals . 
 = = History = = 
 The Aix Basin was first excavated for fossils in 1869 by French paleontologist Philippe <unk> . In the 1950s , Raymond <unk> and Francois <unk> , a pair of French paleontologists working for the Museum d 'Histoire Naturelle Aix @-@ en @-@ Provence , extensively studied the basin 's fossil eggshells . They divided the eggs they had found into ten different types , but they did not describe them in detail . In the 1970s and 1980s , further work was done by the French paleontologist P. <unk> and the German paleontologist H. K. Erben . 
 In M. M. Penner devised one of the early classification schemes for egg fossils in his 1983 doctoral thesis . He was the first to recognize the eggs now named Cairanoolithus as a distinct type ; under his classification scheme , they were called " Group 2 " . In 1994 , French paleontologists M. Vianey @-@ Liaud , P. <unk> , O. <unk> and C. <unk> described them under the modern parataxonomic system as Cairanoolithus dughii and " Dughioolithus " roussetensis . They did not assign either of them to any oofamily , but both oogenera were classified in the oofamily <unk> by the Russian paleontologist Konstantin Mikhailov in 1996 . Following further discoveries in 2001 , <unk> Garcia and Monique Vianey @-@ Liaud <unk> the two oogenera . In 2002 , French paleontologist R. Cousin took a step further and synonymized the two oospecies . 
 In 2012 , the first Cairanoolithus fossils discovered outside of France were first reported by Albert G. Selles in his PhD thesis at Universitat de Barcelona , in which he also proposed that Cairanoolithus be moved into its own oofamily . Three years later , Selles and Angel Galobart published a comprehensive reanalysis of Cairanoolithus , in which they formally named the new oofamily , Cairanoolithidae , to contain <unk> . Contrary to Cousin 's conclusions , Selles and Galobart separated the oospecies C. dughii and C. roussetensis . Also , they demonstrated that Cairanoolithus was not the eggs of an ornithopod or sauropod and conjectured that it could be the eggs of a nodosaur . 
 = Family in early modern Scotland = 
 The family in early modern Scotland includes all aspects of kinship and family life , between the Renaissance and the Reformation of the sixteenth century and the beginnings of industrialisation and the end of the Jacobite risings in the mid @-@ eighteenth century in Scotland . 
 Scottish kinship in this period was agnatic , with descent judged through a common ancestor , helping to create the surname system in the Borders and the clans in the Highlands , with these systems beginning to break down in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries respectively . There was considerable concern over the safety of children . The abolition of godparents in the Reformation meant that baptism became a mechanism for emphasising the role and responsibilities of fathers . Wet @-@ nurses were used for young children , but in most families mothers took the primary role in bringing up children , while the Kirk emphasised the role of the father for older children . After the Reformation there was an increasing emphasis on education , resulting in the growth of a parish school system , but its effects were limited for the children of the poor and for girls . Most children left home for a period of life @-@ cycle service , as domestic or agricultural servants or as apprentices before marriage . 
 Marriages were often the subject of careful negotiations , particularly higher in society . Marriage lost its sacramental status at the Reformation and irregular marriage continued to be accepted as valid throughout the period . Women managed the household and might work beside their husbands and , although obedience to husbands was stressed , this may have been limited in practice . Divorce developed after the Reformation and was available for a wider range of causes and accessed by a much larger section of society than in England . Because of high mortality rates widowhood was a relatively common state , and some women acquired independence and status , but others were forced into a marginal existence and remarriage was common . The elaborate funerals and complex system of prayers for the dead that dominated in late Medieval Scotland were removed at the Reformation and simpler services adopted . Burial inside the church was discouraged . As a result separate aisles for the rich and graveyards with stone markers for the majority became common . 
 = = Kinship = = 
 Unlike in England , where kinship was predominately cognatic ( derived through both males and females ) , in early modern Scotland kinship was agnatic ( with members of a group sharing a , sometimes fictional , common ancestor through only the male line ) . Women retained the original surname of their family of origin at marriage and marriages were intended to create alliances between kin groups , rather than a new bond of kinship that joined two families together . In the Borders , on both the English and Scottish sides , there were extensive bonds of kinship , often reflected in a common surname . A shared surname has been seen as a " test of kinship " , proving large bodies of kin who could call on each other ’ s support . At the beginning of the period this could help intensify the idea of the feud . Feuds were semi @-@ formalised disputes , often motivated by revenge for past actions against a member of kin . In a surname system large bodies of kin could be counted on to support rival sides , resulting in long @-@ term local warfare , although conflict between members of kin groups also occurred . From the reign of James VI ( r . 1567 – 1625 ) , systems of judicial law were enforced , aided by the Union of Crowns in 1603 that dissolved much of the political significance of the border . The leadership of the heads of the great surnames was largely replaced by the authority of landholding lairds in the seventeenth century and by the early eighteenth century the feud had been almost completely suppressed . 
 The combination of agnatic kinship and the feudal system , which formalised mutual obligations of service and protection , organised through heritable jurisdictions , has been seen as creating the Highland clan system . The head of a clan was usually the eldest son of the last chief of the most powerful sept or branch . The leading families of a clan formed the fine , often seen as equivalent to Lowland lairds , providing council in peace and leadership in war , and below them were the daoine usisle ( in Gaelic ) or tacksmen ( in Scots ) , who managed the clan lands and collected the rents . Most of the followers of the clan were tenants , who supplied labour to the clan heads and could be called upon to act as soldiers when needed . In the early modern era they usually took the clan name as their surname , turning it into a massive , if often fictive , kin group . Economic change and the imposition of royal justice had begun to undermine the clan system before the eighteenth century , but the process was accelerated after the Jacobite rising of 1745 . Highland dress was banned , clansmen were forcible disarmed , there was the compulsory purchase of heritable jurisdictions , many chiefs were exiled and ordinary clansmen were sent to the colonies as indentured labourers . Within a generation , these factors reduced most clan leaders to the status of simple landholders , without independent military power . 
 = = Childhood = = 
 There was considerable concern over the safety of mother and child in birth . Although childbirth was a predominantly female event , with neighbours and midwives in support , the father was often present in or near the birthing chamber to assert , or in the cases of birth outside marriage to admit , his paternity . Before the Reformation , baptism was a means of creating wider spiritual kinship with godparents , but in the reformed Kirk , godparents were abolished and the baptismal ceremony was used primarily as a means of strengthening the " natural " relationship of the child with the parents and to define their roles . This was particularly focused on the father , who would have the primary responsibility for the moral and spiritual education of the child . Among the elite of Highland society , there existed a system of <unk> that created similar links to <unk> , with children being sent to the households of other major families to facilitate the creation of mutual bonds , that often endured into later life . 
 Following birth it was common , particularly among richer families , to employ a wet @-@ nurse to care for the child , sometimes living in with the family . Few sources give an insight into the experiences of young children in this period . Some parents played with their children and parents demonstrated grief at their loss . The primary responsibility for bringing up young children fell on the mother . For older children , the major duty of parents was , according to the Kirk , to ensure the spiritual development of the child , with fathers leading daily family prayers , but it is not clear how widely these practices were adopted . 
 = = Youth and education = = 
 Historians debate whether early modern individuals experienced a period of youth in the modern sense . For many the early teens were marked by moving away from home to undertake life @-@ cycle service , which was necessary so that they could build up skills and capital that would enable them to marry and create a separate household . Lower down in society boys might be apprenticed to a trade , or become agricultural servants . Girls might go into domestic or agricultural service . For those higher up in society and increasingly for those lower down , this might be after a period of schooling or even university . 
 The Humanist concern with widening education that had become significant in the Renaissance was shared by Protestant reformers . For boys , in the burghs the old schools were maintained , with the song schools and a number of new foundations becoming reformed grammar schools or ordinary parish schools . There were also large number of unregulated " adventure schools " , which sometimes fulfilled a local needs and sometimes took pupils away from the official schools . At their best , the curriculum included catechism , Latin , French , Classical literature and sports . A series of acts attempted to establish schools in every parish from 1616 . By the late seventeenth century there was a largely complete network of parish schools in the Lowlands , but in the Highlands basic education was still lacking in many areas . 
 The widespread belief in the limited intellectual and moral capacity of women , vied with a desire , intensified after the Reformation , for women to take personal moral responsibility , particularly as wives and mothers . In Protestantism this necessitated an ability to learn and understand the catechism and even to be able to independently read the Bible , but most commentators , even those that tended to encourage the education of girls , thought they should not receive the same academic education as boys . In the lower ranks of society , they benefited from the expansion of the parish schools system that took place after the Reformation , but were usually outnumbered by boys , often taught separately , for a shorter time and to a lower level . They were frequently taught reading , sewing and knitting , but not writing . Female illiteracy rates based on signatures among female servants were around 90 percent , from the late seventeenth to the early eighteenth centuries and perhaps 85 percent for women of all ranks by 1750 , compared with 35 per cent for men . Among the nobility there were many educated and cultured women , of which Mary , Queen of Scots is the most obvious example . 
 = = Marriage = = 
 Lowland Scotland was part of the pattern of late marriage for both men and women ( between the mid and late 20s ) , with a relatively large proportion of the population remaining unmarried . In the Highland and Islands marriage ages may have been lower and more closely resembled Gaelic Ireland . Throughout the period , women could legally marry from the age of 12 and boys from 14 . However , while many girls from the social elite married in their teens , most in the Lowlands only married after a period of life @-@ cycle service , in their twenties . Normally marriage followed <unk> , a period of betrothal , which in the Highlands may have effectively been a period of trial marriage , in which sexual activity may have been accepted as legitimate . Marriages , particularly higher in society , were often political in nature and the subject of complex negotiations over the tocher ( dowry ) . Some mothers took a leading role in negotiating marriages , as Lady Glenorchy did for her children in the 1560s and 1570s . They could also act as matchmakers , finding suitable and compatible partners for others . 
 In the Middle Ages marriage was a sacrament and the key element in validity was consent . The sacramental status was removed at the Reformation , but the centrality of consent remained . Weddings were often elaborate occasions for public celebration and feasting . Among the poor , the tradition of the penny wedding developed , by which guests contributed to the costs of occasion . There was usually a meal after the ceremony , sometimes followed by music and dancing . These events were strongly discouraged by the Reformed Kirk , particularly in the Lowlands where the Kirk had greatest control , but opposition began to ease from about 1715 to 1725 . Unlike in England , after the Reformation , " Irregular marriage " , without a church ceremony or any residence qualifications , remained valid if promises were made between the couple in front of witnesses . From the 1730s the border settlements of Coldstream Bridge , Lamberton Toll , and most famously Gretna Green , developed local industries in private and rapid marriages for English couples wishing to take advantage of the more flexible Scottish marriage laws , undertaken by individuals who declared themselves marriage priests . This business would expand rapidly after the passage of Lord Hardwicke 's Marriage Act in 1754 , which completely ended irregular marriages in England , but not in Scotland . 
 While among the wealthy , married women often focused on running the household , lower down in society they also worked with their husbands . In rural Scotland this would have included taking part in all the major agricultural tasks around the farm . They had a particular role as shearers in the harvest , forming most of the reaping team of the bandwin . In the Highlands they may have been even more significant as workers as there is evidence that many men considered agricultural work to be beneath their status and in places they may have formed the majority of the rural workforce . There was a stress on a wife 's duties to her husband and on the virtues of chastity and obedience . How exactly patriarchy worked in practice is difficult to discern . Scottish women in this period had something of a reputation among foreign observers for being forthright individuals , with the Spanish ambassador to the court of James IV ( r . 1488 – 1513 ) noting that they were " absolute mistresses of their houses and even their husbands " . 
 Before the Reformation , the extensive prohibited degrees of kinship , up to the fourth degree through consanguinity , meant that most noble marriages necessitated a papal dispensation . This could later be used as grounds for annulment if the marriage proved politically or personally inconvenient , although there was no divorce as such . After the mid @-@ sixteenth century the prohibited degrees were reduced to those in Leviticus 13 : 4 – 13 , which limited them to relationships in the second degree of kinship . Separation from bed and board continued to be allowed in exceptional circumstances , usually adultery , and under the Reformed Kirk divorce was allowed on grounds of adultery or desertion . Scotland was one of the first countries to allow desertion as legal grounds for divorce and , unlike England , where divorce necessitated and act of parliament , divorce cases were initiated relatively far down the social scale . 
 = = Widowhood = = 
 Given very high mortality rates , women could inherit important responsibilities from their fathers and from their husbands as widows . Evidence from towns indicates that around one in five households were headed by women who often continued to run an existing business interest . In noble society , widowhood created some very wealthy and powerful women . These included Catherine Campbell ( d . 1578 ) , who became the richest widow in the kingdom when her husband , the ninth earl of Crawford , died in 1558 . The twice @-@ widowed Margaret Ker , dowager Lady Yester , was described in 1635 as having " the greatest conjunct fie [ fiefdom ] that any lady hes in Scotland " and she proved the funds for Lady Yester 's Kirk in Edinburgh . 
 There is evidence of widows engaging in independent economic activity . They can be found keeping schools , brewing ale and trading . Some were highly successful , like Janet Flockhart , an Edinburgh <unk> or moneylender , who had been left a widow with seven children after her third husband 's suicide , and who managed her business affairs so successfully that she had amassed a moveable estate of £ 22 @,@ 000 by her death in the late sixteenth century . The deaths of the two husbands of Mary Erskine ( 1629 – 1708 ) left her with the resources to become a highly successful business woman and philanthropist , founding the Mary Erskine School and the Trades Maiden Hospital in Edinburgh . Lower down the social scale the rolls of poor relief indicate that large numbers of widows with children endured a marginal existence and were particularly vulnerable in times of economic hardship . This may in part explain the relatively high rates of remarriage suggested by the available sources . Many widows needed financial security and widowers often needed heirs or a mother for their children . Although contemporary writers seem to have been generally pessimistic about the step @-@ parent relationships that these <unk> created , the evidence of diaries and autobiographies from the period suggest that they were often highly successful , with many children remembering their step @-@ parents with genuine affection . 
 = = Death = = 
 In the late Middle Ages , Scottish people , like most of Catholic Europe , were increasingly concerned with prayers for the dead , necessary to speed passage from Purgatory to Heaven . The upper nobility began to turn from patronage for monasteries to the establishing collegiate churches to pray for them , such as Lord Dummond 's foundation at <unk> in 1508 and Lord Fleming 's re @-@ establishment at Biggar in 1546 . Those lower down in society paid for shrines , priests and masses , leading to a proliferation of altars , clergy and services within existing churches . In the burghs the primary function of craft guilds was to pay for the funerals and masses of their members . By the early sixteenth century St. Mary 's in Dundee had perhaps 48 altars and St Giles ' in Edinburgh over 50 . 
 After the Reformation , the Mass and Purgatory were rejected by the Kirk , along with the efficacy of good works and prayers for the dead . In place of elaborate processions and masses at a funeral there was a simple service , where the body was taken to its resting place without singing and readings and interred soberly without ceremony . Unlike other reformed churches the Kirk also rejected burial inside the church , which were now seen as unseemly for a house of prayer . This caused friction with traditional rights , particularly of local notables , to be buried with their ancestors . The use of burial aisles , an extension projecting for the main body of the church , almost exclusively used for burial and commemoration , represented a uniquely Scottish solution to this problem . For most ranks in society the <unk> remained the desired place of burial . From the seventeenth century burials were increasingly marked by gravestones , often including inscriptions that indicated affection for and the virtues of the deceased . 
 = Maryland Route 33 = 
 Maryland Route 33 ( MD 33 ) is a state highway in the U.S. state of Maryland . The state highway runs 23 @.@ 17 mi ( 37 @.@ 29 km ) from Tilghman Island east to Washington Street in Easton . MD 33 connects Easton , the county seat of Talbot County , with all communities on the peninsula that juts west into the Chesapeake Bay between the Miles River and Eastern Bay on the north and the <unk> Avon River and Choptank River on the south . The state highway passes through the historic town of Saint Michaels , home of the Chesapeake Bay Maritime Museum , and enters Tilghman Island by passing over Knapps Narrows on the busiest Bascule bridge in the United States . 
 MD 33 between Easton and Saint Michaels was one of the original state roads outlined by the Maryland State Roads Commission in 1909 . The state highway was constructed between Easton and Claiborne , the terminus of a ferry to Annapolis , in the late 1910s and early 1920s , and was originally designated MD 17 . The portion of the highway between Claiborne and Tilghman Island was constructed as MD 451 in the early 1930s . The state highway was extended north to MD 404 in Matapeake on Kent Island when the western terminus of the ferry from Claiborne was moved to Romancoke in the late 1930s . MD 33 received its present number in a 1940 number swap with present MD 17 . Following the shutdown of the ferry , MD 33 was extended west along MD 451 to Tilghman Island and the Romancoke – Matapeake highway was redesignated MD 8 . In Easton , MD 33 was extended north along Washington Street in the late 1940s and then along Easton Parkway , now MD 322 , in the mid @-@ 1960s , before the eastern terminus returned to its present location in the late 1970s . 
 = = Route description = = 
 MD 33 begins at the start of state maintenance 0 @.@ 10 mi ( 0 @.@ 16 km ) south of Wharf Road and Phillips Road on Tilghman Island . The roadway continues south as Black Walnut Point Road , a county highway that leads to the namesake point at the south end of the island . MD 33 heads north through the village of Tilghman Island as two @-@ lane Tilghman Island Road , passing Tilghman Elementary School and many businesses before leaving the island by crossing Knapps Narrows on a single @-@ bascule drawbridge that is the busiest of its type in the United States in terms of bridge openings . Shortly after leaving Tilghman Island , the state highway passes through a mix of forest and farmland , passing the hamlets of Sherwood and Wittman and several pieces of old alignment of the highway . MD 33 curves to the east around the head of Harris Creek and passes through McDaniel before reaching Claiborne Road , which was formerly MD 451 and heads northwest to the village of Claiborne . 
 MD 33 continues southeast as St. Michaels Road . The state highway passes the northern terminus of MD 579 ( Bozman <unk> Road ) and around the head of Broad Creek before curving south and passing through the town of Saint Michaels and its namesake historic district . MD 33 is known as Talbot Street within the town , where the highway passes the entrance to the Chesapeake Bay Maritime Museum , marked by the previous drawbridge over Knapps Narrows . The state highway curves to the southeast within the town and continues straight out of town through a mix of farmland and forests until the hamlet of Newcomb , where MD 329 ( Royal Oak Road ) splits to the south towards Royal Oak and Bellevue while MD 33 curves east to cross Oak Creek along the shore of the Miles River . MD 33 continues northeast , collecting the other end of MD 329 before passing a few riverfront subdivisions ahead of the intersection with MD 370 ( Unionville Road ) . Shortly after entering the town limits of Easton , the state highway crosses Tanyard Branch at the intersection with MD 322 ( Easton Parkway ) , a bypass of the town that connects with US 50 in both directions . MD 33 continues east as Bay Street toward downtown Easton , where the highway reaches its eastern terminus at Washington Street . 
 MD 33 is a part of the National Highway System as a principal arterial from the west town limit of Easton to Washington Street . 
 = = History = = 
 The portion of present @-@ day MD 33 between Easton and Saint Michaels was designated one of the original state roads when the Maryland State Roads Commission laid out the original state road system in 1909 . However , the Easton – Saint Michaels road was not considered a necessary component of the system , so construction in its modern form was delayed in favor of the Easton – Wye Mills road . A 2 @-@ mile ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) section of the road between the eastern intersection with MD 329 and MD 370 was paved by 1910 . The first sections of modern MD 33 constructed by the State Roads Commission were between Saint Michaels and Claiborne , which became the terminus of the Claiborne – Annapolis Ferry in 1919 . Sections were completed between the two villages in 1919 and 1920 . A section of the highway was also completed between Easton and the MD 370 intersection in 1920 . The Easton – Claiborne Road was completed in 1924 . When numbers were assigned to certain state highways beginning in 1927 , the road was designated MD 17 . 
 The next section of present @-@ day MD 33 was constructed between Claiborne and the highway 's present western terminus on Tilghman Island as MD 451 . The sections from Claiborne to a point between Wittman and Sherman and on Tilghman Island were completed around 1930 . The gap between Knapps Narrows and Sherman was filled in 1933 . MD 451 was completed when a new single bascule drawbridge was completed over Knapps Narrows in 1934 . MD 17 was extended from Claiborne across Eastern Bay along Romancoke Road to MD 404 in Matapeake on Kent Island in 1938 . This section was added in response to the replacement of the Claiborne – Annapolis ferry route with a Claiborne – Romancoke route in 1938 , with traffic following the new section of MD 17 to Matapeake to take a second ferry across the Chesapeake Bay to Annapolis . MD 17 switched numbers with MD 33 , the highway connecting Brunswick and <unk> in Frederick County that is now MD 17 in 1940 . 
 After a new , straighter US 213 ( replaced by US 50 in 1949 ) was completed from south of Easton to Wye Mills in 1948 , MD 33 was extended north along Washington Street within Easton to the new bypass . Following the closing of the Claiborne – Romancoke ferry in 1953 , MD 33 and MD 451 switched alignments in 1957 ; MD 33 achieved its present western terminus at Tilghman Island while MD 451 became a short highway from MD 33 to Claiborne . MD 33 between Romancoke and Matapeake was redesignated MD 8 in 1960 . MD 451 was removed from state maintenance in 1998 . 
 Easton Parkway was constructed as a western bypass of Easton in the 1960s . MD 33 was moved from Washington Street to the part of the bypass north of present MD 33 when that section of Easton Parkway opened in 1965 . MD 322 , which was assigned to the southern part of Easton Parkway , replaced MD 33 on Bay Street between Easton Parkway and Washington Street , the latter of which became a northern extension of MD 565 . In 1978 , MD 322 was assigned to all of Easton Parkway and MD 33 assumed its present eastern terminus . The Knapps Narrows drawbridge was replaced by a new drawbridge in 1998 . The 1934 drawbridge was transferred to the entrance of the Chesapeake Bay Maritime Museum in Saint Michaels . 
 = = Junction list = = 
 The entire route is in Talbot County . 
 = Siege of Bjelovar Barracks = 
 The Siege of Bjelovar Barracks , also known by the codename Operation Bilogora ( Croatian : Operacija Bilogora ) , was the blockade and capture of the Yugoslav People 's Army ( JNA ) barracks and other facilities in and around the city of Bjelovar , a part of the JNA 32nd ( Varaždin ) Corps , during the Croatian War of Independence . A general blockade of the JNA facilities in Croatia was ordered on 14 September 1991 , and it continued until 29 September when the JNA garrison was captured by Croatian forces . Its capture occurred one week after the bulk of the 32nd Corps surrendered . It was part of the Battle of the Barracks — an effort by Croatian armed forces to isolate JNA units based at barracks in Croatia , or capture the barracks to provide arms for Croatia 's nascent army . 
 The fighting resulted in the capture of a substantial stock of weapons , including 78 tanks , 77 infantry fighting vehicles and 13 artillery pieces greater than 100 @-@ millimetre ( 3 @.@ 9 in ) caliber . The clash also caused considerable damage to the city of Bjelovar and its surroundings due to artillery fire and the explosion of an ammunition storage depot on the outskirts of the city . The fighting erupted despite a ceasefire that had been arranged days before , and caused JNA General Veljko Kadijević to withdraw from negotiations regarding the ceasefire 's implementation . He subsequently issued an ultimatum to Croatian authorities , warning against the capture of further JNA facilities . 
 = = Background = = 
 In 1990 , ethnic tensions between Serbs and Croats worsened after the electoral defeat of the government of the Socialist Republic of Croatia by the Croatian Democratic Union ( Croatian : Hrvatska demokratska zajednica – HDZ ) . The Yugoslav People 's Army ( Serbian : Jugoslovenska Narodna Armija – JNA ) confiscated Croatia 's Territorial Defence ( Croatian : Teritorijalna obrana – TO ) weapons to minimize resistance . On 17 August , the tensions escalated into an open revolt of the Croatian Serbs , centred on the predominantly Serb @-@ populated areas of the Dalmatian hinterland around Knin ( approximately 60 kilometres ( 37 miles ) north @-@ east of Split ) , parts of the Lika , Kordun , Banovina and eastern Croatia . In January 1991 , Serbia , supported by Montenegro and Serbia 's provinces of Vojvodina and Kosovo , unsuccessfully tried to obtain the Yugoslav Presidency 's approval for a JNA operation to disarm Croatian security forces . The request was denied and a bloodless skirmish between Serb insurgents and Croatian special police in March prompted the JNA itself to ask the Federal Presidency to give it wartime authority and declare a state of emergency . Even though the request was backed by Serbia and its allies , the JNA request was refused on 15 March . Serbian President Slobodan Milošević , preferring a campaign to expand Serbia rather than to preserve Yugoslavia with Croatia as a federal unit , publicly threatened to replace the JNA with a Serbian army and declared that he no longer recognized the authority of the federal Presidency . The threat caused the JNA to abandon plans to preserve Yugoslavia in favour of expansion of Serbia as the JNA came under Milošević 's control . By the end of March , the conflict had escalated with the first fatalities . In early April , leaders of the Serb revolt in Croatia declared their intention to amalgamate the areas under their control with Serbia . These were viewed by the Government of Croatia as breakaway regions . 
 At the beginning of 1991 , Croatia had no regular army . To bolster its defence , Croatia doubled its police numbers to about 20 @,@ 000 . The most effective part of the Croatian police force was 3 @,@ 000 @-@ strong special police comprising twelve battalions organised along military lines . There were also 9 @,@ 000 – 10 @,@ 000 regionally organised reserve police in 16 battalions and 10 companies , but they lacked weapons . In response to the deteriorating situation , the Croatian government established the Croatian National Guard ( Croatian : Zbor narodne garde – ZNG ) in May by expanding the special police battalions into four all @-@ professional guards brigades . Under Ministry of Defence control and commanded by retired JNA General Martin Špegelj , the four guards brigades comprised approximately 8 @,@ 000 troops . The reserve police , also expanded to 40 @,@ 000 , was attached to the ZNG and reorganised into 19 brigades and 14 independent battalions . The guards brigades were the only units of the ZNG that were fully equipped with small arms ; throughout the ZNG there was a lack of heavier weapons and there was poor command and control structure above the brigade level . The shortage of heavy weapons was so severe that the ZNG resorted to using World War II weapons taken from museums and film studios . At the time , the Croatian weapon stockpile consisted of 30 @,@ 000 small arms purchased abroad and 15 @,@ 000 previously owned by the police . To replace the personnel lost to the guards brigades , a new 10 @,@ 000 @-@ strong special police was established . 
 = = Prelude = = 
 The views of the Croatian leadership on how to deal with the JNA 's role in the Croatian Serb revolt gradually evolved between January and September 1991 . Croatian President Franjo Tuđman 's initial plan was to win European Community ( EC ) and United States support , so he dismissed Špegelj 's advice to seize JNA barracks and storage facilities in Croatia in late 1990 . During the Ten @-@ Day War in June and July 1991 , Špegelj once again urged Tuđman to act while the JNA fought Slovenia 's TO . Špegelj 's calls were echoed by Šime Đodan , who succeeded him as Defence Minister in July . Špegelj remained in command of the ZNG . 
 Tuđman 's initial stance was based on his belief that Croatia could not win a war against the JNA . The ZNG was therefore limited to conducting defensive operations , even though the actions of the JNA appeared to be coordinated with Croatian Serb forces . This impression was reinforced by buffer zones established by the JNA after fighting between Croatian Serb militia and the ZNG . The JNA often intervened after the ZNG had lost territory , leaving the Croatian Serbs in control of areas they had captured before the JNA stepped in . The JNA provided some weapons to the Croatian Serbs , although most of their weaponry was sourced from Serbia 's TO and the Serbian Ministry of Internal Affairs . 
 In July 1991 , Špegelj and Đodan 's advice was supported by a number of Croatian Parliament members . In response , Tuđman dismissed Đodan the same month he was appointed Defence Minister , and Špegelj resigned his command of the ZNG on 3 August . The deteriorating situation in eastern Croatia , including the JNA expulsion of ZNG troops from Baranja , intermittent fighting around Osijek , Vukovar and Vinkovci , increasing losses and the growing conviction that the JNA were actively supporting the Croatian Serb revolt , forced Tuđman to act . On 22 August , he issued an ultimatum to the federal Yugoslav authorities demanding the withdrawal of the JNA to its barracks by the end of the month . The ultimatum stated that if the JNA failed to comply , Croatia would consider it an army of occupation and take corresponding action . On 1 September , the EC proposed a ceasefire and a peace conference was accepted by the Yugoslav Presidency and by Tuđman , despite his earlier ultimatum . The conference started on 7 September , but only four days later , the Croatian member and chair of the presidency , Stjepan Mesić , ordered the JNA to return to its barracks within 48 hours . This order was motivated by Tuđman 's concern that the conference would drag on while the ZNG lost territory . Even though the order was opposed by other members of the presidency , it gave Croatia justification to openly confront the JNA . 
 Prime Minister Franjo Gregurić advised Tuđman to implement Špegelj 's plan . According to General Anton Tus , Tuđman ordered the ZNG to capture JNA barracks on 12 September , but rescinded the order the next day . The order was reinstated on 14 September after Tus pleaded with Tuđman to re @-@ authorize action , arguing that the ZNG was running out of time . The same day , the ZNG and the Croatian police blockaded and cut utilities to all JNA facilities it had access to , beginning the Battle of the Barracks . This action comprised blockades of 33 large JNA garrisons in Croatia , and numerous smaller facilities , including border posts , and weapons and ammunition storage depots . 
 = = Order of battle = = 
 Since 1988 , the JNA 's Bjelovar garrison had been included in the 32nd Corps , which was headquartered in Varaždin , and was the second largest JNA corps in Croatia . It commanded the 32nd Mechanised Brigade and the 32nd Mixed Artillery Regiment both based in Varaždin , the 32nd Engineer Regiment in Čakovec , the 411th Mixed Antitank Artillery Regiment based in Križevci , the 73rd Motorised Brigade headquartered in Koprivnica , the 265th Mechanised Brigade based in Bjelovar , and the 288th Mixed Antitank Artillery Brigade in Virovitica . The JNA did not have sufficient troops in the area to secure all its facilities , but it was possible that the 5th ( Banja Luka ) Corps units deployed to Okučani might attempt to relieve some of the garrisons . A part of the 265th Mechanised Brigade was deployed to Koprivnica to reinforce the 73rd Motorised Brigade . It consisted of a battalion of tanks and one engineer battalion , and they were relocated to Koprivnica in August 1990 to boost the JNA 's presence in the town . A battlegroup comprising 23 armoured and 14 other vehicles , drawn from the 265th Mechanised Brigade and commanded by Lieutenant Colonel Milan Čeleketić , was deployed to Okučani . It was attached to the 5th Corps on 15 August to prevent Croatian special police from ousting Croatian Serb forces from the town . 
 Bjelovar also hosted the headquarters of the 28th Partisan Division ( TO ) and one of the division 's brigades . The most significant JNA facility in Bjelovar and its immediate surroundings was the Božidar Adžija Barracks , situated on the western outskirts of the city . The barracks housed Bjelovar garrison headquarters and the bulk of the weaponry of the 265th Mechanised Brigade , and approximately 500 officers and soldiers . There was a JNA non @-@ combat facility in the centre of Bjelovar , protected by a small security detail , a radar base and an anti @-@ aircraft defence communications hub in the village of <unk> , adjacent to the settlement of <unk> <unk> on the northern outskirts of Bjelovar , and two storage depots . The <unk> Depot was used to store tanks and other equipment of the 265th Mechanised Brigade and weapons that had been confiscated from the TO in Bjelovar , and was guarded by approximately 50 troops . The Barutana Depot was used to store ammunition . Unlike the <unk> Depot , which was situated in the city itself , the Barutana Depot was located in the Bedenik Forest near Bjelovar . 
 Croatia established a company @-@ sized special police unit in Bjelovar on 23 February 1991 . Following the deterioration of the situation in western Slavonia , the 105th Brigade of the ZNG was raised in the city , largely equipped with small arms only , and plans for a blockade of the routes in and out of the city were developed . A crisis headquarters was set up to coordinate the defence of the city and the manufacture of weapons in industrial plants which had been modified for their production . 
 = = Timeline = = 
 = = = Growing tensions and the blockade = = = 
 The first significant conflict involving the JNA in the Bjelovar area occurred on 1 September , when 14 JNA officers and soldiers were disarmed at a Croatian checkpoint . The commanding officer of the Bjelovar JNA garrison , Colonel Rajko Kovačević , demanded that the weapons to be returned , however the Croatian forces declined the request , claiming that the weapons had already been sent to Zagreb . Tensions greatly increased after 18 ZNG troops from the 105th Brigade , deployed from Bjelovar , went missing during the Battle of Kusonje on 9 September . The civilian authorities in the city demanded that the JNA provide information on their fate , but the JNA declared it had no knowledge of the matter . 
 By 22 September , Croatian forces had besieged and captured all major garrisons of the 32nd Corps , except those in Bjelovar and Koprivnica . The JNA garrisons in those two cities were ordered to extract themselves to territory near Okučani that was under the control of the 5th Corps . The Koprivnica @-@ based garrison was ordered to break out to Bjelovar , link up with the 265th Mechanised Brigade , then proceed towards Daruvar via Grubišno Polje . At the same time , the Bjelovar garrison had been blockaded , and its utilities and supplies were cut . Negotiations ensued for the surrender of the garrison , led by the civilian crisis headquarters presided over by Jure Šimić . The negotiations stalled when the JNA demanded that the 265th Mechanised Brigade be allowed to evacuate to Okučani or Bosnia and Herzegovina . At the time , a number of Croatian Serb civilians took refuge in the barracks either fearing for their safety or in order to isolate themselves from the Croatian authorities . 
 = = = Preparations for attack = = = 
 Preparations to seize the JNA facilities in Bjelovar took place on 21 – 29 September . These involved the placing of obstacles around the JNA facilities , setting up of artillery and air defence units , and drafting of plans to capture the JNA garrison , codenamed Operation Bilogora . The 1st Battalion of the 105th Brigade was deployed to around the villages of Bedenik and Velika <unk> , the 2nd Battalion in the village of <unk> , and the 3rd Battalion north of Bjelovar , thereby encircling the city . In the city itself , nine battlegroups were deployed to attack armoured units which might attempt a breakout . Air defence systems consisting of two 12 @.@ 7 @-@ millimetre ( 0 @.@ 50 in ) machine guns and two 20 @-@ millimetre ( 0 @.@ 79 in ) anti @-@ aircraft guns were set up in nearby villages . A battery of towed 100 @-@ millimetre ( 3 @.@ 9 in ) T @-@ 12 antitank guns was deployed to the <unk> area . In an attempt to mitigate an overall shortage of anti @-@ tank weapons , 200 Molotov cocktails were sent from Zagreb and three armoured personnel carriers armed with <unk> Malyutka anti @-@ tank guided missile systems arrived from Virovitica on 23 September . The crisis headquarters was to coordinate all activities of the Croatian armed forces based in Bjelovar , as well as reinforcements received from Varaždin after the JNA garrison based there surrendered , but Colonel Želimir Škarec , a member of the General Staff of the Armed Forces of the Republic of Croatia , was appointed as the commanding officer of the military operation . 
 Despite the ceasefire agreement signed on 22 September between the JNA and Croatia , which provided for the resumption of supplies to the JNA barracks , the authorities in Bjelovar refused to restore utilities , claiming that the agreement allowed for the supply of JNA officers and soldiers only , but there were also civilians sheltering in the barracks . On 27 September , the Croatian General Staff directed that the garrison be captured on 28 – 30 September . Tus , acting as the Chief of the General Staff , ordered the clandestine killing of extremists before they caused mass killing of civilians or great material damage . According to Tus , this order was based on an assessment that there were extremist JNA officers present in Bjelovar , intent on carrying out such acts . 
 = = = Capture of the garrison = = = 
 On the morning of 29 September , the ZNG and Croatian police attacked the JNA facilities in Bjelovar . In response , Kovačević contacted the JNA 5th Military District in Zagreb and requested airstrikes against the city and the ZNG . The sources do not indicate if the requested airstrikes were carried out . The 5th Military District instead pressured the central Croatian authorities to order the ZNG in Bjelovar to observe a comprehensive ceasefire previously agreed between Croatia and the JNA on 22 September . In order to verify the ceasefire , the European Community Monitor Mission ( ECMM ) deployed a monitoring team to the city . However , the authorities in Bjelovar ignored the order they received from the General Staff and stopped the ECMM team before it reached the city . According to Šimić , the move was made after Lieutenant General Petar Stipetić telephoned him and urged him to continue the attack . The authenticity of Šimić 's account of has been disputed by Admiral Davor Domazet @-@ Lošo , who claims it was an attempt to discredit Croatia before the ECMM . At 19 : 00 , the ZNG captured Božidar Adžija Barracks . By that time , all other JNA facilities in and near Bjelovar had been captured . 
 Before Barutana Depot was captured by the ZNG , one of the four storage structures , containing 1 @,@ 700 tonnes ( 1 @,@ 700 long tons ; 1 @,@ 900 short tons ) of ammunition , was blown up by JNA Major Milan Tepić . The explosion occurred at 10 : 43 , killing Tepić , and eleven ZNG troops who were blockading the depot in Bedenik Forest . The blast knocked down trees in a circle 200 metres ( 660 feet ) wide , caused damage to nearby structures , and could be heard 20 kilometres ( 12 miles ) away . The JNA lost another soldier in the area of the depot , killed by an antitank missile while he was engaging the ZNG using an infantry fighting vehicle gun . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 The JNA suffered 14 killed , and 30 wounded during the siege and capture of the Bjelovar barracks . The ZNG lost 17 dead , and five civilians were killed . There were 70 wounded ZNG troops and civilians combined . The ZNG troops captured 60 JNA officers and 365 soldiers . The captured troops were released on 14 November , in a prisoner exchange between Slavonski Šamac and Bosanski Šamac . Equipment captured by the ZNG included 75 T @-@ 55 and three PT @-@ 76 tanks , nine 122 @-@ millimetre ( 4 @.@ 8 in ) howitzers , four M @-@ 63 Plamen multiple rocket launchers , 77 BVP M @-@ 80 infantry fighting vehicles , small arms previously confiscated from the Bjelovar TO , and weapons of the 1st Brigade of the 28th Partisan Division ( TO ) including 1 @,@ 300 assault rifles and machine guns and approximately 100 trucks . During the fighting , 437 residential structures , 513 apartments , 169 utility structures and 25 public and commercial buildings were damaged or destroyed in Bjelovar and <unk> . The following day , the only remaining major unit of the 32nd Corps — the 73rd Motorised Brigade based in Koprivnica — surrendered to the ZNG . 
 The capture of the JNA barracks in Bjelovar also affected the ceasefire agreement reached between the JNA and Croatia in <unk> , specifically a provision regarding the lifting of the blockade of the JNA barracks there . Initially there was a dispute between Tuđman and JNA General Veljko Kadijević as to whether it meant achieving normal living conditions in the barracks or complete freedom of movement for the JNA in Croatia . A compromise interpretation was negotiated , only to be dropped by Kadijević specifically because of the events in Bjelovar . On 1 October , Kadijević issued an ultimatum to Croatia threatening destruction of one civilian facility vital to the Croatian population for each military post captured by the ZNG . The ultimatum demonstrated that the JNA considered Croatia enemy territory , rather than part of the country it had a responsibility to protect . 
 Tepić was considered a hero in Serbia because he preferred to die rather than surrender . He was posthumously awarded the Order of the People 's Hero by the Presidency of Yugoslavia on 19 November 1991 , becoming the last recipient of the order . The authorities in Serbia subsequently painted his actions as heroic , and used him as a model for their soldiers . 
 In 2005 , authorities in Bjelovar announced they would file war crime charges against two unnamed JNA officers . In 2010 , Šimić was charged with war crimes , specifically the killing of prisoners of war . According to the charges filed by the County Court of Bjelovar , Šimić or several persons directly commanded by him killed Kovačević and two other JNA officers after they surrendered on 29 September . As of 2014 , the trial is in progress . Four other persons were tried on charges of killing of six prisoners of war captured at the Božidar Adžija Barracks . These prisoners , along with one civilian who had been held in custody since 2 September , were taken to the <unk> Forest near the village of Malo <unk> to be shot . The soldiers were killed , but the civilian survived , although he sustained severe injuries . The four accused were acquitted in 2012 . Škarec and Chief of Staff of Bjelovar TO Stjepan <unk> were charged with disobeying the orders issued by the General Staff , and were imprisoned . After spending several months in custody , Škarec and <unk> were released without formal charges . Škarec was discharged from the Croatian armed forces . 
 = A Community of Witches = 
 A Community of Witches : Contemporary Neo @-@ Paganism and Witchcraft in the United States is a sociological study of the Wiccan and wider Pagan community in the Northeastern United States . It was written by American sociologist Helen A. Berger of the West Chester University of Pennsylvania and first published in 1999 by the University of South Carolina Press . It was released as a part of a series of academic books entitled Studies in Comparative Religion , edited by Frederick M. Denny , a religious studies scholar at the University of Chicago . 
 Berger became interested in studying the Wiccan and Pagan movement in 1986 , when she presented a lecture on the subject at the Boston Public Library . Subsequently becoming acquainted with members of the New England Pagan community , she undertook fieldwork in both a local Wiccan coven , the Circle of Light , and a wider Pagan organisation , the EarthSpirit Community ( ESC ) . In total , Berger underwent 11 years of fieldwork among the Pagan community . Along with ESC founder Andras Corban Arthen , Berger also undertook a " Pagan Census " survey of the U.S. in the mid @-@ 1990s to obtain more data on the country 's Pagan community . 
 A Community of Witches is based on interviews with more than a hundred practicing Wiccans and Pagans , study of the pre @-@ existing literature on the subject and a national survey of the Pagan community in the U.S. In her work , Berger interprets Wicca as a religion of late modernity , as opposed to postmodernity , and subsequently examines it using the theories of sociologists Anthony Giddens and James A. Beckford . Themes covered include Pagan conceptions of the self , the role of covens and the wider Pagan community , the place of children in the movement and the increasing <unk> of Wicca through the foundation of organised churches and clergy . 
 Academic reviewers were mostly positive , but several raised concerns over Berger 's incorrect use of terminology . Reviewers noted the study 's importance in developing Pagan studies as an academic discipline and helping further the wider sociological investigation into new religious movements in the United States . In the years following the study 's publication , Berger continued to investigate the Pagan community , focusing her interest on the popularity of Wicca among teenagers . 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = Paganism and Wicca in the United States = = = 
 Contemporary Paganism , also referred to as Neo @-@ Paganism , is an umbrella term used to identify a wide variety of modern religious movements , particularly those influenced by or claiming to be derived from the various pagan beliefs of pre @-@ modern Europe . The religion of Pagan Witchcraft , or Wicca , was developed in England during the first half of the 20th century and is one of several Pagan religions . The figure at the forefront of Wicca 's early development was the English occultist Gerald Gardner ( 1884 – 1964 ) , the author of Witchcraft Today ( 1954 ) and The Meaning of Witchcraft ( 1959 ) and the founder of a tradition known as Gardnerian Wicca . Gardnerian Wicca revolved around the veneration of both a Horned God and a Mother Goddess , the celebration of eight seasonally @-@ based festivals in a Wheel of the Year and the practice of magical rituals in groups known as covens . Gardnerianism was subsequently brought to the U.S. in the early 1960s by an English initiate , Raymond Buckland ( 1934 – ) , and his then @-@ wife Rosemary , who together founded a coven in Long Island . In the U.S. , new variants of Wicca developed , including Dianic Wicca , a tradition founded in the 1970s which was influenced by second @-@ wave feminism , emphasized female @-@ only covens , and rejected the veneration of the Horned God . One initiate of both the Dianic and Gardnerian traditions was a woman known as Starhawk ( 1951 – ) who went on to found her own tradition , Reclaiming Wicca . She furthermore published The Spiral Dance : a Rebirth of the Ancient Religion of the Great Goddess ( 1979 ) , a book which helped spread Wicca throughout the U.S. 
 = = = Academic fieldwork into Wicca = = = 
 Prior to Berger 's work , several American researchers working in the field of Pagan studies had separately published investigations of the Pagan community in the United States and the United Kingdom . The first of these was the practicing Wiccan , journalist and political activist Margot Adler in her Drawing Down the Moon : Witches , Druids , Goddess @-@ Worshippers , and Other Pagans in America Today , which was first published by Viking Press in 1979 . A second study was produced by the anthropologist Tanya M. Luhrmann in her Persuasions of the Witch 's Craft : Ritual Magic in Contemporary England ( 1989 ) , in which she focused on both a Wiccan coven and several ceremonial magic orders that were then operating in London . 
 The next academic book to be published based upon fieldwork undertaken in the U.S. Pagan community was Living Witchcraft : A Contemporary American Coven , published by Praeger in 1994 . Living Witchcraft had been co @-@ written by three academics , the sociologist Allen Scarboro , psychologist Nancy Campbell and literary critic Shirley Stave , herself a Wiccan practitioner . It was based upon their fieldwork undertaken in the Ravenwood coven of Atlanta , Georgia , over several months across 1990 and 1991 . At the same time as Scarboro , Campbell and Stave were undertaking their research , the American anthropologist and practicing Wiccan Loretta Orion was also undertaking an investigation into the Pagan movement in the East Coast and Midwest of the United States . Orion 's work was published as Never Again the Burning Times : Paganism Revisited by Waveland Press in 1995 , although would be heavily criticized in published reviews written by both Luhrmann and T.O. <unk> , both of whom were of the opinion that Orion 's Pagan beliefs had clouded her critical interpretation . 1997 then saw the publication of Witchcraft and Paganism in Australia , authored by the anthropologist Lynne Hume . 
 = = = Berger and her research = = = 
 Helen Berger , then a lecturer in sociology at the West Chester University of Pennsylvania , had initially become involved in the study of the Pagan movement in preparation for a series of public lectures that she gave at the Boston Public Library in October 1986 . Based on the subject of the historical witch trials that took place in New England during the Early Modern period , she devoted the final lecture in the series to an examination of the contemporary Pagan Witches , or Wiccans , then living in the area . Having yet to perform the sociological investigation that would culminate in A Community of Witches , Berger gained her information for this lecture from the information published in the works of Margot Adler , Starhawk and Marcello Truzzi , and also from a singular interview that she had carried out with a woman who was " peripherally associated " with Paganism . After the lecture , several audience members approached Berger to identify themselves as practicing Wiccans , and it was through them that she came into contact with the New England Pagan community . Three of the Wiccans at the lecture invited Berger to " participate as a researcher " as they founded their own coven , the Circle of Light , and she attended their weekly meetings and festival celebrations for the next two years . 
 At the first open Pagan ritual that she attended , Berger met Andras Corban Arthen , the founder of the EarthSpirit Community ( ESC ) , a Pagan organization open to non @-@ Wiccans which she joined after paying the annual membership fee of $ 30 . Attending many of the ESC 's open rituals and festivals , she was introduced to a " diverse group " of Wiccans and other Pagans , and developed a contact base in the community . Berger and Arthen subsequently embarked on a project entitled " The Pagan Census " in an attempt to gain sociological data from the Pagan community across the U.S. Receiving funding from the Faculty Development Fund at West Chester University , Berger was aided in this project by over 15 students who helped her to code and enter data for the survey . Together , Berger and Arthen wrote and distributed their survey through Wiccan and Pagan organizations across the country , as well as in journals , on the internet and at festivals . The duo received over 2000 responses , providing Berger with one of her main sources of information . 
 Throughout her 11 @-@ year period of fieldwork , Berger had to use snowball sampling to retrieve her data on the Pagan community , something that she attributed to the " secrecy of groups and practitioners " . She conducted formal interviews with over 40 practicing Pagans , and over 60 others instead were informally interviewed during conversations at Pagan events , following which Berger recorded their responses in her <unk> . She participated in rituals with ten different Wiccan covens , two of which were all @-@ female covens , and the other eight of which were mixed @-@ gender in structure , but all of whom assembled in the Northeastern United States . Accepting that this regional focus might affect her results , she supplemented her fieldwork by reading literature on Paganism from across the country , concluding that " the differences among groups and practitioners within the United States are less important than the similarities . " Unlike the sociologists Margot Adler and Loretta Orion , both of whom had been or became Pagans whilst studying the movement , Berger stated that she had not joined the religion , thereby remaining an " outsider " throughout her research , but had made many friends within the Pagan community . 
 A Community of Witches was a part of a series of books entitled ' Studies in Comparative Religion ' that were published by the University of South Carolina Press , and edited by Frederick M. Denny . In Denny 's preface to the book , he remarked that it " adds significantly to the steadily growing scholarly literature " on the subject of Wicca and contemporary Paganism , being of " considerable use for our understanding of how other new religious communities are sustaining and developing themselves in the unprecedented rich tapestry of American religious pluralism . " 
 = = Synopsis = = 
 Starting with a preface in which Berger explains how she first began studying the Wiccan and Pagan community of New England , Berger opens the main part of her book with a description of a <unk> which she attended . Proceeding to introduce both the Wiccan religion and her theoretical approach , Berger explains the British sociologist James A. Beckford 's approach to the religions of late modernity as well as Anthony Giddens ' theoretical approaches to modernism . 
 In the second chapter , " The Magical Self " , Berger examines the ways in which Wiccans in the U.S. understand themselves , looking at sociological ideas about self @-@ identity and utilising them in her analysis of Wiccan rituals that deal with the transformation of the self . She moves on to look at concepts of gender in the Wiccan community , both for men and women and among homosexuals . The third chapter , entitled " The Coven : Perfect Love , Perfect Trust " , provides an explanation of the coven system within Wicca , and the ways in which friendships are built and collapse amongst coven members , and the extent to which covens imitate family structures . 
 Chapter four , " A Circle within a Circle : The Neo @-@ Pagan Community " , looks at the wider community beyond the coven structure , interpreting it through theoretical ideas about community in late modernity . Moving on , Berger looks at ideas of community memory and community building amongst U.S. Pagans , before examining the manner in which some Pagans engage in both emancipatory politics and life politics . The fifth chapter , entitled " The Next Generation " , is devoted to the place of children within the Pagan community , and deals with ideas of rites of passage , attitudes towards children 's sexuality and the extent to which children are involved in rituals . 
 The sixth chapter , " The <unk> of Creativity " , looks at the relationship between Wicca and <unk> , and examines how the anti @-@ authoritarian ethos of the religion has been in part eroded through the creation of Pagan organisations like the EarthSpirit Community and the Circle Sanctuary , which have purchased land and led to the development of a paid clergy . Finally , Berger concludes her work with a round @-@ up of her study , and muses on the possible future for Wicca in the United States . 
 = = Arguments = = 
 = = = Wicca as a religion of late modernity = = = 
 Whereas the sociologist Loretta Orion had believed that contemporary Paganism was a postmodern movement , in A Community of Witches , Berger argued against this , instead considering Wicca to be a religion of late modernity . In supporting this position , Berger turned to the work of the British sociologist of religion , James A. Beckford ( 1942 – ) , who in his book Religion and Advanced Industrial Society ( 1989 ) had argued that many new religious movements reflect the characteristics of late modernity by challenging traditional definitions of religion , sharing a holistic worldview and emphasising the development and transformation of the self . Berger stated that while " Wicca is not specifically mentioned by Beckford , it does fit the model of New Age religions that he is analyzing . " Whilst accepting that elements of postmodernism can be found within Wicca , Berger argued that the religion does not " signify an epistemological break with Enlightenment thought " , and that as such it was intrinsically late modernist in structure ; as she related , the " emphasis on globalism , the belief in personal and social transformation , and the use of <unk> rationality place Wicca firmly within the Enlightenment tradition . " 
 Berger 's choice of " framework for understanding Wicca within the context of late modernity " was that of structuration , a theory put forward by the English sociologist and political theorist Anthony Giddens ( 1938 – ) in his book The Constitution of Society ( 1984 ) . <unk> theory maintains that both structure and agency influence human beings in their choices ; the former refers to the recurrent patterned arrangements which influence or limit the choices and opportunities available for an individual , whilst the latter refers to the capacity of individuals to act independently and to make their own free choices . Berger argued that whilst the beliefs and practices of Wiccans were " in part determined by social factors , such as class , race and gender " , at the same time these Wiccans exerted a level of control and self @-@ determination over their lives " both by the very act of becoming a Witch and through the self @-@ conscious use of rituals to create a persona . " 
 = = = Wicca as a result of globalism = = = 
 Berger was of the opinion that Wicca 's " development and spread " could be seen as " an outgrowth of globalism " . As evidence , she noted that the religion had been created by modern westerners adopting elements from a variety of " older and geographically disparate religious practices " in order to fashion their new faith , something which she believed was only possible in a globalised world . 
 = = = The future of Wicca = = = 
 Whereas Mary Jo Neitz ( 1991 ) and Nancy J. Finley ( 1991 ) had both argued that ultimately , it would be the feminist @-@ orientated , female @-@ only form of Wicca found in the Dianic tradition that would grow to become dominant in the United States , Berger disagreed , arguing that " inclusive groups " , meaning those traditions who welcome both men and women into their covens , " will ultimately prove to be more significant . " She believed that this was in part because they " are more likely to include and fully involve children in their practices " , something which she saw as having the likely " greatest impact " on the future of Wicca in the United States . In Berger 's view , these children born into the faith would act as " maintainers of their families ' practice " , replacing the role that had formerly been played by neophytes in the community . 
 = = Reception and recognition = = 
 = = = Academic reviews = = = 
 In a review published in the Review of Religious Research journal , Stephen D. Glazier of the University of Nebraska described A Community of Witches as an " important study " which had " many virtues and few faults . " Glazier commended it as an improvement on earlier sociological studies of contemporary Paganism , which in his opinion had dwelt on " personal experiences " and acted as something of " <unk> for Neo @-@ Pagan beliefs and practices . " He furthermore praised Berger for " maintaining a high degree of theoretical sophistication " while still " remaining accessible for the average reader " . He also expressed several criticisms , for instance noting that Berger had used the terms " Wiccan " and " Neo @-@ Pagan " interchangeably , even though they have different meanings , something that he felt might confuse some of the book 's readers . 
 In her review of A Community of Witches published in the Sociology of Religion journal , Frances <unk> of the Governors State University commented positively on Berger 's work , describing it as " an invaluable theoretical and descriptive account of Wicca " that is also " a fine example of ethnographic research and writing . " Stefanie von Schnurbein of the University of Chicago described A Community of Witches as " an exciting and important approach to the study of contemporary neopaganism " in her review published in The Journal of Religion . Schnurbein believed that Berger " has an intimate knowledge of her field and makes creative and interesting use of contemporary sociological theory " but that a " discussion of the vivid cultural and theoretical controversies around gender and sexuality would have added to the theoretical value of Berger 's book . " 
 Writing in the Contemporary Sociology journal , <unk> G. <unk> of Indiana University Northwest described A Community of Witches as " Well organized , clearly written , and aimed at an academic audience " . Believing it to be a " valuable addition to the existing scholarship on witchcraft " , <unk> did highlight some problems with the work , wishing that it had included an " in @-@ depth analysis " of her Pagan Census survey and noting that it erroneously used the terms " Neo @-@ Paganism " , " Witchcraft " and " Wicca " interchangeably . In her review for the Journal for the Scientific Study of Religion , Mary Jo Neitz of the University of Missouri was more critical , arguing that Berger had generalised information from the north @-@ eastern U.S. and claimed that it was applicable for the Pagan community across the entire country , something which Neitz felt was counter to her " own observations of Wicca . " 
 = = = Wider recognition = = = 
 A Community of Witches was awarded the A List Exceptional Books of 1999 Award . It was also mentioned by Canadian religious studies scholar Barbara Jane Davy in her 2007 work , Introduction to Pagan Studies , during which she listed the books on Pagan Studies that had then seen publication . 
 = = Berger 's later work = = 
 The publication of A Community of Witches did not signal the end of Berger 's studies on the subject of American Paganism , and over the following several years she would publish several more volumes detailing her work in this area . In 2003 , she co @-@ authored a book delving deeper into the results of the Pagan Census that she had undertaken with Andras Corban Arthen . Entitled Voices from the Pagan Census : A National Survey of Witches and Neo @-@ Pagans in the United States , it was co @-@ written with Leigh S. Shaffer , a fellow professor of sociology at West Chester University , and also with Evan A. Leach , then an associate professor of management at West Chester . Like A Community of Witches , Voices from the Pagan Census was published by the University of South Carolina Press in their series on ' Studies in Comparative Religion ' , and in his preface to the book , the series editor Frederick M. Denny referred to it as the " sequel " to Berger 's earlier work . 
 In their preface , Berger , Leach and Shaffer discussed the Pagan Census and how it had been used in producing A Community of Witches ; they noted that at the time Berger had originally written the book , " the rest of the data had not been completely processed , cleaned , and analyzed . Unlike that book , which relied primarily on her ethnographic research in the northeastern United States and an analysis of journals , books , and newsletters written by Neo @-@ Pagans , this one is based primarily on the survey data . " 
 In 2005 , the University of Pennsylvania published an edited anthology entitled Witchcraft and Magic in the New World : North America in the Twentieth Century , which had been edited by Berger . In 2007 , Berger 's third book was published , Teenage Witches : Magical Youth and the Search for the Soul , which had been co @-@ written with Douglas Ezzy , a senior lecturer in sociology at the University of Tasmania in Australia . 
 = Camille Saint @-@ Saëns = 
 Charles @-@ Camille Saint @-@ Saëns ( French : [ <unk> <unk> sɛ ̃ <unk> ̃ s ] ; 9 October 1835 – 16 December 1921 ) was a French composer , organist , conductor and pianist of the Romantic era . His best @-@ known works include Introduction and Rondo Capriccioso ( 1863 ) , the Second Piano Concerto ( 1868 ) , the First Cello Concerto ( 1872 ) , Danse macabre ( 1874 ) , the opera Samson and Delilah ( 1877 ) , the Third Violin Concerto ( 1880 ) , the Third ( " Organ " ) Symphony ( 1886 ) and The Carnival of the Animals ( 1886 ) . 
 Saint @-@ Saëns was a musical prodigy , making his concert debut at the age of ten . After studying at the Paris Conservatoire he followed a conventional career as a church organist , first at Saint @-@ Merri , Paris and , from 1858 , La Madeleine , the official church of the French Empire . After leaving the post twenty years later , he was a successful freelance pianist and composer , in demand in France , mainland Europe , Britain , and the Americas . 
 As a young man , Saint @-@ Saëns was enthusiastic for the most modern music of the day , particularly that of Schumann , Liszt and Wagner , although his own compositions were generally within a conventional classical tradition . He was a scholar of musical history , and remained committed to the structures worked out by earlier French composers . This brought him into conflict in his later years with composers of the impressionist and dodecaphonic schools of music ; although there were neoclassical elements in his music , foreshadowing works by Stravinsky and Les Six , he was often regarded as a reactionary in the years before and after his death . 
 Saint @-@ Saëns held only one teaching post , at the École de Musique Classique et Religieuse in Paris , and remained there for less than five years . It was nevertheless important in the development of French music : his students included Gabriel Fauré , among whose own later pupils was Maurice Ravel . Both of them were strongly influenced by Saint @-@ Saëns , whom they revered as a genius . 
 = = Life and career = = 
 = = = Early life = = = 
 Saint @-@ Saëns was born in Paris , the only child of Jacques @-@ Joseph @-@ Victor Saint @-@ Saëns ( 1798 – 1835 ) , an official in the French Ministry of the Interior , and Françoise @-@ Clémence , née Collin . Victor Saint @-@ Saëns was of Norman ancestry , and his wife was from an Haute @-@ Marne family ; their son , born in the Rue du <unk> in the 6th arrondissement of Paris , and baptised at the nearby church of Saint @-@ Sulpice , always considered himself a true Parisian . Less than two months after the christening , Victor Saint @-@ Saëns died of consumption on the first anniversary of his marriage . The young Camille was taken to the country for the sake of his health , and for two years lived with a nurse at Corbeil , 29 kilometres ( 18 mi ) to the south of Paris . 
 When Saint @-@ Saëns was brought back to Paris he lived with his mother and her widowed aunt , Charlotte Masson . Before he was three years old he displayed perfect pitch and enjoyed picking out tunes on the piano . His great @-@ aunt taught him the basics of pianism , and when he was seven he became a pupil of Camille @-@ Marie Stamaty , a former pupil of Friedrich Kalkbrenner . Stamaty required his students to play while resting their forearms on a bar situated in front of the keyboard , so that all the pianist 's power came from the hands and fingers rather than the arms , which , Saint @-@ Saëns later wrote , was good training . Clémence Saint @-@ Saëns , well aware of her son 's precocious talent , did not wish him to become famous too young . The music critic Harold C. Schonberg wrote of Saint @-@ Saëns in 1969 , " It is not generally realized that he was the most remarkable child prodigy in history , and that includes Mozart . " The boy gave occasional performances for small audiences from the age of five , but it was not until he was ten that he made his official public debut , at the Salle Pleyel , in a programme that included Mozart 's Piano Concerto in B ♭ ( <unk> ) , and Beethoven 's Third Piano Concerto . Through Stamaty 's influence , Saint @-@ Saëns was introduced to the composition professor Pierre <unk> and the organ teacher Alexandre Pierre François <unk> . From the latter he acquired a lifelong love of the music of Bach , which was then little known in France . 
 As a schoolboy Saint @-@ Saëns was outstanding in many subjects . In addition to his musical prowess , he distinguished himself in the study of French literature , Latin and Greek , divinity , and mathematics . His interests included philosophy , archaeology and astronomy , of which , particularly the last , he remained a talented amateur in later life . 
 In 1848 , at the age of thirteen , Saint @-@ Saëns was admitted to the Paris Conservatoire , France 's foremost music academy . The director , Daniel Auber , had succeeded Luigi Cherubini in 1842 , and brought a more relaxed regime than that of his martinet predecessor , though the curriculum remained conservative . Students , even outstanding pianists like Saint @-@ Saëns , were encouraged to specialise in organ studies , because a career as a church organist was seen to offer more opportunities than that of a solo pianist . His organ professor was François Benoist , whom Saint @-@ Saëns considered a mediocre organist but a first @-@ rate teacher ; his pupils included Adolphe Adam , César Franck , Charles Alkan , Louis Lefébure @-@ Wély and Georges Bizet . In 1851 Saint @-@ Saëns won the Conservatoire 's top prize for organists , and in the same year he began formal composition studies . His professor was a protégé of Cherubini , Fromental Halévy , whose pupils included Charles Gounod and Bizet . 
 Saint @-@ Saëns 's student compositions included a symphony in A major ( 1850 ) and a choral piece , Les <unk> ( 1850 ) , to a poem by Victor Hugo . He competed for France 's premier musical award , the Prix de Rome , in 1852 but was unsuccessful . Auber believed that the prize should have gone to Saint @-@ Saëns , considering him to have more promise than the winner , <unk> Cohen , who made little mark during the rest of his career . In the same year Saint @-@ Saëns had greater success in a competition organised by the Société Sainte @-@ Cécile , Paris , with his Ode à Sainte @-@ Cécile , for which the judges unanimously voted him the first prize . The first piece the composer acknowledged as a mature work and gave an opus number was Trois Morceaux for harmonium ( 1852 ) . 
 = = = Early career = = = 
 On leaving the Conservatoire in 1853 , Saint @-@ Saëns accepted the post of organist at the ancient Parisian church of Saint @-@ Merri near the Hôtel de Ville . The parish was substantial , with 26 @,@ 000 parishioners ; in a typical year there were more than two hundred weddings , the organist 's fees from which , together with fees for funerals and his modest basic stipend , gave Saint @-@ Saëns a comfortable income . The organ , the work of François @-@ Henri <unk> , had been badly damaged in the aftermath of the French Revolution and imperfectly restored . The instrument was adequate for church services but not for the ambitious recitals that many high @-@ profile Parisian churches offered . With enough spare time to pursue his career as a pianist and composer , Saint @-@ Saëns composed what became his opus 2 , the Symphony in E ♭ ( 1853 ) . This work , with military fanfares and augmented brass and percussion sections , caught the mood of the times in the wake of the popular rise to power of Napoleon III and the restoration of the French Empire . The work brought the composer another first prize from the Société Sainte @-@ Cécile . 
 Among the musicians who were quick to spot Saint @-@ Saëns 's talent were the composers Gioachino Rossini , Hector Berlioz and Franz Liszt , and the influential singer Pauline Viardot , who all encouraged him in his career . In early 1858 Saint @-@ Saëns moved from Saint @-@ Merri to the high @-@ profile post of organist of La Madeleine , the official church of the Empire ; Liszt heard him playing there and declared him the greatest organist in the world . 
 Although in later life he had a reputation for outspoken musical conservatism , in the 1850s Saint @-@ Saëns supported and promoted the most modern music of the day , including that of Liszt , Robert Schumann and Richard Wagner . Unlike many French composers of his own and the next generation , Saint @-@ Saëns , for all his enthusiasm for and knowledge of Wagner 's operas , was not influenced by him in his own compositions . He commented , " I admire deeply the works of Richard Wagner in spite of their bizarre character . They are superior and powerful , and that is sufficient for me . But I am not , I have never been , and I shall never be of the Wagnerian religion . " 
 = = = 1860s : Teacher and growing fame = = = 
 In 1861 Saint @-@ Saëns accepted his only post as a teacher , at the École de Musique Classique et Religieuse , Paris , which Louis Niedermeyer had established in 1853 to train first @-@ rate organists and choirmasters for the churches of France . Niedermeyer himself was professor of piano ; when he died in March 1861 , Saint @-@ Saëns was appointed to take charge of piano studies . He scandalised some of his more austere colleagues by introducing his students to contemporary music , including that of Schumann , Liszt and Wagner . His best @-@ known pupil , Gabriel Fauré , recalled in old age : 
 After allowing the lessons to run over , he would go to the piano and reveal to us those works of the masters from which the rigorous classical nature of our programme of study kept us at a distance and who , moreover , in those far @-@ off years , were scarcely known . ... At the time I was 15 or 16 , and from this time dates the almost filial attachment ... the immense admiration , the unceasing gratitude I [ have ] had for him , throughout my life . " 
 Saint @-@ Saëns further enlivened the academic regime by writing , and composing incidental music for , a one @-@ act farce performed by the students ( including André Messager ) . He conceived his best @-@ known piece , The Carnival of the Animals , with his students in mind , but did not finish composing it until 1886 , more than twenty years after he left the Niedermeyer school . 
 In 1864 Saint @-@ Saëns caused some surprise by competing a second time for the Prix de Rome . Many in musical circles were puzzled by his decision to enter the competition again , now that he was establishing a reputation as a soloist and composer . He was once more unsuccessful . Berlioz , one of the judges , wrote : 
 We gave the Prix de Rome the other day to a young man who wasn 't expecting to win it and who went almost mad with joy . We were all expecting the prize to go to Camille Saint @-@ Saëns , who had the strange notion of competing . I confess I was sorry to vote against a man who is truly a great artist and one who is already well known , practically a celebrity . But the other man , who is still a student , has that inner fire , inspiration , he feels , he can do things that can 't be learnt and the rest he 'll learn more or less . So I voted for him , sighing at the thought of the unhappiness that this failure must cause Saint @-@ Saëns . But , whatever else , one must be honest . 
 According to the musical scholar Jean Gallois , it was apropos of this episode that Berlioz made his well @-@ known bon mot about Saint @-@ Saëns , " He knows everything , but lacks inexperience " ( " Il sait tout , mais il <unk> d <unk> " ) . The winner , Victor Sieg , had a career no more notable than that of the 1852 winner , but Saint @-@ Saëns 's biographer Brian Rees speculates that the judges may " have been seeking signs of genius in the midst of tentative effort and error , and considered that Saint @-@ Saëns had reached his summit of proficiency " . The suggestion that Saint @-@ Saëns was more proficient than inspired dogged his career and posthumous reputation . He himself wrote , " Art is intended to create beauty and character . Feeling only comes afterwards and art can very well do without it . In fact , it is very much better off when it does . " The biographer Jessica Duchen writes that he was " a troubled man who preferred not to betray the darker side of his soul " . The critic and composer Jeremy Nicholas observes that this reticence has led many to underrate the music ; he quotes such slighting remarks as " Saint @-@ Saëns is the only great composer who wasn 't a genius " , and " Bad music well written " . 
 While teaching at the Niedermeyer school Saint @-@ Saëns put less of his energy into composing and performing , but after he left in 1865 he pursued both aspects of his career with vigour . In 1867 his cantata Les noces de Prométhée beat more than a hundred other entries to win the composition prize of the Grande Fête Internationale in Paris , for which the jury included Auber , Berlioz , Gounod , Rossini and Giuseppe Verdi . In 1868 he premiered the first of his orchestral works to gain a permanent place in the repertoire , his Second Piano Concerto . Playing this and other works he became a noted figure in the musical life of Paris and other cities in France and abroad during the 1860s . 
 = = = 1870s : War , marriage and operatic success = = = 
 In 1870 , concerned at the dominance of German music and the lack of opportunity for young French composers to have their works played , Saint @-@ Saëns and Romain Bussine , professor of singing at the Conservatoire , discussed the founding of a society to promote new French music . Before they could take the proposal further , the Franco @-@ Prussian War broke out . Saint @-@ Saëns served in the National Guard during the war . During the brief but bloody Paris Commune that followed , his superior at the Madeleine , the Abbé <unk> , was murdered by rebels ; Saint @-@ Saëns was fortunate to escape to temporary exile in England . With the help of George Grove and others he supported himself while there , giving recitals . Returning to Paris in 1871 , he found that anti @-@ German sentiments had considerably enhanced support for the idea of a pro @-@ French musical society . The Société Nationale de Musique , with its motto , " Ars Gallica " , was established in February 1871 , with Bussine as president , Saint @-@ Saëns as vice @-@ president and Henri Duparc , Fauré , Franck and Jules Massenet among its founder @-@ members . 
 As an admirer of Liszt 's innovative symphonic poems , Saint @-@ Saëns enthusiastically adopted the form ; his first " <unk> symphonique " was Le Rouet d 'Omphale ( 1871 ) , premiered at a concert of the <unk> Nationale in January 1872 . In the same year , after more than a decade of intermittent work on operatic scores , Saint @-@ Saëns finally had one of his operas staged . La princesse jaune ( " The Yellow Princess " ) , a one @-@ act , light romantic piece , was given at the Opéra @-@ Comique , Paris in June . It ran for five performances . 
 Throughout the 1860s and early 1870s , Saint @-@ Saëns had continued to live a bachelor existence , sharing a large fourth @-@ floor flat in the Rue du Faubourg Saint @-@ Honoré with his mother . In 1875 he surprised many by marrying . The groom was approaching forty and his bride was nineteen ; she was Marie @-@ Laure <unk> , the sister of one of the composer 's pupils . The marriage was not a success . In the words of the biographer Sabina Teller Ratner , " Saint @-@ Saëns 's mother disapproved , and her son was difficult to live with " . Saint @-@ Saëns and his wife moved to the Rue Monsieur @-@ le @-@ Prince , in the Latin Quarter ; his mother moved with them . The couple had two sons , both of whom died in infancy . In 1878 , the elder , André , aged two , fell from a window of the flat and was killed ; the younger , Jean @-@ François , died of pneumonia six weeks later , aged six months . Saint @-@ Saëns and Marie @-@ Laure continued to live together for three years , but he blamed her for André 's accident ; the double blow of their loss effectively destroyed the marriage . 
 For a French composer of the 19th century , opera was seen as the most important type of music . Saint @-@ Saëns 's younger contemporary and rival , Massenet , was beginning to gain a reputation as an operatic composer , but Saint @-@ Saëns , with only the short and unsuccessful La princesse jaune staged , had made no mark in that sphere . In February 1877 , he finally had a full @-@ length opera staged . His four @-@ act " drame <unk> " , Le timbre d 'argent ( " The Silver Bell " ) , to Jules Barbier 's and Michel Carré 's libretto , reminiscent of the Faust legend , had been in rehearsal in 1870 , but the outbreak of war halted the production . The work was eventually presented by the Théâtre Lyrique company of Paris ; it ran for eighteen performances . 
 The dedicatee of the opera , Albert <unk> , died three months after the premiere , leaving Saint @-@ Saëns a large legacy " to free him from the slavery of the organ of the Madeleine and to enable him to devote himself entirely to composition " . Saint @-@ Saëns , unaware of the imminent bequest , had resigned his position shortly before his friend died . He was not a conventional Christian , and found religious dogma increasingly irksome ; he had become tired of the clerical authorities ' interference and musical insensitivity ; and he wanted to be free to accept more engagements as a piano soloist in other cities . After this he never played the organ professionally in a church service , and rarely played the instrument at all . He composed a requiem in memory of his friend , which was performed at Saint @-@ Sulpice to mark the first anniversary of <unk> 's death ; Charles @-@ Marie Widor played the organ and Saint @-@ Saëns conducted . 
 In December 1877 , Saint @-@ Saëns had a more solid operatic success , with Samson et Dalila , his one opera to gain and keep a place in the international repertoire . Because of its biblical subject , the composer had met many obstacles to its presentation in France , and through Liszt 's influence the premiere was given at Weimar in a German translation . Although the work eventually became an international success it was not staged at the Paris Opéra until 1892 . 
 Saint @-@ Saëns was a keen traveller . From the 1870s until the end of his life he made 179 trips to 27 countries . His professional engagements took him most often to Germany and England ; for holidays , and to avoid Parisian winters which affected his weak chest , he favoured Algiers and various places in Egypt . 
 = = = 1880s : International figure = = = 
 Saint @-@ Saëns was elected to the Institut de France in 1881 , at his second attempt , having to his chagrin been beaten by Massenet in 1878 . In July of that year he and his wife went to the <unk> spa town of La <unk> for a holiday . On 28 July he disappeared from their hotel , and a few days later his wife received a letter from him to say that he would not be returning . They never saw each other again . Marie Saint @-@ Saëns returned to her family , and lived until 1950 , dying near Bordeaux at the age of ninety @-@ five . Saint @-@ Saëns did not divorce his wife and remarry , nor did he form any later intimate relationship with a woman . Rees comments that although there is no firm evidence , some biographers believe that Saint @-@ Saëns was more attracted to his own sex than to women . After the death of his children and collapse of his marriage , Saint @-@ Saëns increasingly found a surrogate family in Fauré and his wife , Marie , and their two sons , to whom he was a much @-@ loved honorary uncle . Marie told him , " For us you are one of the family , and we mention your name ceaselessly here . " 
 In the 1880s Saint @-@ Saëns continued to seek success in the opera house , an undertaking made the more difficult by an entrenched belief among influential members of the musical establishment that it was unthinkable that a pianist , organist and symphonist could write a good opera . He had two operas staged during the decade , the first being Henry VIII ( 1883 ) commissioned by the Paris Opéra . Although the libretto was not of his choosing , Saint @-@ Saëns , normally a fluent , even facile composer , worked at the score with unusual diligence to capture a convincing air of 16th @-@ century England . The work was a success , and was frequently revived during the composer 's lifetime . When it was produced at Covent Garden in 1898 , The Era commented that though French librettists generally " make a pretty hash of British history " , this piece was " not altogether contemptible as an opera story " . 
 The open @-@ mindedness of the Société Nationale had hardened by the mid @-@ 1880s into a dogmatic adherence to Wagnerian methods favoured by Franck 's pupils , led by Vincent d 'Indy . They had begun to dominate the organisation and sought to abandon its " Ars Gallica " ethos of commitment to French works . Bussine and Saint @-@ Saëns found this unacceptable , and resigned in 1886 . Having long pressed the merits of Wagner on a sometimes sceptical French public , Saint @-@ Saëns was now becoming worried that the German 's music was having an excessive impact on young French composers . His increasing caution towards Wagner developed in later years into stronger hostility , directed as much at Wagner 's political nationalism as at his music . 
 By the 1880s Saint @-@ Saëns was an established favourite with audiences in England , where he was widely regarded as the greatest living French composer . In 1886 the Philharmonic Society of London commissioned what became one of his most popular and respected works , the Third ( " Organ " ) Symphony . It was premiered in London at a concert in which Saint @-@ Saëns appeared as conductor of the symphony and as soloist in Beethoven 's Fourth Piano Concerto , conducted by Sir Arthur Sullivan . The success of the symphony in London was considerable , but was surpassed by the ecstatic welcome the work received at its Paris premiere early the following year . Later in 1887 Saint @-@ Saëns 's " drame lyrique " Proserpine opened at the Opéra @-@ Comique . It was well received and seemed to be heading for a substantial run when the theatre burnt down within weeks of the premiere and the production was lost . 
 In December 1888 Saint @-@ Saëns 's mother died . He felt her loss deeply , and was plunged into depression and insomnia , even contemplating suicide . He left Paris and stayed in Algiers , where he recuperated until May 1889 , walking and reading but unable to compose . 
 = = = 1890s : Marking time = = = 
 During the 1890s Saint @-@ Saëns spent much time on holiday , travelling overseas , composing less and performing more infrequently than before . A planned visit to perform in Chicago fell through in 1893 . He wrote one opera , the comedy <unk> ( 1893 ) , and together with Paul Dukas helped to complete <unk> ( 1895 ) an opera left unfinished by Ernest Guiraud , who died in 1892 . <unk> was well received , and prompted calls for more comic operas at the Opéra @-@ Comique , which had latterly been favouring grand opera . His few choral and orchestral works from the 1890s are mostly short ; the major concert pieces from the decade were the single movement fantasia Africa ( 1891 ) and his Fifth ( " Egyptian " ) Piano Concerto , which he premiered at a concert in 1896 marking the fiftieth anniversary of his début at the Salle Pleyel in 1846 . Before playing the concerto he read out a short poem he had written for the event , praising his mother 's tutelage and his public 's long support . 
 Among the concerts that Saint @-@ Saëns undertook during the decade was one at Cambridge in June 1893 , when he , Bruch and Tchaikovsky performed at an event presented by Charles Villiers Stanford for the Cambridge University Musical Society , marking the award of honorary degrees to all three visitors . Saint @-@ Saëns greatly enjoyed the visit , and even spoke approvingly of the college chapel services : " The demands of English religion are not excessive . The services are very short , and consist chiefly of listening to good music extremely well sung , for the English are excellent choristers " . His mutual regard for British choirs continued for the rest of his life , and one of his last large @-@ scale works , the oratorio The Promised Land , was composed for the Three Choirs Festival of 1913 . 
 = = = 1900 – 21 : Last years = = = 
 In 1900 , after ten years without a permanent home in Paris , Saint @-@ Saëns took a flat in the rue de Courcelles , not far from his old residence in the rue du Faubourg Saint @-@ Honoré . This remained his home for the rest of his life . He continued to travel abroad frequently , but increasingly often to give concerts rather than as a tourist . He revisited London , where he was always a welcome visitor , went to Berlin , where until the First World War , he was greeted with honour , and travelled in Italy , Spain , Monaco and provincial France . In 1906 and 1909 he made highly successful tours of the US , as a pianist and conductor . In New York on his second visit he premiered his " Praise ye the Lord " for double choir , orchestra and organ , which he composed for the occasion . 
 Despite his growing reputation as a musical reactionary , Saint @-@ Saëns was , according to Gallois , probably the only French musician who travelled to Munich to hear the premiere of Mahler 's Eighth Symphony in 1910 . Nonetheless , by the 20th century Saint @-@ Saëns had lost much of his enthusiasm for modernism in music . Though he strove to conceal it from Fauré , he did not understand or like the latter 's opera Pénélope ( 1913 ) , of which he was the dedicatee . In 1917 Francis Poulenc , at the beginning of his career as a composer , was dismissive when Ravel praised Saint @-@ Saëns as a genius . By this time , various strands of new music were emerging with which Saint @-@ Saëns had little in common . His classical instincts for form put him at odds with what seemed to him the <unk> and structure of the musical impressionists , led by Debussy . Nor did the theories of Arnold Schönberg 's dodecaphony commend themselves to Saint @-@ Saëns : 
 There is no longer any question of adding to the old rules new principles which are the natural expression of time and experience , but simply of casting aside all rules and every restraint . " Everyone ought to make his own rules . Music is free and unlimited in its liberty of expression . There are no perfect chords , dissonant chords or false chords . All aggregations of notes are legitimate . " That is called , and they believe it , the development of taste . 
 Holding such conservative views , Saint @-@ Saëns was out of sympathy – and out of fashion – with the Parisian musical scene of the early 20th century , fascinated as it was with novelty . It is often said that he walked out , scandalised , from the premiere of Vaslav Nijinsky and Igor Stravinsky 's ballet The Rite of Spring in 1913 . In fact , according to Stravinsky , Saint @-@ Saëns was not present on that occasion , but at the first concert performance of the piece the following year he expressed the firm view that Stravinsky was insane . 
 When a group of French musicians led by Saint @-@ Saëns tried to organise a boycott of German music during the First World War , Fauré and Messager dissociated themselves from the idea , though the disagreement did not affect their friendship with their old teacher . They were privately concerned that their friend was in danger of looking foolish with his excess of patriotism , and also his growing tendency to denounce in public the works of rising young composers , as in his condemnation of Debussy 's En blanc et noir ( 1915 ) : " We must at all costs bar the door of the Institut against a man capable of such atrocities ; they should be put next to the cubist pictures . " His determination to block Debussy 's candidacy for election to the Institut was successful , and caused bitter resentment from the younger composer 's supporters . Saint @-@ Saëns 's response to the neoclassicism of Les Six was equally uncompromising : of Darius Milhaud 's polytonal symphonic suite <unk> ( 1919 ) he commented , " fortunately , there are still lunatic asylums in France " . 
 Saint @-@ Saëns gave what he intended to be his farewell concert as a pianist in Paris in 1913 , but his retirement was soon in abeyance as a result of the war , during which he gave many performances in France and elsewhere , raising money for war charities . These activities took him across the Atlantic , despite the danger from German warships . 
 In November 1921 Saint @-@ Saëns gave a recital at the Institut for a large invited audience ; it was remarked that his playing was as vivid and precise as ever , and that his personal bearing was admirable for a man of eighty @-@ six . He left Paris a month later for Algiers , with the intention of wintering there , as he had long been accustomed to do . While there he died without warning of a heart attack on 16 December 1921 . His body was taken back to Paris , and after a state funeral at the Madeleine he was buried at the Cimetière de Montparnasse . Heavily veiled , in an inconspicuous place among the mourners from France 's political and artistic élite , was his widow , Marie @-@ Laure , whom he had last seen in 1881 . 
 = = Music = = 
 In the early years of the 20th century , the anonymous author of the article on Saint @-@ Saëns in Grove 's Dictionary of Music and Musicians wrote : 
 Saint @-@ Saëns is a consummate master of composition , and no one possesses a more profound knowledge than he does of the secrets and resources of the art ; but the creative faculty does not keep pace with the technical skill of the workman . His incomparable talent for orchestration enables him to give relief to ideas which would otherwise be crude and mediocre in themselves ... his works are on the one hand not frivolous enough to become popular in the widest sense , nor on the other do they take hold of the public by that sincerity and warmth of feeling which is so convincing . 
 Although a keen modernist in his youth , Saint @-@ Saëns was always deeply aware of the great masters of the past . In a profile of him written to mark his eightieth birthday , the critic D C Parker wrote , " That Saint @-@ Saëns knows Rameau ... Bach and Handel , Haydn and Mozart , must be manifest to all who are familiar with his writings . His love for the classical giants and his sympathy with them form , so to speak , the foundation of his art . " 
 Less attracted than some of his French contemporaries to the continuous stream of music popularised by Wagner , Saint @-@ Saëns often favoured self @-@ contained melodies . Though they are frequently , in Ratner 's phrase , " supple and pliable " , more often than not they are constructed in three- or four @-@ bar sections , and the " phrase pattern AABB is characteristic " . An occasional tendency to neoclassicism , influenced by his study of French baroque music , is in contrast with the colourful orchestral music more widely identified with him . Grove observes that he makes his effects more by characterful harmony and rhythms than by extravagant scoring . In both of those areas of his craft he was normally content with the familiar . <unk> , he inclined to standard double , triple or compound metres ( although Grove points to a 5 / 4 passage in the Piano Trio and another in 7 / 4 in the Polonaise for two pianos ) . From his time at the Conservatoire he was a master of counterpoint ; contrapuntal passages crop up , seemingly naturally , in many of his works . 
 = = = Orchestral works = = = 
 The authors of the 1955 The Record Guide , Edward Sackville @-@ West and Desmond Shawe @-@ Taylor write that Saint @-@ Saëns 's brilliant musicianship was " instrumental in drawing the attention of French musicians to the fact that that there are other forms of music besides opera . " In the 2001 edition of Grove 's Dictionary , Ratner and Daniel Fallon , analysing Saint @-@ Saëns 's orchestral music rate the unnumbered Symphony in A ( c . 1850 ) as the most ambitious of the composer 's juvenilia . Of the works of his maturity , the First Symphony ( 1853 ) is a serious and large @-@ scale work , in which the influence of Schumann is detectable . The " Urbs Roma " Symphony ( 1856 ) in some ways represents a backward step , being less deftly orchestrated , and " thick and heavy " in its effect . Ratner and Fallon praise the Second Symphony ( 1859 ) as a fine example of orchestral economy and structural cohesion , with passages that show the composer 's mastery of fugal writing . The best known of the symphonies is the Third ( 1886 ) which , unusually , has prominent parts for piano and organ . It opens in C minor and ends in C major with a stately chorale tune . The four movements are clearly divided into two pairs , a practice Saint @-@ Saëns used elsewhere , notably in the Fourth Piano Concerto ( 1875 ) and the First Violin Sonata ( 1885 ) . The work is dedicated to the memory of Liszt , and uses a recurring motif treated in a <unk> style of thematic transformation . 
 Saint @-@ Saëns 's four symphonic poems follow the model of those by Liszt , though , in Sackville @-@ West 's and Shawe @-@ Taylor 's view , without the " vulgar <unk> " to which the earlier composer was prone . The most popular of the four is Danse macabre ( 1874 ) depicting skeletons dancing at midnight . Saint @-@ Saëns generally achieved his orchestral effects by deft harmonisation rather than exotic instrumentation , but in this piece he featured the xylophone prominently , representing the rattling bones of the dancers . Le Rouet d 'Omphale ( 1870 ) was composed soon after the horrors of the Commune , but its lightness and delicate orchestration give no hint of recent tragedies . Rees rates <unk> ( 1873 ) as the finest of the symphonic poems , belying the composer 's professed indifference to melody , and inspired in its depiction of the mythical hero and his fate . A critic at the time of the premiere took a different view , hearing in the piece " the noise of a hack coming down from Montmartre " rather than the galloping fiery horses of Greek legend that inspired the piece . The last of the four symphonic poems , La jeunesse d 'Hercule ( " Hercules 's Youth " , 1877 ) was the most ambitious of the four , which , Harding suggests , is why it is the least successful . In the judgment of the critic Roger Nichols these orchestral works , which combine striking melodies , strength of construction and memorable orchestration " set new standards for French music and were an inspiration to such young composers as Ravel " . 
 Saint @-@ Saëns wrote a one @-@ act ballet , <unk> ( 1896 ) , the score for the film L <unk> du duc de Guise ( 1908 ) , and incidental music to a dozen plays between 1850 and 1916 . Three of these scores were for revivals of classics by Molière and Racine , for which Saint @-@ Saëns 's deep knowledge of French baroque scores was reflected in his scores , in which he incorporated music by Lully and Charpentier . 
 = = = Concertante works = = = 
 Saint @-@ Saëns was the first major French composer to write piano concertos . His First , in D ( 1858 ) , in conventional three @-@ movement form , is not well known , but the Second , in G minor ( 1868 ) is one of his most popular works . The composer experimented with form in this piece , replacing the customary sonata form first movement with a more discursive structure , opening with a solemn cadenza . The scherzo second movement and presto finale are in such contrast with the opening that the pianist Zygmunt <unk> commented that the work " begins like Bach and ends like Offenbach " . The Third Piano Concerto , in E ♭ ( 1869 ) has another high @-@ spirited finale , but the earlier movements are more classical , the texture clear , with graceful melodic lines . The Fourth , in C minor ( 1875 ) is probably the composer 's best @-@ known piano concerto after the Second . It is in two movements , each comprising two identifiable sub @-@ sections , and maintains a thematic unity not found in the composer 's other piano concertos . According to some sources it was this piece that so impressed Gounod that he dubbed Saint @-@ Saëns " the Beethoven of France " ( other sources base that distinction on the Third Symphony ) . The Fifth and last piano concerto , in F major , was written in 1896 , more than twenty years after its predecessor . The work is known as the " Egyptian " concerto ; it was written while the composer was wintering in Luxor , and incorporates a tune he heard Nile boatmen singing . 
 The First Cello Concerto , in A minor ( 1872 ) is a serious although animated work , in a single continuous movement with an unusually turbulent first section . It is among the most popular concertos in the cello repertory , much favoured by Pablo Casals and later players . The Second , in D minor ( 1902 ) , like the Fourth Piano Concerto , consists of two movements each subdivided into two distinct sections . It is more purely virtuosic than its predecessor : Saëns @-@ Saëns commented to Fauré that it would never be as popular as the First because it was too difficult . There are three violin concertos ; the first to be composed dates from 1858 but was not published until 1879 , as the composer 's Second , in C major . The First , in A , was also completed in 1858 . It is a short work , its single 314 @-@ bar movement lasting less than a quarter of an hour . The Second , in conventional three @-@ movement concerto form , is twice as long as the First , and is the least popular of the three : the thematic catalogue of the composer 's works lists only three performances in his lifetime . The Third , in B minor , written for Pablo Sarasate , is technically challenging for the soloist , although the virtuoso passages are balanced by intervals of pastoral serenity . It is by some margin the most popular of the three violin concertos , but Saint @-@ Saëns 's best @-@ known concertante work for violin and orchestra is probably the Introduction and Rondo Capriccioso , in A minor , Op. 28 , a single @-@ movement piece , also written for Sarasate , dating from 1863 . It changes from a wistful opening to a swaggering main theme , described as faintly sinister by the critic Gerald Larner , who goes on , " After a multi @-@ stopped cadenza ... the solo violin makes a breathless sprint through the coda to the happy ending in A major " . 
 = = = Operas = = = 
 Discounting his collaboration with Dukas in the completion of Guiraud 's unfinished <unk> , Saint @-@ Saëns wrote twelve operas , two of which are <unk> comiques . During the composer 's lifetime his Henry VIII became a repertory piece ; since his death only Samson et Dalila has been regularly staged , although according to Schonberg , Ascanio ( 1890 ) is considered by experts to be a much finer work . The critic Ronald Crichton writes that for all his experience and musical skill , Saint @-@ Saëns " lacked the ' nose ' of the theatre animal granted , for example , to Massenet who in other forms of music was his inferior . " In a 2005 study , the musical scholar Steven Huebner contrasts the two composers : " Saint @-@ Saëns obviously had no time for Massenet 's histrionics " . Saint @-@ Saëns 's biographer James Harding comments that it is regrettable that the composer did not attempt more works of a light @-@ hearted nature , on the lines of La princesse jaune , which Harding describes as like Sullivan " with a light French touch " . 
 Although most of Saint @-@ Saëns 's operas have remained neglected , Crichton rates them as important in the history of French opera , as " a bridge between Meyerbeer and the serious French operas of the early 1890s " . In his view , the operatic scores of Saint @-@ Saëns have , in general , the strengths and weaknesses of the rest of his music – " lucid Mozartian transparency , greater care for form than for content ... There is a certain emotional dryness ; invention is sometimes thin , but the workmanship is impeccable . " Stylistically , Saint @-@ Saëns drew on a range of models . From Meyerbeer he drew the effective use of the chorus in the action of a piece ; for Henry VIII he included Tudor music he had researched in London ; in La princesse jaune he used an oriental pentatonic scale ; from Wagner he derived the use of leitmotifs , which , like Massenet , he used sparingly . Huebner observes that Saint @-@ Saëns was more conventional than Massenet so far as through composition is concerned , more often favouring discrete arias and ensembles , with less variety of tempo within individual numbers . In a survey of recorded opera Alan Blyth writes that Saint @-@ Saëns " certainly learned much from Handel , Gluck , Berlioz , the Verdi of Aida , and Wagner , but from these excellent models he forged his own style . " 
 = = = Other vocal music = = = 
 From the age of six and for the rest of his life Saint @-@ Saëns composed mélodies , writing more than 140 . He regarded his songs as thoroughly and typically French , denying any influence from Schubert or other German composers of Lieder . Unlike his protégé Fauré , or his rival Massenet , he was not drawn to the song cycle , writing only two during his long career – <unk> <unk> ( " Persian Songs " , 1870 ) and Le <unk> rouge ( " The Red Ash Tree " , 1914 , dedicated to Fauré ) . The poet whose works he set most often was Victor Hugo ; others included Alphonse de Lamartine , Pierre Corneille , Amable <unk> , and , in eight songs , Saint @-@ Saëns himself : among his many non @-@ musical talents he was an amateur poet . He was highly sensitive to word setting , and told the young composer Lili Boulanger that to write songs effectively musical talent was not enough : " you must study the French language in depth ; it is indispensable . " Most of the mélodies are written for piano accompaniment , but a few , including " Le lever du soleil sur le Nil " ( " Sunrise over the Nile " , 1898 ) and " Hymne à la paix " ( " Hymn to Peace " , 1919 ) , are for voice and orchestra . His settings , and chosen verses , are generally traditional in form , contrasting with the free verse and less structured forms of a later generation of French composers , including Debussy . 
 Saint @-@ Saëns composed more than sixty sacred vocal works , ranging from motets to masses and oratorios . Among the larger @-@ scale compositions are the Requiem ( 1878 ) and the oratorios Le <unk> ( 1875 ) and The Promised Land ( 1913 ) with an English text by Hermann Klein . He was proud of his connection with British choirs , commenting , " One likes to be appreciated in the home , par excellence , of oratorio . " He wrote a smaller number of secular choral works , some for unaccompanied choir , some with piano accompaniment and some with full orchestra . In his choral works , Saint @-@ Saëns drew heavily on tradition , feeling that his models should be Handel , Mendelssohn and other earlier masters of the genre . In Klein 's view , this approach was old @-@ fashioned , and the familiarity of Saint @-@ Saëns 's treatment of the oratorio form impeded his success in it . 
 = = = Solo keyboard = = = 
 Nichols comments that although as a famous pianist Saint @-@ Saëns wrote for the piano throughout his life , " this part of his oeuvre has made curiously little mark " . Nichols <unk> the Étude en forme de valse ( 1912 ) , which he observes still attracts pianists eager to display their left @-@ hand technique . Although Saint @-@ Saëns was dubbed " the French Beethoven " , and his Variations on a Theme of Beethoven in E ♭ ( 1874 ) is his most extended work for unaccompanied piano , he did not emulate his predecessor in composing piano sonatas . He is not known even to have contemplated writing one . There are sets of bagatelles ( 1855 ) , études ( two sets – 1899 and 1912 ) and fugues ( 1920 ) , but in general Saint @-@ Saëns 's works for the piano are single short pieces . In addition to established forms such as the song without words ( 1871 ) and the mazurka ( 1862 , 1871 and 1882 ) popularised by Mendelssohn and Chopin , respectively , he wrote descriptive pieces such as " Souvenir d 'Italie " ( 1887 ) , " Les cloches du soir " ( " Evening bells " , 1889 ) and " Souvenir d <unk> " ( 1895 ) . 
 Unlike his pupil , Fauré , whose long career as a reluctant organist left no legacy of works for the instrument , Saint @-@ Saëns published a modest number of pieces for organ solo . Some of them were written for use in church services – " Offertoire " ( 1853 ) , " <unk> <unk> " ( 1859 ) , " Communion " ( 1859 ) and others . After he left the Madeleine in 1877 Saint @-@ Saëns wrote ten more pieces for organ , mostly for concert use , including two sets of preludes and fugues ( 1894 and 1898 ) . Some of the earlier works were written to be played on either the harmonium or the organ , and a few were primarily intended for the former . 
 = = = Chamber = = = 
 Saint @-@ Saëns wrote more than forty chamber works between the 1840s and his last years . One of the first of his major works in the genre was the Piano Quintet ( 1855 ) . It is a straightforward , confident piece , in a conventional structure with lively outer movements and a central movement containing two slow themes , one chorale @-@ like and the other cantabile . The Septet ( 1880 ) , for the unusual combination of trumpet , two violins , viola , cello , double bass and piano , is a neoclassical work that draws on 17th @-@ century French dance forms . At the time of its composition Saint @-@ Saëns was preparing new editions of the works of baroque composers including Rameau and Lully . 
 In Ratner 's view , the most important of Saint @-@ Saëns 's chamber works are the sonatas : two for violin , two for cello , and one each for oboe , clarinet and bassoon , all seven with piano accompaniment . The First Violin Sonata dates from 1885 , and is rated by Grove 's Dictionary as one of the composer 's best and most characteristic compositions . The Second ( 1896 ) signals a stylistic change in Saint @-@ Saëns 's work , with a lighter , clearer sound for the piano , characteristic of his music from then onwards . The First Cello Sonata ( 1872 ) was written after the death of the composer 's great @-@ aunt , who had taught him to play the piano more than thirty years earlier . It is a serious work , in which the main melodic material is sustained by the cello over a virtuoso piano accompaniment . Fauré called it the only cello sonata from any country to be of any importance . The Second ( 1905 ) is in four movements , and has the unusual feature of a theme and variations as its scherzo . 
 The woodwind sonatas are among the composer 's last works . Ratner writes of them , " The spare , evocative , classical lines , haunting melodies , and superb formal structures underline these beacons of the neoclassical movement . " Gallois comments that the Oboe Sonata begins like a conventional classical sonata , with an andantino theme ; the central section has rich and colourful harmonies , and the molto allegro finale is full of delicacy , humour and charm with a form of tarantella . For Gallois the Clarinet Sonata is the most important of the three : he calls it " a masterpiece full of impishness , elegance and discreet lyricism " amounting to " a summary of the rest " . The work contrasts a " doleful <unk> " in the slow movement with the finale , which " pirouettes in 4 / 4 time " , in a style reminiscent of the 18th century . The same commentator calls the Bassoon Sonata " a model of transparency , vitality and lightness " , containing humorous touches but also moments of peaceful contemplation . 
 The composer 's most famous work , The Carnival of the Animals ( 1887 ) , although far from a typical chamber piece , is written for eleven players , and is considered by Grove 's Dictionary to be part of Saint @-@ Saëns 's chamber output . Grove rates it as " his most brilliant comic work , parodying Offenbach , Berlioz , Mendelssohn , Rossini , his own Danse macabre and several popular tunes " . He forbade performances of it during his lifetime , concerned that its frivolity would damage his reputation as a serious composer . 
 = = = Recordings = = = 
 Saint @-@ Saëns was a pioneer in recorded music . In June 1904 The Gramophone Company of London sent its producer Fred Gaisberg to Paris to record Saint @-@ Saëns as accompanist to the mezzo @-@ soprano <unk> <unk> in arias from Ascanio and Samson et Dalila , and as soloist in his own piano music , including an arrangement of sections of the Second Piano Concerto ( without orchestra ) . Saint @-@ Saëns made more recordings for the company in 1919 . 
 In the early days of the LP record , Saint @-@ Saëns 's works were patchily represented on disc . The Record Guide ( 1955 ) lists one recording apiece of the Third Symphony , Second Piano Concerto and First Cello Concerto , alongside several versions of Danse Macabre , The Carnival of the Animals , the Introduction and Rondo Capriccioso and other short orchestral works . In the latter part of the 20th century and the early 21st , many more of the composer 's works were released on LP and later CD and DVD . The 2008 Penguin Guide to Recorded Classical Music contains ten pages of listings of Saint @-@ Saëns works , including all the concertos , symphonies , symphonic poems , sonatas and quartets . Also listed are an early Mass , collections of organ music , and choral songs . A recording of twenty @-@ seven of Saint @-@ Saëns 's mélodies was released in 1997 . 
 With the exception of Samson et Dalila the operas have been sparsely represented on disc . A recording of Henry VIII was issued on CD and DVD in 1992 . Hélène was released on CD in 2008 . There are several recordings of Samson et <unk> , under conductors including Sir Colin Davis , Georges Prêtre , Daniel Barenboim and Myung @-@ <unk> Chung . 
 = = Honours and reputation = = 
 Saint @-@ Saëns was made a Chevalier of the Legion of Honour in 1867 and promoted to Officier in 1884 , and Grand Croix in 1913 . Foreign honours included the British Royal Victorian Order ( CVO ) in 1902 , and honorary doctorates from the universities of Cambridge ( 1892 ) and Oxford ( 1907 ) . 
 In its obituary notice , The Times commented : 
 The death of M. Saint @-@ Saëns not only deprives France of one of her most distinguished composers ; it removes from the world the last representative of the great movements in music which were typical of the 19th century . He had maintained so vigorous a vitality and kept in such close touch with present @-@ day activities that , though it had become customary to speak of him as the doyen of French composers , it was easy to forget the place he actually took in musical chronology . He was only two years younger than Brahms , was five years older than Tchaikovsky , six years older than Dvořák , and seven years older than Sullivan . He held a position in his own country 's music certain aspects of which may be <unk> compared with each of those masters in their own spheres . 
 In a short poem , " Mea culpa " , published in 1890 Saint @-@ Saëns accused himself of lack of decadence , and commented approvingly on the excessive enthusiasms of youth , lamenting that such things were not for him . An English commentator quoted the poem in 1910 , observing , " His sympathies are with the young in their desire to push forward , because he has not forgotten his own youth when he championed the progressive ideals of the day . " The composer sought a balance between innovation and traditional form . The critic Henry Colles , wrote , a few days after the composer 's death : 
 In his desire to maintain " the perfect equilibrium " we find the limitation of Saint @-@ Saëns 's appeal to the ordinary musical mind . Saint @-@ Saëns rarely , if ever , takes any risks ; he never , to use the slang of the moment , " goes off the deep end " . All his greatest contemporaries did . Brahms , Tchaikovsky , and even Franck , were ready to sacrifice everything for the end each wanted to reach , to drown in the attempt to get there if necessary . Saint @-@ Saëns , in preserving his equilibrium , allows his hearers to preserve theirs . 
 Grove concludes its article on Saint @-@ Saëns with the observation that although his works are remarkably consistent , " it cannot be said that he evolved a distinctive musical style . Rather , he defended the French tradition that threatened to be engulfed by Wagnerian influences and created the environment that nourished his successors " . 
 Since the composer 's death writers sympathetic to his music have expressed regret that he is known by the musical public for only a handful of his scores such as The Carnival of the Animals , the Second Piano Concerto , the Organ Symphony , Samson et Dalila , Danse macabre and the Introduction and Rondo Capriccioso . Among his large output , Nicholas singles out the Requiem , the Christmas Oratorio , the ballet <unk> , the Piano Quartet , the Septet for trumpet , piano and strings , and the First Violin Sonata as neglected masterpieces . In 2004 , the cellist Steven Isserlis said , " Saint @-@ <unk> is exactly the sort of composer who needs a festival to himself ... there are Masses , all of which are interesting . I 've played all his cello music and there isn 't one bad piece . His works are rewarding in every way . And he 's an endlessly fascinating figure . " 
 = Hurricane Danielle ( 2004 ) = 
 Hurricane Danielle was the first of several Cape Verde @-@ type hurricane to form during the 2004 Atlantic hurricane season . Danielle was the fourth named storm and third hurricane of the season . Danielle formed on August 13 , 2004 in the far eastern Atlantic Ocean and remained over the central Atlantic , peaking as a strong Category 2 hurricane on August 16 before weakening over cooler waters ; becoming a remnant low on August 21 and dissipating on August 24 . Danielle never approached land , although it briefly threatened the Azores as it made the northerly turn . As a result , there was no impact caused by the storm . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 Hurricane Danielle began as a vigorous tropical wave over Africa . As the wave emerged into the Atlantic , it quickly became more organized due to favorable conditions , including low wind shear . The circulation consolidated and spawned Tropical Depression Four on the morning of August 13 south @-@ southeast of the Cape Verde islands . The system was over somewhat cooler water at first with sea surface temperatures around 79 ° F ( 26 ° C ) ; however , the low shear environment allowed the depression to continue to organize . Late that evening , the system strengthened into Tropical Storm Danielle . 
 As Danielle tracked westward into the open Atlantic early on August 14 , the storm encountered warmer water southwest of Cape Verde and began to gradually intensify , becoming a moderate tropical storm with 50 mph ( 85 km / h ) winds that morning . At that point , a bout of rapid intensification began to take place , and the storm was upgraded to Hurricane Danielle that evening as an eye began to form . Over a 24 ‑ hour period ending in the morning of August 15 , the pressure fell from 1004 to 978 mbar and the winds increased to 90 mph ( 145 km / h ) , making it a high @-@ end Category 1 hurricane on the Saffir @-@ Simpson hurricane scale . 
 Danielle levelled off somewhat in intensity after that round of rapid intensification , only gradually strengthening afterward due to structural changes in the storm related to the small wind field relative to the size of the eye . Nonetheless , Danielle became a Category 2 hurricane on the afternoon of August 15 as it approached the subtropical ridge which blocked the continued westward movement . Beginning late on August 15 , at about 35 ° W , Danielle began to recurve to the northwest and eventually north while continuing to gradually strengthen . Early on August 16 , the recurvature became more pronounced , and Danielle turned abruptly northward in the central Atlantic Ocean as an upper @-@ level trough opened up a large break in the ridge . That movement took it along the eastern side of the subtropical ridge , preventing Danielle from moving any farther west and becoming any threat to North America or the Caribbean . While moving northwest , Danielle strengthened a bit more , reaching its peak intensity of 110 mph ( 175 km / h ) , just under Category 3 intensity , on the afternoon of August 16 . 
 The northward movement also sent Danielle into somewhat increased shear , which allowed it to begin to weaken . However , the weakening was gradual at first as the waters remained fairly warm . The abrupt northerly turn meant that , for a while on August 17 , the Azores were threatened by Danielle in the long @-@ range forecast , as a weakened tropical storm or extratropical cyclone . Danielle weakened to a Category 1 hurricane on the evening of August 17 as shear continued to increase . Danielle began to turn to the northeast early on August 18 , and at that point , the weakening trend accelerated . Some of the deep convection was being removed from the system due to wind shear , and that morning , Danielle weakened to a tropical storm . The rapid weakening trend continued that afternoon , and Danielle weakened to a low @-@ end tropical storm with 45 mph ( 75 km / h ) winds late that evening . However , the intensity levelled off early on August 19 and Danielle remained a tropical storm for the next couple days over moderately warm water of around 78 ° F ( just under 26 ° C ) while south @-@ southwest of the Azores . 
 Intermittent deep convection continued to fire up , keeping the storm afloat for the next day and turning it away from the Azores . Danielle also changed direction and meandered slightly to the northwest , away from the Azores , due to very weak steering currents . After holding on as a minimal tropical storm , Danielle finally lost its deep convection due to high upper @-@ level vertical shear and was downgraded to a tropical depression on the afternoon of August 20 . The depression turned once again to the north , and continued to lose organization over cooler water . It degenerated into a remnant low on the afternoon of August 21 as the convection was completely sheared away from the center of Danielle . The remnant low remained in the open ocean , remaining devoid of any deep convection , until August 24 when it dissipated west @-@ southwest of the Azores . 
 = = Impact , naming , and records = = 
 Hurricane Danielle did not have any impact on land and no damage or fatalities were reported . No ships were reported to have come into contact with Danielle . When Danielle became a tropical storm at 24 @.@ 8 ° W , it was the farthest east that a storm had received a name since Hurricane Alberto in the 2000 Atlantic hurricane season . 
 = Characters of the Final Fantasy Type @-@ 0 universe = 
 Final Fantasy Type @-@ 0 , an action role @-@ playing game developed and published by Square Enix in 2011 , revolves around a war between four nations in the world of Orience . An episodic companion game , Final Fantasy Agito , was released in 2014 . Type @-@ 0 was re @-@ released internationally in 2015 as a high @-@ definition remaster for PlayStation 4 and Xbox One . The main protagonists are Class Zero , a group of students at the magical academy in Rubrum . The story is told through two new members of Class Zero : Machina Kunagiri and Rem Tokimiya . The main character of Agito is a player @-@ created cadet at the Rubrum magical academy . The world and characters were designed by Yusuke Naora , Yusaku Nakaaki and Tetsuya Nomura . Their stories were created by Hajime Tabata , Hiroki Chiba and Sarah Obake . 
 The main characters are the twelve members of Class Zero : Ace , Deuce , Trey , Cater , Cinque , Sice , Seven , Eight , Nine , Jack , Queen and King . Alongside them are Machina Kunagiri and Rem Tokimiya , old friends who are assigned to Class Zero shortly after the events of the game begin . A guest character is Kurasame Susaya , Class Zero 's tutor and a veteran warrior . Other major characters include Arecia Al @-@ Rashia , head of the Rubrum Academy 's magical department and a key figure in Orience 's lore ; Cid Aulstyne , the leader of Milites Empire and the game 's main antagonist ; and Joker and Tiz , two characters who observe the events of the games . 
 The concept , which was set within the mythos of the Fabula Nova Crystallis subseries , was for a much darker scenario than other Final Fantasy games . The main cast were designed by Nomura and Naora , while side characters were handled by Nakaaki . Multiple pieces of merchandise and additional media have been created around the characters , including trading cards and multiple manga . They have been the subject of positive reviews in Japan and import reviews : the main praise has gone to their interactions and writing , while the main criticism was difficulties arising from handling the large cast . Western reviews were also generally positive about the character portrayals , but there were criticisms about dialogue , character interactions , and the quality of the localization . 
 = = Concept and creation = = 
 The original scenario and concept of Final Fantasy Type @-@ 0 , originally a mobile title named Final Fantasy Agito XIII , was conceived by Hajime Tabata . He wished for a group @-@ driven story as he felt that a single playable character would not be able to properly convey the scope and themes of the story . Because Tabata wanted to show a history of survival told from the point of view of young people caught in a war , it was decided to set the story during a war between four nations . Much of the original story , which mainly revolved about defying the gods , was drawn from popular anime and manga and did not survive . After the platform change to PlayStation Portable , Tabata adopted a story @-@ telling style similar to a documentary film : a direct inspiration for this was Centuries of Picture , a documentary series broadcast on NHK . Alongside that , multiple war films were used as inspiration . Type @-@ 0 's script was written by Hiroki Chiba and Sarah Okabe . During the rough draft stage , elements such as extra plot points involving Khalia Chival , a boss fight with Arecia , and a main plot thread involving Joker and Tiz were planned . Most of these elements were cut from the final product , meaning elements such as Joker and Tiz 's role needed to be included in written texts found in @-@ game so they were not left hanging . The deaths of Class Zero were planned from an early stage , and to emphasize the state of the world , a large number of the supporting cast were killed off near the end . Tabata wanted to create a story depicting different fates for Type @-@ 0 's characters , and this decision was supported by both staff members and fans of the original . He also implemented the ability for players to decide the course of the story , which was to have been included in the Type @-@ 0 when it was still known as Agito XIII . Final Fantasy Agito was given a more upbeat atmosphere when compared to Type @-@ 0 , although dark and more dramatic moments were still present . The story grew out of what Tabata originally envisioned for Type @-@ 0 . 
 The setting of Type @-@ 0 was written around the Fabula Nova Crystallis subseries , which also includes Final Fantasy XIII and Final Fantasy XV . The mythos involves how humans are manipulated and controlled by the world 's deities . The crystals of Type @-@ 0 's world were the equivalent of the fal 'Cie , demigods serving these deities . Originally , the crystals were to have been called " fal 'Cie " . The characters Arecia , Gala and Diva were also created to fill the roles of fal 'Cie . The approach taken to the incorporation of the mythos was that the world of Orience was part of a shared universe that also contained the worlds of XIII and XV rather than a standalone existence . As opposed to XIII , which told a story directly related to the mythos ' deities , Type @-@ 0 focused on the human side of the story , depicting the deities ' role in world events from a historical standpoint . A key element carried directly from the mythos is the l 'Cie , humans chosen by servants of the world 's deities to fulfill a pre @-@ determined task called a " Focus " . Tabata neglected including elements from the Fabula Nova Crystallis mythos until approximately halfway through the process . Chiba and Obake were the ones responsible for including the elements in the storyline , as well as including the cyclic nature of the game 's world to help communicate some aspects of the mythos : originally disliked by Tabata , he later said that it suited the game due to the heavy eastern influences . 
 = = = Character design = = = 
 The characters were designed by regular Final Fantasy designer Tetsuya Nomura , art director Yusuke Naora , co @-@ art director Yusaku Nakaaki , and sub @-@ character designer Roberto Ferrari . Naora asked Nomura to contribute to the character designs . Naora and Nomura did the main cast , while Nakaaki and Ferrari handled secondary characters . Each player character was initially given a basic design trait drawn by Nomura . The design was gradually expanded upon during the creative process , working to avoid making them appear similar . Part of this was giving each character a unique weapon : Deuce 's flute and Ace 's cards were the most difficult to realize from a technical standpoint . After the world and setting were created , the characters ' personalities and traits were finalized : for each character , the team planned how each character originated and the events which happened around them . The main cast 's naming system , based on playing cards , was chosen because the team liked the idea . Nomura came up with the idea of having fourteen characters , with thirteen main characters and a " Joker " . This idea , originally created for Agito XIII , carried over into Type @-@ 0 . The characters were made of various heights and builds to emphasize both the game 's realism and the characters being teenagers . 
 While portraying the bonds between the members of Class Zero , and between them and their summoned monsters , along with the game 's themes of death and war , Naora drew inspiration from when he saw a cat killed by a car surrounded by other cats . Nomura was in charge of choosing the voice cast , which featured several well @-@ known voice actors . When listening to the samples and picking the actors , Nomura focused on whether they could successfully project the characters ' personalities . The actors and actresses helped define the characters , adding individual touches during voice recording sessions . <unk> Hoshino acted as the game 's character texture artist . Originally , she was going to put in black voids where a female character 's panties would have been due to hardware limitations . However the staff realized that the players would be looking at the backs of characters a lot , so Hoshino designed panties for each female character and worked with the staff to incorporate them into the character models . 
 After Type @-@ 0 's release , Tabata resurrected his initial concept for a mobile game as the prequel Agito . Hoshino became the title 's art director . As with Type @-@ 0 , one of the areas she focused on was the female characters ' underwear . The characters ' facial animations were done using Silicon Studio 's Motion Portrait middleware . For Type @-@ 0 HD , the characters ' original gameplay models were replaced with updated versions of the original cutscene models due to the latter 's higher detail . Due to this higher detail , the cutscene models looked older than the gameplay models , so they needed adjustments to look more like the original models . Their appearances were also adjusted to look more " charming " . The game 's graphical upgrade was only partially done for the game 's characters due to time constraints : while the main cast were given the most attention , secondary characters such as Kurasame received less work . 
 = = Playable characters = = 
 Class Zero ( <unk> , <unk> Zero ) are the main protagonists and playable cast of Type @-@ 0 , later revealed to have been chosen for their potential to become saviors referred to as Agito , a group of people created to force open the barrier between the mortal world and the Unseen Realm . Each member of Class Zero also appears in Agito , although the others are in different classes while Ace remains a member of Class Zero . They can also be summoned into battle to assist the Cadet . In Type @-@ 0 , Machina and Rem were recently transferred to Class Zero but not fully classed with the rest of the group . During their battle with the Rursan Arbiter , Class Zero are fatally wounded , and during their final moments , they imagine their possible post @-@ war lives . Their deaths are instrumental in convincing Arecia to free Orience from its cycle of war . 
 = = = Ace = = = 
 Ace ( <unk> , <unk> ) is a cool @-@ headed youth who is one of the first members of Class Zero , able to use cards and with knowledge of magic and warfare . He is one of the few in Orience to be able to sense the raw emotions of the dead and mourn them . He was also a friend of Machina 's brother Izana . In Agito , Ace remains a member of Class Zero . First introduced after saving the Cadet from a monster attack , he remains a close ally throughout the game 's events . In Agito 's second cycle , Ace is chosen to become the Rursan Arbiter and is defeated by the Cadet and the chosen representatives of Agito . Ace is voiced by Jonathon McClendon in English and Yūki Kaji in Japanese . 
 = = = Other Class Zero Members = = = 
 While they are members of Class Zero in Type @-@ 0 , they appear in other classes during the events of Agito . 
 Deuce ( <unk> , <unk> ) , the flute @-@ wielding member of the Class . In Agito , she is a member of Class Fourth . She is voiced by Bryce Hitchcock in English and Kana Hanazawa in Japanese . 
 Trey ( <unk> , <unk> ) , the Class ' archer . In Agito , he is a member of Class Eleventh . Trey is voiced by Matthew Mercer in English and Yūichi Nakamura in Japanese . 
 Cater ( <unk> , <unk> ) , one of the two gun @-@ wielding members of the Class , bearing a magic @-@ infused handgun . Through the course of the game , she experiences the highest amount of deja vu , due to her having gone through the cycle of history more times than the others . In Agito , she is a member of Class Tenth . Cater is voiced by Kristen <unk> in English and Minori <unk> in Japanese . 
 Cinque ( <unk> , Shinku ) , the mace @-@ wielding member of the Class . In Agito , she is a member of Class Third . Cinque is voiced by Cristina Valenzuela in English and Aki Toyosaki in Japanese . 
 Sice ( <unk> , <unk> ) , the scythe @-@ wielding member of the Class . In Agito , she is a member of Class Sixth . Sice is voiced by Corri English in English and Miyuki Sawashiro in Japanese . 
 Seven ( <unk> , Sebun ) , the chain whip @-@ wielding member of the Class . In Agito , she is a member of Class Seventh . Seven is voiced by <unk> Townsend in English and Mayuko Aoki in Japanese . 
 Eight ( <unk> , Eito ) , the martial artist of the Class . In Agito , he is a member of Class Fifth . Eight is voiced by Jeff Fischer in English and Miyu Irino in Japanese . 
 Nine ( <unk> , Nain ) , the spearman of the Class . In Agito , he is a member of Class Second . Tabata called Nine his favorite character due to his straightforward manner and personality . Nine is voiced by Orion Acaba in English and Daisuke Ono in Japanese . 
 Jack ( ジャック , Jakku ) , the katana @-@ wielding member of the Class . In Agito , he is a member of Class Twelfth . Jack is voiced by Cameron Covell in English and Kenichi Suzumura in Japanese . 
 Queen ( <unk> , <unk> ) , the swordswoman of the Class . In Agito , she is a member of Class First . Queen is voiced by Heather Hogan in English and Ami <unk> in Japanese . 
 King ( <unk> , <unk> ) , the second gun @-@ wielding member of the Class , bearing twin pistols . In Agito , he is a member of Class Ninth . King is voiced by Mike Vaughn in English and Tomokazu Sugita in Japanese . 
 = = = Machina Kunagiri = = = 
 Machina Kunagiri ( <unk> ・ <unk> , <unk> Kunagiri ) is the thirteenth member of Class Zero and acts as one of the game 's narrators . During the events of Type @-@ 0 , Machina became a Milites l 'Cie and was forced to kill Rem before joining her in crystal stasis . He is later revived by Arecia to rebuild Orience once the crystals are removed . In Agito , he is a member of Class Second . Machina is voiced by Bryce Papenbrook in English and Hiroshi Kamiya in Japanese . 
 = = = Rem Tokimiya = = = 
 Rem Tokimiya ( <unk> ・ <unk> , <unk> Tokimiya ) is the fourteenth member of Class Zero and acts as one of the game 's narrators . During the events of Type @-@ 0 , as Finis begins , Rem becomes a Vermillion Bird l 'Cie and is fatally wounded by Machina before entering crystal stasis and later being revived by Arecia to rebuild Orience once the crystals are removed . In Agito , she is a member of Class Seventh . Rem is voiced by Peyton McCormick in English and Ryoko Shiraishi in Japanese . 
 = = = Cadet = = = 
 The player @-@ customized Cadet ( <unk> , <unk> @-@ sei ) is the playable character of Final Fantasy Agito . The Cadet 's gender , appearance , equipment and other aspects are chosen by the player before the game starts . The Cadet is first encountered when they are saved by Ace from a beast attack , and thereafter become part of Rubrum 's general effort to fight against the Milites Empire . Their final appearance is at the end of Orience 's second cycle , where Tiz and Joker wish them well and vow to free Orience from its cycle . 
 = = Supporting characters = = 
 = = = Kurasame Susaya = = = 
 Kurasame Susaya ( <unk> ・ <unk> ) is Class Zero 's mentor and a guest character in battle . He is accompanied by a <unk> , a recurring monster in the Final Fantasy series . In earlier years , he was friends with Kazusa and Emina , and his performance on the battlefield earned him the moniker " Reaper of the Icy Blade " ( 氷剣の死神 , <unk> no Shinigami ) . A betrayal left his lower face permanently scarred , and he wears a mask to hide it . Kurasame is voiced by Robbie Daymond in English and Takahiro Sakurai in Japanese . 
 = = = Arecia Al @-@ Rashia = = = 
 Arecia Al @-@ Rashia ( <unk> ・ <unk> , <unk> <unk> ) is the one who established Class Zero . Though she appears human , Arecia is a being who serves the deity Pulse and is responsible for the creation of Orience 's crystals . Arecia 's purpose was to use the powerful souls among Class Zero to locate Etro 's Gate in an endless cycle of conflict , but the events of Type @-@ 0 have Arecia end the experiment and depart to points unknown . Before she leaves , she frees Machina and Rem from crystal stasis . Arecia is voiced by Eliza Jane Schneider in English and Atsuko Tanaka in Japanese . 
 = = = Joker and Tiz = = = 
 Joker ( <unk> , <unk> ) and Tiz ( <unk> , <unk> ) are supporting characters in Type @-@ 0 . The two are unofficial members of Class Zero , acting as Arecia 's agents . As revealed in Agito , their respective real names are Lean <unk> ( <unk> ・ <unk> , <unk> <unk> ) and Tohno Mahoroha ( <unk> ・ <unk> , <unk> Mahoroha ) : Lean was allied with the Milites Empire as a scientist , while Tohno is an antisocial student at Akademeia . During the events of the final chapter of Orience 's second cycle , Arecia chooses them to be her immortal agents , retaining their memories of each cycle . During Type @-@ 0 , Tiz decides to use the accumulated memories of Orience 's dead to convince Arecia to abandon the experiment . Joker is voiced by Adam McArthur in English and Kōki Uchiyama in Japanese , while Tiz is voiced by Chelsea Ricketts in English and Hitomi <unk> in Japanese . 
 = = = Cid Aulstyne = = = 
 Cid Aulstyne ( シド ・ <unk> , Shido <unk> ) is Imperial Marshal of the Milites army , having become the empire 's acting leader and the main antagonist of Type @-@ 0 and Agito . Seeing his people 's prayers to the White Tiger Crystal go unanswered , he decided to oust the crystals and others related to the world 's deities , bringing Orience under the rule of humans . Enacting a coup d 'état against the Militesi Emperor , Cid appointed himself as the ruler of the Empire and took control of the White Tiger Crystal . When Tempus Finis arrives , Cid is confronted by Gala and chosen as the Rursan Arbiter , the being who carries out Gala 's will . In a futile attempt to thwart Gala 's plan , Cid kills himself . Resurrected by Gala as the Rursan Arbiter , he acts as the game 's final antagonist , and is finally defeated by Class Zero . Cid is voiced by Steven Blum in English and <unk> Moriyama in Japanese . 
 = = = Gala and Diva = = = 
 Gala ( <unk> , <unk> ) and Diva ( <unk> , <unk> ) are minor characters related to the lore of Orience . Gala is a servant of the deity Lindzei , he is the leader of the Lulusath Army : whenever the balance between Orience 's nations is disrupted , he summons his army to slaughter the population . After Arecia abandons the experiment , he falls into a coma . He remains unnamed in the game , being referred to as " the Masked Man " , but is named in the Ultimania guide book . Diva is the main narrator of Final Fantasy Type @-@ 0 . Like Arecia and Gala , she is a being created by the world 's deities : her duty is to watch over the world and record the events of each cycle . Diva is voiced by Fleur Saville in English and Maaya Sakamoto in Japanese . 
 = = = Miyu Kagerohi = = = 
 Miyu Kagerohi ( <unk> ・ <unk> , <unk> Kagerohi ) is a supporting character from Final Fantasy Agito . A member of Class Second , she is the representative for the cadets in the Vermillion Peristyrium . Her true identity , as revealed with the coming of Tempus Finis , is Myuria ( <unk> , <unk> ) , a servant of Gala who oversees the Lulusath Army . Her defeat signals the coming of Tempus Finis , as the first cycle is deemed a failure . She later appears at the end of the second cycle , pondering with Arecia whether to continue with the experiment . She is voiced by Haruka Tomatsu in Japanese . Miyu as Myuria appears in concept art for Type @-@ 0 , but she was cut from the game . 
 = = Other characters = = 
 = = = Dominion of Rubrum = = = 
 Khalia Chival VI ( <unk> ・ <unk> , Kariya <unk> <unk> ) is a supporting character . He is the ruler of the Dominion of Rubrum and the 174th Director of the Vermillion Peristylium . Unlike most of the population of Orience , he is aware of both the nature of the crystals and Arecia 's true form . Khalia is voiced by William Bassett in English and Iemasa Kayumi in Japanese . 
 Izana Kunagiri ( <unk> ・ <unk> ) is a minor supporting character and Machina 's brother . Before the events of Type @-@ 0 , he was the keeper of the Peristylium chocobo pens and a good friend of Ace . During the assault on the Vermillion Peristylium by Milites , he was sent through the midst of the battle on a mission by Arecia , causing his death . The circumstances behind his death eventually alienate Machina from Class Zero . Izana is voiced by Jason <unk> in English and Keiji Fujiwara in Japanese . 
 The Cranberry Knights ( <unk> , <unk> Naitsu ) are a group of thirteen moogles . In the world of Orience , the word " moogle " stands for Military Operation Organization Guidance Logistics Expert . One moogle is assigned to each class in the Peirstyrium . The one assigned to Class Zero , <unk> , gives the group missions across Orience ( the game 's version of side quests ) . In Agito , a moogle accompanies the Cadet through the Peirstyrium . Chiba was initially to have put in a sequence involving all members of the Knights , but he forgot . <unk> is voiced by Ariel Winter in English and Sumire <unk> in Japanese . 
 Emina <unk> ( <unk> ・ <unk> ) is a minor supporting character . A supervisor of Peristylium cadets , she was a friend of Kurasame and Kazusa during her time as a student . Over the course of the game , it is revealed that she is a spy from Milites who betrayed her handlers after growing to love the people of the academy . She is arrested by the forces of Rubrum as a potential spy and it is implied that she was executed for espionage . Emina is voiced by Ali Hillis in English and Rie Tanaka in Japanese . 
 Kazusa <unk> ( <unk> ・ <unk> ) is a minor supporting character . A schoolfriend of Kurasame and Emina , he is a scientific researcher at the Vermillion Peirstyrium . Multiple times , he uses Class Zero to further his work , much to Kurasame 's annoyance . After Kurasame 's death , he uses a machine to recall memories of him , but neither Emina or Kazusa can remember him any more . He is one of the few senior Peristylium staff to survive Finis and help in Orience 's reconstruction . Kazusa was scenario writer 's Sarah Obake 's favorite character in Type @-@ 0 . He is voiced by Joel Johnstone in English and Akira Ishida in Japanese . 
 Caetuna ( <unk> , Setsuna ) is a l 'Cie of Rubrum and a minor supporting character . The oldest and one of the most powerful l 'Cie in Orience , she specializes in summoning magic . During Rubrum 's battle against the united forces of Milites and Concordia , she is deployed in a decisive battle to use her summoning skills . She summons the <unk> Eidolon Alexander with the help of sacrificed energy from Kurasame and other students . The summoning costs all of them , including Caetuna , their lives . Caetuna is voiced by Erin <unk> in English and Marina Inoue in Japanese . 
 Zhuyu <unk> <unk> ( <unk> ・ <unk> ・ <unk> , <unk> <unk> <unk> ) is a supporting character in Type @-@ 0 . Often referred to as " Lord Zhuyu " , he is a l 'Cie of the Vermillion Bird crystal . During his time serving the crystal , he has been gradually losing his memories : to try to maintain some link to his past , he continues to wear his old Peristyrium uniform . Zhuyu is voiced by Marc Worden in English and Hiroki Tōchi in Japanese . 
 <unk> <unk> ( <unk> ・ <unk> ) : A bandana @-@ wearing aloof cadet from Class Ninth who is a self @-@ proclaimed idol and member of the Intelligence Club . He is voiced by Daniel <unk> in English and Shōtarō Morikubo in Japanese . 
 Carla <unk> ( <unk> ・ <unk> , <unk> <unk> ) : A fiery merchant girl from Class Second who offers items and information for outrageous prices . Because of her good grades , she is popular among the faculty . She is voiced by Danielle Judovits in English Aya Hirano in Japanese . 
 Quon <unk> ( <unk> ・ <unk> , Kuon <unk> ) : A magic researcher from Class Third who has no interest for common spells and is constantly looking for the ultimate magic . He is voiced by Chris Carmack in English Ryōtarō Okiayu in Japanese . 
 Mutsuki <unk> ( <unk> ・ <unk> ) : Though Class Twelfth 's genius inventor , her paranoia and skill in bomb making make her dangerous to even her peers . She is voiced by Cassandra Morris in English and Marika Matsumoto in Japanese . 
 <unk> Uruk ( <unk> ・ <unk> , <unk> <unk> ) : A member of Class Fifth , he is part Lorican on his mother 's side and is the grandson of Enkidu . Due to his mixed heritage , he is destined to lose the ability to wield magic . He trains every day to use his strength to protect others . He is voiced by Travis Willingham in English Masahiro Kobayashi in Japanese . 
 = = = Milites Empire = = = 
 Qator Bashar ( <unk> ・ <unk> , <unk> <unk> ) is a secondary antagonist . Second @-@ in @-@ command of the Milites Army , he is fiercely loyal to Cid . His primary weapon and means of transport is Gabriel , a flying <unk> armor . He often takes part in battles , and consequently fights Class Zero . During Rubrum 's final assault on Milites , Qator fights Class Zero again , but sacrifices himself to save Milites when he finds out an Ultima bomb is hidden inside Gabriel . Qator is voiced by Mark Hanson in English and Hideo Ishikawa in Japanese . 
 <unk> <unk> Tru 'e ( <unk> ・ <unk> , <unk> <unk> ) is a minor antagonist . A new l 'Cie of the White Tiger crystal , she is given control of the Crystal Jammer mounted on the <unk> armor <unk> . She faces off against Class Zero , and narrowly escapes after <unk> is destroyed . During a later mission , she is trapped in stone , managing to transfer her l 'Cie powers to Machina before entering crystal stasis . <unk> <unk> is voiced by Aimée Castle in English and Megumi Toyoguchi in Japanese . 
 Nimbus ( <unk> , <unk> ) is a minor antagonist . A l 'Cie of the White Tiger crystal , he has been in its service for a hundred years and has lost all purpose in life apart from obeying its commands . During Rubrum 's efforts to repulse Milites , Nimbus and Zhuyu do battle , completely destroying a region of Rubrum . After bringing Cid to Pandaemonium , Nimbus vanishes to points unknown it is implied that , after the crystals lose power , he dies . Nimbus is voiced by Kyle Hebert in English and Junichi Suwabe in Japanese . 
 = = = Kingdom of Concordia = = = 
 Andoria Kaya <unk> Fam <unk> ( <unk> ・ <unk> ・ <unk> ・ <unk> ・ <unk> ) , often simply called " Queen Andoria " , is the ruler of Concordia . In an effort to stop the war , she evokes the Fabula Pact , forcing a ceasefire . During the peace talks , Andoria is assassinated by <unk> and Concordian conspirators , resulting in Class Zero being framed for her murder . Andoria is voiced by Catherine Taber in English and Megumi Hayashibara . 
 Claes Celestia <unk> <unk> ( <unk> ・ <unk> ・ <unk> ・ <unk> , <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> ) , often just called " Celestia " , is a supporting character in Type @-@ 0 , being a l 'Cie of the Azure Dragon crystal . Celestia is voiced by Kim Mai Guest in English and Nana Mizuki in Japanese . 
 The king of Concordia ( <unk> , Sōryū @-@ ō , lit . Blue Dragon King ) is a supporting character in Type @-@ 0 . Appointed after Andoria 's death as part of a Milites puppet regime , he is a proud and selfish man who puts his own agenda before the welfare of Concordia . The king is voiced by Piotr Michael in English and Jun Fukuyama in Japanese . 
 = = = Lorican Alliance = = = 
 Gilgamesh ( <unk> , <unk> ) is a supporting character and minor antagonist in Final Fantasy Type @-@ 0 . Originally the king of the Lorican Alliance , he became a l 'Cie of the Black Tortoise crystal and consequently began losing his memories , eventually forgetting his duty to the crystal . Gilgamesh is voiced by Keith Szarabajka in English and Kazuya Nakai in Japanese . 
 Enkidu ( <unk> , Enkidu ) is a minor supporting character in Final Fantasy Type @-@ 0 . A childhood friend of and guide for Gilgamesh , he is a l 'Cie of the Black Tortoise crystal . Enkidu is voiced by Liam O 'Brien in English and Hiroshi <unk> in Japanese . 
 = = Cultural impact = = 
 = = = Merchandise = = = 
 Characters from the game , including Ace , Mog , Machina and other members of Class Zero , appeared in the fourth series of releases for the Final Fantasy Trading Card Game . On November 2011 , a manga adaptation of Type @-@ 0 began serialization . It is illustrated by Takatoshi Shiozawa and published in Young Gangan magazine . The manga has been collected into a tankōbon volume and was released on April 21 , 2012 . An English translation was released with the Collector 's Edition of Type @-@ 0 HD in March 2015 , exclusive to Square Enix 's website . Another manga titled Final Fantasy Type @-@ 0 Side Story : Reaper of the Icy Blade ( <unk> 氷剣の死神 , Fainaru Fantajī Reishiki Gaiden <unk> no Shinigami ) . The manga is also illustrated by Shiozawa , supervised by Tetsuya Nomura and published in Young Gangan magazine from April 2012 . The manga ended in January 2014 , with a bonus chapter being published in February . It was later released in five compiled volumes . Yen Press will begin distribution of the manga in the west in July 2015 . A novel adaptation titled Final Fantasy Type @-@ 0 : Change the World -The Answer- ( ファイナルファンタジー零式 Change the World -The Answer- ) has been released by Square Enix on April 21 , 2012 . A second novel adaptation titled Final Fantasy Type @-@ 0 : Change the World 2 -The Penultimate <unk> ( ファイナルファンタジー零式 Change the World 2 <unk> <unk> ) was released by Square Enix on June 28 , 2012 . The novels depict an alternate version of Type @-@ 0 's story . 
 = = = Reception = = = 
 The characters of Type @-@ 0 have so far received positive reception from video game critics in both local and import reviews . One of the reviewers for Famitsu magazine said that the large amount of characters made the game " a very different [ Final Fantasy ] . " RPG Site 's Erren Van Duine was very impressed , saying that certain character interactions were " handled excellently and you really get a sense of specific character motivations because of it . " He also praised the sympathetic portrayal of Cid Aulstyne , and stated that the game had " so many great moments , [ the player will ] have to experience each little detail for [ themselves ] . Heath Hindman , writing for PlayStation Lifestyle , called the characters " pretty strong overall " , although she cited some scenes where various characters ' inclusion felt like a necessity rather than a useful element to be a fault . 
 Western reception of the characters has been mixed to positive . IGN 's Meghan Sullivan said that the story 's focus on young cadets sent into battle " reminder that it ’ s the young who die in war , and who are the first to be forgotten . " She also praised the comedic side characters , which helped strike a balance with the serious story . Game Informer 's Matt Miller was fairly critical , saying that the abundance of main characters hampered character development , and found conversations " stilted and melodramatic " . Alexa Ray <unk> of GameSpot was pleased with the main cast , enjoyed the romance between Rem and Machina , and praised the reactions of non @-@ playable characters around the Peristylium to Class Zero 's achievements during the story . Her main criticism was that she found the supporting cast fell short as the player often needed to remember faces only briefly seen before . Becky Cunningham of GamesRadar said that Class Zero 's <unk> with the story 's political intrigues and interpersonal drama " make a story worth experiencing . " GameTrailers ' Michael Damiani felt that the character 's " awkward " dialogue hampered the otherwise intriguing story , saying that the script relied too much on the player accepting leaps in logic on a character 's say @-@ so . 
 Mollie L Patterson of Electronic Gaming Monthly enjoyed the game 's fresh take on the high school setting so common in Japanese media , while PC Gamer 's Samuel Roberts found the size of the cast hindered the story and compared the experience to a low @-@ quality anime series . RPGamer 's Michael A Cunningham enjoyed the characters despite being shallow , with him saying Machina and Rem had the best development out of the main cast . Destructoid 's Chris Carter said that , as with other Final Fantasy games , players would find favorites among the characters , and was entertained by the conflict between classes and classmates , which worked in the school setting . Most of the reviewers made mixed to negative comments on the quality of the localization ; Sullivan drew attention to Nine 's incongruous addition of " yo " and " hey " to his sentences , <unk> found the experience better when she switched to the Japanese voice track , while Cunningham <unk> the effort put into the translation while finding the final product inconsistent with the new platforms . The exception was <unk> , who said that the English cast " do a great job " . 
 = Center for Class Action Fairness = 
 The Center for Class Action Fairness ( CCAF ) is a Washington , D.C.-based public @-@ interest law firm , founded by Ted Frank in June 2009 to represent consumers dissatisfied with their counsel in class actions and class action settlements . It is a 501 ( c ) ( 3 ) organization . 
 According to The American Lawyer , as of March 2011 , the CCAF had filed objections to 17 settlements , with eight objections pending in federal district courts , and had been successful on six of them . The CCAF has objected to settlements throughout the United States , particularly in cases where class action lawyers receive cash payments but the plaintiff class receives only discount coupons for further products and services from the defendant company . It has distanced itself from other firms that make money by holding up class action settlements until they themselves are paid off . The CCAF has raised objections to class action settlements involving the Grand Theft Auto " Hot Coffee " minigame , Honda Civic Hybrids , Apple backdating , A.G. Edwards , Bluetooth headsets , and the <unk> Indian Trust . 
 = = Background = = 
 Ted Frank was inspired to establish the Center from his success in objecting to the class action settlement in the Grand Theft Auto consumer fraud case where class members would have received under $ 30 @,@ 000 while the attorneys were asking for $ 1 million . 
 In June 2009 , Frank founded the public @-@ interest non @-@ profit law firm Center for Class Action Fairness ( CCAF ) to represent consumers dissatisfied with their counsel in class actions and class action settlements . The firm is described by Frank as " a " guerrilla " operation with a shoestring budget " . CCAF was initially a project of Donors Trust , a nonprofit donor @-@ advised fund , which paid him as an independent contractor to manage the project , relying on donors from charitable foundations and independent individuals to fund it . To date , the CCAF has accepted only about 40 percent of the requests it has received to object to a settlement and Frank has said that if it is a good settlement or close enough to the line , he wouldn 't " risk creating bad precedent . " As of 2010 , the CCAF has three staff attorneys , including Frank . 
 The CCAF has distanced itself from other firms , sometimes called " professional objectors " , that make money by holding up class action settlements until they themselves are paid off , Whereas that practice has been criticized as doing to class action lawyers what class action lawyers are doing to companies , one commentator said that CCAF appears to be doing so as a matter of principle . According to The American Lawyer , as of March 2011 , the CCAF had filed objections to 17 settlements , with eight objections pending in federal district courts , and had been successful on six of them . 
 = = Cause = = 
 Founder Ted Frank has said that " the whole reason I started this is because there is a high probability of district courts rubber @-@ stamping settlements . I think these are very bad settlements that the [ 9th U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals ] will provide guidance for when judges should or shouldn ’ t approve settlements . ” He has also said " the class action landscape has long included some “ professional settlement objectors ” who target large cases in hopes of extracting a percentage of the attorney fees as a reward . But that doesn ’ t solve the problem . The niche isn ’ t being filled unless you find somebody crazy like me who is willing to spend dozens of hours of his own time and hundreds of dollars of his own money to make a claim he can ’ t benefit from . " Frank said in an objection in a case at the Court of the United States District Court Northern District of Ohio of the CCAF , " while the Center focuses on bringing objections to unfair class action settlements , it makes no effort to engage in quid pro quo settlements to extort attorneys , and has never settled an objection . The Center analyses complaints from consumers aggrieved by class actions settlement notices to determine whether a settlement is objectionable under the law because it favors attorneys over class members . " 
 Among <unk> cases are those challenging an emerging trend known as cy @-@ près . Created by American courts in the 1970s as a mechanism to distribute funds to stand @-@ in organizations and causes in cases in which it would be impractical to distribute class action settlement funds directly to the entire class of plaintiffs , the practice has been criticized from time to time for redirecting funds that would otherwise go to the parties to the case . In one case , CCAF challenged a settlement that would have directed $ 2 @.@ 5 million out of a total $ 16 @.@ 5 million settlement Apple Inc. was to pay to shareholders for backdating employee stock option grants , to unrelated law school programs on corporate governance . According to Frank , in March 2010 , two attorneys from the <unk> Brown Kellner firm published an op ed in the Los Angeles Daily Journal attacking the litigation against impermissible cy pres awards as part of a " corporate " campaign . Frank firmly stated on the Manhattan Institute run website Point of <unk> that the " Center for Class Action Fairness has never taken a dollar of for @-@ profit corporate money . " 
 CCAF has objected to settlements throughout the United States , in cases where class action lawyers receive cash payments but the plaintiff class receives only discount coupons for further products and services from the defendant company . CCAF argues in those cases that few of the coupons are ever used , so the actual payment to plaintiffs is much lower than the stated amounts . In 2010 , CCAF successfully objected to a coupon settlement in a Central District of California class action alleging consumer fraud in the sale of Honda Civic Hybrids ; the settlement would have provided $ 2 @.@ 95 million in attorneys ' fees , but only coupons to the class . Frank and the CCAF 's position against coupon settlements was expressed in his written objection to the case in which he stated that they often do not provide meaningful compensation to class members , they often fail to disgorge ill @-@ gotten gains from the defendant , and they often require class members to do future business with the defendant in order to receive compensation . 
 = = Notable cases = = 
 The CCAF recently lost its appeal in the Online @-@ DVD Rental Antitrust Litigation case , initially filed in the Northern District of California and appealed to the United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit . The CCAF had objected to the amount of attorneys ' fees awarded by the district court , but the district court judge overruled the objections and awarded the attorneys ' fees requested . The appeal to the circuit court was met with disfavor and the award of attorneys ' fees was affirmed . Theodore H. Frank et al. v. Netflix Inc. et al . , case number 12 @-@ <unk> , in the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit . 
 Frank , at his own expense , traveled to New York and filed a successful objection to the proposed class action settlement in the Grand Theft Auto consumer fraud case where class members who had bought a Grand Theft Auto computer game with a hidden , sexually explicit easter egg would have received less than $ 30 @,@ 000 , while the plaintiffs ' attorneys would have received $ 1 million in legal fees . Spurred by complaints about excessive sexual content in the game , class action attorneys sued its makers , Take Two Interactive Software . Although the software giant had received only $ 27 @,@ 000 in claims from irate consumers , it agreed to a settlement in which the plaintiffs ’ lawyers themselves would collect $ 1 million . The CCAF 's case succeeded and the settlement was halted . 
 In January 2010 , the CCAF , representing its client Dan Greenberg , successfully filed an objection to the original settlement in the <unk> v. Travelers Indemnity case in the U.S. District Court for the Northern District of Ohio , which reduced the $ 6 @.@ 6 million attorneys ’ fee request by $ 2 million , with the class members receiving $ 4 @.@ 8 million instead of $ 2 @.@ 8 million . In February 2010 , CCAF successfully objected to a coupon settlement in a Central District of California class action alleging consumer fraud in the sale of Honda Civic Hybrids ; the settlement would have provided $ 2 @.@ 95 million in attorneys ' fees , but only coupons to the class . Frank was reported to have said " coupons are nearly worthless because so few of the intended beneficiaries will find it worthwhile to fill in all the necessary paperwork . " The CCAF has also been involved in the case surrounding the allegations of email spamming by Ameritrade in 2009 . The case brought Frank before Northern District of California Chief Judge Vaughn Walker , where he challenged the fairness of a TD Ameritrade settlement , which consists of coupons for antivirus software . Frank " argued that the court should not award , or should at least limit , the requested $ 1 @.@ 87 million in attorney fees . " Judge Walker rejected the Ameritrade settlement in October 2009 . 
 Later in 2010 , Frank and the CCAF , citing American Law Institute guidelines on cy @-@ près , objected to Apple 's settlement of a securities class action over their backdating , arguing that giving money to third parties affiliated with the class counsel instead of to the class was a breach of fiduciary duty . Frank stated that " the magnitude of the settlement compared to the original claims demonstrates that it is an extortionate nuisance settlement , being made because it would cost more to defend the suit than to pay the attorneys to go away . " In response to CCAF 's objection , the parties amended the settlement by reallocating the $ 2 @.@ 5 million originally proposed as cy @-@ près to class members ; the court awarded CCAF attorneys ' fees for their role in winning $ 2 @.@ 5 million for the class . 
 In April 2011 , Frank and the CCAF filed an objection to the $ 3 @.@ 4 billion taxpayer funded <unk> Indian Trust settlement , which the federal government had agreed to in December 2009 , which had established a $ 1 @.@ 5 billion Trust Accounting and Administration Fund and a $ 1 @.@ 9 billion Trust Land Consolidation Fund to buy fractionated land interests . Under the agreed settlement , a maximum of $ 99 @.@ 9 million had been allocated for the lawyers fees but they had demanded $ 223 million . Acting on behalf of Kimberly Craven , a Sisseton @-@ Wahpeton <unk> tribe member , Frank argued that the case was about pure greed , stating that it included " an outrageous fee request that has resulted in bipartisan criticism " and that the Class Counsel were " more interested in maximizing their personal recovery than the interests of the class . " 
 The CCAF filed a lengthy brief in Missouri in May 2011 challenging a settlement which gave lawyers who sued A.G. Edwards $ 21 million in fees for negotiating an agreement that provided a total of $ 6 million for some customers and three annual coupons valued at $ 8 @.@ 22 apiece for the rest . St. Louis Judge Angela T. <unk> of the Missouri Court of Appeals rejected the case , ruling that “ in cases involving complex litigation or in the class action context , a one @-@ third contingent fee award is not unreasonable . ” 
 In August 2011 , the CCAF won a case at a federal appeals court in California in which they objected to class action settlements and attorneys ' fees in litigation regarding Bluetooth headsets . The original case over the headsets had been filed when lawyers had noticed news articles about potential hearing loss and headsets and filed suits on behalf of millions of Motorola and <unk> customers . The prior settlement would have effectively paid consumers nothing but given the lawyers who negotiated the pact $ 850 @,@ 000 in fees , amended by Frank and his firm . Frank regards the case as a milestone in his fight to prevent abuses . Frank also unsuccessfully filed an objection to a settlement in an antitrust case against Sirius XM Radio , which provided nothing for the plaintiffs , but a 100 percent payout of $ 13 million for the attorneys . Judge Harold Baer , Jr. ruled on 24 August that the settlement terms " demonstrate sufficient fairness , adequacy and reasonableness " and rejected Frank 's claims . Frank vowed to appeal , saying " you don 't like to lose , but it 's a good case to take to the appellate court . " In June 2010 , the CCAF filed an objection on behalf of four class members to the Dewey v. Volkswagen , Water <unk> Settlement where attorneys were asking for over $ 23 million for recovering an $ 8 million reimbursement fund for a small subset of the class . The case is still pending . 
 = Annie ( Norwegian singer ) = 
 Anne Lilia Berge Strand ( born 21 November 1977 ) , better known by her stage name Annie , is a Norwegian singer , songwriter , record producer and DJ . Annie began her recording career in 1999 with the underground hit single " The Greatest Hit " and gained international acclaim , particularly from music bloggers , for her debut album Anniemal ( 2004 ) . 
 = = Biography = = 
 After completing secondary school , Annie started DJing in Bergen , where she met house producer and soon @-@ to @-@ be boyfriend Tore Kroknes . In 1999 , Annie and Kroknes released the single " The Greatest Hit " , which sold out in two days and became popular in Norwegian and British nightclubs . Before Annie and Kroknes could release an album , Kroknes died from a congenital heart defect in 2001 . Annie went on to sign a record deal with Britain 's 679 Recordings in 2003 , releasing her debut album Anniemal in 2004 , for which she received widespread critical acclaim and several Norwegian music awards . 
 Annie has been praised for her unique , " indie " style of electropop and synthpop music and has been described as " a pop singer with credibility , an indie artist with one eye on the dancefloor " , and " the Kylie it 's cool to like " . Annie describes her music as " pop with strange edges " . 
 Annie released her second studio album , Don 't Stop , on the Smalltown Supersound label on 19 October 2009 . Annie currently lives in Berlin . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Annie was born in 1977 Trondheim , Norway and was raised in the coastal town of Kristiansand . Annie 's father , a church organ player , died of cancer when Annie was 7 . After a series of moves , Annie and her mother , a teacher of English and religion , moved to Norway 's second largest city Bergen when Annie was 13 . By this time , Annie sang in choirs . 
 At age 16 , Annie and a group of friends formed Suitcase , an indie rock band . Suitcase only performed once , before a panel of judges for a music competition where they did not reach the finals . A few years after Suitcase 's inception , Annie left the band when " the other members wanted to make trip hop . " 
 Annie attended secondary school until around 1997 , when she began to DJ around Bergen , getting acquainted with members of the Bergen music scene . During this time she met producer Mikal Tellé , owner of the Bergen @-@ based Tellé record label , and Norwegian house producer Tore Andreas Kroknes , known professionally as DJ <unk> . 
 = = Music career = = 
 = = = 1999 – 2002 : " Greatest Hit " = = = 
 Annie and Kroknes became romantically involved , and began to collaborate musically . Annie 's talent for writing melodies and vocals worked well with Kroknes 's production skills . Annie launched her solo singing career in 1999 with the single " Greatest Hit " . The song was recorded after Annie played Madonna 's song " Everybody " for Kroknes , who was experiencing a creative block at the time . Kroknes sampled the song , and Annie started to sing a melody to it . They recorded and released the song under the Tellé label . The song saw a limited release of 500 7 @-@ inch singles , which sold out in two days . " Greatest Hit " became an underground club hit in Norway and Britain , and Annie received offers for record contracts . Annie reflects that she and Kroknes had recorded the song " for fun " , but with the success of the single , Annie says , " I realized that I could actually make a living out of this . " 
 Annie and Kroknes made plans to release an album and began recording " I Will Get On " in 2000 . However , Kroknes , who was born with a degenerative heart condition , fell ill near the end of 2000 and was hospitalized repeatedly . In April 2001 , Kroknes died of complications from his heart condition at the age of 23 . Annie told Clubbing Magazine : 
 " After that , I was so depressed I just wasn 't able to do anything . I stayed at home , away from everyone , completely in my own world . I wanted to make the album with Tore — that was the plan . After he died I just didn 't think I had the heart . But then I thought , ' Right , you 're really depressed now but you have to make this album . Tore would be quite pissed off if you just stopped doing anything . ' " 
 After a hiatus from music , Annie returned to DJing and songwriting in late 2001 , running a club night called Pop Till You Drop at the Agora nightclub in Bergen with DJ friend <unk> <unk> . Among the music acts booked for Pop Till You Drop were Peaches , DJ Adam Mac , and Finnish DJ Timo Kaukolampi of Op : l Bastards . Annie later DJed at Kaukolampi 's own night club in Helsinki and lent her vocals to some Op : l Bastards tracks . 
 = = = 2003 – 05 : Anniemal = = = 
 Annie was signed to British label 679 Recordings in March 2003 . Annie recorded the track " Kiss Me " with Kaukolampi , and was approached by Richard X to record vocals for the track " Just Friends " on Richard X Presents His X @-@ Factor Vol . 1 , released in August 2003 . In return , he and Hannah Robinson co @-@ wrote " Chewing Gum " and " Me Plus One " for Annie . Annie and Richard X continued to work together , releasing the single " Chewing Gum " in Annie 's name in September 2004 . The track was named single of the week by NME soon after its release , and charted in the UK at number 25 . 
 Later that year , Annie released her debut CD Anniemal , collaborating with Timo Kaukolampi , Richard X , and fellow Norwegians Röyksopp . The album featured " The Greatest Hit " , " Chewing Gum " , and the album 's second single " Heartbeat " . The song , produced by Röyksopp , was voted number one on Pitchfork Media 's Top 50 Singles of 2004 list , before the song was officially released . " Chewing Gum " held the number @-@ eleven spot on that same list . " Heartbeat " was remixed by Canadian electronic duo MSTRKRFT in 2005 . 
 In 2005 , Annie won several awards for her work , including Best Pop Album and Best Newcomer at the Norwegian Alarm Awards . " Chewing Gum " had also been nominated for Song of the Year . In addition , Annie won the Best Newcomer award at the prestigious Spellemannprisen . Annie 's 5 February performance at the Alarm Awards was one of the first live performances of her solo career . 
 Annie toured around the world in 2005 to promote Anniemal , including a brief stint opening for Saint Etienne , to whom she had sent a demo tape while still in Suitcase in 1996 . Annie performed at sold out club venues in the United States in 2005 , and returned to the US later that year . 
 In 2005 , Annie released a DJ mix album as part of ! K7 's DJ @-@ Kicks series . Around this time , she began a record label called Totally , with Timo Kaukolampi , and planned to release a 12 " single with <unk> . She also provided vocals for the Teddybears track " Yours to Keep " as well as the <unk> track " Follow Me " , and re @-@ recorded her songs " Chewing Gum " and " Heartbeat " in Simlish for The Sims 2 : Nightlife 's Danish and Norwegian <unk> . 
 = = = 2006 – 10 : Don 't Stop = = = 
 In January 2007 , Annie signed an international deal with Island Records , owned by Universal Music Group . She had planned to release her second album , Don 't Stop , in September 2008 , preceded by the Richard X @-@ produced single " I Know UR Girlfriend Hates Me " , after she finished touring on the Popjustice <unk> Pop Tour . In November 2008 , Annie announced that due to internal problems within the label , she had decided to part ways with Island Records ; in interviews following the eventual release of Don 't Stop , Annie explained that her original A & R agent at the label , Nick Gatfield , left to join EMI UK , and Annie left the label because her new agent was not enthusiastic about her work . Although this left her second album 's future uncertain , she retained legal control over the songs she recorded during her contracted period with the label . Verdens Gang suggested that the split with the label was precipitated by the poor chart performance of " I Know UR Girlfriend Hates Me " , which charted at number fifty @-@ four in the UK . Don 't Stop leaked in its original incarnation in 2008 . 
 After her departure from Island Records , Annie released a new single , " Anthonio " , via producer Richard X 's Pleasure Masters label in May 2009 . The song tells the story of a holiday affair between Annie and the title character ; Annie described the song as " the ultimate summer track " . 
 In August 2009 , Pitchfork announced that Don 't Stop would be released via independent label Smalltown Supersound and Annie 's own label Totally Records . It came out in the UK on 19 October 2009 and in the US on 17 November . Don 't Stop includes collaborations with former collaborators Richard X and Timo Kaukolampi , as well as British producers Xenomania and Paul Epworth . The album 's release was preceded by two digital singles : " Songs Remind Me of You " , a Richard X production , and " My Love Is Better " , which was produced by Xenomania and features guitar from Alex Kapranos of Franz Ferdinand . The latter initially featured backing vocals by British pop group Girls Aloud , but their record label intervened . 
 Annie co @-@ wrote Mini Viva 's debut single " Left My Heart in Tokyo " , released in September 2009 and produced by Xenomania . 
 = = = 2010 – present : The A & R EP / Endless Vacation EP = = = 
 In October 2010 , Xenomania 's News Blog reported that Annie was back in the studio recording her follow up to 2009 's " Don 't Stop " . Annie started recording in August 2010 with Brian Higgins at Xenomania 's studios in Kent , England . During 2010 , she also contributed vocals to the song " Crazy for You " by New York electro duo Designer Drugs ( who remixed her track " Anthonio " ) for their debut album Hardcore / <unk> , released on February 2011 and to " Alien Summer " by French producer The Toxic Avenger , for their album Angst released on 18 May 2011 . By the second half of 2011 , Annie began working on The Night Within Us ! , an EP that was slated for an early 2012 release . The <unk> @-@ produced title track and soon @-@ to @-@ be single " The Night Within " , is the theme song for an homonymous short film by <unk> <unk> and part of an interdisciplinary project by Norwegian artist Bjarne Melgaard . The installation and set of paintings , exhibited on the Guido W. <unk> gallery in Berlin from 26 November 2011 to 25 February 2012 , are based on the lyrics and theme of the song , which " deal with love and loss " , and capture " the existential need for human tenderness , trust and partnership on one hand , and the painful realisation of lies , deceit and abandonment " , all of which have been somewhat present on Melgaard 's work . A video has been done for the song , based almost entirely on the exhibition . 
 Annie released the single " <unk> and Lonely Hearts " on April 26 , 2013 . The track is a " song for the dance floor , " and is , " inspired by the rave scene in Bergen . " 
 The A & R EP was released on July 29 , 2013 , and features the single " Back Together " . 
 On February 7 , 2014 Annie released " Russian Kiss " , a song with Bjarne Melgaard and Richard X , which condemns Russia 's homophobic laws . 
 On August 20 and 21 , 2014 , Annie was a guest member of the jury on Idol Norway . 
 On October 16 , 2015 , Annie released an EP entitled Endless Vacation . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Annie currently lives in Berlin , where she moved after being evicted from the apartment in Bergen she was living in because it was going to be turned into a hotel . She owned a cat named Joey , whom she named after both Joey Ramone and Joey McIntyre of New Kids on the Block . Joey died on 29 January 2010 . Annie is an avid reader and follows global politics . She is friends with musician Peaches . Her musical influences include Madonna , Saint Etienne , the Pet Shop Boys , and Kate Bush . She has a green belt in karate . 
 = = Discography = = 
 = = = Studio albums = = = 
 Anniemal ( 2004 ) 
 Don 't Stop ( 2009 ) 
 = Nancy Cartwright = 
 Nancy Jean Cartwright ( born October 25 , 1957 ) is an American voice actress , film and television actress , and comedian . She is known for her long @-@ running role as Bart Simpson on the animated television series The Simpsons . Cartwright also voices other characters for the show , including Nelson Muntz , Ralph Wiggum , Todd Flanders , Kearney , and Database . 
 Cartwright was born in Dayton , Ohio . Cartwright moved to Hollywood in 1978 and trained alongside voice actor Daws Butler . Her first professional role was voicing Gloria in the animated series Richie Rich , which she followed with a starring role in the television movie Marian Rose White ( 1982 ) and her first feature film , Twilight Zone : The Movie ( 1983 ) . 
 After continuing to search for acting work , in 1987 Cartwright auditioned for a role in a series of animated shorts about a dysfunctional family that was to appear on The Tracey Ullman Show . Cartwright intended to audition for the role of Lisa Simpson , the middle child ; when she arrived at the audition , she found the role of Bart — Lisa 's brother — to be more interesting . Matt Groening , the series ' creator , allowed her to audition for Bart and offered her the role on the spot . She voiced Bart for three seasons on The Tracey Ullman Show , and in 1989 , the shorts were spun off into a half @-@ hour show called The Simpsons . For her subsequent work as Bart , Cartwright received a Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Voice @-@ Over Performance in 1992 and an Annie Award for Best Voice Acting in the Field of Animation in 1995 . 
 Cartwright has voiced numerous animated characters , including Chuckie Finster in Rugrats and All Grown Up ! ( the former of which was previously held by Christine Cavanaugh ) , Rufus in Kim Possible , Mindy in Animaniacs , Margo Sherman in The Critic and Chip in The Kellys . In 2000 , she published her autobiography , My Life as a 10 @-@ Year @-@ Old Boy , and four years later adapted it into a one @-@ woman play . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Cartwright was born in Dayton , Ohio , on October 25 , 1957 , the fourth of Frank and Miriam Cartwright 's six children . She grew up in Kettering , Ohio , and discovered her talent for voices at an early age . While in the fourth grade , she won a school @-@ wide speech competition with her performance of Rudyard Kipling 's How the Camel Got His Hump . Cartwright attended Fairmont West High School , and participated in the school 's theater and marching band . She regularly entered public speaking competitions , placing first in the " Humorous Interpretation " category at the National District Tournament two years running . The judges often suggested to her that she should perform cartoon voices . Cartwright graduated from high school in 1976 and accepted a scholarship from Ohio University . She continued to compete in public speaking competitions ; during her sophomore year , she placed fifth in the National Speech Tournament 's exposition category with her speech " The Art of Animation " . 
 In 1976 , Cartwright landed a part @-@ time job doing voice @-@ overs for commercials on WING radio in Dayton . A representative from Warner Bros. Records visited WING and later sent Cartwright a list of contacts in the animation industry . One of these was Daws Butler , known for voicing characters such as Huckleberry Hound , <unk> , Elroy Jetson and Yogi Bear . Cartwright called him , and left a message in a Cockney accent on his answering machine . Butler immediately called her back and agreed to be her mentor . He mailed her a script and instructed her to send him a tape recording of herself reading it . Once he received the tape , Butler critiqued it and sent her notes . For the next year they continued in this way , completing a new script every few weeks . Cartwright described Butler as " absolutely amazing , always encouraging , always polite " . 
 Cartwright returned to Ohio University for her sophomore year , but transferred to the University of California , Los Angeles ( UCLA ) so she could be closer to Hollywood and Butler . Her mother , Miriam , died late in the summer of 1978 . Cartwright nearly changed her relocation plans but , on September 17 , 1978 , " <unk> " left for Westwood , Los Angeles . 
 = = Career = = 
 = = = Early career = = = 
 While attending UCLA , which did not have a public speaking team , Cartwright continued training as a voice actress with Butler . She recalled , " every Sunday I 'd take a 20 @-@ minute bus ride to his house in Beverly Hills for a one @-@ hour lesson and be there for four hours ... They had four sons , they didn 't have a daughter and I kind of fitted in as the baby of the family . " Butler introduced her to many of the voice actors and directors at Hanna @-@ Barbera . After she met the director Gordon Hunt , he asked her to audition for a recurring role as Gloria in Richie Rich . She received the part , and later worked with Hunt on several other projects . At the end of 1980 , Cartwright signed with a talent agency and landed a lead role in a pilot for a sitcom called In Trouble . Cartwright described the show as " forgettable , but it jump @-@ started my on @-@ camera career " . She graduated from UCLA in 1981 with a degree in theater . During the summer , Cartwright worked with Jonathan Winters as part of an improvisation troupe at Kenyon College in Gambier , Ohio . 
 Returning to Los Angeles , Cartwright won the lead role in the television movie Marian Rose White . Janet Maslin , a critic for The New York Times , described Cartwright as " a chubby , lumbering , slightly cross @-@ eyed actress whose naturalness adds greatly to the film 's impact " . Cartwright replied by sending Maslin a letter insisting she was not cross @-@ eyed , and included a photograph . Later , Cartwright auditioned for the role of Ethel , a girl who becomes trapped in a cartoon world in the third segment of Twilight Zone : The Movie . She met with director Joe Dante and later described him as " a total cartoon buff , and once he took a look at my resume and noticed Daws Butler 's name on it , we were off and running , sharing anecdotes about Daws and animation . After about twenty minutes , he said , ' considering your background , I don 't see how I could cast anyone but you in this part ! ' " It was her first role in a feature film . The segment was based on The Twilight Zone television series episode " It 's a Good Life " , which was later parodied in The Simpsons episode " Treehouse of Horror II " ( 1992 ) . 
 Cartwright continued to do voice work for projects including Pound Puppies , Popeye and Son , Snorks , My Little Pony and Saturday Supercade . She joined a " loop group " , and recorded vocals for characters in the background of films , although in most cases the sound was turned down so that very little of her voice was heard . She did minor voice @-@ over work for several films , including The Clan of the Cave Bear ( 1986 ) , Silverado ( 1985 ) , Sixteen Candles ( 1984 ) , Back to the Future Part II ( 1989 ) and The Color Purple ( 1985 ) . The most notable of these was a role in Who Framed Roger Rabbit ( 1988 ) as a shoe that was " dipped " in acid . She described it as her first " off @-@ screen death scene " , and worked to correctly convey the emotion involved . 
 In 1985 , she auditioned for a guest spot as Cynthia in Cheers . The audition called for her to say her line and walk off the set . Cartwright decided to take a chance on being different and continued walking , leaving the building and returning home . The production crew was confused , but she received the part . In search of more training as an actress , Cartwright joined a class taught by Hollywood coach Milton Katselas . He recommended that Cartwright study La Strada , a 1956 Italian film starring Giulietta Masina and directed by Federico Fellini . She began performing " every imaginable scene " from La <unk> in her class and spent several months trying to secure the rights to produce a stage adaptation . She visited Italy with the intention of meeting Fellini and requesting his permission in person . Although they never met , Cartwright kept a journal of the trip and later wrote a one @-@ woman play called In Search of Fellini , partially based on her voyage . The play was co @-@ written by Peter <unk> , and Cartwright won a Drama @-@ Logue Award after performing it in Los Angeles in 1995 . In a 1998 interview , she stated her intention to make it into a feature film . 
 = = = The Simpsons = = = 
 Cartwright is best known for her role as Bart Simpson on the long @-@ running animated television show The Simpsons . On March 13 , 1987 , Nancy Cartwright auditioned for a series of animated shorts about a dysfunctional family that was to appear on The Tracey Ullman Show , a sketch comedy program . Cartwright originally intended to audition for the role of Lisa Simpson , the eldest daughter . After arriving at the audition , she found that Lisa was simply described as the middle child and at the time did not have much personality . Cartwright became more interested in the role of Bart , described as " devious , underachieving , school @-@ hating , irreverent , [ and ] clever " . Creator Matt Groening let her try out for Bart , and gave her the job on the spot . Bart 's voice came naturally to Cartwright , as she had previously used elements of it in My Little Pony , Snorks , and Pound Puppies . Cartwright describes Bart 's voice as easy to perform compared with other characters . The recording of the shorts was often primitive ; the dialog was recorded on a portable tape deck in a makeshift studio above the bleachers on the set of the The Tracey Ullman Show . Cartwright , the only cast member to have been professionally trained in voice acting , described the sessions as " great fun " . However , she wanted to appear in the live @-@ action sketches and occasionally showed up for recording sessions early , hoping to be noticed by a producer . 
 In 1989 , the shorts were spun off into a half @-@ hour show on the Fox network called The Simpsons . Bart quickly became the show 's breakout personality and one of the most celebrated characters on television — his popularity in 1990 and 1991 was known as " Bartmania " . Bart was described as " television 's brightest new star " by Mike Boone of The Gazette and was named 1990 's " entertainer of the year " by Entertainment Weekly . Despite Bart 's fame , however , Cartwright remained relatively unknown . During the first season of The Simpsons , Fox ordered Cartwright not to give interviews , because they did not want to publicize the fact that Bart was voiced by a woman . Cartwright 's normal speaking voice is said to have " no obvious traces of Bart " , and she believes her role is " the best acting job in the world " , since she is rarely recognized in public . When she is recognized and asked to perform Bart 's voice in front of children , Cartwright refuses because it " freaks [ them ] out " . Bart 's catchphrase " Eat My Shorts " was an ad @-@ lib by Cartwright in one of the original table readings , referring to an incident from her high school days . Once while performing , members of the Fairmont West High School marching band switched their chant from the usual " Fairmont West ! Fairmont West ! " to the irreverent " Eat my shorts ! " Cartwright felt it appropriate for Bart , and improvised the line ; it became a popular catchphrase on the show . 
 Cartwright voices several other characters on the show , including Nelson Muntz , Ralph Wiggum , Todd Flanders , Kearney and Database . She first voiced Nelson in the episode " Bart the General " ( season one , 1990 ) . The character was to be voiced by Dana Hill , but Hill missed the recording session and Cartwright was given the role . She developed Nelson 's voice on the spot and describes him as " a throat @-@ ripper " . Ralph Wiggum had originally been voiced by Jo Ann Harris , but Cartwright was assigned to voice the character in " Bart the Murderer " ( season three , 1991 ) . Todd Flanders , the only voice for which Cartwright used another source , is based on Sherman ( voiced by Walter Tetley ) , the boy from Peabody 's Improbable History , a series of shorts aired on The Rocky and Bullwinkle Show . 
 Cartwright received a Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Voice @-@ Over Performance in 1992 for her performance as Bart in the episode " Separate Vocations " and an Annie Award in 1995 for Best Voice Acting in the Field of Animation . Bart was named one of the 100 most important people of the 20th century by Time , and in 2000 , Bart and the rest of the Simpson family were awarded a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame , located at 7021 Hollywood Boulevard . 
 Until 1998 , Cartwright was paid $ 30 @,@ 000 per episode . During a pay dispute in 1998 , Fox threatened to replace the six main voice actors , and made preparations for casting new actors . The dispute was resolved , however , and Cartwright received $ 125 @,@ 000 per episode until 2004 , when the voice actors demanded $ 360 @,@ 000 an episode . A compromise was reached after a month , and Cartwright 's pay rose to $ 250 @,@ 000 per episode . Salaries were re @-@ negotiated in 2008 with the voice actors receiving approximately $ 400 @,@ 000 per episode . Three years later , with Fox threatening to cancel the series unless production costs were cut , Cartwright and the other cast members accepted a 25 percent pay cut , down to just over $ 300 @,@ 000 per episode . 
 = = = Further career = = = 
 In addition to her work on The Simpsons , Cartwright has voiced many other characters on several animated series , including Chuckie Finster in Rugrats and All Grown Up ! , Margo Sherman in The Critic , Mindy in Animaniacs and Rufus the naked mole @-@ rat in Kim Possible . For the role of Rufus , Cartwright researched mole @-@ rats extensively , and became " a font of useless trivia " . She was nominated for a Daytime Emmy Award for Outstanding Performer in an Animated Program in 2004 for her work on the show . In 2001 , Cartwright took over the Rugrats role of Chuckie Finster when Christine Cavanaugh retired . Cartwright describes Rufus and Chuckie as her two most difficult voices : " Rufus because my diaphragm gets a workout while trying to utilize the 18 vocal sounds a mole makes . Chuckie because ... he 's an asthmatic with five personalities rolled into one — plus I have to do the voice the way [ Cavanaugh ] did it for 10 years . " Other television shows that have used her voice work include Galaxy High ; God , the Devil and Bob ; Goof Troop ; Mike , Lu & Og ; The Replacements ; Pinky and the Brain and <unk> . Cartwright has appeared on camera in numerous television shows and films , including Fame , Empty Nest , The Fresh Prince of Bel @-@ Air , Flesh and Blood , Godzilla and 24 . 
 In 2000 , Cartwright published her autobiography , My Life as a 10 @-@ Year @-@ Old Boy . The book details her career ( particularly her experiences as the voice of Bart ) and contains stories about life behind the scenes of The Simpsons . Laura A. Bischoff of the Dayton Daily News commented that the book was the " ultimate insider 's guide to The Simpsons " . Critics complained that the book lacked interesting stories and was aimed mostly at fans of The Simpsons rather than a general audience . 
 Cartwright adapted My Life as a 10 @-@ Year @-@ Old Boy into a one @-@ woman play in 2004 . Cartwright has performed it at a variety of venues , including the August 2004 Edinburgh Festival Fringe in Scotland . The play received modest reviews , including criticism for a lack of inside stories about The Simpsons , and its " <unk> upbeat " tone . David Chatterton of The British Theatre Guide described the show as " interesting and entertaining , but not really a ' must see ' even for Simpsons fans " . 
 Cartwright has shown an interest in stock car racing and as of 2007 was seeking a NASCAR license . In 2001 , she founded a production company called <unk> and created an online animated series called The Kellys . The series is focused on racing ; Cartwright voices a seven @-@ year @-@ old named Chip Kelly . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Cartwright met writer Warren Murphy on her birthday in 1988 and married him two months later . In her book , she describes Murphy as her " personal laugh track " . The couple had two children , Lucy and Jack , before divorcing in 2002 . 
 Cartwright was raised a Roman Catholic but joined the Church of Scientology in 1991 . She has said that before becoming involved with the church she was depressed that she did not have a " committed relationship " , and wanted to get married and have children . She " thought that maybe [ she ] could find a relationship by going to a church " . Cartwright attended a barbecue at a friend 's house and noticed that all of the attendees were Scientologists with " thriving careers " . Cartwright began reading the works of L. Ron Hubbard and found solace in a chapter about shedding the pain of loss . She said later , " I felt he was talking directly to me , I said to myself , ' I want to stop that feeling . ' " Cartwright was awarded Scientology 's Patron Laureate Award after she donated $ 10 million , almost twice her annual salary , to the Church in 2007 . 
 Cartwright actively supports many nonprofit organizations , including Famous Fone Friends , the Make @-@ A @-@ Wish Foundation , and Scientology @-@ related The Way to Happiness Foundation . She is co @-@ founder of " Happy House " , a non @-@ profit organization dedicated to building ' better ' families and distributing Scientology @-@ based literature , based on The Way to Happiness Foundation and is a contributor to ASIFA @-@ Hollywood 's Animation Archive Project . In September 2007 , Cartwright received the Make @-@ a @-@ Wish Foundation 's Wish Icon Award " for her tremendous dedication to the Foundation 's fundraising and wish @-@ fulfillment efforts " . In 2005 , Cartwright created a scholarship at Fairmont High School " designed to aid Fairmont [ graduates ] who dream of following in her footsteps and studying speech , debate , drama or music " at Ohio University . In 2005 , Cartwright was given the title of Honorary Mayor of Northridge , California ( a neighborhood of Los Angeles ) by the Northridge Chamber of Commerce . 
 In 2007 , Cartwright was in a relationship with contractor Stephen Brackett . They planned to get married in spring 2008 . Brackett was the President and Treasurer of Brackett Construction in Hollywood , California ; the construction company was founded in 1987 and had $ 8 @.@ 5 million in sales in 2009 . He was a fellow member of Scientology , reaching the Operating Thetan level of OT V in Scientology , in 1989 . He died in May 2009 . According to The Monterey County Herald , Brackett leaped off the Bixby Creek Bridge in Big Sur , California . Law enforcement stated , " friends and relatives of Brackett said he was despondent because of financial troubles with his business " . In September 2010 , it was announced Cartwright was being sued by the executives of American Safety Casualty Insurance Company over a policy covering refurbishment work Stephen Brackett failed to finish before his death . The lawsuit sought $ 260 @,@ 000 from Cartwright , who the company claims was guarantor for the policy but has refused to cover the expenses . The lawsuit also alleges Brackett diverted contract funds to the Church of Scientology . 
 In January 2009 , Cartwright used Bart 's voice in an automated telephone message to Scientologists , inviting them to an event in Hollywood , California . She opened the message in Bart 's voice , saying " Yo , what 's <unk> ' man , this is Bart Simpson [ laugh ] " , then used her normal voice in most of the remaining message . In a 2000 interview , Cartwright explained that a character 's voice is copyrighted and she can use Bart 's voice in public but cannot record original dialogue without approval . Al Jean , executive producer of The Simpsons , said that the calls had not been " authorized by us " , while The Simpsons creator Matt Groening commented that the issue had been " blown up beyond what was intended " . 
 = = Filmography = = 
 = = = Film = = = 
 = = = Television = = = 
 = = = Video games = = = 
 = = = Music videos = = = 
 = = = Theme park = = = 
 = = Awards = = 
 = Jeopardy ! = 
 Jeopardy ! is an American television game show created by Merv Griffin . The show features a quiz competition in which contestants are presented with general knowledge clues in the form of answers , and must phrase their responses in the form of questions . The original daytime version debuted on NBC on March 30 , 1964 , and aired until January 3 , 1975 . A weekly nighttime syndicated edition aired from September 1974 to September 1975 , and a revival , The All @-@ New Jeopardy ! , ran on NBC from October 1978 to March 1979 . The current version , a daily syndicated show produced by Sony Pictures Television , premiered on September 10 , 1984 and is still airing , making it by far the program 's most successful incarnation . 
 Both NBC versions and the weekly syndicated version were hosted by Art Fleming . Don Pardo served as announcer until 1975 , and John Harlan announced for the 1978 – 79 show . Since its inception , the daily syndicated version has featured Alex Trebek as host and Johnny Gilbert as announcer . 
 With 7 @,@ 000 episodes aired , the daily syndicated version of Jeopardy ! has won a record 31 Daytime Emmy Awards and is the only post @-@ 1960 game show to be honored with the Peabody Award . In 2013 , the program was ranked No. 45 on TV Guide 's list of the 60 greatest shows in American television history . Jeopardy ! has also gained a worldwide following with regional adaptations in many other countries . The daily syndicated series ' 32nd season premiered on September 14 , 2015 . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Three contestants each take their place behind a lectern , with the returning champion occupying the leftmost lectern ( from the viewer 's perspective ) . The contestants compete in a quiz game comprising three rounds : Jeopardy ! , Double Jeopardy ! , and Final Jeopardy ! . The material for the questions covers a wide variety of topics , including history and current events , the sciences , the arts , popular culture , literature , and languages . Category titles often feature puns , wordplay , or shared themes , and the host will regularly remind contestants of topics or place emphasis on category themes before the start of the round . 
 = = = First two rounds = = = 
 The Jeopardy ! and Double Jeopardy ! rounds each feature six categories , each of which contains five clues , which are ostensibly valued by difficulty . The dollar values of the clues increased over time . On the original Jeopardy ! series , clue values in the first round ranged from $ 10 to $ 50 . On The All @-@ New Jeopardy ! , they ranged from $ 25 to $ 125 . The current series ' first round originally ranged from $ 100 to $ 500 , and were doubled to $ 200 to $ 1 @,@ 000 on November 26 , 2001 . On the Super Jeopardy ! specials , clues were valued in points rather than in dollars , and ranged in the first round from 200 to 1 @,@ 000 points . 
 The Jeopardy ! round begins when the returning champion selects a clue , which may be from any position on the game board . The clue is revealed and read aloud by the host , after which any contestant may ring @-@ in using a hand @-@ held signaling device . The first contestant to ring @-@ in successfully is prompted to provide a response to the clue , phrased in the form of a question . For example , if a contestant were to select " Presidents for $ 200 " , the resulting clue could be " This ' Father of Our Country ' didn 't really chop down a cherry tree " , to which the correct response would be " Who is / was George Washington ? " ( Contestants are free to phrase the response in the form of any question ; the traditional phrasing of " who is / are " for people or " what is / are " for things or words is almost always used . ) If the contestant responds correctly , the clue 's dollar value is added to the contestant 's score , and they may select a new clue from the board . An incorrect response , or a failure to respond within five seconds , deducts the clue 's value from the contestant 's score and allows the other contestants the opportunity to ring @-@ in and respond . If no contestant responds correctly , the host gives the correct response ; the " last correct questioner " chooses the next clue . 
 From the premiere of the original Jeopardy ! until the end of the first season of the current syndicated series , contestants were allowed to ring @-@ in as soon as the clue was revealed . Since September 1985 , contestants are required to wait until the clue is read before ringing @-@ in . To accommodate the rule change , lights were added to the game board ( unseen by home viewers ) to signify when it is permissible for contestants to signal ; attempting to signal before the light goes on locks the contestant out for half of a second . The change was made to allow the home audience to play along with the show more easily and to keep an extremely fast contestant from potentially dominating the game . In pre @-@ 1985 episodes , a buzzer would sound when a contestant signaled ; according to Trebek , the buzzer was eliminated because it was " distracting to the viewers " and sometimes presented a problem when contestants rang in while Trebek was still reading the clue . Contestants who are visually impaired or blind are given a card with the category names printed in Braille before each round begins , and an audible tone is played after the clue has been read aloud . 
 The second round , Double Jeopardy ! , features six new categories of clues . Clue values are doubled from the Jeopardy ! round ( except in Super Jeopardy ! , where Double Jeopardy ! values ranged from 500 to 2 @,@ 500 points ) . The contestant with the least money at the end of the Jeopardy ! round makes the first selection in Double Jeopardy ! ; if there is a tie , the tied contestant standing at the leftmost lectern selects first . 
 A " Daily Double " is hidden behind one clue in the Jeopardy ! round , and behind two in Double Jeopardy ! The name and inspiration were taken from a horse racing term . Only the contestant who uncovers a Daily Double may respond to that clue and need not use his / her signaling device to do so . Before the clue is revealed , the contestant must declare a wager , from a minimum of $ 5 to a maximum of his / her entire score ( known as a " true Daily Double " ) or the highest clue value available in the round , whichever is greater . A correct response adds the value of the wager to the contestant 's score , while an incorrect response deducts it . Whether or not the contestant responds correctly , he or she maintains control of the board . 
 During the Jeopardy ! round , except in response to the Daily Double clue , contestants are not penalized for forgetting to phrase their response in the form of a question , although the host will remind contestants to watch their phrasing in future responses . In the Double Jeopardy ! round and in the Daily Double in the Jeopardy ! round , the phrasing rule is followed more strictly , with a response not phrased in the form of a question counting as wrong if it is not re @-@ phrased immediately . If it is determined that a previous response was wrongly ruled to be correct or incorrect , the scores are adjusted at the first available opportunity . If , after a game is over , a ruling change is made that would have significantly altered the outcome of the game , the affected contestant ( s ) are invited back to compete on a future show . 
 Contestants who finish Double Jeopardy ! with $ 0 or a negative score are automatically eliminated from the game at that point and awarded the third place prize . On at least one episode hosted by Art Fleming , all three contestants finished Double Jeopardy ! with $ 0 or less , and as a result , no Final Jeopardy ! round was played . During Celebrity Jeopardy ! games , contestants with a $ 0 or negative score are given $ 1 @,@ 000 for the Final Jeopardy ! round . 
 = = = Final Jeopardy ! = = = 
 The Final Jeopardy ! round features a single clue . At the end of the Double Jeopardy ! round , the host announces the Final Jeopardy ! category , and a commercial break follows . During the break , barriers are placed between the contestant lecterns , and each contestant makes a final wager between $ 0 and his / her entire score . Contestants enter their wagers using a light pen to write on an electronic display on their lectern . After the break , the Final Jeopardy ! clue is revealed and read by the host . The contestants have 30 seconds to write their responses on the electronic display , while the show 's iconic " Think ! " music plays in the background . In the event that either the display or the pen malfunctions , contestants can use an index card and a marker to manually write their response and wager . Visually impaired or blind contestants use a Braille keyboard to type in a wager and response . 
 Contestants ' responses are revealed in order of their pre @-@ Final Jeopardy ! scores , from lowest to highest . A correct response adds the amount of the contestant 's wager to his / her score , while a miss , failure to respond , or failure to phrase the response as a question ( even if correct ) deducts it . The contestant with the highest score at the end of the round is that day 's winner . If there is a tie for second place , consolation prizes are awarded based on the scores going into the Final Jeopardy ! round . If all three contestants finish with $ 0 , no one returns as champion for the next show , and based on scores going into the Final Jeopardy ! round , the two contestants who were first and second will receive the second @-@ place prize , and the contestant in third will receive the third @-@ place prize . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 The top scorer ( s ) in each game retain the value of their winnings in cash , and return to play in the next match . Non @-@ winners receive consolation prizes . Since May 16 , 2002 , consolation prizes have been $ 2 @,@ 000 for the second @-@ place contestant ( s ) and $ 1 @,@ 000 for the third @-@ place contestant . Since the show does not generally provide airfare or lodging for contestants , cash consolation prizes alleviate contestants ' financial burden . An exception is provided for returning champions who must make several flights to Los Angeles . 
 Before 1984 , all three contestants received their winnings in cash ( contestants who finished with $ 0 or a negative score received consolation prizes ) . This was changed in order to make the game more competitive , and avoid the problem of contestants who would stop participating in the game , or avoid wagering in Final Jeopardy ! , rather than risk losing the money they had already won . From 1984 to 2002 , non @-@ winning contestants on the Trebek version received vacation packages and merchandise , which were donated by manufacturers as promotional consideration . The current cash consolation prize is provided by <unk> . 
 = = = Returning champions = = = 
 The winner of each episode returns to compete against two new contestants on the next episode . Originally , a contestant who won five consecutive days retired undefeated and was guaranteed a spot in the Tournament of Champions ; the five @-@ day limit was eliminated at the beginning of season 20 on September 8 , 2003 . 
 Ties for first place following Final Jeopardy ! are broken with a tie @-@ breaker clue , resulting in only a single champion being named , keeping their winnings , and returning to compete in the next show . Previously , if two or all three contestants tied for first place , they were declared " co @-@ champions " , and each retained his or her winnings and returned on the following episode . A tie occurred on the January 29 , 2014 episode when Arthur Chu , leading at the end of Double Jeopardy ! , wagered to tie challenger Carolyn Collins rather than winning ; Chu followed Jeopardy ! College Champion Keith Williams 's advice to wager for the tie to increase the leader 's chances of winning . A three @-@ way tie for first place has only occurred once on the Trebek version , on March 16 , 2007 , when Scott Weiss , Jamey Kirby , and Anders Martinson all ended the game with $ 16 @,@ 000 . 
 If no contestant finishes Final Jeopardy ! with a positive total , there is no winner . This has happened on several episodes , most recently on January 18 , 2016 . Three new contestants appear on the next episode . A triple zero has also occurred twice in tournament play ( 1990 Seniors and 2013 Teen ) , and also once in a Celebrity Week episode in 1998 . In Celebrity play , the full first , second , and third place prize money for charities is given based on the score before the round . In tournament play , an additional high scoring non @-@ winner will advance to the next round . 
 Special considerations have been given for contestants who were unable to return as champion because of circumstances beyond their control , especially when there is a considerable time between taping of episodes . This occurred for the first time in season 25 , when Priscilla Ball , who won on January 16 , 2009 , was unable to attend the taping of the next episode because of illness ; as a result , three new contestants appeared on the next episode . Ball returned as a co @-@ champion to play on the episode airing April 9 , 2009 . On the episode aired December 21 , 2015 , the returning champion , Claudia Corriere , could not return as champion because of a job offered in the weeks between tapings , so three new contestants played that day as well . Corriere returned as a co @-@ champion on the January 18 , 2016 episode , but was eliminated in a three @-@ way loss . 
 Typically , the two challengers participate in a backstage draw to determine lectern positions . In all situations with three new contestants , the draw will also determine who will take the champion 's position and select first to start the game . 
 = = = Variations for tournament play = = = 
 Tournaments generally run for 10 consecutive episodes and feature 15 contestants . The first five episodes , the quarter @-@ finals , feature three new contestants each day . The winners of these five games , and the four highest scoring non @-@ winners ( " wild cards " ) , advance to the semi @-@ finals , which run for three days . The winners of these three games advance to play in a two @-@ game final match , in which the scores from both games are combined to determine the overall standings . This format has been used since the first Tournament of Champions in 1985 and was devised by Trebek himself . 
 If there is a tie for the final wild card position , the non @-@ winner that advances will be based on the same regulations as two contestants who tie for second ; the tie @-@ breaker is the contestant 's score after the Double Jeopardy ! round , and if further tied , the score after the Jeopardy ! round determines the contestant who advances as the wild card . In the rare case after the first round of the tournament , fewer than four non @-@ winners have a positive score to advance to the second round , then the contestants who have a zero score after Final Jeopardy ! will be ranked in the same procedure . 
 If two or more contestants have the same positive score at the end of match ( first round , semi @-@ final game , or end of a two @-@ game final ) , a one @-@ clue tiebreaker is used . The tied contestants are given a category , and then the clue . The first contestant to ring @-@ in and respond correctly becomes that game 's winner . Contestants are not eliminated for providing an incorrect response , and cannot win by default . If it takes multiple attempts to determine a winner , only the final clue will air . 
 If none of the contestants in a quarter @-@ final or semi @-@ final game end with a positive score , all three are provisionally eliminated and an additional wild card contestant advances instead . This occurred in the quarter @-@ finals of the 1991 Seniors Tournament and the semi @-@ finals of the 2013 Teen Tournament . 
 If a finalist finishes Double Jeopardy ! with a $ 0 or negative score on either day , that contestant is eliminated from Final Jeopardy ! as usual for that leg of the two @-@ legged tie only , and their score for that leg is recorded as $ 0 . If any game of the finals ends in which no finalist finishes with a positive score , all scores for that day are recorded as $ 0 . If , at the end of the finals , no finalist finishes with a positive score after combining the totals from the first and second games , the one @-@ clue tiebreaker is played . 
 = = Conception and development = = 
 In a 1964 Associated Press profile released shortly before the original Jeopardy ! series premiered , Merv Griffin offered the following account of how he created the quiz show : 
 My wife <unk> just came up with the idea one day when we were in a plane bringing us back to New York from Duluth . I was mulling over game show ideas , when she noted that there had not been a successful " question and answer " game on the air since the quiz show scandals . Why not do a switch , and give the answers to the contestant and let them come up with the question ? She fired a couple of answers to me : " 5 @,@ 280 " – and the question of course was " How many feet in a mile ? " . Another was " 79 <unk> Vista " ; that was Fibber and Mollie McGee 's address . I loved the idea , went straight to NBC with the idea , and they bought it without even looking at a pilot show . 
 Griffin 's first conception of the game used a board comprising ten categories with ten clues each , but after finding that this board could not easily be shown on camera , he reduced it to two rounds of thirty clues each , with five clues in each of six categories . He originally intended the show to require grammatically correct phrasing ( e.g. , only accepting " Who is ... " for a person ) , but after finding that grammatical correction slowed the game down , he decided that the show should instead accept any correct response that was in question form . Griffin discarded his initial title for the show , What 's the Question ? , when skeptical network executive Ed Vane rejected his original concept of the game , claiming , " It doesn 't have enough <unk> . " 
 Jeopardy ! was not the first game show to give contestants the answers and require the questions . That format had previously been used by the Gil Fates @-@ hosted program CBS Television Quiz , which aired from July 1941 until May 1942 . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 = = = Hosts and announcers = = = 
 The first three versions of the show were hosted by Art Fleming . Don Pardo served as announcer for the original NBC version and weekly syndicated version , but when NBC 's revival The All @-@ New Jeopardy ! launched in 1978 , Pardo 's announcing duties were taken over by John Harlan . 
 Alex Trebek has served as host of the daily syndicated version since it premiered in 1984 , except when he switched places with Wheel of Fortune host Pat Sajak as an April Fool 's joke on the episode aired April 1 , 1997 . His most recent contract renewal , from March 2015 , takes his tenure through the 2017 – 18 season . In the daily syndicated version 's first pilot , from 1983 , Jay Stewart served as the show 's announcer , but Johnny Gilbert took over the role when that version was picked up as a series and has held it since then . 
 = = = Clue Crew = = = 
 The Jeopardy ! Clue Crew , introduced on September 24 , 2001 , is a team of roving correspondents who appear in videos , recorded around the world , to narrate some clues . Explaining why the Clue Crew was added to the show , executive producer Harry Friedman said , " TV is a visual medium , and the more visual we can make our clues , the more we think it will enhance the experience for the viewer . " 
 Following the initial announcement of auditions for the team , over 5 @,@ 000 people applied for Clue Crew posts . The original Clue Crew members were Cheryl Farrell , Jimmy McGuire , Sofia <unk> , and Sarah Whitcomb . <unk> departed the Clue Crew in 2004 to become an anchor on the high school news program Channel One News , and a search was held to replace her in early 2005 . The winners were Jon Cannon and Kelly Miyahara , who formally joined the crew starting in season 22 , which premiered on September 12 , 2005 . Farrell continued to record clues for episodes aired as late as October 2008 , and Cannon continued to appear until July 2009 . 
 The Clue Crew has traveled to 280 cities worldwide , spanning all 50 of the United States and 44 other countries . In addition to appearing in Jeopardy ! clue videos , the team 's members also travel to meet fans of the show and future contestants . Occasionally , they visit schools to showcase the educational game Classroom Jeopardy ! Miyahara also serves as announcer for the Sports Jeopardy ! spin @-@ off series . 
 = = = Production staff = = = 
 Robert Rubin served as the producer of the original Jeopardy ! series for most of its run , and later became its executive producer . Following Rubin 's promotion , the line producer was Lynette Williams . 
 Griffin was the daily syndicated version 's executive producer until his retirement in 2000 . Trebek served as producer as well as host until 1987 , when he began hosting NBC 's Classic Concentration for the next four years . At that time , he handed producer duties to George Vosburgh , who had formerly produced The All @-@ New Jeopardy ! . In the 1997 – 98 season , Vosburgh was succeeded as producer by Harry Friedman , Lisa Finneran , and Rocky Schmidt . Beginning in 1999 , Friedman became executive producer , and Gary Johnson became the show 's new third producer . In the 2006 – 07 season , Deb <unk> and Brett Schneider became the producers , and Finneran , Schmidt , and Johnson were promoted to supervising producers . 
 The original Jeopardy ! series was directed at different times by Bob <unk> , Eleanor <unk> , and Jeff Goldstein . Dick Schneider , who directed episodes of The All @-@ New Jeopardy ! , returned as director for the Trebek version 's first eight seasons . Since 1992 , the show has been directed by Kevin McCarthy , who had previously served as associate director under Schneider . 
 The current version of Jeopardy ! employs nine writers and five researchers to create and assemble the categories and clues . Billy Wisse and Michele Loud , both longtime staff members , are the editorial producer and editorial supervisor , respectively . Previous writing and editorial supervisors have included Jules Minton , Terrence McDonnell , Harry Eisenberg , and Gary Johnson . 
 The show 's production designer is Naomi Slodki . Previous art directors have included Henry Lickel , Dennis Roof , Bob Rang , and Ed Flesh ( who also designed sets for other game shows such as The $ 25 @,@ 000 Pyramid , Name That Tune , and Wheel of Fortune ) . 
 = = Production = = 
 The daily syndicated version of Jeopardy ! is produced by Sony Pictures Television ( previously known as Columbia TriStar Television , the successor company to original producer Merv Griffin Enterprises ) . The copyright holder is Jeopardy Productions , which , like SPT , operates as a subsidiary of Sony Pictures Entertainment . The rights to distribute the program on television in the United States are owned by CBS Television Distribution , which absorbed original distributor King World Productions in 2007 . 
 The original Jeopardy ! series was taped in Studio 6A at NBC Studios at 30 Rockefeller Plaza in New York City , and The All @-@ New Jeopardy ! was taped in Studio 3 at NBC 's Burbank Studios at 3000 West Alameda Avenue in Burbank , California . The Trebek version was initially taped at Metromedia Stage 7 , KTTV @-@ TV , on Sunset Boulevard in Hollywood , but moved its production facilities to Hollywood Center Studios ' Stage 9 in 1985 . After the final shows of season 10 were recorded on February 15 , 1994 , the Jeopardy ! production facilities were moved to Sony Pictures Studios ' Stage 10 on Washington Boulevard in Culver City , California , where the show has been recorded ever since . 
 = = = Set = = = 
 Various technological and aesthetic changes have been made to the Jeopardy ! set over the years . The original game board was exposed from behind a curtain and featured clues printed on cardboard pull cards which were revealed as contestants selected them . The All @-@ New Jeopardy ! ' s game board was exposed from behind double @-@ slide panels and featured flipping panels with the dollar amount on one side and the clue on the other . When the Trebek version premiered in 1984 , the game board used individual television monitors for each clue within categories . The original monitors were replaced with larger and sleeker ones in 1991 . In 2006 , these monitors were discarded in favor of a nearly seamless projection video wall , which was replaced in 2009 with 36 high @-@ definition flat @-@ panel monitors manufactured by Sony Electronics . 
 From 1985 to 1997 , the sets were designed to have a background color of blue for the Jeopardy ! round and red for the Double Jeopardy ! and Final Jeopardy ! rounds . At the beginning of season 8 in 1991 , a brand new set was introduced that resembled a grid . On the episode aired November 11 , 1996 , two months after the start of season 13 , Jeopardy ! introduced the first of several sets designed by Naomi Slodki , who intended the set to resemble " the foyer of a very contemporary library , with wood and sandblasted glass and blue granite " . 
 Shortly after the start of season 19 in 2002 , the show switched to yet another new set , which was given slight modifications when Jeopardy ! and sister show Wheel of Fortune transitioned to high @-@ definition broadcasting in 2006 . During this time , the show began to feature virtual tours of the set on its official web site . The various HD improvements for Jeopardy ! and Wheel represented a combined investment of approximately $ 4 million , 5 @,@ 000 hours of labor , and 6 miles ( 9 @.@ 7 km ) of cable . Both shows had been shot using HD cameras for several years before beginning to broadcast in HD . On standard @-@ definition television broadcasts , the shows continue to be displayed with an aspect ratio of 4 : 3 . 
 In 2009 , Jeopardy ! updated its set once again . The new set debuted with special episodes taped at the 42nd annual International CES technology trade show , hosted at the Las Vegas Convention Center in Winchester ( Las Vegas Valley ) , Nevada , and became the primary set for Jeopardy ! when the show began taping its 26th season , which premiered on September 14 , 2009 . It was significantly remodeled when season 30 premiered in September 2013 . 
 = = = Theme music = = = 
 Since the debut of Jeopardy ! in 1964 , several different songs and arrangements have served as the theme music for the show , most of which were composed by Griffin . The main theme for the original Jeopardy ! series was " Take Ten " , composed by Griffin 's wife <unk> . The All @-@ New Jeopardy ! opened with " January , February , March " and closed with " Frisco Disco " , both of which were composed by Griffin himself . 
 The best @-@ known theme song on Jeopardy ! is " Think ! " , originally composed by Griffin under the title " A Time for Tony " , as a lullaby for his son . " Think ! " has always been used for the 30 @-@ second period in Final Jeopardy ! when the contestants write down their responses , and since the syndicated version debuted in 1984 , a rendition of that tune has been used as the main theme song . " Think ! " has become so popular that it has been used in many different contexts , from sporting events to weddings . Griffin estimated that the use of " Think ! " had earned him royalties of over $ 70 million throughout his lifetime . " Think ! " led Griffin to win the Broadcast Music , Inc . ( BMI ) President 's Award in 2003 , and during GSN 's 2009 Game Show Awards special , it was named " Best Game Show Theme Song " . In 1997 , the main theme and Final Jeopardy ! recordings of " Think ! " were rearranged by Steve Kaplan , who served as the show 's music director until his December 2003 death . In 2008 , Chris Bell Music and Sound Design overhauled the Jeopardy ! music package for the show 's 25th anniversary . 
 = = = Audition process = = = 
 Prospective contestants of the original Jeopardy ! series called the show 's office in New York to arrange an appointment and to preliminarily determine eligibility . They were briefed and auditioned together in groups of ten to thirty individuals , participating in both a written test and mock games . Individuals who were successful at the audition were invited to appear on the program within approximately six weeks . 
 Auditioning for the current version of the show begins with a written exam , comprising fifty questions in total . This exam is administered online periodically , as well as being offered at regional contestant search events . Since season 15 ( 1998 – 99 ) , the show has used a Winnebago recreational vehicle called the " Jeopardy ! Brain Bus " to conduct regional events throughout the United States and Canada . Participants who correctly answer at least 35 out of 50 questions advance in the audition process and are invited to compete in mock games . Those who are approved are notified at a later time and invited to appear on the show . 
 In 2016 , producers disallowed Canadians from applying online , citing new Canadian privacy rules regarding personal information on the Internet . Trebek confirmed this to The Ottawa Citizen in an interview . Neither named a particular law or regulation , and The Toronto Star was unable to discern the exact problem . 
 = = Broadcast history = = 
 The original Jeopardy ! series premiered on NBC on March 30 , 1964 , and by the end of the 1960s was the second @-@ highest @-@ rated daytime game show , behind only The Hollywood Squares . The show was successful until 1974 , when Lin Bolen , then NBC 's Vice President of Daytime Programming , moved the show out of the noontime slot where it had been located for most of its run , as part of her effort to boost ratings among the 18 – 34 female demographic . After 2 @,@ 753 episodes , the original Jeopardy ! series ended on January 3 , 1975 ; to compensate Griffin for its cancellation , NBC purchased Wheel of Fortune , another show that he had created , and premiered it the following Monday . A syndicated edition of Jeopardy ! , distributed by Metromedia and featuring many contestants who were previously champions on the original series , aired in the primetime during the 1974 – 75 season . The NBC daytime series was later revived as The All @-@ New Jeopardy ! , which premiered on October 2 , 1978 and aired 108 episodes , ending on March 2 , 1979 ; this revival featured significant rule changes , such as progressive elimination of contestants over the course of the main game , and a bonus round instead of Final Jeopardy ! 
 The daily syndicated version debuted on September 10 , 1984 , and was launched in response to the success of the syndicated version of Wheel and the installation of electronic trivia games in pubs and bars . This version of the program has met with greater success than the previous incarnations ; it has outlived 300 other game shows and become the second most popular game show in syndication ( behind Wheel ) , averaging 25 million viewers per week . The show 's most recent renewal , in April 2015 , extends it through the 2017 – 18 season . 
 Jeopardy ! has spawned versions in many foreign countries throughout the world , including Canada , the United Kingdom , Germany , Sweden , Russia , Denmark , Israel , and Australia . The American syndicated version of Jeopardy ! is also broadcast throughout the world , with international distribution rights handled by CBS Studios International . 
 Three spin @-@ off versions of Jeopardy ! have been created . Rock & Roll Jeopardy ! debuted on VH1 in 1998 and ran until 2001 ; the show centered around post @-@ 1950s popular music trivia and was hosted by Jeff Probst . <unk> ! , which aired on GSN during the 1998 – 99 season , was a special children 's version hosted by Bob Bergen and featured various rule changes from the original version . Sports Jeopardy ! , a sports @-@ themed version hosted by Dan Patrick , premiered in 2014 on the Crackle digital service and eventually moved to the cable sports network NBCSN in 2016 . 
 = = = Archived episodes = = = 
 Only a small number of episodes of the first three Jeopardy ! versions survive . From the original NBC daytime version , archived episodes mostly consist of black @-@ and @-@ white kinescopes of the original color videotapes . Various episodes from 1967 , 1971 , 1973 , and 1974 are listed among the holdings of the UCLA Film and Television Archive . The 1964 " test episode " , Episode No. 2 @,@ 000 ( from February 21 , 1972 ) , and a June 1975 episode of the weekly syndicated edition exist at the Paley Center for Media . Incomplete paper records of the NBC @-@ era games exist on microfilm at the Library of Congress . GSN holds The All @-@ New Jeopardy ! ' s premiere and finale in broadcast quality , and aired the latter on December 31 , 1999 , as part of its " <unk> " marathon . The UCLA Archive holds a copy of a pilot taped for CBS in 1977 , and the premiere exists among the Paley Center 's holdings . 
 GSN , which , like Jeopardy ! , is an affiliate of Sony Pictures Television , has rerun ten seasons since the channel 's launch in 1994 . Copies of 43 Trebek @-@ hosted syndicated Jeopardy ! episodes aired between 1989 and 2004 have been collected by the UCLA Archive , and the premiere and various other episodes are included in the Paley Center 's collection . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Jeopardy ! has won a record 31 Daytime Emmy Awards since 1984 . The show holds the record for the Daytime Emmy Award for Outstanding Game / Audience Participation Show , with fourteen awards won in that category . Another five awards have been won by Trebek for Outstanding Game Show Host . Twelve other awards were won by the show 's directors and writers in the respective categories of Outstanding Direction for a Game / Audience Participation Show and Outstanding Special Class Writing before these categories were removed in 2006 . On June 17 , 2011 , Trebek shared the Lifetime Achievement Award with Sajak at the 38th Annual Daytime Emmy Awards ceremony . The following year , the show was honored with a Peabody Award for its role in encouraging , celebrating , and rewarding knowledge ; as such , it holds the distinction of being the only game show since 1960 to win the Peabody Award . 
 In its April 17 – 23 , 1993 issue , TV Guide named Jeopardy ! the best game show of the 1970s as part of a celebration of its 40th anniversary . In January 2001 , the magazine ranked the show number 2 on its " 50 Greatest Game Shows " list — second only to The Price Is Right . It would later rank Jeopardy ! number 45 on its list of the 60 Best TV Series of All Time , calling it " habit @-@ forming " and saying that the program " always makes [ its viewers ] feel smarter " . Also in 2013 , the show ranked number 1 on TV Guide 's list of the 60 Greatest Game Shows . In the summer of 2006 , the show was ranked number 2 on GSN 's list of the 50 Greatest Game Shows of All Time , second only to Match Game . 
 A hall of fame honoring Jeopardy ! was added to the Sony Pictures Studios tour on September 20 , 2011 . It features the show 's Emmy Awards as well as retired set pieces , classic merchandise , video clips , photographs , and other memorabilia related to Jeopardy ! ' s history . 
 = = Tournaments and other events = = 
 = = = Regular events = = = 
 Starting in 1985 , the show has held an annual Tournament of Champions featuring the top fifteen champions who have appeared on the show since the last tournament . The top prize awarded to the winner was originally valued at $ 100 @,@ 000 , and increased to $ 250 @,@ 000 in 2003 . Other regular tournaments include the Teen Tournament , with a $ 75 @,@ 000 top prize ; the College Championship , in which undergraduate students from American colleges and universities compete for a $ 100 @,@ 000 top prize ; and the Teachers Tournament , where educators compete for a $ 100 @,@ 000 top prize . Each tournament runs for ten consecutive episodes in a format devised by Trebek himself , consisting of five quarter @-@ final games , three semifinals , and a final consisting of two games with the scores totaled . Winners of the College Championship and Teachers Tournament are invited to participate in the Tournament of Champions . 
 Non @-@ tournament events held regularly on the show include Celebrity Jeopardy ! , in which celebrities and other notable individuals compete for charitable organizations of their choice ; and Kids Week , a special competition for school @-@ age children aged 10 through 12 . 
 = = = Special events = = = 
 Three International Tournaments , held in 1996 , 1997 , and 2001 , featured one @-@ week competitions among champions from each of the international versions of Jeopardy ! . Each of the countries that aired their own version of the show in those years could nominate a contestant . The format was identical to the semifinals and finals of other Jeopardy ! tournaments . In 1996 and 1997 , the winner received $ 25 @,@ 000 ; in 2001 , the top prize was doubled to $ 50 @,@ 000 . The 1997 tournament was recorded in Stockholm on the set of the Swedish version of Jeopardy ! , and is significant for being the first week of Jeopardy ! episodes to be taped in a foreign country . 
 There have been a number of special tournaments featuring the greatest contestants in Jeopardy ! history . The first of these " all @-@ time best " tournaments , Super Jeopardy ! , aired in the summer of 1990 on ABC , and featured 37 top contestants from the previous seasons of the Trebek version and one notable champion from the original Jeopardy ! series competing for a top prize of $ 250 @,@ 000 . In 1993 , that year 's Tournament of Champions was followed by a Tenth Anniversary Tournament conducted over five episodes . In May 2002 , to commemorate the Trebek version 's 4,000th episode , the show invited fifteen champions to play for a $ 1 million prize in the Million Dollar Masters tournament , which took place at Radio City Music Hall in New York City . The Ultimate Tournament of Champions aired in 2005 and pitted 145 former Jeopardy ! champions against each other , with two winners moving on to face Ken Jennings in a three @-@ game final for $ 2 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 , the largest prize in the show 's history ; overall , the tournament spanned 15 weeks and 76 episodes , starting on February 9 and ending on May 25 . In 2014 , Jeopardy ! commemorated the 30th anniversary of the Trebek version with a Battle of the Decades tournament , in which 15 champions apiece from the first , second , and third decades of Jeopardy ! ' s daily syndicated history competed for a grand prize of $ 1 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 . 
 In November 1998 , Jeopardy ! traveled to Boston to reassemble 12 past Teen Tournament contestants for a special Teen Reunion Tournament . In 2008 , the 25th season began with reuniting 15 contestants from the first two Kids Weeks to compete in a special reunion tournament of their own . During the next season ( 2009 – 10 ) , a special edition of Celebrity Jeopardy ! , called the Million Dollar Celebrity Invitational , was played in which twenty @-@ seven contestants from past celebrity episodes competed for a grand prize of $ 1 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 for charity ; the grand prize was won by Michael McKean . 
 The IBM Challenge aired February 14 – 16 , 2011 , and featured IBM 's Watson computer facing off against Ken Jennings and Brad Rutter in a two @-@ game match played over three shows . This was the first man @-@ <unk> competition in Jeopardy ! ' s history . Watson won both the first game and the overall match to win the grand prize of $ 1 million , which IBM divided between two charities ( World Vision International and World Community Grid ) . Jennings , who won $ 300 @,@ 000 for second place , and Rutter , who won the $ 200 @,@ 000 third @-@ place prize , both pledged to donate half of their winnings to charity . The competition brought the show its highest ratings since the Ultimate Tournament of Champions . 
 = = Record holders = = 
 Jeopardy ! ' s record for the longest winning streak is held by Ken Jennings , who competed on the show from June 2 through November 30 , 2004 , winning 74 matches before being defeated by Nancy Zerg in his 75th appearance . He amassed $ 2 @,@ 520 @,@ 700 over his 74 wins and a $ 2 @,@ 000 second @-@ place prize in his 75th appearance . At the time , he held the record as the highest money @-@ winner ever on American game shows , and his winning streak increased the show 's ratings and popularity to the point where it became TV 's highest @-@ rated syndicated program . Jennings later won the $ 500 @,@ 000 second @-@ place prize in the Ultimate Tournament of Champions , the $ 300 @,@ 000 second @-@ place prize in the IBM Challenge , and the $ 100 @,@ 000 second @-@ place prize in the Battle of the Decades . 
 The highest @-@ earning all @-@ time Jeopardy ! contestant is Brad Rutter , who has won a cumulative total of $ 4 @,@ 355 @,@ 102 . He became an undefeated champion in 2000 and later won an unprecedented four Jeopardy ! tournaments : the 2001 Tournament of Champions , the 2002 Million Dollar Masters Tournament , the 2005 Ultimate Tournament of Champions , and the 2014 Battle of the Decades . Rutter broke Jennings 's record for all @-@ time game show winnings when he defeated Jennings and Jerome Vered in the Ultimate Tournament of Champions finals . Jennings regained the record through appearances on various other game shows , culminating in an appearance on Are You Smarter than a 5th Grader ? on October 10 , 2008 . In 2014 , Rutter regained the title after winning $ 1 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 in the Battle of the Decades , defeating Jennings and Roger Craig in the finals . 
 Craig is the holder of the all @-@ time record for single @-@ day winnings on Jeopardy ! . On the episode that aired September 14 , 2010 , he amassed a score of $ 47 @,@ 000 after the game 's first two rounds , then wagered and won an additional $ 30 @,@ 000 in the Final Jeopardy ! round , finishing with $ 77 @,@ 000 . The previous single @-@ day record of $ 75 @,@ 000 had been set by Jennings . 
 The record @-@ holder among female contestants on Jeopardy ! — in both number of games and total winnings — is Julia Collins , who amassed $ 429 @,@ 100 over 21 games between April 21 and June 2 , 2014 . She won $ 428 @,@ 100 in her 20 games as champion , plus $ 1 @,@ 000 for finishing third in her twenty @-@ first game . Collins also achieved the second @-@ longest winning streak on the show , behind Jennings . The streak , which was interrupted in May by the Battle of the Decades , was broken by Brian <unk> . 
 The highest one @-@ day score in a Celebrity Jeopardy ! tournament was achieved by comedian Andy Richter during a first round game of the 2009 – 10 season 's " Million Dollar Celebrity Invitational " , in which he finished with $ 68 @,@ 000 for his selected charity , the St. Jude Children 's Research Hospital . 
 Three contestants on the Trebek version have won a game with the lowest amount possible ( $ 1 ) . The first was U.S. Air Force Lieutenant Colonel Darryl Scott , on the episode that aired January 19 , 1993 ; the second was Benjamin Salisbury , on a Celebrity Jeopardy ! episode that aired April 30 , 1997 ; and the third was Brandi Chastain , on the Celebrity Jeopardy ! episode that aired February 9 , 2001 . 
 = = Other media = = 
 = = = Portrayals and parodies = = = 
 Jeopardy ! has been featured in a number of films , television shows and books over the years , mostly with one or more characters participating as contestants , or viewing and interacting with the game show from their own homes . 
 On " Questions and Answers " , a season 7 episode of The Golden Girls aired February 8 , 1992 , Dorothy Zbornak ( Bea Arthur ) auditions for Jeopardy ! , but despite her excellent show of knowledge , she is rejected by a contestant coordinator who feels that America would not root for her . In a dream sequence , Dorothy competes against roommate Rose Nylund ( Betty White ) and neighbor Charlie <unk> ( David Leisure ) , in a crossover from Empty Nest . Trebek and Griffin appear as themselves in the dream sequence , and Gilbert provides a voice @-@ over . 
 A 1988 episode of Mama 's Family titled " Mama on Jeopardy ! " features the titular Mama , Thelma Harper ( Vicki Lawrence ) , competing on the show after her neighbor and friend Iola Boylan ( Beverly Archer ) is rejected . For most of the game the questions given by Mama are incorrect , but she makes a miraculous comeback near the end and barely qualifies for Final Jeopardy ! Her final question given is also incorrect , but she finishes in second place by $ 1 and wins a trip to Hawaii for herself and her family . Again , Trebek guest stars and Gilbert provides a voice @-@ over . 
 In the Cheers episode " What Is ... Cliff Clavin ? " ( 1990 ) , the titular mailman , portrayed by John Ratzenberger , appears on the show and racks up an impressive $ 22 @,@ 000 going into the Final Jeopardy ! round , well ahead of his competitors . Despite having a total that his competitors cannot reach in Final Jeopardy ! , Cliff risks all of his winnings on the final clue , which is revealed to be " Archibald Leach , Bernard Schwartz and Lucille LeSueur " ( the real names of Cary Grant , Tony Curtis , and Joan Crawford , respectively ) . Cliff 's response , " Who are three people who 've never been in my kitchen ? " , is deemed incorrect , and he leaves with no money . 
 In " I Take Thee Quagmire " , a season 4 episode of Family Guy aired March 12 , 2006 , Mayor Adam West appears as a contestant on Jeopardy ! . He spells Trebek 's name backwards ( as " <unk> Xela " ) , " sending him back " to the fifth dimension , in reference to when Mister Mxyzptlk , a nemesis to DC Comics ' Superman , is sent to the fifth dimension when someone makes him say his own name backwards . 
 Trebek appears as himself on " Miracle on Evergreen Terrace " , a season 9 episode of The Simpsons in which Marge Simpson appears on a fictional version of the show , but performs very poorly , leaving with – $ 5 @,@ 200 . 
 From 1996 to 2002 and again in 2005 , 2009 , and 2015 , Saturday Night Live featured a recurring Celebrity Jeopardy ! sketch in which Trebek , portrayed by Will Ferrell , has to deal with the constant taunts of antagonists such as Sean Connery ( played by Darrell Hammond ) and Burt Reynolds ( Norm Macdonald ) , the latter of which insists on being called " Turd Ferguson " . 
 Jeopardy ! is featured in a subplot of the 1992 film White Men Can 't Jump , in which Gloria Clemente ( Rosie Perez ) attempts to pass the show 's auditions . She succeeds , and ends up appearing on the show , winning over $ 14 @,@ 000 . 
 Other films and television series in which Jeopardy ! has been portrayed over the years include The ' <unk> , Die Hard , Men in Black , Rain Man , Charlie 's Angels , Dying Young , The Education of Max Bickford , The Bucket List , Groundhog Day , and Finding Forrester . 
 In the David Foster Wallace short story " Little <unk> Animals " , first published in The Paris Review and later reprinted in Wallace 's collection Girl with Curious Hair , a character competes and wins on every Jeopardy ! game for three years ( a total of 700 episodes ) , using her winnings to pay for the care of her autistic brother . 
 The Ellen 's Energy Adventure attraction at Epcot 's Universe of Energy pavilion features a dream sequence in which Ellen DeGeneres plays a Jeopardy ! game entirely focused on energy . 
 Fleming makes a cameo appearance reprising his role as host of Jeopardy ! in the 1982 film Airplane II : The Sequel . 
 The music video " I Lost on Jeopardy " , a parody of Greg Kihn 's 1983 hit song " Jeopardy " , was released by " Weird Al " Yankovic in 1984 , a few months before Trebek 's version debuted ; the video featured cameos from Fleming , Pardo , Kihn , and Dr. Demento . 
 = = = Merchandise = = = 
 Over the years , the Jeopardy ! brand has been licensed for various products . From 1964 through 1976 , Milton Bradley issued annual board games based on the original Fleming version . The Trebek version has been adapted into board games released by Pressman Toy Corporation , Tyco Toys , and Parker Brothers . In addition , Jeopardy ! has been adapted into a number of video games released on various consoles and handhelds spanning multiple hardware generations , starting with a Nintendo Entertainment System game released in 1987 . The show has also been adapted for personal computers , Facebook , Twitter , Android , and the Roku Channel Store . 
 A DVD titled Jeopardy ! : An Inside Look at America 's Favorite Quiz Show , released by Sony Pictures Home Entertainment on November 8 , 2005 , features five memorable episodes of the Trebek version ( the 1984 premiere , Jennings ' final game , and the three finals matches of the Ultimate Tournament of Champions ) and three featurettes discussing the show 's history and question selection process . Other products featuring the Jeopardy ! brand include a collectible watch , a series of daily desktop calendars , and various slot machine games for casinos and the Internet . 
 = = = Internet = = = 
 Jeopardy ! ' s official website , active as early as 1998 , receives over 400 @,@ 000 monthly visitors . The website features videos , photographs , and other information related to each week 's contestants , as well as mini @-@ sites promoting remote tapings and special tournaments . As the show changes its main title card and corresponding graphics with every passing season , the Jeopardy ! website is re @-@ skinned to reflect the changes , and the general content of the site ( such as online tests and promotions , programming announcements , " spotlight " segments , photo galleries , and downloadable content ) is regularly updated to align with producers ' priorities for the show . In its 2012 " Readers Choice Awards " , About.com praised the official Jeopardy ! website for featuring " everything [ visitors ] need to know about the show , as well as some fun interactive elements " , and for having a humorous error page . 
 In November 2009 , Jeopardy ! launched a viewer loyalty program called the " Jeopardy ! Premier Club " , which allowed home viewers to identify Final Jeopardy ! categories from episodes for a chance to earn points , and play a weekly Jeopardy ! game featuring categories and clues from the previous week 's episodes . Every three months , contestants were selected randomly to advance to one of three quarterly online tournaments ; after these tournaments were played , the three highest scoring contestants would play one final online tournament for the chance to win $ 5 @,@ 000 and a trip to Los Angeles to attend a taping of Jeopardy ! The Premier Club was discontinued by July 2011 . 
 There is an unofficial Jeopardy ! fansite known as the " J ! Archive " ( j @-@ <unk> ) , which transcribes games from throughout Jeopardy ! ' s daily syndicated history . In the archive , episodes are covered by Jeopardy ! -style game boards with panels which , when hovered over with a mouse , reveal the correct response to their corresponding clues and the contestant who gave the correct response . The site makes use of a " wagering calculator " that helps potential contestants determine what amount is safest to bet during Final Jeopardy ! , and an alternative scoring method called " Coryat scoring " that disregards wagering during Daily Doubles or Final Jeopardy ! and gauges one 's general strength at the game . The site 's main founding archivist is Robert Knecht Schmidt , a student from Cleveland , Ohio , who himself appeared as a Jeopardy ! contestant in March 2010 . Before J ! Archive , there was an earlier Jeopardy ! fansite known as the " <unk> " , created by season 19 contestant Ronnie O 'Rourke , who managed and updated the site until Jennings ' run made her disillusioned with the show . 
 = Pascal and Maximus = 
 Pascal and Maximus are a pair of fictional characters who first appear in Walt Disney Pictures ' 50th animated feature film Tangled ( 2010 ) as supporting characters , and subsequently star in its short Tangled Ever After ( 2012 ) . Created by directors Nathan Greno and Byron Howard , both characters are voiced by American actor Frank Welker in Tangled ; in Tangled Ever After , Welker reprises his role as Pascal while Greno replaces the actor as Maximus . A comedic chameleon and horse duo , Pascal and Maximus serve as sidekicks to main characters Rapunzel and Flynn Rider , respectively . 
 In Tangled , Pascal resides alongside Rapunzel in Mother Gothel 's tower , while Maximus is a police horse originally trained to arrest Flynn Rider before he befriends him at Rapunzel 's insistence . In Tangled Ever After , Pascal and Maximus appear as ring bearers at Rapunzel and Flynn 's wedding . When they lose the couple 's wedding rings , the duo frantically attempts to retrieve them . Greno and Howard created Pascal in order to provide the lonely , isolated Rapunzel with a friend to talk to . Feeling that a reptile would compliment Rapunzel 's quirky personality , the directors ultimately decided to make the character a chameleon as opposed to a traditional woodland creature . Meanwhile , Maximus was originally conceived as a very serious horse based on actor Tommy Lee Jones until the animators decided to make him a funnier and more likeable character . The unusual decision to make Pascal and Maximus non @-@ speaking characters with Welker providing them with realistic sound effects was inspired by the performances of silent film actors Charlie Chaplin and Buster Keaton . 
 Both individually and as a comedic duo , Pascal and Maximus have garnered universal acclaim from film critics , who referred to the characters scene stealers – British magazine SFX dubbed Maximus the film 's breakout star while The Age hailed the character as the funniest horse in film history – in addition to praising the fact that both characters are refreshingly funny , expressive and charismatic without the use of dialogue . Additionally , several film critics preferred Pascal and Maximus to the film 's couple . 
 = = Development = = 
 = = = Conception = = = 
 Filmmaker Walt Disney himself had first attempted to adapt the Brothers Grimm fairy tale " Rapunzel " into a feature @-@ length animated film during the 1930s . However , Disney eventually abandoned the project because the story was considered too " small . " When first approached to direct Tangled in 2008 , directors Nathan Greno and Byron Howard decided that it would be best to update the story " for a modern audience . " The directors soon discovered " that the problem with having a prison character [ like Rapunzel ] ... is that they don 't have anyone to talk to . " Howard explained that because Rapunzel is incapable of having a conversation with Mother Gothel , the isolated , incarcerated heroine " needed someone to relate to . " Unwilling to default to using the traditional " boring , ordinary side @-@ kick , " Greno and Howard created Pascal , conceiving the character as a chameleon because Rapunzel is , according to Greno , " a rough @-@ and @-@ tumble girl . " Howard explained that " what we wanted to do is something fresh , something different . This girl , she 's not a dainty , precious girl ... So what would she have ? ... She 's going to have a lizard . " Additionally , Howard believed that a reptile would compliment and suit Rapunzel 's personality best , describing the character as " a quirky pet for a quirky young woman . " 
 Maximus was originally conceived by Howard as the " ultimate super @-@ cop " , jokingly dubbing the character " the Tommy Lee Jones of horses " . Attempting to make Maximus feel like a " fresh " character , the filmmakers researched several historical horses from both animated and live @-@ action films in order to ensure that the character was unique and different enough from his predecessors . Greno explained that " Maximus ... could have easily slipped into the category of , ' Oh , I 've seen that before . ' " To prevent this , the filmmakers referenced " a board with photos of all the different animated horses that had been done " . Howard explained that Maximus was originally conceived as a " pretty serious " character , but eventually developed into a funnier and more likeable horse as the animators continued to draw him with dog @-@ like attributes . Both Pascal and Maximus , who according to the Austin American @-@ Statesman are responsible for providing the film with the majority of its comic relief , were eventually written into the film by screenwriter Dan Fogelman . Analyzing the characters ' roles in the film , HitFix observed that " There 's a simplicity to it all that I admire , and you throw in a few anthropomorphized animals so everyone laughs a lot , and that 's the Disney recipe " . One critic wrote about Maximus : 
 " Horses have played a key role in armies and police forces around the world for hundreds of years , but Maximus is clearly one of a kind . Fearless in the face of danger , relentless in pursuit , and possessed of a nose befitting a bloodhound , this equine super @-@ sleuth won 't let anything stop him getting his man . " 
 = = = Characterization = = = 
 Considered rare for Disney animals , Pascal and Maximus do not speak . The idea to make Pascal and Maximus mute was inspired by the performances of actors Charlie Chaplin and Buster Keaton in Silent films . Identifying themselves as " huge fans " of Chaplin , Greno and Howard suggested that it would be a good idea to have a character like the actor featured in the film . Additionally , the directors explained in an interview with Orange that Pascal and Maximus ' silence was also inspired by the roles of Princess Aurora 's animal friends in Disney 's Sleeping Beauty ( 1959 ) , following the film 's rules and guidelines that even though they do not talk , they remain " very expressive " nonetheless and " act and understand without words . " Maximus particularly " belongs to the grand tradition of Disney creatures that are full of personality even though they don 't talk . " One film critic observed that Pascal and Maximus " have personalities all their own , making use of techniques harkening back to the silent era " . Howard explained that " Pantomime acting is a great challenge for our animators " because , according to animator Jin Kim , Pascal and Maximus both " had to be funny without speech " , forcing the animators to exaggerate their emotions and facial expressions . The Chicago Sun @-@ Times observed that " Pascal ... doesn 't speak , but manages to convey himself with eye rolls and changes of color . " Both animals ' sound effects are provided by American actor Frank Welker . 
 Pascal 's supervising animator Lino DiSalvo told the Los Angeles Times that at one point the animators " weren 't getting enough entertainment out of Pascal . " DiSalvo elaborated , " originally , he was very realistic . He moved like a real chameleon , " which in turn depicted him as very " cold . " By exaggerating the character 's shape and face , the animators eventually " amped [ him ] up " in order to make him funnier . The name " Pascal " was borrowed from a pet chameleon owned by Tangled animator Kellie Lewis . During production , Lewis ' other pet chameleon and Pascal 's mate hatched six eggs , in turn making Pascal a father . In tribute to Pascal , the directors included a " Chameleon Babies " credit in the film 's closing credits , parodying the more traditional " Production babies " credit , while Lewis herself received a " Chameleon Wrangler " credit . 
 Discussing the likelihood a Tangled sequel , Howard explained to the Los Angeles Times " We don 't want to do a sequel for the sake of sequels ... The story has to be worth telling . " Because the original film " buttons up " well , the directors wanted to avoid simply creating a movie wedding featuring Rapunzel and Flynn because " that 's not entertainment " , so Greno and Howard conceived a funny story about Pascal and Maximus instead , providing the animators and writers with " an opportunity to do a lot of slapstick " that was mostly absent in Tangled . Wanting the film " to be a movie for everyone " , the directors " figured out a way to give [ the audience ] exactly what they wanted , so there is a beautiful grand wedding in the short , but what happens pretty quickly , those two goofballs Maximus and Pascal lose the wedding rings ... It turned into this big , zany , cartoony , fun , action @-@ packed short . " In the short , Pascal and Maximus encounter " a trail of comical chaos that includes flying lanterns , a flock of doves , a wine barrel barricade and a very sticky finale " . 
 = = Appearances = = 
 = = = Tangled = = = 
 Pascal and Maximus first appear in Tangled ( 2010 ) . Introduced as the pet and best friend of Rapunzel , Pascal is a chameleon who lives with Rapunzel in Mother Gothel 's secluded tower . Although Rapunzel pretends to be happy living in isolation under Gothel 's strict , controlling parenting , Pascal refuses to hide his discontent . Meanwhile , Maximus and thief Flynn Rider share a bitter animosity ; a police horse , Maximus is determined to arrest Flynn Rider for stealing a crown . Seeking refuge from Maximus , Flynn hides in Gothel 's tower where he is quickly incapacitated by Rapunzel , and he and Pascal immediately adopt a love @-@ hate relationship . Determined to see the mysterious " floating lights " in time for her eighteenth birthday , Rapunzel agrees to return Flynn 's crown to him only after he escorts her to safely to the kingdom . Meanwhile , Maximus , who continues his search for Flynn , inadvertently tips off Gothel that Rapunzel , on whose magical hair she relies to stay alive , has left the tower accompanied by Flynn . With her life in danger , she desperately pursues them . 
 When Maximus eventually catches up with Rapunzel , Flynn and Pascal , the horse attempts to apprehend Flynn only to be charmed by Rapunzel , who convinces him to leave Flynn alone until they have arrived at their destination while Pascal ensures that the two maintain a healthy relationship . In the kingdom , Flynn , Rapunzel and Pascal embark on a canoe ride to see the floating lights , revealed to be lanterns , up @-@ close , while Maximus is forced to wait ashore as there is not enough room for him . In a friendly gesture , Flynn gives him a bag of apples . Realizing that he is falling in love with Rapunzel , Flynn attempts to hand off the crown he was promised to the Stabbington Brothers , two colleagues of his , only to be kidnapped and handed over to the police . Mistaking this for abandonment , Rapunzel is taken back to the tower by Gothel , who has caught up with them . 
 Maximus manages to help an imprisoned Flynn about to be hanged for his crimes escape from the dungeon and races him to Gothel 's tower , where he is stabbed . However , Rapunzel eventually heals Flynn after he cuts her hair , which in turn destroys Gothel , and they live happily every after Pascal and Maximus move to Corona with them ; Maximus is eventually knighted , becoming Captain of the Guards and eliminates crime in the kingdom . 
 = = = Tangled Ever After = = = 
 Tangled Ever After ( 2012 ) is set shortly after the events of the first film . In the short , Pascal and Maximus are ring bearers at Rapunzel and Flynn Rider 's wedding . When Maximus suffers a reaction from one of the flower petals Pascal is sprinkling along the aisle , Maximus sneezes and the rings are propelled off the pillow on which he is carrying the rings ; the fly through a window in the chapel and into the city streets . Pascal and Maximus discreetly sneak out of the chapel to retrieve them in time for Rapunzel and Flynn to exchange them . Pascal and Maximus encounter several obstacles and hindrances in their attempt , eventually crashing into a tar factor upon retrieving the rings from a flock of flying doves . Completely soiled , Pascal and Maximus finally return to the chapel and return the rings , only to cause the wedding cake to roll out the door . 
 = = = Miscellaneous = = = 
 Both Pascal and Maximus appear in the Nintendo DS version of Tangled : The Video Game ( 2010 ) . While playing mostly as Rapunzel , players are allowed to " interact with Flynn , Pascal , and Maximus " , according to <unk> The video game includes a minigame inspired by Pascal entitled " Pascal 's Colors / Melody Match " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
