 In the wake of the tornado , the mayor of Sleepy Hollow declared a village @-@ wide state of emergency . Two hundred emergency personnel responded to the storm . Consolidated Edison ( <unk> ) crews were sent out to repair downed power lines and clear roads . By the next night , power was restored to all but 600 of the previous 10 @,@ 000 residences without power in Westchester . Westchester County opened its Emergency Operations Center after the storm to respond to the event . Two days after the storm , many of the roads had been cleared and power was fully restored . A recreational path in Tarrytown , New York , was not expected to be open for another two weeks due to numerous fallen trees . Metro @-@ North Railroad suspended trains on the Upper Harlem line until 5 : 00 p.m. EDT ( 21 : 00 UTC ) for the removal of debris on the tracks . During the time the rails were shut down , southbound passengers were transported by bus . All trains were back on schedule by 7 : 00 p.m. EDT ( 23 : 00 UTC ) . 
 = Inside No. 9 = 
 Inside No. 9 is a British dark comedy anthology television programme written by Reece Shearsmith and Steve Pemberton and produced by the BBC . The first series was broadcast between 5 February and 12 March 2014 on BBC Two , and a second series aired from 26 March to 29 April 2015 . Each half @-@ hour episode is a self @-@ contained story with new characters and a new setting , and all star at least one ( usually both ) of Pemberton and Shearsmith . Aside from the writers , each episode has a new cast , allowing Inside No. 9 to attract a number of well @-@ known actors . The stories are linked only by the fact that each takes place at a number 9 , whether this is a suburban house , a gothic mansion or a barn . Pemberton and Shearsmith took inspiration for Inside No. 9 from an episode of Psychoville , a previous project , which was filmed in a single room . This episode was , in turn , inspired by Alfred Hitchcock 's Rope . Inside No. 9 was also a reaction to Psychoville , which featured a long overarching story realised over multiple series . 
 Themes and tone varied from episode @-@ to @-@ episode , but all have elements of comedy and horror . The first series contained six episodes . " Sardines " concerns a game of sardines at an engagement party . " A Quiet Night In " , an episode almost entirely free of dialogue , follows a pair of hapless burglars breaking into a modernist house . In " Tom & Gerri " , an aspiring novelist invites a homeless man into his flat . " Last Gasp " sees a popstar die while blowing up a balloon at a sick child 's birthday party . In " The Understudy " , an understudy in a West End production of Macbeth longs for the lead role . The series 's final episode was " The Harrowing " , a gothic horror story in which a schoolgirl <unk> a mansion belonging to a brother and sister . An online @-@ only episode composed of <unk> , " The Inventors " , was also released by the BBC , but was not written by Pemberton and Shearsmith . The second series also contained six episodes . " La Couchette " follows a group of passengers on a French sleeper carriage , while " The 12 Days of Christine " tells the story of a young woman 's life . " The Trial of Elizabeth Gadge " is a period piece concerning a witch trial in a 17th @-@ century village . " Cold Comfort " follows a number of characters working at a crisis hotline call centre . " Nana 's Party " involves family secrets being revealed during a grandmother 's birthday party . The final episode , " Séance Time " , begins with a young woman visiting a medium . A third series has been commissioned . 
 Inside No. 9 as a whole has been very well received by critics , who have praised the humour and creativity of the scripts , as well as the talent of the featured actors . The programme was variously described as " never less @-@ than @-@ captivating " and " consistently compelling " . Inside No. 9 won the Sketch and Comedy prize at the 35th annual Banff World Media Festival Rockie Awards , and was nominated for the Best TV Sitcom prize at the 2014 Freesat Awards , the Broadcast Award for Best Original Programme , and at the 2014 British Comedy Awards for both the Best New Comedy Programme and the Best Comedy Drama . However , sympathetic critics have suggested that the programme may be an acquired taste ; despite generally high acclaim , some journalists were highly critical of Inside No. 9 , and the viewing figures were comparatively low . The first series was released on DVD on 17 March 2014 , with a second series DVD being released on 4 May 2015 . 
 = = Format = = 
 Inside No. 9 is an anthology series , with each episode featuring a new story , with a new setting and new characters . Episodes last around half an hour , with the self @-@ contained story reaching a conclusion . The stories are linked only by the fact that each takes place in number 9 , be that a mansion , a dressing room or a flat . Every episode stars at least one of Shearsmith or Pemberton , and normally both . Each episode is effectively a short play , and could easily be performed on stage . Most episodes take place in real @-@ time , following half an hour in the lives of the characters . 
 As is typical of Reece Shearsmith and Steve Pemberton 's work , the scripts address dark topics , with , for instance , the first episode touching upon incest , child sexual abuse and murder . The plotlines make use of twists and surprises of various sorts , though in some cases the surprise is the lack of twist . In an interview , Pemberton said that " there is always a desire to wrong @-@ foot the viewer . That 's what you strive to do " . The tone varies episode @-@ by @-@ episode . For example , while gothic horror was a major component in one case , other times slapstick comedy was used extensively ; the humour , however , is typically dark and British . The episodes generally begin with scenes of " utter banality " , before the darker elements are revealed . Inside No. 9 is somewhat more grounded and realistic than the writers ' previous work , such as Psychoville and The League of Gentlemen . Pemberton said that they decided not to mix the worlds of Inside No. 9 and their previous work , but nonetheless include the occasional reference ; for example , a character called " Ollie " is mentioned in one Inside No. 9 episode , and the writers imagined that this was Ollie <unk> of Legz <unk> , a character from The League of Gentlemen . Despite the various episodes featuring unrelated plots and characters , one reviewer said that they are all linked " by a mercurial synthesis of morbid comedy , wicked social commentary and a genuine creepiness " . 
 = = Production and development = = 
 In 2012 , after the cancellation of their Psychoville , writers Steve Pemberton and Reece Shearsmith were commissioned to produce two series for the BBC by controllers Janice Hadlow and Cheryl Taylor , partially in response to Sky beginning to produce comedy . At the time , it was unclear whether this would be two series of Inside No. 9 , then known by the working title Happy Endings , or a series of Inside No. 9 and a series of some other programme . Inside No. 9 was to be produced by a BBC team , which was later revealed to be David Kerr ( director ) , Jon Plowman ( executive producer ) and Adam Tandy ( producer ) . 
 Pemberton and Shearsmith took inspiration for Inside No. 9 from " David and Maureen " , episode 4 of the first series of Psychoville , which was in turn inspired by Alfred Hitchcock 's Rope . This episode took place entirely in a single room , and was filmed in only two shots . The writers were keen to explore other stories in this bottle episode or TV play format , and Inside No. 9 allowed them to do this . At the same time , the concept of Inside No. 9 was a " reaction " to Psychoville , with Shearsmith saying that the two of them had " been so involved with labyrinthine over @-@ arcing , we thought it would be nice to do six different stories with a complete new house of people each week . That 's appealing , because as a viewer you might not like this story , but you 've got a different one next week . " Elsewhere , Shearsmith explained that the pair returned to writing macabre stories as they " always feel slightly unfulfilled if [ they ] write something that 's purely comedic , [ as ] it just feels too frivolous and light " . During the filming Inside No. 9 , Shearsmith professed excitement to be working on the programme , saying that " [ b ] <unk> in the middle of filming a third series of Psychoville would be utterly depressing " . Pemberton and Shearsmith aimed for a simpler experience with Inside No. 9 than they had experienced with Psychoville , describing " Sardines " , Inside No. 9 's first episode , by saying that it was " just about some good actors in a wardrobe with a good story . " 
 The anthology series is currently a rare genre for British television programmes . Previous horror anthologies include Tales of the Unexpected , The Twilight Zone and Alfred Hitchcock Presents ; while these would sometimes utilise comedic elements , they are more prominent in Inside No. 9 . Murder Most Horrid followed a similar format , but was far more comedic than horrific . Other anthology @-@ like series on British television include Seven of One and Comedy Playhouse , though these programmes lacked horror elements , and , unlike Inside No. 9 , served as pilots for potential series . For Pemberton , the 1970s and 1980s were " full of " anthology shows ; other examples included Play for Today , Beasts and Armchair Thriller . More recently , anthologies have become less popular with television executives , but the writers hope that they may be able to contribute to a " renaissance " for the genre . According to journalist and broadcaster Mark Lawson , this is because anthologies can fail to motivate viewers to stay with a series , and , further , new sets and casts must be paid for each episode , meaning that a six @-@ part anthology series will generally be more expensive than a six @-@ part series in a more standard format . For Lawson , Inside No. 9 was able to overcome these problems through the " pleasing coherence " offered by the fact each episode was set in a number 9 , and " the wit and inventiveness " of the opening episodes , which could sufficiently engage viewers . Pemberton and Shearsmith had originally considered alternative ways to link the stories , such as all the settings having a shared post man , but then decided that such a strong relationship between stories was not needed . 
 Inspiration and production varied from instalment to instalment , and each was filmed separately , taking less than a week per episode . After Shearsmith and Pemberton had decided that each episode would be about confinement , and having written some of the later episodes , they were inspired by a wardrobe in their working space for " Sardines " . The writers were keen to see how confined they could make the characters , aiming to induce feelings of claustrophobia in viewers . The anthology format allowed Pemberton and Shearsmith to revisit prior ideas , which is what they did with " A Quiet Night In " and " Tom & Gerri " . The former was inspired by the writers ' efforts to include a long segment without dialogue in an episode of Psychoville . Both episodes followed break @-@ ins . The Pinteresque " Tom & Gerri " was based upon a play written by Pemberton and Shearsmith while the pair were living together and job seeking . The setting was based upon their own flat , while the character Tom 's development evoked the experience of job @-@ hunting . " Last Gasp " was inspired by a person Pemberton had seen on Multi @-@ Coloured Swap Shop who collected jars of air , as well as the death of Michael Jackson and the death of Amy Winehouse . " The Understudy " , the plot of which is partially based upon and concerns Macbeth , took longer to write than any other episode ; the writers rewrote the script several times , as they were unsure of whether the characters should be amateur or professional actors . " The Harrowing " was the writers ' attempt to produce a gothic horror episode . They made use of more horror tropes than previous episodes , but the setting allowed them to include modern elements . 
 The BBC ordered a second series of Inside No. 9 before the first episode had aired . The second series was written in 2014 , and then filmed from the end of 2014 into early 2015 . The writers were permitted two sets for the second series , and so a fake train compartment and a fake flat ( for " La Couchette " and " The 12 Days of Christine " respectively ) were built at Twickenham Studios . The other episodes were filmed on location ; for example , " The Trial of Elizabeth Gadge " was filmed in a barn at the Chiltern Open Air Museum . David Kerr was unable to stay on as director for the second series . Guillem Morales and Dan Zeff each took on directorial duties for two episodes , and Pemberton and Shearsmith , in addition to continuing to write and star in the episodes , jointly directed the other two . The writers had hoped to direct for some time , and this represented a good opportunity to make their directorial debut . While writing for the series , the pair did not know which episodes they would be directing ; in an interview , Shearsmith said that the pair had considered directing episodes in which they did not appear much , but scheduling concerns left them with " Cold Comfort " and " Nana 's Party " ; the episodes feature the writers quite heavily . 
 The six episodes of the second series derived inspiration from a variety of sources . " La Couchette " aimed to explore the intimacy of sleeper carriages ; specifically , the unusual problems associated with sleeping in close proximity to strangers . " The 12 Days of Christine " follows a woman over the course of 12 years , with scenes displaying key moments in her life . " The Trial of Elizabeth Gadge " was inspired by genuine witch trials , some transcripts of which Pemberton and Shearsmith had read as part of the writing process . " Cold Comfort " began with the idea of a call centre , and was filmed in the style of a CCTV feed . With " Nana 's Party " , the writers aimed for a feeling of suburban darkness , reminiscent of the work of Alan Ayckbourn . " Séance Time " began with the idea of a séance , an idea the writers had wanted to explore for some time . 
 A third series was commissioned in October 2015 by the BBC . Pemberton has said that he would be interested in an online spin @-@ off , perhaps called No. 9A , with less experienced comedy writers . In an interview , he said " The format has so many opportunities and can incorporate so many styles , as long as you stick to the small cast , single location constraint . I think it 's really important to bring through fresh voices . " 
 = = Episodes = = 
 = = = Series 1 ( 2014 ) = = = 
 = = = = Online episode = = = = 
 A special online @-@ only episode of Inside No. 9 , " The Inventors " , was launched by the BBC on 12 February 2014 . " The Inventors " stars Tom <unk> and Dan Renton Skinner as brothers who lost their mother in the Great Storm of 1987 . The story is told through a series of <unk> with dialogue . The episode is interactive , advancing only with input from the viewer . " The Inventors " was developed by media agency <unk> , and produced by Jon Aird , who had previously produced BAFTA @-@ winning online content for Psychoville , with executive producer Will Saunders . It was directed by Martin Stirling . 
 = = = Series 2 ( 2015 ) = = = 
 = = Cast = = 
 As each episode of Inside No. 9 features new characters , the writers were able to attract actors who may have been unwilling to commit to an entire series . The writers ' reputation also helped attract writers , with journalist David Chater saying that they " have developed such a track record over the years that many of the finest actors in the country jump at the chance to appear in their dark imaginings " . The fact that Pemberton and Shearsmith only played a single character in each story was a change for them ; in The League of Gentlemen , the pair have played some 30 characters each , while , in Psychoville , they had played around five each . Though Pemberton and Shearsmith generally starred in each episode , they did not necessarily take on the main roles . Shearsmith explained this by saying that they " didn 't write this for us to be in . We wrote the stories first then thought , could we be in them ? " 
 = = = Series 1 = = = 
 = = = Series 2 = = = 
 = = Distribution = = 
 The first series of Inside No. 9 was shown in the UK on BBC Two ( and BBC Two HD ) between 5 February and 12 March 2014 . It was aired in Australia on BBC First , premiering on 5 January 2015 . The second series aired in the UK from 26 March to 29 April 2015 , and aired in Australia from 27 July 2015 . 
 The first series was released on DVD on 17 March 2014 . In addition to the six episodes , the DVD featured the making of feature " Inside Inside No. 9 " , including unseen interviews with Pemberton , Shearsmith and Kerr , and a photo gallery with previously unreleased photos . Published by 2 Entertain , the DVD was rated 18 by the British Board of Film Classification . To publicise the DVD , the writers appeared at the Oxford Street , London , branch of HMV for a signing event on 20 March . The DVD was reviewed by David Upton for webzine PopMatters , who gave the main feature an 8 / 10 rating , and the extras a 5 / 10 rating , and Ben Walsh for The Independent , who gave the DVD overall 4 / 5 . Phelim O 'Neill , reviewing the release for The Guardian , described the boxset as " very <unk> " , suggesting that it would help Inside No. 9 reach a wider audience . South African newspapers The Sunday Times and The Star both published positive reviews of the DVD , with The Star 's anonymous review saying the DVD " makes a great <unk> for cynics , so if you know any lawyers or journalists ... " . The second series was released on DVD on 4 May 2015 . A review in the Leicester Mercury awarded it four out of five stars . 
 = = Reception and performance = = 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 Many critics responded very positively to Inside No. 9 . After the final episode , comedic critic Bruce Dessau said on his website that the series " really set an early benchmark to beat for comedy of the year . It has been consistently compelling as each week we entered an entirely different world . " On the same day , David Chater , writing in The Times , said of the series as a whole that " [ i ] t 's hard to know which to admire more – the rich and perverse imaginations of Steve Pemberton and Reece Shearsmith or the extraordinary range of acting talent that has brought this strange and memorable series to life . " Chater had previously described " A Quiet Night In " , the second episode of Inside No. 9 , as " the funniest , cleverest , most imaginative and original television I have seen for as long as I can remember – one of those fabulous programmes where time stands still and the world around you disappears " . Mark Jones ( The Guardian ) considered the whole series , saying that the Inside No. 9 was " never less @-@ than @-@ captivating " , while a review in the Liverpool Echo described every episode as " intriguing and lovingly @-@ crafted " , though it was felt that the first three episodes were stronger than the latter three . In December 2014 , Metro television critic Keith Watson named Inside No. 9 the twentieth best television programme of 2014 , and in January 2015 , Daily Star Sunday columnist Garry Bushell named Inside No. 9 the best comedy TV programme of 2014 . 
 Writing before Inside No. 9 was televised , broadcaster and journalist Mark Lawson suggested that , among anthology series , the programme possessed " the potential to be remembered as a singular achievement " . <unk> both the acting and writing of Inside No. 9 , New Statesman television critic Rachel Cooke offered a positive verdict of the programme after seeing the first half of the series . Cooke expressed particular admiration of Pemberton and Shearsmith 's ability to squeeze " perfectly formed narratives – characters with proper backstories , scenarios that are complicated and unwind relatively slowly – into just 30 minutes " . Also writing mid @-@ series , journalist Gareth Lightfoot called Inside No. 9 " hands down the best , freshest thing on [ television ] at the moment " in the Evening Gazette , though he doubted whether it could truly be considered comedy . 
 Donal Lynch , of Irish newspaper the Sunday Independent , suggested that , like the previous work of Pemberton and Shearsmith , Inside No. 9 may be something of " a cult hit / acquired taste " . Barry <unk> , of The Herald , expressed a similar sentiment , calling Inside No. 9 " probably the most <unk> programme on television " . The Times published a response to a complaint received from a viewer , who was unhappy with Chater 's positive reviews of Inside No. 9 , suggesting that " A Quiet Night In " was more traumatic than humorous . Sam Wollaston , television critic for The Guardian , noted that humour is extremely personal , and though he could appreciate much about Inside No. 9 , he had never liked Pemberton and Shearsmith 's work : " I 'm sure I 'll be crucified – probably quite rightly – but I don 't love Inside No 9 . " Some tabloid columnists also expressed dissatisfaction with the programme . Virginia Blackburn , of the Daily Express , wrote a highly critical review of " Last Gasp " . Blackburn considered Inside No. 9 an example of the weakness of contemporary television comedy , saying that the episode is " not funny , it 's not clever and is so utterly , irredeemably , naffly silly that it ends up being incredibly irritating and nothing else " . Another journalist unimpressed was the Daily Mirror columnist Kevin O 'Sullivan , who dismissed the programme by saying simply " BBC2 's alleged comedy Inside No. 9 : didn 't even smile " . 
 Cooke observed the difficulty in reviewing Inside No. 9 as a whole due to the fact that each episode is different from the last . " Sardines " was commended for its cast and acting , as well as the scripting , but critics had a mixed response to the twist ending . " A Quiet Night In " was a change in approach , relying on physical comedy , but it was well received as funny , and inventive . " Tom & Gerri " was less comedic but darker than previous episodes ; critics commended the plot , but disagreed about the portrayal of mental illness in the episode . Less horrific than other episodes in the series , " Last Gasp " dealt with themes of celebrity culture and fandom , and was considered a weaker instalment . Critics called " The Understudy " a " return to form " . While it was based upon Macbeth , a knowledge of the play was not necessary for enjoyment , and the plot 's divergence from the play was praised . " The Harrowing " was the most horrific episode of the series , and was considered genuinely scary by critics . 
 = = = Viewing figures = = = 
 Despite the generally positive reception among critics and viewers , the viewing figures for the series were poor . The average viewing figures for the series were 904 @,@ 000 people , or 4 @.@ 9 % of the audience , lower than the slot average of 970 @,@ 000 ( 5 @.@ 1 % of the audience ) . The series had a strong start , with 1 @.@ 1 million viewers , which was 5 @.@ 6 % of the audience , watching " Sardines " . The series low was the fifth episode , " The Understudy " , which attracted 720 @,@ 000 viewers ( 4 @.@ 1 % of the audience ) . 
 = = = Awards and nominations = = = 
 Thanks to their work on Inside No. 9 , Pemberton and Shearsmith jointly won the 2014 / 2015 Royal Television Society Programme award for best comedy performance . The other nominees were Harry Enfield , for his performance in Harry and Paul 's Story of the Twos , and Sarah Hadland , for her performance in The Job Lot . The pair were also jointly nominated for the 2015 British Academy Television Craft Award for comedy writer for their work on Inside No. 9 , but lost to Mackenzie Crook for his work on <unk> . Arthur Matthews and Matt Berry ( Toast of London ) and Mathew Baynton and James Corden ( The Wrong Mans ) were the other nominees . The following year , Guillem Morales was nominated for the Television Craft Award for Breakthrough Talent for his work on " The 12 Days of Christine " , but lost to Michaela <unk> , who wrote Chewing Gum . The other nominees were D. C. Moore ( Not Safe for Work ) and Marcus Plowright ( Muslim Drag Queens ) . 
 At the 2013 / 2014 Royal Television Society Craft and Design Awards , Lisa Cavalli @-@ Green was nominated for the " Make Up Design – Drama " award for her work on Inside No. 9 , but lost to Davy Jones , for his work on In the Flesh . Loz Schiavo ( Peaky Blinders ) was the other nominee . Due in part to her role in " The Harrowing " , Aimee @-@ Ffion Edwards was shortlisted for WalesOnline 's " Daffta " award for best actress , but lost to Eve Myles . The <unk> celebrate Welsh television talent and prizes are awarded based on a public vote . 
 Inside No. 9 itself won the Sketch and Comedy prize at the 35th annual Banff World Media Festival Rockie Awards . The other nominees were Do I Have to Take Care of Everything ? , It 's a Date , Tiny Plastic Men , Gangsta Granny and The Revolution Will Be Televised . In response to the nomination , Shearsmith tweeted that he was " [ t ] <unk> " , joking that the programme was " in ' Comedy ' . I knew it was one " . Inside No. 9 was also nominated for Best TV Sitcom at the 2014 Freesat Awards , which celebrate the best of free British television . The programme lost to BBC2 's The Wrong Mans , as determined by a panel made up of television experts and commentators . The other nominees were Birds of a Feather , Mrs. Brown 's Boys and Toast of London . In November 2014 , it was announced that Inside No. 9 had been shortlisted for the 2015 Broadcast Award for Best Original Programme . The other nominees were <unk> , Glasgow Girls , Release the Hounds , Suspects and The Island with Bear Grylls . At the award ceremony in London on 4 February 2015 , Glasgow Girls was granted the award , but Inside No. 9 was highly commended . Inside No. 9 won the TV award at the 2015 Chortle Awards . The programme was longlisted for the Best Comedy prize in the 2015 TV Choice Awards . 
 At the 2014 British Comedy Awards , Inside No. 9 was nominated in the Best New Comedy Programme and the Best Comedy Drama categories . In the former category , it lost to Toast of London . The other nominees were The Wrong Mans and Man Down . In the latter category , it lost to Rev , and the other nominees were The Wrong Mans and Uncle . For Chater ( The Times ) , the comedy drama category was the strongest of the awards , but for Ben Williams ( Time Out ) , Inside No. 9 should have won . Writing in The Independent , journalist Alice Jones said she was " sorry to see the relentlessly innovative Inside No 9 go unrewarded " . 
 = Mama ( Spice Girls song ) = 
 " Mama " is a song by British pop group Spice Girls . It was written by the Spice Girls , Matt Rowe and Richard Stannard , and produced by Rowe and Stannard for the group 's debut album Spice , released in November 1996 . " Mama " is a pop ballad that features instrumentation from keyboards , a rhythm guitar , a cello , and a violin , and its lyrics deal with the difficulties in relationships between mothers and daughters that appear during adolescence . 
 It was released as a double A @-@ side with " Who Do You Think You Are " , and became the official single of the 1997 Comic Relief . Its Big TV ! directed music video , featured the group singing to an audience of children and their own mothers . Despite receiving mixed reviews from music critics , " Mama " was commercially successful . Released as the album 's fourth single in March 1997 , it became their fourth consecutive number @-@ one single in the United Kingdom , which made the Spice Girls the first act in UK chart history to have its first four singles reach number one . It was certified platinum by the British Phonographic Industry ( BPI ) . The single performed well internationally , reaching the top ten in many European countries and New Zealand , and the top fifteen in Australia . 
 = = Writing and inspiration = = 
 " Mama " was written by the Spice Girls with songwriting partners Matt Rowe and Richard Stannard . In an interview about the writing process between the group and the duo , Rowe credits Mel B as the one who came up with the song 's concept . During the writing process , each member wrote a small verse in a different corner of the recording studio , while the chorus was finished around the piano with a guitar . Then , the producers added a gospel choir filled with the group 's harmonies at the end of the song . Brown explained the song 's inspiration on the book Real Life : Real Spice The Official Story : 
 We wrote ' Mama ' when I was going through a bad phase with my mum . The sentiments are really that your mum 's probably the best friend that you 've got . Whether she 's an over @-@ protective mother or a bit of a landmine , she probably knows you better than yourself in some ways . 
 In the same book , Melanie C further elaborated : " ' Mama 's all about how you 're such a cow to your mum when you 're going through that rebellious teenage stage . Then when you get a bit older , you realise that whatever she was doing , she was only doing it for your own good . And you think : ' God , I was really horrible . ' " " Mama " was released in the UK and Ireland as a double A @-@ side along with " Who Do You Think You Are " in March 1997 , timed not only for the Comic Relief telethon , but also for Mothering Sunday . 
 = = Composition = = 
 " Mama " is a pop ballad , written in the key of F minor , it is set in the time signature of common time and moves at a moderate tempo of 100 beats per minute . The song is constructed in a verse @-@ chorus form , with a bridge before the third chorus , and its instrumentation comes from keyboards , a rhythm guitar , a cello , and a violin . 
 It opens with an instrumental introduction , with a chord progression of D ♭ – E ♭ – Fm – E ♭ / G – A ♭ , that is used in the entire song . Bunton and Brown sing the first and second verse respectively . The bridge and third chorus follow . Then a choir , arranged by Mark Beswick , supplements the group during the last part of the song . " Mama " ends with the group repeating the chorus until the song gradually fades out . Lyrically , the song deals with the difficulties in the relationships between mothers and teenagers that appears during the adolescence , and it was dedicated to the group 's mothers . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 " Mama " received mixed reviews from music critics . The Daily Mirror criticised the song saying " Yuk ! We don 't want our Spice Girls sweet , ta very much . They should concentrate on the raunch and let Daniel O 'Donnell take care of the mums . " Dev Sherlock of Yahoo ! Music Radio called it a " glossy ballad that would do Mariah Carey proud " . Edna Gundersen of the USA Today said that their album Spice " is assembly @-@ line dance @-@ pop " , adding that " only the funky ' Say You 'll Be There ' and touchingly cornball ' Mama ' hint at depth " . 
 In a review of their album Spice , Ken Tucker from Entertainment Weekly called it " a fearlessly corny ballad " , and added that it " will likely keep them from being one @-@ hit wonders in America " . Melissa Ruggieri of the Richmond Times @-@ Dispatch said that in the song , the girls " are sunny vocalists who harmonize with <unk> sweetness when called upon " . Daniel Incognito of Sputnikmusic said that in " Mama " the group " sing with heartfelt emotion " , and added that " their somewhat amateurish singing is brought up and pushed along by the production crew , harmonising nicely into a stirring pop hook " . 
 = = = Chart performance = = = 
 " Mama " was released in the UK as a double A @-@ side single with " Who Do You Think You Are " on 3 March 1997 . It debuted on the UK Singles Chart at number one , with sales of 248 @,@ 000 copies , becoming the group 's fourth consecutive chart @-@ topper . This achievement made the Spice Girls the first act in UK chart history to have its first four singles reach number one , breaking the record set by Gerry & The Pacemakers , Frankie Goes to Hollywood , Jive Bunny and the <unk> , and Robson & Jerome with three number ones each . It spent three weeks at number one , nine weeks in the top forty , fifteen weeks in the top seventy @-@ five , and sold 672 @,@ 577 copies in total , earning a platinum certification by the British Phonographic Industry ( BPI ) . 
 " Mama " was commercially successful in Europe . It peaked at number three on the Eurochart Hot 100 , and performed similarly in other European charts . It became the group 's third number @-@ one single in Ireland , and peaked inside the top ten in Belgium ( both the Flemish and French charts ) , Germany , the Netherlands , Sweden , and Switzerland . " Mama " was released as a standalone single in Austria , Finland , and Italy . In Austria , it was released on 23 March 1997 , debuting on the Ö3 Austria Top 40 at number thirty @-@ one . It peaked at number one in its ninth week , and remained fifteen weeks on the chart . 
 In Oceania , its commercial performance was generally positive , though not as overwhelming as their three first singles . In New Zealand , it debuted on 23 March 1997 at number ten , while their three first singles were slowly descending from the chart . It peaked at number six and stayed fifteen weeks on the chart . In Australia , it did not perform as well as their previous releases . On 27 July 1997 , it debuted on the singles chart at number thirteen , but was unable to reach a higher position and dropped off the chart after fourteen weeks . 
 = = Music video = = 
 The music video for " Mama " was directed in February 1997 by Big TV ! , and filmed in a studio in Ealing , London . It features the group singing to an audience of children and their own mothers . The video alternated between this scenes and shots of actors playing young versions of the Spice Girls doing various things all together , such as playing and practicing singing and dancing , though none of the group 's members grew up together . It also shows each mother of the girls holding a picture of their daughter . 
 About the shoot , Victoria Beckham commented : " It took such a long time to film the ' Mama ' video , but it was nice that our mums were there and could see what we 're doing . It 's good , because they were actually knackered at the end of the day and I said to my mum : ' Ha ! Now you know how I feel every day ! " Geri Halliwell commented : " I found it a bit bizarre bringing my mum to work with me on the ' Mama ' video . You know : ' This is what I do — come and do it , too . ' If you worked in Sainsbury 's , you wouldn 't get your mum to sit with you on the till " . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 The song was performed many times on television , including An Audience with ... , Live & Kicking , Top of the Pops , the 1997 Prince 's Trust Gala , and the 1997 Comic Relief . In October 1997 , the group performed it as the thirteenth song of their first live concert at the Abdi İpekçi Arena in Istanbul , Turkey . The performance was broadcast on Showtime in a pay @-@ per @-@ view event titled Spice Girls In Concert Wild ! . However , the VHS and DVD release of the concert , Girl Power ! Live in Istanbul , does not include the performance . The song was also used during the climax of their 1997 film , Spice World . In the scene , the group performs " Mama " at London 's Royal Albert Hall , surrounded by the media and thousands of fans . The scene was included as a bonus performance in the VHS and DVD release of the movie . 
 The group have performed the song on their three tours , the Spiceworld Tour , the Christmas In Spiceworld Tour , and the Return of the Spice Girls . It remained in the group 's live set after Halliwell 's departure at the end of the European leg of the Spiceworld Tour . The performance at the tour 's final concert can be found on the video : Spice Girls Live at Wembley Stadium , filmed in London , on 20 September 1998 . During the Return of the Spice Girls tour , " Mama " was performed as the second song from the show 's fifth segment . All five girls stood together holding hands to perform it , while the LED screens in the background showed photos of their mothers holding baby pictures of the group , and a montage of them and their children . For the British shows , fifty young girls from the Capital Children 's Choir dressed in white came out from a platform and lined the stage against the backdrop screens to sing with the Spice Girls . During some of the shows , the group brought their children onstage . 
 = = Formats and track listings = = 
 These are the formats and track listings of major single releases of " Mama " : 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Published by Windswept Pacific Music Ltd / PolyGram Music Publishing Ltd . 
 = = Charts and certifications = = 
 = = = Weekly charts = = = 
 = Virginia House = 
 Virginia House is a manor house on a hillside overlooking the James River in the Windsor Farms neighborhood of Richmond , Virginia , United States . 
 The house was constructed from the materials of the sixteenth @-@ century Warwick Priory in Warwickshire , England , and shipped over and reassembled , completed several months before the stock market crash of 1929 . Virginia House is in the Tudor architectural style but incorporates a range of designs from other English houses and has modern facilities such as ten baths and central heating . 
 Virginia House was built by Alexander and Virginia Weddell , salvaging many materials from the Priory and other old English manor houses and adding further elegant English and Spanish antiques , oriental carpets , silks , and silver . Today Virginia House is operated by the Virginia Historical Society as a house museum , although it largely remains as it was in the 1940s during the Weddells ’ tenancy . Immediately to the west of the property is Agecroft Hall . 
 = = History = = 
 The façade of Virginia House was originally located on the grounds of the former Augustinian Priory of the Holy Sepulcher of Jerusalem ( Warwick Priory ) in Warwick , England , founded in 1109 . In 1536 , at the Dissolution of the Monasteries , the priory was shut down and the land later bought by a politician named Thomas Hawkins alias Fisher , during the reign of Edward VI . Fisher demolished most of the monastic buildings and erected the house which he named " Hawk 's Nest , " set among gardens . He entertained Elizabeth I at the house . The property was bought in 1709 by Henry Wise , Royal Gardener to Queen Anne . In the mid @-@ nineteenth century , it was purchased by the Lloyds Bank family who put the manor up for sale at auction in 1925 . 
 The auction of the Warwick Priory was to take place on September 23 , 1925 , and was described in the catalogue as a " Highly Important <unk> Demolition Sale " offering such items as " rare old oak doors , large quantity of floor boards , the whole of the joists and other timbers , and enormous quantities of excellent brick , sandstone , old oak and other beams , timbers and girders " . Alexander W. Weddell , a wealthy American diplomat and his wife Virginia Chase Steedman , however , offered a lump sum of £ 3 @,@ 500 for the entire remaining structure and secured a deal before it was held . The purchase by the Americans caused an outrage in the British press and the Weddells were heavily frowned on given that the heritage property was to be demolished . The objection to the purchase was also backed by a member of the House of Commons who proposed that the sale be invalidated in order to prevent this " act of vandalism " . However , it was rejected and important persons in Britain gradually learned what their intentions were , and on April 13 , 1926 , another member , F.G. Rye , sent a letter to Alexander Weddell saying , " Had you not stepped in and bought the materials of the partially demolished structure , they would have been lost for all time , whereas now they will be utilized in the erection of a new building . " 
 The Tudor mansion was dismantled , but concerned that the stone would swiftly disintegrate during the demolition phase , Weddell 's advisers ordered that a small explosive device be triggered off in the centre of the house and to salvage the remaining stones . However , the explosion had the effect of splitting the walls intact meaning that much of the building could be salvaged and shipped to the United States . The first shipments arrived in Richmond , Virginia in early 1926 , but were soaked in seawater and had to be dried in a barn for up to six months . From the very beginning , the Weddells planned on <unk> the house to the Virginia Historical Society and to allocate the west wing of the structure as a museum once it was rebuilt in Virginia . The Weddells also intended the structure to become the society 's new headquarters . 
 Virginia House was constructed in the Windsor Farms neighborhood of Richmond by the General Contracting firm of Allen J. Saville , Inc . , although several different architects were employed during the rebuilding . Foundation work began on November 6 , 1925 and the structure was officially turned over to the Weddells on January 1 , 1929 . The total cost of the construction of Virginia House was $ 236 @,@ 968 @.@ 83 , with an additional $ 15 @,@ 000 spent on buying the lot . 
 The Weddells lived at Virginia House until their deaths in a train accident in 1948 . The house became the permanent residence of the historic society . On June 13 , 1990 , Virginia House was listed on the National Register of Historic Places , due to it being considered " a noteworthy representative of a peculiar residential building type prevalent in the late @-@ nineteenth and early- twentieth @-@ century period of American architecture . " 
 = = Structure = = 
 = = = Exterior = = = 
 Virginia House is a large , asymmetrical , two @-@ story long rectangular stone building with massive sandstone walls , small medieval windows , characterized by two high Dutch gables that date to the 1620 remodeling of the Thomas Hawkins @-@ era Priory in Warwickshire , England . The adjacent cross @-@ gable roofs and crenelated balustrade over the carriage entrance provide a horizontal cross @-@ axis on either side of the gabled central bays . Two rear ells of the house project into the garden terrace , one of them containing the two @-@ story cathedral @-@ ceilinged library , and the other a drawing room and the master bedroom wing . Polygonal bays and oriel windows project from the north and south sides with heavy perimeter walls constructed of recycled sandstone . Over a window on the west side of the north elevation of Virginia house is a copy of a coat of arms commemorating the visit of Queen Elizabeth I to the Priory in England in 1572 . The original coat of arms is currently on display inside . The leaded @-@ glass , quarrel @-@ paned casement windows widely used in Virginia House also salvage authentic crown glass dating from the sixteenth to the nineteenth century from the English priory . The interior of the property is richly embellished with oak furnishings . 
 Although many stones and materials were salvaged and used to rebuild the Hawkins priory in Virginia , the reconstructed house incorporated other designs and influences . Following the acquisition of the property , the Weddells hired chief architect Henry Grant Morse and scouted the English countryside , surveying properties and considering various designs they could incorporate into the rebuilding process . As a result , the reconstruction is not a replica of the original building . The west wing of the house is actually a replica of Sulgrave Manor , a small manor house in Northamptonshire , England , which once belonged to Lawrence Washington , an ancestor of America 's first president , George Washington . However , the center of the house is a reproduction of the original Warwickshire priory and uses the curvilinear gables , strapwork design , and balustrades that the English commonly adapted from the Low Countries in the early seventeenth century . The east wing of the house , however , is based on Wormleighton Manor , a Spencer @-@ Churchill family estate in England . 
 The original boundary of Virginia House property , recorded in the Clerk 's Office of the Circuit Court of the County of Henrico , Virginia , is described as lot 9 , Block 41 , Windsor Farms , in the plan of Windsor Farms made by Allen J. Saville , Inc . , dated September 15 , 1926 . In 1928 , Virginia Weddell requested that a two @-@ story porch be added to expand the master bedroom suite and to build a second @-@ floor sunroom . This was constructed in January 1932 by the contracting firm of Claiborne and Taylor , and was designed again by Henry Morse using Briar Hill sandstone . Further developments were made in the 1930s . On May 29 , 1935 , a shipment of Cotswold Stone Roofing Slate arrived from England , thicker , heavier and lighter in color than Virginia Buckingham Slate , and were used to emphasize the height of the steep roof . On April 14 , 1936 , an adjacent 7 @.@ 77 @-@ acre ( 31 @,@ 400 m2 ) lot was purchased to accommodate an expansive landscape plan . 
 In 1941 , Virginia Weddell hired architect William Lawrence Bottomley and purchased antique stone columns from the Spanish Duke of the <unk> to reconstruct an ancient Spanish loggia on the southwest elevation of the house . Bottomley was able to incorporate the existing parapets , finials and pierced railings and posts from the north library bay windows into the loggia design , with a ceiling reconstructed from a sixteenth @-@ century house on the grounds of a manor in Knole , Kent , England . Wall tiles were used which <unk> use of gunpowder on the original property . Bottomley , however , was quite critical of his work and believed his loggia was too symmetrical and lacking in the quality of picturesqueness and romance that the rest of the house displayed and proposed an octagonal stairway be added on the outside corner of the loggia . However , his idea was rejected by the Weddells , and it was completed in 1946 . Bottomley was paid $ 10 @,@ 764 and received a ten percent commission for his drawings and construction . 
 = = = Interior = = = 
 The interior to Virginia House is elegant with oak furnishings and an assortment of English and Spanish antiques , oriental carpets , silks , and silverware . The first floor consists mainly of large , elaborate rooms , intended for social meetings and to house the functions and exhibits of the Virginia Historical Society . The second floor was restricted and used for the living quarters of the Weddells and their staff although it features a large library , intended to function as the boardroom and research facility of the Virginia Historical Society . 
 The main entrance hall is a grand , high ceilinged room using oak paneling salvaged from the Warwick Priory . The ornate , " L " shaped staircase is actually a reconstruction of the original sixteenth @-@ century staircase of the priory repurchased from an antique shop in London and includes an acanthus leaf newel cap and <unk> newel posts in its design . The floor in the entrance hall is fashioned from a composite made up of terracotta , asphalt and wood shavings known as <unk> , with tiles arranged in an irregular rectangular formation . The room beyond the entrance hall also uses oak paneling , but uses materials derived from another English manor house in Warwickshire . The floor is made of wide @-@ plank oak and has a fifteenth @-@ century stained glass oval window in the south wall using leaded glass from the Warwick Priory . A Tudor rose motif is located on the plaster ceiling , and the Weddells hired Italian artisans to complete it in 1925 @-@ 26 . Adjacent to this room to the east is a smaller drawing room , this time with heraldic reliefs on the plaster ceiling and featuring a cylindrical Florentine soapstone fireplace . 
 The rear hall again uses old oak high paneling and has small six by nine inch oil portraits of Renaissance figures . <unk> Corinthian columns in the hallway form an ornamental gateway and stained glass doors at the end enter the rear porch arcade . The dining room was furnished with oak from <unk> Manor in Hertfordshire which was bought later and has an imposing Portland stone fireplace positioned midway in the room . The floor is made of old re @-@ sawn pegged oak and the Tudor rose ceiling motif is repeated in the room . The gallery room is located in the northwest corner of the house , furnished with vertical oak paneling and a <unk> floor which was to be used for the exhibition of artwork and historic artifacts from the Virginia Historical Society collection . In the southeast wing of the house is the Sulgrave Room , a reproduction of the great hall from the Washington family 's Sulgrave Manor . The fireplace mantel is made of an oak beam , once used at the original priory . Heavy oak timbers are used to construct the open beam ceiling in this room , with mottled plaster walls . 
 The grand second floor library room is also of major note , with a high <unk> ceiling and a grand conference table previously used for board meetings by the Virginia Historical Society . Again , as with the Sulgrave Room , the mantelpiece is made from the Hawkins manor oak and is notably carved with an Old English inscription that reads , " O ye fyre and <unk> bless ye the Lord . " Behind the library panelling is a secret hidden passage , added at Alexander Weddell 's request , leading to his private study . The rest of the second floor consists of living quarters and bathrooms , including many rooms of staff of the Virginia Historical Society and Virginia Weddell 's bedroom , bath , and study . 
 = = Gardens = = 
 Virginia House is set in carefully planned landscape gardens , which contain a diversity of plants and plantings . Virginia Weddell hired the noted landscape architect Charles Gillette in 1927 , and over some twenty years he built more than 8 acres ( 32 @,@ 000 m2 ) of scenic gardens containing close to 1 @,@ 000 types of ornamental plants — from formal spring displays to wisteria , roses , and sprawling hydrangea that drape balconies and garden rails . The first phase of the plan was to create an informal Tudor @-@ style garden on the original 1 @-@ acre ( 4 @,@ 000 m2 ) site that the Weddells purchased for the house site , using a steeply sloping southern hillside by creating interconnecting cascading ponds , flagstone walkways and terraced garden beds . In 1932 , the second phase reworked the original concept by overlaying a cross @-@ axis and planting further beds for flowers such as tulips and iris . The third phase of the plan took place in 1939 , when the Weddells purchased a large adjacent piece of land on the southern side of the house down towards the James River . Gillette extensively planted grass and positioned evergreens in an asymmetrical pattern which he believed would demonstrate a romantic mirroring of the rambling architecture of the house . As of 1990 , Gillette 's original blueprints and notes are preserved in a collection at the Fiske Kimball Fine Arts Library at the University of Virginia . Garden Week tours are held in Virginia House gardens in the spring , attracting thousands of visitors annually . 
 = Yelp = 
 Yelp is an American multinational corporation headquartered in San Francisco , California . It develops , hosts and markets Yelp.com and the Yelp mobile app , which publish crowd @-@ sourced reviews about local businesses , as well as the online reservation service <unk> and online food @-@ delivery service <unk> . The company also trains small businesses in how to respond to reviews , hosts social events for reviewers , and provides data about businesses , including health inspection scores . 
 Yelp was founded in 2004 by former PayPal employees , Russel Simmons and Jeremy Stoppelman . Yelp grew quickly and raised several rounds of funding . By 2010 it had $ 30 million in revenues and the website had published more than 4 @.@ 5 million crowd @-@ sourced reviews . From 2009 – 2012 , Yelp expanded throughout Europe and Asia . In 2009 it entered several negotiations with Google for a potential acquisition . Yelp became a public company in March 2012 and became profitable for the first time two years later . As of 2016 , Yelp.com has 135 million monthly visitors and 95 million reviews . The company 's revenues come from businesses advertising . 
 According to BusinessWeek , Yelp has a complicated relationship with small businesses . Criticism regarding Yelp focus on the legitimacy of reviews , public statements of Yelp manipulating and blocking reviews in order to increase ad spending , as well as concerns regarding the privacy of reviewers . 
 = = Company history = = 
 = = = Origins ( 2004 – 2009 ) = = = 
 Two former PayPal employees , Jeremy Stoppelman and Russel Simmons , founded Yelp at a business incubator , MRL Ventures , in 2004 . Stoppelman and Simmons conceived the initial idea for Yelp as an email @-@ based referral network , after Stoppelman caught the flu and had a difficult time finding an online recommendation for a local doctor . The co @-@ founders ' former colleague from PayPal and founder of MRL Ventures , Max <unk> , provided $ 1 million in initial funding . MRL co @-@ founder David Galbraith , who instigated the local services project based on user reviews , came up with the name " Yelp " . According to Fortune Magazine , Yelp 's initial email @-@ based system was " convoluted " . The idea was rejected by investors and did not attract users beyond the cofounders ' friends and family . Usage data showed that users were not answering requests for referrals , but were using the " Real Reviews " feature , which allowed them to write reviews unsolicited . 
 According to the San Francisco Chronicle , " the site 's popularity soared " after it was re @-@ designed in late 2005 . Yelp raised $ 5 million in funding in 2005 from Bessemer Ventures and $ 10 million in November 2006 from Benchmark Capital . The number of reviewers on the site grew from 12 @,@ 000 in 2005 , to 100 @,@ 000 in 2006 . By the summer of 2006 , the site had one million monthly visitors . It raised $ 15 million in funding from DAG Ventures in February 2008 . In 2010 , Elevation Partners invested $ 100 million ; $ 75 million was spent on purchasing equity from employees and investors , while $ 25 million was invested in sales staff and expansion . Yelp grew from six million monthly visitors in 2007 to 16 @.@ 5 million in 2008 and from 12 to 24 cities during the same time period . By 2009 , the site had 4 @.@ 5 million reviews . By 2010 , Yelp 's revenues were estimated to be $ 30 million and it employed 300 people . 
 = = = Private company ( 2009 – 2011 ) = = = 
 Yelp introduced a site for the United Kingdom in January 2009 and one for Canada that August . The first non @-@ English Yelp site was introduced in France in 2010 ; users had the option to read and write content in French or English . From 2010 to 2011 , Yelp launched several more sites , in Austria , Germany , Spain and the Netherlands . International website traffic doubled during the same time period . An Australian website went live in November 2011 . It was supported through a partnership with Telstra , which provided one million initial business listings , and was initially glitchy . Yelp had a presence in 20 countries by the end of 2012 , including Turkey and Denmark . Yelp 's first site in Asia was introduced in September 2012 in Singapore , which was followed by Japan in 2014 . 
 In December 2009 , Google entered into negotiations with Yelp to acquire the company , but the two parties failed to reach an agreement . According to The New York Times , Google offered more than $ 500 million , but the deal fell through after Yahoo offered $ 1 billion . Tech Crunch reported that Google refused to match Yahoo 's offer . Both offers were later abandoned following a disagreement between Yelp 's management and board of directors about the offers . In June 2015 , Yelp published a study alleging Google was altering search results to benefit its own online services . 
 Yelp began a service called Yelp Deals in April 2011 , but by August it cut back on Deals due to increased competition and market saturation . That September , the Federal Trade Commission investigated Yelp 's allegations that Google was using Yelp web content without authorization and that Google 's search engine algorithms favored Google Places over similar services provided by Yelp . In a January 2014 agreement , Google was not subject to anti @-@ trust litigation from the FTC , but did have to allow services like Yelp the ability to opt out of having their data scraped and used on Google 's websites . 
 = = = Public entity ( 2011 – present ) = = = 
 In November 2011 , Yelp filed for an initial public offering ( IPO ) with the Securities Exchange Commission . On March 2 , 2012 , the company 's stock began public trading on the New York Stock Exchange at a share price of $ 15 , valuing the company at $ 898 million . In 2012 , Yelp agreed to acquire its largest European rival , <unk> , for $ 50 million . The following year , CEO Jeremy Stoppelman reduced his salary to $ 1 . Yelp acquired the start @-@ up online reservation company <unk> for $ 12 @.@ 7 million in cash and company stock in 2013 . Yelp 's second quarter 2013 revenue of $ 55 million " exceeded expectations " , but the company was not yet profitable . 
 In 2012 / 13 , Yelp moved into its new corporate headquarters , occupying nearly 150 @,@ 000 square feet on 12 floors of 140 New Montgomery ( the former <unk> building ) in San Francisco . 
 The company was profitable for the first time in the second quarter of 2014 , as a result of increasing ad spending by business owners and possibly from changes in Google 's local search algorithm . It is dubbed as Google Pigeon , which helped authoritative local directory sites like Yelp and TripAdvisor , in getting more visibility . Over the course of the year , Yelp websites were launched in Mexico , Japan and Argentina . Also in 2014 , Yelp expanded in Europe through the acquisitions of German @-@ based restaurant review site Restaurant @-@ Kritik and French @-@ based <unk> . 
 In early February 2015 Yelp announced it was buying <unk> , an online food @-@ ordering service , for $ 134 million . 
 In late 2015 , a " Public Services & Government " section was introduced to Yelp and the General Services Administration began encouraging government agencies to create and monitor official government pages . For example , the Transportation Security Administration created official TSA Yelp pages . Later that year Yelp began experimenting in San Francisco with consumer alerts that were added to pages about restaurants with poor hygiene scores in government inspections . Research conducted by the Boston Children 's Hospital found that Yelp reviews with keywords associated with food poisoning correlates strongly with poor hygiene at the restaurant . Researchers at Columbia University used data from Yelp to identify three previously unreported restaurant @-@ related food poisoning outbreaks . 
 = = Features = = 
 Yelp 's website , Yelp.com , is a crowd @-@ sourced local business review and social networking site . Its user community is primarily active in major metropolitan regions . The site has pages devoted to individual locations , such as restaurants or schools , where Yelp users can submit a review on their products or services using a one to five star rating system . Businesses can also update contact information , hours and other basic listing information or add special deals . In addition to writing reviews , users can react to reviews , plan events or discuss their personal lives . According to Sterling Market Intelligence , Yelp is " one of the most important sites on the Internet . " It has 132 million monthly visitors and 57 million reviews . As of 2010 , Yelp had an established user @-@ base in 33 cities . 
 85 percent of small businesses listed on the site have a rating of three stars or better , but some negative reviews are very personal or extreme . Many reviews are written in an entertaining or creative manner . Users can give a review a " thumbs @-@ up " if it is " useful , funny or cool . " Each day a " Review of the Day " is determined based on a vote by users . 
 As of 2012 , 45 percent of Yelp searches are done from a mobile device . The Yelp iPhone app was introduced in December 2008 . In August 2009 , Yelp released an update to the iPhone app with a hidden Easter Egg augmented reality feature called Monocle , which allowed users looking through their iPhone camera to see Yelp data on businesses seen through the camera . Check @-@ in features were added in 2010 . 
 Yelp users can make restaurant reservations in Yelp through <unk> , a feature added in June 2010 . In 2013 , features to have food ordered and delivered were added to Yelp as well as the ability to view hygiene inspection scores and make appointments at spas . Yelp 's content was integrated into the mapping and directions app of Apple 's September 2012 release of iOS 6 . Yelp also has features for finding local businesses offering special deals to Yelp users . 
 In March 2014 , Yelp added features for ordering and scheduling <unk> , flowers , golf and legal consultations , among other things , through Yelp . In October 2014 , the company , working in collaboration with hotel search site <unk> , added features to book hotels through Yelp . 
 = = = Features for businesses = = = 
 Yelp added the ability for business owners to respond to reviews in 2008 . Businesses can respond privately by messaging the reviewer or publicly on their profile page . In some cases , Yelp users that had a bad experience have updated their reviews more favorably due to the businesses ' efforts to make it right . In other cases disputes between reviewers and business owners have led to harassment and physical altercations . The system has led to criticisms that business owners can bribe reviewers with free food or discounts to increase their rating , though Yelp users say this rarely occurs . A business owner can " claim " a profile , which allows them to respond to reviews and see traffic reports . Businesses can also offer discounts to Yelp users that visit often using the " check in " feature . In 2014 , Yelp released an app for business owners to respond to reviews and manage their profiles from a mobile device . Business owners can also flag reviews to be removed , if they violate Yelp 's content guidelines . 
 Yelp 's revenues come from selling ads and sponsored listings to small businesses . As of 2010 , Yelp has 150 salespeople . Advertisers can pay to have their listing appear at the top of search results , or feature ads on the pages of their competitors . As of 2013 , advertising revenue was growing at a rate of 77 % per year . Yelp will only allow businesses with at least a three @-@ star rating to sign up for advertising . Originally a sponsored " favorite review " could place a positive review above negative ones , but Yelp stopped offering this option in 2010 in an effort to deter misconceptions that advertisers were able to marginalize negative reviews for pay . 
 = = Relationship with businesses = = 
 A Harvard Business School study published in 2011 found that each " star " in a Yelp rating affected the business owner 's sales by 5 – 9 percent . A 2012 study by two Berkeley economists found that an increase from 3 @.@ 5 to 4 stars on Yelp resulted in a 19 percent increase in the chances of the restaurant being booked during peak hours . A 2014 survey of 300 small business owners done by <unk> found that 78 percent were concerned about negative reviews . Also , 43 percent of respondents said they felt online reviews were unfair , because there is no verification that the review is written by a legitimate customer . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 As Yelp became more influential , the practice of fake reviews written by competitors or business owners became more prevalent . A study from Harvard professor Michael Luca analyzed 316 @,@ 415 reviews in Boston and found that fake reviews rose from 6 % of the site 's reviews in 2006 to 20 % in 2014 . Yelp 's own review filter identifies 25 percent of reviews as suspicious . 
 Yelp has a proprietary algorithm that attempts to evaluate whether a review is authentic and filters @-@ out reviews that it believes are not based on a patron 's actual personal experiences , as required by the site 's Terms of Use . The review filter was first developed two weeks after the site was founded and the company saw their " first obviously fake reviews . " <unk> reviews are moved into a special area and not counted towards the businesses ' star @-@ rating . The filter sometimes filters legitimate reviews , leading to complaints from business owners . New York Attorney General Eric T. Schneiderman said Yelp has " the most aggressive " astroturfing filter out of the crowd @-@ sourced websites it looked into . Yelp has also been criticized for not disclosing how the filter works , which it says would reveal information on how to out @-@ smart it . 
 Yelp also conducts " sting operations " to uncover businesses writing their own reviews . In October 2012 , Yelp placed a 90 @-@ day " consumer alert " on 150 business listings believed to have paid for reviews . The alert read " We caught someone red @-@ handed trying to buy reviews for this business " . In June 2013 , Yelp filed a lawsuit against <unk> / <unk> for allegedly writing fake reviews for pay . In 2013 Yelp sued a lawyer it alleged was part of a group of law firms that exchanged Yelp reviews , saying that many of the firm 's reviews originated from their own office . The lawyer said Yelp was trying to get revenge for his own legal disputes and activism against Yelp . An effort to win dismissal of the case was denied in December 2014 . In September 2013 , Yelp cooperated with Operation Clean Turf , a sting operation by the New York Attorney General that uncovered 19 astroturfing operations . 
 = = = Alleged manipulation by Yelp = = = 
 According to BusinessWeek , Yelp has " always had a complicated relationship with small businesses . " Throughout much of Yelp 's history there have been allegations that Yelp has manipulated their website 's reviews based on participation in its advertising programs . Many business owners say Yelp salespeople offered to remove or suppress negative reviews if they purchase advertising . Others report seeing negative reviews featured prominently and positive reviews buried ; soon after , they would receive calls from Yelp attempting to sell paid advertising . Yelp says its sales staff do not have the ability to modify reviews and that changes in the reviews are caused by its automated filter . 
 Several lawsuits have been filed against Yelp accusing it of extorting businesses into buying advertising products . Each have been dismissed by a judge before reaching trial . In early 2010 , a class @-@ action lawsuit was filed against Yelp alleging it asked a Long Beach veterinary hospital to pay $ 300 a month for advertising services that included the suppression or deletion of disparaging customer reviews . The following month , nine additional businesses joined the class @-@ action lawsuit , and two similar lawsuits were filed . That May the lawsuits were combined into one class @-@ action lawsuit , which was dismissed by San Francisco U.S. District Judge Edward Chen in 2011 . Chen said the reviews were protected by the Communications Decency Act of 1996 and that there was no evidence of manipulation by Yelp . The plaintiffs filed an appeal . In September 2014 the Ninth U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals upheld the dismissal , finding that even if Yelp did manipulate reviews to favor advertisers , this would not fall under the court 's legal definition of extortion . 
 In August 2013 , Yelp launched a series of town hall style meetings in 22 major American cities in an effort to address concerns among local business owners . Many attendees expressed frustrations with Yelp 's automated filter removing positive reviews after they decline to advertise , receiving reviews from users that never entered the establishment , and other issues . A 2011 Harvard study by Michael Luca found that there was no significant statistical correlation between being a Yelp advertiser and having more favorable reviews . The Federal Trade Commission received 2 @,@ 046 complaints about Yelp from 2008 to 2014 , most from small businesses regarding allegedly unfair or fake reviews or negative reviews that appear after declining to advertise . According to Yelp , the Federal Trade Commission finished a second examination of Yelp 's practices in 2015 and in both cases did not pursue an action against the company . 
 Journalist David Lazarus of the Los Angeles Times also criticized Yelp in 2014 for the practice of selling competitors ' ads to run on top of business listings and then offering to have the ads removed as part of a paid feature . 
 In 2015 , San Francisco filmmaker Kaylie Milliken was reportedly producing a documentary film titled Billion Dollar Bully about Yelp 's alleged business practices . 
 = = Community = = 
 According to Inc . Magazine most reviewers ( sometimes called " <unk> " ) are " well @-@ intentioned " and write reviews in order to express themselves , improve their writing , or be creative . In some cases , they write reviews in order to lash out at corporate interests or businesses they dislike . Reviewers may also be motivated by badges and honors , such as being the first to review a new location , or by praise and attention from other users . Many reviews are written in an entertaining or creative manner . Some users post reviews as a matter of protest or support of the business 's political views ; Yelp attempts to filter these . Users can give a review a " thumbs @-@ up " if it is " useful , funny or cool . " Each day a " Review of the Day " is determined based on a vote by users . According to The Discourse of Online Consumer Reviews many Yelp reviewers are internet @-@ savvy adults aged 18 – 25 or " suburban baby boomers " . 
 Reviewers are encouraged to use real names and photos . Each year members of the Yelp community are invited or self @-@ nominated to the " Yelp Elite Squad " and some are accepted based on an evaluation of their reviews . Users must also use their real name and photo on Yelp to qualify for the Elite Squad . They are governed by a council and estimated to have several thousand members . Yelp does not disclose how the Yelp Elite are selected . Elite Squad members are given different color badges based on how long they 've been an elite member . The Yelp Elite Squad originated with parties Yelp began throwing for members in 2005 , and in 2006 it was formally codified ; the name came from a joking reference to prolific reviewers that were invited to Yelp parties as the " Yelp Elite Squad . " Members are invited to special opening parties , given gifts , and receive other perks . Businesses host parties for the Yelp Elite as a way of getting reviews . As of 2011 , there were 60 local Elite Squads , most in North America and Europe . 
 Yelp receives about six subpoenas a month asking for the names of anonymous reviewers , mostly from business owners seeking litigation against those writing negative reviews . In 2012 the Alexandria Circuit Court and the Virginia Court of Appeals held Yelp in contempt for refusing to disclose the identities of seven reviewers that anonymously criticized a carpet @-@ cleaning business ; in 2014 Yelp appealed to the Virginia Supreme Court . Six internet companies and the Electronic Frontier Foundation said a ruling against Yelp would negatively affect free speech online . The judge from an early ruling said that if the reviewers did not actually use the businesses ' services , their communications would be false claims not protected by free speech laws . In 2014 , a California state law was enacted that prohibits businesses from using " disparagement clauses " in their contracts or terms of use that allow them to sue or fine customers that write negatively about them online . 
 As of 2010 , Yelp employed a staff of 40 community managers that organize parties for prolific reviewers , send encouraging messages to reviewers and host classes for small business owners . Yelp reviewers are not required to disclose their identity , but Yelp encourages them to do so . After leaving a negative review a user may say " you 've been <unk> " , while businesses with positive reviews advertise with " People Love us on Yelp ! " . 
 = Constantine Doukas ( usurper ) = 
 Constantine Doukas ( or Doux ) ( Greek : Κωνσταντίνος Δούκας / <unk> ) ( died 913 ) was a prominent Byzantine general . In 904 , he stopped the influential eunuch court official Samonas from defecting to the Arabs . In return , Samonas manipulated his father , Andronikos Doukas , into rebelling and fleeing to the Abbasid court in 906 / 7 . Constantine followed his father to Baghdad , but soon escaped and returned to Byzantium , where he was restored by Leo VI the Wise to favour and entrusted with high military offices . Upon the death of the Emperor Alexander , Constantine with the support of several aristocrats unsuccessfully tried to usurp the throne from the young Constantine VII , but was killed in a clash with supporters of the legitimate emperor . 
 = = Life = = 
 = = = Early life and career = = = 
 Constantine Doukas was the son of Andronikos Doukas , a prominent general under Emperor Leo VI the Wise ( reigned 886 – 912 ) and the first prominent member of the Doukas family . Constantine first appears in the sources in 904 , during the attempted flight of the Arab @-@ born eunuch Samonas , one of the emperor 's most trusted aides , to Syria . Constantine captured Samonas at the Monastery of the Holy Cross at <unk> , near the river Halys , and escorted him back to Constantinople , where an enquiry into the matter was held before the Senate . Leo , who was still attached to his servant , enjoined Constantine to maintain that Samonas had in fact been making a pilgrimage to the shrine of <unk> , and not the Arab frontier . When the senators however asked Constantine to verify the truth of this claim by swearing on " God and the emperor 's head " , he refused to hide the truth . Samonas was punished by house arrest , and although he was pardoned by Leo after only four months and restored to his offices , he had conceived a deep enmity towards the Doukai . 
 This grudge came to the fore in 906 , when Samonas tricked Andronikos into refusing to participate in an imperial expedition . Afraid that he would be punished for his disobedience , Andronikos with his family and retainers fled to the fortress of <unk> , near Iconium , and thence across the border into exile in the Abbasid Caliphate . Constantine and his father ended up in Baghdad , the Abbasid capital . Leo sent a secret message to the Doukai , offering a full pardon if they returned , but again through the machinations of Samonas , the letter fell into the hands of Caliph al @-@ Muktafi ( r . 902 – 908 ) , who had Andronikos confined to house arrest and forced to convert to Islam along with those who had followed him . He died there in ca . 910 . Constantine however managed to escape Baghdad , and was warmly welcomed back by Leo in a ceremony in the throne room of the Chrysotriklinos . The date of his return to Byzantium is unclear , but must be placed between ca . 908 and ca . 911 . Despite his father 's revolt , the Doukai remained very popular due to their military successes , and prophecies apparently circulated that predicted Constantine 's rise to the throne . As a result , according to Theophanes Continuatus , Leo warned the young man from trying to become emperor , but this is probably a later interpolation in view of Constantine Doukas ' eventual fate . In reality , Leo seems to have trusted him , for he showered him with gifts and appointed him to senior military positions : initially he was named — apparently in succession to Eustathios Argyros — strategos of the Charsianon theme , but by 913 he had risen to the post of Domestic of the Schools ( commander @-@ in @-@ chief of the army ) . From both positions he fought victoriously against the Arabs . 
 = = = Attempted usurpation = = = 
 Leo VI died in May 912 and was succeeded by his brother Alexander ( r . 912 – 913 ) , who reigned for little over a year before dying in June 913 . Leo 's empress , Zoe Karbonopsina , and his son and titular co @-@ emperor , Constantine VII ( r . 913 – 959 ) , were sidelined during the reign of Alexander , who also restored Zoe 's old adversary , Nicholas Mystikos , as Patriarch of Constantinople . Thus , at the death of Alexander ( 6 June 913 ) , with Constantine VII not even eight years old , a power struggle ensued between Zoe and Patriarch Nicholas , who headed the regency council . It was at this point that Constantine Doukas launched a rebellion aiming for the throne . The Life of Euthymius hagiography , a source hostile to Patriarch Nicholas , reports that the Patriarch was also involved , although the other Byzantine sources include this as a widespread rumour rather than a fact . According to these sources , unaware that he would be appointed regent ( Alexander named him to the regency council on his deathbed ) , fearful of losing his pre @-@ eminent position , and anxious about the military threat posed by the Bulgarian Tsar Simeon , which required a more experienced hand at the helm of the state , the Patriarch summoned Doukas to assume the throne . 
 Doukas , enjoying wide support among both the aristocrats and the populace , accepted the summons and headed to Constantinople with a few trusted friends . Barely three days after Alexander 's death , he entered the capital in secret during the night through a postern on the sea walls , and hid in the house of his father @-@ in @-@ law , Gregoras <unk> , where he was soon joined by high @-@ ranking courtiers such as the patrikios Constantine <unk> . Already before dawn on the following morning , Constantine and his supporters , bearing torches , marched to the Hippodrome , joined along the way by a great multitude of people . Constantine was duly proclaimed emperor before the people at the Hippodrome , and headed in triumph towards the Chalke Gate of the imperial palace . After crossing the iron gate of the Chalke , however , at the hall of the <unk> , he was opposed by the soldiers of the Hetaireia guard and armed oarsmen of the imperial fleet , assembled by the magistros John <unk> , a member of the regency council . A clash followed , in which many were killed , including Constantine 's son Gregory , his nephew Michael and his friend Kourtikes . Disheartened , Constantine turned and tried to flee , but his horse slipped and fell . Constantine was killed by an arrow ; according to the Life of Euthymius cursing the Patriarch Nicholas as he died . His head was cut off and presented to Constantine VII . 
 The Life of Basil the Younger on the other hand reports a slightly different version , according to which the summons to Doukas were undertaken by the entire regency council , which proposed to Doukas to assume the governance of the state while Constantine VII would be limited to his ceremonial duties . According to this source , the proposal met with refusal from Doukas , and the regents had to send a second letter with their own <unk> to persuade him otherwise . By the time he entered Constantinople , however , the regents had changed their minds and barricaded the palace against him . After his proclamation at the Hippodrome , Doukas resolved to besiege the palace , but finally tried to enter through the Chalke , while ordering his followers not to draw their swords so as to avoid bloodshed . There he was ambushed by archers placed by the regents , and killed along with a number of his followers . 
 Numerous supporters of the usurper — 800 according to the Life of Euthymius , over 3 @,@ 000 according to the Life of Basil the Younger — were harshly punished ; some were blinded and exiled , while others — including those who had sought sanctuary in the Hagia Sophia — were tonsured and confined to monasteries , while many of the common folk were affixed to stakes on the eastern shore of the Bosporus . 
 Constantine Doukas ' wife was shorn and exiled to her husband 's estate in Paphlagonia and his younger son Stephen was castrated . Along with the deaths of Constantine 's son and nephew , this meant the extinction of this branch of the Doukas family : the relation of the later bearers of the Doukas name with Andronikos and Constantine is unclear . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Despite his failure at seizing the throne , Constantine Doukas ' popularity meant that his memory was preserved both among the people and the aristocracy of Asia Minor : in the 930s , Basil the Copper Hand assumed his identity and led a peasant revolt , while among the aristocracy he was glorified as a hero . Elements of Constantine 's life eventually found their way into the epic poem Digenes <unk> . 
 = Ummagumma = 
 Ummagumma is the fourth studio album by the English progressive rock band Pink Floyd . It is a double album and was released on 25 October 1969 by Harvest Records in the UK and by Capitol Records internationally . The first disc is a live album that contains part of their normal set list of the time , while the second contains solo compositions by each member of the band recorded as their fourth studio album . The artwork was designed by regular Floyd collaborators Hipgnosis and features a number of pictures of the band combined to give a Droste effect . 
 Although the album was well received at the time of release , and was a top five hit in the UK album charts , it has since been looked upon unfavourably by the band , who have expressed negative opinions about it in interviews . Nevertheless , the album has been reissued on CD several times , along with the rest of their catalogue . 
 = = Title = = 
 The album 's title supposedly comes from Cambridge slang for sex , commonly used by Pink Floyd friend and occasional roadie , Iain " Emo " Moore , who would say " I 'm going back to the house for some <unk> " . According to Moore , he made up the term himself . 
 = = Background = = 
 Although the sleeve notes say that the live material was recorded in June 1969 , the live album of Ummagumma was recorded live at Mothers Club , Birmingham on 27 April 1969 and the following week at Manchester College of Commerce on 2 May of the same year as part of The Man and The Journey Tour . The band had also recorded a live version of " Interstellar Overdrive " ( from The Piper at the Gates of Dawn ) intended for placement on side one of the live album , and " The Embryo " , which was recorded in the studio before it was decided that the band members each come up with their own material . 
 The studio album came as a result of Richard Wright wanting to make " real music " , where each of the four group members ( in order : Wright , Roger Waters , David Gilmour and Nick Mason ) had half an LP side each to create a solo work without involvement from the others . Wright 's contribution , " <unk> " , was named after a character in Greek mythology , usually spelled " Sisyphus " , and contained a combination of various keyboards , including piano and mellotron . Although initially enthusiastic about making a solo contribution , Wright later described it as " pretentious " . Waters ' " Several Species of Small Furry Animals <unk> Together in a Cave and <unk> with a Pict " contained a variety of vocal and percussion effects treated at various speeds , both forwards and backwards , and was influenced by Ron Geesin , who would later collaborate with both Waters and Pink Floyd . Waters ' other contribution Grantchester Meadows was a more pastoral acoustic offering and was usually played as an opening to concerts over 1969 . Gilmour has since stated he was apprehensive about creating a solo work , and admits he " went into a studio and started waffling about , tacking bits and pieces together " , although part one of " The Narrow Way " had already been performed as " Baby Blue Shuffle in D Major " in a BBC radio session in December 1968 . Gilmour said he " just <unk> " through the piece . He asked Waters to write some lyrics for his compositions , but he refused to do so . Mason 's " The Grand Vizier 's Garden Party " featured his then wife , Lindy , playing flute , and Mason playing a seven @-@ minute drum solo , which was actually used as part two of his three @-@ part piece . 
 = = Packaging = = 
 The album was the first album by the band released on the Harvest label . The cover artwork shows a Droste effect featuring the group , with a picture hanging on the wall showing the same scene , except that the band members have switched positions . The cover of the original LP varies between the British , American / Canadian and Australian releases . The British version has the album Gigi leaning against the wall immediately above the " Pink Floyd " letters . At a talk given at Borders bookstore in Cambridge on 1 November 2008 , as part of the " City Wakes " project , Storm Thorgerson explained that the album was introduced as a red herring to provoke debate , and that it has no intended meaning . On most copies of American and Canadian editions , the Gigi cover is airbrushed to a plain white sleeve , apparently because of copyright concerns ; however , the earliest American copies do show the Gigi cover , and it was restored for the American remastered CD edition . On the Australian edition , the Gigi cover is completely airbrushed , not even leaving a white square behind . The house used as the location for the front cover of the album is located in Great Shelford , near Cambridge . 
 On the rear cover , roadies Alan Styles ( who also appears in " Alan 's Psychedelic Breakfast " ) and Peter Watts are shown with the band 's equipment laid out on a taxiway at Biggin Hill Airport . This concept was proposed by Mason , with the intention of replicating the " exploded " drawings of military aircraft and their payloads , which were popular at the time . 
 Song titles on the back are laid out slightly differently in British vs. North American editions ; the most important difference being the inclusion of subtitles for the four sections of " A Saucerful of Secrets " . These subtitles only appeared on American and Canadian editions of this album , but not on the British edition ; nor did they appear on original pressings of A Saucerful of Secrets . 
 The inner gatefold art shows separate black @-@ and @-@ white photos of the band members . Gilmour is seen standing in front of the Elfin Oak . Original vinyl editions showed Waters with his first wife , Judy Trim , but she has been cropped out of the picture on most CD editions ( with the original photo 's caption " Roger Waters ( and Jude ) " accordingly changed to just " Roger Waters " ) . The <unk> picture was restored for the album 's inclusion in the box set Oh , by the Way . 
 = = Release history = = 
 Ummagumma was released in the UK and US on 25 October and 10 November 1969 , respectively . It reached number 5 on the UK albums chart and number 74 in the US , marking the first time the band reached the top 100 there . The album was certified gold in the US in February 1974 and platinum in March 1994 . American versions of the cassette retained only " Astronomy Domine " from the live set and omitted the three other tracks . In 1987 , the album was re @-@ released on a two @-@ CD set . A digitally remastered version was issued in 1994 . 
 In 2009 , to mark the 40th anniversary of the album 's release , Thorgerson sold a limited number of autographed lithographs of the front cover . Although the 2011 re @-@ release campaign Why Pink Floyd ... ? presented all fourteen albums newly remastered in 2011 , only the studio disc of Ummagumma was remastered – the live disc is the previous 1994 version . Both the live and studio album will re @-@ issue on 3 June 2016 with Pink Floyd Records label . 
 = = Reception = = 
 On release , Ummagumma received favourable reviews . International Times were particularly positive about the live album , with the reviewer describing it as " probably one of the best live recordings I have ever heard " . Vox included the live half of this album on its list of ' The Greatest Live Albums Ever ' . Stylus Magazine were very positive towards the album , saying the live half " as a visceral document of the early Floyd ’ s proclivity for atmospheric , energetic jamming , there ’ s nothing else like it " and the studio half " somehow transcends its fractured construction to make a full album @-@ length statement " . 
 However , the band have since been dismissive and critical of the work . Recalling the album in later years , Waters said : " Ummagumma – what a disaster ! " , while in 1995 , Gilmour described the album as " horrible " . In a 1984 interview , Mason said : " I thought it was a very good and interesting little exercise , the whole business of everyone doing a bit . But I still feel really that that 's quite a good example of the sum being greater than the parts … " Later , he described it as " a failed experiment " , adding that " the most significant thing is that we didn 't do it again " . 
 Paste , reviewing the 2011 re @-@ release , described the album as " rock excess of the worst kind " , although the writer praised the live version of " Careful with that Axe , Eugene " . Robert Christgau has suggested that the album 's " hypnotic melodies " made it " an admirable record to fall asleep to " . 
 = = = Dragonfly species = = = 
 In December 2015 scientists named a new found dragonfly / damselfly of the genus Umma Umma <unk> after the album Ummagumma of Pink Floyd . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = = = Double @-@ LP Edition = = = 
 Record one - Live album 
 Record two – studio album 
 = = = UK Cassette Edition = = = 
 = = = US Cassette Edition = = = 
 = = = CD Edition = = = 
 = = Personnel = = 
 = = Charts and certifications = = 
 = The Last of Us = 
 The Last of Us is an action @-@ adventure survival horror video game developed by Naughty Dog and published by Sony Computer Entertainment . It was released for the PlayStation 3 in June 2013 . An updated version , The Last of Us Remastered , was released for the PlayStation 4 in July 2014 . In the game , players control Joel , a man tasked with escorting a young woman named Ellie across a post @-@ apocalyptic United States . 
 The Last of Us is played from a third @-@ person perspective ; players use firearms and improvised weapons , and can use stealth to defend against hostile humans and cannibalistic creatures infected by a mutated strain of the Cordyceps fungus . " Listen Mode " allows players to locate enemies through a heightened sense of hearing and spatial awareness . Weapons can also be upgraded using items scavenged from the environment . In the game 's online multiplayer mode , up to eight players engage in co @-@ operative and competitive gameplay in recreations of single @-@ player settings . 
 Development of The Last of Us began in 2009 , soon after the release of Naughty Dog 's previous game , Uncharted 2 : Among Thieves . The relationship between Joel and Ellie was the central focus of the game , with all other elements developed around it . The team chose actors Troy Baker and Ashley Johnson to portray Joel and Ellie respectively , who provided voice and motion capture for the roles . Both assisted creative director Neil Druckmann with the development of the characters and story . The original score was composed and performed by Gustavo Santaolalla . 
 Following its announcement in December 2011 , The Last of Us was widely anticipated . It was acclaimed by many reviewers , with praise particularly directed at its characterization , subtext , exploration of the human condition , and depiction of female characters . The Last of Us became one of the best @-@ selling PlayStation 3 games , selling over 1 @.@ 3 million units in its first week , and over eight million units within fourteen months . Considered to be one of the greatest video games of all time , it won year @-@ end accolades , including multiple Game of the Year awards from several gaming publications , critics , and game award shows , making it one of the most awarded games in history . After the game 's release , Naughty Dog released several downloadable content additions ; The Last of Us : Left Behind added a new single @-@ player campaign , taking place both before and during the main story , featuring Ellie and her friend Riley . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 The Last of Us is a post @-@ apocalyptic action @-@ adventure survival horror game that is viewed from a third @-@ person perspective . Players traverse post @-@ apocalyptic environments , moving through locations such as towns , buildings , and sewers to advance through the game 's story . Players use firearms , improvised weapons , and stealth to defend against hostile humans and cannibalistic creatures infected by a mutated strain of the Cordyceps fungus . For most of the game , players control Joel — a man tasked with escorting a young girl named Ellie across the United States ; Ellie and other companions are controlled by the artificial intelligence . Players also control Ellie throughout the game 's winter segment . 
 In combat , players can use long @-@ ranged weapons , such as rifles , shotguns , and bows , and short @-@ barreled guns , such as pistols and revolvers ; players can scavenge limited @-@ use melee weapons , such as pipes and baseball bats . Bottles and bricks can be thrown to distract , stun , or attack enemies . The game features a crafting system , allowing players to upgrade weapons at <unk> using collected items . Equipment such as health kits and Molotov cocktails can be found or crafted using collected items . Physical abilities , such as the health meter and crafting speed , can be upgraded by collecting pills and medicinal plants . Should players take damage , their health meter can be recharged through the use of health kits . 
 Though players can attack enemies directly , they have the option to use stealth tactics to attack undetected or sneak by them . Stealth combat uses a gameplay mechanic called " Listen Mode " , which allows players to effectively locate enemies through a heightened sense of hearing and spatial awareness . When using Listen Mode , an outline of the enemies becomes visible to players , allowing them to view enemies in different locations . A dynamic cover system is present , in which players crouch behind obstacles to gain a tactical advantage during combat . The game features periods without combat , often involving conversation between the characters . Players solve simple puzzles , such as using floating pallets to move Ellie , who is unable to swim , across bodies of water , and using ladders or dumpsters to reach higher areas . Story collectibles , such as notes , maps and comics , can be scavenged and viewed in the backpack menu . 
 The game features an artificial intelligence system in which hostile human enemies react to any combat situation they are placed in . If enemies discover the player , they may take cover or call for assistance , and can take advantage of players when they are distracted , out of ammunition , or in the midst of a fight . Players ' companions , such as Ellie , can assist in combat by throwing objects at threats to stun them , announcing the location of unseen enemies , or using a knife and pistol to attack enemies . 
 The game 's online multiplayer allows up to eight players to engage in competitive gameplay in recreations of multiple single @-@ player settings . The game features three multiplayer game types : Supply Raid and Survivors are both team deathmatches , with the latter excluding the ability to respawn ; Interrogation features teams investigating the location of the enemy team 's <unk> , and the first to capture such <unk> wins . In every mode , players select a Faction — Hunters ( a group of hostile survivors ) or Fireflies ( a revolutionary militia group ) — and keep their clan alive by collecting supplies during matches . Each match is equal to one day ; by surviving twelve " weeks " , players have completed a journey and can re @-@ select their Faction . Killing enemies , reviving allies , and crafting items earn the player parts that can be converted to supplies ; parts can also be scavenged from enemies ' bodies . Players are able to carry more equipment by earning points as their clan 's supplies grow . Players can connect the game to their Facebook account , which alters clan members ' names and faces to match the players ' Facebook friends . Players have the ability to customize their characters with hats , helmets , masks , and emblems . 
 = = Plot = = 
 In September 2013 , an outbreak of a mutant Cordyceps fungus ravages the United States , transforming its human hosts into cannibalistic monsters known as Infected . In the suburbs of Austin , Joel ( Troy Baker ) flees the chaos with his brother Tommy ( Jeffrey Pierce ) and daughter Sarah ( Hana Hayes ) . As they flee , Sarah is shot by a soldier and she dies in Joel 's arms . In the twenty years that follow , most of civilization is destroyed by the infection . Survivors live in heavily policed quarantine zones , independent settlements , and nomadic groups . Joel works as a smuggler with his partner Tess ( Annie Wersching ) in the Boston quarantine zone . They hunt down Robert ( Robin Atkin Downes ) , a black market dealer , to recover a stolen weapons cache . Before Tess kills him , Robert reveals that he traded the goods to the Fireflies , a rebel group opposing the quarantine zone authorities . 
 The leader of the Fireflies , Marlene ( Merle Dandridge ) , promises to double their stolen cache in return for smuggling a teenage girl , Ellie ( Ashley Johnson ) , to Fireflies hiding in the Boston capitol building , outside of the quarantine . Joel , Tess , and Ellie sneak out in the night , but after an encounter with a patrol , they discover Ellie is infected . Full infection normally occurs in under two days , but Ellie claims she was infected three weeks ago and that her immunity may lead to a cure . The trio make their way to their destination through hordes of infected , but find that the Fireflies there have been killed . Tess reveals she has been bitten by an infected ; believing in Ellie 's importance , Tess sacrifices herself against pursuing soldiers so Joel and Ellie can escape . Joel decides to find Tommy , a former Firefly , in the hope that he can locate the remaining Fireflies . With the help of Bill ( W. Earl Brown ) , a smuggler who owes Joel a favor , they acquire a working vehicle . Driving into Pittsburgh , they are ambushed by bandits and their car is wrecked . They ally with two brothers , Henry ( Brandon Scott ) and Sam ( <unk> Jeter ) ; after they escape the city , Sam is bitten by an infected but hides it from the group . As his infection takes hold , Sam attacks Ellie , but Henry shoots him and commits suicide . 
 In the fall , Joel and Ellie finally find Tommy in Jackson , Wyoming , where he has assembled a fortified settlement near a hydroelectric dam with his wife Maria ( Ashley Scott ) . Joel contemplates leaving Ellie with Tommy , but after she confronts him about Sarah , he decides to stay with her . Tommy directs them to a Fireflies enclave at the University of Eastern Colorado . There , they find the university abandoned , but learn that the Fireflies have moved to a hospital in Salt Lake City . As they leave , they are attacked by bandits and Joel is severely wounded . During the winter , Ellie and Joel shelter in the mountains . Joel is on the brink of death and relies on Ellie to care for him . Hunting for food , Ellie encounters David ( Nolan North ) and James ( Reuben Langdon ) , scavengers willing to trade medicine for food ; David reveals that the university bandits Ellie and Joel killed were part of his group . Ellie manages to lead David 's group away from Joel , but is eventually captured ; David intends to recruit her into his cannibal group . She escapes after killing James , but David corners her in a burning restaurant . Meanwhile , Joel recovers from his wounds and sets out to find Ellie . He reaches Ellie as she kills David ; Joel consoles her before they flee . 
 In the spring , Joel and Ellie arrive in Salt Lake City and are captured by a Firefly patrol . In the hospital , Marlene tells Joel that Ellie is being prepared for surgery : in hope of producing a vaccine for the infection , the Fireflies must remove the infected portion of Ellie 's brain , which will kill her . Unwilling to let Ellie die , Joel battles his way to the operating room and carries the unconscious Ellie to the parking garage , where he is confronted by Marlene , who he shoots and kills to prevent the Fireflies from pursuing them . On the drive out of the city , Joel attempts to shield Ellie from the truth of what happened ; he claims that the Fireflies had found many other people who are immune but were unable to create a cure , and that they have stopped trying . The pair arrive on the outskirts of Tommy 's settlement . Ellie reveals that she was not alone when she was infected and expresses her survivor guilt . At her request , Joel swears his story about the Fireflies is true . 
 = = Development = = 
 Naughty Dog began developing The Last of Us in 2009 , following the release of Uncharted 2 : Among Thieves . For the first time in the company 's history , Naughty Dog split into two teams ; while one team developed Uncharted 3 : Drake 's Deception ( 2011 ) , the other began work on The Last of Us . Director Bruce Straley and creative director Neil Druckmann led the team responsible for developing The Last of Us . 
 Druckmann views The Last of Us as a coming of age story , in which Ellie adapts to survival after spending time with Joel , as well as an exploration of how willing a father is to save his child . A major motif of the game is that " life goes on " ; this is presented in a scene in which Joel and Ellie discover a herd of giraffes , which concept artist John Sweeney explained was designed to " reignite [ Ellie 's ] lust for life " , after her suffering following her encounter with David . The Infected , a core concept of the game , were inspired by a segment of the BBC nature documentary Planet Earth ( 2006 ) , which featured the Cordyceps fungi . Though the fungi mainly infect insects , taking control of their motor functions and forcing it to help cultivate the fungus , the game explores the concept of the fungus evolving and infecting humans , and the direct results of an outbreak of this infection . 
 The relationship between Joel and Ellie was the central focus of the game ; all other elements were developed around it . Troy Baker and Ashley Johnson were cast as Joel and Ellie , respectively , and provided voice and motion capture performances . Baker and Johnson contributed to the development of the characters ; for example , Baker convinced Druckmann that Joel would care for Tess due to his loneliness , and Johnson convinced Druckmann that Ellie should be stronger and more defensive . Ellie 's physical appearance was also redesigned throughout development to make her look more similar to Johnson . The game 's other characters also underwent changes . The character Tess was originally intended to be the main antagonist of The Last of Us , but the team found it difficult to believe her motives . The sexuality of the character Bill was originally left vague in the script , but later altered to further reflect his homosexuality . 
 The Last of Us features an original score composed primarily by Gustavo Santaolalla , along with compositions by Andrew Buresh , Anthony Caruso , and Jonathan Mayer . Known for his minimalist compositions , Santaolalla was contacted early in development . He used various instruments to compose the score , including some that he was unfamiliar with , giving a sense of danger and innocence . This minimalist approach was also taken with the game 's sound and art design . The sound of the Infected was one of the first tasks during development ; the team experimented with the sound in order to achieve the best work possible . To achieve the sound of the Clicker , they hired voice actress Misty Lee , who provided a sound that audio lead Phillip Kovats described as originating in the " back of the throat " . The art department took various pieces of work as inspiration , such as Robert Polidori 's photographs following Hurricane Katrina , which were used as a reference point when designing the flooded areas of Pittsburgh . The art department were forced to negotiate for things that they wished to include , due to the strong differing opinions of the team during development . Ultimately , the team settled on a balance between simplicity and detail ; while Straley and Druckmann preferred the former , the art team preferred the latter . The game 's opening credits were produced by Sony 's San Diego Studio . 
 The team created new engines to satisfy their needs for the game . The artificial intelligence was created to coordinate with players ; the addition of Ellie as artificial intelligence was a major contributor to the engine . The lighting engine was also re @-@ created to incorporate soft light , in which the sunlight weeps in through spaces and reflects off surfaces . The gameplay introduced difficulty to the team , as they felt that every mechanic required thorough analysis . The game 's user interface design also underwent various iterations throughout development . 
 The Last of Us was officially announced on December 10 , 2011 , at the Spike Video Game Awards , alongside its debut trailer and an official press release acknowledging some of the game 's features . Journalists noted that the announcement ignited widespread anticipation within the gaming industry , which they owed to Naughty Dog 's reputation . The game missed its original projected release date of May 7 , 2013 , and was pushed back to June 14 , 2013 to allow for further polishing . To spur pre @-@ order game sales , Naughty Dog collaborated with several retail outlets to provide special edition versions of the game , with extra features and content . 
 = = = Additional content = = = 
 Downloadable content ( DLC ) for the game was released following its launch . The game 's Season Pass includes access to all DLC , as well as some additional abilities , and the documentary Grounded : Making The Last of Us ; the documentary was released online in February 2014 . Two DLC packs were included with some of the game 's special editions and were available upon release . The Sights and Sounds Pack included the soundtrack , a dynamic theme for the PlayStation 3 home screen , and two avatars . The Survival Pack featured bonus skins for the player following the completion of the campaign , and in @-@ game money , as well as bonus experience points and early access to customizable items for the game 's multiplayer . Abandoned Territories Map Pack , released on October 15 , 2013 , added four new multiplayer maps , based on locations in the game 's story . Nightmare Bundle , released on November 5 , 2013 , added a collection of ten head items , nine of which are available to purchase separately . 
 The Last of Us : Left Behind added a new single @-@ player campaign which serves as a prequel to the main storyline , featuring Ellie and her friend Riley ; it was released on February 14 , 2014 as DLC and on May 12 , 2015 as a standalone expansion pack . A third bundle was released on May 6 , 2014 , featuring five separate DLC : Grounded added a new difficulty to the main game and Left Behind ; <unk> Territories Map Pack added new multiplayer maps ; Professional Survival Skills Bundle and Situational Survival Skills Bundle added eight new multiplayer skills ; and <unk> Weapon Bundle added four new weapons . The Grit and Gear Bundle , which added new headgear items , masks and gestures , was released on August 5 , 2014 . A Game of the Year Edition containing all downloadable content was released in Europe on November 11 , 2014 . 
 = = = The Last of Us Remastered = = = 
 On April 9 , 2014 , Sony announced The Last of Us Remastered , an enhanced version of the game for the PlayStation 4 . It was released on July 29 , 2014 in North America . Remastered features improved graphics and rendering upgrades , including increased draw distance , an upgraded combat mechanic , and higher frame rate . Other enhancements include advanced audio options , an audio commentary , and a Photo Mode . It includes the previously released downloadable content , including Left Behind and some multiplayer maps . The development team aimed at creating a " true " remaster , maintaining the " same core experience " and not changing any large story or gameplay elements . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 The Last of Us received critical acclaim . Metacritic calculated an average score of 95 out of 100 , indicating " universal acclaim " , based on 98 reviews . It is the fifth @-@ highest rated PlayStation 3 game on Metacritic . Reviewers praised the character development , story and subtext , visual and sound design , and depiction of female and LGBT characters . The game is considered one of the most significant titles of the seventh generation of video games , and has been included among the greatest video games of all time . Colin Moriarty of IGN called The Last of Us " a masterpiece " and " PlayStation 3 's best exclusive " , and Edge considered it " the most riveting , emotionally resonant story @-@ driven epic " of the console generation . Oli Welsh of Eurogamer wrote that it is " a beacon of hope " for the survival horror genre ; Andy Kelly of Computer and Video Games declared it " Naughty Dog 's finest moment " . 
 Kelly of Computer and Video Games found the story memorable , and IGN 's Moriarty named it one of the game 's standout features . PlayStation Official Magazine 's David Meikleham wrote that the pacing contributed to the improvement of the story , stating that there is " a real sense of time elapsed and journey traveled along every step of the way " , and Destructoid 's Jim Sterling lauded the game 's suspenseful moments . Richard Mitchell of Joystiq found that the narrative improved the character relationships . 
 The characters — particularly the relationship between Joel and Ellie — received acclaim . Matt Helgeson of Game Informer wrote that the relationship felt identifiable , naming it " poignant " and " well @-@ drawn " . Eurogamer 's Welsh wrote that the characters were developed with " real patience and skill " , appreciating their emotional value , and Joystiq 's Mitchell found the relationship " genuine " and emotional . PlayStation Official Magazine 's Meikleham named Joel and Ellie the best characters of any PlayStation 3 game , while IGN 's Moriarty identified it as a highlight of the game . Kelly of Computer and Video Games named the characters " richly painted " , feeling invested in their stories . Philip Kollar of Polygon felt that Ellie was believable , making it easier to develop a connection to her , and that the relationship between the characters was assisted by the game 's optional conversations . The character performances also received praise , with Edge and Eurogamer 's Welsh noting that the script improved as a result . 
 Many reviewers found the game 's combat a refreshing difference from other games . Game Informer 's Helgeson appreciated the vulnerability during fights , while Kelly of Computer and Video Games enjoyed the variety in approaching the combat . IGN 's Moriarty felt that the crafting system assisted the combat , and that the latter contributed to the narrative 's emotional value , adding that enemies feel " human " . Joystiq 's Mitchell reiterated similar comments , stating that the combat " piles death upon death on Joel 's hands " . Welsh of Eurogamer found the suspenseful and threatening encounters added positively to the gameplay . Tom Mc Shea of GameSpot wrote that the artificial intelligence negatively affected the combat , with enemies often ignoring players ' companions . Polygon 's Kollar felt that the combat was unfair , especially when fighting the Infected . 
 The game 's visual features were commended by many reviewers . The art design was lauded as " outstanding " by Computer and Video Games ' Kelly , and " jaw @-@ dropping " by Eurogamer 's Welsh . Mc Shea of GameSpot identified the visual representation of the post @-@ apocalyptic world was " mundane " , having been portrayed various times previously . The game 's graphics have been frequently named by critics as the best for a PlayStation 3 game , with Helgeson of Game Informer naming them " unmatched in console gaming " and Moriarty of IGN stating that they contribute to the realism . Destructoid 's Sterling wrote that game was visually impressive but that technical issues , such as some " muddy and basic " textures found early in the game , left a negative impact on the visuals . 
 The world and environments of the game drew acclaim from many reviewers . Kelly of Computer and Video Games stated that the environments are " large , detailed , and littered with secrets " , adding that The Last of Us " masks " its linearity successfully . Edge repeated similar remarks , writing that the level design serves the story appropriately . Helgeson of Game Informer wrote that the world " effectively and gorgeously [ conveys ] the loneliness " of the story . IGN 's Moriarty appreciated the added design elements placed around the game world , such as the hidden notes and letters . 
 Reviewers praised the use of sound in The Last of Us . Eurogamer 's Welsh felt that the sound design was significantly better than in other games , while Game Informer 's Helgeson dubbed it " amazing " . Mc Shea of GameSpot stated that the audio added to the effect of the gameplay , particularly when hiding from enemies . Kelly of Computer and Video Games found that the environmental audio positively impacted gameplay , and that Gustavo Santaolalla 's score was " sparse and delicate " . Both Game Informer 's Helgeson and Destructoid 's Sterling called the score " haunting " , with the latter finding that it complements the gameplay . 
 The graphic depiction of violence in The Last of Us generated substantial commentary from critics . Engadget writer Ben Gilbert found the game 's persistent focus on combat was " a necessary evil to lead the game 's fragile protagonist duo to safety " , as opposed to being used as a method to achieve objectives . Kotaku 's Kirk Hamilton wrote that the violence was " heavy , consequential and necessary " , as opposed to gratuitous . USGamer 's Anthony John Agnello wrote that the game consistently reinforces the negativity associated with violence , intentionally making players feel uncomfortable while in violent combat . He stated that the deaths within the game were not unnecessary or unjustified , making the story more powerful . Kelly of Computer and Video Games stated that , despite the " incredibly brutal " combat , the violence never felt gratuitous . Eurogamer 's Welsh echoed similar remarks , stating that the violence is not " desensitized or mindless " . Matt Helgeson of Game Informer observed that the game 's violence leads to players questioning the morality of their choices . Joystiq 's Mitchell wrote that the violence is " designed to be uncomfortable " , stating that it contributes to Joel 's character . Prior to the release of the game , Keith Stuart of The Guardian wrote that the acceptability of the violence would depend on its context within the game . 
 Many critics discussed the game 's depiction of female characters . Jason Killingsworth of Edge praised its lack of sexualized female characters , writing that it " offers a refreshing antidote to the sexism and regressive gender attitudes of most blockbuster videogames " . Eurogamer 's Ellie Gibson praised Ellie as " sometimes strong , sometimes vulnerable , but never a cliché " . She felt that Ellie is initially established as a " damsel in distress " , but that this concept is subverted . GameSpot 's Carolyn Petit praised the female characters as morally conflicted and sympathetic , but wrote that gender in video games should be evaluated " based on their actual merits , not in relation to other games " . Chris Suellentrop of The New York Times acknowledged that Ellie was a likable and " sometimes powerful " character , but argued that The Last of Us is " actually the story of Joel " , stating that it 's " another video game by men , for men and about men " . The Last of Us was also praised for its depiction of LGBT characters . Sam Einhorn of <unk> felt that the revelation of Bill 's sexuality " added to his character ... without really <unk> him " . American organization GLAAD named Bill one of the " most intriguing new LGBT characters of 2013 " , calling him " deeply flawed but wholly unique " . A kiss between two female characters in Left Behind was met with positive reactions . 
 = = = Sales = = = 
 Within seven days of its release , The Last of Us sold over 1 @.@ 3 million units , becoming the biggest video game launch of 2013 at the time . Three weeks after its release , the game sold over 3 @.@ 4 million units , and was deemed the biggest launch of an original game since 2011 's L.A. Noire and the fastest @-@ selling PlayStation 3 game of 2013 at the time . The game became the best @-@ selling digital release on PlayStation Store for PlayStation 3 , though numerical sales figures were not disclosed ; this record was later beaten by Grand Theft Auto V. The Last of Us ultimately became the tenth best @-@ selling game of 2013 . By August 2014 , the game had sold eight million copies : seven million on PlayStation 3 and one million on PlayStation 4 . It is the third best @-@ selling PlayStation 3 game of all time . In the United Kingdom , the game remained atop the charts for six consecutive weeks , matching records set by multi @-@ platform titles . Within 48 hours of its release , The Last of Us generated more than the £ 3 million earned by Man of Steel in the same period . The game also topped the charts in the United States , France , Ireland , Italy , the Netherlands , Sweden , Finland , Norway , Denmark , Spain , and Japan . 
 = = = Awards = = = 
 The Last of Us is one of the most awarded games of all time , winning over 240 Game of the Year awards . Prior to its release , it received numerous awards for its previews at E3 . It was review aggregators Metacritic and GameRankings ' second @-@ highest rated for the year 2013 , behind Grand Theft Auto V. The game appeared on several year @-@ end lists of the best games of 2013 , receiving wins from the 41st Annie Awards , The A.V. Club , the British Academy Video Games Awards , Canada.com , Daily Mirror , The Daily Telegraph , Destructoid , the 17th Annual DICE Awards , The Escapist , GamesRadar , GameTrailers , the 14th Annual Developers Choice Awards , Game Revolution , Giant Bomb , Good Game , Hardcore Gamer , IGN , IGN Australia , International Business Times , Kotaku , VG247 , and <unk> It was also named the Best PlayStation Game by GameSpot , GameTrailers , Hardcore Gamer , and IGN . Naughty Dog won Studio of the Year and Best Developer from The Daily Telegraph , Edge , the Golden Joystick Awards , Hardcore Gamer , and the 2013 Spike VGX . 
 Baker and Johnson received multiple nominations for their performances as Joel and Ellie , respectively ; Baker won awards from Hardcore Gamer and the 2013 Spike VGX , while Johnson won awards at the British Academy Video Games Awards , DICE Awards , VGX 2013 , and from The Daily Telegraph . The game 's story also received awards at the British Academy Video Games Awards , the DICE Awards , the Game Developers Choice Awards , the Golden Joystick Awards , and the Writers Guild of America Awards , and from GameTrailers , Giant Bomb , Hardcore Gamer , and IGN . The sound design and music received awards at the DICE Awards , the Inside Gaming Awards , and from IGN . The game 's graphical and artistic design also won awards from Destructoid , the DICE Awards , the Golden Joystick Awards , and IGN . 
 The Last of Us was awarded Outstanding Innovation in Gaming at the DICE Awards , and Best Third Person Shooter from GameTrailers . The game received Best New IP from Hardcore Gamer , Best Newcomer at the Golden Joystick Awards , and Best Debut from Giant Bomb . It received Best Overall Sound , Best PlayStation 3 Multiplayer , and Best Action @-@ Adventure Game on PlayStation 3 , and overall at IGN 's Best of 2013 Awards . It also won Best Action @-@ Adventure Game at the British Academy Video Games Awards , and The Escapist , as well as Best Action Game from Hardcore Gamer and Adventure Game of the Year at the DICE Awards . 
 = = Adaptations and possible sequel = = 
 A four @-@ issue comic book miniseries , titled The Last of Us : American Dreams , was published by Dark Horse Comics from April to July 2013 . Written by Druckmann and illustrated by Faith Erin Hicks , the comics serve as a prequel to the game , chronicling the journey of a younger Ellie and Riley . On March 6 , 2014 , Sony announced that Screen Gems will distribute a film adaptation of The Last of Us , written by Druckmann and produced by Sam Raimi . By January 2015 , Druckmann had written the script 's second draft , and performed a read @-@ through with some actors . Very little work occurred following this , as Druckmann stated in April 2016 that the film had entered development hell . On July 28 , 2014 , the cast of the game performed a live reading of selected scenes in Santa Monica , California , with live music by Santaolalla . The performance was hosted and directed by Druckmann , with graphics by Alex Hobbs . 
 In February 2014 , Druckmann said the possibility of a sequel was " about 50 / 50 " , and the team needed to find a story " really worth telling , and that 's not repeating itself " . In July 2014 , community strategist Arne Meyer said that not considering a sequel " would be a disservice " to the studio and the fans . In June 2015 , discussing his future with Naughty Dog on a Q & A panel , actor Nolan North mentioned : " I know they 're doing a Last of Us 2 " ; Druckmann later responded to these comments , stating that a small team at Naughty Dog had explored ideas and begun building prototypes relating to a sequel , but were interrupted when the team shifted development to Uncharted 4 : A Thief 's End , which was eventually released on May 10 , 2016 . 
 = Andorra national football team = 
 The Andorra national football team ( Catalan : <unk> de <unk> d 'Andorra , Spanish : Selección de <unk> de Andorra , French : <unk> d <unk> de football ) represents Andorra in association football and is controlled by the Andorran Football Federation , the governing body for football in Andorra . The team has enjoyed very little success due to the Principality 's tiny population , the fifth smallest of any UEFA country ( only Liechtenstein , San Marino , Gibraltar and the Faroe Islands are smaller ) . 
 Andorra 's first official game was a 6 – 1 defeat in a friendly match to Estonia in 1996 . Since the qualifying rounds for the UEFA Euro 2000 tournament , Andorra have competed in qualifying for every European Championship and World Cup but have had very little success . They have only ever won three matches , all at home . They have one win in competitive matches , a 1 – 0 win against Macedonia in the 2006 FIFA World Cup qualifying competition . 
 = = History = = 
 Though the Andorran Football Federation formed in 1994 , and the Andorra domestic league started in 1995 , the national team could not participate in major championships until it gained affiliation with governing bodies FIFA and UEFA in 1996 . The national team played its first match against Estonia in Andorra La Vella and lost 6 – 1 . 
 Andorra 's first match in a FIFA @-@ sanctioned competition was a 3 – 1 loss to Armenia on 5 September 1998 in a qualifier for UEFA Euro 2000 . Andorra lost all ten qualifiers for the tournament . The team particularly struggled in away matches ; each loss was by at least three goals . Andorra scored only three goals , two of which were penalties , and two of which were in the away matches . Andorra conceded 28 goals , and their biggest defeat of the qualifiers was a 6 – 1 away loss to Russia . 
 For their first World Cup qualifying campaign , Andorra were drawn in a group with Cyprus , Estonia , Ireland , the Netherlands and Portugal . They lost their opening match 1 – 0 loss to Estonia . In the next game , they lost 3 – 2 to Cyprus but scored their first World Cup qualifying goals . They were again defeated by Estonia , this time 2 – 1 . They lost all their matches and their only away goal was in a 3 – 1 loss against Ireland . Their worst defeat was 7 – 1 to Portugal on a neutral ground in <unk> , Spain . Andorra finished the campaign with no points and conceded 36 goals in ten matches . 
 In the team 's qualification campaign for Euro 2004 they again lost every game . They scored their only goal in a 2 – 1 away loss to Bulgaria . In this competition the scores were closer than before as they lost 3 – 0 to Bulgaria , Croatia and Belgium , 2 – 0 twice to Estonia , 2 – 0 to Croatia and 1 – 0 to Belgium . 
 By Andorran standards , qualification for the 2006 World Cup was successful . They won their first competitive game 1 – 0 at home against Macedonia . Andorra midfielder Marc <unk> , who played in the Spanish second division , received a long throw in off his chest and volleyed in a goal early in the second half . After the game , Macedonia coach Dragan <unk> resigned and called the game " a shameful outcome , a humiliation . " Andorra also drew two matches , 0 – 0 in Macedonia and 0 – 0 at home against Finland . This tournament has been the only one in which Andorra has scored points . In Euro 2008 qualifying , Andorra again lost every game . The closest game was against Russia , a 1 – 0 defeat on 21 November 2007 , which helped Russia qualify at the expense of England . Their biggest defeat was a 7 – 0 loss to Croatia in Andorra La Vella , which is their worst defeat in UEFA competitions and matched their loss to the Czech Republic as their largest losing deficit . Andorra scored only two goals and conceded 42 in a total of 12 games . 
 In 2010 World Cup qualifying they lost all ten matches . For the tournament , they scored three goals , in defeats to Belarus and Kazakhstan , and conceded 39 goals , including six in a defeat to England , the largest margin in the group . Qualifying for UEFA Euro 2012 ended in a similar way ; they lost all ten matches , scoring only one goal and conceding 25 ; their best results were two one @-@ goal losses to Slovakia and a 3 – 1 loss in Ireland . The 2014 World Cup qualifying was even more disastrous , Andorra losing all the matches , conceding 30 goals and not scoring . 
 At 2016 UEFA Euro qualifying , Andorra lost again all its ten games but scored four goals , its record in a qualifying group for a European Championship . 
 = = Andorra all @-@ time record against all nations = = 
 As of 1 June 2016 
 ° FIFA @-@ unofficial match on February 19 , 1998 between Andorra – Czech Republic ( 0 – 1 ) is not included . 
 = = Stadium = = 
 From 1996 until 2014 Andorra played their home matches at the Comunal d 'Andorra la Vella , in the capital city of Andorra la Vella . This stadium has a capacity of 1 @,@ 800 and also hosts the matches of club sides FC Andorra and the Andorran Premier League . On 9 September 2014 , the national team began playing at the new Estadi Nacional with a capacity of 3 @,@ 306 . 
 Andorra have occasionally played " home " matches outside their borders . For example , Andorra hosted France and England in the 2000 European Championship , 2008 European Championship and 2010 World Cup qualifiers in the Estadi <unk> Lluís Companys in Barcelona , which was the home of RCD Espanyol between 1997 and 2009 . 
 = = Kit suppliers = = 
 = = Reputation = = 
 Andorra 's dismal record gives them a lowly reputation in world football . The nation has only won one competitive fixture , a 1 – 0 World Cup qualifying win against Macedonia , and two exhibition games against Belarus ( 2 – 0 ) and Albania ( 2 – 0 ) . All matches were played at home . 
 With the fourth smallest population of any UEFA country , until the admission of Gibraltar , the talent pool is small . Also Andorra is one of the youngest UEFA member association along with <unk> , both founded in 1994 . Players are predominantly amateurs because the Andorra domestic league is only part @-@ time . Although , since Andorra began playing in 1996 their average FIFA ranking is 163 . 
 = = Players and managers = = 
 <unk> Lima is the only Andorran player to have scored more than three career goals for the team ; he has nine goals . Lima is also the second @-@ most capped player with 96 appearances . Óscar <unk> 's 105 appearances are the most for the Andorra national team . Koldo has the second @-@ most with 78 caps between 1998 and 2009 . 
 Manuel <unk> was the first coach of the team and managed their first three matches of European Championship qualifying . He departed in 1999 to make way for David Rodrigo , whose first competitive match was a 2 – 0 European Championship qualifying defeat at home to Iceland on 27 March of that year . Rodrigo had been in charge of the team until February 2010 , when it was announced that Koldo took over this role . 
 In January 2006 , the Andorran Football Association named Koldo , their goalkeeper from 1998 to 2009 , as their greatest ever player . 
 = = Manager history = = 
 Isidre Codina ( 1996 ) 
 Manuel <unk> ( 1997 – 1999 ) 
 David Rodrigo ( 1999 – 2009 ) 
 Koldo Álvarez de <unk> ( 2010 – ) 
 = = Player history = = 
 = = Recent results and fixtures = = 
 = = = 2015 = = = 
 = = = 2016 = = = 
 = = = 2017 = = = 
 = = World Cup record = = 
 = = European Championship record = = 
 = = Current squad = = 
 Andorra manager Koldo Álvarez named an 18 @-@ man squad for the Friendly Match against Estonia on June 1 , 2016.Caps and goals correct as of June 1 , 2016 , after the match against Estonia . 
 = = = Recent call @-@ ups = = = 
 The following players have been called up to the Andorra squad in the last 12 months . 
 RET : player retired from international <unk> : player <unk> due to injury 
 = = 2018 FIFA World Cup qualification = = 
 = = UEFA Euro 2016 qualifying = = 
 = = International goals = = 
 Andorra has scored very few goals in competitive internationals ( UEFA European Football Championship or FIFA World Cup matches ) ; the list below is comprehensive . 
 a <unk> 
 = UEFA European Football Championship qualification match , <unk> = 
 FIFA World Cup qualification <unk> The Andorra score is always listed <unk> The Andorra @-@ Cyprus match in 2000 is the only game Andorra has scored two goals in any competitive <unk> The Andorra @-@ Macedonia match in 2004 is the only competitive match Andorra has won . 
 = 1983 Atlantic hurricane season = 
 The 1983 Atlantic hurricane season was the least active Atlantic hurricane season in 53 years , during which only four tropical storms formed . The season officially began on June 1 , 1983 , and lasted until November 30 , 1983 . These dates conventionally delimit the period of each year when most storms form in the Atlantic basin . The season had very little activity , with only seven tropical depressions , four of which reached tropical storm strength or higher . This led to the lowest Accumulated Cyclone Energy count since 1950 , but not since 1900 . 
 The season began later than normal ; the first tropical depression formed on July 29 and the second on July 31 . Neither tropical depression strengthened and they dissipated soon thereafter . Hurricane Alicia formed as Tropical Depression Three on August 15 , quickly intensified into a hurricane on August 16 and made landfall in Texas on August 18 . Alicia caused over $ 3 billion in damage in Texas . Hurricane Barry formed on August 25 , crossed Florida and strengthened into a hurricane . Barry made landfall near Brownsville , Texas and dissipated over land on August 30 . 
 Hurricane Chantal , the third of three hurricanes in 1983 , formed on September 10 . It strengthened into a hurricane , but stayed out at sea , and became absorbed by a front on September 15 . Tropical Depression Six formed on September 19 and caused heavy rains in the Caribbean before degenerating into a wave on September 21 . Tropical Storm Dean was the final storm of the season , forming on September 26 . It originally tracked to the north , peaking at 55 mph ( 89 km / h ) winds ( 85 km / h ) , and made landfall in the Delmarva Peninsula on September 29 . It dissipated over the coast of Virginia on September 30 . 
 = = Seasonal forecasts and activity = = 
 Forecasts of hurricane activity are issued before each hurricane season by noted hurricane experts like Dr. William M. Gray , and his associates at Colorado State University . A normal season , as defined by NOAA , has six to fourteen named storms , with four to eight of those reaching hurricane strength , and one to three major hurricanes . The July 23 , 1983 forecast predicted that after the slow start to the season , that a total of eight storms would form , and five of the storms would reach hurricane status . The forecast did not specify how many of the hurricanes would reach major hurricane status . However , the predictions proved to be too high , with only four named storms forming by the end of the season and three of those reaching hurricane status . 
 The season , which began on June 1 and ended on November 30 , was very inactive because of strong upper @-@ level wind shear . The wind shear was unusually strong throughout the Caribbean and open Atlantic , and disrupted convection in areas of disturbed weather so they could not develop . Over sixty African systems had formed and made it westward , but when they reached the Lesser Antilles , they were dissolved easily . The only area where the shear was minimal — a region encompassing the Gulf of Mexico and the Atlantic north of the Bahamas and east of Florida — was where the four named storms developed . This makes the 1983 season the least active season since the 1930 Atlantic hurricane season which had only two storms . 1983 and the prior season became the first example of two consecutive years to have no storms form in the Caribbean Sea since 1871 , when reliable record began . 1983 also proved to be the first season since 1871 that a storm did not form south of 25 ° N latitude . 
 1983 was the first season for which the National Hurricane Center issued numeric landfall probabilities . Probabilities had been calculated for prior storms for use in the issuing of hurricane watches and warnings , but this was the first time the raw numeric probabilities were released to the public . The probabilities issued were accurate during Alicia , indicating that Galveston and surrounding portions of the upper Texas coast were the most likely area to be struck . 
 The season 's activity was reflected with a low cumulative accumulated cyclone energy ( ACE ) rating of 17 , which is classified as " below normal " . ACE is , broadly speaking , a measure of the power of the hurricane multiplied by the length of time it existed , so storms that last a long time , as well as particularly strong hurricanes , have high ACEs . ACE is only calculated for full advisories on tropical systems at or exceeding 34 knots ( 39 mph , 63 km / h ) or tropical storm strength . Subtropical cyclones are excluded from the total . 
 = = Storms = = 
 = = = Tropical Depression One = = = 
 Tropical Depression One formed from a tropical disturbance near the Lesser Antilles on July 29 . The National Hurricane Center indicated the possibility of the depression strengthening into a tropical storm in media reports but upper @-@ level wind shear inhibited any development . The depression dissipated the next day . 
 = = = Tropical Depression Two = = = 
 An area of disturbed weather in the central Atlantic managed to gain enough organization to be designated Tropical Depression Two on July 31 . The depression moved across the Atlantic without strengthening due to high upper @-@ level wind shear , and dissipated near the Lesser Antilles on August 3 . 
 = = = Hurricane Alicia = = = 
 The system that would become Hurricane Alicia originated from the western end of a frontal trough that stretched from New England to the Gulf of Mexico . Satellite pictures showed a meso @-@ scale low pressure area that had moved off the Alabama and Mississippi coasts near the trough and was possibly the precursor system to Alicia . Pressures in the Gulf of Mexico were high and stayed high during the early development stages . On August 15 , a ship recorded a minimal pressure of 1015 millibars ( 29 @.@ 99 inHg ) , when the system was upgraded into Tropical Storm Alicia . With high environmental pressures around it , Alicia remained a small system . 
 Steering currents above Alicia remained weak during the storm 's lifetime . However , a ridge was well formed to the north of the developing storms . With fluctuations in the pressures , Alicia began to drift to west on August 16 . This was short @-@ lived , as Alicia turned to the northwest towards Texas . During the period of August 16 to August 18 , an anticyclone had formed over Alicia and along with slow movement over warm waters , caused Alicia to intensify rapidly . The pressure in Alicia decreased one millibar an hour in the 40 hours before landfall . Alicia peaked at 115 mph ( 185 km / h ) in winds and 962 millibars ( 28 @.@ 39 inHg ) in pressure on August 18 . Alicia made landfall near Galveston , Texas on August 18 as a Category 3 hurricane . Alicia weakened quickly over land and accelerated over the Midwest , before dissipating over Nebraska on August 21 . 
 As Alicia moved northward , the remnants caused moderate to heavy rainfall in several states . Houston suffered heavy damage , including thousands of shattered glass panes from downtown skyscrapers . In the end , Alicia killed 22 people and caused $ 2 billion ( 1983 US $ ) in damage ( $ 4 @.@ 1 billion , 2007 USD ) . 
 = = = Hurricane Barry = = = 
 Hurricane Barry originated from a tropical disturbance that left the Northwestern African coast on August 13 . Most of the season , the northwestern tropical Atlantic Ocean had upper @-@ level wind shear , which had inhibited development of systems . Due to these conditions , the disturbance was unable to strengthen until August 22 as it was approaching the Bahamas . A weak trough moved the disturbance into an area of low wind shear , and the disturbance intensified into Tropical Depression Four on the evening of August 23 . The depression was just to the northeast of the northern Bahamian Islands where it strengthened into Tropical Storm Barry on the morning of August 24 . 
 Tropical Storm Barry turned to the west and with returning wind shear , weakened into a tropical depression . The depression made landfall near Melbourne , Florida on the morning of August 25 . After Tropical Depression Barry emerged from central Florida , it was still under pressure from high @-@ level winds . The depression entered the central Gulf of Mexico and returned to tropical storm strength . Barry rapidly intensified , becoming a hurricane on August 28 , making landfall near Brownsville , Texas that afternoon . Before landfall , Barry peaked with 80 mph ( 130 km / h ) winds and a pressure of 986 millibars ( 29 @.@ 11 inHg ) . The remnants dissipated over the northern Mexican mountains on August 29 . 
 = = = Hurricane Chantal = = = 
 The area of disturbed weather that would soon become Chantal began in a large envelope of low pressure on the morning of September 10 . The disturbed weather , nested off the coast of Bermuda , was one of the remnants of an old frontal trough that had extended from Hispaniola to the central north Atlantic Ocean . This particular area of disturbed weather become part of the northeast portion of a low @-@ pressure system . On September 10 , a reconnaissance aircraft found sustained winds of 30 mph ( 50 km / h ) and a 1010 millibar ( 29 @.@ 83 inHg ) pressure reading . This reading indicated the system developed into the fifth tropical depression of the 1983 season . 
 The depression moved to within 100 miles ( 160 kilometers ) of Bermuda and slowly intensified . Late that afternoon , Tropical Depression Five had intensified into a 40 mph ( 60 km / h ) storm and was named Chantal . Chantal intensified rapidly , intensifying to hurricane status late on September 11 . Chantal turned to the east and gained a weak outflow with cirrus clouds . The structure changed little over the next 24 hours , until becoming disorganized on the night of the 12th . Chantal was downgraded to a tropical storm around the same time . 
 Overnight , all convection in Chantal dissipated , and its forward speed decreased as it headed to the north . A weak wave caused Chantal to speed up and the system was absorbed in the frontal system by the night of September 14 . Effects on Bermuda were minimal , with the island getting winds of up to 20 mph ( 25 km / h ) and few thundershowers . Chantal generated swells of 30 – 40 ft ( 9 – 12 m ) offshore . 
 = = = Tropical Depression Six = = = 
 Tropical Depression Six formed on September 19 . The depression caused heavy rainfall in the Lesser Antilles before degenerating into a tropical wave on September 21 near the Dominican Republic . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Dean = = = 
 Tropical Storm Dean originated from inside a frontal cloud band , which had moved off the Eastern Coast of the United States on September 22 . During the next few days , the band became stationary from The Bahamas to beyond Bermuda . During this period , a 1035 millibar ( 30 @.@ 56 inHg ) high pressure cell had become settled over the northeastern United States . This resulted in a strong pressure gradient and winds near gale force along the eastern coast . 
 A low @-@ level circulation formed from the frontal cloud band on September 26 about 460 miles ( 740 km ) east of central Florida . Dean was first identified on the afternoon of September 26 as a subtropical storm . An Air Force reconnaissance flight was sent to Dean on September 27 and only reported winds of 35 mph ( 55 km / h ) at 23 miles ( 37 kilometres ) from the center . A pressure of 999 millibars ( 29 @.@ 50 inHg ) indicated that Dean was strengthening as it headed northward . Additionally , satellite pictures showed that the subtropical cyclone was emerging from the cloud . This data also showed that the storm was gaining tropical characteristics and was given the name Dean on the afternoon of September 27 . 
 Dean 's winds peaked at 55 mph ( 80 km / h ) on September 28 as it headed northward . Dean 's circulation turned to the northwest on September 29 then made landfall in the Delmarva Peninsula and dissipated over land on September 30 . Gale warnings were from North Carolina to Rhode Island in association with Dean . Dean produced rainfall spreading from the North Carolina / Virginia border all the way to New England . Virginia reported rains of 1 inch ( 25 @.@ 4 mm ) with 3 inches ( 76 @.@ 2 mm ) at the border . Rains peaked at 4 @.@ 62 inches ( 117 mm ) at <unk> Ranger Station in Connecticut . Damage was limited to minor beach erosion and flooding along the portion of Mid @-@ Atlantic coast states . 
 = = Seasonal effects = = 
 = = Storm names = = 
 The following names were used for named storms that formed in the North Atlantic in 1983 . The names not retired from this list were used again in the 1989 season . It was the first time these names had been used since the post @-@ 1978 change in the National Hurricane Center 's naming policy . 
 = = = Retirement = = = 
 The World Meteorological Organization retired one name in the spring of 1984 : Alicia . It was replaced in the 1989 season by Allison . 
 = Garrett 's Miss Pawhuska = 
 Garrett 's Miss Pawhuska ( 1946 – 1975 ) was a Quarter Horse broodmare who produced eight foals , three of which would become world champion race horses . When she was a yearling , she was sold by her owner , although he had not really planned on selling her . He felt he had to because one of his employees had told a customer the filly was for sale . 
 Garrett 's Miss Pawhuska 's official race record lists her with six wins in six starts , but it is incomplete and is missing some earnings as well as some races . After racing for two years , she retired to become a broodmare and died in 1975 at age 29 . Her son Vandy 's Flash was the first gelding to be named a World Champion Quarter Running Horse . She was inducted into the American Quarter Horse Association Hall of Fame . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Garrett 's Miss Pawhuska was a 1946 sorrel mare sired by Leo and out of Jenny Dee , a daughter of Jimmie Allred . Her dam ( mother ) was out of a mare named Big Bay , who was of unknown breeding . Jimmie Allred was sired by Dan whose father was Old Joe Bailey . Jimmie Allred 's dam was Alice McGill who was sired by Little Hickory Bill , a son of Hickory Bill who was sired by Peter McCue Garrett 's Miss Pawhuska was bred by Bill Rowe of Carlsbad , New Mexico , but by the time she was a yearling she was owned by Earl Jackson , of Pawhuska , Oklahoma . It isn 't clear if Jackson bought Garrett 's Miss Pawhuska as a foal or if he bought Garrett 's Miss Pawhuska 's dam while she was still carrying Garrett 's Miss Pawhuska . 
 When Garrett 's Miss Pawhuska was a yearling , Dee Garrett visited Jackson 's ranch and one of Jackson 's ranch hands told him the filly was for sale for $ 200 ( approximately $ 2 @,@ 100 in current dollars ) . Although Jackson had not planned to sell the filly , he felt obligated to complete the sale because his employee had put a price on her . 
 = = Race career = = 
 Although Garrett 's widow later described Garrett 's Miss Pawhuska as " scrawny — she looked like a jackrabbit then " , Garrett trained her for the track and she raced as a two @-@ year @-@ old and three @-@ year @-@ old . Her first race was the Oklahoma Futurity in 1948 , where she won her qualifying heat and won the finals by a nose . The finals ' start was delayed , but even after the delay , Garrett 's Miss Pawhuska won , beating Savannah G , <unk> , and Red River Pride . Her time for the 220 yards ( 200 m ) race was 12 @.@ 7 seconds . 
 Although Garrett 's Miss Pawhuska 's official record with the American Quarter Horse Association ( or AQHA ) is six starts and six wins , the early records are not all entered into the AQHA 's computers and the official charts published in the 1940s show she lost a match race to Gin High . However , the published race chart for the race noted that she was leading the race until she ran over a stake 50 yards ( 46 m ) before the end of the race , which caused her to lose the race . She earned a Race ROM and $ 250 @.@ 00 ( approximately $ 2 @,@ 500 in current dollars ) in her official records . The official earnings only reflect one race , a match race in 1949 , but they don 't list the other purses she earned , including the $ 1 @,@ 000 ( approximately $ 9 @,@ 800 in current dollars ) purse for the 1948 Oklahoma Futurity . She also is claimed to have won a match race worth $ 2 @,@ 500 ( approximately $ 24 @,@ 900 in current dollars ) , although this was an unofficial race . 
 Garrett 's Miss Pawhuska 's jockey at the time , C. W. Cascio , said of her when he raced her at Del Rio , Texas , " I thought she was going to have to go all out just to keep up with those big two @-@ year @-@ olds — what with her little enough to run under their bellies . " Her last race was at Enid , Oklahoma , and it was a match race against Bob K K , which she won . 
 = = Breeding career = = 
 Garrett 's Miss Pawhuska 's owner , Dee Garrett , bred her to his champion stallion Vandy , and produced three world champions : Vandy 's Flash , <unk> Dee , and Vannevar . Vansarita Too set a new track record and Vandy 's Betty and Miss Vanity earned AAA speed ratings . Her first foal was Vandy 's Betty , who went on to earn an AAA rating on the race track and became the dam of Mr. Van Deck . Her next foal was <unk> Dee , who racked up 94 starts with 31 wins , 20 seconds and 16 thirds in six years of racing . Her total earnings were $ 83 @,@ 325 ( approximately $ 676 @,@ 400 in current dollars ) . Vannevar was the next foal , and was AQHA Champion Racing <unk> in 1956 and 1957 . Garrett 's Miss Pawhuska 's 1954 foal was Vandy 's Flash , who was the first gelding named World Champion Quarter Running Horse , in 1960 . Garrett 's Miss Pawhuska 's 1955 foal was Vansarita , who was never raced . A number of miscarriages followed , but in 1958 Garrett 's Miss Pawhuska produced Miss Vanity , another AAA @-@ rated racehorse . Garrett 's Miss Pawhuska slipped , or lost , her next two foals , but produced Vansarita Too in 1961 , who also earned an AAA on the race track . Garrett 's Miss Pawhuska 's last foal by Vandy was Vandy 's Flash , a stallion , who was never raced but sired 107 foals . Garrett 's Miss Pawhuska 's last foal was not by Vandy , but was by a son of Three Bars named The Ole Man , but the gelding was never raced . 
 = = Death and legacy = = 
 Garrett 's Miss Pawhuska died at the age of 29 in 1975 . She was buried on the Garretts ' ranch outside Pawhuska . Garrett 's grandson said of her that " She was very gentle , the kind of mare you could do anything with . " He also said of her " I guess you could say she was a family pet . I used to rider her out to the pastures to round up other mares , things like that . " She was on the leading dams of Race ROM earners from 1959 through 1969 . 
 Garrett 's Miss Pawhuska was inducted into the AQHA 's AQHA Hall of <unk> in 2006 . Garrett 's Miss Pawhuska also has a stakes race named in her honor at Remington Park Track in Oklahoma City . 
 = = Pedigree = = 
 = Walter Skinner = 
 FBI Assistant Director Walter Sergei Skinner is a fictional character in the Fox science fiction @-@ supernatural television shows The X @-@ Files and The Lone Gunmen . Skinner supervised the X @-@ Files office , which is concerned with cases with particularly mysterious or possibly supernatural circumstances that were left unsolved and shelved by the FBI . Fox Mulder , the FBI agent in charge of the X @-@ Files , considers the X @-@ Files the truth behind the supposed conspiracy . Portrayed by American actor Mitch Pileggi , Skinner was a main character in the ninth and tenth seasons of the show and a recurring character throughout the first eight seasons . 
 Skinner made his first appearance in the first season 1994 episode " Tooms " . At the start of the series , Skinner was unfriendly towards Mulder because of his belief in the extraterrestrial , while throughout the series run Skinner has moved on to respect and agree with Mulder 's idea , which is finally proven in " Requiem " , when he saw an Alien spacecraft . Walter Skinner has received critical acclaim and has become a fan favorite . Pileggi received the role of Walter Skinner after " two or three " auditions for the role . Beginning with only a small cameo , his character frequently made more appearances during the second season . Pileggi was honored with numerous awards and award nominations for his portrayal of Skinner . 
 = = Character arc = = 
 Skinner is a former Marine and a Vietnam War veteran . In the war he once killed a boy at a very short distance , an experience which has scarred him for life . He is married to Sharon Skinner . He has been treated at a sleep disorder clinic , suffering from recurring dreams of an old woman , which may either be a hallucination arising from drug use during Vietnam or a succubus . Skinner 's hobbies include jogging and boxing , the latter of which has been shown in his ability to <unk> Fox Mulder and X and to defend himself reasonably well when he was attacked by Alex Krycek and his men . 
 Initially , Skinner acts solely as a supervisor to Agent Mulder and Dana Scully 's investigations of the paranormal . In the early episodes , it is unclear whether he is entirely independent of his actions or controlled by men such as the " Cigarette Smoking Man " . Eventually , Skinner begins trusting Mulder and Scully and becomes their ally , saving both of their lives on multiple occasions . He stands up to the conspirators that tried to control him , for which he frequently pays throughout the series . 
 After Skinner has long broken free of the " Cigarette Smoking Man " , he is again forced to take orders , this time from Alex Krycek . He is covertly infected with nanotechnology , which gives Krycek the leverage to control him . Two years later , Skinner is finally able to rid himself of Krycek , when during an attempt by Krycek on Mulder 's life , Skinner fatally shoots Krycek . At Mulder 's murder trial , Skinner is asked to act as Mulder 's lawyer , having become a supporter of Mulder 's cause . Later , Skinner and Deputy Director Alvin Kersh confront the " Toothpick Man " in Kersh 's office , after Agents John Doggett and Monica Reyes discover that the X @-@ Files office had been emptied out . This results in another , apparently permanent , closing of the X @-@ Files division . Six years later , with the X @-@ Files still closed down , Skinner assists Scully in finding Mulder after he goes missing while consulting on the FBI 's investigation into the disappearance of a missing agent . Mulder and Skinner are shown to still be on friendly terms , despite Mulder 's animosity towards the FBI for the events following the trial . 
 = = Conceptual history = = 
 = = = Creation and development = = = 
 The role of Walter Skinner was played by actor Mitch Pileggi , who had unsuccessfully auditioned for two or three other characters on The X @-@ Files before getting the part . At first , the fact that he was asked back to audition for the recurring role slightly puzzled him , until he discovered the reason he had not previously been cast in those roles — Chris Carter had been unable to envision Pileggi as any of those characters , due to the fact that the actor had been shaving his head . When the actor had attended the audition for Walter Skinner , he had been in a grumpy mood and had allowed his small amount of hair to grow back . Pileggi 's attitude fit well with Walter Skinner 's character , causing Carter to assume that the actor was only pretending to be grumpy . After successfully auditioning for the role , Pileggi thought he had been lucky that he had not been cast in one of the earlier roles , as he believed he would have appeared in only a single episode and would have missed the opportunity to play the recurring role of Walter Skinner . 
 Pileggi himself thought he got the role because of Gillian Anderson 's ( who portrayed Dana Scully ) pregnancy during the second season , saying the producers felt they needed to take the " show in a different direction " while she was pregnant . So Pileggi felt at the start that he " compensated " for the situation of the show , and after a while the character started to grow on the producers and fellow cast , as Pileggi puts it , " the character just started kind of clicking and working " . At the end of the second season , the producers wanted Pileggi to return in future episodes , so he signed a six @-@ year contract with them . 
 In an interview with X @-@ Files fan site host Robin <unk> , Pileggi commented once that he felt David Duchovny 's ( portrayed Fox Mulder ) semi @-@ departure in season eight and the introduction of Robert Patrick 's John Doggett , and the fact that he started to believe in Aliens at the end of season seven , Skinner was given the " opportunity to grow " , further stating " new avenues " had been opened . While Pileggi stated that he missed Duchovny 's presence in The X @-@ Files , he continued saying that he didn 't have the opportunity to work with him during the seventh season . He even went as far as saying that there was no " interaction between " the two characters . He was positive to the new storyline conceived during Duchovny 's departure , saying it gave the show a " shot in the arm , " which reinvented the show . 
 = = = I Want to Believe = = = 
 As writers Carter and Frank Spotnitz aimed to avoid complicating the storyline of The X @-@ Files : I Want to Believe with superfluous appearances of characters from the television series , Skinner is the only returning character in the movie . He was included in the film 's plot only when a fitting opportunity to involve him arose , and Spotnitz and Carter were very happy to write Skinner into the story . The scenes of The X @-@ Files : I Want to Believe that include Skinner were filmed very late in the movie 's filming schedule , and the particular scene that acts as the character 's introduction in the movie was filmed , for reasons of time , in two different locations . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The character received critical acclaim from fans and critics alike and since became a fan 's favourite of the show . Mitch Pileggi received acclaim for his portrayal of the character . 
 While not winning or getting nominated for any of his work alone in The X @-@ Files , Mitch Pileggi and several other cast members were nominated in the category " Outstanding Performance by an Ensemble in a Drama Series " by the Screen Actors Guild Awards in 1997 , 1998 and 1999 but did not win . Following the broadcast of " One Breath " , in which Skinner recalls serving as a US Marine during the Vietnam War , Pileggi received several fan letters from Vietnam veterans . Ben @-@ Rawson Jones named the character of Skinner a " Spy cult icon " in 2008 , describing him as the " corporate middle man " . 
 George Avalos and Michael Liedtke from the Contra Costa Times both reacted positively to the death of Alex Krycek at the hands of Skinner , saying it was the best scene of the eighth season finale , " Existence " . Another review from the same site and writers said the season eight episode , " Via Negativa " , said the story " clicked " largely thanks to Skinner along with Alvin Kersh , saying that Skinner " delivered another <unk> " . In a review of The X @-@ Files feature film , Soren Andersen from The News Tribune said the character was " underused " both in the series and film . Entertainment Weekly reviewer Bruce Fretts said Skinner brought " a real element of danger to the show . " 
 = Brownie Mary = 
 Mary Jane Rathbun ( December 22 , 1922 – April 10 , 1999 ) , popularly known as Brownie Mary , was an American medical cannabis activist . As a hospital volunteer at San Francisco General Hospital , she became known for illegally baking and distributing cannabis brownies to AIDS patients . Along with activist Dennis Peron , Rathbun lobbied for the legalization of cannabis for medical use , and she helped pass San Francisco Proposition P ( 1991 ) and California Proposition 215 ( 1996 ) to achieve those goals . She also contributed to the establishment of the San Francisco Cannabis Buyers Club , the first medical cannabis dispensary in the United States . 
 Rathbun was arrested on three occasions , with each arrest bringing increased local , national , and international media attention to the medical cannabis movement . Her grandmotherly appearance generated public sympathy for her cause and undermined attempts by the district attorney 's office to prosecute her for possession . The City of San Francisco eventually gave Rathbun permission to distribute cannabis brownies to people with AIDS . Her arrests generated interest in the medical community and motivated researchers to propose one of the first clinical trials to study the effects of cannabinoids in HIV @-@ infected adults . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Brownie Mary was born Mary Jane Rathbun in Chicago , Illinois , on December 22 , 1922 . Her mother , a conservative Irish Catholic , named her " Mary Jane " . She was raised in Minneapolis , Minnesota , where she attended Catholic school . At the age of 13 , she was involved in an altercation with a nun who tried to cane her , but Rathbun fought back . As a teenager , she moved out of her home and found a job as a waitress ; she worked as a waitress for most of her adult life . Social activism appealed to her from a young age ; she traveled from Chicago to Wisconsin to campaign for the right of miners to form unions . In the late 1940s , she worked as an activist promoting abortion rights for women in Minneapolis . During World War II , she moved to San Francisco , California , where she met a man at a United Service Organization ( USO ) dance . They married , but soon divorced . The marriage produced a daughter , Peggy , who was born in 1955 . She later moved to Reno , Nevada , but after Peggy was killed by a drunk driver in a car accident in the early 1970s , Rathbun returned to San Francisco . 
 = = Activism = = 
 = = = 1974 – 1982 ; Peron , two arrests = = = 
 Rathbun first met fellow activist Dennis Peron in 1974 in the Castro district at Cafe Flore , where they shared a cannabis cigarette . While working as a waitress at the International House of Pancakes , she earned extra money selling cannabis @-@ laced brownies ; she became known in the Castro for selling " magical brownies " out of a basket for several dollars each . Rathbun baked and sold cannabis brownies for profit out of her house . Peron also sold Rathbun 's brownies at his Big Top pot supermarket on Castro Street . He was shot in the leg during a police raid on his business in 1977 . 
 In the early 1980s , Rathbun was baking about 50 dozen cannabis brownies per day . She advertised her " original recipe brownies " on San Francisco bulletin boards , calling them " magically delicious " . An undercover police officer discovered what she was doing , and on the night of January 14 , 1981 , police raided Rathbun 's home and found more than 18 pounds ( 8 @.@ 2 kg ) of cannabis , 54 dozen cannabis brownies , and an assortment of other drugs . When Rathbun opened the door , she reportedly told the police , " I thought you guys were coming . " She was 57 years old when she was first arrested . It was at this time that the media began calling her " Brownie Mary " . She pleaded guilty to nine counts of possession and received three years probation . The judge also sentenced her to 500 hours of community service . Rathbun began working with the Shanti Project , a support group for people with HIV / AIDS . According to Peron : 
 Those first 500 hours she worked at a variety of places , from the gay thrift store to the Shanti project , doing her community service in record time — 60 days . Although no longer obligated to do community service , she continued her work for St. Martin de Pores soup kitchen until 1982 , when she joined the Shanti project , which was responding to the demands of the emerging AIDS crises . Mary had lost her only daughter in an auto accident ... and now she adopted every kid in San Francisco as her own . 
 Rathbun 's brownie customers were mostly gay men . When they first began coming down with AIDS in the early 1980s , she noticed that cannabis helped them with the wasting syndrome ; she also found this to be true of cancer patients . People donated cannabis to Rathbun and she began baking brownies in the hundreds and distributing them to sick people free of charge . Rathbun 's monthly $ 650 Social Security check helped her to purchase baking supplies . 
 On December 7 , 1982 , Rathbun was walking down Market Street carrying a bag of brownies when she by chance met one of the officers who had originally arrested her in 1981 . Rathbun was on her way to deliver cannabis brownies for a friend who had cancer and was suffering from the side effects of chemotherapy . The officer inquired as to the contents of her bag and found her in possession of four dozen cannabis brownies . She was taken to the city jail and held on multiple counts of possession and violation of her probation . The district attorney eventually dropped the charges . 
 = = = 1984 – 1991 ; volunteerism , Proposition P = = = 
 Beginning in 1984 , Rathbun volunteered weekly in the AIDS ward ( Ward 86 ) at San Francisco General Hospital ( SFGH ) . According to Donald Abrams , " she used to wheel our patients to radiology [ and ] take their specimens to the lab " . Ward 86 honored her with a " Volunteer of The Year " award in 1986 . Author Carol <unk> profiled Rathbun 's volunteer work at SFGH in her book , As Real As It Gets : The Life of a Hospital at the Center of the AIDS Epidemic ( 1992 ) . 
 In New York in the early 1990s , Peron spoke at a meeting of the AIDS Coalition to Unleash Power ( ACT UP ) about the possible use of cannabis for the relief of AIDS symptoms . Multiple studies had demonstrated that cannabis could help with nausea and the loss of appetite suffered by patients undergoing therapy for diseases like cancer and AIDS . However , cannabis had been illegal in the United States since 1937 . Classified under Schedule I of the Controlled Substances Act in 1970 as a drug that " has no currently accepted medical use in treatment in the United States " , medicinal users of cannabis were subject to arrest . 
 In spite of a skeptical reception at his initial meeting with ACT UP , Peron persisted . He told Rathbun about ACT UP , and she later spoke to the group about her first @-@ hand experience distributing cannabis @-@ laced brownies to people with AIDS . Reporter Peter Gorman noted that this time " the reception was warmer , but still skeptical " . 
 Rathbun helped work on Proposition P , which made it the policy of the City of San Francisco to recommend that the State of California and the California Medical Association make cannabis available for medicinal purposes and to protect physicians from penalties for prescribing medicinal cannabis . Proposition P passed with the support of 79 percent of San Francisco voters on November 5 , 1991 . 
 = = = 1992 – 1997 ; third arrest , Proposition 215 = = = 
 Rathbun was arrested for a third time in Cazadero , California , on July 19 , 1992 , while pouring cannabis into brownie batter at the home of a grower . She was charged with possession of 2 @.@ 5 pounds ( 1 @.@ 1 kg ) of cannabis and released on bail . The Sonoma County district attorney 's office attempted to prosecute her in People v. Rathbun , bringing her case international media coverage . She pleaded not guilty to two counts of felony marijuana possession . Rathbun was acquitted of the charges . Attorney Norman Elliott Kent notes that Rathbun 's legal defense relied on medical necessity , the same defense used by Robert Randall in United States v. Randall ( 1976 ) . According to Kent , Rathbun " was able to testify that her deliveries were made to assist others in need , not to advance individual greed , that the nobility of her actions outweighed the <unk> of her offense according to the law . " 
 In August 1992 , Rathbun testified about medical cannabis in a hearing held by the San Francisco Board of Supervisors . The Board passed a resolution making the arrest or prosecution of people in possession of or growing medical cannabis the " lowest priority " . The Board recognized Rathbun 's volunteer work at the hospital by declaring August 25 " Brownie Mary Day " . 
 In September 1992 , Rathbun joined ACT UP / DC at a protest in Washington , D.C. , against the medical cannabis policies of the George H. W. Bush administration . The group delivered a letter to James O. Mason , head of the United States Public Health Service , requesting that people with AIDS receive immediate access to cannabis . After fourteen years of allowing a small group of individuals to use cannabis for medicinal purposes , Mason had terminated the federal government 's Compassionate <unk> New Drug program ( Compassionate IND ) in March 1992 . The Carter administration first established the Compassionate IND program in 1976 when Robert C. Randall successfully argued a medical necessity defense in United States v. Randall . 
 In addition to cancelling Compassionate IND , Mason made controversial comments about the program , arguing , among other things , that people with AIDS who used cannabis " might be less likely to practice safe ... sexual behavior . " ACT UP / DC asked Mason to resign his post if he failed to meet their demands to restore access to cannabis . Brownies were served at the protest in honor of Rathbun , who had been arrested the month before and was now facing felony possession charges for distributing cannabis brownies to AIDS patients . Outside the Department of Health and Human Services , Rathbun invited Mason to " follow me around for two days as I visit my kids in the wards , and then see where he stands on this " . 
 In 1992 , Rathbun helped Peron open the San Francisco Cannabis Buyers Club , the first medical cannabis dispensary in the United States . In 1996 , she and Peron campaigned on behalf of California Proposition 215 , a statewide voter initiative that would allow patients to possess and cultivate cannabis for personal medical use with the recommendation of a physician . The initiative passed with more than 55 percent of the vote and became state law ; other states have since passed similar legislation . 
 In 1997 , she was honored as the Grand Marshal of the San Francisco Gay Pride Parade , along with Dennis Peron . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Rathbun often appeared in public wearing polyester <unk> , and she was said to have a " sailor 's mouth . " Jane Meredith Adams of The Dallas Morning News observed that " four @-@ letter words are an essential part of the vocabulary of Brownie Mary . " Philosophically , she considered herself an anarchist and an atheist . 
 = = Illness and death = = 
 Rathbun suffered from chronic obstructive pulmonary disease and osteoarthritis . She survived colon cancer and walked with artificial knees . Rathbun often self @-@ medicated by consuming half a cannabis brownie in the morning and another half in the afternoon to ease the pain of osteoarthritis in her knees . She claimed cannabis brownies allowed her to walk and helped her with her gout . By the spring of 1996 , Rathbun was in extreme pain and was no longer able to bake . She began losing weight and told Peron that she considered traveling to Michigan for physician @-@ assisted suicide at the hands of Jack Kevorkian . After suffering a fall in August 1998 , Rathbun was admitted to Mount Zion Hospital for surgery on her neck and spine . She recovered from the operation at Davies Medical Center , but received few visitors . Later , she was confined to a bed at Laguna Honda Hospital , a nursing home for the poor . Rathbun died of a heart attack at age 77 on April 10 , 1999 . On April 17 , 300 people , including her friend , district attorney Terence <unk> , attended a candlelight vigil held in her honor in the Castro . <unk> told a crowd of several hundred people gathered at her memorial that she was a hero who will " one day be remembered as the Florence Nightingale of the medical marijuana movement . " 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Associated Press , United Press International , Reuters , and CNN distributed stories about Rathbun 's arrests around the world and brought her campaign for access to medical cannabis to a wide audience . Her grandmotherly visage became the public face of the American medical cannabis movement in the early 1990s , winning support and sympathy for the movement . Support for Proposition P and California Proposition 215 gained momentum when her arrests were publicized . Rathbun and her court case in 1992 became , according to Jane Meredith Adams of The Dallas Morning News , " a cause célèbre for those fighting to legalize marijuana for medical use ... a heroine to people with AIDS and cancer " and others . English news magazine The Economist attributed Rathbun 's efforts at direct action on the issue to the change in electoral support for medical cannabis in the United States : " In 1996 California eased its law on the use of marijuana . The change allows a doctor in the state to prescribe the drug if he believes it will lessen a patient 's pain . The relaxation in the public mood towards the use of marijuana was ascribed chiefly to Mary Jane Rathbun . " 
 Rathbun 's 1992 arrest caught the attention of her friend Donald Abrams , clinical professor at the University of California , San Francisco , and a physician at San Francisco General Hospital ( SFGH ) . He was in Amsterdam attending an AIDS conference when he learned of Rathbun 's arrest by way of CNN . Rick Doblin of the Multidisciplinary Association for Psychedelic Studies read about Rathbun 's arrest in the newspaper . He sent a letter to the AIDS program at SFGH proposing that " Brownie Mary 's institution " should consider conducting clinical trials of cannabis on the wasting syndrome in AIDS patients . Inspired by Rathbun 's arrest , Abrams and Doblin collaborated to develop a protocol to test the effects of cannabis on appetite and body weight . Five years later , after two of their proposed studies were rejected by the National Institute on Drug Abuse ( NIDA ) , their third research protocol , " Short @-@ Term Effects of <unk> in Patients with HIV @-@ 1 Infection " , was finally approved in 1997 . The study was funded with $ 978 @,@ 000 from the National Institutes of Health with cannabis supplied by NIDA . 
 = = Publications = = 
 Burch , Claire . ( 2007 ) . California Chronicles of Medical Marijuana . Regent Press . DVD . 
 Rathbun , Mary ; Dennis Peron ( 1996 ) . Brownie Mary 's Marijuana Cookbook and Dennis Peron 's Recipe for Social Change . Trail of Smoke Publishing . ISBN 0 @-@ <unk> @-@ 0 @-@ 0 . 
 Rathbun , Mary . ( April 17 , 1993 ) . 50th Anniversary of LSD : Marijuana and Medical Uses ; Sacred and Healing Plants and Psychedelic Drugs in the Treatment of Substance Abuse . San Francisco Unitarian Center . ( Audio / Video ) . 
 = Ombla = 
 The Ombla is a short river in Croatia , northeast of Dubrovnik . Its course is approximately 30 metres ( 98 feet ) long , and it empties into the Rijeka Dubrovačka embayment of the Adriatic Sea near Komolac in Dubrovnik @-@ Neretva County . Rijeka Dubrovačka is actually a ria , a flooded river valley formed through changes in sea surface elevation on a geologic time scale . The river rises as a karst spring fed by groundwater replenished by Trebišnjica , which is an <unk> stream flowing in Popovo Polje , in the immediate hinterland of the Ombla . The elevation difference between the river 's source and its mouth is just over 2 metres ( 6 feet 7 inches ) . The average discharge of the river is 24 @.@ 1 cubic metres ( 850 cubic feet ) per second . The drainage basin of the Ombla encompasses 600 square kilometres ( 230 square miles ) and , besides the short surface course , includes only groundwater flow . 
 The Ombla is used as a source of drinking water for Dubrovnik 's water supply network , and construction of a hydroelectric power plant has been planned for the past two decades . As of 2012 , the plans entail construction of a subsurface reservoir and a 68 megawatt power plant . The plan sparked controversy amid doubts raised with respect to environmental protection and biodiversity management , technical and financial feasibility , and procedural problems related to the project . A particular concern expressed was that the underground reservoir might trigger earthquakes . 
 = = Source and course = = 
 The course of the Ombla River is located in the Dubrovnik @-@ Neretva County , northeast of the city of Dubrovnik in the southernmost part of the mainland of Croatia . The area surrounding the river , known as Rijeka Dubrovačka ( lit . Dubrovnik 's River ) , encompasses several villages clustered near the Ombla that are home to 12 @,@ 000 people . The name is also applied to an estuary of the Ombla — a ria enclosed by steep slopes of 600 @-@ metre ( 2 @,@ 000 ft ) high hills , forming a 5 @-@ kilometre ( 3 @.@ 1 @-@ mile ) long , 200 @-@ to @-@ 400 @-@ metre ( 660 to 1 @,@ 310 ft ) wide and 26 @-@ metre ( 85 @-@ foot ) deep embayment of the Adriatic Sea . The Ombla rises at the foot of the 422 @-@ metre ( 1 @,@ 385 ft ) Golubov Kamen massif , a landform that straddles the border between Croatia and Bosnia @-@ Herzegovina . 
 The river rises in a 80 @-@ by @-@ 40 @-@ metre ( 260 by 130 ft ) cave whose roof has an 8 @-@ metre ( 26 ft ) clearance above the surface of the water . The primary source is located at an elevation of 15 metres ( 49 feet ) below sea level , and the secondary sources are found at 2 @.@ 5 metres ( 8 feet 2 inches ) above sea level ( a.s.l. ) . The spring is the largest karst spring in Croatia , and one of the largest ones in the Dinarides . The surface of the water in the cave is 2 @.@ 38 metres ( 7 feet 10 inches ) a.s.l. The watercourse flows for approximately 30 metres ( 98 feet ) before reaching a weir across which the Ombla discharges into the Adriatic Sea , leading to claims that the Ombla is the shortest river in the world . 
 = = Drainage basin = = 
 The drainage basin of the Ombla is estimated to cover an area of at least 600 square kilometres ( 230 square miles ) , and up to 900 square kilometres ( 350 square miles ) between the Adriatic Sea coast in the area of Dubrovnik and Popovo Polje . Other than the short surface course of the river , the drainage basin includes groundwater only . The exact boundaries of the drainage basin vary depending on prevailing hydrological conditions determining groundwater seepage and flow . The area comprises 176 settlements and 50 @,@ 000 inhabitants . 
 The area exhibits karst morphology , with bedrock largely consisting of limestones and comparatively small areas of dolomites and Quaternary sediments . Eocene flysch forms the southwest boundary of the catchment area , towards which the catchment basin drains and where the Ombla rises . The rocks were formed as a thick series of carbonate sediments were deposited between the Norian and Late Cretaceous as the Adriatic Carbonate Platform , up to 8 @,@ 000 metres ( 26 @,@ 000 ft ) deep . In the Eocene and early Oligocene , the Adriatic Plate moved north and north @-@ east , contributing to the Alpine orogeny via the tectonic uplift of the Dinarides . The basin 's karst topography developed from the carbonate platform 's exposure to weathering . Karstification largely began after the Dinarides ' final uplift in the Oligocene and the Miocene , when the carbonates were exposed to atmospheric effects ; this extended to the level of 120 metres ( 390 feet ) below the present sea level , exposed during the Last Glacial Maximum . Some karst formations were created during earlier sea level drops , most notably the Messinian salinity crisis . The geological structure of the area indicates recent tectonic activity in the catchment , with a fault running between Hum and the Ombla . A recent strong earthquake in the wider region was the 1979 Montenegro earthquake , measuring 7 @.@ 0 on the Richter scale . The only strong historical earthquake in the immediate area was the 1667 Dubrovnik earthquake , which was followed by a tsunami . 
 The hydrological regime of the basin and Popovo Polje is determined by the flow of the Trebišnjica — a losing stream disappearing underground in the polje . The groundwater is distributed to a number of springs . Some of them are headwaters of watercourses discharging into the Neretva River to the northwest of the polje , or appearing as <unk> ( submarine springs ) or as headwaters of the Ombla river . Flow rate of the Ombla River , measured at the Komolac water intake plant , ranges from 3 @.@ 96 to 104 cubic metres ( 140 to 3 @,@ 673 cubic feet ) per second , averaging 24 @.@ 1 cubic metres ( 850 cubic feet ) per second . The average has dropped by about 10 cubic metres ( 350 cubic feet ) per second since completion of Trebišnjica Hydroelectric Power Plant and the concreting of the Trebišnjica 's river bed . On the other hand , the minimum discharge was not affected by the river engineering works . 
 The catchment basin area straddles boundary of two climate zones — the Mediterranean climate zone in areas at elevations up to 400 metres ( 1 @,@ 300 feet ) a.s.l , and the continental climate zone in other parts of the basin . Average annual precipitation varies depending on the climate zones : 1 @,@ 238 millimetres ( 48 @.@ 7 inches ) in Dubrovnik , at the coast , and 2 @,@ 037 millimetres ( 80 @.@ 2 inches ) in Hum , in Popovo Polje . 
 = = Economy = = 
 As of 2012 , the Ombla is used as a source of drinking water for the city of Dubrovnik . The water intake plant at Komolac has a water supply capacity of 560 litres ( 120 imperial gallons ; 150 US gallons ) per second . The Ombla has been used as a part of Dubrovnik 's water supply network since 1897 , when the first contract to supply 960 cubic metres ( 34 @,@ 000 cubic feet ) of water per day was made with an owner of watermills operating on the river . The river water becomes opaque , containing increased proportion of suspended particulate matter , three to five times a year for periods of four to five days after increased rainfall . The situation is proposed to be addressed through moving of the intake plant to a higher elevation during construction of a proposed Ombla Hydroelectric Power Plant ( HPP ) . The new water intake is planned to be constructed at 55 metres ( 180 feet ) a.s.l. These changes are expected to improve the quality of the drinking water , and to increase the water supply capacity to 1 @,@ 500 litres ( 330 imperial gallons ; 400 US gallons ) per second . Average volume of water diverted to the water supply network varies considerably by month , peaking during summer tourist seasons . In August 2008 , daily volume of water taken from Ombla for the water supply network averaged at 23 @,@ 419 cubic metres ( 827 @,@ 000 cubic feet ) . In 2008 , the annual daily volume of the water diverted averaged 17 @,@ 750 cubic metres ( 627 @,@ 000 cubic feet ) . 
 = = = Proposed power plant = = = 
 The Ombla HPP is proposed to be built as an underground power plant utilizing headwaters of the Ombla River through a planned underground reservoir , which would hold the water behind a grout curtain and a concrete block extending from 250 metres ( 820 feet ) below sea level to 135 metres ( 443 feet ) a.s.l. The project entails flooding of a cavern system at the spring to a level 7 metres ( 23 feet ) below the entrance to the 3 @,@ 063 @-@ metre ( 10 @,@ 049 @-@ foot ) long <unk> Cave . The proposed power plant is planned to have productive capacity of 68 megawatts . The project is to be financed in part through an European Bank for Reconstruction and Development ( EBRD ) loan in the amount of 123 @.@ 2 million Euros , approved on 22 November 2011 . Total project cost is estimated at 152 @.@ 4 million Euros . Pursuant to the European Union Habitats Directive , an additional assessment and a biodiversity management plan are required before the EBRD actually provides the approved funds . The documents should define any mitigating or compensating activities that might be needed . 
 The development project became controversial as environmental protection non @-@ governmental organizations ( NGOs ) drew public attention to a possible threat that may arise to seven species of bats . Subsequently , the NGOs alleged that the project is illegal , environmentally unsafe , financially not feasible , and technically questionable . Project legality was disputed because it is based on a 1999 environmental impact assessment ( EIA ) , while Croatian legislation requires that <unk> must not be more than two years old . Flooding of <unk> Cave is cited as an environmental concern , while the financial issues are based on previous cost overruns by Hrvatska elektroprivreda — the state @-@ owned company planning the development — in other projects . One objection to the technical aspects of the project is the possibility that the groundwater may trigger earthquakes . Opponents of the project have urged the Prime Minister of Croatia to cancel development of the plant . 
 After the elections of 2011 , <unk> Holy , who had declared her opposition to the project prior to the elections , was appointed Minister of Environment and Nature Protection . In 2012 the ministry commissioned four reviews of the EIA . The reviews — one of them supporting the EIA and three disproving the conclusions of the original EIA — were submitted to the Government of Croatia one day after Holy resigned her post , reportedly over an unrelated matter , on 7 June 2012 . Objections were raised by authors of the EIA that the reviews were not published and the names of the authors have been kept secret . Prime Minister Zoran Milanović said he wanted to collect opinions from the foremost Croatian , European , and worldwide experts before deciding on the matter , which has been under consideration since the early 1990s . 
 In May 2013 , the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development cancelled its proposed loan to the project , pointing at environmental concerns . 
 = = Etymology = = 
 In classical antiquity , the Ombla was a part of the river Arion , rising and sinking in present @-@ day region of Herzegovina before resurfacing at the coast . This is the earliest known name of the river , reported in Periplus of Pseudo @-@ Scylax . The most likely etymology of the river 's name is that it is derived from the Latin <unk> , being named after vineyards , or <unk> , since the river was once in Zachlumia . Alternatively it is proposed that the name of the river descended from the Slavic word <unk> or <unk> , meaning a pit containing water , possibly a water well . Since the 16th century , the river was called Ombla or <unk> , or a variety of similar names which all translate as " River " — Rika , <unk> , <unk> , and Rijeka . In the 19th century , the use of name Orion was also reported , apparently based on the Arion of the classical period . The word " Ombla " means sweet water from Albanian language 
 = Necrid = 
 Necrid ( <unk> , <unk> ) is a playable character in the Soul series of weapon @-@ based fighting games . Designed by comic book artist and toy designer Todd McFarlane through a collaboration with Namco , the character first appeared in console ports of Soulcalibur II and later as part of an action figure set created by McFarlane Productions . Though designed and named by McFarlane , Necrid 's concept and physical build were outlined by Namco , who aimed to target North American audiences with the character . Necrid 's spoken lines in the game are unintelligible , and no voice actor has been credited . 
 According to the game 's back @-@ story , Necrid was once a human warrior . He sought and found the cursed sword Soul Edge , only to be pulled into the dimension that the sword 's spirit inhabits . Escaping the dimension with his body drastically mutated , his memories and sanity initially lost , he now wields various forms of energy as weapons , while searching for fragments of the shattered Soul Edge that soothe the pain caused by his separation from the dimension 's energies . 
 The character has received a divisive response . While some sources criticized the character 's design for clashing with the game 's aesthetic , some others praised the visual appeal of the character when in motion . Some have called Necrid one of the best characters introduced to the series ; others deem him one of the worst . 
 = = Conception and history = = 
 Series producer Hiroaki Yotoriyama learned that comics creator Todd McFarlane was a fan of the Soul series and that McFarlane had praised their characters ' designs . In 2003 , McFarlane was interested in creating a new video game based on the Spawn comic book franchise ; his search for a developer resulted in a deal with Soul publisher Namco . When the topic of toys arose in discussions , McFarlane and Namco reached an agreement to release a line of action figures based on Soulcalibur II characters . Afterward , Namco proposed that their company design a new character for video game console ports of the game , an idea that McFarlane accepted because he considered it an opportunity to create a toy based on Necrid 's finished design . 
 Necrid 's design targeted North American audiences , specifically fans of American comic books . Although McFarlane received most of the credit for the character , Necrid was the result of a collaboration ; Namco outlined the then @-@ unnamed character 's traits , such as his in @-@ game role and physical build , and McFarlane 's company completed the design . As a result , both companies hold a partial copyright for Necrid , with Namco 's rights to the character as a derivative work of McFarlane 's illustrations . 
 = = = Design = = = 
 Necrid is a bald , green , and muscular humanoid . His eyes glow bright red , and short bones protrude from his left arm , back , jaw and a Mohawk @-@ like ridge on his head . The fingers on his right hand have claw points , but his left hand is much larger and has three fingers with large , talon @-@ like bone claws . Two large , ram @-@ like horns extend from opposite sides of his left wrist , toward and slightly beyond his elbow . His clothing consists of dark blue pants , large metal sandals held together by bandages , and armor plating covering his abdomen , the sides of his legs , and the back of his lower right arm . A pulsating red jewel described by McFarlane as a " power plant " is set in a circular piece of metal strapped to his chest . At about 6 1 ⁄ 2 feet ( 196 cm ) , Necrid is the second tallest Soul series character whose height is known . 
 Necrid 's alternate appearance differs heavily , and features scaly , reddish – orange skin . Additional differences include teal eyes , black pants , and a blue jewel . The protruding bones are isolated and bigger on his left shoulder and arm , and appear crystalline . A pauldron covering his right shoulder is fastened to the jewel 's support harness , and the armor on his legs incorporate a pair of greaves . He wears a fauld on his abdomen , and bandages wrap around his stomach . A mask covers his face and is held in place by two straps around his head . 
 Necrid 's speech is unintelligible , and the vocal samples in the game 's sound test feature are named after emotions , such as " Determination " and " <unk> " . He is the only speaking Soulcalibur II character whose voice does not change when the player selects a different language setting . 
 = = In video games = = 
 As introduced in Soulcalibur II , Necrid is a warrior who fought and defeated a former wielder of the cursed sword Soul Edge , and was pulled into the dimension where the sword 's spirit , Inferno , inhabited . Instead of battling Inferno , he fled , and became trapped in the dimension for years . Warped physically and mentally by the dimension as a result , he escaped during the closing events of Soulcalibur , but quickly found that , without the dimension 's energies , he experienced intense pain and would eventually die . Attacking travelers he perceived as enemies , he happened upon a fragment of Soul Edge and felt his pain dampened . Pursuing other fragments of the sword , he encountered Talim , who was also seeking them , and helped defeat the resurrected Inferno . His memories and sanity restored by the battle , Necrid closed the entrance to the void , trapping himself within . 
 To date , Necrid has appeared in only one game of the series , Soulcalibur II . He did not appear in the original arcade version , but was added later when the game was ported to the GameCube , PlayStation 2 , and Xbox video game consoles . When asked whether the character would return in Soulcalibur III , Yotoriyama replied , " Necrid has gone on vacation . " When the subject came up again during the production of Soulcalibur V , game director Daishi <unk> responded via his Twitter account , “ To be honest , that will be too hard to do due to copyright issues . ” 
 = = = Gameplay = = = 
 Using fighting skills Yotoriyama described as " horrific splendor " , Necrid attacks using <unk> , a transforming , physical manifestation of the energy in Soul Edge . He controls <unk> by channeling it through his hands to form various bladed weapons , able to set them aside or reabsorb them as needed . Necrid can also attack using other forms of energy , such as ignis <unk> , <unk> , and chaos , represented in game as equipable alternate weapons with varying effects and attributes . Necrid also incorporates acrobatics into his fighting style through a variety of flips and kicks . 
 Several of Necrid 's attacks duplicate physical motions and properties of attacks used by other characters in the series . However , each attack causes his weapon to extend from then retract into his hands , resulting in different visual cues than the move they derive from . Some attacks combine elements of two other existing character moves ; for example , Dragon Blaze begins with one attack used by Maxi and ends with another from Nightmare . Despite this fact some moves are unique to Necrid 's repertoire , such as Elder Topaz , an attack stance that allows the use of an altered set of attacks for a short time , and Void Cannon , which creates a small explosion on the ground at varying distances from Necrid . 
 = = Promotion and reception = = 
 Yotoriyama announced Necrid early in Soulcalibur II 's production for the Xbox , in an interview with the Japanese magazine Famitsu . Text in each version of the game 's box art also drew attention to Necrid . Namco later featured the character in promotional items , such as artwork , screenshots , and an animated <unk> , which they distributed to IGN and other news outlets . McFarlane Productions distributed one thousand copies of a limited @-@ edition lithograph to promote the character at E3 2003 . Drawn by Greg Capullo , the lithograph featured a comic @-@ book rendition of Necrid , fighting Spawn in one of the game 's arenas . In August 2003 , Namco included a sculpture of Necrid in a set of five based on different Soulcalibur II characters . The figure was based on Necrid 's secondary outfit , stood 6 inches ( 15 cm ) tall ( with a base ) , and allowed for adjustment of its head and arms . McFarlane Productions later gave the sculptures and copies of the game as prizes in a contest named after the character . 
 Critical response to Necrid varied . University of Delaware professor Rachel Hutchinson cited him as an example of the cultural stereotype of human versus monster , a " mutated or damned [ creature ] deviant from the human norm " that the game 's human characters are expected to vanquish . A staff writer for GameNOW magazine called the visual design " silly " and compared the character to an " old @-@ school He @-@ Man character " , but added that Necrid 's gameplay was decent . Another magazine , GMR , described him as an example of " bad American comic book design " . IGN 's Kaiser Hwang called Necrid a " disappointment " and questioned the character 's design in comparison to others in the series ; he also felt Necrid was " filler " rather than a complete character . GameSpot made similar comments in their review of the game , as did GameSpy . IGN 's Xbox article editor described the character 's inclusion as an unnecessary marketing ploy and would have preferred new characters made without McFarlane 's involvement ; the editor also wrote that Necrid did not " vibe " with the rest of the game . 1UP.com 's podcast Retronauts criticized the design and wrote that the character 's name was used as a synonym for " shitty " . They further added that McFarlane had " tainted " the game with Necrid 's inclusion , with host Jeremy Parish stating " I could close my eyes and draw a better character " . In a retrospective of the series , Joystiq used him as an example of the series succumbing to " commercial gimmicks " , citing his design as reviled and that Necrid was either too strong or too weak a character to play as , depending on who one asked . 
 Other reviewers praised the character 's gameplay and design . An editor for the video game website GameZone wrote that his attacks compensated for his appearance and described him as " cool " , while also praising both his weapon and fighting style . Adam Sessler and Morgan Webb of X @-@ Play stated that , while Necrid did not seem to fit the aesthetic , the character did have some appeal . UGO 's Doug Trueman stated Necrid 's weapon had to be " seen to be believed " , and described him among other new characters as " [ adding ] something spectacular to the Soul Calibur pantheon " . Tim Rogers of website Insert Credit called Necrid " a work of digital art both in form and function " and added that " as far as console @-@ only characters go — everybody wins with Necrid " . Despite their negative remarks , an editor for IGN listed Necrid as eighth on their list of the top ten characters contributed to the Soulcalibur games by designers outside Namco and wrote that while they felt the character 's gameplay was unbalanced , it added to Necrid 's appeal ; the editor wrote " what do you expect from a man who shares a symbiotic relationship with the very energy that powers Soul Edge ? If you needed to clean house in [ Soulcalibur II ] , Necrid was the man for the job . " 
 = Hygrophoropsis aurantiaca = 
 Hygrophoropsis aurantiaca , commonly known as the false chanterelle , is a species of fungus in the family Hygrophoropsidaceae . It is found across several continents , growing in woodland and heathland , and sometimes on woodchips used in gardening and landscaping . Fruit bodies ( mushrooms ) are yellow – orange with a funnel @-@ shaped cap up to 8 cm ( 3 1 ⁄ 8 in ) across that has a felt @-@ like surface . The thin , often forked gills on the underside of the cap run partway down the length of the otherwise smooth stipe . Reports on the mushroom 's edibility vary – it can serve as food , though not a particularly flavorful one , or it can be mildly poisonous . 
 Austrian naturalist Franz Xaver von Wulfen described the false chanterelle in 1781 , noting both its resemblance with the true chanterelles and people 's propensity to confuse them . The false chanterelle was then placed in the genus Clitocybe , but it was later observed that its forked gills and dextrinoid spores indicated a relationship to Paxillus . Genetic analysis has confirmed that it belongs to the order Boletales and is more closely related to boletes . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 Austrian naturalist Franz Xaver von Wulfen described the false chanterelle as Agaricus aurantiacus in 1781 , reporting that it appeared in the fir tree forests around Klagenfurt in October . He added that it could be confused with the chanterelle by the inexperienced , but that its true nature was very different ; in contrast to its edible lookalike , he described it as " kind of pernicious " . The specific epithet is the Latin word aurantiacus , meaning " orange " . James Sowerby illustrated it and gave it the name Agaricus <unk> , describing it as a " perhaps unfavourable " variety of A. cantharellus ( chanterelle ) . The fungus was placed in the genus Merulius by Johann Friedrich Gmelin in 1792 , and then Cantharellus by Elias Fries in 1821 . Bernhard Studer @-@ <unk> concluded it could only be classified in the genus Clitocybe in 1900 , based on its white spores , decurrent gills and lack of a ring . It was elevated to the status of genus in Emile Martin @-@ Sans ' 1929 publication L <unk> par les champignons et <unk> les intoxications dues aux <unk> du groupe des Clitocybe et du groupe des Cortinarius , with authorship attributed to René Maire . Martin @-@ Sans concurred with Maire 's assessment of Hygrophoropsis , suggesting that it represented a form intermediate between Cantharellus and Clitocybe , and was thus worthy of generic ranking . The genus name refers to a resemblance to the genus Hygrophorus . It is commonly known as the false chanterelle . 
 Two varieties described by Derek Reid in 1972 , H. aurantiaca var. macrospora and H. aurantiaca var. rufa , have since been promoted to distinct species status as H. macrospora ( 1996 ) and H. rufa ( 2008 ) . Two other varieties of the fungus have been described , but they are not considered to have independent taxonomic significance by Index Fungorum : var. nana ( Singer 1946 ) , characterized by a small fruit body ; and var. robusta ( Antonín 2000 ) , characterized by a robust fruit body and an odour similar to Maggi seasoning sauce . Pale forms of the fungus are sometimes referred to as var. pallida . This taxon was first published by Robert Kühner and Henri Romagnesi in 1953 , but later considered invalid as it did not conform to nomenclatural rules . Variety nigripes , a taxon with a black @-@ brown stipe , is invalid for similar reasons . H. aurantiaca var. pallida was published validly in 1995 . 
 In 1979 , Egon Horak suggested that H. aurantiaca and the New Zealand taxon H. <unk> were the same species , but neither Index Fungorum nor MycoBank accept this synonymy . According to MycoBank , H. aurantiaca has several <unk> synonyms , that is , they have different types , but are considered the same species : 
 Agaricus <unk> <unk> . ( 1774 ) 
 Agaricus <unk> Sowerby ( 1809 ) 
 Cantharellus <unk> Chevall . ( 1826 ) 
 Cantharellus ravenelii Berk . & <unk> ( 1853 ) 
 Merulius <unk> ( Chevall . ) Kuntze ( 1891 ) 
 Hygrophoropsis aurantiaca has been confused with the true chanterelles ( genus Cantharellus ) because of overall similarities in appearance . However , the forked gills , frequently off @-@ centre stipe placement , and dextrinoid spores of H. aurantiaca suggested a relationship with Paxillus , prompting Rolf Singer to classify the genus Hygrophoropsis in the family Paxillaceae in 1946 . Several pigments have been identified from the fungus , including the orange variegatic acid , methyl variegate , the red variegatorubin , and several derivatives of pulvinic acid . The presence of these pigments suggests a chemotaxic relationship with the Boletaceae , Coniophoraceae , and Paxillaceae — families of Boletales with members that have similar compounds . Molecular phylogenetic analysis confirmed its affinity lay in the order Boletales in 1997 , though later research showed it is not closely related to Paxillus or other gilled members of the order . 
 = = Description = = 
 The false chanterelle has a golden @-@ orange cap up to 8 cm ( 3 1 ⁄ 8 in ) across , initially convex but becoming funnel @-@ shaped as the mushroom matures . The cap margin , which remains rolled in a little , becomes wavy or lobed in age . The cap surface is covered with a fine down . The decurrent gill @-@ like structures are narrow and forked , which is a distinctive and distinguishing feature . They are generally a more intense shade of orange than the cap . Along the stipe , the gills may be slightly crimped . The orange stipe is 3 – 5 cm ( 1 1 ⁄ 8 – 2 in ) high and 0 @.@ 5 – 1 cm ( 1 ⁄ 4 – 3 ⁄ 8 in ) thick , and lacks a ring . It often has a darker , brownish , base . The ability to form sclerotia ( compact masses of hardened fungal mycelium ) has been documented for H. aurantiaca in laboratory studies . These structures contain glycogen and protein that may be used as food reserves during spore germination . 
 The soft , thin flesh ranges from white to yellowish to golden @-@ orange . It has an odour and taste described variously as indistinct , or unpleasant and earthy . The spore print is white to cream . The oval spores are 5 @.@ 5 – 7 by 4 – 4 @.@ 5 micrometres ( µm ) , with walls that tend to thicken in age . The spores are cyanophilous , meaning that they will readily stain dark blue in methyl blue solution . Staining with Melzer 's reagent often produces a dextrinoid ( reddish @-@ brown ) colour reaction . Basidia ( spore @-@ bearing cells ) measure 25 – 40 by 5 – 8 µm , and can be two- , three- , or four @-@ spored . Cystidia ( large sterile cells on the hymenium ) are absent . The cap cuticle is in the form of a trichoderm , where the outermost hyphae are roughly parallel , like hairs , perpendicular to the cap surface . These hyphae are 4 – 15 µm in diameter , and contain intracellular pigments that impart an orange @-@ brown to yellow @-@ brown colouring to the cells . Clamp connections are present in the hyphae . 
 <unk> ( developmentally abnormal ) forms of H. aurantiaca were reported to occur in the United Kingdom . The fruit bodies of these specimens were club @-@ shaped with a wrinkled upper surface of convoluted gill tissue . The overall morphology of these forms somewhat resembles species of <unk> . Although the cause of this abnormal development is not known with certainty , environmental pollutants or virus infection have been suggested as contributing factors . 
 = = = Similar species = = = 
 Characteristics typically used in the field to distinguish Hygrophoropsis aurantiaca from lookalike species include : the soft , dry consistency of its cap ; the crowded , decurrent , and forked gills that are saffron to orange coloured ; and the lack of any distinctive taste or odour . The false chanterelle can be distinguished from the true chanterelle ( Cantharellus cibarius ) by its deeper orange colour , brown base to the stipe , velvety cap surface , forked gills rather than gill @-@ like ridges , softer ( and thinner ) flesh , and lack of the characteristic apricot @-@ smell . The cap surface of Hygrophoropsis <unk> , found in Britain , has fine brown scales overlaying a dull orange background . H. rufa has velvety brown fur covering its cap , while H. macrospora has cream gills and stipe . Microscopically , these three species have larger spores than H. aurantiaca . H. tapinia , found in a range extending from southern Florida to Central America , is set apart from H. aurantiaca by its growth on or under deciduous trees ( never conifers ) , and smaller spores , which measure 3 @.@ 3 – 4 @.@ 8 by 2 @.@ 5 – 3 @.@ 3 µm . 
 Formerly a member of Hygrophoropsis , <unk> olida is also similar in appearance to H. aurantiaca but can be distinguished from the false chanterelle by its smaller , pinkish fruit bodies and candy @-@ like odour . It also has smaller spores . <unk> chrysophylla has a yellowish brown cap and <unk> yellow gills . Cortinarius <unk> , an eastern North American species that associates with oaks , has a rusty brown spore print and a cortina in young specimens . The poisonous jack @-@ o ' -lantern mushrooms ( genus Omphalotus ) comprise another group of lookalikes ; however , they have straight , non @-@ forked true gills . The European wood @-@ rotting species <unk> <unk> , sometimes confused with H. aurantiaca , is most readily distinguished from the latter by its pink spore print and gills that do not fork . 
 = = Distribution , habitat , and ecology = = 
 Hygrophoropsis aurantiaca is a widely distributed species . In Europe and North America , it is found in both hardwood and conifer forests , as well as heathland , in summer and autumn . In Mexico , it is common in coniferous forests . It fruits from the ground or from decaying wood , on burned areas in forests , and is often found near fallen trees and tree stumps . The fungus can also grow on woodchips used in gardening and landscaping , and so it also appears on roadsides and other locations where this material is used . Fruit bodies occur singly to scattered , or in clusters , and can be very abundant . Generally considered a dry weather mushroom , it can be plentiful when other mushrooms are scarce . Other locations where the false chanterelle has been recorded include Africa , Central and South America , northern Asia , Australia and New Zealand . Populations in California represent a complex of undescribed species that are collectively referred to as Hygrophoropsis aurantiaca sensu lato . 
 A saprophytic fungus , H. aurantiaca obtains nutrients from forest litter and decomposing wood , causing a brown rot on the wood upon which it grows . A Finnish field study on tree stumps in a forest near Helsinki found that the species colonised them after 6 – 7 years . 
 H. aurantiaca secretes large amounts of oxalic acid , a reducing agent and relatively strong acid . This stimulates weathering of the humus layer of forest soil , and influences the solubility and turnover of nutrients ( particularly phosphorus and nitrogen ) , which in turn affects their availability for use by forest trees . 
 = = Edibility = = 
 The false chanterelle has been described as edible ( though not tasty ) by some experts , but other authors report it as potentially poisonous . Indeed , Fries described it as <unk> , meaning " poisonous " , in 1821 . David Arora speculates that the confusion about edibility may be a result of misidentification with the similar @-@ looking but definitely poisonous Omphalotus species . However , extracts made from Nigerian collections were mildly toxic to mice . Some people experience gastrointestinal symptoms after eating the mushroom , possibly due to its high levels of the sugar alcohol arabitol . It was eaten , though not especially highly regarded , by the Zapotec people of Ixtlán de Juárez in Oaxaca . The <unk> people of northwestern Mexico also occasionally eat the mushroom , which they refer to in their native language as <unk> <unk> ( " delightful " ) or kia 's <unk> ' ( " iguana lard " ) ; there , it is commonly prepared by roasting over charcoal , or boiling and <unk> with cheese . 
 = Self Made Man ( Terminator : The Sarah Connor Chronicles ) = 
 " Self Made Man " is the 20th episode ( 11th of the second season ) of the United States television series Terminator : The Sarah Connor Chronicles ( T : TSCC ) . Aired on December 1 , 2008 ( 2008 @-@ 12 @-@ 01 ) , " Self Made Man " explores Cameron 's nighttime activities of enlisting help to research a Terminator 's presence in the past , as well as John Connor 's continuing relationship with Riley Dawson . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Written by Toni Graphia , the plot of " Self Made Man " consists of two separate storylines . 
 While the Connors sleep , Cameron ( Summer Glau ) secretly visits the library and her friend , bone cancer survivor and nighttime library attendant , Eric ( Billy Lush ) ; it 's revealed that Cameron has been doing this regularly to improve her human disguise and infiltration capabilities . After discovering the 1920 photograph of a T @-@ 888 model Terminator ( Todd <unk> ) , Cameron uses the library 's resources to deduce that it time travelled to the wrong date . The T @-@ 888 , having accidentally killed the architect of a downtown landmark ( Pico Tower ) crucial to its original mission of assassinating the governor of California in 2010 , it invented a new identity : 1920s Los Angeles realty magnate , Myron Stark . As Stark , the T @-@ 888 funded and designed the building itself before <unk> itself inside a wall to wait for New Year 's Eve 2010 . Returning to the library after finding and tending to Stark , Cameron damages her relationship with Eric by revealing to him that his cancer has returned ; the following night however , Eric is missing , but Cameron is unconcerned and succeeds in wooing the new attendant with the doughnuts she had brought for Eric . 
 Simultaneously with Cameron 's escapades , John ( Thomas Dekker ) also sneaks out of the house , responding to a phone call from Riley Dawson ( Leven Rambin ) . Meeting her at a house party in Van Nuys , they leave after John beats up the host ( Oren Dayan ) for accosting Riley — who stole his lighter . Driving to a vista overlooking Los Angeles , John and Riley discuss their relationship and supposed foster family backgrounds . The official T : TSCC blog revealed that John Connor 's fight was written knowing that he 's still dealing with posttraumatic stress disorder and having killed <unk> <unk> earlier in the season . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Self Made Man " is the third T : TSCC episode written by Toni Graphia , whereas it was director Holly Dale 's first foray into the Terminator franchise . Graphia vetted the episode 's historical information alongside T : TSCC department heads , and History for Hire , a prop house specializing in period pieces . All of the 1920s scenes were shot on the Warner Bros. backlot , which itself was inaugurated during the same era . " Myron Stark 's " meeting Rudolph Valentino ( Branden R. Morgan ) at the premiere of The Sheik is the first occasion of the series referencing a real @-@ life person . The fictional Pico Tower was written at the intersection of Pico Boulevard and 3rd Street , despite the two roadways running parallel in real life . Costume designer Amanda Friedland created the flapper @-@ themed wardrobe for " Self Made Man " . Production wrapped on " Self Made Man " on October 15 , 2008 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Reviewing the episode for IGN , Travis Fickett extolled Summer Glau 's performance , and held it up as an example of her acting ability keeping the whole series from failing . Fickett also explained that " Self Made Man " received better ratings than the preceding episodes of the series ' second season . At the website Television Without Pity ( TWoP ) , the staff review rated the episode a " C " , and specifically took issue with the suspension of disbelief required for Cameron 's ability to find anything and everything about the Myron Stark storyline in a closed public library ; as of January 2010 , 757 of their readers awarded it an average grade of " B + " . 
 Though the series never specifically explains the three dots written on the Connors ' basement wall in " Automatic for the People " , reviewers ( including IGN , TWoP , and Total Sci @-@ Fi 's Owen Van Spall ) attributed them to this episode 's revelation of the Terminators ' temporal triangulation ability . Van Spall and TWoP also noted the plot point of the T @-@ 888 's mission to kill the Governor of California . Stark 's assassination mission was to take place on New Year 's Eve 2010 , at which time Arnold Schwarzenegger would still be the Californian Governor ( leaving office in January 2011 ) ; Schwarzenegger is the star of the first three Terminator films in the franchise , having premiered the role in 1984 . 
 = The Culinary Institute of America at Greystone = 
 The Culinary Institute of America at Greystone is a branch campus of the private culinary college the Culinary Institute of America . The Greystone campus , located on State Route 29 / 128 in St. Helena , California , offers associate degrees and two certificate programs in culinary arts and baking and pastry arts . 
 The campus ' primary facility is a 117 @,@ 000 @-@ square @-@ foot ( 10 @,@ 900 m2 ) stone building , known as Greystone Cellars and built for William Bowers Bourn II as a cooperative wine cellar in 1889 . The building changed ownership several times , and was notably owned by the Christian Brothers as a winery from 1945 to 1989 . It was used as a winery until its sale to the school in 1993 , and was added to the National Register of Historic Places in 1978 . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Establishment of Greystone Cellars = = = 
 The Greystone campus is situated in and around the Greystone Cellars building , which William Bowers Bourn II conceived as a business concept . His father , William Bowers Bourn Sr. , was wealthy from ownership of the gold mine the Empire Mine , as well as co @-@ ownership of a shipping company . Bourn II was a businessman with business interests and residences around California , although he had spent his summers during his youth at White Sulphur Springs Resort in St. Helena , before his parents bought <unk> , an estate in the town . 
 Around the 1880s , San Francisco wine dealers were purchasing wine from Napa Valley vintners at low prices ( sometimes around 15 to 18 cents per gallon ) . The dealers had facilities to store and age wines that most Napa Valley vintners lacked , and thus were able to purchase wine from the vintners at low prices . Because of this , Bourn began a campaign to build the cooperative winery ; he was in his early 30s at the time . He created a business partnership with another businessman , E. Everett Wise , who was of a similar age . Bourn then asked for support within the Napa County wine industry . Bourn met with Henry Pellet , president of the St. Helena <unk> Club , who endorsed the idea and encouraged his associates to do the same . Bourn and Wise ended up gathering enough support from the local wine industry , and they hired George Percy and F. F. Hamilton of the San Francisco architectural firm Percy & Hamilton to design the Greystone Cellars , along with Italian stonemasons to build the façades , and the Ernest L. Ransome firm to handle concrete work . The plans involved the use of new materials and technology of the time , including the relatively new Portland cement . The cement was used as mortar and also poured over the iron reinforcing rods built within the first and second floor elevations . The heavy timber construction of the third floor provided structural support for not only that floor 's cask , barrel and bottle aging space but also for the gravity @-@ flow crushing area located on the floor above . The architects planned for the cellars to hold two million gallons of wine at a time , with thirteen tunnels in the hillside behind the building to hold another million gallons . Those tunnels collapsed due to effects of water seepage and of the 1906 San Francisco earthquake . 
 A large number of men were hired for the building 's construction , and local workers were chosen over non @-@ locals . During the construction , many of the workers lived in tents beside their worksite , and cooked meals and stayed there when not working . The cornerstone was laid on June 15 , 1888 ; beneath it was laid several bottles of wine , a copy of a St. Helena Star and San Francisco newspapers , and foreign and rare coins . The building , called the Bourn & Wise Wine Cellar , was completed around June 1889 , along with a distillery north of the building and a superintendent 's house to the south . In September of that year Everett Wise became too ill to work and sold his share in the winery to Bourn , who between that time and 1890 named the winery Greystone Cellars . 
 The building cost $ 250 @,@ 000 ( $ 6 @.@ 58 million in 2015 ) . At its completion , architect George Percy described Greystone Cellars as the largest wine cellar in California , if not the world . Greystone was also the first California winery to be operated and illuminated by electricity , produced by a boiler and gas generator located in a mechanical room below the building 's central front wing . In the spring of 1894 , a long @-@ lasting phylloxera scourge made Bourn decide the winery was no longer profitable . 
 = = = Subsequent uses = = = 
 He sold the building at a low price that year , to Charles <unk> , who deeded the property to the California Wine Association . The association continued using the Greystone Cellars wine label . A year later , the <unk> brothers of San Jose purchased Greystone where they produced sacramental wine under the same label until 1930 , and again beginning in October 1933 . The <unk> family maintained part of the land , including a Victorian house nicknamed Albert 's Villa south of the winery . The house burned down around 1929 and was replaced with a Spanish @-@ style house that is now owned by the school . 
 In 1940 , the Brothers of the Christian Schools ( the Christian Brothers ) leased the property , purchasing it in 1945 , and using it for sparkling wine production from 1950 to 1989 . It was listed on the National Register of Historic Places in 1978 . The Christian Brothers sold the property in 1989 because of declining market shares and vineyard yields , and the costs of seismically retrofitting Greystone . The Heublein Company of Canada purchased the property and marketing rights to the Christian Brothers ' brands in 1990 , shortly after the 1989 Loma Prieta earthquake occurred . The earthquake damaged the Greystone Cellars building , rendering the northern portion of the building unusable . 
 = = = Culinary Institute campus = = = 
 In 1993 , Heublein sold the property at about 10 percent of its $ 14 million ( $ 22 @.@ 9 million in 2015 ) valuation , $ 1 @.@ 68 million ( $ 2 @.@ 75 million in 2015 ) , to the Culinary Institute of America , which used $ 15 million ( $ 24 @.@ 6 million in 2015 ) to renovate the building and give it a seismic retrofit . After completing the work in August 1995 , the school established the property as a branch campus . After initially offering certificate courses , in autumn 2006 , the campus began offering associate degrees . In 2015 , the college put in motion plans to purchase a portion of Copia , a museum in downtown Napa that operated from 2001 to 2008 . The college intends to open a campus , the Culinary Institute of America at Copia , which will house the CIA 's new Food Business School . The school , which was outgrowing the Greystone campus , purchased the northern portion of the property for $ 12 @.@ 5 million ( it was recently assessed for $ 21 @.@ 3 million ) . 
 = = Architecture = = 
 The Greystone Cellars building stands on a terraced hillside site on the west side of 29 / 128 , about a mile north of St. Helena 's central business district . It has 117 @,@ 000 @-@ square @-@ foot ( 10 @,@ 900 m2 ) , three stories , and a basement , and is around 400 feet ( 120 m ) long , 76 feet ( 23 m ) wide , and 66 feet ( 20 m ) tall , with 22 @-@ inch ( 56 cm ) thick walls . As a wine cellar , it held 3 @.@ 5 million gallons . The building was designed in the Richardson Romanesque style , with an arched entranceway and tower , stone mullions and transoms , a low sweeping roof , well @-@ fitted stonework , and a large and simple stone façade . The building 's exterior is made of local light gray volcanic stone put together with Portland cement ; the trimmings are of a red stone . Bourne had insisted that gray stones were used in the east façade of the building ( its main façade ) , with darker or other colored stones usable for the other sides of the building . The roof originally used black slate roof tiles . 
 The building has a front projection measuring 50 by 20 feet ( 15 m × 6 @.@ 1 m ) , which held the main entranceway and an office and sample room . The former office has walls and ceilings of quartered oak , and includes a stone fireplace and vault door . The former sample room has paneled mahogany walls and ceilings , a parquet floor , open bottle racks on walls , and two lockers of mahogany . The windows are polished plate glass with stained glass transoms . The tasting and sales rooms are still preserved in their original form . The projection also includes a 20 @-@ by @-@ 20 @-@ foot ( 6 @.@ 1 m × 6 @.@ 1 m ) stone tower that extends one story above the roof and was built to hold a large water tank . A driveway wraps around the front and back of the building , where it is nearly level with the third floor . 
 The interior has two distinct wings with a large hallway between them , originally with an iron staircase and a hydraulic ram elevator both leading to the third floor . Each side of the hallway on each floor had three doors 8 feet ( 2 @.@ 4 m ) wide . 4 @-@ inch ( 100 mm ) iron pipes were placed through the walls and floors every thirty feet in order to pipe wine from one part of the building to another , and into and out of the building . 
 Property changes since the original construction include the front terrace , entranceway and landscaping . The former front lawn and flower beds were paved over , and a new driveway was cut into the stone wall north of the original large stone arch over the first driveway . 
 = = Programs = = 
 The campus ' programs include associate degrees in culinary arts and in baking and pastry arts , a 30 @-@ week culinary arts certificate program , a 30 @-@ week wine and beverage certificate program , and several culinary arts programs for students who have met basic requirements . Of the campus ' 300 students , approximately 60 percent are in the culinary arts degree program , 23 percent in the baking and pastry arts degree program , and 17 percent in a certificate program . 
 = = School facilities = = 
 The primary school building is the Greystone Cellars building , which houses teaching kitchens , the Wine Spectator Greystone Restaurant , the Bakery Café by illy , the Spice Islands Marketplace ( the campus store ) , the De Baun and Ecolab Theatres ( auditoriums and cooking demonstration facilities , also used as lecture halls ) , and administrative offices . Adjacent to the teaching kitchens is the Margie Schubert Library . 
 = = = Teaching kitchens = = = 
 The 15 @,@ 000 @-@ square @-@ foot ( 1 @,@ 400 m2 ) teaching kitchens at Greystone are on the third floor of the primary building . The space was designed without interior walls in order to facilitate ease of movement and open exchange of ideas . The kitchens vary from common stainless steel commercial kitchens by using materials including granite , stone , tile , and wood . The kitchens use Bonnet stoves and have a variety of cooking appliances , including <unk> , appliances for induction cooking , a stone hearth oven , convection ovens , combi steamers , French tops , and numerous large mixers . The baking and pastry kitchen has 16 @-@ foot ( 4 @.@ 9 m ) flecked granite and solid oak tables for pastry and dough preparation . 
 On the first floor , the 5 @,@ 000 @-@ square @-@ foot ( 460 m2 ) Viking Teaching Kitchen is designed for 36 to 40 students at a time . Its appliances and equipment were donated by Viking Range Corporation 's founders and installed as part of a comprehensive redesign of the building 's first floor in 2010 . The redesign also involved the completion of a chocolate @-@ making facility and the campus store and Flavor Bar . 
 = = = Restaurants = = = 
 The Conservatory Restaurant is led by students of the American Food Studies : Farm @-@ to @-@ Table Cooking concentration in the CIA 's bachelor 's degree programs . The Bakery Café by illy is run by Baking and Pastry Arts Certificate students . The café has sandwiches , salads , soups , and fresh pastries and breads , and also serves coffee , <unk> , and teas . The Wine Spectator Greystone Restaurant ( <unk> ) is run by students in the associate degree program in culinary arts . The restaurant focuses on using local and seasonal ingredients . The dining room has open cooking stations to give diners a full view of the working kitchen . The <unk> initially served food of the Mediterranean cuisines , and was at first professionally run . Later on , it became fully student @-@ run , however changes in late 2015 led to lunch service staffed by students and dinner service staffed by employees . 
 = = = Residence halls = = = 
 The campus offers housing for 130 students , and has three residence halls : the 18 @-@ room Guest House , the 41 @-@ room Vineyard Lodge I , and the 30 @-@ room Vineyard Lodge II . The residence halls have single , double , and triple @-@ occupancy rooms . The Guest House is located on @-@ campus and the Vineyard Lodges are about three @-@ quarters of a mile ( 1 @.@ 2 km ) from the campus , with shuttle service to and from the buildings . 
 The campus ' newest residence hall , Vineyard Lodge II , was built around 2009 as the campus expected to double its enrollment . The building has two @-@ stories , 31 dorm rooms , a kitchen , an activity room , an outside deck and two manager 's rooms . The school planned for an environmentally @-@ oriented dormitory , with solar panels to cover some of the building 's electrical needs , as well as a membrane system for waste water . The building also has board and batten siding , which lasts longer than wooden siding . The building , on Pratt Avenue in St. Helena , is the first building in the city to be metal @-@ framed rather than wood @-@ framed , to better prevent termites , mold , and fire . The school estimated costs of $ 4 million for a Napa @-@ based construction company to construct the building . The company demolished a 1 @,@ 750 @-@ square @-@ foot ( 163 m2 ) laundry and facilities building in what was described as a green @-@ oriented process . At the time of construction , the school annually enrolled 104 students ; the new residence hall would allow the campus to enroll another 100 students . 
 = = = Other facilities = = = 
 The De Baun Theatre is a 48 @-@ seat demonstration kitchen that hosts cooking demonstrations for the public . 
 The Ecolab Theatre is a 125 @-@ seat amphitheater @-@ style demonstration auditorium that rises through the first two levels of the building . It is designed for cooking demonstrations , lectures , food and wine tastings , and other special events . The auditorium 's demonstration kitchen has a 22 @-@ foot ( 6 @.@ 7 m ) cooking center , large video monitors , and fixed tables at every seat . 
 The Rudd Center for Professional Wine Studies , a two @-@ story distillery building dating to around 1889 , is used for the Professional Wine Studies program and was named after the Rudd family of Rudd Farms . The building has sensory analysis classrooms with wireless keypad response systems , built @-@ in light boxes , and <unk> stations . The Rudd Center contains a pantry , a 4 @,@ 000 @-@ bottle wine cave and private dining room , and a terrace . Karen MacNeil is the creator and chairman of the center . The building opened in 2003 for a wine professional credential ; the school began its wine and beverage certification program in 2010 . In 2013 the school began a wine , beverage , and hospitality concentration in its bachelor 's degree program . 
 The Spice Islands Marketplace is the campus store , and offers culinary @-@ related items ( cooking equipment , cookbooks , uniforms , and food ingredients ) . Next to the store is a flavor bar that holds tasting exercises for guests . 
 The Ventura Center for Menu Research and Development has 8 @,@ 000 square feet ( 740 m2 ) of classrooms , a theater @-@ style kitchen , and interactive audience response audio technologies . 
 The Williams Center for Flavor Discovery , in the former gatehouse , is used by students for the study of flavors and flavor development in food and wine . The results of tasting panels at the building are shared with members of the culinary industry to enhance understanding of flavor in food , cooking , and wine . 
 = Stephen Strasburg = 
 Stephen James Strasburg ( / <unk> / ; born July 20 , 1988 ) is an American professional baseball pitcher for the Washington Nationals of Major League Baseball ( MLB ) . Strasburg was selected by Washington with the first pick in the 2009 MLB Draft , and he made his MLB debut with the Nationals in 2010 . 
 A talented but unpolished high school baseball player at West Hills High School , Strasburg played college baseball for the San Diego State Aztecs . There , he became one of the best collegiate pitchers in the country . He pitched for the United States national baseball team at the 2008 Summer Olympics , winning the bronze medal . Two years later , Strasburg was called the " most @-@ hyped pick in draft history " by ESPN and the " most hyped and closely watched pitching prospect in the history of baseball " by Sports Illustrated . Strasburg 's major league debut on June 8 , 2010 , produced a franchise @-@ record 14 strikeouts . 
 Several months into his major league career , Strasburg tore a ligament in his pitching elbow . The injury required Tommy John surgery and a year of rehabilitation . He rejoined the Nationals on September 6 , 2011 , but was only able to pitch 24 innings that year . His 2012 season marked a successful return to form ; Strasburg was selected to play in the 2012 MLB All @-@ Star Game . Strasburg pitches an average fastball of 94 @.@ 7 mph . 
 = = Amateur career = = 
 = = = High school = = = 
 Strasburg attended West Hills High School in Santee , California . At first , he struggled on the school 's baseball team , posting a 1 – 10 win – loss record in his junior year . A twelve @-@ strikeout game against El Capitan High School in his senior year , in which Strasburg allowed one hit , drew attention from scouts . He finished his senior year with a 1 @.@ 68 earned run average ( ERA ) and 74 strikeouts in 62 1 ⁄ 3 innings pitched , with seven complete games . He finished with three varsity letters , set school records in ERA and shutouts , and was named his school 's 2006 Scholar @-@ Athlete of the Year . He was also named second @-@ team all @-@ league and his team 's MVP . Despite these achievements , he was not selected in that year 's Major League Baseball Draft . 
 = = = College = = = 
 Strasburg had hoped to attend Stanford University but was not accepted there . Although recruited by a number of schools across the country , he enrolled at San Diego State University , where both of his parents attended school . He played college baseball for the San Diego State Aztecs , coached by the late Baseball Hall of Fame inductee Tony Gwynn . When he first arrived , he was an unlikely candidate to pitch collegiate baseball at all ; he was so overweight and out of shape that his conditioning coach nicknamed him " <unk> " and encouraged him to quit baseball . He also had a difficult time adjusting to college life , moving out of his dormitory and in with his mother after five days . He acknowledged , " I wasn 't the most mature guy out of high school . … The dorm was an overload , too much , too soon . " Strasburg responded with an intense workout regimen , losing 30 pounds ( 14 kg ) in the process . He also worked to improve his mental toughness . Coaches tested him by placing him in high @-@ pressure situations and telling him he needed to get strikeouts . 
 San Diego State used Strasburg as a relief pitcher in his freshman year ; he began the season pitching in middle relief , before becoming the Aztecs ' closer . He held opponents to a <unk> batting average against and was named Co @-@ Freshman of the Year for the Mountain West Conference . In the summer of 2007 , Strasburg also played for the Torrington Twisters of the collegiate summer baseball New England Collegiate Baseball League ( NECBL ) . He was named to the NECBL First Team as a closer , and was also chosen as the Top Pro Prospect and Top Relief Pitcher in the NECBL . 
 In 2008 , as a sophomore , Strasburg was converted to a full @-@ time starting pitcher . He went 8 – 3 with a 1 @.@ 58 ERA and 134 strikeouts in 98 ⅓ innings . Four of his thirteen starts in 2008 were complete games , two of which were shutouts . On April 11 of that year , he struck out a Mountain West Conference record 23 batters in a game versus the University of Utah . He also gained eight miles per hour on his fastball , regularly working in the upper 90s and touching 100 mph . 
 Strasburg finished his junior year , the 2009 season , 13 – 1 with a 1 @.@ 32 ERA , 59 hits allowed , 16 earned runs , 19 walks , and 195 strikeouts in 109 innings pitched . In his final home start on May 8 , 2009 , Strasburg threw his first career no @-@ hitter while striking out 17 Air Force Falcons batters . His lone loss came against the Virginia Cavaliers in the NCAA Regionals as Virginia advanced toward the College World Series , but he still struck out 15 in seven innings during the loss . He won the Dick Howser Trophy and the National Pitcher of the Year Award . 
 = = = International play = = = 
 Strasburg was named to the United States national baseball team on June 24 , 2008 . In that role he appeared in the 2008 World University Baseball Championship , held in late July . The United States won the gold medal in the competition . 
 Strasburg was the lone collegiate player selected for the United States national team at the 2008 Summer Olympics in Beijing . In his first start at the Olympics , Strasburg one @-@ hit the Netherlands over seven innings , striking out five of the first six batters he faced and 11 overall . The lone hit Strasburg allowed was a seventh @-@ inning single to <unk> Adriana . 
 With the United States having already secured a spot in the semifinals medal round , manager Davey Johnson held Strasburg from what would have been his second start on August 20 in order to pitch him in the first round of the semifinals against Norge Luis Vera of the Cuban national baseball team , on August 22 . Vera outdueled Strasburg with six innings pitched and only two runs , one earned . Strasburg , meanwhile , lasted only four innings while giving up three runs , two earned . Cuba won the game 10 – 2 . 
 Strasburg ended up with a 1 – 1 record , a 1 @.@ 67 ERA , and a bronze medal for the Olympics , as the United States won its following contest against Japan 8 – 4 . He won the USA Baseball Richard W. " Dick " Case Player of the Year Award in 2008 . 
 = = Professional career = = 
 = = = Draft = = = 
 On June 9 , 2009 , Strasburg was drafted number one overall in the 2009 Major League Baseball Draft by the Washington Nationals . On August 17 , 2009 , he signed a record @-@ breaking four @-@ year , $ 15 @.@ 1 million contract with the Nationals , just 77 seconds before the deadline , shattering a dollar @-@ amount record previously held by Mark Prior , who signed for $ 10 @.@ 5 million in 2001 . Strasburg is represented by agent Scott Boras . 
 = = = Minor leagues = = = 
 Strasburg made his professional debut on October 16 , 2009 , starting for the Phoenix Desert Dogs in the Arizona Fall League at Phoenix Municipal Stadium . He was selected to play in the league 's Rising Stars Showcase , but was unable to participate due to a minor neck injury . He also won Pitcher of the Week honors for the week of November 2 , 2009 and led the AFL with four wins . Before the 2010 season started , Baseball America named Strasburg as the top pitching prospect , and the second @-@ best overall prospect behind Jason Heyward . 
 Strasburg was assigned to the Harrisburg Senators of the Class AA Eastern League for the start of the 2010 season . There was so much anticipation and hype surrounding Strasburg that there were about 70 credentialed media members in attendance at his April 11 , 2010 debut , and ESPN nationally broadcast portions of the game . He won his Senators debut against the Altoona Curve , allowing four hits and four runs ( one earned ) , while striking out eight batters in five innings . During his first home start on April 16 , he yielded two hits and an unearned run with three strikeouts in 2 ⅓ innings in a loss to the New Britain Rock Cats , one where his innings were limited due to a rain delay . Harrisburg set an attendance record in Strasburg 's home debut with 7 @,@ 895 fans . He completed his Class AA stint with a 1 @.@ 64 ERA while striking out 27 and walking six in 22 innings . 
 On May 4 , 2010 , he was promoted to the Syracuse Chiefs of the Class AAA International League . In his first game with the Chiefs , he pitched six scoreless innings , striking out six batters while allowing one hit and one walk . That game drew 13 @,@ 766 fans — the highest attendance in the 135 @-@ year history of baseball in Syracuse . In his second start , Strasburg was removed after pitching six no @-@ hit innings . He finished his minor league stint with an overall record of 7 – 2 , an ERA of 1 @.@ 30 , 65 strikeouts and 13 walks in 55 ⅓ innings , and a walks plus hits per inning pitched ( WHIP ) ratio of 0 @.@ 80 . 
 = = = Washington Nationals = = = 
 = = = = Debut = = = = 
 Strasburg made his major @-@ league debut on June 8 , 2010 , against the Pittsburgh Pirates . A Sports Illustrated columnist termed it " the most hyped pitching debut the game has ever seen . " An ESPN article revealed the colloquial name for Strasburg 's celebrated debut as " <unk> " . Strasburg picked up the win in his debut , pitching seven innings , allowing two earned runs and no walks and 14 strikeouts , setting a new team strikeout record . Also , he was the first pitcher in history to strike out at least eleven batters without issuing any walks in his pro debut , while falling just one strikeout short of the all @-@ time record for a pitcher 's debut — Karl Spooner ( 1954 ) and J. R. Richard ( 1971 ) both struck out 15 , but each took nine innings to do it , and each walked three . ( Bob Feller also struck out 15 in his first start , although it wasn 't his big league debut ) . He struck out every batter in the Pirates ' lineup at least once and struck out the last seven batters he faced — also a Nationals record . He threw 34 of his 94 pitches at 98 miles per hour ( 158 km / h ) or faster , including two that reached 100 miles per hour ( 160 km / h ) . 
 In Strasburg 's second and third major league starts he struck out another eight and ten batters , respectively , setting a major league record for the most strikeouts in a pitcher 's first three starts with 32 . The previous record holder had been Richard , who struck out 29 in his first three starts in 1971 . 
 Strasburg was also featured in the cover story of Sports Illustrated following his second start . His # 37 jersey was the top @-@ selling jersey in all of baseball for the month of June and became the best @-@ selling Nationals jersey of all time in that span . 
 = = = = Injuries and rehab = = = = 
 Strasburg was placed on the disabled list with an inflamed right shoulder in July 2010 . He returned to action on August 10 , but in his third game back , on August 21 , he was removed with an apparent injury . On August 27 , the Nationals announced that Strasburg had a torn ulnar collateral ligament , requiring Tommy John surgery , and about 12 to 18 months of rehabilitation . 
 In the 2010 season Strasburg pitched in 12 games , all starts , throwing 68 innings , 92 strikeouts and compiling a 2 @.@ 91 ERA . He was named a pitcher on the 2010 Topps Major League Rookie All @-@ Star Team . 
 Strasburg made his first rehab start on August 7 , 2011 for the Hagerstown Suns . Strasburg made six rehab starts during the 2011 minor league season throwing a total of 20 ⅓ innings , with 29 strikeouts , compiling a 3 @.@ 49 ERA and a 1 – 1 record . He then made 5 starts during the 2011 major league season , his first coming against the Los Angeles Dodgers on September 6 . That year he threw for 24 innings , struck out 24 , compiled a 1 @.@ 50 ERA and a 1 – 1 record . 
 = = = = 2012 season = = = = 
 In April 2012 , Strasburg accumulated an NL @-@ best 34 strikeouts and second @-@ best 1 @.@ 13 ERA . He totaled 6 walks and did not give up a home run . Consequently , he was named NL Pitcher of the Month . On May 20 , Strasburg went 2 @-@ for @-@ 2 as a hitter in a game against the Baltimore Orioles and hit his first career home run , a solo shot off of Wei @-@ Yin Chen . 
 In his June 13 start against the Toronto Blue Jays , Strasburg became the first pitcher of the year to strike out 100 batters . On July 1 , Strasburg was elected to his first All @-@ Star Game , alongside teammates Gio Gonzalez , Ian Desmond , and Bryce Harper . Strasburg ended the season 15 – 6 with a 3 @.@ 16 ERA , 1 @.@ 15 WHIP and 197 strikeouts in 159 ⅓ innings pitched . 
 Strasburg hit .277 with a home run , 7 RBI , and three walks , earning him a Silver Slugger Award . 
 = = = = = Innings limit and shutdown = = = = = 
 As part of Strasburg 's rehabilitation from his Tommy John surgery , and as a precaution due to his low innings total in 2011 , the Nationals decided to limit the number of innings Strasburg would throw in the 2012 season . Although the number was never official , rumors started that Strasburg 's limit would be between 160 and 180 innings . It was also decided that Strasburg 's shutdown would be final ; he would not pitch in the playoffs . Dr. Lewis <unk> , the surgeon who operated on Strasburg 's elbow , agreed in 2011 that Strasburg 's 2012 innings total should be limited , although he did not consult with Nationals General Manager Mike Rizzo or Strasburg during the season . Teammate Jordan Zimmermann underwent a similar process the year before . 
 Strasburg 's high profile and the success of the Nationals in the 2012 season made the innings limit a topic of national conversation . In addition to baseball writers , a number of other figures made their views on the topic known , including football broadcasters Troy Aikman and Terry Bradshaw , basketball reporter Stephen A. Smith , and even prominent politicians such as Rudy Giuliani and Mitch McConnell . Rizzo defended the decision to shut down Strasburg and criticized the buzz surrounding it : " It 's a good conversational piece , it 's a good debatable subject . But most of the people that have weighed in on this know probably 10 percent of the information that we know , and that we 've made our opinion based upon . " 
 The Nationals announced that Strasburg would be scheduled to make his final start on September 12 and would be replaced by John Lannan in the Nationals ' starting rotation . However , after a rough outing on September 8 , Davey Johnson announced that Strasburg was finished for the 2012 season . Strasburg spent the postseason on the physically unable to perform list as the Nationals lost the 2012 NLDS to the St. Louis Cardinals in 5 games . 
 = = = = 2013 season = = = = 
 Strasburg pitched Opening Day for the Nationals at Nationals Park in Washington , D.C. , on April 1 , 2013 . He went seven innings , giving up no runs and three hits and recording three strikeouts . Following the first batter of the game , Juan Pierre , he retired nineteen straight batters . Strasburg earned the decision , a win , with a final score of 2 – 0 . 
 Strasburg served a brief stint on the disabled list with a mild lateral strain in June and was re @-@ activated on June 16 . 
 Strasburg achieved milestones in longevity in 2013 . He pitched into the 8th inning for the first time in his big @-@ league career on May 16 , in a win against his hometown San Diego Padres , and in subsequent starts on May 26 and July 24 . On August 11 , 2013 , Strasburg pitched his first career complete game winning , 6 – 0 over the Philadelphia Phillies . 
 He was ejected for the first time in his MLB career on August 17 , 2013 by umpire Marvin Hudson for intentionally pitching at Braves batter <unk> Simmons in the second inning of a Nationals @-@ Braves game . Prior to the ejection , Hudson warned both teams after Strasburg hit Justin Upton with a first @-@ pitch fastball following a Braves home run . 
 Strasburg finished the year with a 3 @.@ 00 ERA , 1 @.@ 05 WHIP , 8 Wins , 9 Losses , and 191 strikeouts over 183 innings pitched . 
 = = = = 2014 season = = = = 
 Strasburg enjoyed the best season of his career , leading the league in strikeouts and finishing 9th in the Cy Young award balloting . He posted career @-@ bests in innings pitched and strikeouts . 
 = = = = 2015 season = = = = 
 2015 was a disappointing year for Strasburg and the Nationals as injuries limited his production to 127 innings , his lowest output since 2011 . In the meantime , the Nationals failed to make it to the playoffs , in part due to Strasburg 's unavailability . Despite the setbacks , he was effective in limited action , winning 11 games , good for third most wins in the Nationals ' pitching staff . 
 = = = = 2016 season = = = = 
 On May 9 , 2016 , it was reported that Strasburg had agreed to a 7 @-@ year , $ 175 million extension to remain with the Nationals . The deal was made official the next day on May 10 . With the extension , Strasburg became the first National to receive an opt @-@ out clause in his contract , which will allow him to elect free agency after the 2019 or 2020 seasons if he desires . On June 26 , 2016 , he was placed on the 15 @-@ day disabled list due to an upper back strain . He returned on July 3 against the Cincinnati Reds , where he took a no @-@ hitter through 6 @.@ 2 innings until being lifted from the game after throwing 109 pitches . The no @-@ hitter was broken up in the 8th inning , but the Nationals still won 12 @-@ 1 . On July 8 , Strasburg became the first pitcher since 1912 to start 12 @-@ 0 . 
 = = Pitching style = = 
 = = = Pitch repertoire and approach = = = 
 Strasburg 's repertoire features four pitches : a four @-@ seam fastball , his primary pitch at 95 – 98 miles per hour ( 153 – 158 km / h ) which tops out at 100 mph ; a two @-@ seam fastball at 94 – 97 miles per hour ( 151 – 156 km / h ) ; a curveball that Strasburg himself refers to as a slurve at 79 – 82 miles per hour ( 127 – 132 km / h ) ; and a changeup at 87 – 90 miles per hour ( 140 – 145 km / h ) . Strasburg throws a mix of all four pitches to left @-@ handed hitters , but he mostly eliminates the changeup when facing right @-@ handed hitters . He is liable to throw his four @-@ seamer or slurve to right @-@ handers with 2 strikes , and adds the changeup in those counts against lefties . 
 His velocity was not significantly affected by his Tommy John surgery in 2010 . He had the fastest four @-@ seam fastball among starting pitchers in the 2012 season , averaging 96 @.@ 5 miles per hour ( 155 km / h ) . 
 Strasburg has a high strikeout rate of 11 @.@ 2 per 9 innings through his first 251 ⅓ MLB innings . This corresponds with high swing @-@ and @-@ miss rates across all of his pitches , including 54 % on his changeup — the highest whiff rate among all starting pitchers ' changeups since <unk> / x began tracking pitches . Through the 2012 season , Strasburg 's career strikeout @-@ to @-@ walk ratio of 4 @.@ 67 would rank second all @-@ time if he had enough innings to qualify . Strasburg maintains that his high strikeout rate is not intentional , and in fact is a hindrance to maintaining low pitch counts . 
 = = = Mechanics = = = 
 Strasburg 's pitching mechanics have drawn concern over the years from scouts and coaches . The sequence of Strasburg 's delivery places a great deal of stress on his arm , placing him at greater risk of elbow and shoulder injuries . Indeed , " several pitching coaches quietly predicted Strasburg was at risk " before the rupture of his elbow ligament . Independent scout Paul Reddick compared his mechanics unfavorably with those of pitching legend Greg Maddux , saying Strasburg 's motion is inefficient and badly synchronized . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Strasburg was born in San Diego , California , He credits his maternal grandmother with helping him develop his baseball skills as a child . She would frequently play catch and even work on pitching with him . He labels her as one of his biggest inspirations . He was married on January 9 , 2010 , to Rachel Lackey , whom he had met while they were students at San Diego State . On June 24 , 2014 Strasburg stated in an interview that he was going to stop chewing tobacco in the wake of his college coach Tony Gwynn 's death . 
 = Michael Jackson = 
 Michael Joseph Jackson ( August 29 , 1958 – June 25 , 2009 ) was an American singer , songwriter , record producer , dancer , and actor . Famously called the King of Pop , his contributions to music , dance and fashion along with his publicized personal life made him a global figure in popular culture for over four decades . 
 The eighth child of the Jackson family , Michael made his professional debut in 1964 with his elder brothers Jackie , Tito , Jermaine , and Marlon as a member of the Jackson 5 , and began his solo career in 1971 . In the early 1980s , Jackson became a dominant figure in popular music . His music videos , including those of " Beat It " , " Billie Jean " , and " Thriller " from his 1982 album Thriller , are credited with breaking racial barriers and transforming the medium into an art form and promotional tool . The popularity of these videos helped bring the television channel MTV to fame . Jackson 's 1987 album Bad spawned the U.S. Billboard Hot 100 number @-@ one singles " I Just Can 't Stop Loving You " , " Bad " , " The Way You Make Me Feel " , " Man in the Mirror " , and " Dirty Diana " , becoming the first album to have five number @-@ one singles on the Billboard Hot 100 . He continued to innovate with videos such as " Black or White " and " Scream " throughout the 1990s , and forged a reputation as a touring solo artist . Through stage and video performances , Jackson popularized a number of complicated dance techniques , such as the robot and the moonwalk , to which he gave the name . His distinctive sound and style has influenced numerous artists of various music genres . 
 Thriller is currently the best @-@ selling album of all time , with estimated sales of 65 million copies worldwide . Jackson 's other albums , including Off the Wall ( 1979 ) , Bad ( 1987 ) , Dangerous ( 1991 ) , and HIStory ( 1995 ) , also rank among the world 's best @-@ selling albums . He is recognized as the Most Successful Entertainer of All Time by Guinness World Records . Jackson is one of the few artists to have been inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame twice , and was also inducted into the Songwriters Hall of Fame and the Dance Hall of Fame as the only dancer from pop and rock music . His other achievements include multiple Guinness World Records , 13 Grammy Awards , the Grammy Legend Award , the Grammy Lifetime Achievement Award , 26 American Music Awards — more than any other artist — including the " Artist of the Century " and " Artist of the 1980s " , 13 number @-@ one singles in the United States during his solo career , — more than any other male artist in the Hot 100 era — and estimated sales of over 400 million records worldwide . Jackson has won hundreds of awards , making him the most awarded recording artist in the history of popular music . He became the first artist in history to have a top ten single in the Billboard Hot 100 in five different decades when " Love Never Felt So Good " reached number nine on May 21 , 2014 . Jackson traveled the world attending events honoring his humanitarianism , and , in 2000 , the Guinness World Records recognized him for supporting 39 charities , more than any other entertainer . 
 Aspects of Jackson 's personal life , including his changing appearance , personal relationships , and behavior , generated controversy . In 1993 , he was accused of child sexual abuse , but the civil case was settled out of court for an undisclosed amount and no formal charges were brought . In 2005 , he was tried and acquitted of further child sexual abuse allegations and several other charges after the jury found him not guilty on all counts . While preparing for his comeback concert series , This Is It , Jackson died of acute propofol and benzodiazepine intoxication on June 25 , 2009 , after suffering from cardiac arrest . The Los Angeles County Coroner ruled his death a homicide , and his personal physician , Conrad Murray , was convicted of involuntary manslaughter . Jackson 's death triggered a global outpouring of grief , and a live broadcast of his public memorial service was viewed around the world . Forbes ranks Jackson as the top @-@ earning dead celebrity , a title held for a sixth consecutive year , with $ 115 million in earnings . 
 = = Life and career = = 
 = = = 1958 – 75 : Early life and the Jackson 5 = = = 
 Michael Joseph Jackson was born on August 29 , 1958 . He was the eighth of ten children in a working class African @-@ American family living in a two @-@ bedroom house on Jackson Street in Gary , Indiana , an industrial city and a part of the Chicago metropolitan area . His mother , Katherine Esther Scruse , was a devout Jehovah 's Witness . She played clarinet and piano and once aspired to be a country @-@ and @-@ western performer , but worked part @-@ time at Sears to support the family . Michael 's father , Joseph Walter " Joe " Jackson , a former boxer , was a steelworker at U.S. Steel . Joe also performed on guitar with a local rhythm and blues band , the Falcons , to supplement the family 's household income . Michael grew up with three sisters ( Rebbie , La Toya , and Janet ) and five brothers ( Jackie , Tito , Jermaine , Marlon , and Randy ) . A sixth brother , Marlon 's twin Brandon , died shortly after birth . 
 Jackson had a troubled relationship with his father , Joe . In 2003 , Joe acknowledged that he regularly whipped him as a boy . Joe was also said to have verbally abused his son , often saying that he had a " fat nose " . Jackson stated that he was physically and emotionally abused during incessant rehearsals , though he credited his father 's strict discipline with playing a large role in his success . In an interview with Martin Bashir for the 2003 documentary Living with Michael Jackson , Jackson recalled that Joe often sat in a chair with a belt in his hand as he and his siblings rehearsed , and that " if you didn 't do it the right way , he would tear you up , really get you . " 
 Jackson 's parents have disputed the longstanding allegations of abuse , with Katherine stating that while whipping is considered abuse today , it was a common way to discipline children at the time . Jackie , Tito , Jermaine and Marlon have also said that their father was not abusive and that the whippings , which were harder on Michael because he was younger , kept them disciplined and out of trouble . Speaking openly about his childhood in an interview with Oprah Winfrey broadcast in February 1993 , Jackson acknowledged that his youth had been lonely and isolating . His deep dissatisfaction with his appearance , his nightmares and chronic sleep problems , his tendency to remain hyper @-@ compliant , especially with his father , and to remain childlike throughout his adult life are consistent with the effects of the maltreatment he endured as a young child . 
 In 1964 , Michael and Marlon joined the Jackson Brothers — a band formed by their father and which included brothers Jackie , Tito , and Jermaine — as backup musicians playing congas and tambourine . In 1965 , Jackson began sharing lead vocals with his older brother Jermaine , and the group 's name was changed to the Jackson 5 . The following year , the group won a major local talent show with Jackson performing the dance to Robert Parker 's 1965 hit " <unk> ' " . From 1966 to 1968 the band toured the Midwest , frequently performing at a string of black clubs known as the " chitlin ' circuit " as the opening act for artists such as Sam & Dave , the O 'Jays , Gladys Knight , and Etta James . The Jackson 5 also performed at clubs and cocktail lounges , where striptease shows and other adult acts were featured , and at local auditoriums and high school dances . In August 1967 , while touring the East coast , the group won a weekly amateur night concert at the Apollo Theater in Harlem . 
 The Jackson 5 recorded several songs , including " Big Boy " ( 1968 ) , their first single , for Steeltown Records , a Gary , Indiana , record label , before signing with Motown in 1969 . They left Gary in 1969 and relocated to the Los Angeles area , where they continued to record music for Motown . Rolling Stone later described the young Michael as " a prodigy " with " overwhelming musical gifts " who " quickly emerged as the main draw and lead singer . " The group set a chart record when its first four singles — " I Want You Back " ( 1969 ) , " ABC " ( 1970 ) , " The Love You Save " ( 1970 ) , and " I 'll Be There " ( 1970 ) — peaked at number one on the Billboard Hot 100 . In May 1971 , the Jackson family moved into a large home on two @-@ acre estate in Encino , California . During this period , Michael evolved from child performer into a teen idol . As Jackson began to emerge as a solo performer in the early 1970s , he maintained ties to the Jackson 5 and Motown . Between 1972 , when his solo career began , and 1975 , Michael released four solo studio albums with Motown : Got to Be There ( 1972 ) , Ben ( 1972 ) , Music & Me ( 1973 ) , and Forever , Michael ( 1975 ) . " Got to Be There " and " Ben " , the title tracks from his first two solo albums , both became successful singles , as did a cover of Bobby Day 's " Rockin ' Robin " . 
 The Jackson 5 were later described as " a cutting @-@ edge example of black crossover artists . " Although the group 's sales began to decline in 1973 , and the band members chafed under Motown 's refusal to allow them creative input , they achieved several top 40 hits , including the top five single " Dancing Machine " ( 1974 ) , before leaving Motown in 1975 . 
 = = = 1975 – 81 : Move to Epic and Off the Wall = = = 
 In June 1975 , the Jackson 5 signed with Epic Records , a subsidiary of CBS Records , and renamed themselves the Jacksons . Younger brother Randy formally joined the band around this time , while Jermaine chose to stay with Motown and pursue a solo career . The Jacksons continued to tour internationally , and released six more albums between 1976 and 1984 . Michael , the group 's lead songwriter during this time , wrote hits such as " Shake Your Body ( Down to the Ground ) " ( 1979 ) , " This Place Hotel " ( 1980 ) , and " Can You Feel It " ( 1980 ) . 
 His work in film began in 1978 , when he starred as the Scarecrow in The Wiz , a musical directed by Sidney Lumet that also starred Diana Ross , Nipsey Russell , and Ted Ross . The film was a box @-@ office failure . While working on the film Jackson met producer Quincy Jones , though this was not the first time they had met ( they originally met when Michael was 12 , at Sammy Davis Jr . ' s house ) . Jones was arranging the film 's musical score and agreed to produce Jackson 's next solo album , Off the Wall . In 1979 , Jackson broke his nose during a complex dance routine . His subsequent rhinoplasty was not a complete success ; he complained of breathing difficulties that would affect his career . He was referred to Dr. Steven Hoefflin , who performed Jackson 's second rhinoplasty and subsequent operations . 
 Off the Wall ( 1979 ) , which Jones and Jackson co @-@ produced , established Jackson as a solo performer . The album helped Jackson transition from the bubblegum pop of his youth to the more complex sounds he would create as an adult . Songwriters for the album included Jackson , Rod Temperton , Stevie Wonder , and Paul McCartney . Off the Wall was the first solo album to generate four top 10 hits in the United States : " Off the Wall " , " She 's Out of My Life " , and the chart @-@ topping singles " Don 't Stop ' Til You Get Enough " and " Rock with You " . The album reached number three on the Billboard 200 and eventually sold over 20 million copies worldwide . In 1980 , Jackson won three awards at the American Music Awards for his solo efforts : Favorite Soul / R & B Album , Favorite Soul / R & B Male Artist , and Favorite Soul / R & B Single for " Don 't Stop ' Til You Get Enough " . He also won Billboard Year @-@ End awards for Top Black Artist and Top Black Album , and a Grammy Award for Best Male R & B Vocal Performance for 1979 with " Don 't Stop ' Til You Get Enough " . In 1981 Jackson was the American Music Awards winner for Favorite Soul / R & B Album and Favorite Soul / R & B Male Artist . Despite its commercial success , Jackson felt Off the Wall should have made a bigger impact , and was determined to exceed expectations with his next release . In 1980 , he secured the highest royalty rate in the music industry : 37 percent of wholesale album profit . 
 Jackson recorded with Queen singer Freddie Mercury from 1981 to 1983 , including a demo of " State of Shock " , " Victory " and " There Must Be More to Life Than This " . The recordings were intended for an album of duets but , according to Queen 's then @-@ manager Jim Beach , the relationship between the singers soured when Jackson insisted on bringing a llama into the recording studio . The collaborations were not officially released until 2014 . Jackson went on to record the single " State of Shock " with Mick Jagger for the Jacksons ' album Victory ( 1984 ) . Mercury included the solo version of " There Must Be More To Life Than This " on his Mr. Bad Guy album ( 1985 ) . 
 = = = 1982 – 83 : Thriller and Motown 25 : Yesterday , Today , Forever = = = 
 In 1982 , Jackson combined his interests in songwriting and film when he contributed the song " Someone in the Dark " to the storybook for the film E.T. the Extra @-@ Terrestrial . The song , with Quincy Jones as its producer , won a Grammy for Best Recording for Children for 1983 . 
 More success came with the release of his sixth album , Thriller , in late 1982 . The album earned Jackson seven more Grammys and eight American Music Awards , including the Award of Merit , the youngest artist to win it . It was the best @-@ selling album worldwide in 1983 , and became the best @-@ selling album of all time in the United States and the best @-@ selling album of all time worldwide , selling an estimated 65 million copies . It topped the Billboard 200 chart for 37 weeks and was in the top 10 of the 200 for 80 consecutive weeks . It was the first album to have seven Billboard Hot 100 top 10 singles , including " Billie Jean " , " Beat It " , and " Wanna Be Startin ' Somethin ' " . In December 2015 , Thriller was certified for 30 million shipments by the RIAA , making it the only album to achieve that feat in the United States . Thriller won Jackson and Quincy Jones the Grammy award for Producer of the Year ( Non @-@ Classical ) for 1983 . It also won Album of the Year , with Jackson as the album 's artist and Jones as its co @-@ producer , and a Best Pop Vocal Performance , Male , award for Jackson . " Beat It " won Record of the Year , with Jackson as artist and Jones as co @-@ producer , and a Best Rock Vocal Performance , Male , award for Jackson . " Billie Jean " won Jackson two Grammy awards , Best R & B Song , with Jackson as its songwriter , and Best R & B Vocal Performance , Male , as its artist . Thriller also won another Grammy for Best Engineered Recording – Non Classical in 1984 , awarding Bruce Swedien for his work on the album . The AMA Awards for 1984 provided Jackson with an Award of Merit and AMAs for Favorite Male Artist , Soul / R & B , and Favorite Male Artist , Pop / Rock . " Beat It " won Jackson AMAs for Favorite Video , Soul / R & B , Favorite Video , Pop / Rock , and Favorite Single , Pop / Rock . Thriller won him AMAs for Favorite Album , Soul / R & B , and Favorite Album , Pop / Rock . 
 In addition to the album , Jackson released " Thriller " , a 14 @-@ minute music video directed by John Landis , in 1983 . It " defined music videos and broke racial barriers " on the Music Television Channel ( MTV ) , a fledgling entertainment television channel at the time . In December 2009 , the Library of Congress selected the " Thriller " music video for inclusion in the National Film Registry . It was one of 25 films named that year as " works of enduring importance to American culture " that would be " preserved for all time . " As of 2009 , the zombie @-@ themed " Thriller " is the only music video to have been inducted into the registry . 
 Jackson 's attorney John Branca noted that Jackson had the highest royalty rate in the music industry at that point : approximately $ 2 for every album sold . He was also making record @-@ breaking profits from sales of his recordings . The videocassette of the documentary The Making of Michael Jackson 's Thriller sold over 350 @,@ 000 copies in a few months . The era saw the arrival of novelties such as dolls modeled after Michael Jackson , which appeared in stores in May 1984 at a price of $ 12 . Biographer J. Randy Taraborrelli writes that " Thriller stopped selling like a leisure item — like a magazine , a toy , tickets to a hit movie — and started selling like a household staple . " In 1985 , The Making of Michael Jackson 's Thriller won a Grammy for Best Music Video , Longform . Time described Jackson 's influence at that point as " star of records , radio , rock video . A one @-@ man rescue team for the music business . A songwriter who sets the beat for a decade . A dancer with the fanciest feet on the street . A singer who cuts across all boundaries of taste and style and color too " . The New York Times wrote that " in the world of pop music , there is Michael Jackson and there is everybody else " . 
 On March 25 , 1983 , Jackson reunited with his brothers for a live performance taped at the Pasadena Civic Auditorium for Motown 25 : Yesterday , Today , Forever , an NBC television special . The show aired on May 16 , 1983 , to an estimated audience of 47 million viewers , and featured the Jacksons and other Motown stars . The show is best remembered for Jackson 's solo performance of " Billie Jean " , which earned Jackson his first Emmy nomination . Wearing a distinctive black @-@ sequined jacket and a golf glove decorated with rhinestones , he debuted his signature dance move , the moonwalk , which former Soul Train dancer and Shalamar member Jeffrey Daniel had taught him three years earlier . Jackson originally turned down the invitation to perform at the show , believing he had been doing too much television at the time ; however , at the request of Berry Gordy , Jackson agreed to perform in exchange for time to do a solo performance . According to Rolling Stone reporter Mikal Gilmore , " There are times when you know you are hearing or seeing something extraordinary ... that came that night . " Jackson 's performance drew comparisons to Elvis Presley 's and the Beatles ' appearances on The Ed Sullivan Show . Anna Kisselgoff of The New York Times later wrote : " The moonwalk that he made famous is an apt metaphor for his dance style . How does he do it ? As a technician , he is a great illusionist , a genuine mime . His ability to keep one leg straight as he glides while the other bends and seems to walk requires perfect timing . " Berry Gordy said of the performance , " from the first beat of Billie Jean , I was mesmerized , and when he did his iconic moonwalk , I was shocked , it was magic , Michael Jackson went into orbit , and never came down . " 
 = = = 1984 – 85 : Pepsi , " We Are the World " , and business career = = = 
 In November 1983 Jackson and his brothers partnered with PepsiCo in a $ 5 million promotional deal that broke advertising industry records for a celebrity endorsement . The first Pepsi Cola campaign , which ran in the United States from 1983 to 1984 and launched its " New Generation " theme , included tour sponsorship , public relations events , and in @-@ store displays . Jackson , who was actively involved in creating the iconic advertisement , suggested using his song , " Billie Jean " , as its jingle with a revised chorus . According to a Billboard report in 2009 , Brian J. Murphy , executive VP of branded management at TBA Global , said : " You couldn 't separate the tour from the endorsement from the licensing of the music , and then the integration of the music into the Pepsi fabric . " 
 On January 27 , 1984 , Michael and other members of the Jacksons filmed a Pepsi commercial overseen by executive Phil Dusenberry , a BBDO ad agency executive , and Alan <unk> , Pepsi 's Worldwide Creative Director , at the Shrine Auditorium in Los Angeles . During a simulated concert before a full house of fans , pyrotechnics accidentally set Jackson 's hair on fire , causing second @-@ degree burns to his scalp . Jackson underwent treatment to hide the scars and had his third rhinoplasty shortly thereafter . Pepsi settled out of court , and Jackson donated his $ 1 @.@ 5 million settlement to the Brotman Medical Center in Culver City , California . Its Michael Jackson Burn Center is named in his honor . Dusenberry later recounted the episode in his memoir , Then We Set His Hair on Fire : Insights and Accidents from a Hall of Fame Career in Advertising . Jackson signed a second agreement with Pepsi in the late 1980s for a reported $ 10 million . The second campaign had a global reach of more than 20 countries and would provide financial support for Jackson 's Bad album and 1987 – 88 world tour . Although Jackson had endorsements and advertising deals with other companies , such as LA Gear , Suzuki , and Sony , none were as significant as his deals with Pepsi , which later signed other music stars such as Britney Spears and Beyoncé to promote its products . 
 Jackson 's humanitarian work was recognized on May 14 , 1984 , when he was invited to the White House to receive an award from President Ronald Reagan for his support of charities that helped people overcome alcohol and drug abuse , and in recognition of his support for the Ad Council 's and the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration 's Drunk Driving Prevention campaign . Jackson donated the use of " Beat It " for the campaign 's public service announcements . 
 Unlike later albums , Thriller did not have an official tour , but the Victory Tour of 1984 headlined the Jacksons and showcased much of Jackson 's new solo material to more than two million Americans . It was the last tour he would do with his brothers . Following controversy over the concert 's ticket sales , Jackson held a press conference and announced that he would donate his share of the proceeds , an estimated $ 3 to 5 million , to charity . His charitable work and humanitarian awards continued with the release of " We Are the World " ( 1985 ) , which he co @-@ wrote with Lionel Richie . The song was recorded on January 28 , 1985 and was released worldwide in March 1985 to aid the poor in the United States and Africa . The song earned $ 63 million for famine relief , and became one of the best @-@ selling singles of all time , with 20 million copies sold . " We Are the World " won four Grammys for 1985 , including Song of the Year going to Jackson and Richie as its co @-@ songwriters . Although the American Music Award directors removed the charity song from the competition because they felt it would be inappropriate , the AMA show in 1986 concluded with a tribute to the song in honor of its first anniversary . The project 's creators received two special AMA honors : one for the creation of the song and another for the USA for Africa idea . Jackson , Quincy Jones , and entertainment promoter Ken <unk> received special awards for their roles in the song 's creation . 
 Jackson 's financial interests in the music publishing business grew after Jackson collaborated with Paul McCartney in the early 1980s . He subsequently learned that McCartney was making approximately $ 40 million a year from other people 's songs . By 1983 , Jackson had begun investing in publishing rights to songs that others had written , but he was careful with his acquisitions , only bidding on a few of the dozens that were offered to him . Jackson 's early acquisitions of music catalogs and song copyrights such as the Sly Stone collection included " Everyday People " ( 1968 ) , Len Barry 's " 1 @-@ 2 @-@ 3 " ( 1965 ) , and Dion DiMucci 's " The Wanderer " ( 1961 ) and " Runaround Sue " ( 1961 ) ; however , Jackson 's most significant purchase came in 1985 , when he acquired the publishing rights to ATV Music Publishing after months of negotiation . ATV had acquired the publishing rights to nearly 4000 songs , including the Northern Songs catalog that contained the majority of the Lennon – McCartney compositions recorded by the Beatles . 
 In 1984 Robert Holmes à Court , the wealthy Australian investor who owned ATV Music Publishing , announced he was putting the ATV catalog up for sale . In 1981 , McCartney was offered the ATV music catalog for £ 20 million ( $ 40 million ) . According to McCartney , he contacted Yoko Ono about making a joint purchase by splitting the cost at £ 10 million each , but Ono thought they could buy it for £ 5 million each . When they were unable to make a joint purchase , McCartney , who did not want to be the sole owner of the Beatles ' songs , did not pursue an offer on his own . According to a negotiator for Holmes à Court in the 1984 sale , McCartney was given first right of refusal and declined to purchase . 
 Jackson was informed of the sale by his attorney , John Branca , in September 1984 . An attorney for McCartney also assured Branca that McCartney was not interested in bidding . McCartney reportedly felt it was too expensive , but several other companies and investors were interested in bidding . Jackson submitted a bid of $ 46 million on November 20 , 1984 . His agents thought they had a deal several times , but encountered new bidders or new areas of debate . In May 1985 , Jackson 's team left talks after having spent more than $ 1 million and four months of due diligence work on the negotiations . In June 1985 , Jackson and Branca learned that Charles Koppelman 's and Marty Bandier 's The Entertainment Company had made a tentative agreement with Holmes à Court to buy ATV Music for $ 50 million ; however , in early August , Holmes à Court 's team contacted Jackson and talks resumed . Jackson raised his bid to $ 47 @.@ 5 million , which was accepted because he could close the deal more quickly , having already completed due diligence of ATV Music . Jackson also agreed to visit Holmes à Court in Australia , where he would appear on the Channel Seven Perth Telethon . Jackson 's purchase of ATV Music was finalized on August 10 , 1985 . 
 = = = 1986 – 90 : Changing appearance , tabloids , Bad , films , autobiography , and Neverland = = = 
 Jackson 's skin had been a medium @-@ brown color during his youth , but starting in the mid @-@ 1980s gradually grew paler . The change gained widespread media coverage , including rumors that he might have been bleaching his skin . According to J. Randy Taraborrelli 's biography , in 1984 , Jackson was diagnosed with vitiligo , which Taraborrelli noted may be a consequence of skin bleaching . He claimed Jackson was diagnosed with lupus . The vitiligo partially lightened his skin , and the lupus was in remission . Both illnesses made his skin sensitive to sunlight . The treatments Jackson used for his condition further lightened his skin tone , and with the application of pancake makeup to even out blotches he could appear pale . Jackson was also diagnosed with vitiligo in his autopsy , though not lupus . 
 Jackson claimed he had only two <unk> and no other facial surgery , although at one point mentioned having a dimple created in his chin . He lost weight in the early 1980s because of a change in diet and a desire for " a dancer 's body " . Witnesses reported that he was often dizzy , and speculated he was suffering from anorexia nervosa . Periods of weight loss would become a recurring problem later in life . During the course of his treatment , Jackson made two close friends : his dermatologist , Dr. Arnold Klein , and Klein 's nurse Debbie Rowe . Rowe eventually became Jackson 's second wife and the mother of his two eldest children . He also relied heavily on Klein for medical and business advice . 
