 Jackson became the subject of increasingly sensational reports . In 1986 , the tabloids ran a story claiming that Jackson slept in a hyperbaric oxygen chamber to slow the aging process ; he was pictured lying in a glass box . Although the claim was untrue , according to tabloid reports that are widely cited , Jackson had disseminated the fabricated story himself . When Jackson bought a chimpanzee named Bubbles from a laboratory , he was reported to be increasingly detached from reality . It was reported that Jackson had offered to buy the bones of Joseph Merrick ( the " Elephant Man " ) and , although untrue , Jackson did not deny the story . Although he initially saw these stories as opportunities for publicity , he stopped leaking untruths to the press as they became more sensational . Consequently , the media began fabricating stories . These reports became embedded in the public consciousness , inspiring the nickname " Wacko Jacko " , which Jackson came to despise . Responding to the gossip , Jackson remarked to Taraborrelli : 
 Why not just tell people I 'm an alien from Mars ? Tell them I eat live chickens and do a voodoo dance at midnight . They 'll believe anything you say , because you 're a reporter . But if I , Michael Jackson , were to say , " I 'm an alien from Mars and I eat live chickens and do a voodoo dance at midnight , " people would say , " Oh , man , that Michael Jackson is nuts . He 's cracked up . You can 't believe a single word that comes out of his mouth . " 
 Jackson collaborated with filmmakers George Lucas and Francis Ford Coppola on the 17 @-@ minute 3D film Captain EO , which debuted in September 1986 at both the original Disneyland and at Epcot in Florida , and in March 1987 at Tokyo Disneyland . The $ 30 million movie was a popular attraction at all three parks . A Captain EO attraction was later featured at Euro Disneyland after that park opened in 1992 . All four parks ' Captain EO installations stayed open well into the 1990s : the Paris installation was the last to close , in 1998 . The attraction would later return to Disneyland in 2010 after Jackson 's death . In 1987 , Jackson disassociated himself from the Jehovah 's Witnesses , in response to their disapproval of the Thriller video . 
 With the industry expecting another major hit , Jackson 's first album in five years , Bad ( 1987 ) , was highly anticipated . The album produced seven successful singles in the U.S. , five of which ( " I Just Can 't Stop Loving You " , " Bad " , " The Way You Make Me Feel " , " Man in the Mirror " , and " Dirty Diana " ) reached number one on the Billboard Hot 100 . This was a record for most number one Hot 100 singles from any one album , including Thriller . As of 2012 , the album had sold between 30 and 45 million copies worldwide . Bruce Swedien and Humberto Gatica won one Grammy in 1988 for Best Engineered Recording – Non Classical and Michael Jackson won one Grammy for Best Music Video , Short Form for " Leave Me Alone " in 1989 . In the same year , Jackson won an Award of Achievement at the American Music Awards because Bad is the first album ever to generate five number one singles in the U.S. , the first album to top in 25 countries , and the best @-@ selling album worldwide in 1987 and 1988 . In 1988 , " Bad " won an American Music Award for Favorite Soul / R & B Single . 
 The Bad World Tour began on September 12 that year , finishing on January 14 , 1989 . In Japan alone , the tour had 14 sellouts and drew 570 @,@ 000 people , nearly tripling the previous record of 200 @,@ 000 in a single tour . Jackson broke a Guinness World Record when 504 @,@ 000 people attended seven sold @-@ out shows at Wembley Stadium . He performed a total of 123 concerts to an audience of 4 @.@ 4 million people . 
 In 1988 , Jackson released his only autobiography , Moonwalk , which took four years to complete and sold 200 @,@ 000 copies . He wrote about his childhood , the Jackson 5 , and the abuse he had suffered . He also wrote about his changing facial appearance , attributing it to puberty , weight loss , a strict vegetarian diet , a change in hair style , and stage lighting . Moonwalk reached the top position on The New York Times best sellers ' list . Jackson released a film , Moonwalker , which featured live footage and short films starring Jackson and Joe Pesci . Due to financial issues , the film was only released theatrically in Germany ; in other markets it was released direct @-@ to @-@ video . It debuted at the top of the Billboard Top Music Video Cassette chart , staying there for 22 weeks . It was eventually knocked off the top spot by Michael Jackson : The Legend Continues . 
 In March 1988 , Jackson purchased land near Santa Ynez , California , to build Neverland Ranch at a cost of $ 17 million . He installed several carnival rides on the 2 @,@ 700 @-@ acre ( 11 km2 ) property , including a Ferris wheel , carousel , menagerie , as well as a movie theater and a zoo . A security staff of 40 patrolled the grounds . In 2003 , it was valued at approximately $ 100 million . In 1989 , Jackson 's annual earnings from album sales , endorsements , and concerts were estimated at $ 125 million for that year alone . Shortly afterwards , he became the first Westerner to appear in a television ad in the Soviet Union . 
 Jackson 's success resulted in him being dubbed the " King of Pop " . The nickname was popularized by Elizabeth Taylor when she presented him with the Soul Train Heritage Award in 1989 , proclaiming him " the true king of pop , rock and soul . " President George H. W. Bush designated him the White House 's " Artist of the Decade " . From 1985 to 1990 , he donated $ 455 @,@ 000 to the United Negro College Fund , and all profits from his single " Man in the Mirror " went to charity . Jackson 's live rendition of " You Were There " at Sammy Davis Jr . ' s 60th birthday celebration won Jackson a second Emmy nomination . 
 = = = 1991 – 93 : Dangerous , Heal the World Foundation , and Super Bowl XXVII = = = 
 In March 1991 , Jackson renewed his contract with Sony for $ 65 million , a record @-@ breaking deal at the time , displacing Neil Diamond 's renewal contract with Columbia Records . In 1991 , he released his eighth album , Dangerous , co @-@ produced with Teddy Riley . Dangerous was certified seven times platinum in the U.S. , and by 2008 had sold approximately 30 million copies worldwide . In the United States , the album 's first single " Black or White " was its biggest hit , reaching number one on the Billboard Hot 100 and remaining there for seven weeks , with similar chart performances worldwide . The album 's second single , " Remember the Time " , spent eight weeks in the top five in the United States , peaking at number three on the Billboard Hot 100 singles chart . At the end of 1992 , Dangerous was awarded the best @-@ selling album of the year worldwide and " Black or White " was awarded best @-@ selling single of the year worldwide at the Billboard Music Awards . Jackson also won an award as best @-@ selling artist of the 1980s . In 1993 , he performed the song at the Soul Train Music Awards in a chair , saying he had suffered an injury in rehearsals . In the UK and other parts of Europe , " Heal the World " was the album 's most successful song ; it sold 450 @,@ 000 copies in the UK and spent five weeks at number two in 1992 . 
 Jackson founded the Heal the World Foundation in 1992 . The charity organization brought underprivileged children to Jackson 's ranch to enjoy theme park rides that Jackson had built on the property . The foundation also sent millions of dollars around the globe to help children threatened by war , poverty , and disease . In the same year , Jackson published his second book , Dancing the Dream , a collection of poetry , revealing a more intimate side of his nature . While it was a commercial success , it received mostly negative reviews . In 2009 , the book was republished by Doubleday and was more positively received by some critics in the wake of Jackson 's death . The Dangerous World Tour grossed $ 100 million . The tour began on June 27 , 1992 , and finished on November 11 , 1993 . Jackson performed to 3 @.@ 5 million people in 70 concerts . He sold the broadcast rights to his Dangerous world tour to HBO for $ 20 million , a record @-@ breaking deal that still stands . 
 Following the illness and death of AIDS spokesperson Ryan White , Jackson helped draw public attention to HIV / AIDS , something that was controversial at the time . He publicly pleaded with the Clinton Administration at Bill Clinton 's Inaugural Gala to give more money to HIV / AIDS charities and research . In a high @-@ profile visit to Africa , Jackson visited several countries , among them Gabon and Egypt . His first stop to Gabon was greeted with an enthusiastic reception of more than 100 @,@ 000 people , some of them carrying signs that read , " Welcome Home Michael . " In his trip to Ivory Coast , Jackson was crowned " King Sani " by a tribal chief . He thanked the dignitaries in French and English , signed official documents formalizing his kingship , and sat on a golden throne while presiding over ceremonial dances . 
 In January 1993 , Jackson performed at the Super Bowl XXVII halftime show in Pasadena , California . Because of a dwindling interest during halftime in the preceding years , the NFL decided to seek big @-@ name talent that would keep ratings high , with Jackson selected for his universal appeal . It was the first Super Bowl whose half @-@ time performance drew greater audience figures than the game itself . The performance began with Jackson catapulting onto the stage as fireworks went off behind him . As he landed on the canvas , he maintained a " clenched fist , standing statue stance , " dressed in a gold and black military outfit and sunglasses ; he remained completely motionless for a minute and a half while the crowd cheered . He then slowly removed his sunglasses , threw them away , and performed four songs : " Jam " , " Billie Jean " , " Black or White " , and " Heal the World " . Jackson 's Dangerous album rose 90 places up the album chart soon after . 
 Jackson gave a 90 @-@ minute interview to Oprah Winfrey on February 10 , 1993 , his second television interview since 1979 . He grimaced when speaking of his childhood abuse at the hands of his father ; he believed he had missed out on much of his childhood years , admitting that he often cried from loneliness . He denied tabloid rumors that he had bought the bones of the Elephant Man , slept in a hyperbaric oxygen chamber , or bleached his skin , stating for the first time that he had vitiligo . Dangerous re @-@ entered the album chart in the top 10 , more than a year after its original release . 
 In February 1993 , Jackson was given the " Living Legend Award " at the 35th Annual Grammy Awards in Los Angeles . " Black or White " was Grammy @-@ nominated for best vocal performance . " Jam " gained two nominations : Best R & B Vocal Performance and Best R & B Song . The Dangerous album won a Grammy for Best Engineered – Non Classical , awarding the work of Bruce Swedien and Teddy Riley . In the same year , Michael Jackson won three American Music Awards for Favorite Pop / Rock Album ( Dangerous ) , Favorite Soul / R & B Single ( " Remember the Time " ) , and was the first to win the International Artist Award of Excellence , for his global performances and humanitarian concerns . 
 Jackson agreed to produce the soundtrack for Sega 's 1994 video game Sonic the Hedgehog 3 with collaborators Brad Buxer , Bobby Brooks , Darryl Ross , Geoff Grace , Doug Grigsby , and <unk> Jones . Jackson left the project before completion and was never officially credited , allegedly due to his dissatisfaction with the Sega Genesis console 's audio chip . 
 = = = 1993 – 94 : First child sexual abuse allegations and first marriage = = = 
 In the summer of 1993 , Jackson was accused of child sexual abuse by a 13 @-@ year @-@ old boy named Jordan Chandler and his father , Evan Chandler , a dentist . The Chandler family demanded payment from Jackson , and the singer initially refused . Jordan Chandler eventually told the police that Jackson had sexually abused him . Evan Chandler was recorded discussing his intention to pursue charges , saying , " If I go through with this , I win big @-@ time . There 's no way I lose . I will get everything I want and they will be destroyed forever ..... Michael 's career will be over . " Jordan 's mother was , however , adamant at the time that there had been no wrongdoing on Jackson 's part . Jackson later used the recording to argue that he was the victim of a jealous father whose only goal was to extort money from the singer . In January 1994 , after investigation on allegations of extortion against the singer by Chandler , deputy Los Angeles County district attorney Michael J. Montagna stated that Chandler would not be charged , due to lack of cooperation from Jackson 's party and its willingness to negotiate with Chandler for several weeks , among other reasons . 
 In August 1993 , Jackson 's home was raided by the police who , according to court documents , found books and photographs in his bedroom featuring young boys with little or no clothing . Since the books were legal to purchase and own , the jury decided not to indict Jackson . In December 1993 , Jackson was strip @-@ searched . Jordan Chandler had reportedly given police a description of Jackson 's intimate parts , and the strip search revealed that Jordan had correctly claimed Jackson had patchy @-@ colored buttocks , short pubic hair , and pink and brown marked testicles . Reportedly , Jordan had also previously drawn accurate pictures of a dark spot on Jackson 's penis only visible when his penis was lifted . Despite differing initial internal reports from prosecutors and investigators and later , with reports of jurors feeling otherwise that the photos did not match the description , the DA stated his belief in a sworn affidavit that the description was accurate , along with the sheriff 's photographer stating the description was accurate . A 2004 motion filed by Jackson 's defense asserted that Jackson was never criminally indicted by any grand jury and that his settlement admitted no wrongdoing and contained no evidence of criminal misconduct . 
 The investigation was inconclusive and no charges were filed . Jackson described the search in an emotional public statement , and proclaimed his innocence . On January 1 , 1994 , Jackson settled with the Chandlers out of court for $ 22 million . A Santa Barbara County grand jury and a Los Angeles County grand jury disbanded on May 2 , 1994 , without indicting Jackson , and the Chandlers stopped co @-@ operating with the criminal investigation around July 6 , 1994 . The out @-@ of @-@ court settlement 's documentation stated Jackson admitted no wrongdoing and no liability ; the Chandlers and their family lawyer Larry Feldman signed it without contest . 
 Feldman also stated " nobody bought anybody 's silence " . A decade after the fact , during the second round of child abuse allegations , Jackson 's lawyers would file a memo stating that the 1994 settlement was done without his consent . A later disclosure by the FBI of investigation documents compiled over nearly 20 years led Jackson 's attorney to suggest that no evidence of molestation or sexual impropriety from Jackson toward minors existed . According to reports the Department of Children and Family Services ( Los Angeles County ) had investigated Jackson beginning in 1993 with the Chandler allegation and again in 2003 . Reports show the LAPD and DCFS did not find credible evidence of abuse or sexual misconduct . 
 In May 1994 , Jackson married Lisa Marie Presley , the daughter of Elvis and Priscilla Presley . They had met in 1975 , when a seven @-@ year @-@ old Presley attended one of Jackson 's family engagements at the MGM Grand Hotel and Casino , and reconnected through a mutual friend . According to a friend of Presley 's , " their adult friendship began in November 1992 in L.A. " They stayed in contact every day over the telephone . As the child molestation accusations became public , Jackson became dependent on Presley for emotional support ; she was concerned about his faltering health and addiction to drugs . Presley explained , " I believed he didn 't do anything wrong and that he was wrongly accused and yes I started falling for him . I wanted to save him . I felt that I could do it . " She eventually persuaded him to settle the civil case out of court and go into rehabilitation to recover . 
 Jackson proposed to Presley over the telephone towards the fall of 1993 , saying , " If I asked you to marry me , would you do it ? " They married in the Dominican Republic in secrecy , denying it for nearly two months afterwards . The marriage was , in her words , " a married couple 's life ... that was sexually active . " The tabloid media speculated that the wedding was a ploy to prop up Jackson 's public image . The marriage ended less than two years later with an amicable divorce settlement . In a 2010 interview with Oprah , Presley admitted that they had spent four more years after the divorce " getting back together and breaking up " until she decided to stop . 
 = = = 1995 – 99 : HIStory , second marriage , and fatherhood = = = 
 In 1995 , Jackson merged his ATV Music catalog with Sony 's music publishing division , creating Sony / ATV Music Publishing . He retained ownership of half the company , earning $ 95 million up front as well as the rights to more songs . In June , he released the double album HIStory : Past , Present and Future , Book I. The first disc , HIStory Begins , is a 15 @-@ track greatest hits album ( later reissued as Greatest Hits : HIStory , Volume I in 2001 ) ; the second disc , HIStory Continues , contains 13 original songs and 2 cover versions . The album debuted at number one on the charts and has been certified for seven million shipments in the US . It is the best @-@ selling multiple @-@ disc album of all @-@ time , with 20 million copies ( 40 million units ) sold worldwide . HIStory received a Grammy nomination for Album of the Year . 
 The first single released from the album was " Scream / Childhood " . " Scream " , a duet with Jackson 's youngest sister Janet , protests the media , particularly for its treatment of him during the 1993 child abuse allegations . The single had the highest debut on the Billboard Hot 100 at number five , and received a Grammy nomination for " Best Pop Collaboration with Vocals " . " You Are Not Alone " was the second single released from HIStory ; it holds the Guinness World Record for the first song ever to debut at number one on the Billboard Hot 100 chart . It was seen as a major artistic and commercial success , receiving a Grammy nomination for " Best Pop Vocal Performance " . 
 In late 1995 , Jackson was rushed to a hospital after collapsing during rehearsals for a televised performance , caused by a stress @-@ related panic attack . " Earth Song " was the third single released from HIStory , and topped the UK Singles Chart for six weeks over Christmas 1995 ; it sold a million copies , making it Jackson 's most successful single in the UK . The track " They Don 't Care About Us " became controversial when the Anti @-@ Defamation League and other groups criticized its allegedly antisemitic lyrics . Jackson quickly released a revised version of the song without the offending lyrics . In 1996 , Jackson won a Grammy for Best Music Video , Short Form for " Scream " and an American Music Award for Favorite Pop / Rock Male Artist . 
 HIStory was promoted with the successful HIStory World Tour , beginning on September 7 , 1996 , and ending on October 15 , 1997 . Jackson performed 82 concerts in five continents , 35 countries and 58 cities to over 4 @.@ 5 million fans , and grossed a total of $ 165 million , becoming Jackson 's most successful tour in terms of audience figures . During the tour , Jackson married his longtime friend Deborah Jeanne Rowe , a dermatology nurse , in an impromptu ceremony in Sydney , Australia . Rowe was approximately six months pregnant with the couple 's first child at the time . Originally , Rowe and Jackson had no plans to marry , but Jackson 's mother Katherine persuaded them to do so . Michael Joseph Jackson Jr ( commonly known as Prince ) was born on February 13 , 1997 ; his sister Paris @-@ Michael Katherine Jackson was born a year later on April 3 , 1998 . The couple divorced in 1999 , and Jackson received full custody of the children . The divorce was relatively amicable , but a subsequent custody suit was not settled until 2006 . 
 In 1997 , Jackson released Blood on the Dance Floor : HIStory in the Mix , which contained remixes of hit singles from HIStory and five new songs . Worldwide sales stand at 6 million copies , making it the best @-@ selling remix album of all time . It reached number one in the UK , as did the title track . In the US , the album was certified platinum , but only reached number 24 . Forbes placed Jackson 's annual income at $ 35 million in 1996 and $ 20 million in 1997 . 
 Throughout June 1999 , Jackson was involved in a number of charitable events . He joined Luciano Pavarotti for a benefit concert in Modena , Italy . The show was in support of the nonprofit organization War Child , and raised a million dollars for the refugees of Kosovo , FR Yugoslavia , and additional funds for the children of Guatemala . Later that month , Jackson organized a series of " Michael Jackson & Friends " benefit concerts in Germany and Korea . Other artists involved included Slash , The Scorpions , Boyz II Men , Luther Vandross , Mariah Carey , A. R. Rahman , Prabhu Deva Sundaram , Shobana , Andrea Bocelli , and Luciano Pavarotti . The proceeds went to the Nelson Mandela Children 's Fund , the Red Cross and UNESCO . From August 1999 through 2000 , he lived in New York City at 4 East 74th Street . 
 = = = 2000 – 03 : Label dispute and Invincible = = = 
 At the turn of the century , Jackson won an American Music Award as Artist of the 1980s . Throughout 2000 and 2001 , he worked with collaborators including Teddy Riley and Rodney Jerkins to produce his tenth solo album , Invincible , released in October 2001 . The album cost $ 30 million to record , not including promotional expenditures . Invincible was Jackson 's first full @-@ length album in six years , and was the last album of original material he released in his lifetime . The release was preceded by a dispute between Jackson and his record label , Sony Music Entertainment . Jackson had expected the licenses to the masters of his albums to revert to him sometime in the early 2000s . Once he had the licenses , he would be able to promote the material however he pleased and keep all the profits ; however , clauses in the contract set the revert date years into the future . Jackson discovered that the attorney who had represented him in the deal had also been representing Sony . Jackson was also concerned about the fact that for years , Sony had been pressuring him to sell his share in its music catalog venture . Jackson feared that Sony might have a conflict of interest , since if Jackson 's career failed , he would have to sell his share of the catalog at a low price . Jackson sought an early exit from his contract . 
 In September 2001 , two 30th Anniversary concerts were held at Madison Square Garden to mark Jackson 's 30th year as a solo artist . Jackson appeared onstage alongside his brothers for the first time since 1984 . The show also featured performances by Mýa , Usher , Whitney Houston , NSYNC , Destiny 's Child , Monica , Luther Vandross , and Slash , among other artists . The second of the two shows took place the night before the September 11 , 2001 , terrorist attacks . After 9 / 11 , Jackson helped organize the United We Stand : What More Can I Give benefit concert at RFK Stadium in Washington , D.C. The concert took place on October 21 , 2001 , and included performances from dozens of major artists , including Jackson , who performed his song " What More Can I Give " as the finale . Due to contractual issues related to the earlier 30th Anniversary concerts , later edited into a two @-@ hour TV special titled Michael Jackson : 30th Anniversary Celebration broadcast in November 2001 , Jackson 's solo performances were omitted from the televised benefit concert , although he could still be seen singing background vocals . 
 Invincible was released in October 2001 to much anticipation . It debuted at number one in 13 countries and went on to sell approximately 13 million copies worldwide . It received double @-@ platinum certification in the U.S. However , sales for Invincible were lower than Jackson 's previous releases , due in part to the record label dispute and the lack of promotion or tour , and its release at a bad time for the music industry in general . Invincible spawned three singles , " You Rock My World " , " Cry " , and " Butterflies " , the latter without a music video . Jackson alleged in July 2002 that the @-@ then Sony Music chairman Tommy Mottola was a " devil " and a " racist " who did not support his African @-@ American artists , using them merely for his own personal gain . He charged that Mottola had called his colleague Irv Gotti a " fat nigger " . Sony refused to renew Jackson 's contract , and claimed that a $ 25 million promotional campaign had failed because Jackson refused to tour in the United States . 
 In 2002 , Michael Jackson won his 22nd American Music Award for Artist of the Century . In the same year , his third child , Prince Michael Jackson II ( nicknamed " Blanket " ) was born . The mother 's identity was not announced , but Jackson said the child was the result of artificial insemination from a surrogate mother and his own sperm . On November 20 of that year , Jackson brought his infant son onto the balcony of his room at the Hotel Adlon in Berlin as fans stood below , holding him in his right arm , with a cloth loosely draped over the baby 's face . The baby was briefly extended over a railing , four stories above ground level , prompting widespread criticism in the media . Jackson later apologized for the incident , calling it " a terrible mistake " . In November 2003 , Sony released Number Ones , a compilation of Jackson 's hits on CD and DVD . In the U.S. , the album was certified triple platinum by the RIAA ; in the UK it was certified six times platinum for shipments of at least 1 @.@ 2 million units . 
 = = = 2003 – 05 : Second child sexual abuse allegations and acquittal = = = 
 Beginning in May 2002 , Jackson allowed a documentary film crew , led by British TV personality Martin Bashir , to follow him around nearly everywhere he went . Bashir 's film crew was with Jackson during the " baby @-@ dangling incident " in Berlin . The program was broadcast in March 2003 as Living with Michael Jackson . In a particularly controversial scene , Jackson was seen holding hands and discussing sleeping arrangements with a young boy . 
 As soon as the documentary aired , the Santa Barbara county attorney 's office began a criminal investigation . After an initial probe from the LAPD and DCFS was conducted in February 2003 , they had initially concluded that molestation allegations were " unfounded " at the time . After the young boy involved in the documentary and his mother had told investigators that Jackson had behaved improperly with the boy , Jackson was arrested in November 2003 , and was charged with seven counts of child molestation and two counts of administering an intoxicating agent in relation to the 13 @-@ year @-@ old boy shown in the film . Jackson denied the allegations , saying the sleepovers were not sexual in nature . The People v. Jackson trial began on January 31 , 2005 , in Santa Maria , California , and lasted five months , until the end of May . On June 13 , 2005 , Jackson was acquitted on all counts . After the trial , in a highly publicized relocation he moved to the Persian Gulf island of Bahrain , as a guest of Sheikh Abdullah . Bahrain was also where the family intended to send Jackson if he was convicted ( though Jackson did not know about the plan ) , according to a statement by Jermaine Jackson printed in The Times of London in September 2011 . 
 = = = 2006 – 09 : Closure of Neverland , final years , and This Is It = = = 
 In March 2006 , the main house at the Neverland Ranch was closed as a cost @-@ cutting measure . There were numerous reports around that time that Jackson had been having financial problems . He had been delinquent on his repayments of a $ 270 million loan secured against his music @-@ publishing holdings , even though those holdings were reportedly making him as much as $ 75 million a year . Bank of America sold the debt to Fortress Investments . Sony reportedly proposed a restructuring deal which would give them a future option to buy half of Jackson 's stake in their jointly @-@ owned publishing company , leaving Jackson with a 25 % stake . Jackson agreed to a Sony @-@ backed refinancing deal in April 2006 , although the details were not made public . Jackson did not have a recording contract at the time . In early 2006 , it was announced that Jackson had signed a contract with a Bahrain @-@ based startup called Two Seas Records . However , nothing came of the deal , and the Two Seas CEO Guy Holmes later stated that the deal had never been finalized . 
 Throughout 2006 , Sony repackaged 20 singles from the 1980s and 1990s as the Michael Jackson : Visionary series , which subsequently became a box set . Most of those singles returned to the charts as a result . In September 2006 , Jackson and his ex @-@ wife Debbie Rowe confirmed reports that they had settled their long @-@ running child custody suit . The terms were never made public . Jackson continued to be the custodial parent of the couple 's two children . In October 2006 , Fox News entertainment reporter Roger Friedman said that Jackson had been recording at a studio in rural Westmeath , Ireland . It was not known at the time what Jackson had working on , or who had paid for the sessions , since his publicist had recently issued a statement claiming that he had left Two Seas . 
 In November 2006 , Jackson invited an Access Hollywood camera crew into the studio in Westmeath , and MSNBC reported that he was working on a new album , produced by will.i.am. Jackson performed at the World Music Awards in London on November 15 , 2006 , and accepted a Diamond Award for selling over 100 million records . He returned to the United States after Christmas 2006 to attend James Brown 's funeral in Augusta , Georgia , where he gave one of the eulogies , saying that " James Brown is my greatest inspiration . " In the spring of 2007 , Jackson and Sony teamed up to buy another music publishing company , Famous Music LLC , formerly owned by Viacom . This deal gave him the rights to songs by Eminem and Beck , among others . In March 2007 , Jackson gave a brief interview to the Associated Press in Tokyo , where he said : " I 've been in the entertainment industry since I was 6 years old , and as Charles Dickens would say , ' It 's been the best of times , the worst of times . ' But I would not change my career ... While some have made deliberate attempts to hurt me , I take it in stride because I have a loving family , a strong faith and wonderful friends and fans who have , and continue , to support me . " In March 2007 , Jackson visited a U.S. Army post in Japan , Camp Zama , to greet over 3 @,@ 000 U.S. troops and their families . The hosts presented Jackson with a Certificate of Appreciation . 
 In September 2007 , Jackson was reportedly still working on his next album , but the work was never completed . In 2008 , Jackson and Sony released Thriller 25 to mark the 25th anniversary of the original Thriller . This album featured the previously unreleased song " For All Time " , an outtake from the original sessions , as well as remixes , where Jackson collaborated with younger artists who had been inspired by his work . Two of the remixes were released as singles with modest success : " The Girl Is Mine 2008 " ( with will.i.am ) and " Wanna Be Startin ' Somethin ' 2008 " ( with Akon ) . The first single was based on an early demo version , without Paul McCartney . The album was a commercial success . In anticipation of Jackson 's 50th birthday , Sony BMG released a series of greatest hits albums , King of Pop . Slightly different versions were released in various countries , based on polls of local fans . King of Pop reached the top 10 in most countries where it was issued , and also sold well as an import in other countries ( such as the United States ) . 
 In late 2008 , Fortress Investments threatened to foreclose on Neverland Ranch , which Jackson used as collateral for loans running into many tens of millions of dollars . However , Fortress opted to sell Jackson 's debts to Colony Capital LLC . In November , Jackson transferred Neverland Ranch 's title to Sycamore Valley Ranch Company LLC , a joint venture between Jackson and Colony Capital LLC . The deal cleared Jackson 's debt and reportedly earned him an additional $ 35 million . At the time of his death , Jackson still owned a stake of unknown size in Neverland / Sycamore Valley . In September 2008 , Jackson entered negotiations with Julien 's Auction House to display and auction a large collection of memorabilia amounting to approximately 1 @,@ 390 lots . The auction was scheduled to take place between April 22 and 25 . An exhibition of the lots opened as scheduled on April 14 , but the actual auction was eventually cancelled at Jackson 's request . 
 In March 2009 , Jackson held a press conference at London 's O2 Arena to announce a series of comeback concerts titled This Is It . The shows would be Jackson 's first major series of concerts since the HIStory World Tour finished in 1997 . Jackson suggested possible retirement after the shows , saying it would be his " final curtain call " . The initial plan was for 10 concerts in London , followed by shows in Paris , New York City and Mumbai . Randy Phillips , president and chief executive of AEG Live , stated that the first 10 dates alone would earn the singer approximately £ 50 million . The London residency was increased to 50 dates after record @-@ breaking ticket sales : over one million were sold in less than two hours . The concerts would have commenced on July 13 , 2009 , and finished on March 6 , 2010 . Jackson rehearsed in Los Angeles in the weeks leading up to the tour under the direction of choreographer Kenny Ortega . Most of these rehearsals took place at the Staples Center , owned by AEG . Less than three weeks before the first show was due to begin in London , with all concerts sold out , Jackson died after suffering cardiac arrest . Some time before his death , it was reported that he was starting a clothing line with Christian <unk> . 
 Jackson 's first posthumous song released entirely by his estate was " This Is It " , which he had co @-@ written in the 1980s with Paul Anka . It was not on the setlists for the concerts , and the recording was based on an old demo tape . The surviving brothers reunited in the studio for the first time since 1989 to record backing vocals . On October 28 , 2009 , a documentary film about the rehearsals , Michael Jackson 's This Is It , was released . Despite a limited two @-@ week engagement , it became the highest @-@ grossing documentary or concert film of all time , with earnings of more than $ 260 million worldwide . Jackson 's estate received 90 % of the profits . The film was accompanied by a compilation album of the same name . Two versions of " This Is It " appear on the album , which also featured original masters of Jackson 's hits in the order in which they appear in the film , along with a bonus disc with previously unreleased versions of more Jackson hits and a spoken @-@ word poem , " Planet Earth " . At the 2009 American Music Awards , Jackson won four posthumous awards , two for him and two for his album Number Ones , bringing his total American Music Awards to 26 . 
 = = Death and memorial = = 
 On June 25 , 2009 , Jackson fell unconscious while lying in bed at his rented mansion at 100 North Carolwood Drive in the Holmby Hills district of Los Angeles . Attempts at resuscitating him by Conrad Murray , his personal physician , were unsuccessful . Los Angeles Fire Department paramedics received a 911 call at 12 : 22 pm ( PDT , 19 : 22 UTC ) , arriving three minutes later . Jackson was reportedly not breathing and CPR was performed . Resuscitation efforts continued en route to Ronald Reagan UCLA Medical Center , and for more than an hour after arriving there at 1 : 13 pm ( 20 : 13 UTC ) . He was pronounced dead at 2 : 26 pm Pacific time ( 21 : 26 UTC ) . 
 Jackson 's death triggered a global outpouring of grief . The news spread quickly online , causing websites to slow down and crash from user overload . Both TMZ and the Los Angeles Times suffered outages . Google initially believed that the millions of search requests meant their search engine was under DDoS attack , and blocked searches related to Michael Jackson for 30 minutes . Twitter reported a crash , as did Wikipedia at 3 : 15 pm PDT ( 22 : 15 UTC ) . The Wikimedia Foundation reported nearly a million visitors to Jackson 's biography within one hour , probably the most visitors in a one @-@ hour period to any article in Wikipedia 's history . AOL Instant Messenger collapsed for 40 minutes . AOL called it a " seminal moment in internet history ... We 've never seen anything like it in terms of scope or depth . " Around 15 % of Twitter posts ( 5 @,@ 000 tweets per minute ) reportedly mentioned Jackson after the news broke , compared to the 5 % recalled as having mentioned the Iranian elections or the flu pandemic that had made headlines earlier in the year . Overall , web traffic ranged from 11 % to at least 20 % higher than normal . MTV and BET aired marathons of Jackson 's music videos . Jackson specials aired on television stations around the world . The British soap opera EastEnders added a last @-@ minute scene to the June 26 episode in which one character tells another about the news . MTV briefly returned to its original music video format to celebrate his work , airing hours of Jackson 's music videos , accompanied by live news specials featuring reactions from MTV personalities and other celebrities . The temporary shift in MTV 's programming culminated the following week in the channel 's live coverage of Jackson 's memorial service . 
 Jackson 's memorial was held on July 7 , 2009 at the Staples Center in Los Angeles , preceded by a private family service at Forest Lawn Memorial Park 's Hall of Liberty . Due to high demand , tickets to the memorial were distributed via lottery , and over 1 @.@ 6 million fans applied for tickets during the two @-@ day application period . 8 @,@ 750 names were drawn at random , with each recipient receiving two tickets each . Jackson 's casket was present during the memorial but no information was released about the final disposition of the body . The memorial service was one of the most watched events in streaming history , with an estimated U.S. audience of 31 @.@ 1 million , an amount comparable to the estimated 35 @.@ 1 million that watched the 2004 burial of former president Ronald Reagan , and the estimated 33 @.@ 1 million Americans who watched the 1997 funeral for Princess Diana . 
 Mariah Carey , Stevie Wonder , Lionel Richie , John Mayer , Jennifer Hudson , Usher , Jermaine Jackson , and Shaheen <unk> performed at the event . Berry Gordy and Smokey Robinson gave eulogies , while Queen Latifah read " We Had Him " , a poem written for the occasion by Maya Angelou . The Reverend Al Sharpton received a standing ovation with cheers when he told Jackson 's children : " Wasn 't nothing strange about your daddy . It was strange what your daddy had to deal with . But he dealt with it anyway . " Jackson 's 11 @-@ year @-@ old daughter Paris Katherine , speaking publicly for the first time , wept as she told the crowd : " Ever since I was born , Daddy has been the best father you could ever imagine ... I just wanted to say I love him ... so much . " Reverend Lucious Smith provided a closing prayer . 
 At the time of death , Jackson had been administered propofol , lorazepam , and midazolam , and the Los Angeles coroner decided to treat the death as a homicide . Law enforcement officials conducted a manslaughter investigation of his personal physician Conrad Murray , and charged him with involuntary manslaughter in Los Angeles on February 8 , 2010 . Jackson 's body was entombed on September 3 , 2009 , at Forest Lawn Memorial Park in Glendale , California . 
 On June 25 , 2010 , the first anniversary of Jackson 's death , fans traveled to Los Angeles to pay tribute . They visited Jackson 's star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame , his family 's home , and Forest Lawn Memorial Park . Many of the fans were carrying sunflowers and other tribute items to leave at the sites . Members of the Jackson family and close friends arrived to pay their respects . Katherine returned to Gary , Indiana to unveil a granite monument constructed in the front yard of the family home . The memorial continued with a candlelight vigil and a special performance of " We Are the World " . On June 26 , there was a protest march in front of the Los Angeles Police Department 's Robbery @-@ Homicide Division at the old Parker Center building and a petition with thousands of signatures demanding justice . The Jackson Family Foundation , in conjunction with <unk> , presented " Forever Michael " , an event bringing together Jackson family members , celebrities , fans , supporters and the community to celebrate and honor his legacy . A portion of the proceeds were presented to some of Jackson 's favorite charities . Katherine also introduced her new book " Never Can Say Goodbye " . 
 = = = Aftermath = = = 
 In the 12 months after his death , Jackson sold more than 8 @.@ 2 million albums in the United States and 35 million albums worldwide , making him the best @-@ selling albums artist of 2009 . He became the first artist to sell one million downloads in a week in music download history , with a record @-@ breaking 2 @.@ 6 million downloads of his songs . Three of his albums sold more than any new album , the first time a catalog album has ever scanned more sales than any new album . Jackson also became the first artist in history to have four of the top 20 best @-@ selling albums in a single year in the United States . Following this surge in sales , Sony announced that they had extended their distribution rights for Jackson 's material , which had been due to expire in 2015 . On March 16 , 2010 , Sony Music Entertainment , spearheaded by its Columbia / Epic Label Group division , signed a new deal with the Jackson estate to extend their distribution rights to his back catalogue until at least 2017 , and release ten new albums of previously unreleased material and new collections of released work . 
 On November 4 , 2010 , Sony announced the first <unk> album , Michael , released on December 14 , with the promotional single , " Breaking News " , released to radio on November 8 . Sony Music reportedly paid the Jackson estate $ 250 million for the deal , plus royalties , making it the most expensive music contract pertaining to a single artist in history . Video game developer Ubisoft announced a dancing @-@ and @-@ singing game featuring Michael Jackson for the 2010 holiday season , Michael Jackson : The Experience ; it is among the first games to use Kinect and PlayStation Move , the motion @-@ detecting camera systems for Microsoft 's Xbox 360 and Sony 's PlayStation 3 respectively . 
 On November 3 , 2010 , the theatrical performing company Cirque du Soleil announced that it would launch Michael Jackson : The Immortal World Tour in October 2011 in Montreal , while a permanent show will reside in Las Vegas . The 90 @-@ minute $ 57 @-@ million production will combine Jackson 's music and choreography with the Cirque 's artistry , dance and aerial displays involving 65 artists . The tour was written and directed by Jamie King and centers on Jackson 's " inspirational Giving Tree – the wellspring of creativity where his love of music and dance , fairy tale and magic , and the fragile beauty of nature are unlocked . " On October 3 , 2011 , the accompanying compilation soundtrack album Immortal was announced to have over 40 Jackson 's original recordings re @-@ produced by Kevin Antunes . A second , larger and more theatrical Cirque show , Michael Jackson : One , designed for residency at the Mandalay Bay resort in Las Vegas , was announced on February 21 , 2013 . This show , also produced , written and directed by King , began its run on May 23 , 2013 in a newly renovated theater to critical and commercial success . 
 In April 2011 , billionaire businessman Mohamed Al @-@ Fayed , chairman of Fulham Football Club and Jackson 's longtime friend , unveiled a statue of Michael Jackson outside the club 's stadium , Craven Cottage . Fulham fans were bemused by the statue and failed to understand the relevance of Jackson to the club . Al Fayed defended the statue and told the fans to " go to hell " if they did not appreciate it . The statue was removed in September 2013 and moved to the National Football Museum in Manchester in May 2014 . 
 In 2012 , in an attempt to end public family feuding , Jackson 's brother Jermaine Jackson retracted his signature on a public letter criticizing executors of Michael Jackson 's estate and his mother 's advisers concerning the legitimacy of his brother 's will . T.J. Jackson , son of Tito Jackson , was given co @-@ guardianship of Michael Jackson 's children after false reports surfaced of Katherine Jackson going missing . 
 On May 16 , 2013 , choreographer Wade Robson alleged on The Today Show that Jackson " performed sexual acts on me and forced me to perform sexual acts on him " for 7 years , beginning when Robson was 7 years old . Robson had previously testified in defence of Jackson at the singer 's 2005 child molestation trial . The attorney for Jackson 's estate described Robson 's claim as " outrageous and pathetic " . The date for the hearing which will determine whether Robson can sue Jackson 's estate was scheduled for June 2 , 2014 . In February 2014 , the Internal Revenue Service reported that Jackson 's estate owed $ 702 million , including $ 505 million in taxes and $ 197 million in penalties after they claimed the estate undervalued Jackson 's fortune . 
 On March 31 , 2014 , Epic Records announced Xscape , an album of eight songs of unreleased material culled from past recording sessions . It was released on May 13 , 2014 . On May 12 , 2014 , another young man , Jimmy Safechuck , sued Jackson 's estate , claiming Jackson sexually abused him " from the age of 10 to about 14 or 15 " in the 1980s . During the 2014 Billboard Music Awards on May 18 , a " Pepper 's ghost " likeness of Jackson appeared , dancing to " Slave to the Rhythm " , one of the tracks from Xscape . Later that year , Queen released three duets that Freddie Mercury had recorded with Jackson in the 1980s . 
 Jackson 's earnings have exponentially increased following his sudden death in comparison to his final years alive . According to Forbes , he has been the top @-@ earning dead celebrity each year since his death , with triple @-@ digit millions per annum ( $ 115 million in 2015 ) . In December 2015 , Jackson 's album Thriller became the first album in the United States to surpass 30 million shipments , certifying it 30 × platinum by the RIAA . Two months later , Billboard reported that the album was certified again at 32 × platinum , surpassing 32 million shipments after Soundscan added streams and audio downloads to album certifications . 
 = = Artistry = = 
 = = = Influences = = = 
 Jackson was influenced by musicians including Little Richard , James Brown , Jackie Wilson , Diana Ross , Fred Astaire , Sammy Davis Jr . , Gene Kelly , David Ruffin , the Isley Brothers , and the Bee Gees . According to choreographer David Winters , who met and befriended Jackson while choreographing the 1971 Diana Ross TV special Diana ! , Jackson watched the musical West Side Story almost every week , and it was his favorite film ; he paid tribute to it in " Beat It " and the " Bad " video . While Little Richard had a substantial influence on Jackson , James Brown was Jackson 's greatest inspiration . In reference to Brown , Jackson declared : " Ever since I was a small child , no more than like six years old , my mother would wake me no matter what time it was , if I was sleeping , no matter what I was doing , to watch the television to see the master at work . And when I saw him move , I was mesmerized . I had never seen a performer perform like James Brown , and right then and there I knew that was exactly what I wanted to do for the rest of my life because of James Brown . " 
 The young Jackson owed his vocal technique in large part to Diana Ross . Not only a mother figure to him , she was often observed in rehearsal as an accomplished performer . He later said : " I got to know her well . She taught me so much . I used to just sit in the corner and watch the way she moved . She was art in motion . I studied the way she moved , the way she sang – just the way she was . " He told her : " I want to be just like you , Diana . " She said : " You just be yourself . " Jackson owed part of his enduring style — especially his use of the oooh interjection — to Ross . From a young age , Jackson often punctuated his verses with a sudden exclamation of oooh . Diana Ross had used this effect on many of the songs recorded with the Supremes . 
 = = = Musical themes and genres = = = 
 Jackson explored a variety of music genres , including pop , soul , rhythm and blues , funk , rock , disco , post @-@ disco , dance @-@ pop and new jack swing . Unlike many artists , Jackson did not write his songs on paper and instead dictated into a sound recorder . When composing music , he preferred to beatbox and imitate instruments vocally rather than use instruments . 
 According to Steve Huey of AllMusic , Thriller refined the strengths of Off the Wall ; the dance and rock tracks were more aggressive , while the pop tunes and ballads were softer and more soulful . Notable tracks included the ballads " The Lady in My Life " , " Human Nature " and " The Girl Is Mine " ; the funk pieces " Billie Jean " and " Wanna Be Startin ' Somethin ' " ; and the disco set " Baby Be Mine " and " P.Y.T. ( Pretty Young Thing ) " . With Thriller , Christopher Connelly of Rolling Stone commented that Jackson developed his long association with the subliminal theme of paranoia and darker imagery . AllMusic 's Stephen Thomas Erlewine noted this is evident on the songs " Billie Jean " and " Wanna Be Startin ' Somethin ' " . In " Billie Jean " , Jackson sings about an obsessive fan who alleges he has fathered a child of hers . In " Wanna Be Startin ' Somethin ' " he argues against gossip and the media . " Beat It " decried gang violence in an homage to West Side Story , and was Jackson 's first successful rock cross @-@ over piece , according to Huey . He also observed that the title track " Thriller " began Jackson 's interest with the theme of the supernatural , a topic he revisited in subsequent years . In 1985 , Jackson co @-@ wrote the charity anthem " We Are the World " ; humanitarian themes later became a recurring theme in his lyrics and public persona . 
 In Bad , Jackson 's concept of the predatory lover can be seen on the rock song " Dirty Diana " . The lead single " I Just Can 't Stop Loving You " is a traditional love ballad , while " Man in the Mirror " is an anthemic ballad of confession and resolution . " Smooth Criminal " was an evocation of bloody assault , rape and likely murder . AllMusic 's Stephen Thomas Erlewine states that Dangerous presents Jackson as a very paradoxical individual . He comments the album is more diverse than his previous Bad , as it appeals to an urban audience while also attracting the middle class with anthems like " Heal the World " . The first half of the record is dedicated to new jack swing , including songs like " Jam " and " Remember the Time " . The album is Jackson 's first where social ills become a primary theme ; " Why You Wanna Trip on Me " , for example , protests against world hunger , AIDS , homelessness and drugs . Dangerous contains sexually charged efforts such as the multifaceted love song , " In the Closet " . The title track continues the theme of the predatory lover and compulsive desire . The second half includes introspective , pop @-@ gospel anthems such as " Will You Be There " , " Heal the World " and " Keep the Faith " ; these songs show Jackson opening up about various personal struggles and worries . In the ballad " Gone Too Soon " , Jackson gives tribute to his friend Ryan White and the plight of those with AIDS . 
 HIStory creates an atmosphere of paranoia . Its content focuses on the hardships and public struggles Jackson went through just prior to its production . In the new jack swing @-@ funk @-@ rock efforts " Scream " and " Tabloid Junkie " , along with the R & B ballad " You Are Not Alone " , Jackson retaliates against the injustice and isolation he feels , and directs much of his anger at the media . In the introspective ballad " Stranger in Moscow " , Jackson laments over his " fall from grace " , while songs like " Earth Song " , " Childhood " , " Little Susie " and " Smile " are all operatic pop pieces . In the track " D.S. " , Jackson launched a verbal attack against Tom Sneddon . He describes Sneddon as an antisocial , white supremacist who wanted to " get my ass , dead or alive " . Of the song , Sneddon said , " I have not — shall we say — done him the honor of listening to it , but I 've been told that it ends with the sound of a gunshot " . Invincible found Jackson working heavily with producer Rodney Jerkins . It is a record made up of urban soul like " Cry " and " The Lost Children " , ballads such as " Speechless " , " Break of Dawn " , and " Butterflies " and mixes hip hop , pop , and R & B in " 2000 Watts " , " Heartbreaker " and " Invincible " . 
 = = = Vocal style = = = 
 Jackson sang from childhood , and over time his voice and vocal style changed noticeably . Between 1971 and 1975 , Jackson 's voice descended from boy soprano to high tenor . His vocal range as an adult was F2 @-@ E ♭ 6 . Jackson first used a technique called the " vocal hiccup " in 1973 , starting with the song " It 's Too Late to Change the Time " from the Jackson 5 's <unk> : Get It Together album . Jackson did not use the hiccup technique — somewhat like a gulping for air or gasping — fully until the recording of Off the Wall : it can be seen in full force in the " Shake Your Body ( Down to the Ground ) " promotional video . With the arrival of Off the Wall in the late 1970s , Jackson 's abilities as a vocalist were well regarded . At the time , Rolling Stone compared his vocals to the " breathless , dreamy stutter " of Stevie Wonder . Their analysis was also that " Jackson 's feathery @-@ timbred tenor is extraordinarily beautiful . It slides smoothly into a startling falsetto that 's used very daringly " . 1982 saw the release of Thriller , and Rolling Stone was of the opinion that Jackson was then singing in a " fully adult voice " that was " tinged by sadness " . 
 A distinctive deliberate mispronunciation of " come on " , used frequently by Jackson , occasionally spelled " c 'mon " , " cha <unk> " , or " <unk> " , is also a staple in impressions and caricatures of him . The turn of the 1990s saw the release of the introspective album Dangerous . The New York Times noted that on some tracks , " he gulps for breath , his voice quivers with anxiety or drops to a desperate whisper , hissing through clenched teeth " and he had a " wretched tone " . When singing of brotherhood or self @-@ esteem the musician would return to " smooth " vocals . When commenting on Invincible , Rolling Stone were of the opinion that — at the age of 43 — Jackson still performed " exquisitely voiced rhythm tracks and vibrating vocal harmonies " . Nelson George wrote : " The grace , the aggression , the growling , the natural boyishness , the falsetto , the smoothness — that combination of elements mark him as a major vocalist " . Cultural critic Joseph Vogel notes that Jackson had a " distinctive styles is his ability to convey emotion without the use of language : there are his trademark gulps , grunts , gasps , cries , exclamations ; he also frequently scats or twists and contorts words until they are barely discernible . " Neil McCormick notes that Jackson 's unorthodox singing style " was original and utterly distinctive , from his almost ethereal falsetto to his soft , sweet mid @-@ tones ; his fluid , seamless control of often very fast moving series of notes ; his percussive yet still melodic outbursts , ululations and interjections ( from those spooky " tee @-@ hee @-@ <unk> " to grunts and wails ) . Unusually for someone coming from a black American soul tradition , he did not often sing straight , unadorned ballads , though when he did ( from ' Ben ' to ' She 's Out of My Life ' ) the effect was of a powerful simplicity and truth . " 
 Concerned about a transparent rendition of this identity , the sound engineer Bruce Swedien opted for some technical approaches and studio strategies aiming at keeping as truly as possible the singer 's intimate and natural expressions : mikes , <unk> recordings , special techniques elaborated to design vocal prisms , creation of natural acoustic spaces , conversion of stereophonic fields in tri @-@ dimensional sound spaces playing with early reflections , plywood , <unk> or <unk> . 
 = = = Music videos and choreography = = = 
 Jackson has been called the King of Music Videos . Steve Huey of AllMusic observed how Jackson transformed the music video into an art form and a promotional tool through complex story lines , dance routines , special effects and famous cameo appearances , simultaneously breaking down racial barriers . Before Thriller , Jackson struggled to receive coverage on MTV , allegedly because he was African American . Pressure from CBS Records persuaded MTV to start showing " Billie Jean " and later " Beat It " , leading to a lengthy partnership with Jackson , also helping other black music artists gain recognition . MTV employees deny any racism in their coverage , or pressure to change their stance . MTV maintains that they played rock music , regardless of race . The popularity of his videos on MTV helped to put the relatively young channel " on the map " ; MTV 's focus shifted in favor of pop and R & B. His performance on Motown 25 : Yesterday , Today , Forever changed the scope of live stage show ; " That Jackson lip @-@ synced ' Billie Jean ' is , in itself , not extraordinary , but the fact that it did not change the impact of the performance is extraordinary ; whether the performance was live or lip @-@ synced made no difference to the audience " thus creating an era in which artists re @-@ create the spectacle of music video imagery on stage . Short films like Thriller largely remained unique to Jackson , while the group dance sequence in " Beat It " has frequently been imitated . The choreography in Thriller has become a part of global pop culture , replicated everywhere from Indian films to prisons in the Philippines . The Thriller short film marked an increase in scale for music videos , and has been named the most successful music video ever by the Guinness World Records . 
 In the 19 @-@ minute music video for " Bad " — directed by Martin Scorsese — Jackson began using sexual imagery and choreography not previously seen in his work . He occasionally grabbed or touched his chest , torso and crotch . When asked by Oprah in the 1993 interview about why he grabbed his crotch , he replied , " I think it happens subliminally " and he described it as something that was not planned , but rather , as something that was compelled by the music . " Bad " garnered a mixed reception from both fans and critics ; Time magazine described it as " infamous " . The video also featured Wesley Snipes ; in the future Jackson 's videos would often feature famous cameo roles . For the " Smooth Criminal " video , Jackson experimented with an anti @-@ gravity lean where the performer leans forward at a 45 degree angle , beyond the performer 's center of gravity . To accomplish this move live , Jackson and designers developed a special shoe that locks the performer 's feet to the stage , allowing them to lean forward . They were granted U.S. Patent 5 @,@ 255 @,@ 452 for the device . Although the music video for " Leave Me Alone " was not officially released in the US , in 1989 it was nominated for three Billboard Music Video Awards ; the same year it won a Golden Lion Award for the quality of the special effects used in its production . In 1990 , " Leave Me Alone " won a Grammy for Best Music Video , Short Form . 
 He received the MTV Video Vanguard Award in 1988 and the MTV Video Vanguard Artist of the Decade Award in 1990 to celebrate his accomplishments in the art form in the 1980s ; in 1991 the first award was renamed in his honor . " Black or White " was accompanied by a controversial music video , which , on November 14 , 1991 , simultaneously premiered in 27 countries with an estimated audience of 500 million people , the largest viewing ever for a music video at that time . It featured scenes construed as having a sexual nature as well as depictions of violence . The offending scenes in the final half of the 14 @-@ minute version were edited out to prevent the video from being banned , and Jackson apologized . Along with Jackson , it featured Macaulay Culkin , Peggy Lipton , and George Wendt . It helped usher in morphing as an important technology in music videos . 
 " Remember the Time " was an elaborate production , and became one of his longest videos at over nine minutes . Set in ancient Egypt , it featured groundbreaking visual effects and appearances by Eddie Murphy , Iman , and Magic Johnson , along with a distinct complex dance routine . The video for " In the Closet " was Jackson 's most sexually provocative piece . It featured supermodel Naomi Campbell in a courtship dance with Jackson . The video was banned in South Africa because of its imagery . 
 The music video for " Scream " , directed by Mark Romanek and production designer Tom Foden , is one of Jackson 's most critically acclaimed . In 1995 , it gained eleven MTV Video Music Award Nominations — more than any other music video — and won " Best Dance Video " , " Best Choreography " , and " Best Art Direction " . The song and its accompanying video are a response to the backlash Jackson received from the media after being accused of child molestation in 1993 . A year later , it won a Grammy for Best Music Video , Short Form ; shortly afterwards Guinness World Records listed it as the most expensive music video ever made , at a cost of $ 7 million . 
 " Earth Song " was accompanied by an expensive and well @-@ received music video , which gained a Grammy nomination for Best Music Video , Short Form in 1997 . The video had an environmental theme , showing images of animal cruelty , deforestation , pollution and war . Using special effects , time is reversed so that life returns , wars end , and the forests re @-@ grow . Released in 1997 and premiering at the 1996 Cannes Film Festival , Michael Jackson 's Ghosts was a short film written by Jackson and Stephen King and directed by Stan Winston . The video for Ghosts is over 38 minutes long and holds the Guinness World Record as the world 's longest music video . 
 = = Legacy and influence = = 
 The media has commonly referred to Jackson as the " King of Pop " because , throughout his career , he transformed the art of music videos and paved the way for modern pop music . For much of Jackson 's career , he had an unparalleled worldwide influence over the younger generation through his musical and humanitarian contributions . His music and videos , such as Thriller , fostered racial diversity in MTV 's roster and steered its focus from rock to pop music and R & B , shaping the channel into a form that proved enduring . Jackson 's work continues to influence numerous artists of various music genres . 
 AllMusic 's Steve Huey describes Jackson as " an unstoppable juggernaut , possessed of all the skills to dominate the charts seemingly at will : an instantly identifiable voice , eye @-@ popping dance moves , stunning musical versatility and loads of sheer star power " . BET described Jackson " as quite simply the greatest entertainer of all time " and someone who " revolutionized the music video and brought dances like the moonwalk to the world . Jackson 's sound , style , movement and legacy continues to inspire artists of all genres . " 
 In 1984 , TIME magazine 's pop critic Jay Cocks wrote that " Jackson is the biggest thing since the Beatles . He is the hottest single phenomenon since Elvis Presley . He just may be the most popular black singer ever . " In 1990 , Vanity Fair cited Jackson as the most popular artist in the history of show business . In 2003 , Daily Telegraph writer Tom Utley described Jackson as " extremely important " and a " genius " . In 2007 , Jackson said : " Music has been my outlet , my gift to all of the lovers in this world . Through it , my music , I know I will live forever . " 
 At Jackson 's memorial service on July 7 , 2009 , Motown founder Berry Gordy proclaimed Jackson " the greatest entertainer that ever lived " . In a June 28 , 2009 Baltimore Sun article titled " 7 Ways Michael Jackson Changed The World " , Jill Rosen wrote that Jackson 's legacy was " as enduring as it is multi @-@ faceted " , influencing fields including sound , dance , fashion , music videos and celebrity . On December 19 , 2014 , the British Council of Cultural Relations named Jackson 's life one of the 80 most important cultural moments of the 20th century . 
 In July 2009 , the Lunar Republic Society , which promotes the exploration , settlement and development of the Moon , named a Moon crater after Jackson . In the same year , for Jackson 's 51st birthday , Google dedicated their Google Doodle to him . In 2010 , two university librarians found that Jackson 's influence extended to academia , with references to Jackson in reports concerning music , popular culture , chemistry and an array of other topics . 
 = = Honors and awards = = 
 Michael Jackson was inducted onto the Hollywood Walk of Fame in 1980 as member of the Jacksons and in 1984 as solo artist . Throughout his career he received numerous honors and awards , including the World Music Awards ' Best @-@ Selling Pop Male Artist of the Millennium , the American Music Award 's Artist of the Century Award and the Bambi Pop Artist of the Millennium Award . He was a double @-@ inductee of the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame , once as a member of The Jackson 5 in 1997 and later as a solo artist in 2001 . Jackson was also inducted in several other halls of fame , including Vocal Group Hall of Fame ( as a Jackson 5 member ) in 1999 and the Songwriters Hall of Fame in 2002 . In 2010 , Jackson was inducted into the Dance Hall of Fame as the first ( and currently only ) dancer from the world of pop and rock ' n ' roll . In 2014 , Jackson was inducted into the second class of inductees to the Rhythm and Blues Music Hall of Fame ; his father Joe Jackson accepted on his behalf . 
 His awards include many Guinness World Records ( eight in 2006 alone ) , including for the Most Successful Entertainer of All Time , 13 Grammy Awards ( as well as the Grammy Legend Award and the Grammy Lifetime Achievement Award ) , 26 American Music Awards ( including the " Artist of the Century " and " Artist of the 1980s " ) , — more than any artist — 13 number @-@ one singles in the US in his solo career — more than any other male artist in the Hot 100 era — and estimated sales of over 400 million records worldwide , which makes him one of the best @-@ selling artists of all time . On December 29 , 2009 , the American Film Institute recognized Jackson 's death as a " moment of significance " saying , " Michael Jackson 's sudden death in June at age 50 was notable for the worldwide outpouring of grief and the unprecedented global eulogy of his posthumous concert rehearsal movie This Is It . " Michael Jackson also received an Honorary Doctor of Humane Letters Degree from the United Negro College Fund and also an Honorary Doctorate of Humane Letters from Fisk University . 
 = = Earnings and wealth = = 
 It is estimated that Michael Jackson earned about $ 750 million in his lifetime . Sales of his recordings through Sony 's music unit earned him an estimated $ 300 million in royalties . He may have also earned an additional $ 400 million from concerts , music publishing ( including his share of the Beatles catalog ) endorsements , merchandising and music videos . Estimating how much of these earnings Jackson was able to personally pocket is difficult because one has to account for taxes , recording costs and production costs . 
 There have also been several detailed estimates of Jackson 's net worth which range from negative $ 285 million to positive $ 350 million for the years 2002 , 2003 and 2007 . 
 = = = U.S. federal estate tax problems = = = 
 On July 26 , 2013 , the executors of the Estate of Michael Jackson filed a petition in the United States Tax Court as a result of a dispute with the Internal Revenue Service ( IRS ) over U.S. federal estate taxes imposed on the value of Jackson 's Estate at the time of his death . The executors of the Estate claim that the Estate was worth about $ 7 million . The IRS asserts that the Estate was worth over $ 1 @.@ 1 billion , and that over $ 700 million in federal estate taxes ( including penalties ) are due . The parties have been ordered to submit a status report to the Court on settlement negotiations by November 2 , 2015 . 
 = = Discography = = 
 Got to Be There ( 1972 ) 
 Ben ( 1972 ) 
 Music & Me ( 1973 ) 
 Forever , Michael ( 1975 ) 
 Off the Wall ( 1979 ) 
 Thriller ( 1982 ) 
 Bad ( 1987 ) 
 Dangerous ( 1991 ) 
 HIStory : Past , Present and Future , Book I ( 1995 ) 
 Invincible ( 2001 ) 
 = = Filmography = = 
 The Wiz ( 1978 ) 
 Captain EO ( 1986 ) 
 Moonwalker ( 1988 ) 
 Michael Jackson 's Ghosts ( 1997 ) 
 Men in Black II ( 2002 ) 
 Miss Cast Away and the Island Girls ( 2004 ) 
 Michael Jackson 's This Is It ( 2009 ) 
 Bad 25 ( 2012 ) 
 Michael Jackson : The Last Photo Shoot ( 2014 ) 
 Michael Jackson 's Journey from Motown to Off the Wall ( 2016 ) 
 = = Tours = = 
 Bad ( 1987 – 89 ) 
 Dangerous World Tour ( 1992 – 93 ) 
 HIStory World Tour ( 1996 – 97 ) 
 MJ & Friends ( 1999 ) 
 This Is It ( 2009 – 10 ; cancelled ) 
 = Steve Morison = 
 Steven ' Steve ' William Morison ( born 29 August 1983 ) is a Wales international footballer who currently plays for League One side Millwall . 
 Morison started his career at Northampton Town at the age of 16 , progressing through the club 's centre of excellence . After featuring regularly for the club 's reserve team , Morison made his first @-@ team debut in 2002 , and played a total of 28 times for the club during his three years with Northampton . He left Northampton and joined Conference South side Bishop 's Stortford for an undisclosed fee in November 2004 . Morison spent just under two years with Stortford , scoring prolifically , before joining another Hertfordshire team in the form of Stevenage for a " small four @-@ figure fee " in August 2006 . 
 During the 2006 – 07 season , Morison scored a total of 34 times in 53 games , including the winner in Stevenage 's 3 – 2 victory over Kidderminster Harriers in the FA Trophy final in May 2007 – the first competitive cup final to be held at the new Wembley Stadium . The following season , Morison netted 22 times in 45 matches , before scoring 30 times during the club 's 2008 – 09 campaign ; scoring again in Stevenage 's 2 – 0 win against York City in the FA Trophy final in May 2009 , his last game for the club . He subsequently joined Millwall for £ 130 @,@ 000 ahead of 2009 – 10 season , and helped the club to promotion to the Championship by scoring 23 goals in 52 games . He finished as Millwall 's top goalscorer the following season , before signing for Premier League side Norwich City for an undisclosed fee in June 2011 . In January 2013 , Morison signed for Leeds United as part of a swap deal . After just five months at Leeds , Morison rejoined Millwall on a season @-@ long loan in June 2013 . Morison earned eight caps for the England C team , scoring three goals . In August 2010 , Morison made his senior international debut for Wales . 
 = = Club career = = 
 = = = Northampton and Bishop 's Stortford = = = 
 Born in Enfield , London , Morison joined Northampton Town as part of the club 's youth system after a successful trial period with the club , having also spent time on trial at Leicester City . When Morison turned 18 , he signed a two @-@ year professional contract with Northampton . He impressed manager Kevan Broadhurst and subsequently made his debut at the end of the 2001 – 02 season in a 2 – 2 draw against Cambridge United . The following season , Morison featured regularly as a substitute , playing a total of 15 games , scoring his first goal for the Northamptonshire side in a 2 – 2 draw against Plymouth Argyle . However , the 2003 – 04 season witnessed Morison feature in only 5 games , getting on the scoresheet once . In June 2004 , he was offered a new six @-@ month contract at the club , and told by manager Colin Calderwood that he had to prove his worth at the club . 
 Morison played the opening five games of the club 's 2004 – 05 campaign , but failed to score . He featured two more times for the club , scoring Northampton 's equaliser away at Darlington in September 2004 . The following month , Morison joined Conference South side Bishop 's Stortford for an undisclosed fee . He scored on his debut in a 1 – 1 draw against Redbridge , and scored in the following game in Stortford 's 3 – 1 loss at Bognor Regis Town . He also helped Stortford reach the FA Trophy semi @-@ final and Morison finished the season as the club 's top goalscorer , as well as finishing as the 2004 – 05 FA Trophy top goalscorer . The following season , Morison struggled for form at the start of the club 's league campaign , and was subsequently used as a substitute during the first two months of the season . He started in a game against Histon in November 2005 , scoring a hat @-@ trick in a 5 – 0 win . He followed this up with goals against St Albans City and Eastbourne Borough respectively , as well as scoring Stortford 's fourth in a 5 – 2 victory over Dorchester Town . He ended the season by scoring twice against Eastleigh , meaning he scored a total of 15 goals as he continued to impress at Woodside Park . 
 = = = Stevenage Borough = = = 
 He started the 2006 – 07 season by scoring two goals in two games for Stortford , before joining Conference National side Stevenage Borough on a two @-@ year deal in August 2006 for a " small four figure fee " . He scored on his debut in a 3 – 2 defeat against Crawley Town , also having a goal disallowed in the same game . He continued his goalscoring form at his new club by scoring a hat @-@ trick against Morecambe in a 3 – 3 draw at Christie Park , and then a brace two days later against Forest Green Rovers . The following week , he partnered George Boyd upfront , scoring once and assisting all of Boyd 's three goals in a 6 – 0 victory against Stafford Rangers . He went on to score doubles against Forest Green Rovers in the FA Cup , Oxford United , and Leigh RMI in the FA Trophy . He also scored goals in draws against Morecambe and Forest Green Rovers respectively in April 2007 , and scored his last league goal of the season in Stevenage 's 3 – 0 win against Tamworth . Morison also helped the club to success in the FA Trophy , finishing the competition 's top goalscorer with 8 goals , including a goal in the final in May 2007 against Kidderminster Harriers , scoring the winner in a 3 – 2 victory at Wembley Stadium in front of a competition record crowd of 53 @,@ 262 . In total , Morison played 53 games during the season , scoring 34 times in all competitions and finishing as the club 's top goalscorer for the season . 
 Morison continued his scoring form throughout Stevenage 's 2007 – 08 campaign , scoring 22 times in 43 appearances , as the club narrowly missed out on the play @-@ offs . He scored his first goal of the campaign in Stevenage 's 2 – 1 victory against Histon in the club 's first home fixture of the season , following this up with goals in victories against Weymouth , Stafford Rangers , and York City respectively . Morison scored his first brace of the season in a 4 – 0 win over Farsley Celtic in September 2007 . He went on to score six goals in four games during the Christmas period – scoring doubles against Altrincham , Stafford Rangers , and Droylsden . He also scored on the last day of the season in a 2 – 1 win against Halifax Town . Although his least prolific season at Stevenage , Morison still managed a one @-@ in @-@ two ratio . At the end of the season , Morison handed in a transfer request as he sought a return to the Football League . Despite the club granting him his wish , and attracting interest from League Two side Crewe Alexandra , nothing materialised and Morison signed a new three @-@ year contract at Stevenage . There was a clause in the contract that stated he could leave the club at the end of the 2008 – 09 season for a pre @-@ arranged fee if Stevenage failed to make it into the Football League . 
 He scored 30 goals in 51 games for the Hertfordshire outfit during the 2008 – 09 season , and captained the side for the majority of the campaign . His season got off to a bad start , however , with Stevenage losing 5 – 0 away to Wrexham ; a game in which Morison was sent @-@ off for an " off the ball headbutt " . He subsequently missed the next three games , but quickly re @-@ discovered his goalscoring form in early September 2008 , following up a hat @-@ trick against champions Burton Albion with a brace against Altrincham . Another brace followed shortly after in a 3 – 3 draw against York City , as well as scoring the winner in a 3 – 2 win against Mansfield Town . Morison 's goals were vital in ensuring Stevenage 's surge up the league table over the Christmas period ; notching braces against Rushden & Diamonds , Lewes , and Barrow , whilst also scoring Stevenage 's solitary goal in a 1 – 1 at Nene Park against Rushden . He later scored goals in away victories to both Weymouth and York City respectively , as well as scoring in a 3 – 1 win over Kidderminster Harriers to ensure Stevenage made the play @-@ offs , finishing in the final play @-@ off spot . Morison was also instrumental in the side 's successful FA Trophy campaign in the same season , scoring seven times in seven games , including once in the side 's 2 – 0 win against York in the Final , as captain Morison lifted the trophy at Wembley Stadium . However , Stevenage failed to achieve promotion to League Two following an aggregate 4 – 3 defeat to Cambridge United in the play @-@ offs ; with Morison scoring twice at Broadhall Way , but missing a " gilt edged " chance in the return leg . Subsequently , activating a release clause in his contract , Morison was allowed to leave and , shortly after , agreed personal terms with League One team Millwall in May 2009 , with a fee of £ 130 @,@ 000 being agreed for the transfer . During his three @-@ year tenure at the club , Morison made a total of 152 appearances , scoring 89 goals . Morison was also included in the club 's ' Wall of Fame ' , which features " the six greatest players in Stevenage 's history as voted for by the club 's supporters " . 
 = = = Millwall = = = 
 He made his debut for Millwall in the opening game of the 2009 – 10 season , starting in the club 's 1 – 1 draw with Southampton ; providing the assist for Millwall 's equaliser . A month later , he scored his first goal for Millwall in a 3 – 1 victory over Huddersfield Town . Playing in a deeper role than when at Stevenage , Morison struggled for goals , but made the majority of Millwall 's goals throughout October , whilst also netting in a 5 – 0 win over Tranmere Rovers . In December 2009 , he scored a 91st @-@ minute winner in a 3 – 2 victory over Milton Keynes Dons , and also scored a similar goal in a 4 – 0 win over Staines Town in the FA Cup . Three days later , Morison scored twice in Millwall 's 2 – 1 victory over Walsall . His fine form through December continued , scoring twice in a 4 – 4 draw against Charlton Athletic at The Valley . He scored his seventh goal in as many games in a 2 – 0 win over Bristol Rovers , whilst also assisting the second goal . Morison scored his second goal of Millwall 's FA Cup campaign against Derby County at Pride Park in early January 2010 ; scoring in the 108th minute as Millwall were knocked out 5 – 3 on a penalty shootout . He provided the assists for both of Millwall 's goals in games against Southampton and Oldham Athletic respectively , before scoring the winner in a 1 – 0 victory over Brighton & Hove Albion ; his 11th goal of the season . This was followed up with a brace in a 3 – 1 win away to Carlisle United , whilst also setting up Millwall 's third goal . Morison scored another brace four days later , as Millwall beat Charlton Athletic 4 – 0 . His 17th of the season came in front of the Sky cameras against Leeds United at Elland Road . Shortly after , Morison scored his 18th goal of the campaign , scoring a header from an acute angle in Millwall 's 5 – 0 win over Stockport County . As a result of his fine goalscoring form throughout March , Morison was named Football League One Player of the Month . Another goal followed for Morison in a 2 – 1 win away at Colchester United . Morison 's 20th goal of the season came in a 2 – 1 victory over Leyton Orient , scoring Millwall 's second goal from the penalty spot . The goal subsequently means that Morison has now scored 20 goals or more in his last six seasons for three different clubs . On the last day of the season , Morison scored a brace against Swindon Town in a 3 – 2 victory . Morison 's first was a coolly dispatched penalty , whilst he supplied the cross that led to an own goal . Morison 's second goal of the game was a half @-@ volley from outside the area ; looping into the top right @-@ hand corner of the net . He scored his 23rd goal of the season in Millwall 's 2 – 0 win against Huddersfield Town as Millwall progressed to the League One play @-@ off final , where they beat Swindon Town 1 – 0 at Wembley Stadium ; Morison 's third successive victory at the stadium . 
 Ahead of the 2010 – 11 season , Morison scored in pre @-@ season friendlies against AFC Wimbledon and Stevenage respectively . He started the season by assisting two of Millwall 's goals in the club 's 3 – 0 win against Bristol City at Ashton Gate . In the club 's following league match , he scored two headed goals as Millwall beat Hull City comprehensively at The Den . He scored his third goal of the season from the penalty spot as Millwall beat Middlesbrough 2 – 1 in the League Cup . Four days later , Morison was on the scoresheet again , scoring a penalty to seal Millwall 's 3 – 1 win against Coventry City . He also provided the assist for Millwall 's first goal . He scored his fifth goal in six games in Millwall 's 1 – 1 draw with Nottingham Forest at The City Ground , giving Millwall the lead in the fifth minute with a header . Ten days later , Morison added to his goal tally when he scored against Ipswich Town in the League Cup , scoring after the hour mark in a 2 – 1 home defeat . In October , Morison scored his seventh goal of the campaign in Millwall 's 2 – 0 win against Derby County , the club 's first home win since August . Two weeks later , Morison scored the opening goal of the game against Doncaster Rovers at the <unk> Stadium , but was unable to prevent Millwall from losing the match 2 – 1 . He went three games without scoring through November 2010 , before scoring two late goals in Millwall 's televised victory over Scunthorpe United in early December 2010 . On 15 December 2010 , it was widely reported that Millwall had rejected a £ <unk> offer for Morison from Nottingham Forest , with Millwall manager Kenny Jackett claiming there is " no chance " that Morison will be sold in the January transfer window . A day later , Jackett said the club had not received a formal bid for Morison from Forest . Morison 's eleventh goal of the season came in Millwall 's last game of 2010 ; scoring the first goal in a 2 – 0 home win over Leicester City . He went on to score goals in home victories against Ipswich Town and Barnsley respectively . Morison signed a new 2 ½ year contract with Millwall on 5 February 2011 , ending transfer speculation about his long term commitment to the club , he stated " I 'm looking forward to playing my part in the future success of Millwall " . After a run of six games without a goal , Morison scored in Millwall 's 2 – 0 win over eventual Championship winners Queens Park Rangers , netting Millwall 's first goal in the 63rd minute . Eleven days later , Morison scored a lobbed effort against Cardiff City to restore parity in a game that ended 3 – 3 . His sixteenth goal of the 2010 – 11 campaign came on 2 April 2011 , scoring another lobbed effort , this time in a 1 – 0 away win at Hull City . A week later , Morison was on hand to score Millwall 's third goal in a 3 – 2 home win over Leeds United . He was sent @-@ off just three days later in the club 's 0 – 0 draw with Bristol City , receiving the red card for a " reckless lunge " on Bristol City 's Jamal Campbell @-@ Ryce . This subsequently meant Morison served a three @-@ game suspension , returning for Millwall 's two final league games of the season . Morison ended the season having scored 17 goals for Millwall in 43 appearances . 
 = = = Norwich City = = = 
 At the end of the 2010 – 11 season , Morison handed in a written transfer request amid speculation about a move to newly promoted Premier League side Norwich City . Millwall subsequently rejected the transfer request . A day later , Morison revealed " Norwich have made a couple of bids that have been turned down so I 've done what I 've done . I want to play in the Premier League , I might not get another opportunity " . On 2 June 2011 , Millwall accepted an offer from Norwich City for Morison after the two clubs agreed a fee for the player , it was the fourth bid Norwich had made for Morison . He signed for the club on a three @-@ year contract for an undisclosed fee on 6 June . Morison made his Norwich City debut against Wigan Athletic during the club 's first game of the 2011 – 12 campaign , playing 75 minutes of the match in a 1 – 1 draw . He was crucial in Norwich 's equalising goal , beating Adrián López Rodríguez on the right wing and providing a cross that was ultimately turned in by Wes Hoolahan . He scored his first goal for the club in Norwich 's first home win of the season , a 2 – 1 victory against Sunderland on 26 September . The goal came shortly after half @-@ time , with Morison heading in Marc Tierney 's cross to give Norwich a two @-@ goal lead . Morison scored his second goal for Norwich in a 3 – 3 draw against Blackburn Rovers on 29 October , with the goal being described as a " stunning strike " from the edge of the area . A week later , he scored a header from an acute angle in Norwich 's 3 – 2 away defeat against Aston Villa . Morison 's fourth goal of the campaign came in a 2 – 1 home defeat to Arsenal on 19 November , scoring the opening goal of the game after he stole the ball from Per Mertesacker before calmly beating Wojciech Szczęsny in the Arsenal goal . He scored his fourth goal in five Premier League appearances on 3 December , beating Gaël Clichy at the back post to powerfully head the ball past Joe Hart in the Manchester City goal . Morison 's goal was a minor consolation in a 5 – 1 defeat at the City of Manchester Stadium . Morison was also on target for the Canaries in the club 's 4 – 2 home win over Newcastle United on 10 December , scoring Norwich 's third goal when he powerfully headed in Andrew Crofts ' cross from 12 @-@ yards out . He scored in Norwich 's first three games of 2012 despite featuring as a substitute in two of the matches , scoring once in the FA Cup in a 4 – 1 victory over Burnley , as well as netting late goals in 2 – 1 away victories against Queens Park Rangers and West Bromwich Albion respectively . After his goal at West Brom , Morison did not find the scoresheet for another three months — eventually scoring his tenth goal of the campaign in a 3 – 3 draw away to Arsenal at Emirates Stadium on 5 May 2012 . Morison 's late strike from a tight angle drew Norwich level after they had trailed 3 – 2 with five minutes remaining . During his first season at the club , he scored ten goals in 37 appearances . 
 The following season , under new Norwich manager Chris Hughton , Morison featured predominantly as a substitute ; starting just four games during the first half of the campaign . He scored his first goal of the season in a 5 – 2 home defeat to Liverpool in September 2012 , a match in which he started . He went on to score one further goal for the club , netting in Norwich 's 4 – 1 loss to Aston Villa in the League Cup quarter @-@ final on 11 December . He dedicated the goal to former team mate Mitchell Cole , who had recently died . Morison made his last appearance for Norwich in a 4 – 3 defeat to Manchester City in the club 's final game of 2012 . He made 59 appearances during his one @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half year spell at the club , scoring 12 goals . 
 = = = Leeds United = = = 
 On the last day of the 2013 January transfer window , Morison signed for Championship side Leeds United as part of a swap deal . The transfer involved Luciano <unk> moving to Norwich , as well as Norwich paying Leeds a " further undisclosed sum " . On signing Morison , the then @-@ Leeds manager Neil Warnock said that — " Steve meets all the requirements of the striker we 've been looking to bring in . For me , he is a player who has everything . He can score goals from anywhere – whether it 's 25 yards or a tap @-@ in – he has pace , and he has all the attributes you want " . He made his Leeds debut on 9 February 2013 , playing the whole match in the club 's 2 – 2 draw against Wolverhampton Wanderers at Molineux . Morison scored his first goal for the club on his home debut on 20 February , netting the second goal in a 2 – 0 victory over Blackpool . He scored twice for Leeds in the club 's 2 – 2 draw against Crystal Palace at Selhurst Park on 9 March . The two goals proved to be Morison 's last of the season , scoring three goals in 16 appearances during the second half of the 2012 – 13 campaign . 
 = = = = Millwall loan = = = = 
 Just a day after returning for pre @-@ season training with Leeds , on 28 June 2013 , Morison joined former club Millwall , also of the Championship , on a season @-@ long loan deal . On rejoining Millwall , Morison stated — " I 'm pleased to be back here . If anybody has any doubts about me all I 'd say is that I aim to score plenty of goals for Millwall and help this club to greater success " . Morison finished the season with 8 goals in 41 appearances , helping the London club stave off relegation from The Championship with a 19th @-@ place finish . 
 = = = = Return to Leeds = = = = 
 In June 2014 , after returning to Leeds , new Leeds owner Massimo <unk> revealed that Morison would be fully in Dave Hockaday 's plans for the following season , describing that " he needs to show if he ’ s still a good player because he used to be . " On 1 August , Morison was assigned the Leeds number 19 shirt for the 2014 – 15 season , with Morison 's previous shirt number going to team @-@ mate Matt Smith . Morison missed the opening games of the season through injury , making his first league appearance for Leeds in over a year as a substitute against Huddersfield Town on 20 September . 
 On 25 October 2014 , Morison was named in Leeds ' starting 11 for the first time in 18 months for the game against Wolverhampton Wanderers , replacing the suspended Souleymane <unk> . The match proved to be Darko <unk> 's last match as head coach . 
 On 19 April 2015 , Morison scored his first goal for Leeds since March 2013 , when he scored a volley in a 2 – 1 loss against Charlton Athletic . After scoring against Charlton , Morison followed this up by scoring in the consecutive game on 25 April in a 2 – 1 win against Yorkshire rivals Sheffield Wednesday . It would have been three goals in three games if his goal against Rotherham hadn 't been wrongly called offside . 
 He started off the 2015 / 16 pre season in good form , scoring against Harrogate Town on 10 July 2015 , and then scoring against Eintracht Frankfurt in a 2 – 1 defeat on 21 July 2015 . On 31 July 2015 , Morison was given the number 20 shirt for the upcoming 2015 / 16 season . 
 = = = Millwall = = = 
 On 4 August 2015 , Leeds announced that Morison had rejoined League 1 side Millwall for an undisclosed fee . 
 = = International career = = 
 = = = England C = = = 
 Morison was called up to the England C team , who represent England at non @-@ league level , in November 2006 , scoring in a European Challenge Trophy game against the Netherlands . Morison was then chosen to represent his country for the Four Nations Tournament hosted in Scotland in May 2007 , where he played in victories against Republic of Ireland C and Scotland C respectively , assisting two goals in the process . He was included in the 16 @-@ man squad for the Four Nations Tournament hosted in Wales in May 2008 , scoring in the side 's 1 – 0 win against Scotland C , as well as featuring against both Gibraltar and Wales C. He was subsequently called up for the England C tour of the Caribbean in June 2008 , in which Morison played both games against Grenada and Barbados respectively , scoring against the former in a 1 – 1 draw . Morison played a total of eight times for the England C side , scoring three times , before his age meant that he was ineligible to be selected . 
 = = = Wales = = = 
 In May 2010 , it was identified that Morison was eligible to represent Wales due to Welsh ancestry – as his grandmother was born in Tredegar , near Ebbw Vale . Wales assistant manager Roy Evans was present to watch Morison in Millwall 's 1 – 0 victory against Swindon Town , while Morison " registered his interest " in representing Wales . In July 2010 , Wales boss John Toshack named Morison in the Wales squad for a friendly against Luxembourg in Llanelli on 11 August 2010 . On being called up to the Wales squad , Morison said " It 's a fantastic achievement and it feels good to be recognised for my hard work " . Morison subsequently started in Wales ' 5 – 1 victory against Luxembourg , playing the whole match and assisting Ashley Williams ' goal . Following Morison 's debut , manager John Toshack said " I was very impressed with the debut of Steve Morison , he didn ’ t get on the scoresheet , but he certainly made his presence felt " . A week after his first appearance for Wales , Morison was called up again as part of the 25 @-@ man squad for Wales ' first UEFA Euro 2012 qualifier against Montenegro in September 2010 . He started the match against Montenegro , but was substituted with ten minutes remaining as Wales lost 1 – 0 . In October 2010 , Morison was again included in Wales ' squad for their qualifiers against Bulgaria and Switzerland respectively . He started in Wales ' 1 – 0 home loss to Bulgaria , before appearing as a substitute with ten minutes remaining in the team 's 4 – 1 loss to Switzerland in Basel . Morison earned his fifth cap for Wales on 26 March 2011 , starting in Wales ' UEFA Euro 2012 qualifier against England . The game ended 2 – 0 to England . 
 At the start of the 2011 – 12 season , Morison was called up for Wales ' friendly game against Australia , coming on as a 62nd @-@ minute substitute in a 2 – 1 defeat . Wales manager Gary Speed called Morison up for the country 's two UEFA Euro 2012 qualifiers in September 2011 . He scored his first international goal for Wales in a 2 – 1 victory against Montenegro , played at Cardiff City Stadium on 2 September . Morison 's goal came from six yards out , sliding to make contact with David Vaughan 's low cross . The victory was Wales ' first of the qualification group . He earned his tenth cap for Wales in a 1 – 0 defeat to England at Wembley Stadium four days later , on 6 September . Morison went on to make two further appearances in victories against Switzerland and Bulgaria respectively in October 2011 , before starting up @-@ front alongside Craig Bellamy in a 4 – 1 friendly win over Norway . Two further appearances in friendly matches against Costa Rica and Mexico took Morison 's appearances tally for Wales to 15 . 
 He opened the 2012 – 13 season by appearing in a 2 – 0 friendly loss to Bosnia and Herzegovina , coming on as a 69th @-@ minute substitute in the match . Morison started in Wales ' first two 2014 FIFA World Cup qualifiers , a 2 – 0 home defeat to Belgium on 7 September 2012 , followed by a 6 – 1 away loss to Serbia four days later . He started in Wales ' first win of the World Cup campaign a month later , playing the first 65 minutes as Wales came from behind to defeat Scotland at Cardiff City Stadium . Morison earned his 20th cap in a 2 – 0 defeat to Croatia in Osijek on 16 October 2012 . 
 = = Style of play = = 
 Morison plays as a striker and has been described as a " player who is always in the right place at the right time " , which is a reference to his goalscoring exploits . Ahead of the 2008 – 09 season , Stevenage manager Graham Westley sent Morison to a training camp whereby he would work on his pace , and later said " he is improving all the time " . He also described him as a player that " no defender would want to play against " due to his height , pace , and strength . In May 2010 , Millwall manager Kenny Jackett said that Morison " has a lot of strength and pace , which he uses on defenders perfectly " , as well as referring to him as a " physical threat " because of his aerial ability . Nick <unk> of The Times stated that Morison plays with " a fearless , all @-@ action style " , and that this was emphasised when he " played against Huddersfield Town with his head bandaged to protect a wound that required three stitches " . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Morison attended Enfield Grammar School , leaving school at the age of 16 with one GCSE qualification . During his time at Northampton Town , Morison added to his qualifications with a National Diploma in Sports science , and also earned a coaching badge during his time at <unk> . When Morison fell into part @-@ time football with Bishop 's Stortford in 2004 , he worked for a shredding company , " getting up at four in the morning shredding paper around London " . However , he said he " could not handle the early starts " and subsequently got " an easier job indoors " doing administration work in an office , where he met his wife , since then they have had a baby boy together , called Fenton . He quit the administration job immediately after signing for Stevenage in August 2006 . 
 Morison has always had an interest in greyhound racing , ever since he attended Walthamstow Stadium as a boy . In January 2013 , Morison set up a greyhound racing syndicate alongside his former strike partner at Norwich City , Grant Holt , and the two launched the <unk> Racing Club . Talking of the racing club , Morison stated — " I 've got lots of kennels myself , lots of animals , lots of dogs . So me and Grant got together bought a couple of dogs and it ’ s spiralled out of control a little bit , because we ’ ve bought seven now in the space of about three months . But it 's been brilliant " . When he finishes playing football , he says it would be " a dream " to be a greyhound trainer . 
 = = Honours = = 
 Stevenage Borough 
 FA Trophy ( 2 ) : 2006 – 07 , 2008 – 09 
 Millwall 
 League One play @-@ offs ( 1 ) : 2009 – 10 
 Individual 
 Stevenage Player of the Year ( 1 ) : 2007 – 08 
 League One Player of the Month ( 1 ) : March 2010 
 = = Career statistics = = 
 As of 15 May 2016 
 = = = Club = = = 
 = = = International = = = 
 = = = International goals = = = 
 Wales ' goal tally first 
 = Funeral ( Glee ) = 
 " Funeral " is the twenty @-@ first episode of the second season of the American musical television series Glee , and the forty @-@ third overall . It first aired May 17 , 2011 on Fox in the United States , and was written by series creator Ryan Murphy and directed by Bradley Buecker . The episode featured Jonathan Groff guest starring as Jesse St. James , who is brought in as a consultant to help the New Directions glee club prepare for the National Show Choir competition . Sue Sylvester 's ( Jane Lynch ) sister Jean ( Robin Trocki ) dies unexpectedly , and the glee club helps Sue plan her funeral . 
 The episode received a wide range of reviews , from highly enthusiastic to harshly critical . The performances of the five songs covered were generally well @-@ liked , though having four of them arranged as a series of auditions in the middle of the show met with disapproval . All five songs were released as singles , and three of them charted on the Billboard Hot 100 . 
 Upon its initial airing , this episode was viewed by 8 @.@ 97 million American viewers and garnered a 3 @.@ 6 / 10 Nielsen rating / share in the 18 – 49 demographic . The total viewership and ratings for this episode were down slightly from the previous episode , " Prom Queen " . Lynch was nominated for an Outstanding Supporting Actress in a Comedy Series at the 63rd Primetime Emmy Awards for her work on the show , and submitted this episode for judging . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Will Schuester ( Matthew Morrison ) , director of New Directions , the McKinley High School glee club , hires Jesse St. James ( Jonathan Groff ) — an alumnus of championship @-@ winning rival glee club Vocal Adrenaline — as a consultant to help them develop a strategy to win the upcoming Nationals competition . Jesse convinces Will to use Vocal Adrenaline 's methodology , which is to identify the club 's best performer and center the entire performance on that person , and Will decides to hold auditions to determine who will be featured . Santana Lopez ( Naya Rivera ) , Rachel Berry ( Lea Michele ) , Mercedes Jones ( Amber Riley ) and Kurt Hummel ( Chris Colfer ) all audition , with Jesse and Will as judges . Jesse is highly critical of the performances by Santana , Kurt and Mercedes , while he praises his former girlfriend Rachel 's performance . He tells Will that Rachel is the clear winner , which angers the other three . Ultimately , Will decides to ignore Jesse 's advice and instead plans to do for Nationals what brought them victory at the Regionals competition : having the whole group sing original songs . 
 Cheerleading coach Sue Sylvester ( Jane Lynch ) is deeply upset by the death of her sister , Jean ( Robin Trocki ) . She lashes out by having the glee club 's flight to Nationals in New York City rerouted so it has a layover in war @-@ ravaged Tripoli , and kicks Becky Jackson ( Lauren Potter ) off the Cheerios . Sue allows Finn Hudson ( Cory Monteith ) and Kurt to plan Jean 's funeral and help her sort through Jean 's personal belongings , and agrees to have the glee club to perform at the funeral , as she believes no one will attend otherwise . While going through Jean 's belongings , Finn and Kurt discover that her favorite movie was Willy Wonka & the Chocolate Factory , and arrange a funeral inspired by the film . At the funeral , an emotional Sue is unable to continue reading her eulogy after a few sentences , and Will reads the remainder for her . The glee club then sings " Pure Imagination " , the theme song of the film . Touched by Will 's support , Sue later tells him that he is a good friend and he has what Jean had and she does not : a pure heart . She says that she will no longer attempt to destroy the glee club , and announces that she is planning to run for the United States House of Representatives . For the first time , she wishes him good luck . Sue also apologizes to Becky , reinstates her as a member of the Cheerios , and tells her she will be captain of the squad in the fall . Sue asks for and receives a hug from Becky . 
 Finn realizes his true feelings for Rachel during the funeral , and breaks up with Quinn Fabray ( Dianna Agron ) afterward . He later thanks her for not quitting glee club because of their breakup ; Quinn tells him that quitting would have ruined her " big plans " for New York , and refuses to tell him what they are . Finn sees Jesse and Rachel sharing a brief kiss on stage ; after they leave , he brings a flower from behind his back . Will 's ex @-@ wife , Terri ( Jessalyn Gilsig ) , who aided Sue 's earlier plot to sabotage the glee club 's flights , gives Will first @-@ class plane tickets to New York for the entire club , revealing that they were a donation from an airline executive . She tells him she is moving to Miami to start over with her life and to pursue her retail management career , and they say goodbye . 
 = = Production = = 
 The episode was written by series co @-@ creator Ryan Murphy and directed by Bradley Buecker . Two months before it aired , Murphy confirmed at PaleyFest 2011 that there was a death planned before the end of the season , but that it would not be recurring character Dave Karofsky , despite rumors that his death would be paving the way for Kurt 's return to McKinley High . Further details were eventually supplied by entertainment reporter Michael Ausiello , who reported on April 19 , 2011 that a " beloved character " would be dying in the " season 's penultimate episode " , and one week later that the character was female . Morrison confirmed in late April that there would indeed be a death , and added : " The episode right before the finale is called ' Funeral ' . We were actually at a funeral home yesterday , shooting all day . It was a very taxing day . " The day the episode aired , Lynch revealed in an interview that Murphy had conferred with her before proceeding with the storyline : " He took me aside at a party and said ' I want your blessing on this before we move forward . ' I said , ' It sounds like a really great storyline . ' It ’ s the thing that will break Sue Sylvester ’ s heart and get to where she lives . " Lynch was nominated for an Outstanding Supporting Actress in a Comedy Series at the 63rd Primetime Emmy Awards for her work on the show , and submitted " Funeral " to be the episode by which she would be judged . 
 Groff returns for the second of three consecutive episodes as Jesse . Terri 's colleague Howard Bamboo ( Kent Avenido ) also returns , and makes his only appearance of the second season after having featured in several episodes during the first . Other recurring guest stars in the episode include glee club members Mike Chang ( Harry Shum , Jr . ) , Sam Evans ( Chord Overstreet ) and Lauren Zizes ( Ashley Fink ) , cheerleader Becky Jackson ( Lauren Potter ) , and in an uncredited appearance in a video shown during the funeral scene , Sue 's sister Jean Sylvester ( Robin Trocki ) . Additional guests include Becky 's mother Donna Jackson ( Kari Coleman ) , and Jim Metzler as the Reverend who presides at the funeral . 
 " Funeral " features cover versions of five songs : " Back to Black " by Amy Winehouse , sung by Rivera ; " Some People " from Gypsy , performed by Colfer ; " Try a Little Tenderness " by Otis Redding , sung by Riley ; " My Man " in the Barbra Streisand version from the film of Funny Girl , performed by Michele ; and " Pure Imagination " from Willy Wonka & the Chocolate Factory , sung by New Directions . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 " Funeral " was first broadcast on May 17 , 2011 in the United States on Fox . It garnered a 3 @.@ 6 / 10 Nielsen rating / share in the 18 – 49 demographic , and received 8 @.@ 97 million American viewers during its initial airing , despite airing simultaneously with the NCIS season finale on CBS , The Biggest Loser on NBC , Dancing With the Stars Freestyle Special on ABC , and the One Tree Hill season finale on The CW . The total viewership and ratings for this episode were down slightly from those of the previous episode , " Prom Queen " — which was watched by 9 @.@ 29 million American viewers and acquired a 3 @.@ 7 / 11 rating / share in the 18 – 49 demographic upon first airing on television . 
 The episode 's Canadian broadcast , also on May 17 , 2011 , drew 1 @.@ 58 million viewers . It was the fourteenth most @-@ watched show of the week , and ranked two places higher than the previous week 's " Prom Queen " , even though it drew 13 % fewer viewers than the 1 @.@ 82 million recorded for that episode . In Australia , the episode was watched by 1 @.@ 07 million viewers on June 8 , 2011 , which made Glee the seventh most @-@ watched show of the night and the twenty @-@ first most @-@ watched for the week . This was up slightly from " Prom Queen " , which attracted 1 @.@ 04 million viewers on June 1 , 2011 , and was the eighth most @-@ watched program of the night and twenty @-@ sixth of the week . In the UK , the episode debuted on June 7 , 2011 , and was watched by 2 @.@ 19 million viewers ( 1 @.@ 76 million on E4 , and 427 @,@ 000 on E4 + 1 ) , which made it the most @-@ watched show on E4 and E4 + 1 for the week , and the most @-@ watched show on cable for the week . This was up slightly over " Prom Queen " , which aired on May 23 , 2011 , and was watched by 2 @.@ 11 million viewers , again the most @-@ watched show on cable for the week . 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 " Funeral " was met with a wide range of reviews , from highly enthusiastic to harshly critical . Lisa Respers France of CNN said it was " one of the best episodes ever " , and MTV 's Aly Semigran called it " authentic " and " one of the very best " of the season if not the series as a whole . Robert Canning of IGN wrote that it was " a great episode that truly showcased the talents of Jane Lynch " and rated it 8 @.@ 5 out of 10 . Rolling Stone 's Erica Futterman said that the episode " felt like a recycled version of things we 've seen previously " and added that the show is " not as entertaining when it 's simply a showcase " . Todd VanDerWerff of The A.V. Club gave the episode a " C " and characterized the funeral scene as " the highlight of an uneven episode " . The Atlantic 's Kevin Fallon wrote , " Killing off Sue 's sister seemed cruel , but ultimately paid off — it 's too bad the episode completely derailed afterward , dying its own rapid death in turn . " Anthony Benigno of The Faster Times had little good to say , and singled out the writers for doing " such a crappy job " on the penultimate episode of the season . 
 Lynch as Sue received high praise for her acting . Canning wrote that she " stole the episode " and " perfectly portrayed a woman [ whose ] hard heart was trying terribly not to break , but not being able to stop it . " BuddyTV 's John Kubicek stated , " it 's impossible for me to say that Lynch wasn 't exceptional , because her slow breakdown and attempt to cover @-@ up her emotions was well done and fit perfectly with the character . " Respers France commented that " we got to see the range and complexity of Sue Sylvester " , and Sandra Gonzalez of Entertainment Weekly said that Lynch did an " outstanding job of delivering even the funniest quips with an underlying sense of sadness " . Sue 's characterization in the series was criticized by several reviewers , however . Amy Reiter of The Los Angeles Times stated that the " consistent inconsistency of Sue 's character is wearing thin " , and that " our sense of her fails to advance , wandering endlessly between pure evil and pure love for her sister . " Futterman called the episode a " too @-@ little @-@ too late attempt at redemption for Sue 's poor characterization this season . " VanDerWerff wrote that the episode " feels very self @-@ consciously like a way to just remove her character from the table for the season finale " , that " it feels very self @-@ consciously like an attempt by the show to address the fact that the character doesn 't make any sense " , and criticized the death of Jean : " killing her solely to right a wayward character arc is lazy writing , and no amount of actor commitment can wholly save it . " Fallon described the funeral plot line as " pure , classic Glee : <unk> random , emotionally manipulative , wholly unnecessary to plot development , and , in the end , deeply moving . " 
 The secondary plot line , about the auditions for New Directions soloist at Nationals , was roundly criticized . Canning called it a " faux drama " , though he added that Jesse was " a delight to despise " , and VanDerWerff said it was " completely ridiculous to do this with Nationals coming up " in a week 's time , and " constructed almost entirely " to make Jesse a " jerk " . Houston Chronicle 's Bobby Hankinson also hit on the lack of preparation for the upcoming competition and stated that it seemed " like a very bad idea " to be going without a setlist already decided on , much less with songs unwritten . He said the four audition numbers were " awkwardly paced " , though he thought they were " fantastic " ; Reiter said they " stood out like glinting gems in a somewhat muddy episode " . Canning and VanDerWerff also criticized the block of four songs in the middle of the episode which , as VanDerWerff put it , " stops the show cold " . James Poniewozik of Time was unhappy for another reason altogether : " Having four people stand up and sing solos into a microphone may be music ; but it ain 't a musical . " 
 Poniewozik wrote of Will 's Broadway plans that " his ambitions , and guilt over them , make a much more believable and compelling conflict than Matthew Morrison has had to convey for much of the season . " VanDerWerff complimented Morrison on his portrayal of Will : " every time the show hands him anything to play that 's something that makes vague sense , he does a good job with it . " Other kudos for the actors were provided by Respers France , who highlighted the " further great acting " seen during " Finn and Quinn 's moment in his truck " , and E ! Online 's Jenna Mullins , who called the scene where Finn and Kurt help Sue with her sister 's room " positively heartbreaking " , and the trio of characters " magnificent " . Although Canning stated that " Terri leaving lacked much punch " , Poniewozik commented that it was " satisfying to see her realized as an adult for once " . 
 = = = Musical commentary = = = 
 While the placement of the four solos together in the middle of the episode was questioned , the songs themselves were met with approbation : VanDerWerff called all four " really good performances " . Santana 's rendition of " Back to Black " was declared " spot on " by Futterman , and Raymund Flandez of The Wall Street Journal wrote that it was performed " with raspy sensitivity " , and went " deep into the emotional truth of the song " . Kubicek was less enthusiastic , and called it " pretty good , but nothing groundbreaking or special " , and Semigran called it " decent " . Benigno said that " Rivera 's delivery gives this song its smoldering swagger " and gave it an " A − " , and Poniewozik praised Rivera as " really impressive " . 
 " Some People " received adequate to good reviews . Gonzalez missed Kurt 's usual charisma and thought the performance " a bit lackluster " , and Benigno called it " kind of a boring cover " . It received their lowest grades of the show , " B " and " B − " , respectively . Kubicek stated , " Kurt has a unique voice that sounds positively beautiful with the right melodic song , but this is a terrible song for his style " , and Vanity Fair 's Brett Berk added , after he gave it two out of five stars , that it was " not the best showcase of Kurt 's talents " . Futterman and Reiter referred approvingly to Kurt 's " upper register " , and both Reiter and Respers France said he " ripped it " on his song . 
 " Try a Little Tenderness " received a stream of bouquets from the critics . Kubicek raved that Mercedes " gave 100 % of what she has to offer , which is pure greatness " , and Respers France said she " stole the night " and was " amazing " . Berk broke his own scale of one to five stars with six stars , and praised " the unstinting instrument that is Mercedes ' voice " . Gonzalez gave it an " A " and called it " pure perfection " , but Benigno was more restrained with a " B + " , and wrote " she hits a little too hard for my taste " and " the vocals … threaten to engulf the song itself " . 
 " My Man " was also lauded . Flandez called it " heartstopping " , and Futterman summed up with , " she nails the Funny Girl closer , making it one of Rachel 's top performances on the show " . Berk called it " good singing " and gave it three stars out of five , and Gonzalez gave it an " A − " . Benigno was more generous with an " A " grade , and said , " even by Lea Michele 's standards , the vocals here are fan @-@ fucking @-@ tastic " . Hankinson agreed : " Rachel truly nailed the most difficult song she 's ever sung . " 
 The one group number , " Pure Imagination " , received reviews that touched on the song itself as much as the performance . Fallon called it " unsettling yet touching " and Poniewozik described it as " odd but perfect " . Berk , on the other hand , characterized it as " pure dreck " . Benigno felt that while the song was " really quite good " , the " stupidity of the scene " it was in detracted from it , resulting in a grade of " B + " , while Gonzalez , when she gave it an " A − " , said she hadn 't been a " huge fan of the cover " when she heard it before the show aired , but it grew on her in context . Futterman wrote , " The New Directions break into a restrained , tender take on " Pure Imagination " with lush harmonies on the chorus that 's exactly right for the moment . " 
 = = = Chart history = = = 
 Only three of the five cover versions debuted on the Billboard Hot 100 : " Pure Imagination " debuted at number fifty @-@ nine , " Back to Black " at number eighty @-@ two , and " My Man " at number ninety @-@ four . " Pure Imagination " was the only song to make the Billboard Canadian Hot 100 at number eighty @-@ seven . 
 Of the five songs that were featured in the episode , three were featured on the eighth soundtrack album of the series , Glee : The Music , Volume 6 : " Pure Imagination " , " My Man " , and " Try a Little Tenderness " . The album was released on May 23 , 2011 , and debuted at number four on the US Billboard 200 , selling 80 @,@ 000 copies in its first week , which was the second @-@ lowest opening sales figure for a Glee release next to the extended play Glee : The Music , The Rocky Horror Glee Show , and lower than the 86 @,@ 000 sold by Glee : The Music Presents the Warblers in its first week the previous month . The album was also at number four on the Canadian Album charts . 
 = New York State Route 383 = 
 New York State Route 383 ( NY 383 ) is an 18 @.@ 70 @-@ mile ( 30 @.@ 09 km ) north – south state highway in Monroe County , New York , in the United States . The southern terminus of the route is at an intersection with NY 36 in the hamlet of Mumford within the town of Wheatland . Its northern terminus is at a junction with NY 31 in the city of Rochester . The route follows the Genesee River and its tributaries for its entire length and passes through the village of Scottsville . 
 In the early 20th century , the entirety of modern NY 383 south of Scottsville was part of Route 16 , an unsigned legislative route . In 1921 , Route 16 was truncated to end in Caledonia while the entirety of its former routing north of the village became part of Route 15 . The segment of Route 15 between Mumford and Scottsville became part of NY 253 in the 1930 renumbering of state highways in New York . This section of NY 253 was replaced c . 1938 by a rerouted NY 35 , a route that extended northeast of Scottsville to Ontario by way of Rochester . NY 35 was split into two routes in the early 1940s , at which time NY 383 was assigned to the portion between Mumford and Walworth . NY 383 was truncated to Rochester in 1949 , and only minor realignments within the city have occurred since . 
 = = Route description = = 
 NY 383 begins at an intersection with NY 36 in the hamlet of Mumford , located just north of the border between Monroe and Livingston Counties in the town of Wheatland . Taking on the name Scottsville – Mumford Road , NY 383 follows Oatka Creek east through open fields and passes through the small hamlet of Garbutt on its way to the village of Scottsville , where it becomes Caledonia Avenue . At an intersection with the southern terminus of NY 386 , NY 383 turns east onto Main Street and follows it through the residential southern portion of the village and past the Scottsville Free Library . Main Street comes to an end at a junction with River Road ( NY 251 , which has its western terminus here ) and Rochester Street near the northern bank of Oatka Creek . Here , NY 383 curves north onto Rochester Street and proceeds through eastern Scottsville . The street name of NY 383 becomes Scottsville Road upon intersecting the western terminus of NY 253 . Past this junction , the surroundings shift from village streets to housing tracts as the route exits Scottsville . North of the village , NY 383 re @-@ enters open fields once again upon crossing the Wheatland – Chili town line . 
 Within Chili , NY 383 parallels the path of the Genesee River , which Oatka Creek feeds into east of the village of Scottsville . During this stretch , the route passes under the New York State Thruway ( Interstate 90 or I @-@ 90 ) and intersects Mile Wood Road , a highway connecting NY 383 to Mile of Woods , a hamlet on the west bank of the Genesee River . From this point , NY 383 heads to the north while the river flows to the northwest toward the route . Upon meeting the waterway , NY 383 begins to run along the Genesee River 's western bank to a junction with NY 252 . It continues along the riverbank as it proceeds northward , passing over Black Creek and crossing the West Shore Subdivision , a rail line owned by CSX Transportation . As NY 383 approaches the Greater Rochester International Airport , it diverges from the river and has a junction with Paul Road ( unsigned County Route 168 and formerly NY 252A ) south of the Airport . NY 383 follows the southern edge of the airport to an interchange with I @-@ 390 at exit 17 . Shortly afterward , NY 383 crosses the Erie Canal and enters the city of Rochester . At this point , maintenance of NY 383 shifts from the New York State Department of Transportation to the city of Rochester . 
 Scottsville Road continues within the city for four blocks to a three @-@ way junction with Genesee Street and Elmwood Avenue . NY 383 veers north onto Genesee Street for six blocks to Brooks Avenue . Here , the route turns east to access South Plymouth Avenue . NY 383 continues north on Plymouth Avenue through densely populated sections of the city to Ford Street . The route curves east to follow Ford for one block to Exchange Boulevard , where it turns back to the north toward downtown Rochester . NY 383 follows Exchange Boulevard along the Genesee River 's west bank and under the Frederick Douglass – Susan B. Anthony Memorial Bridge , which carries I @-@ 490 over both NY 383 and the river . Past the bridge , the highway enters downtown , where it passes the City of Rochester Public Safety Building and the Blue Cross Arena before terminating at a junction with East Broad Street ( NY 31 ) . 
 = = History = = 
 In 1908 , the New York State Legislature created Route 16 , an unsigned legislative route extending from the village of Cuba to the city of Rochester . Between the hamlet of Mumford and the village of Scottsville , Route 16 followed Scottsville – Mumford Road . By 1919 , Route 15 was extended northeast from Caledonia to meet Route 16 in Scottsville . Within the village , it was routed on River Road and Main Street . On March 1 , 1921 , Route 16 was truncated to end in Le Roy while the portion of its former routing north of Caledonia became part of a realigned and extended Route 15 . None of Route 15 between Mumford and Scottsville was assigned a designation when the first set of routes in the modern state highway system were assigned in 1924 . 
 The portion of former legislative Route 15 from Mumford to Scottsville and the segment of pre @-@ 1921 legislative Route 15 on Main Street in Scottsville was designated as the westernmost portion of NY 253 , a highway extending from Mumford to Henrietta , as part of the 1930 renumbering of state highways in New York . In Scottsville , NY 253 was concurrent with NY 35 , a route stretching from Buffalo to Ontario via Canawaugus ( west of Avon ) , Rochester , and Walworth , on Rochester Street . U.S. Route 20 was rerouted to follow NY 35 between Buffalo and Avon c . 1938 . As a result , NY 35 was reconfigured south of Scottsville to follow the routing of NY 253 to Mumford instead , where it ended at NY 36 . NY 253 was then truncated to the former northern terminus of its overlap with NY 35 northeast of Scottsville . The NY 35 designation was split into two designations in the early 1940s , with the portion from Mumford to Ontario Center Road in Walworth becoming NY 383 . The new route also continued southward for another 2 miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) to NY 5 in Caledonia by way of an overlap with NY 36 ; however , this extension was eliminated by 1970 . 
 Within Rochester , NY 383 was initially routed on Scottsville Road , Elmwood and Plymouth avenues , Main Street , and Winton Road . At the junction of Winton and Blossom roads , NY 383 turned east to follow Blossom into Penfield . It veered east upon intersecting Browncroft Boulevard to follow modern NY 286 east to Walworth . The portion of NY 383 east of NY 96 ( East Avenue ) in downtown Rochester became NY 286 on January 1 , 1949 . At the same time , NY 383 was truncated to the junction of Plymouth Avenue and Main Street in Rochester . NY 383 was further truncated to an interchange with the newly constructed Inner Loop in the mid @-@ 1950s . 
 In the late 1970s , NY 383 was rerouted to follow Ford Street and Exchange Boulevard around the southeastern edge of Rochester 's Corn Hill district to a new terminus at Broad Street ( NY 31 ) in downtown Rochester . The route 's former alignment on Plymouth Avenue was split into two segments in the late 1980s as part of a larger reconfiguration of Corn Hill 's street layout . In the mid @-@ 2000s , NY 383 was rerouted between Elmwood and Brooks Avenues to follow Genesee Street instead . This realignment was made out of necessity as a portion of South Plymouth Avenue immediately south of Brooks Avenue was removed as part of the construction of the Brooks Landing riverside development project . Incidentally , Genesee Street was part of the routing used by NY 35 , NY 383 's predecessor , during the 1930s and 1940s . 
 = = NY 383B = = 
 NY 383B was an alternate route of NY 383 between Rochester and Penfield along Browncroft Boulevard . It was renumbered from NY 35B to NY 383B when the portion of NY 35 in the vicinity of Rochester was redesignated as NY 383 in the early 1940s . It was renumbered again to NY 286A in 1949 to match the redesignation of NY 383 east of Rochester to NY 286 . Despite the " B " suffix of the route , it is the only suffixed route in NY 383 's history — there has never been a " NY <unk> " . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The entire route is in Monroe County . 
 = Real Madrid C.F. = 
 Real Madrid Club de Fútbol ( Spanish pronunciation : [ <unk> <unk> <unk> ðe <unk> ] ; Royal Madrid Football Club ) , commonly known as Real Madrid , or simply as Real outside Spain frontiers , is a professional football club based in Madrid , Spain . 
 Founded in 1902 as Madrid Football Club , the team has traditionally worn a white home kit since inception . The word Real is Spanish for Royal and was bestowed to the club by King Alfonso XIII in 1920 together with the royal crown in the emblem . The team has played its home matches in the 85 @,@ 454 @-@ capacity Santiago Bernabéu Stadium in downtown Madrid since 1947 . Unlike most European sporting entities , Real Madrid 's members ( socios ) have owned and operated the club throughout its history . 
 The club is the most valuable sports team in the world , worth € 2 @.@ 5 billion ( $ 3 @.@ 4 billion ) and the world 's highest @-@ earning football club for 2013 – 14 , with an annual revenue of € 549 @.@ 5 million . The club is one of the most widely supported teams in the world . Real Madrid is one of three founding members of the Primera División that have never been relegated from the top division , along with Athletic Bilbao and Barcelona . The club holds many long @-@ standing rivalries , most notably El Clásico with Barcelona and the El Derbi madrileño with Atlético Madrid . 
 Real Madrid established itself as a major force in both Spanish and European football during the 1950s . The club won five consecutive European Cups , and reached the final seven times . This success was replicated in the league , where the club won five times in the space of seven years . This team , which consisted of players such as Di Stéfano , Ferenc Puskás , <unk> , Raymond Kopa , and <unk> , is considered by some in the sport to be the greatest team of all time . 
 In domestic football , the club has won a record 32 La Liga titles , 19 Copa del Rey , 9 Supercopa de España , 1 Copa Eva Duarte , and 1 Copa de la Liga . In international football , the club has won a record 11 European Cup / UEFA Champions League titles and a joint record 3 Intercontinental Cups , as well as 2 UEFA Cups , 2 UEFA Super Cups and a FIFA Club World Cup . 
 Real Madrid was recognised as the FIFA Club of the 20th Century on 23 December 2000 , and named Best European Club of the 20th Century by the IFFHS on 11 May 2010 . The club received the FIFA Centennial Order of Merit in 2004 . The club is ranked first in the latest IFFHS Club World Ranking , setting a new ranking @-@ points record . The club also leads the current UEFA club rankings . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Early years ( 1897 – 1945 ) = = = 
 Real Madrid 's origins go back to when football was introduced to Madrid by the academics and students of the Institución Libre de <unk> , which included several Cambridge and Oxford University graduates . They founded Football Club Sky in 1897 , playing on Sunday mornings at <unk> . It split into two clubs in 1900 : New Foot @-@ Ball de Madrid and Madrid Football Club . On 6 March 1902 , after a new Board presided by Juan <unk> had been elected , Madrid Football Club was officially founded . Three years after its foundation , in 1905 , Madrid FC won its first title after defeating Athletic Bilbao in the Spanish Cup final . The club became one of the founding sides of the Royal Spanish Football Federation on 4 January 1909 , when club president Adolfo Meléndez signed the foundation agreement of the Spanish FA . After moving between grounds the team moved to the Campo de O 'Donnell in 1912 . In 1920 , the club 's name was changed to Real Madrid after King Alfonso XIII granted the title of Real ( Royal ) to the club . 
 In 1929 , the first Spanish football league was founded . Real Madrid led the first league season until the last match , a loss to Athletic Bilbao , meant they finished runners @-@ up to Barcelona . Real Madrid won its first League title in the 1931 – 32 season . Real won the League again the following year , becoming the first team to have won the championship twice . 
 On 14 April 1931 , the arrival of the Second Spanish Republic caused the club to lose the title Real and went back to being named Madrid Football Club . Football continued during the Second World War , and on 13 June 1943 Madrid beat Barcelona 11 – 1 in the second leg of a semi @-@ final of the Copa del Generalísimo , the Copa del Rey having been renamed in honour of General Franco . It has been suggested that Barcelona players were intimidated by police , including by the director of state security who " allegedly told the team that some of them were only playing because of the regime 's generosity in permitting them to remain in the country . " The Barcelona chairman , Enric <unk> , was assaulted by Madrid fans . However , none of these allegations have been proven and FIFA and UEFA still consider the result as legitimate . According to Spanish journalist and writer , Juan Carlos <unk> , Barcelona player Josep Valle denied that the Spanish security forces came before the match . Instead , at the end of the first half , Barcelona coach Juan José Nogués and all of his players were angry with the hard @-@ style of play Real Madrid was using and with the aggressiveness of the home crowd . When they refused to take the field , the Superior Chief of Police of Madrid appeared , identified himself , and ordered the team to take the field . 
 = = = Santiago Bernabéu <unk> and European success ( 1945 – 78 ) = = = 
 Santiago Bernabéu <unk> became president of Real Madrid in 1945 . Under his presidency , the club , its stadium Santiago Bernabéu and its training facilities Ciudad Deportiva were rebuilt after the Spanish Civil War damages . Additionally , during the 1950s former Real Madrid Amateurs player Miguel <unk> founded Real Madrid 's youth academy , or " <unk> , " known today as La Fábrica . Beginning in 1953 , he embarked upon a strategy of signing world @-@ class players from abroad , the most prominent being Alfredo Di Stéfano . 
 In 1955 , acting upon the idea proposed by the French sports journalist and editor of L 'Équipe Gabriel Hanot , Bernabéu , <unk> and <unk> <unk> created an exhibition tournament of invited teams from around Europe that would eventually become what today is known as the UEFA Champions League . It was under Bernabéu 's guidance that Real Madrid established itself as a major force in both Spanish and European football . The club won the European Cup five times in a row between 1956 and 1960 , which included the 7 – 3 Hampden Park final against Eintracht Frankfurt in 1960 . After these five consecutive successes , Real was permanently awarded the original cup and earning the right to wear the UEFA badge of honour . 
 The club won the European Cup for a sixth time in 1966 defeating Partizan Belgrade 2 – 1 in the final with a team composed entirely of same nationality players , a first in the competition . This team became known as the Yé @-@ yé . The name " Ye @-@ yé " came from the " Yeah , yeah , yeah " chorus in The Beatles ' song " She Loves You " after four members of the team posed for Marca and impersonated the Beatles . The Ye @-@ yé generation was also European Cup runner @-@ up in 1962 and 1964 . In the 1970s , Real Madrid won five league championships and three Spanish Cups . The club played its first UEFA Cup Winners ' Cup final in 1971 and lost to English side Chelsea 2 – 1 . On 2 July 1978 , club president Santiago Bernabéu died while the World Cup was being played in Argentina . FIFA decreed three days of mourning to honour him during the tournament . The following year , the club organized the first edition of the Trofeo Santiago Bernabéu in the memory of its former president . 
 = = = Quinta del Buitre and seventh European Cup ( 1980 – 2000 ) = = = 
 By the early 1980s , Real Madrid had lost its grasp on the Liga title until a new cohort of home @-@ grown stars brought domestic success back to the club . Spanish sport journalist Julio César Iglesias gave to this generation the name La Quinta del Buitre ( " Vulture 's Cohort " ) , which was derived from the nickname given to one of its members , Emilio Butragueño . The other four members were Manuel <unk> , Martín Vázquez , Míchel and Miguel <unk> ; all five footballers were graduates of Real Madrid 's youth academy . With La Quinta del Buitre ( reduced to four members when <unk> left for Zaragoza in 1986 ) and notable players like goalkeeper Francisco <unk> , right @-@ back Miguel <unk> <unk> and Mexican striker Hugo Sánchez , Real Madrid had one of the best teams in Spain and Europe during the second half of the 1980s , winning two UEFA Cups , five Spanish championships in a row , one Spanish cup and three Spanish Super Cups . In the early 1990s , La Quinta del Buitre split up after Martín Vázquez , Emilio Butragueño and Míchel left the club . 
 In 1996 , President Lorenzo Sanz appointed Fabio Capello as coach . Although his tenure lasted only one season , Real Madrid was proclaimed league champion and players like Roberto Carlos , Predrag Mijatović , Davor Šuker and Clarence Seedorf arrived at the club to strengthen a squad that already boasted the likes of Raúl , Fernando Hierro , Iván <unk> , and Fernando Redondo . As a result , Real Madrid ( with the addition of Fernando Morientes in 1997 ) finally ended its 32 @-@ year wait for its seventh European Cup : in 1998 , under manager Jupp Heynckes , they defeated Juventus 1 – 0 in the final with a goal from Predrag Mijatović . 
 = = = Los Galácticos ( 2000 – 2006 ) = = = 
 In July 2000 , Florentino Pérez was elected club president . He vowed in his campaign to erase the club 's € 270 million debt and modernize the club 's facilities . However , the primary electoral promise that propelled Pérez to victory was the signing of Luís Figo from arch @-@ rivals Barcelona . The following year , the club had its training ground rezoned and used the money to begin assembling the Galácticos team by signing a global star every summer , which included Zinedine Zidane , Ronaldo , Luís Figo , Roberto Carlos , Raúl , David Beckham and Fabio Cannavaro . It is debatable whether the gamble paid off , as despite winning the UEFA Champions League and an Intercontinental Cup in 2002 , followed by La Liga in 2003 , the club failed to win a major trophy for the next three seasons . 
 The few days after the capturing of the 2003 Liga title were surrounded with controversy . The first controversial decision came when Pérez sacked winning coach Vicente del Bosque . Over a dozen players left the club , including Madrid captain Fernando Hierro , while defensive midfielder Claude Makélélé refused to take part in training in protest at being one of the lowest @-@ paid players at the club and subsequently moved to Chelsea . " That 's a lot [ of players leaving ] when the normal rule is : never change a winning team , " stated Zidane . Real Madrid , with newly appointed coach Carlos Queiroz , started their domestic league slowly after a hard win over Real Betis . 
 The 2005 – 06 season began with the promise of several new signings : Júlio Baptista ( € 24 million ) , Robinho ( € 30 million ) and Sergio Ramos ( € 27 million ) . However , Real Madrid suffered from some poor results , including a 0 – 3 loss at the hands of Barcelona at the Santiago Bernabéu in November 2005 . Madrid 's coach Wanderley <unk> was sacked the following month and his replacement was Juan Ramón López Caro . A brief return to form came to an abrupt halt after losing the first leg of the Copa del Rey quarterfinal , 6 – 1 to Real Zaragoza . Shortly after , Real Madrid were eliminated from the Champions League for a fourth successive year , this time at the hands of Arsenal . On 27 February 2006 , Florentino Pérez resigned . 
 = = = New president Ramón Calderón ( 2006 – 09 ) = = = 
 Ramón Calderón was elected as club president on 2 July 2006 and subsequently appointed Fabio Capello as the new coach and Predrag Mijatović as the new sporting director . Real Madrid won the Liga title in 2007 for the first time in four years , but Capello was nonetheless sacked at the end of the campaign . On 9 June 2007 , Real played against Zaragoza at La <unk> . Zaragoza led Real 2 – 1 near the end of the match while Barcelona were also winning against Espanyol 2 – 1 . A late Ruud van Nistelrooy equalizer followed by a last @-@ minute Raúl <unk> goal sprang Real Madrid 's title hopes back into their favour . 
 The title was won on 17 June , where Real faced Mallorca at the Bernabéu while Barcelona and Sevilla , the other title challengers , faced <unk> de Tarragona and Villarreal , respectively . At half @-@ time , Real were 0 – 1 down , while Barcelona had surged ahead into a 0 – 3 lead in Tarragona ; however , three goals in the last half @-@ hour secured Madrid a 3 – 1 win and their first league title since 2003 . The first goal came from José Antonio Reyes , who scored after a good work from Gonzalo Higuaín . An own goal followed by another goal from Reyes allowed Real to begin celebrating the title . Thousands of Real Madrid fans began going to Plaza de <unk> to celebrate the title . 
 = = = Second Pérez term , and arrival of Cristiano Ronaldo ( 2009 – 13 ) = = = 
 On 1 June 2009 , Florentino Pérez regained Real Madrid 's presidency . Pérez continued with the Galácticos policy pursued in his first term , buying Kaká from Milan for a record @-@ breaking sum of £ 56 million , and then breaking the record again by purchasing Cristiano Ronaldo from Manchester United for £ 80 million . 
 José Mourinho took over as manager in May 2010 . In April 2011 , a strange occurrence happened when , for the first time ever , four <unk> were to be played in a span of just 18 days . The first fixture was for the Liga campaign on 17 April ( which ended 1 – 1 with penalty goals for both sides ) , the Copa del Rey final ( which ended 1 – 0 to Madrid ) and the controversial two @-@ legged Champions League semifinal on 27 April and 2 May ( 3 – 1 loss on aggregate ) to Barcelona . 
 In the 2011 – 12 La Liga season , Real Madrid won La Liga for a record 32nd time in the league 's history , also finishing the season with numerous club @-@ level records set , including 100 points reached in a single season , a total of 121 goals scored , a goal difference of + 89 and 16 away wins , with 32 wins overall . In the same season , Cristiano Ronaldo become the fastest player to reach 100 goals scored in Spanish league history . In reaching 101 goals in 92 games , Ronaldo surpassed Real Madrid legend Ferenc Puskás , who scored 100 goals in 105 games . Ronaldo set a new club mark for individual goals scored in one year ( 60 ) , and became the first player ever to score against all 19 opposition teams in a single season . 
 Real Madrid began the 2012 – 13 season winning the Supercopa de España , defeating Barcelona on away goals , but finished as second in the league competition . A major transfer of the season was signing from Tottenham Hotspur of Luka Modrić for a fee in the region of £ 33 million . In the Champions League , they were drawn in the " group of death " alongside Borussia Dortmund , Manchester City and Ajax , finishing second with three points behind Dortmund . In the round of 16 , they defeated Manchester United , Galatasaray in the quarter @-@ finals , and reached their third @-@ straight semi @-@ final finish in the Champions League , when they were again stopped by Dortmund . After a disappointing extra time loss to Atlético Madrid in the 2013 Copa del Rey Final , Pérez announced the departure of José Mourinho at the end of the season by " mutual agreement . " 
 = = = Ancelotti and La <unk> ( 2013 – 15 ) = = = 
 On 25 June 2013 , Carlo Ancelotti succeeded Mourinho to become the manager of Real Madrid on a three @-@ year deal . A day later , he was introduced at his first press conference for Madrid where it was announced that both Zinedine Zidane and Paul Clement will be his assistants . On 1 September 2013 , the long @-@ awaited transfer from Tottenham of Gareth Bale was announced . The transfer of the Welshman was reportedly the new world record signing , with the transfer price approximated at € 100 million . In Ancelotti 's first season at the club , Real Madrid won the Copa del Rey , with Bale scoring the winner in the final against Barcelona . On 24 May , Real Madrid defeated city rivals Atlético Madrid in the 2014 Champions League Final , winning their first European title since 2002 , and becoming the first team to win ten European Cups / Champions League titles , an achievement known as " La <unk> . " 
 After winning the 2014 Champions League , Real Madrid signed goalkeeper Keylor Navas , midfielder Toni Kroos and attacking midfielder James Rodríguez . The club won the 2014 UEFA Super Cup against Sevilla , with two goals by Cristiano Ronaldo , the club 's 79th official trophy . During the last week of the 2014 summer transfer window , Real Madrid sold two players key in the previous season 's successes — Xabi Alonso to Bayern Munich and Ángel Di María to Manchester United , the latter for an English record fee of € 75 million . This decision from the club was surrounded by controversy , however , with Ronaldo stating , " If I was in charge , maybe I would have done things differently , " while Carlo Ancelotti admitted , " We must start again from zero . " 
 After a slow start to the 2014 – 15 La Liga season , which included defeats to Atlético Madrid and Real Sociedad , Real Madrid went on a record @-@ breaking winning streak , which included wins against Barcelona and Liverpool , surpassing the previous Spanish record of 18 successive wins set by Frank Rijkaard 's Barça in the 2005 – 06 season . In December 2014 , the club extended their winning streak to 22 games with a 2 – 0 win over San Lorenzo in the 2014 FIFA Club World Cup Final , thus ending the calendar year with four trophies . Their 22 @-@ game winning streak ended in their opening game of 2015 with a loss to Valencia , leaving the club two short of equalling the world record of 24 consecutive wins . The club failed to retain the Champions League ( losing 3 – 2 on aggregate against Juventus in the semi @-@ finals ) , the Copa del Rey ( 4 – 2 aggregate loss to Atlético ) , and failed to land the league title ( finishing two points and a place behind champions Barcelona ) , shortcomings that all preceded Ancelotti 's sacking on 25 May 2015 . 
 = = = Zidane arrival and La <unk> ( 2015 – present ) = = = 
 On 3 June 2015 , Rafael Benítez was confirmed as the new Real Madrid manager , signing a three @-@ year contract . Real Madrid remained unbeaten in the league until a 3 – 2 loss at Sevilla in the eleventh matchday . This was followed by a 0 – 4 home loss in the first El Clásico of the season against Barcelona . Real played Cádiz CF in the Copa del Rey Round of 32 , winning away 1 – 3 in the first leg . However , they fielded an ineligible player in Denis <unk> as he was suspended for that match , resulting in the second leg being cancelled and Real being disqualified . Meanwhile , Real topped their UEFA Champions League group with 16 points . He was sacked on 4 January 2016 , following allegations of unpopularity with supporters , displeasure with players and a failure to get good results against top sides . At the time of sacking , Real were third in La Liga , four points behind leaders Atlético Madrid and two points behind arch @-@ rivals Barcelona ( with a game in hand ) . 
 On 4 January 2016 , Benítez 's departure was announced along with the promotion of Zinedine Zidane to his first head coaching role . Zidane previously worked as assistant to Benítez 's predecessor Carlo Ancelotti and , since 2014 , had occupied the helm of reserve team Real Madrid Castilla . Zidane 's coaching debut for Madrid was marked by a 5 – 0 home victory over Deportivo in La Liga on 9 January 2016 with Gareth Bale scoring a hat @-@ trick . On 28 May , Real Madrid won their eleventh UEFA Champions League title , extending their record for most successes in the competition , with Cristiano Ronaldo scoring the decisive penalty in a shoot out win over Atlético Madrid in the final . 
 = = Crest and colours = = 
 = = = Emblem = = = 
 The first crest had a simple design consisting of a decorative interlacing of the three initials of the club , " MCF " for Madrid Club de Fútbol , in dark blue on a white shirt . The first change in the crest occurred in 1908 when the letters adopted a more streamlined form and appeared inside a circle . The next change in the configuration of the crest did not occur until the presidency of Pedro <unk> in 1920 . At that time , King Alfonso XIII granted the club his royal patronage which came in the form of the title " Real Madrid , " meaning " Royal . " Thus , Alfonso 's crown was added to the crest and the club styled itself Real Madrid Club de Fútbol . 
 With the dissolution of the monarchy in 1931 , all the royal symbols ( the crown on the crest and the title of Real ) were eliminated . The crown was replaced by the dark mulberry band of the Region of Castile . In 1941 , two years after the end of the Civil War , the crest 's " Real Corona " , or " Royal Crown " , was restored while the mulberry stripe of Castile was retained as well . In addition , the whole crest was made full color , with gold being the most prominent , and the club was again called Real Madrid Club de Fútbol . The most recent modification to the crest occurred in 2001 when the club wanted to better situate itself for the 21st century and further standardize its crest . One of the modifications made was changing the mulberry stripe to a more bluish shade . 
 = = = Home kit = = = 
 Real Madrid 's traditional home colours are all white , although before its foundation , in the club 's first game against themselves , they adopted a blue and a red oblique stripe on the shirt to differentiate the two teams ( the club crest design has a purple stripe which is not associated to this . It was incorporated the year they lost the royal crown , as it the traditional region of Castile colour ) ; but unlike today , black socks were worn . Lastly , the black socks will be replaced by dark blue ones . Real Madrid has maintained the white shirt for its home kit throughout the history of the club . There was , however , one season that the shirt and shorts were not both white . It was an initiative undertaken by <unk> and Quesada in 1925 ; the two were traveling through England when they noticed the kit worn by London @-@ based team Corinthian F.C. , one of the most famous teams at the time known for its elegance and sportsmanship . It was decided that Real Madrid would wear black shorts in an attempt to replicate the English team , but the initiative lasted just one year . After being eliminated from the cup by Barcelona with a 1 – 5 defeat in Madrid and a 2 – 0 defeat in Catalonia , President <unk> decided to return to an all @-@ white kit , claiming that the other kit brought bad luck . By the early 1940s , the manager changed the kit again by adding buttons to the shirt and the club 's crest on the left breast , which has remained ever since . On 23 November 1947 , in a game against Atlético Madrid at the <unk> Stadium , Real Madrid became the first Spanish team to wear numbered shirts . English club Leeds United permanently switched their blue shirt for a white one in the 1960s , to emulate the dominant Real Madrid of the era . 
 Real 's traditional away colours are all blue or all purple . Since the advent of the replica kit market , the club has also released various other one colour designs , including red , green , orange and black . The club 's kit is manufactured by Adidas , whose contract extends from 1998 . Real Madrid 's first shirt sponsor , Zanussi , agreed for the 1982 – 83 , 1983 – 84 and 1984 – 85 seasons . Following that , the club was sponsored by Parmalat and <unk> before a long @-@ term deal was signed with <unk> in 1992 . In 2001 , Real Madrid ended their contract with <unk> and for one season and used the <unk> logo to promote the club 's website . Then , in 2002 , a deal was signed with Siemens Mobile and in 2006 , the <unk> Siemens logo appeared on the club 's shirt . Real Madrid 's shirt sponsor from 2007 until 2013 was <unk> following the economic problems of <unk> Siemens . It is currently Fly Emirates . 
 = = Kit manufacturers and shirt sponsors = = 
 Source : 
 = = Grounds = = 
 After moving between grounds , the team moved to the Campo de O 'Donnell in 1912 , which remained its home ground for 11 years . After this period , the club moved for one year to the Campo de Ciudad Lineal , a small ground with a capacity of 8 @,@ 000 spectators . After that , Real Madrid moved its home matches to Estadio Chamartín , which was inaugurated on 17 May 1923 with a match against Newcastle United . In this stadium , which hosted 22 @,@ 500 spectators , Real Madrid celebrated its first Spanish league title . After some successes , the 1943 elected president Santiago Bernabéu decided that the Estadio Chamartín was not big enough for the ambitions of the club , and thus a new stadium was built and was inaugurated on 14 December 1947 . This was the Santiago Bernabéu Stadium as it is known today , although it did not acquire the present name until 1955 . The first match at the Bernabéu was played between Real Madrid and the Portuguese club Belenenses and won by Los Blancos , 3 – 1 , the first goal being scored by Sabino <unk> . 
 The capacity has changed frequently , peaking at 120 @,@ 000 after a 1953 expansion . Since then , there have been a number of reductions due to modernizations ( the last standing places went away in 1998 – 99 in response to UEFA regulations which forbids standing at matches in the UEFA competition ) , countered to some extent by expansions . The last change was an increase of about five thousand to a capacity of 85 @,@ 454 , effected in 2011 . A plan to add a retractable roof has been announced . Real Madrid has the fourth @-@ highest of the average attendances of European football clubs , behind only Borussia Dortmund , Barcelona and Manchester United . 
 The Bernabéu has hosted the 1964 European Championship final , the 1982 FIFA World Cup final , the 1957 , 1969 and 1980 European Cup finals and the 2010 Champions League Final . The stadium has its own Madrid Metro station along the 10 line called Santiago Bernabéu . On 14 November 2007 , the Bernabéu has been upgraded to Elite Football Stadium status by UEFA . 
 On 9 May 2006 , the Alfredo Di Stéfano Stadium was inaugurated in the City of Madrid , where Real Madrid usually trains . The inaugural match was played between Real Madrid and Stade Reims , a rematch of the 1956 European Cup final . Real Madrid won the match 6 – 1 with goals from Sergio Ramos , Antonio Cassano ( 2 ) , Roberto Soldado ( 2 ) and José Manuel Jurado . The venue is now part of the Ciudad Real Madrid , the club 's new training facilities located outside Madrid in <unk> . The stadium holds 5 @,@ 000 people and is Real Madrid Castilla 's home ground . It is named after former Real legend Alfredo Di Stéfano . 
 = = Records and statistics = = 
 Raúl holds the record for most Real Madrid appearances , having played 741 first @-@ team matches from 1994 to 2010 . Iker Casillas comes second with 725 appearances , followed by Manuel <unk> , Jr. having played 711 times . The record for a goalkeeper is held by Iker Casillas , with 725 appearances . With 166 * caps ( 162 while at the club ) , he is also Real 's most capped international player while with 127 caps ( 47 while at the club ) , Luís Figo of Portugal is Real 's most capped foreign international player . 
 Cristiano Ronaldo is Real Madrid 's all @-@ time top goalscorer , with 360 goals . Five other players have also scored over 200 goals for Real : Alfredo Di Stéfano ( 1953 – 64 ) , Santillana ( 1971 – 88 ) , Ferenc Puskás ( 1958 – 66 ) , Hugo Sánchez ( 1985 – 92 ) and the previous goalscoring record @-@ holder Raúl ( 1994 – 2010 ) . Cristiano Ronaldo also holds the record for the most league goals scored in one season ( 48 in 2014 – 15 ) , alongside being Real 's top goalscorer of all time in La Liga history with 256 goals . Di Stéfano 's 49 goals in 58 matches was for decades the all @-@ time highest tally in the European Cup , until it was surpassed by Raúl in 2005 , which now is held by Cristiano Ronaldo with 93 goals . The fastest goal in the history of the club ( 15 seconds ) was scored by the Brazilian Ronaldo on 3 December 2003 during a league match against Atlético Madrid . 
 Officially , the highest home attendance figure for a Real Madrid match is 83 @,@ 329 , which was for a football cup competition , Copa del Rey , in 2006 . The current legal capacity of the Santiago Bernabéu is 80 @,@ 354 . The club 's average attendance in 2007 – 08 season was 76 @,@ 234 , the highest in European Leagues . Real has also set records in Spanish football , most notably the most domestic titles ( 32 as of 2012 – 13 ) and the most seasons won in a row ( five , during 1960 – 65 and 1985 – 90 ) . With 121 matches ( from 17 February 1957 to 7 March 1965 ) , the club holds the record for longest unbeaten run at home in La Liga . 
 The club also hold the record for winning the European Cup / UEFA Champions League ten times and for the most semi @-@ final appearances ( 27 ) . As of April 2016 , Cristiano Ronaldo is the all @-@ time top scorer in the UEFA Champions League , with 93 goals in total , 78 while playing for Real Madrid . The team has the record number of consecutive participations in the European Cup ( before it became the Champions League ) with 15 , from 1955 – 56 to 1969 – 70 . Among the club 's on @-@ field records is a 22 @-@ game winning streak in all competitions during the 2014 – 2015 season , a Spanish record . The same season the team tied the win @-@ streak for games in the UEFA Champions League , with ten . 
 In June 2009 , the club broke its own record for the highest transfer fee ever paid in the history of football by agreeing to pay Manchester United € 96 million ( US $ 131 @.@ 5 million , £ 80 million ) for the services of Cristiano Ronaldo . The fee of € 76 million ( over $ 100 million , £ 45 @.@ 8 million ) for Zinedine Zidane 's transfer from Juventus to Real Madrid in 2001 was the previous highest transfer fee ever paid . This record had been broken previously in June 2009 , for a few days , when Real Madrid agreed to buy Kaká from Milan . The transfer of Tottenham Hotspur 's Gareth Bale in 2013 was reportedly the new world record signing , with the transfer price expected at around € 100 million . In January 2016 , documents pertaining to Bale 's transfer were leaked which confirmed a world record transfer fee of € 100 @,@ 759 @,@ 418 . The club 's sale record came on 26 August 2014 , when Manchester United signed Ángel Di María for € 75 million . 
 = = Support = = 
 During most home matches the majority of the seats in the stadium are occupied by season ticket holders , of which there are average of 68 @,@ 670 . To become a season ticket holder one must first be a socio , or club member . In addition to members , the club has more than 1 @,@ 800 <unk> ( official , club @-@ affiliated supporters ' groups ) in Spain and around the world . Real Madrid has the second highest average all @-@ time attendance in Spanish football and regularly attracts over 74 @,@ 000 fans to Santiago Bernabéu ; it was the second best @-@ supported La Liga team in the 2004 – 05 season , with an average gate of 71 @,@ 900 . Real Madrid is one of the best supported teams globally , and has the second largest social media following in the world among sports teams , after Barcelona , with over 85 million Facebook fans as of November 2015 . 
 Real Madrid 's hardcore supporters are the so @-@ called Ultras Sur supporters , or simply Ultras . They are known for their extreme right @-@ wing politics , akin to Barcelona 's hardcore supporters group Boixos Nois . The Ultras <unk> have developed an alliance with other right wing groups , most notably Lazio <unk> fans , and have also developed an alliance with left @-@ wing groups . On several occasions , they have racially abused opposing players and have been investigated by UEFA for doing so . Florentino Pérez took it upon himself to ban the Ultras from the Bernabéu and assign their seats to the general public . This decision was controversial with some of the Bernabéu faithful , however , as the lively atmosphere of games would suffer as a result . The Ultras have since held protests outside the Bernabéu and have demanded to be reinstated and allowed to enter the grounds . 
 = = Rivalries = = 
 = = = El Clásico = = = 
 There is often a fierce rivalry between the two strongest teams in a national league , and this is particularly the case in La Liga , where the game between Real Madrid and Barcelona is known as " The Classic " ( El Clásico ) . From the start of national competitions , the clubs were seen as representatives of two rival regions in Spain , Catalonia and Castile , as well as of the two cities . The rivalry reflects what many regard as the political and cultural tensions felt between Catalans and the Castilians , seen by one author as a re @-@ enactment of the Spanish Civil War . Over the years , the record from Real Madrid and Barcelona is 81 victories for Madrid , 76 victories for Barcelona , and 39 draws . 
 During the dictatorships of Primo de Rivera and especially of Francisco Franco ( 1939 – 1975 ) , all regional cultures were suppressed . All of the languages spoken in Spanish territory , except Spanish ( Castilian ) itself , were officially banned . <unk> the Catalan people 's desire for freedom , Barcelona became " More than a club " ( " Més que un club " ) for the Catalans . According to Manuel Vázquez Montalbán , the best way for the Catalans to demonstrate their identity was by joining Barcelona . It was less risky than joining a clandestine anti @-@ Franco movement , and allowed them to express their dissidence . During Franco 's regime , however , the Blaugrana team was granted profit due to its good relationship with the dictator at management level , even giving two awards to him . 
 On the other hand , Real Madrid was widely seen as the embodiment of the sovereign oppressive centralism and the fascist regime at management level and beyond – Santiago Bernabéu , the former club president for whom Real Madrid 's stadium is named , fought on the Nationalist side during the Spanish Civil War . During the war , however , members of both clubs , such as Josep Sunyol and Rafael Sánchez Guerra , suffered at the hands of Francoists . 
 During the 1950s , the rivalry was exacerbated further when there was a controversy surrounding the transfer of Alfredo Di Stéfano , who finally played for Real Madrid and was key to their subsequent success . The 1960s saw the rivalry reach the European stage when they met twice in a controversial knock @-@ out round of the European Cup , with Madrid receiving unfavourable treatment from the referee . In 2002 , the European encounter between the clubs was dubbed the " Match of The Century " by Spanish media , and Madrid 's win was watched by more than 500 million people . 
 = = = El Derbi madrileño = = = 
 The club 's nearest neighbour is Atlético Madrid , a rivalry being shared between fans of both football teams . Although Atlético was originally founded by three Basque students in 1903 , it was joined in 1904 by dissident members of Madrid FC . Tensions escalated further after Atlético were merged with the football team of the Spanish airforce ( and thus renamed Atlético Aviación ) , and in the 1940s , Atlético was perceived as the preferred team of Franco 's regime before he revelled in Real 's European success in the 1950s . Furthermore , Real supporters initially came from the middle and upper classes while the Atlético supporters were drawn from the working class . Today , however , these distinctions are largely blurred . They met for the first time on 21 February 1929 in matchday three of the first League Championship at the former Chamartín . It was the first official derby of the new tournament , and Real won 2 – 1 . 
 The rivalry first gained international attention in 1959 during the European Cup when the two clubs met in the semi @-@ final . Real won the first leg 2 – 1 at the Bernabéu while Atlético won 1 – 0 at the <unk> . The tie went to a replay , which Real won 2 – 1 . Atlético , however , gained some revenge when , led by former Real Madrid coach José <unk> , it defeated its city rivals in two successive Copa del Generalísimo finals in 1960 and 1961 . 
 Between 1961 and 1989 , when Real dominated La Liga , only Atlético offered it any serious challenge , winning Liga titles in 1966 , 1970 , 1973 and 1977 . In 1965 , Atlético became the first team to beat Real at the Bernabéu in eight years . Real Madrid 's record against Atlético in more recent times is very favorable . A high point coming in the 2002 – 03 season , when Real clinched the La Liga title after a 0 – 4 victory at Atlético at the Vicente Calderón Stadium . Atlético 's first win over its city rivals since 1999 came with the Copa del Rey win in May 2013 . In 2013 – 14 , Real and Atlético were finalists of UEFA Champions League , the first final which hosted two clubs from same city . Real Madrid triumphed with 4 – 1 in extra time . On 7 February 2015 , Real suffered their first defeat in 14 years at the Vicente Calderón , a 4 – 0 loss . On 28 May 2016 , Real and Atlético met again for the Champions League title in Milan which resulted in a win for Real Madrid via Penalty Shootout . 
 = = = European rivalry = = = 
 Real Madrid and Bayern Munich are two of the most successful clubs in the UEFA Champions League / European Cup competition , Real winning eleven times and Bayern winning five times . Real Madrid versus Bayern is the match that has historically been played most often in the Champions League , with 16 matches and the European Cup with 22 matches . Real 's biggest loss at home in the Champions League came at the hands of Bayern on 29 February 2000 , 2 – 4 . Real Madrid supporters often refer to Bayern as the " Bestia negra " ( " Black Beast " ) . The two teams met in the 2011 – 12 Champions League semi @-@ finals , which resulted in 3 – 3 on aggregate , forcing extra time and penalties . Bayern won 3 – 1 on penalties to reach their first @-@ ever home Champions League final . They then again met in 2013 – 14 UEFA Champions League semi @-@ finals , a rematch of the 2012 semi @-@ final , with Real Madrid winning 5 – 0 on aggregate . 
 = = Finances and ownership = = 
 It was under Florentino Pérez 's first presidency ( 2000 – 2006 ) that Real Madrid started its ambition of becoming the world 's richest professional football club . The club ceded part of its training grounds to the city of Madrid in 2001 , and sold the rest to four corporations : Repsol YPF , Mutua <unk> de Madrid , <unk> <unk> and OHL . The sale eradicated the club 's debts , paving the way for it to buy the world 's most expensive players , such as Zinedine Zidane , Luís Figo , Ronaldo and David Beckham . The city had previously rezoned the training grounds for development , a move which in turn increased their value , and then bought the site . The European Commission started an investigation into whether the city overpaid for the property , to be considered a form of state subsidy . 
 The sale of the training ground for office buildings cleared Real Madrid 's debts of € 270 million and enabled the club to embark upon an unprecedented spending spree which brought big @-@ name players to the club . In addition , profit from the sale was spent on a state @-@ of @-@ the @-@ art training complex on the city 's outskirts . Although Pérez 's policy resulted in increased financial success from the exploitation of the club 's high marketing potential around the world , especially in Asia , it came under increasing criticism for being too focused on marketing the Real Madrid brand and not enough on the performances of the team . 
 By September 2007 , Real Madrid was considered the most valuable football brand in Europe by BBDO . In 2008 , it was ranked the second @-@ most valuable club in football , with a value of € 951 million ( £ 640 million / $ 1 @.@ 285 billion ) , only beaten by Manchester United , which was valued at € 1 @.@ 333 billion ( £ 900 million ) . In 2010 , Real Madrid had the highest turnover in football worldwide . In September 2009 , Real Madrid 's management announced plans to open its own dedicated theme park by 2013 . 
 A study at Harvard University concluded that Real Madrid " is one of the 20 most important brand names and the only one in which its executives , the players , are well @-@ known . We have some spectacular figures in regard to worldwide support of the club . There are an estimated 287 million people worldwide who follow Real Madrid . " In 2010 , Forbes evaluated Real Madrid 's worth to be around € 992 million ( US $ 1 @.@ 323 billion ) , ranking them second after Manchester United , based on figures from the 2008 – 09 season . According to Deloitte , Real Madrid had a recorded revenue of € 401 million in the same period , ranking first . 
 Along with Barcelona , Athletic Bilbao and Osasuna , Real Madrid is organised as a registered association . This means that Real Madrid is owned by its supporters who elect the club president . The club president cannot invest his own money into the club and the club can only spend what it earns , which is mainly derived through merchandise sales , television rights and ticket sales . Unlike a limited company , it is not possible to purchase shares in the club , but only membership . The members of Real Madrid , called socios , form an assembly of delegates which is the highest governing body of the club . As of 2010 , the club has 60 @,@ 000 socios . At the end of the 2009 – 10 season , the club board of directors of the club stated that Real Madrid had a net debt of € 244 @.@ 6 million , € 82 @.@ 1 million lower than the previous fiscal year . Real Madrid announced that it had a net debt of € 170 million after the 2010 – 11 season . From 2007 to 2011 , the club made a net profit of € 190 million . 
 During the 2009 – 10 season , Real Madrid made € 150 million through ticket sales , which was the highest in top @-@ flight football . The club has the highest number of shirt sales a season , around 1 @.@ 5 million . For the 2010 – 11 season its wage bill totalled € 169 million , which was second @-@ highest in Europe behind Barcelona . However , its wage bill to turnover ratio was the best in Europe at 43 percent , ahead of Manchester United and Arsenal at 46 percent and 50 percent , respectively . In 2013 , Forbes listed the club as the world 's most valuable sports team , worth $ 3 @.@ 3 billion . 
 = = Popular culture = = 
 Real Madrid was the featured club in the second edition of the Goal ! football movie trilogy , Goal ! 2 : Living the Dream ... ( 2007 ) . The film follows former Newcastle United star Santiago Muñez as he is first scouted , and then signed by Real Madrid for the 2005 – 06 season . The film 's creators wanted to put emphasis on the changes in Muñez 's life after his move to Madrid . Production was done with the full support of UEFA , allowing the film crew to use many real life players in cameo roles . Real Madrid squad members featured in the film included Iker Casillas , Zinedine Zidane , David Beckham , Ronaldo , Roberto Carlos , Raúl , Sergio Ramos , Robinho , Michael Owen , Míchel Salgado , Júlio Baptista , Steve McManaman and Iván <unk> . Non @-@ Real Madrid players to make cameo appearances included Ronaldinho , Thierry Henry , Lionel Messi , Samuel Eto 'o , Andrés Iniesta , Pablo Aimar , Fredrik Ljungberg , Cesc Fàbregas and Santiago <unk> . In the film , both Florentino Pérez and Alfredo Di Stéfano presented the fictional player Muñez to the club after his signing . 
 Real , The Movie is a 2005 part feature , part documentary film that showcases the world @-@ wide passion for Real Madrid C.F. Produced by the club and directed by Borja Manso , it follows five sub @-@ stories of fans from around the world and their love for Real Madrid . Along with the fictional portion of the film , it also contains real footage of the squad , during training at Ciudad Real Madrid , matches , and interviews . Although the film mentions all of the squad , it mainly focuses on <unk> such as David Beckham , Zinedine Zidane , Raúl , Luís Figo , Ronaldo , Iker Casillas , and Roberto Carlos , among others . The film was originally produced in Spanish , but has been dubbed for their world @-@ wide fanbase . 
 The book White Storm : 100 years of Real Madrid by Phil Ball was the first English @-@ language history of Real Madrid . Published in 2002 , it talks about the most successful moments of the club during its first centenary , having been translated into various languages . In late 2011 , Real Madrid released a digital music album , entitled Legends , and a remix of the club 's anthem , " Himno del Real Madrid , " was released as the first single from the album . 
 = = = Real Madrid TV = = = 
 Real Madrid TV is an encrypted digital television channel , operated by Real Madrid and specialising in the club . The channel is available in Spanish and English . It is located at Ciudad Real Madrid in <unk> ( Madrid ) , Real Madrid 's training centre . 
 = = = Hala Madrid = = = 
 Hala Madrid is a magazine published quarterly for the Real Madrid club members and the <unk> Fan Club card holders . The phrase Hala Madrid , meaning " Forward Madrid " or " Go Madrid " , is also the title of the club 's official anthem , which is often sung by the <unk> ( the club 's fans ) . The magazine includes reports on the club 's matches in the previous month , as well as information about the reserve and youth teams . Features often include interviews with players , both past and present , and the club 's historic matches . 
 = = Honours = = 
 As of 24 May 2014 , Real Madrid has won a record 32 La Liga , a record eleven European Cup / UEFA Champions League and a shared record three Intercontinental Cup trophies . The club was awarded with the recognition of " FIFA Club of the 20th Century " on 23 December 2000 , and named " Best European Club of the 20th Century " by the IFFHS in London on 11 May 2010 . It also received the FIFA Order of Merit in 2004 . Added to this , Real is allowed to wear a multiple – winner badge on their shirt during UEFA Champions League matches as they have won more than five European Cups . 
 = = = Domestic competitions = = = 
 La Liga 
 Winners ( 32 ) – record : 1931 – 32 , 1932 – 33 , 1953 – 54 , 1954 – 55 , 1956 – 57 , 1957 – 58 , 1960 – 61 , 1961 – 62 , 1962 – 63 , 1963 – 64 , 1964 – 65 , 1966 – 67 , 1967 – 68 , 1968 – 69 , 1971 – 72 , 1974 – 75 , 1975 – 76 , 1977 – 78 , 1978 – 79 , 1979 – 80 , 1985 – 86 , 1986 – 87 , 1987 – 88 , 1988 – 89 , 1989 – 90 , 1994 – 95 , 1996 – 97 , 2000 – 01 , 2002 – 03 , 2006 – 07 , 2007 – 08 , 2011 – 12 
 Copa del Rey 
 Winners ( 19 ) : 1905 , 1906 , 1907 , 1908 , 1917 , 1934 , 1936 , 1946 , 1947 , 1961 – 62 , 1969 – 70 , 1973 – 74 , 1974 – 75 , 1979 – 80 , 1981 – 82 , 1988 – 89 , 1992 – 93 , 2010 – 11 , 2013 – 14 
 Supercopa de España 
 Winners ( 9 ) : 1988 , 1989 , 1990 , 1993 , 1997 , 2001 , 2003 , 2008 , 2012 
 Copa Eva Duarte ( the forerunner to the Supercopa de España ) 
 Winners : 1947 
 Copa de la Liga 
 Winners : 1984 – 85 
 = = = European competitions = = = 
 European Cup / UEFA Champions League 
 Winners ( 11 ) – record : 1955 – 56 , 1956 – 57 , 1957 – 58 , 1958 – 59 , 1959 – 60 , 1965 – 66 , 1997 – 98 , 1999 – 2000 , 2001 – 02 , 2013 – 14 , 2015 – 16 
 UEFA Cup 
 Winners ( 2 ) : 1984 – 85 , 1985 – 86 
 UEFA Super Cup 
 Winners ( 2 ) : 2002 , 2014 
 = = = Worldwide competitions = = = 
 Intercontinental Cup 
 Winners ( 3 ) – shared record : 1960 , 1998 , 2002 
 FIFA Club World Cup 
 Winners ( 1 ) : 2014 
 = = Players = = 
 Spanish teams are limited to three players without EU citizenship . The squad list includes only the principal nationality of each player ; several non @-@ European players on the squad have dual citizenship with an EU country . Also , players from the ACP countries — countries in Africa , the Caribbean , and the Pacific that are signatories to the <unk> Agreement — are not counted against non @-@ EU quotas due to the <unk> ruling . 
 = = = Current squad = = = 
 As of 20 July 2016 
 Note : Flags indicate national team as defined under FIFA eligibility rules . Players may hold more than one non @-@ FIFA nationality . 
 Note : Flags indicate national team as defined under FIFA eligibility rules . Players may hold more than one non @-@ FIFA nationality . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 = = = Current technical staff = = = 
 = = = Management = = = 
 = Steamtown , U.S.A. = 
 Steamtown , U.S.A. , was a steam locomotive museum that ran steam excursions out of North Walpole , New Hampshire , and Bellows Falls , Vermont , from the 1960s to 1983 . The museum was founded by millionaire seafood industrialist F. Nelson Blount . The non @-@ profit Steamtown Foundation took over operations following his death in 1967 . Because of Vermont 's air quality regulations restricting steam excursions , declining visitor attendance , and disputes over the use of track , some pieces of the collection were relocated to Scranton , Pennsylvania , in the mid @-@ 1980s and the rest were auctioned off . After the move , Steamtown continued to operate in Scranton but failed to attract the expected 200 @,@ 000 – 400 @,@ 000 visitors . Within two years the tourist attraction was facing bankruptcy , and more pieces of the collection were sold to pay off debt . 
 In 1986 , the United States House of Representatives , under the urging of Pennsylvania Representative Joseph M. McDade , voted to approve $ 8 million to study the collection and to begin the process of making it a National Historic Site . As a result , the National Park Service ( NPS ) conducted historical research on the equipment that remained in the Foundation 's possession . This research was used as a Scope of Collections Statement for the Steamtown National Historic Site . The scope was published in 1991 under the title Steamtown Special History Study . The report provided concise histories of each piece of equipment and made recommendations as to whether or not each piece belonged in the soon @-@ to @-@ be government @-@ funded collection . 
 By 1995 , Steamtown had been acquired and developed by the NPS with a $ 66 million allocation . Several more pieces have been removed from the collection as a result of the government acquisition . Part of the Blount collection is still on display at the Steamtown National Historic Site in Scranton . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Formation of the collection = = = 
 F. Nelson Blount , the heir to the largest seafood processor in the United States , was an avid railroad enthusiast . When he was just seventeen years old he wrote a book on steam power . Acquiring the narrow @-@ gauge <unk> Railroad in Carver , Massachusetts in 1955 , he began amassing one of the largest collections of antique steam locomotives in the United States . By 1964 , another part of his collection housed at North Walpole , New Hampshire consisted of 25 steam locomotives from the United States and Canada , 10 other locomotives , and 25 pieces of rolling stock . The Monadnock , Steamtown & Northern Railroad , as the enterprise was then called , ran excursions between Keene and Westmoreland , New Hampshire . In addition to <unk> Railroad and Steamtown , Blount also ran excursions at Pleasure Island in Wakefield , Massachusetts and <unk> U.S.A. in New York City . In the early 1960s , Blount came close to entering into an agreement with the state of New Hampshire in which he would donate 20 locomotives to a museum which was to be located in Keene . However , the plan , which was originally approved by New Hampshire governor Wesley Powell , in 1962 , was later rejected by the new governor , John W. King . An advisory committee had said of the proposed plan , that it " does not take advantage of anything that is singularly and peculiarly New Hampshire . " 
 In 1964 , incorporation papers were filed for the " Steamtown Foundation for the Preservation of Steam and Railroad Americana " . The non @-@ profit charitable , educational organization was to have nine non @-@ salaried directors , including the five incorporators of which Blount was one . The other incorporators were former New Hampshire governor , Lane <unk> ; Emile <unk> ; Robert L. <unk> , Jr . , mayor of Keene ; and Bellows Falls Municipal Judge , Thomas P. Salmon , who later became governor of Vermont . The president of the Campbell Soup Company , William B. Murphy , who had also served as National Chairman of Radio Free Europe , and Fredrick Richardson , then vice president of Blount Seafood , were among the other directors . The first order of business for the Steamtown Foundation was to acquire the Blount collection at North Walpole , and relocate it to property once owned by the Rutland Railroad , in Bellows Falls , Vermont . 
 = = = Steamtown in Vermont = = = 
 F. Nelson Blount was killed when his private airplane hit a tree during an emergency landing , in Marlboro , New Hampshire , on August 31 , 1967 . By that time a good deal of Blount 's collection was controlled by the Steamtown Foundation and had been relocated to Bellows Falls . Blount owned several corporations and one , the Green Mountain Railroad ( GMRC ) , controlled the tracks that lay between Walpole , Bellows Falls and Chester , Vermont , which Steamtown was to use for its excursions . When Blount died most of the controlling stock of the GMRC was transferred to the president of the railroad , Robert Adams . 
 Throughout its tenure in Vermont , Steamtown provided several types of excursions , primarily in the summer and during the peak foliage season of the autumn . Occasionally , these trips would be lengthy , like one that ran from Boston to Montreal , or those that ran between Bellows Falls and Rutland , Vermont . On a daily basis the excursions ran from Riverside station in Bellows Falls to Chester depot . The cost of the trip , which in 1977 was $ 5 @.@ 75 for an adult and $ 2 @.@ 95 for a child , was combined with entrance into the museum , which was the grounds of Riverside station . The station was located about 2 miles ( 3 km ) outside of town and was situated on the bank of the Connecticut River . One newspaper travel writer , Bill Rice , described the 13 miles ( 21 km ) trip from Riverside to Chester : " The trip to Chester affords a beautiful view of unspoiled Vermont countryside @-@ covered bridges , vintage farms with grazing livestock and cornfield and a winding river with a deep gorge and picturesque waterfall . " The river that Rice referred to was the Williams River , which crossed the route of the train seven times . The waterfall was at Brockway Mills Gorge and was seen from a bridge 100 feet ( 30 m ) above the gorge . Rice also said that at the time he was writing , 1977 , Steamtown had the largest collection of steam locomotives in the world . 
 In 1971 , the Board of Health of Vermont issued a waiver to the GMRC for Vermont 's air pollution regulations . The waiver permitted the operation of steam locomotive excursions between Steamtown 's Riverside station at Bellows Falls , and Chester depot . In 1974 , as the state of Vermont prepared for its celebration of the country 's bicentenary , in which the Steamtown excursion featured prominently , the subject of the air pollution regulations came up again . The tourist attraction was operating on temporary permits that allowed it to operate excursions in Vermont . By 1976 , the relationship between Steamtown and GMRC deteriorated as the two organizations fought over maintenance of the tracks , which were owned by the state of Vermont . 
 By 1978 , the Steamtown Foundation had begun scouting for a new location for Steamtown , U.S.A. Orlando and perhaps other locations in Florida were under consideration . In 1980 , Ray Holland , the Chairman of the Board of Steamtown Foundation , resigned after accusing the board of incompetence . His resignation was followed by that of Robert Barbera , a long @-@ time director of the board . In the year that followed , Steamtown did not run excursions . Don Ball , Jr . , had taken over direction of Steamtown by this time and discovered that the excursion train did not meet federal safety guidelines . In 1981 , despite its vast holdings of vintage railroad stock , Steamtown , U.S.A. had only 17 @,@ 000 visitors , while Connecticut 's Essex Valley Railroad , which ran two small engines , had 139 @,@ 000 visitors . Even in its best year , 1973 , the Vermont location had attracted only 65 @,@ 000 visitors . 
 Self @-@ syndicated newspaper columnist Michael McManus once said that his goal in writing his weekly column was " to suggest answers to problems of the old industrial states . " In March 1982 a substantial article by McManus appeared in the Bangor Daily News . In the article , McManus proposed several reasons why a city , like Chicago , Pittsburgh , or Scranton might find the addition of a tourist attraction like Steamtown beneficial . McManus went on to explain why the business was failing in Vermont . Among the reasons the article gave for poor attendance at the Vermont site were : past failed management , an isolated location and the lack of signs on Interstate 91 , which the state opposed . In addition to these problems , the roof of the largest storage shed on the site collapsed under heavy snow the previous winter , damaging several pieces of equipment . Among the injured were the Canadian Pacific Railway No. 1293 and the Meadow River Lumber Company No. 1 Shay ( shown in the infobox ) . 
 When asked by McManus to describe the value of the Steamtown collection , Jim Boyd , editor of Railfan magazine said , " Everything there is no longer obtainable anywhere , whether it is the " Big Boy " Union Pacific No. 4012 or the Rahway Valley No. 15 , a nice @-@ sized locomotive any museum would give a right arm for . Most of the other large collections do not have any serviceable equipment . " McManus closed his argument for the relocation of Steamtown by pointing out , " What is at stake is more than tourism and jobs . It is a significant part of America 's past before the welder 's torch is turned on the likes of the 1877 " Prince of Liege " , the rare Union Pacific diamond stack , etc . The steel alone is worth $ 3 million . 
 In June 1983 , McManus wrote about Steamtown again , this time announcing that Scranton had taken his suggestion . He said that other cities in contention for the relocation were Springfield , Massachusetts , and Willimantic , Connecticut . " But on May 24 , Scranton signed a contract to get it , pledging to raise $ 2 million to cover the cost of moving 40 ancient steam engines and 60 cars , few of which are operable , and to create a museum . " Steamtown sponsored its last Vermont excursion on October 23 , 1983 , using Canadian Pacific 1246 to pull a " dozen or so cars " on a 100 miles ( 160 km ) round trip from Riverside station to Ludlow , Vermont . 
 = = = Steamtown in Scranton and nationalization = = = 
 When Scranton agreed to take on Steamtown , U.S.A. , it was estimated that the museum and excursion business would attract 200 @,@ 000 to 400 @,@ 000 visitors to the city every year . In anticipation of this economic boon , the city and a private developer spent $ 13 million to renovate the Delaware , Lackawanna and Western Railroad ( DL & W ) station and transform it into a Hilton hotel , at a time when the unemployment rate in the city was 13 percent . Only 60 @,@ 000 visitors showed up at Steamtown in 1987 , and the 1988 excursions were canceled . After only three years , it was $ 2 @.@ 2 million in debt and facing bankruptcy . Part of the problem was the cost of restoration of the new property and the deteriorating equipment . In addition , while the tourists in Vermont had enjoyed the sights of cornfields , farms , covered bridges , a waterfall and a gorge on a Steamtown excursion , the Scranton trip to Moscow , Pennsylvania , cut through one of the nation 's largest junkyards , an eyesore described by Ralph Nader as " the eighth wonder of the world " . 
 In 1986 , the U.S. House of Representatives , under the urging of Scranton native , Representative Joseph M. McDade , voted to approve the spending of $ 8 million to study the collection and to begin the process of making it a National Historic Site . By 1995 , Steamtown was acquired and developed by the National Park Service ( NPS ) at a total cost of $ 66 million , and opened as Steamtown National Historic Site the same year . In preparation for its acquisition of the collection , the NPS had conducted historical research during 1987 and 1988 on the equipment that still remained in the foundation 's possession . This research was used for a Scope of Collections Statement for Steamtown National Historic Site and was published in 1991 under the title Steamtown Special History Study . Aside from providing concise histories of the equipment , the report also made recommendations as to whether or not each piece belonged in the now government @-@ funded collection . Historical significance to the United States was a criterion of the recommendations . Many of the pieces of equipment that did not meet the report 's recommendations were sold or traded for pieces that had historical significance to the DL & W grounds on which the site is located . 
 = = The collection = = 
 Before its move to Scranton , Steamtown , U.S.A. sold several pieces of the collection . After the facility was nationalized , several other pieces were sold or traded for pieces that were significant to the Scranton area . Some examples of the original collection are profiled below . In some cases , the pieces of equipment discussed here are still in the collection in Scranton , but several others are not . When possible the most recent information on the location of the equipment is provided . 
 = = = In operation at Bellows Falls = = = 
 Rahway Valley No. 15 was built by Baldwin Locomotive Works , June 1916 . It is a 2 @-@ 8 @-@ 0 Consolidation type locomotive . It was built for Oneida & Western Railroad and wore the number 20 for that company . The railroad 's initial purpose was to develop Tennessee 's coal and lumber industry , but it became a short line that connected the Cincinnati , New Orleans and the Texas Pacific Railways between Oneida and Jamestown , Tennessee . 
 In the mid @-@ 1930s the engine was purchased by Rahway Valley Railroad in New Jersey . <unk> 15 , the locomotive served primarily while the company 's other locomotives were being serviced . The locomotive was the favorite of master mechanic Charles Nees . " Perhaps not the most efficient engine , Rahway Valley No. 15 qualified as the line 's most attractive . " When it was retired in 1953 , having been replaced with diesel power , No. 15 was put into well @-@ protected storage until it was purchased by F. Nelson Blount in 1959 . 
 Blount used No. 15 first for a static display at Pleasure Island , and then for excursions in New Hampshire and Vermont from 1962 to 1967 . It was used again at Steamtown , in 1973 , when it blew a flue while heading a triple header excursion from Riverside . The incident left veteran engineer Andy Barbera scalded and No. 15 in need of repair . Since the services of the locomotive were not needed at the time , the repairs were not done and remained undone by the time the Steamtown Special History was written . While in Blount 's possession , the locomotive appeared in the movie The Cardinal ( 1963 ) . The Steamtown Special History Study recommended that the engine be cosmetically and operationally restored , as it had served in the northeastern quarter of the United States and had been serviced , at least once , at the Lackawanna 's Scranton shop . As of March 2012 , the locomotive is still displayed at Steamtown National Historic Site . 
 Canadian Pacific Railway No. 1293 was built in 1948 by Canadian Locomotive Company . It was retired after only eight years of service when diesel power made it obsolete . This was one of three type 4 @-@ 6 @-@ 2 , class <unk> light @-@ weight " Pacific " model locomotives that were operational at the time that Steamtown was in Bellows Falls . The Steamtown Special History Study gave no details of the operational career of 1293 , but said that Blount purchased it under the name of Green Mountain Railroad , in January 1964 . The Steamtown Foundation purchased the locomotive from Green Mountain Railroad in 1973 and rebuilt it in 1976 . Making its debut as an excursion train in June of that year and sporting a green and black color scheme , 1293 served the state of Vermont as its " Bicentennial Train " , logging 13 @,@ 000 miles ( 21 @,@ 000 km ) . Leased by the state of Vermont for 80 miles ( 100 km ) excursions that were scheduled for the entire year , the engine was dubbed " The Spirit of Ethan Allen " . In 1979 , the locomotive was renumbered " 1881 " , painted black with silver stripes , and leased to a Hollywood company for use in the filming of the horror movie Terror Train ( 1979 ) , starring Jamie Lee Curtis . In 1980 , the locomotive was repainted with a color scheme used by Canadian Pacific in the 1930s . The black , gold , and Tuscan red paint job was popular with railroad enthusiasts and photographers . The number 1293 was also restored to the engine . In February 1982 , the headlights , handrails , and cab roof of 1293 were damaged when the roof of a Steamtown storage building gave way to heavy snow . 
 Although the Steamtown Special History Study reasoned that , since this type of locomotive had historically operated in New England , perhaps as far south as Boston , it qualified to be part of the federal government 's collection , the Canadian native sat unused for 12 years following the move to Scranton . Ohio Central Railroad System purchased it in 1996 , and it underwent a 13 @-@ month restoration . As of July 2010 , Ohio Central Railroad has lost control of most of its holdings , but former owner , Jerry Joe Jacobson , maintained a collection of vintage equipment including CPR 1293 and her sister , CRP 1278 , which is also a veteran of Steamtown , U.S.A. operational locomotives . No. 1293 is still operational as of October 2011 . 
 Canadian Pacific Railway No. 1278 , like her sister , CPR 1293 , CPR 1278 was also built by Canadian Locomotive Company in 1948 , and is a type 4 @-@ 6 @-@ 2 , class <unk> light @-@ weight " Pacific " locomotive . It was purchased by Blount in May 1965 , and renumbered 127 . Blount had planned to renumber all three of the series 1200 CRP locomotives in his collection from 1246 , 1278 , and 1293 to 124 , 127 and 129 respectively , but 1278 was the only one of the three that underwent the change . The new number remained on the locomotive from 1966 until 1973 , when its former number was restored . The locomotive was leased to the Cadillac and Lake City Railroad in Michigan from 1970 to 1971 . After some repair work , the locomotive was returned to Bellows Falls where it served on excursion runs . After moving to Scranton , CPR 1278 was traded to the Gettysburg Steam Railroad in Pennsylvania . 
 Shortly after 7 p.m. Friday , June 16 , 1995 , an explosion in the firebox of CPR 1278 burned three members of its crew . One man , James Cornell , the son of the owner of the engine , was critically injured . The train that the locomotive was pulling had 310 passengers on board . None of the passengers , who were taking the " Summer Eve Dinner Excursion " to Mount Holly Springs , were hurt . An investigation done by the National Transportation Safety Board determined that the accident was caused by poor maintenance and operator training . The board also pointed out that the Canadian design of the firebox may have prevented further injuries and perhaps deaths . Jerry Jacobson , the owner of the Ohio Central Railroad , ( OCR ) bought the engine at an auction in 1998 . After Jacobson sold the OCR , in 2008 , he maintained ownership of the locomotive . As of 2009 , it is stored at Jacobson 's facility , the Age of Steam Roundhouse , in <unk> , Ohio . 
 Canadian Pacific Railway No. 1246 was the third of the 1200 series Canadian Pacific locomotives in the collection . In the fall of 1983 , Steamtown said " farewell to Vermont " by offering two 100 miles ( 160 km ) excursions " through a landscape of covered bridges , rushing streams and scenic countryside " . The train , which had the capacity of 800 – 1000 passengers , was to be pulled by CRP 1246 . Built in 1946 , CPR 1246 is a 4 @-@ 6 @-@ 2 type locomotive . After operating in Steamtown in Scranton between 1984 and 1986 , it was determined that 1246 was inadequate for service as it was " too light for the heavy grades and sharp curves of the Steamtown line " . The National Park Service sold it to the Connecticut Valley Railroad , in 1988 . This locomotive was on static display from 1996 to 2008 , at the Valley Railroad in Essex , Connecticut . In 2008 , it was moved to the Naugatuck Railroad which is operated by the Railroad Museum of New England , Thomaston , Connecticut . 
 = = Other pieces of the Blount collection = = 
 = = = Union Pacific No. 4012 = = = 
 " Big Boy " , a 4 @-@ 8 @-@ 8 @-@ 4 type locomotive built by American Locomotive Company in November 1941 , is among the world 's largest steam locomotives and weighs 1 @,@ 250 @,@ 000 pounds ( 570 @,@ 000 kg ) . The Steamtown Special History Study recommended that it remain at Steamtown as it is the only articulated type in the collection . It also recommended that it remain on static display , as it was doubtful that the " track , switches , culverts , trestles , bridges , <unk> , turntables , and other facilities that would have to carry her [ could ] bear her great weight " . In fact , since the Steamtown turntable and roundhouse were inadequate for its size , Big Boy has remained out @-@ of @-@ doors since its arrival at Scranton , where it is still on display as of May 2015 . 
 = = = Meadow River Lumber Company No. 1 = = = 
 While at Steamtown , the Shay locomotive endured extensive damage when the building it was stored in collapsed under heavy snow in February 1982 . The Shay 's wooden cab was destroyed , but " its sand dome , its headlight , its front number plate , its bell and bell hanger , whistle , and other components " were missing before this incident . It was determined that it would remain at the National Historic Site as it was the only Shay and the only geared locomotive in the collection . 
 = = = Bevier & Southern Railroad No. 109 = = = 
 Bevier & Southern Railroad No. 109 was built by Brooks in 1900 . This 2 @-@ 6 @-@ 0 type locomotive served the Illinois Central Railroad under several numbers : 560 , <unk> and <unk> . As of July 2010 it is located at the Illinois Railroad Museum in Union and referred to as Illinois Central <unk> . 
 = = = Illinois Central No. 790 = = = 
 This locomotive was built in 1903 by American Locomotive Company as a 2 @-@ 8 @-@ 0 Consolidation type . It was originally owned by Chicago Union Transfer Railway and numbered 100 . It was sold to Illinois Central Railroad Company in 1904 and renumbered 641 . The railroad , which dated back to 1851 , operated 4 @,@ 265 miles of track between Chicago , Illinois and New Orleans , Louisiana . This locomotive pulled heavy freight in Tennessee and " must have seen hard service , for reportedly the Illinois Central rebuilt it in 1918 , modernizing it with a superheater , and possibly replacing the boiler and firebox " . 
 In 1943 it was renumber 790 and remained in service until it was replaced by diesel @-@ electric locomotives and put into storage , " the railroad nevertheless had to fire No. 790 up in the spring to assist Illinois Central trains through track inundated by flood waters near Cedar Rapids , because diesel @-@ electric locomotives with their electric motors shorted out in any water , whereas even the bottom of the firebox in a steam locomotive was much higher above the rail , hence above flood waters . " It was sold to Louis S. Keller of Cedar Rapids , Iowa , in 1959 who had hoped to use it for excursions . It was used for " flood duty " in April 1965 at the Clinton Corn Processing Company " where it plowed through overflow from the Mississippi River . " Later that year it was sold to David de Camp who planned to use it in the area of Lake Placid , New York . The plans were not met and it was sold to F. Nelson Blount in January 1966 . 
 The only surviving locomotive of the Chicago Union Transfer Railway , No. 790 is the only Illinois Central 2 @-@ 8 @-@ 0 Consolidation type of its class to survive . " About 146 standard gauge 2 @-@ 8 @-@ 0s survive in the United States , including Illinois Central No. 790 " . The Steamtown National Historic Site retained this locomotive on the suggestion of the Steamtown Special History Study . 
 = = = Brooks @-@ Scanlon Corporation No. 1 = = = 
 No. 1 was once part of the Steamtown , U.S.A. collection . This type of locomotive was originally developed for use on the flat terrain of the prairie , such as the Great Plains of Kansas and surrounding states , and thus it was referred to as a Prairie @-@ type locomotive . The Prairie locomotives were later used by lumber companies which operated on flat forest terrain . This locomotive was built specifically for the lumber industry and served several lumber firms in Florida 
 The Carpenter @-@ O 'Brien Lumber Company was incorporated in Delaware in 1913 . The company , which operated in Florida , ordered this locomotive from Baldwin Locomotive Works , which completed it in 1914 . Locomotive No. 1 was put into service at the company 's Eastport sawmill in Florida . The locomotive , which could burn either coal or wood , was likely originally outfitted with a Rushton , or cabbage cinder catching stack . " If so , a later owner apparently replaced the Rushton stack with the ' shotgun ' stack now on the locomotive . " 
 After the United States entered World War I in 1917 , the Carpenter @-@ O 'Brien Lumber Company was sold to Brooks @-@ Scanlon Corporation . By 1928 , Brooks @-@ Scanlon was operating in four Florida counties and producing 100 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 board feet ( 200 @,@ 000 m3 ) of lumber . This locomotive was probably used to haul logs in to the mill from the woods or to switch the yard around the Eastport plant , or both . In the following years the locomotive changed hands four of five times between several interconnected Florida lumber firms . 
 In 1959 , locomotive No.1 was taken out of service by its then owner , Lee Tidewater Cypress , in Perry , Florida . It was sold to F. Nelson Blount in 1962 by the Lee Tidewater Cypress parent company , J.C. Turner Company . It was moved to Walpole , New Hampshire and then , across the Connecticut River , to Bellows Falls , Vermont where it stayed until the Blount collection was relocated to Scranton , Pennsylvania . 
 = = = Simons Wrecking Company No. 2 = = = 
 Simons Wrecking Company No. 2 is a H.K. Porter , 0 @-@ 6 @-@ 0T steam engine built in 1941 . The tank engine , which is oil fired , worked for the US Navy during World War II in Virginia as # 14 . Later the engine was put into service with Simons Wrecking Co. as No. 2 . 
 Once part of Blount 's Steamtown collection , Locomotive # 2 was sold before Steamtown moved to Scranton , and languished for many years in an auto salvage yard in Newbury , Massachusetts . In 2006 , the engine was removed from the junkyard by Peabody , Massachusetts Public Works Director Dick Carnevale , and restoration began in hopes for it to be displayed in a city park in Peabody . The restoration of the engine was done by Carnevale personally , along with some volunteers . After he resigned in October 2008 , the city gave him 60 days to remove the engine from city property . Local residents contacted the Friends of Valley Railroad in Essex , Connecticut , who purchased the engine from Carnevale and transported it to Connecticut where , as of July 2010 , the locomotive is undergoing cosmetic restoration and will be displayed at Essex Steam Train and Riverboat . 
 = = = Canadian National Railways No. 1551 = = = 
 No. 1551 is a 4 @-@ 6 @-@ 0 type locomotive , was built by Montreal Locomotive Works , March 1912 , and originally was numbered 1354 for the Canadian Northern Railway . Used primarily on Canadian commuter lines , the locomotive was renumbered 1551 in October 1956 and retired in 1958 . Blount bought the engine and restoration was begun , but never completed . In 1986 , Jerry Joe Jacobson traded a 1929 Baldwin Locomotive Works built shop switcher , Iron and Steel Company No. 3 , 0 @-@ 6 @-@ 0 , for No. 1551 . It was restored and ran excursions for the Ohio Central Railroad until Jacobson lost control of the railroad . Jacobson still owns the locomotive . It is stored at Jacobson 's " Age of Steam Roundhouse " in Ohio and remains operational . 
 = = = Canadian National Railways No. 96 = = = 
 Canadian National Railways No. 96 , 2 @-@ 6 @-@ 0 Mogul type , is also owned by Jerry Joe Jacobson . It was built in 1910 by the Canadian Locomotive Company and originally numbered 1024 for the Grand Trunk Railway , then 926 when Canadian National obtained it in a merger in 1923 , CN renumbered it 96 in 1951 . While owned by Blount , the locomotive was used for its parts . It was sold in the 1980s and went to Ontario . It was purchased by Jacobson in 1994 and as of 2009 is stored out of service . 
 = = = Southern Railway No. 926 ; Repton = = = 
 No. 926 is a Schools class 4 @-@ 4 @-@ 0 type locomotive , one of 40 named after British public schools . It is one of three Schools class locomotives to survive the onset of diesel power . It was completed in May 1934 and entered service on the Bournemouth route , with some time operating between Waterloo and Portsmouth before that line was electrified . It was one of the last of the class to be overhauled by British Railways in 1960 , so was considered a good choice for preservation . In December 1963 the engine was withdrawn from service , and in 1966 it was purchased and overhauled at Eastleigh Works , before moving to America . It was donated by the purchaser to Steamtown . Steamtown loaned the engine to the Cape Breton Steam Railway in Canada , where it operated a regular passenger service . In 1989 , it was sold again , and returned to the United Kingdom to the North Yorkshire Moors Railway ( NYMR ) , where it was again overhauled and found to be in good condition . As of March 2012 , the locomotive is awaiting boiler repair and a possible overhaul at NYMR . 
 = = = Canadian Pacific Railway Locomotive No. 2816 = = = 
 Canadian Pacific Railway Locomotive No. 2816 was acquired by Blount in January 1964 . It was built by Montreal Locomotive Works in 1930 . The 4 @-@ 6 @-@ 4 Hudson , <unk> class locomotive had logged over 2 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 miles ( 3 @,@ 200 @,@ 000 km ) in 30 years of service pulling passenger trains between Winnipeg and Calgary , and Winnipeg and Fort William , Ontario . Later , 2816 served on the Windsor @-@ to @-@ Quebec City corridor . The locomotive 's final run was on May 26 , 1960 , pulling a Montreal – Rigaud commuter train . The Steamtown Special History Study recommended that the locomotive be kept in the collection , as it was the only 4 @-@ 6 @-@ 4 in the group , but the National Park Service sold it back to Canadian Pacific Railway , who restored it and put it back into service . 
 In 1998 , the Steamtown National Historic Site , which is funded by the federal government , began divesting itself of foreign equipment , including CPR 2816 . Canadian Pacific Railway acquired it and undertook a 3 @-@ year , 1 million dollar restoration which included converting it from coal @-@ burning to oil . In 2001 , renamed the " Empress " , 2816 was used for <unk> excursions between Calgary and Vancouver , British Columbia . After taking a year off in 2009 , the Empress went on tour in 2010 offering rides to the general public across Canada . CPR donated the ticket proceeds to the Children 's Wish Foundation . 
 = = = Bullard Company No. 2 = = = 
 Bullard Company No. 2 is a small tank locomotive built by H.K. Porter Company for the Bullard Company , October 1937 . It is on display at Steamtown National Historic Site , as of September 2010 . According to the Steamtown Special History Study , this locomotive was used to switched cars around the Bullard tool plant in Bridgeport , Connecticut , for about 15 or 20 years before acquisition by Steamtown . The Bullard Company sold it to a used locomotive dealer , the American Machinery Corporation of Bridgeport , Connecticut , probably in the late 1950s or early 1960s . It was purchased by Blount in June 1963 . The SSHS also said that a catalog , believed to be the one the Bullard Company used to order the locomotive , was in the possession of the <unk> at the time the report was written . 
 = = = Union Pacific Railway No. 737 = = = 
 Union Pacific No. 737 , a 4 @-@ 4 @-@ 0 " American " , was built by Baldwin Locomotive Works in 1887 . The oldest locomotive in the collection to have operated in the United States , it is the " oldest genuine Union Pacific in existence and the only Union Pacific 4 @-@ 4 @-@ 0 in existence " . At the time it was built it was the most common type of locomotive used for both passenger and freight trains in the United States and was therefore referred to as the " American Standard " or " American " . In 1904 the locomotive was sold to the Southern Pacific Company where its number was changed to 246 and then to 216 . It was retired from service on mainline railroads and put to use in industry in 1929 . The locomotive operated as 216 for the Erath Sugar Company and the Vermillion Sugar Company . It was retired by the latter company in 1956 and acquired by Blount in 1957 . 
 Originally the locomotive had a " diamond " smoke stack . It is unknown when that was changed to a straight " shotgun " stack . Sometime during the early 20th century the locomotive was converted from coal burning to oil burning and its wooden " cowcatcher " pilot was replaced with a steel pipe pilot . The wooden cab was replaced with an all @-@ steel cab , and its kerosene " box " headlamp was replaced with an electric one . When the engine was relocated from Louisiana to Vermont its steel cab roof was removed in preparation for the ride on a flat car . The roof was later mistaken for scrap metal as a worker at Steamtown cut out a piece for use as a stack cover for the locomotive . In 1970 the train underwent what the Steamtown Historical Study refers to as a " misguided " restoration , and given a diamond @-@ shaped smoke stack and a kerosene " box " headlamp , both of which bearing very little resemblance to the stack and headlamp originally worn by the engine . The restoration thus gave the engine an appearance unlike any form it had assumed during its service life . 
 In 2004 , the Portola Railroad Museum traded the 737 to the Double T Ranch in <unk> , California . The Double T has cosmetically restored the engine to its 1914 ( SP # 216 ) appearance , and placed it on display along with some antique passenger cars . This exhibit was dubbed as the " History Train " , and offers " excursion rides " . During these excursions , the train does not actually move , but sounds and motions that simulate a train ride are produced to create an illusion that the train is in motion . 
 = Economy of the Song dynasty = 
 For over three centuries during the Song Dynasty ( 960 – 1279 ) China experienced sustained growth in per capita income and population , structural change in the economy , and increased pace of technological innovation . Movable print , improved seeds for rice and other commercial crops , gunpowder , water @-@ powered mechanical clocks , the use of coal as a source of fuel for a variety of industries , improved techniques for iron and steel production , pound locks and many other technological innovations transformed the economy . In north China , the main fuel source for ceramic kilns and iron furnaces shifted from wood to coal . 
 During the Song dynasty , there was also a notable increase in commercial contacts with global markets . Merchants engaged in overseas trade through investments in trading vessels and trade which reached ports as far away as East Africa . This period also witnessed the development of the world 's first banknote , or printed paper money ( see Jiaozi , Huizi ) , which circulated on a massive scale . Combined with a unified tax system and efficient trade routes by road and canal , this meant the development of a truly nationwide market . Regional specialization promoted economic efficiency and increased productivity . Although much of the central government 's treasury went to the military , taxes imposed on the rising commercial base refilled the coffers and further encouraged the monetary economy . Reformers and conservatives debated the role of government in the economy . The emperor and his government still took responsibility for the economy , but generally made fewer claims than in earlier dynasties . The government did , however , continue to enforce monopolies on certain manufactured items and market goods to boost revenues and secure resources that were vital to the empire 's security , such as tea , salt , and chemical components for gunpowder . 
 These changes made China a global leader , leading some historians to call this an " early modern " economy many centuries before Western Europe made its breakthrough . Many of these economic gains were lost , however , in the succeeding Yuan dynasty . 
 = = Agriculture = = 
 There was a massive expansion of ploughland during the Song dynasty . The government encouraged people to reclaim barren lands and put them under cultivation . Anyone who opened up new lands and paid taxes were granted permanent possession of the new land . Under this policy , the cultivated land in the Song dynasty is estimated to have reached a peak number of 720 million mu , and was not surpassed by later Ming and Qing Dynasties . 
 Irrigation of arable land was also greatly fostered during this period . Prominent statesman and economist Wang Anshi issued the Law and Decree on Irrigation in 1069 that encouraged expansion of the irrigation system in China . By 1076 , about 10 @,@ 800 irrigation projects were completed , which irrigated more than 36 million mu of public and private land . Major irrigation projects included dredging the Yellow River at northern China and artificial silt land in the Lake Tai valley . As a result of this policy , crop production in China tripled . Agricultural yields were about 2 tan ( a unit of about 110 pounds or 50 kilograms ) of grain per mu during the Song dynasty , compared with 1 tan during the early Han and 1 @.@ 5 tan during the late Tang . 
 The economic development of China under the Song dynasty was marked by improvements in farm tools , seeds , and fertilizers . The Song inherited the plow innovations described in the Tang dynasty text The Classic of the Plow , which documents their utilization in Jiangnan . The Song improved on the Tang curved iron plough and invented a special steel plough design specifically for reclaiming wasteland . The wasteland plough was not made of iron , but of stronger steel , the blade was shorter but thicker , and particularly effective in cutting through reeds and roots in wetlands in the Huai River valley . A tool designed to facilitate seedling called " seedling horse " was invented under the Song ; it was made of jujube wood and paulownia wood . Song farms used bamboo water wheels to harness the flow energy of rivers to raise water for irrigation of farmland . 
 The water wheel was about 30 chi in diameter , with ten bamboo watering tubes fastened at its perimeter . Some farmers even used three stage watering wheels to lift water to a height of over 30 chi . 
 High yield Champa paddy seeds , Korean yellow paddy , Indian green pea , and Middle East watermelon were introduced into China during this period , greatly enhancing the variety of farm produce . Song farmers emphasized the importance of night soil as fertilizer . They understood that using night soil could transform barren wasteland into fertile farmland . Chen Pu wrote in his Book of Agriculture of 1149 : " The common saying that farmland becomes exhausted after seeding three to five years is not right , if frequently top up with new soil and cure with night soil , then the land becomes more fertile " . 
 = = = Economic Crops = = = 
 Cotton was introduced from Hainan Island into central China . Cotton flowers were collected , pits removed , beaten loose with bamboo bows , and drawn but <unk> yarns and weaved into cloth called " <unk> " . " The cotton <unk> made in Hainan has great variety , the cloth has great width , often dyed into brilliant colors , stitching up two pieces make a <unk> , stitching four pieces make a curtain Hemp was also widely planted and made into linen . Independent mulberry farms flourished in the Mount Dongting region in Suzhou . The mulberry farmers did not make a living on farmland , but instead they grew mulberry trees and bred silkworm to harvest silk . 
 Sugarcane first appeared in China during the Warring States period . During the Song dynasty , Lake Tai valley was famous for the sugarcane cultivated . Song writer Wang Zhuo described in great detail the method of cultivating sugarcane and how to make cane sugar flour from sugarcane in his monography " Classic of Sugar " in 1154 , the first book about sugar technology in China . 
 Tea plantation in the Song dynasty was three times the size that it during the Tang dynasty . According to a survey in 1162 , tea plantations were spread across 66 prefectures in 244 counties . The <unk> Plantation ( North Park Plantation ) was an imperial tea plantation in Fujian prefecture . It produced more than forty varieties of tribute tea for the imperial court . Only the very tip of tender tea leaves were picked , processed and pressed into tea cakes , embossed with dragon pattern , known as " dragon tea cakes " . 
 With the growth of cities , high value vegetable farms sprung up in the suburbs . In southern China , on average one mu of paddy farm land supported one man , while in the north about three mu for one man , while one mu of vegetable farm supported three men . 
 Flower nurseries also flourished . Peony was the favorite of the rich and powerful . Up to ninety varieties of peony were cultivated . Jasmine and crabapple from Persia were also cultivated . 
 = = Organization , investment , and trade = = 
 During the Song dynasty , the merchant class became more sophisticated , well @-@ respected and organized than in earlier periods of China . Their accumulated wealth often rivaled that of the scholar @-@ officials who administered the affairs of government . For their organizational skills , Ebrey , Walthall , and Palais state that Song merchants : 
 ... set up partnerships and joint stock companies , with a separation of owners ( shareholders ) and managers . In the large cities , merchants were organized into guilds according to the type of product sold ; they periodically set prices and arranged sales from wholesalers to shop owners . When the government requisitioned goods or assessed taxes , it dealt with the guild heads . 
 Although large government @-@ run industries and large privately owned enterprises dominated the market system of urban China during the Song period , there was a plethora of small private businesses and entrepreneurs throughout the large suburbs and rural areas that thrived off the economic boom of the period . There was even a large black market in China during the Song period , which was actually enhanced once the Jurchens conquered northern China and established the Jin dynasty . For example , around 1160 AD there was an annual black market smuggling of some 70 to 80 thousand cattle . There were multitudes of successful small kilns and pottery shops owned by local families , along with oil presses , wine @-@ making shops , small local paper @-@ making businesses , etc . There was also room for small economic success with the " inn keeper , the petty diviner , the drug seller , the cloth trader , " and many others . 
 Rural families that sold a large agricultural surplus to the market not only could afford to buy more charcoal , tea , oil , and wine , but they could also amass enough funds to establish secondary means of production for generating more wealth . Besides necessary agricultural foodstuffs , farming families could often produce wine , charcoal , paper , textiles , and other goods they sold through brokers . Farmers in Suzhou often specialized in raising <unk> mori to produce silk wares , while in Fujian , Sichuan , and Guangdong farmers often grew sugarcane . In order to ensure the prosperity of rural areas , technical applications for public works projects and improved agricultural techniques were essential . The vast irrigation system of China had to be furnished with multitudes of <unk> mass @-@ producing standardized waterwheels and square @-@ pallet chain pumps that could lift water from lower planes to higher irrigation planes . 
 For clothing , silken robes were worn by the wealthy and elite while hemp and <unk> was worn by the poor ; by the late Song period cotton clothes were also in use . Shipment of all these materials and goods was aided by the 10th century innovation of the canal pound lock in China ; the Song scientist and statesman Shen Kuo ( 1031 – 1095 ) wrote that the building of pound lock gates at Zhenzhou ( presumably <unk> along the Yangtze ) during the 1020s and 1030s freed up the use of five hundred working laborers at the canal each year , amounting to the saving of up to 1 @,@ 250 @,@ 000 strings of cash annually . He wrote that the old method of hauling boats over limited the size of the cargo to 300 tan of rice per vessel ( roughly 17 t / 17 @,@ 000 kg ) , but after the pound locks were introduced , boats carrying 400 tan ( roughly 22 t / 22 @,@ 000 kg ) could then be used . Shen wrote that by his time ( c . 1080 ) government boats could carry cargo weights of up to 700 tan ( 39 t / 39 @,@ 000 kg ) , while private boats could hold as much as 800 bags , each weighing 2 tan ( i.e. a total of 88 t / 88 @,@ 000 kg ) . 
 = = = Foreign trade = = = 
 Sea trade abroad to the South East Pacific , the Hindu world , the Islamic world , and the East African world brought merchants great fortune . Although the massive amount of indigenous trade along the Grand Canal , the Yangtze River , its tributaries and lakes , and other canal systems trumped the commercial gains of overseas trade , there were still many large seaports during the Song period that bolstered the economy , such as Quanzhou , Fuzhou , Guangzhou , and Xiamen . These seaports , now heavily connected to the hinterland via canal , lake , and river traffic , acted as a long string of large market centers for the sale of cash crops produced in the interior . The high demand in China for foreign luxury goods and spices coming from the East Indies facilitated the growth of Chinese maritime trade abroad during the Song period . Along with the mining industry , the shipbuilding industry of Fujian province during the Song period increased its production exponentially as maritime trade was given more importance and as the province 's population growth began to increase dramatically . The Song capital at Hangzhou had a large canal that connected its waterways directly to the seaport at <unk> ( modern Ningbo ) , the center where many of the foreign imported goods were shipped out to the rest of the country . Despite the installation of fire stations and a large fire fighting force , fires continued to threaten the city of Hangzhou and the various businesses within it . In safeguarding stored supplies and providing rented space for merchants and shopkeepers to keep their surplus goods safe from city fires , the rich families of Hangzhou , palace eunuchs , and empresses had large warehouses built near the northeast walls ; these warehouses were surrounded by channels of water on all sides and were heavily guarded by hired night watchmen . Shipbuilders generated means of employment for many skilled craftsmen , while sailors for ship crews found many opportunities of employment as more families had enough capital to purchase boats and invest in commercial trading abroad . Foreigners and merchants from abroad had an impact on the economy from within China as well . For example , many Muslims went to Song China not only to trade , but dominated the import and export industry and in some cases became officials of economic regulations . For Chinese maritime merchants , however , there was risk involved in such long overseas ventures to foreign trade posts and seaports as far away as Egypt . In order to reduce the risk of losing money instead of gaining it on maritime trade missions abroad : 
 [ Song era ] investors usually divided their investment among many ships , and each ship had many investors behind it . One observer thought eagerness to invest in overseas trade was leading to an outflow of copper cash . He wrote , " People along the coast are on intimate terms with the merchants who engage in overseas trade , either because they are fellow @-@ countrymen or personal acquaintances ... [ They give the merchants ] money to take with them on their ships for purchase and return conveyance of foreign goods . They invest from ten to a hundred strings of cash , and regularly make profits of several hundred percent . " 
 The author Zhu Yu wrote in his Pingzhou Ketan ( <unk> ; Pingzhou Table Talks ) of 1119 AD about the organization , maritime practices , and government standards of seagoing vessels , their merchants , and sailing crews . His book stated : 
 According to government regulations concerning seagoing ships , the larger ones can carry several hundred men , and the smaller ones may have more than a hundred men on board . One of the most important merchants is chosen to be Leader ( Gang Shou ) , another is Deputy Leader ( Fu Gang Shou ) , and a third is Business Manager ( Za Shi ) . The Superintendent of Merchant Shipping gives them an unofficially sealed red certificate permitting them to use the light bamboo for punishing their company when necessary . Should anyone die at sea , his property becomes forfeit to the government ... The ship 's pilots are acquainted with the configuration of the coasts ; at night they steer by the stars , and in the day @-@ time by the sun . In dark weather they look at the south @-@ pointing needle ( i.e. the magnetic compass ) . They also use a line a hundred feet long with a hook at the end which they let down to take samples of mud from the sea @-@ bottom ; by its ( appearance and ) smell they can determine their whereabouts . 
 Foreign travelers to China often made remarks on the economic strength of the country . The later Muslim Moroccan Berber traveler Ibn Batutta ( 1304 – 1377 ) wrote about many of his travel experiences in places across the Eurasian world , including China at the farthest eastern extremity . After describing lavish Chinese ships holding palatial cabins and saloons , along with the life of Chinese ship crews and captains , Batutta wrote : " Among the inhabitants of China there are those who own numerous ships , on which they send their agents to foreign places . For nowhere in the world are there to be found people richer than the Chinese " . 
 = = = Salaries and Income = = = 
 Wealthy landholders were still typically those who were able to educate their sons to the highest degree . Hence small groups of prominent families in any given local county would gain national spotlight for having sons travel far off to be educated and appointed as ministers of the state . Yet downward social mobility was always an issue with the matter of divided inheritance . Suggesting ways to increase a family 's property , Yuan Cai ( 1140 – 1190 ) wrote in the late 12th century that those who obtained office with decent salaries should not convert it to gold and silver , but instead could watch their values grow with investment : 
 For instance , if he had 100 @,@ 000 strings worth of gold and silver and used this money to buy productive property , in a year he would gain 10 @,@ 000 strings ; after ten years or so , he would have regained the 100 @,@ 000 strings and what would be divided among the family would be interest . If it were invested in a pawn broking business , in three years the interest would equal the capital . He would still have the 100 @,@ 000 strings , and the rest , being interest , could be divided . Moreover , it could be doubled again in another three years , ad infinitum . 
 Shen Kuo ( 1031 – 1095 ) , a minister of finance , was of the same opinion ; in his understanding of the velocity of circulation , he stated in 1077 : 
 The utility of money derives from circulation and loan @-@ making . A village of ten households may have 100 @,@ 000 coins . If the cash is stored in the household of one individual , even after a century , the sum remains 100 @,@ 000 . If the coins are circulated through business transactions so that every individual of the ten households can enjoy the utility of the 100 @,@ 000 coins , then the utility will amount to that of 1 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 cash . If circulation continues without stop , the utility of the cash will be beyond enumeration . 
 Considerable scholarship has been concentrated on researching the level of living standards during the Song dynasty . A recent study by economic historian Cheng <unk> estimated the average income for lower @-@ class laborers during the Song dynasty as 100 wen a day , about 5 times the estimated subsistence level of 20 wen a day and a very high level for preindustrial economies . Per capita consumption of grain and silk respectively was estimated by Cheng to be around 8 jin ( about 400 g each ) a day and 2 bolts a year , respectively . 
 = = Handicraft industry = = 
 = = = Steel and iron industries = = = 
 Accompanying the widespread printing of paper money was the beginnings of what one might term an early Chinese industrial revolution . For example , the historian Robert Hartwell has estimated that per capita iron output rose sixfold between 806 and 1078 , such that , by 1078 China was producing <unk> kg ( 125 @,@ 000 t ) in weight of iron per year . However , historian Donald Wagner questions Hartwell 's method used to estimate these figures ( i.e. by using Song tax and quota receipts ) . 
 In the smelting process of using huge bellows driven by waterwheels , massive amounts of charcoal were used in the production process , leading to a wide range of deforestation in northern China . However , by the end of the 11th century the Chinese discovered that using bituminous coke could replace the role of charcoal , hence many acres of forested land in northern China were spared from the steel and iron industry with this switch of resources . Iron and steel of this period were used to mass @-@ produce ploughs , hammers , needles , pins , nails for ships , musical cymbals , chains for suspension bridges , Buddhist statues , and other routine items for an indigenous mass market . Iron was also a necessary manufacturing component for the production processes of salt and copper . Many newly constructed canals linked the major iron and steel production centers to the capital city 's main market . This was also extended to trade with the outside world , which greatly expanded with the high level of Chinese maritime activity abroad during the Southern Song period . 
 Through many written petitions to the central government by regional administrators of the Song Empire , historical scholars can piece evidence together to appropriate the size and scope of the Chinese iron industry during the Song era . The famed magistrate Bao <unk> ( 999 – 1062 ) wrote of the iron industry at <unk> , Tongzhou Prefecture , along the Yellow River in what is today eastern Shaanxi province , with iron smelting households that were overseen by government regulators . He wrote that 700 such households were acting as iron smelters , with 200 having the most adequate amount of government support , such as charcoal supplies and skilled craftsmen ( the iron households hired local unskilled labor themselves ) . Bao 's complaint to the throne was that government laws against private smelting in Shaanxi hindered profits of the industry , so the government finally heeded his plea and lifted the ban on private smelting for Shaanxi in 1055 . The result of this was an increase in profit ( with lower prices for iron ) as well as production ; 100 @,@ 000 jin ( 60 tonnes ) of iron was produced annually in Shaanxi in the 1040s AD , increasing to 600 @,@ 000 jin ( 360 tonnes ) produced annually by the 1110s , furbished by the revival of the Shaanxi mining industry in 1112 . Although the iron smelters of Shaanxi were managed and supplied by the government , there were many independent smelters operated and owned by rich families . While acting as governor of Xuzhou in 1078 , the famous Song poet and statesman Su Shi ( 1037 – 1101 ) wrote that in the <unk> Industrial Prefecture under his administered region , there were 36 iron smelters run by different local families , each employing a work force of several hundred people to mine ore , produce their own charcoal , and smelt iron . 
 = = = Gunpowder production = = = 
 During the Song period , there was a great deal of organized labor and bureaucracy involved in the extraction of resources from the various provinces in China . The production of sulfur , which the Chinese called ' vitriol liquid ' , was extracted from pyrite and used for pharmaceutical purposes as well as for the creation of gunpowder . This was done by roasting iron <unk> , converting the sulphide to oxide , as the ore was piled up with coal briquettes in an earthenware furnace with a type of still @-@ head to send the sulfur over as vapour , after which it would solidify and crystallize . The historical text of the Song Shi ( History of the Song , compiled in 1345 AD ) stated that the major producer of sulfur in the Tang and Song dynasties was the Jin Zhou sub @-@ provincial administrative region ( modern <unk> in southern Shanxi ) . The bureaucrats appointed to the region managed the industrial processing and sale of it , and the amount created and distributed from the years 996 to 997 alone was 405 @,@ 000 jin ( roughly 200 tons ) . It was recorded that in 1076 AD the Song government held a strict commercial monopoly on sulfur production , and if dye houses and government workshops sold their products to private dealers in the black market , they were subject to meted penalties by government authorities . Even before this point , in 1067 AD , the Song government had issued an edict that the people living in Shanxi and Hebei were forbidden to sell foreigners any products containing saltpetre and sulfur . This act by the Song government displayed their fears of the grave potential of gunpowder weapons being developed by Song China 's territorial enemies as well ( i.e. the Tanguts and Khitans ) . 
 Since Jin Zhou was in close proximity to the Song capital at Kaifeng , the latter became the largest producer of gunpowder during the Northern Song period . With enhanced sulfur from pyrite instead of natural sulfur ( along with enhanced potassium nitrate ) , the Chinese were able to shift the use of gunpowder from an incendiary use into an explosive one for early artillery . There were large manufacturing plants in the Song dynasty for the purpose of making ' fire @-@ weapons ' employing the use of gunpowder , such as fire lances and fire arrows . While engaged in a war with the Mongols , in 1259 the official Li Zengbo wrote in his Ko Zhai Za Gao , Xu Gao Hou that the city of Qingzhou was manufacturing one to two thousand strong iron @-@ cased bomb shells a month , dispatching to Xiangyang and Yingzhou about ten to twenty thousand such bombs at a time . One of the main armories and arsenals for the storage of gunpowder and weapons was located at Weiyang , which accidentally caught fire and produced a massive explosion in 1280 AD . 
 = = Commerce = = 
 This arrangement of allowing competitive industry to flourish in some regions while setting up its opposite of strict government @-@ regulated and monopolized production and trade in others was not exclusive to iron manufacturing . In the beginning of the Song , the government supported competitive silk mills and brocade workshops in the eastern provinces and in the capital city of Kaifeng . However , at the same time the government established strict legal prohibition on the merchant trade of privately produced silk in Sichuan province . This prohibition dealt an economic blow to Sichuan that caused a small rebellion ( which was subdued ) , yet Song Sichuan was well known for its independent industries producing timber and cultivated oranges . The reforms of the Chancellor Wang Anshi ( 1021 – 1086 ) sparked heated debate amongst ministers of court when he nationalised the industries manufacturing , processing , and distributing tea , salt , and wine . The state monopoly on Sichuan tea was the prime source of revenue for the state 's purchase of horses in Qinghai for the Song army 's cavalry forces . Wang 's restrictions on the private manufacture and trade of salt were even criticized in a famous poem by Su Shi , and while the opposing politically charged faction at court gained advantage and lost favor , Wang Anshi 's reforms were continually abandoned and reinstated . Despite this political quarrel , the Song Empire 's main source of revenue continued to come from state @-@ managed monopolies and indirect taxes . As for private entrepreneurship , great profits could still be pursued by the merchants in the luxury item trades and specialized regional production . For example , the silk producers of <unk> County , Shenzhou Prefecture , southern Hebei province were especially known for producing silken headwear for the Song emperor and high court officials in the capital . 
 = = = Copper resources and receipts of deposit = = = 
 The root of the development of the banknote goes back to the earlier Tang dynasty ( 618 – 907 ) , when the government outlawed the use of bolts of silk as currency , which increased the use of copper coinage as money . By the year 1085 the output of copper currency was driven to a rate of 6 billion coins a year up from 5 @.@ 86 billion in 1080 ( compared to just 327 million coins minted annually in the Tang 's prosperous <unk> period of 742 – 755 , and only 220 million coins minted annually from 118 BC to 5 AD during the Han dynasty ) . The expansion of the economy was unprecedented in China : the output of coinage currency in the earlier year of 997 AD , which was only 800 million coins a year . In 1120 alone , the Song government collected 18 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 ounces ( 510 @,@ 000 kg ) of silver in taxes . 
 With many 9th century Tang era merchants avoiding the weight and bulk of so many copper coins in each transaction , this led them to using trading receipts from deposit shops where goods or money were left previously . Merchants would deposit copper currency into the stores of wealthy families and prominent wholesalers , whereupon they would receive receipts that could be cashed in a number of nearby towns by accredited persons . Since the 10th century , the early Song government began issuing their own receipts of deposit , yet this was restricted mainly to their monopolized salt industry and trade . China 's first official regional paper @-@ printed money can be traced back to the year 1024 , in Sichuan province . 
 Although the output of copper currency had expanded immensely by 1085 , some fifty copper mines were shut down between the years 1078 and 1085 . Although there were on average more copper mines found in Northern Song China than in the previous Tang dynasty , this case was reversed during the Southern Song with a sharp decline and depletion of mined copper deposits by 1165 . Even though copper cash was abundant in the late 11th century , Chancellor Wang Anshi 's tax substitution for corvée labor and government takeover of agricultural finance loans meant that people now had to find additional cash , driving up the price of copper money which would become scarce . To make matters worse , large amounts of government @-@ issued copper currency exited the country via international trade , while the Liao dynasty and Western Xia actively pursued the exchange of their iron @-@ minted coins for Song copper coins . As evidenced by an 1103 decree , the Song government became cautious about its outflow of iron currency into the Liao Empire when it ordered that the iron was to be alloyed with tin in the smelting process , thus depriving the Liao of a chance to melt down the currency to make iron weapons . 
 The government attempted to prohibit the use of copper currency in border regions and in seaports , but the Song @-@ issued copper coin became common in the Liao , Western Xia , Japanese , and Southeast Asian economies . The Song government would turn to other types of material for its currency in order to ease the demand on the government mint , including the issuing of iron coinage and paper banknotes . In the year 976 , the percentage of issued currency using copper coinage was 65 % ; after 1135 , this had dropped significantly to 54 % , a government attempt to debase the copper currency . 
 = = = The world 's first paper money = = = 
 The central government soon observed the economic advantages of printing paper money , issuing a monopoly right of several of the deposit shops to the issuance of these certificates of deposit . By the early 12th century , the amount of banknotes issued in a single year amounted to an annual rate of 26 million strings of cash coins . By the 1120s the central government officially stepped in and produced their own state @-@ issued paper money ( using woodblock printing ) . Even before this point , the Song government was amassing large amounts of paper tribute . It was recorded that each year before 1101 AD , the prefecture of <unk> ( modern Xi @-@ xian , Anhui ) alone would send 1 @,@ 500 @,@ 000 sheets of paper in seven different varieties to the capital at Kaifeng . In that year of 1101 , the Emperor Huizong of Song decided to lessen the amount of paper taken in the tribute quota , because it was causing detrimental effects and creating heavy burdens on the people of the region . However , the government still needed masses of paper product for the exchange certificates and the state 's new issuing of paper money . For the printing of paper money alone , the Song court established several government @-@ run factories in the cities of Huizhou , Chengdu , Hangzhou , and Anqi . The size of the workforce employed in these paper money factories were quite large , as it was recorded in 1175 AD that the factory at Hangzhou alone employed more than a thousand workers a day . However , the government issues of paper money were not yet nationwide standards of currency at that point ; issues of banknotes were limited to regional zones of the empire , and were valid for use only in a designated and temporary limit of 3 @-@ year 's time . The geographic limitation changed between the years 1265 and 1274 , when the late Southern Song government finally produced a nationwide standard currency of paper money , once its widespread circulation was backed by gold or silver . The range of varying values for these banknotes was perhaps from one string of cash to one hundred at the most . In later dynasties , the use and enforcement of paper currency was a method undertaken by the government as a response to the counterfeiting of copper coins . 
 The subsequent Yuan , Ming , and Qing dynasties would issue their own paper money as well . Even the Southern Song 's contemporary of the Jin dynasty to the north caught on to this trend and issued their own paper money . At the archeological dig at Jehol there was a printing plate found that dated to the year 1214 , which produced notes that measured 10 cm by 19 cm in size and were worth a hundred strings of 80 cash coins . This Jurchen @-@ Jin issued paper money bore a serial number , the number of the series , and a warning label that counterfeiters would be decapitated , and the <unk> rewarded with three hundred strings of cash . 
 = = = Urban employment and businesses = = = 
 Within the cities there were a multitude of professions and places of work to choose from , if one were not strictly inheriting a profession of his paternal line . Sinologist historians are fortunate enough to have a wide variety of written sources describing minute details about each location and the businesses within the cities of Song China . For example , in the alleys and avenues around the East Gate of the <unk> Temple in Kaifeng , historian Stephen H. West quotes one source : 
 Along the Temple Eastgate Avenue ... are to be found shops specializing in cloth caps with pointed tails , belts and <unk> , books , caps and flowers as well as the vegetarian tea meal of the Ding family ... South of the temple are the brothels of Manager 's Alley ... The nuns and the brocade workers live in Embroidery Alley ... On the north is Small Sweetwater Alley ... There are a particularly large number of Southern restaurants inside the alley , as well as a plethora of brothels . 
 Similarly , in the " Pleasure District " along the Horse Guild Avenue , near a Zoroastrian temple in Kaifeng , West quotes the same source , Dongjing Meng Hua Lu ( Dreams of Splendor of the Eastern Capital ) : 
 In addition to the household gates and shops that line the two sides of New <unk> Gate Street ... military encampments of the various brigades and columns [ of the Imperial Guard ] are situated in facing pairs along approximately ten li of the approach to the gate . Other wards , alleys , and confined open spaces crisscross the area , numbering in the tens of thousands — none knows their real number . In every single place , the gates are squeezed up against each other , each with its own tea wards , <unk> , stages , and food and drink . Normally the small business households of the marketplace simply purchase [ prepared ] food and drink at food stores ; they do not cook at home . For northern food there are the Shi Feng style dried meat cubes ... made of various stewed items ... for southern food , the House of Jin at Temple Bridge ... and the House of Zhou at <unk> ... are acknowledged to be the finest . The night markets close after the third watch only to reopen at the fifth . 
 West points out that Kaifeng shopkeepers rarely had time to eat at home , so they chose to go out and eat at a variety of places such as restaurants , temples , and food stalls . Restaurant businesses thrived on this new clientele , while restaurants that catered to regional cooking targeted customers such as merchants and officials who came from regions of China where cuisine styles and flavors were drastically different than those commonly served in the capital . The pleasure district mentioned above — where stunts , games , theatrical stage performances , taverns and singing girl houses were located — was teeming with food stalls where business could be had virtually all night . West makes a direct connection between the success of the theatre industry and the food industry in the cities . Of the fifty some theatres within the pleasure districts of Kaifeng , four of these could entertain audiences of several thousand each , drawing huge crowds which would then give nearby businesses an enormous potential customer base . Besides food , traders in eagles and hawks , precious paintings , as well as shops selling bolts of silk and cloth , jewelry of pearls , jade , rhinoceros horn , gold and silver , hair ornaments , combs , caps , scarves , and aromatic incense thrived in the marketplaces . 
 = = = Foreign trade = = = 
 The Song dynasty actively promoted overseas trade . About fifty countries carried out overseas trade with the Song , among them Ceylon , Langkasuka , Mait , <unk> , Borneo , Kelantan , Champa , Chenla , <unk> , Java , India , Calicut , <unk> , Bengal , <unk> , <unk> , Mecca , Egypt , Baghdad , Iraq , Amman , the Almoravid dynasty , Sicily , Morocco , Tanzania , Somalia , Ryukyu , Korea , and Japan . Pearls , ivory , <unk> horns , frankincense , <unk> <unk> , coral , agate , hawksbill turtle shell , gardenia , and rose were imported from the Arabs and <unk> , herbal medicine from Java , <unk> from <unk> ( Kuala Sungai <unk> ) cotton cloth , cotton yarn from Mait , and ginseng , silver , copper , and quick silver from Korea . 
 To promote overseas trade and maximize government profits in control of imported goods , in 971 the government established a Maritime Trade Supervisorate at Guangzhou , in 999 established a second one at Hangzhou , a third at <unk> ( now Ningbo city ) , followed by Quanzhou ( Zaitung ) in 1079 , <unk> County ( now part of Shanghai ) in 1113 , and Jiangyin in 1145 . Initially the Maritime Trade Supervisorate was subordinate under the Department of Transportation or prefecture official , later made into a separate agency with its own supervisor . The roles of the Maritime Trade Supervisorate included : 
 Taxation of imported goods , tax rate varied over the Song dynasty , from 10 % to as high as 40 % ; however , during the reign of Emperor Shenzong ( 1048 – 1085 ) , the tax rate for imports was lowered to 6 @.@ 67 % . The tax was goods in kind , not money . 
 Government purchase and sale of imported goods . In 976 , all imported goods from overseas merchants had to be sold only to the government , private sales was prohibited , penalty for violation depended on the quantity of goods involved , and the highest penalty was tattooing of the face and forced labor . Later the 100 % rule was relaxed somewhat . The Maritime Trade <unk> purchased a portion of the finest quality goods , for example 60 % for pearls , 40 % for <unk> horn ; the low quality leftover goods were allowed to be traded in the market . The purchase rate applied to after tax goods , then paid in money , not according to market price , but according to a government @-@ accessed " fare value " . In the Southern Song , the Maritime Trade <unk> were short of funds and were not paid on time , causing huge losses in profits for overseas merchants ; the volume of incoming ships also dropped . 
 Issue foreign trade permits for local merchants . 
 = Dylan Penn = 
 Dylan Frances Penn ( born April 13 , 1991 ) is an American model and actress . She is the daughter of Sean Penn and Robin Wright . Her early public roles included modelling campaigns for Gap Inc . , a controversial magazine cover for treats ! , a music video appearance in Nick Jonas ' " Chains " and an acting role in Elvis & Nixon . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Penn 's mother , Robin Wright , had surrendered the role of Maid Marian in Robin Hood : Prince of Thieves due to her pregnancy with Dylan . Penn was born to Wright and Sean Penn in Los Angeles on April 13 , 1991 , and raised in Ross , a town in Marin County , California . Her father , Penn , is a two @-@ time Academy Award for Best Actor @-@ winner , while her mother , Wright , is a Golden Globe Award for Best Actress – Television Series Drama @-@ winner . She has a younger brother named Hopper Jack . She attended Marin Academy . After high school , she spent time living in New York City . Her parents ' divorce was finalized in 2010 . Before modeling , Penn had worked delivering pizzas , as a waitress and as a freelance screenplay editor . She also worked in New York City as a restaurant hostess and an intern at an advertising agency . 
 = = Public life = = 
 Penn gained public exposure when she dated Robert Pattinson in 2013 . According to Penn , the relationship was not serious . Her first modeling billboards were for Gap in 2013 . Then she appeared in GQ in December 2013 , in W in January 2014 , and Elle in March 2014 . 
 E ! Online reported on March 5 , 2014 , that Penn had declined a $ 150 @,@ 000 offer to pose for the cover of Playboy . However , she accepted an offer to pose for Tony Duran for the cover and a full layout in the seventh issue of treats ! , which was released on April 8 , 2014 . Although nude , Penn was not completely exposed , as she was partially obscured by a Fendi bag in the cover photo and similar accoutrements in the interior layout . Penn said that she had " always loved [ Duran 's ] black @-@ and @-@ white nudes " . At the time of the issue 's April 16 launch party in Los Angeles , she was filming Condemned in New York . She stated that she was experimenting with the profession of acting . Within weeks of the issue 's release , Penn signed a new modeling contract with Premier Model Management to represent her in the United Kingdom . Penn has noted that she only models to earn a paycheck . She aspires to be involved on the writing / directing end of the Hollywood business . 
 On May 23 , 2014 , Maxim revealed its annual Hot 100 list , which included Penn at # 68 . Penn was also listed at # 93 in the 2014 AskMen 99 Most Desirable Women list . During the last weekend in June 2014 , she filmed an undisclosed video project with Nick Jonas at the Hotel Alexandria . In July , Jonas revealed the video to " Chains " , including the Penn performance . In September 2014 , Penn received a lot of attention for appearing without pants alongside Poppy Delevingne in Rock Roll Ride , a short film directed by Julia <unk> <unk> , as biker chicks for shoe designer Stuart Weitzman during Paris Fashion Week . The pair modeled a wide variety of the latest boot designs . It was the first female @-@ directed ad campaign for the brand . She appeared on the cover of L 'Officiel that December and the cover of <unk> in August 2015 . In January 2016 , Penn and her younger brother , Hopper , did their first joint fashion modeling campaign together , eventually making media appearances at Milan Fashion Week . 
 = = Acting = = 
 Her first film , the horror film Condemned , in which she plays the girlfriend of a band member living in a rundown building , is directed by Eli Morgan Gesner . The film opened on Friday the 13th in November 2015 . One of the highlights of her performance was a scene with Johnny Messner that was described as " intense " by Marlow Stern of The Daily Beast . Upon reviewing the film , Frank Scheck of The Hollywood Reporter questioned Penn 's decision to get involved in this production . Noel Murray of Los Angeles Times described her performance as less than extraordinary and the role as limited . Another early role was in Elvis & Nixon , which stars Kevin Spacey . The movie was presented in at least one spring film festival and was released in April 2016 . In November 2015 it was announced that she had booked roles in a pair of independent films : <unk> and Unfiltered . 
 = Desde un Principio : From the Beginning = 
 Desde un Principio : From the Beginning is a greatest hits album from American recording artist Marc Anthony . The album was released on November 9 , 1999 by RMM Records & Video ( RMM ) . It was a result of Anthony leaving RMM Records and signing on with Columbia Records . The recording contains fourteen tracks from his years with RMM and " No Me Ames " by Jennifer Lopez and Anthony . 
 Allmusic 's Jose Promis praised Desde un Principio : From the Beginning , calling the album an " ideal introduction " to the artist , although he complained about the songs on it being " truncated " , particularly towards the end . The album received a Billboard Latin Music Award for Latin Greatest Hits Album of the Year . Desde un Principio : From the Beginning reached number one on both the Billboard Top Latin Albums and the Billboard Tropical Albums charts , and became the best @-@ selling album of 2000 on both charts . The album was certified gold by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) after shipments reached 500 @,@ 000 copies . 
 = = Background = = 
 After the release of Contra la Corriente in 1997 , disputes over certain business practices arose between Marc Anthony and RMM executive Ralph Mercado . Columbia Records had approached Anthony to sign a contract with their record label . However , Mercado would not allow Anthony to leave RMM Records because of an earlier contract committing Anthony to record two more albums for RMM . Anthony filed a lawsuit , and with the backing of Columbia Records , bought out the remainder of the contract . As part of the settlement , Anthony allowed RMM Records to release a " greatest hits " collection from his earlier records . 
 = = Content = = 
 Desde un Principio : From the Beginning includes a total of fifteen songs , most of which came from his recordings with RMM . Four songs were selected from each of his earlier albums ( Otra Nota , Todo a Su Tiempo , and Contra la Corriente ) . The opener , a tropical version of " No Me Ames " , is a duet with American singer and actress Jennifer Lopez ; she included the recording on her debut album On the 6 ( 1999 ) . " Vivir lo Nuestro " , featuring La India , was originally recorded on the RMM Records compilation album <unk> Perfecta . " Preciosa " is a cover of the Rafael Hernández song which Anthony had recorded for a tribute album to Hernandez , Romance Del <unk> – La Musica del Rafael Hernández . 
 = = Commercial reception = = 
 The album debuted at number three on the Billboard Top Latin Albums on the week of November 27 , 1999 and reached number one the following week . The recording debuted atop the Billboard Tropical Albums chart on the week of November 27 , 1999 , and remained at number one for five consecutive months . Desde un Principio : From the Beginning peaked at number 151 on the Billboard 200 chart and became the best @-@ selling album of 2000 for the Top Latin Albums and Tropical Albums charts . It was then certified gold by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Jose Promis of Allmusic gave the album 4 @.@ 5 out of 5 stars . He described it as a " superb collection " , and wrote that Desde un Principio " provides a wonderful introduction to the music of Marc Anthony , a singer that , undoubtedly , will one day rank among the best . " Promis also complained that the songs were " severely truncated " , especially near their end . 
 In 2001 , Anthony received a Billboard Latin Music Award for " Latin Greatest Hits Albums of the Year " . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 The following track information is from Allmusic . 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 = = Album certification = = 
 = 1932 Freeport hurricane = 
 The 1932 Freeport hurricane was an intense tropical cyclone that primarily affected areas of the Texas coast in August of the 1932 Atlantic hurricane season . It was the second storm and first hurricane of the season , developing just off the Yucatán Peninsula on August 12 . While moving to the northwest , the storm began to quickly intensify the next day . It rapidly intensified from a Category 1 hurricane to a Category 4 with winds estimated at 150 mph ( 240 km / h ) and an estimated central pressure of 935 mbar ( 27 @.@ 6 inHg ) shortly before making landfall near Freeport , Texas , early on August 14 . After landfall , the hurricane began to quickly weaken before dissipating over the Texas Panhandle . 
 The storm caused heavy rainfall inland , peaking at 9 @.@ 93 in ( 252 mm ) in Angleton . Record rainfall rates were also reported in some areas . Power outages were reported in Galveston and San Antonio . The storm caused $ 7 @.@ 5 million in damages , mostly to crops , and 40 deaths . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 The Freeport hurricane was first noted by ships on August 12 as a tropical disturbance in the Gulf of Mexico . However , it was suggested in later research that the disturbance may have originated from a low @-@ pressure area between Belize and Honduras on August 11 . Steadily moving to the northwest , the storm began to intensify , reaching hurricane strength on August 13 , and soon after reaching major hurricane strength later that day . A report remarked that the storm was " phenomenal " due to the fact that previously the storm had " seemed to be of only moderate intensity " while near land before rapidly intensifying . 
 The storm eventually reached winds of 145 mph ( 233 km / h ) , making it a Category 4 hurricane on the Saffir @-@ Simpson Hurricane Scale . The hurricane proceeded to make landfall early on August 14 just east of Freeport with winds of 150 mph ( 240 km / h ) . A ship just offshore of the coast reported a minimum pressure of 942 mbar ( 27 @.@ 8 inHg ) , but the official estimate for the hurricane 's landfall intensity was set to 935 mbar ( 27 @.@ 6 inHg ) given the fact that the system was still rapidly intensifying at the time . Due to the storm 's small size , it quickly weakened to tropical storm strength later that day . The storm finally weakened into a tropical depression before dissipating the next day over the Texas Panhandle . 
 = = Preparations , impact , and aftermath = = 
 In preparation for the storm , 150 vehicles evacuated out of Freeport , while water craft were taken up the Brazos River as far inland as possible . 100 families in <unk> and Gilchrist were also evacuated . The 38th division of the Texas National Guard , stationed in Palacios , was alerted due to the oncoming storm . 
 Heavy rainfall occurred across the coast and further inland due to the storm . Four locations set 24 @-@ hour rainfall records for the month of August , the highest of which was set near Angleton , recording 9 @.@ 93 in ( 252 mm ) of rain on August 13 . Angleton also faced a water shortage after its pumping station was destroyed . The remnants of the storm produced as much as 12 in ( 300 mm ) of rain in Oklahoma . Occupants in four vehicles were rescued by the United States Coast Guard near San Luis Pass . In Wharton , 800 birds went missing in the heavy rain . Galveston suffered primarily wind damage in the form of unroofed structures and broken windows . The Galveston Causeway was flooded by the heavy rain , preventing access from Galveston Island to the mainland . Several other roads were blocked by fallen trees . The city was also affected by a power outage after the storm caused loss of power and damaged communication lines . In addition , communication lines in San Antonio were damaged . 
 At William P. Hobby Airport in Houston , 11 planes were damaged when a hangar collapsed , resulting in losses of $ 250 @,@ 000 . Hermann Park was also affected by the storm , where nine goats began to roam within the park due to a broken fence caused by a fallen limb . 35 convicts were freed from the Ramsey Unit state prison during the storm due to the chance of the prison collapsing . However , after the storm , only eight returned to the prison , leaving 27 others missing . 
 After the storm , the American Red Cross brought supplies to areas affected by the hurricane , requesting as much as $ 10 @,@ 000 in relief work . Several other local relief committees also brought supplies to affected areas . An estimated $ 2 million in damages from the storm were attributed to crop damage alone , especially rice and cotton . The storm was estimated to have killed 40 people and caused $ 7 @.@ 5 million in damage . 
 = Gossip ( The Office ) = 
 " Gossip " is the sixth season premiere of the American comedy television series The Office , and the 101st overall episode of the series . It originally aired on NBC in the United States on September 17 , 2009 . The episode was written and directed by Paul Lieberstein . It features Max Carver , <unk> Miyata and Elvy Yost in guest appearances as Dunder Mifflin 's summer interns . 
 The series — presented as if it were a real documentary — depicts the everyday lives of office employees in the Scranton , Pennsylvania , branch of the fictional Dunder Mifflin Paper Company . In the episode , Michael spreads a rumor about Stanley having an affair , then spreads a series of false rumors to try to convince everyone the original rumor was not true . The rumors cause Andy to question his sexuality , and Pam and Jim to debate whether or not to tell the office that Pam is pregnant . 
 " Gossip " confirmed the fact that protagonist Pam was pregnant , which was strongly hinted in the fifth season finale , " Company Picnic " . " Gossip " was the first episode to feature Ellie Kemper as a regular cast member , and the first Office episode since Ed Helms achieved box office success with the summer comedy film , The Hangover . " Gossip " received generally positive reviews , with several commentators particularly praising the subplot in which Andy questions whether the rumor about him being gay might actually be true . According to Nielsen ratings , the episode was watched by 8 @.@ 21 million viewers . Although The Office had the highest 9 p.m. rating among viewers aged between 18 and 49 , the overall episode constituted an 18 percent drop in viewership compared to the fifth season premiere , " Weight Loss " . " Gossip " was nominated for a Writers Guild of America Award for best episodic comedy . 
 = = Synopsis = = 
 As the three summer interns prepare to depart , Michael ( Steve Carell ) hears from various members of the office that two of the interns might be dating , and feels upset that he was left out of the gossip . He talks about the situation with the third intern , and learns that the interns had recently gone out to a young people 's club , where they saw Stanley ( Leslie David Baker ) dancing with a woman , presumably his wife Teri . Michael , wanting to start some gossip of his own , forms the conclusion that Stanley was out because he was having a mid @-@ life crisis and shares it with the office , but Phyllis ( Phyllis Smith ) claims Stanley does not like crowds and that Teri is out of town . When Michael confronts the interns about this , they insist they saw Stanley there " making out " with a woman . Now realizing that Stanley is possibly having an affair and he is the first person to learn of it , Michael starts telling the employees . Jim ( John Krasinski ) urges Michael to stop spreading a rumor that he does not know for certain to be true . When Stanley is leaving , Michael heads to the parking lot to discuss the rumor with him . Stanley initially denies it , but when Michael mentions that he was spotted in the club by the interns , he reveals that since Teri has been out of town constantly , he has been seeking company from a nurse named Cynthia , whom he met in rehab . Stanley urges Michael not to say anything since he is breaking it off with Cynthia , and Michael agrees , despite having already told the entire office . 
 Hoping to obscure the truth about Stanley 's affair , Michael starts spreading a variety of false rumors , among them that there is another person physically inside Kevin ( Brian Baumgartner ) ) , that Kelly is anorexic , that Toby ( Paul Lieberstein ) is still a virgin , that Pam ( Jenna Fischer ) is pregnant , and that Andy ( Ed Helms ) is gay . When Andy hears about this , he realizes that many people have thought this about him in the past and gets increasingly insecure as he begins to question his sexual orientation . Jim and Pam , who were trying to keep Pam 's pregnancy a secret , think they have been found out . The couple then notice that there have been various absurd rumors about office employees being spread . When Jim brings it to everyone 's attention , they trace one particular rumor back to Michael , who then tries to slip out of the office . 
 The employees pursue Michael , and he confesses that he created the rumors to conceal the one true rumor . Andy fears that it might be the one about him . The employees urge Michael to tell them which one is true , but just as Michael is about to give in , Jim announces that Pam is actually pregnant to save Stanley . Michael denies it , but Pam shows her baby 's ultrasound picture to prove it . Later , while Michael discusses her pregnancy with Jim and Pam in his office , Stanley 's wife Teri returns Michael 's call from earlier . He picks up the phone with the intention of making an excuse for his earlier call so as to not tip her off , but he accidentally calls her Cynthia twice before Jim hangs up the phone for him . Teri had already been suspicious of Stanley and Cynthia , so Michael calling her Cynthia is enough for her to figure out what is going on . Michael , feeling guilty , watches from his office window as Stanley attacks Michael 's car with a tire iron in a fit of rage . At the end of the episode , the three interns discuss what they have learned at Dunder Mifflin , which they essentially reveal was nothing . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Gossip " was written and directed by Paul Lieberstein , a producer and screenwriter for the series who also plays Toby . The episode confirmed the fact that Pam was pregnant , which was strongly hinted in the fifth season finale , " Company Picnic " . " Gossip " was the first episode to feature Ellie Kemper as a full cast member ; she had guest starred in several episodes at the end of the fifth season as receptionist Erin Hannon . It was also the first episode of The Office to air since the release of the Ed Helms comedy film The Hangover . The film was a surprise box office success , grossing more than twice the amount of The 40 @-@ Year Old Virgin , which established Steve Carell as a comedy movie star . Commentators were split on what the success would mean for The Office , with some believing it would allow the show 's writers to better realize his potential and write better material for Helms , and others expressing concern Helms would not be as dedicated to the Andy Bernard role . One of the interns , portrayed by Elvy Yost , also appeared in an earlier episode from season four , Job Fair . 
 The official website for The Office included three cut scenes from " Gossip " within a week of its original release . In the first 40 @-@ second clip , Dwight has the interns pass hand @-@ written notes to <unk> , while Ryan orders them to search thousands of pennies for rare coins . In the second clip , which is one minute and 10 seconds , Dwight has the interns pick up their own cake , but chastises them for not picking up candles . In the final two @-@ minute clip , Dwight makes the interns memorize trivial bits of information , then tells them what he believes are inspirational stories . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 During the episode 's cold open , Michael , Dwight and Andy run throughout the office climbing on desks , jumping off chairs and pushing themselves off objects . The actions are their attempts to engage in parkour , the art of moving from point A to point B as creatively as possible , which Jim describes as " the Internet sensation of 2004 " . Jim points out parkour was used in a chase scene in the 2006 James Bond film Casino Royale . This is the first season premiere to include an internet trend in the cold open . The second was in Nepotism where the office make a lip dub video of the song Nobody but Me . The third was in The List where multiple characters plank in various places throughout the episode . 
 Pam says the Dunder Mifflin office previously did not have interns for years because Michael kept making jokes about Monica Lewinsky , an intern at the White House who had a sexual relationship with President Bill Clinton in 1995 and 1996 . Michael discusses the 1960 film Spartacus , which he calls as a great " whodunit " due to the ending , in which dozens of people claim to be the real Spartacus in order to protect the actual title character . 
 While trying to figure out whether he is gay , Andy says he would reluctantly accept a kiss from movie star Brad Pitt . The three summer interns say Michael constantly says they look like actors Jet Li , Julia Stiles and Alan Thicke . Michael spreads a rumor that Oscar is the voice of the Taco Bell dog , a chihuahua used as an advertising character in the 1990s and 2000s for the restaurant chain Taco Bell . Michael also claims Angela is dating a billionaire who manages a Quiznos , a fast @-@ food submarine sandwich restaurant . Michael starts a rumor that someone in the office is a J.Crew model , originally referring to himself , although everyone believes it to be Jim . J.Crew is an American clothing and accessories retailer . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In its original American broadcast on September 17 , 2009 , " Gossip " was seen by 8 @.@ 21 million viewers , according to Nielsen ratings . The viewership was an 18 percent drop compared to the fifth season premiere , " Weight Loss " . " Gossip " received a 4 @.@ 0 rating among viewers aged between 18 and 49 . It was the highest rating of that age group in the 9 p.m. to 10 p.m. slot , competing with CBS ' CSI : Crime Scene Investigation , Fox 's Fringe , ABC 's Grey 's Anatomy ( a rerun ) and The CW 's Supernatural . However , the rating was a drop compared to a 4 @.@ 9 rating among ages 18 to 49 for " Weight Loss " . " Gossip " served as the lead @-@ in for the series premiere of NBC 's Community , which held on to 93 percent of The Office 's 18 to 49 audience to premiere with a 3 @.@ 7 rating , garnering 7 @.@ 68 million viewers . The episode was viewed by 931 @,@ 000 households during its Canadian premiere on September 17 , 2009 , making it the 28th highest viewed program of that week . 
 " Gossip " received generally positive reviews . Several commentators particularly praised the comedic performance of Ed Helms , as well as the line by Kevin , " Who 's been saying that there 's another person inside of me working me with controls ? " Alan Sepinwall of The Star @-@ Ledger called the episode " not an instant classic , but a solid start to the season " . Sepinwall said it started slowly , but gradually built to a " very funny , and kinda sweet climax in the conference room " . New York magazine writer Will Leitch said " Gossip " appeared to be a return to a more normal Office atmosphere , compared to the surprises and twists of the fifth season . Rick Ingebritson of The Palm Beach Post said he was concerned the season premiere would not be good because Steve Carell , John Krasinski and Ed Helms would be too distracted with their growing film careers . But , he said , " Thankfully , if Thursday 's premiere was any indication , it appears that the Dunder Mifflin crew still has a lot to offer . " Entertainment Weekly writer Margaret Lyons said , " ' Gossip ' had some terrific moments , but I don 't know that I 'd put it on my all @-@ time great episodes list . " She specifically praised the performances of Brian Baumgartner and Jenna Fischer . 
 Chicago Tribune television columnist Maureen Ryan called " Gossip " a " solidly entertaining premiere " , specifically complimenting the Ed Helms subplot and the various office rumors . Hopper of Best Week Ever praised the episode 's final scene , in which Michael unsuccessfully tries to lie his way through a phone call with Stanley 's wife . Dan Hopper said of the episode , " Season six is off to an appropriately awkward start . " Philadelphia Examiner writer Matt Carter gave the episode an 8 @.@ 9 out of 10 score . Carter said the episode was " proof that there is still a ton of life left in these characters " , and particularly enjoyed the way Jim and Pam stood up for Stanley by revealing the truth about Pam 's pregnancy . Dan Phillips of IGN said the episode included several " amusing asides and laugh @-@ out @-@ loud moments " , particularly from supporting characters Creed , Kevin and Andy . He also praises the episode 's " day in the life " formula , which he said has been successful in other previous Office episodes . Tara <unk> of The Express @-@ Times said the episode lived up to the series ' standards , particularly praising the Ed Helms subplot and the parkour cold open . 
 For his work on this episode , Paul Lieberstein was nominated for a Writers Guild of America Award for Best Screenplay – Episodic Comedy , but lost to the pilot episode of Modern Family and the 30 Rock episode " Apollo , Apollo " , which split the prize . 
 = Talbot Samba = 
 The Talbot Samba is a supermini car manufactured by the PSA Group in the former Simca factory in Poissy , France , and marketed under the short @-@ lived modern @-@ day Talbot brand . Based on the Peugeot 104 , it was the only Talbot not inherited from Chrysler Europe , engineered by PSA alone . It was also the last new Talbot to be launched , and the last in production . Its demise in 1986 was effectively the end of the Talbot brand for passenger cars . Launched initially as a three @-@ door hatchback , it was also for some time the only supermini available in a factory @-@ ordered <unk> body style , and the most economical car in Europe . 
 = = Development = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 The PSA Group , formed in 1976 when Peugeot bought out its competitor , Citroën , took over the former Chrysler Europe in 1979 ; one of its first decisions was to rebrand all of the models manufactured in the French and British factories to Talbot . Among the models inherited from Chrysler was the Scottish @-@ built rear @-@ wheel drive Talbot Sunbeam , the only supermini in the lineup . 
 The Sunbeam was originally conceived by Chrysler as a stopgap model , developed to keep the Linwood works running — it was based on the running gear of the earlier Avenger made there — while helping the company to maintain a foothold in the growing supermini market . Aware that a more modern design was needed to compete with upcoming front @-@ wheel drive rivals , Chrysler undertook some development work on a shortened version of the Chrysler Horizon ( which had the development code C2 ) , dubbed C2 @-@ short , but it was cut short by the company 's financial problems and plans to divest Chrysler Europe . 
 PSA decided that the Linwood plant would be unprofitable to maintain and should be closed , which meant an end to both the Avenger and Sunbeam model lines , further emphasizing the need for a new supermini in the Talbot lineup . On the eve of the 1980s , PSA 's supermini lineup consisted of models based on the veteran front @-@ wheel drive 1972 Peugeot 104 , which came in a shorter three @-@ door and longer five @-@ door version . Citroën rebadged the short @-@ wheelbase 104 as the Citroën LN , and the long @-@ wheelbase chassis formed the base of the five @-@ door Citroën Visa . 
 = = = Decision = = = 
 In 1979 , PSA decided that their new small Talbot would also be based on the 104 rather than the Horizon . Keeping the common underpinnings allowed the new model , known internally as project C15 ( later renamed to T15 to reflect the brand change from Chrysler to Talbot ) to be launched in 1981 , in time to replace the Sunbeam when Linwood would close . In order not to create too much internal competition , a wheelbase between the 3 door and 5 door versions of the 104 was chosen . This made the projected model slot in size slightly below popular <unk> such as the Ford Fiesta , but above the smallest cars , including the about @-@ to @-@ be @-@ launched Austin Metro . 
 = = = Styling = = = 
 As with previous Talbot and Chrysler Europe models , styling of the T15 was the responsibility of the British design centre in Whitley , Coventry . The stylists were limited by the need to retain the entire body structure of the 104 , and allegedly were given Peugeot 's own proposal of a 104 facelift as a starting point . The resulting design was quite different from and more modern @-@ looking than its progenitor ; only the bonnet and tailgate were shared , and the car was given a distinctive front end in Chrysler / Talbot " international " style . 
 = = Launch = = 
 Production of the new car started in October 1981 , and it was officially launched as the Talbot Samba in December . Unlike the Horizon , 1510 / Alpine or <unk> , which were made simultaneously in France and England , the model was assembled only in Poissy . The engine lineup included three versions of the four cylinder PSA X engine , which the Samba shared with its Peugeot and Citroën siblings , coupled with three trim levels . The base LS came with the 954 cc XV , the GL with the 1124 cc <unk> and the top @-@ of @-@ the @-@ line GLS ' with the largest 1360 cc XY . The GL was rated as " Europe 's most economical car " according to the official EEC fuel consumption figures , bettering the previously triumphant Renault 5 , but later lost the title to the Austin Metro . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 In an effort to make the vehicle stand out in the market against similar rivals , which included its own derivatives , Peugeot added a more glamorous two @-@ door cabriolet to the standard three @-@ door hatchback . Although announced at the hatchback 's launch , the first models were not available until 1982 . Designed and built by the Italian coachbuilder Pininfarina , who had been building open @-@ top Peugeots since the 1960s , it came only with the 1360 cc engine ; two engine versions were offered , 53 or 59 kilowatts ( 72 or 80 PS ) — the former was dropped after 1984 , at which time a slightly revised cabriolet was released featuring the later style 104 dashboard , twin carburettors and a lined hood ; the <unk> engine was shared with the Rallye . At the time of its launch it was the only <unk> supermini available from the manufacturer , although other models subsequently entered the market segment created by the Samba , including PSA 's own Citroën Visa <unk> . Pininfarina built 13 @,@ 062 Samba <unk> . 
 = = = Rallye = = = 
 Following the rallying successes of the Simca 1000 and the Talbot Sunbeam , PSA launched the Samba Rallye . Fitted with the 1219 cc <unk> version of the X engine , delivering 66 kilowatt ( 90 PS ) , it came in either white or red , with a hood scoop and side stripes . In 1985 , a version with the 1360 cc unit producing 59 kilowatt ( 80 PS ) was launched , without the stripes . A special <unk> @-@ only Group B model , officially called the Peugeot Talbot Sport Samba Rallye preceded the later Peugeot 205 T16 , with a 1285 cc , 96 kilowatt engine ( 130 PS ) . 
 = = Later developments = = 
 In 1982 , the Talbot Group was merged into Peugeot within PSA , and responsibility for the model was devolved to France . The Whitley design studio was dissolved , and some of the designers crossed over to British Leyland , where they joined their former boss Roy Axe . PSA had by then already started work on a replacement for the Samba , based on the Citroën AX , a few prototypes of which — essentially rebadged <unk> — were created in 1983 / 84 . The Samba sold reasonably well throughout 1982 and 1983 , after which sales began to suffer , partly because of the model 's aging and partly because of competition from the very popular Peugeot 205 , which created powerful ( and successful ) internal competition within PSA for the little Talbot . 
 To sustain interest in the Samba towards the end of its life , PSA launched a few concept and special versions of the model . The Copacabana was a Samba @-@ based concept car , featuring body elements painted in garish colors . It was followed by the 1984 Samba <unk> production model , targeted at " young buyers " , which came in silver metallic paint , with a choice of yellow , red or blue highlights and either a radio or a sunroof . In 1985 , the sunroof became standard and only yellow highlights were available . The Samba Bahia ( marketed as the Samba Trio in the UK ) was a 1985 model , also targeted at younger customers . It came with the 1 @.@ 1 litre engine , denim @-@ covered seats , and a sunroof , and was painted in metallic blue . The Samba Style model was launched with both radio and sunroof as standard , but not the colorful highlights , essentially to facilitate the sales of the last Samba series . 
 The Samba was not the only Talbot model to see customer interest waning ; as the 1980s progressed , all Talbots began to sell rather poorly and the range was gradually phased out . Peugeot had been working on developing a replacement for the Samba as late as 1984 , which would have been based on the forthcoming Citroen AX , but this project was abandoned as Peugeot took the decision to phase out the Talbot brand , and the Peugeot 205 was proving so popular that Peugeot felt little need for a third car of this size within the group . 
 The Citroën AX was launched without a twin in 1986 , and the only other Talbot in development , the Arizona family hatchback , was launched instead as the Peugeot 309 at the end of 1985 . Production of the Samba ended in May 1986 , by which time 270 @,@ 555 had been made , signalling the beginning of the end of the Talbot brand for passenger cars , the death knell finally sounding the following year when the last Horizon rolled off the production line in Finland , although the brand survived on commercial vehicles until 1994 . 
 It was , however , retained until 1994 for the Talbot Express , one of the <unk> Sud vans . 
 = = Jeremy Clarkson video = = 
 In Jeremy Clarkson 's 2009 DVD Duel , a 1984 Talbot Samba Cabriolet was destroyed by hurling it from a catapult into a wall , with a speed camera nearby showing that its speed was 164 mph ( 264 km / h ) before it hit the wall and exploded . 
 = Algol = 
 Algol ( Beta Per , β Persei , β Per ) , known colloquially as the Demon Star , is a bright star in the constellation Perseus . It is one of the best known eclipsing binaries , the first such star to be discovered , and also one of the first ( non @-@ nova ) variable stars to be discovered . Algol is actually a three @-@ star system ( Beta Persei Aa1 , Aa2 , and Ab ) in which the large and bright primary β Persei Aa1 is regularly eclipsed by the dimmer β Persei Aa2 . Thus , Algol 's magnitude is usually near @-@ constant at 2 @.@ 1 , but regularly dips to 3 @.@ 4 every 2 @.@ 86 days ( 2 days , 20 hours and 49 minutes ) during the roughly 10 @-@ hour @-@ long partial eclipses . There is also a secondary eclipse ( the " second minimum " ) when the brighter star occults the fainter secondary . This secondary eclipse can only be detected <unk> . Algol gives its name to its class of eclipsing variable , known as Algol variables . 
 = = Observation history = = 
 An Ancient Egyptian Calendar of Lucky and Unlucky Days composed some 3200 years ago is claimed to be the oldest historical document of the discovery of Algol . 
 The association of Algol with a demon @-@ like creature ( Gorgon in the Greek tradition , ghoul in the Arabic tradition ) suggests that its variability was known long before the 17th century , but except for the Ancient Egyptian discovery there is still no indisputable evidence for this . 
 The variability of Algol was noted in 1667 by Italian astronomer <unk> Montanari , but the periodic nature of its variations in brightness was not recognized until more than a century later , when the British amateur astronomer John <unk> also proposed a mechanism for the star 's variability . In May 1783 he presented his findings to the Royal Society , suggesting that the periodic variability was caused by a dark body passing in front of the star ( or else that the star itself has a darker region that is periodically turned toward the Earth ) . For his report he was awarded the Copley Medal . 
 In 1881 , the Harvard astronomer Edward Charles Pickering presented evidence that Algol was actually an eclipsing binary . This was confirmed a few years later , in 1889 , when the Potsdam astronomer Hermann Carl Vogel found periodic doppler shifts in the spectrum of Algol , inferring variations in the radial velocity of this binary system . Thus Algol became one of the first known spectroscopic binaries . Joel Stebbins at the University of Illinois Observatory used an early selenium cell photometer to produce the first @-@ ever photoelectric study of a variable star . The light curve revealed the second minimum and the reflection effect between the two stars . Some difficulties in explaining the observed spectroscopic features led to the conjecture that a third star may be present in the system ; four decades later this conjecture was found to be correct . 
 = = System = = 
 From the point of view of the Earth , Algol Aa1 and Algol Aa2 form an eclipsing binary because their orbital plane contains the line of sight to the Earth . To be more precise , Algol is a triple @-@ star system : the eclipsing binary pair is separated by only 0 @.@ 062 astronomical units ( AU ) from each other , whereas the third star in the system ( Algol Ab ) is at an average distance of 2 @.@ 69 AU from the pair , and the mutual orbital period of the trio is 681 Earth days . The total mass of the system is about 5 @.@ 8 solar masses , and the mass ratios of Aa1 , Aa2 , and Ab are about 4 @.@ 5 to 1 to 2 . 
 The three components of the bright triple star used to be , and still sometimes are , referred to as β Per A , B , and C. The Washington Double Star Catalog lists them as Aa1 , Aa2 , and An , with two very faint stars B and C about one arcmin distant . A further five faint stars are also listed as companions . 
 Studies of Algol led to the Algol paradox in the theory of stellar evolution : although components of a binary star form at the same time , and massive stars evolve much faster than the less massive ones , it was observed that the more massive component Algol A is still in the main sequence , whereas the less massive Algol B is a subgiant star at a later evolutionary stage . The paradox can be solved by mass transfer : when the more massive star became a subgiant , it filled its Roche lobe , and most of the mass was transferred to the other star , which is still in the main sequence . In some binaries similar to Algol , a gas flow can be seen . 
 This system also exhibits variable activities in the forms of x @-@ ray and radio wave flares . The former is thought to be caused by the magnetic fields of the A and B components interacting with the mass transfer . The radio @-@ wave emissions might be created by magnetic cycles similar to those of sunspots , but because the magnetic fields of these stars are up to ten times stronger than the field of the Sun , these radio flares are more powerful and more persistent . 
 Magnetic activity cycles in the <unk> active secondary component induce changes in its radius of gyration that have been linked to recurrent orbital period variations on the order of <unk> / P ≈ 10 − 5 via the Applegate mechanism . Mass transfer between the components is small in the Algol system but could be a significant source of period change in other Algol @-@ type binaries . 
 Algol is located about 92 @.@ 8 light years from the Sun , but about 7 @.@ 3 million years ago it passed within 9 @.@ 8 light years of the Solar System and its apparent magnitude was about − 2 @.@ 5 , which is considerably brighter than the star Sirius is today . Because the total mass of the Algol system is about 5 @.@ 8 solar masses , at the closest approach this might have given enough gravity to perturb the Oort cloud of the Solar System somewhat and hence increase the number of comets entering the inner Solar System . However , the actual increase in net cometary collisions is thought to have been quite small . 
 = = Names = = 
 The name Algol derives from Arabic <unk> <unk> <unk> al @-@ <unk> : head ( <unk> ) of the ogre ( al @-@ <unk> ) ( see " ghoul " ) . The English name " Demon Star " is a direct translation of this . 
 In Hebrew folklore , Algol was called <unk> ha <unk> or " Satan 's Head " , as stated by Edmund Chilmead , who called it " <unk> head " or Rosch <unk> . A Latin name for Algol from the 16th century was Caput Larvae or " the Spectre 's Head " . Hipparchus and Pliny made this a separate , though connected , constellation . 
 In Chinese , <unk> ( Dà Líng ) , meaning Mausoleum , refers to an asterism consisting of β Persei , 9 Persei , τ Persei , ι Persei , κ Persei , ρ Persei , 16 Persei and 12 Persei . Consequently , β Persei itself is known as <unk> ( Dà Líng wu , English : The Fifth Star of Mausoleum . ) . According to R.H. Allen the star bore the grim name of <unk> She <unk> ( Dié Shī ) , meaning " <unk> up Corpses " but this appears to be a misidentification . 
 = = Cultural significance = = 
 Historically , the star has received a strong association with bloody violence across a wide variety of cultures . In the <unk> , the 2nd @-@ century astrological text of the Alexandrian astronomer Ptolemy , Algol is referred to as " the Gorgon of Perseus " and associated with death by decapitation : a theme which mirrors the myth of the hero Perseus 's victory over the snake @-@ haired Gorgon Medusa . Astrologically , Algol is considered one of the unluckiest stars in the sky , and was listed as one of the 15 Behenian stars . 
 = New Jersey Route 70 = 
 Route 70 is a state highway located in the U.S. state of New Jersey . It extends 59 @.@ 84 mi ( 96 @.@ 30 km ) from an interchange with Route 38 in Pennsauken Township , Camden County to an intersection with Route 34 and Route 35 in Wall Township , Monmouth County . Route 70 cuts across the middle of the state as a two @-@ lane highway through the Pine Barrens in Burlington and Ocean counties . The western section in Cherry Hill and Marlton is a four to eight @-@ lane divided highway that serves as a major suburban arterial ; as such , it is congested . It is locally known as the Marlton Pike . The eastern section in Monmouth and Ocean counties is also a multilane divided highway that runs through suburban areas . Route 70 is officially known as the John Davison Rockefeller Memorial Highway its entire length in honor of John Davison Rockefeller . 
 The portion of the current route between <unk> and Lakehurst became a part of pre @-@ 1927 Route 18 in 1923 . In 1927 , Route 40 was legislated to run from Camden to Lakewood ; the termini were eventually moved to the Airport Circle in Pennsauken and the Laurelton Circle in Brick Township . Route 40 became Route 70 in 1953 in order to avoid conflicting with U.S. Route 40 ; in addition , the western terminus was cut back to its current location to avoid a concurrency with Route 38 and the eastern terminus was moved to the Brielle Circle , replacing a portion of Route 34 between the Laurelton Circle and the Brielle Circle . 
 = = Route description = = 
 = = = Camden County = = = 
 Route 70 begins at an interchange with Route 38 and County Route 601 ( CR 601 ) in Pennsauken Township , Camden County . From this interchange , it heads to the southeast on Marlton Pike , a six @-@ lane divided highway that runs through suburban residential and commercial areas . The road is also officially called the John Davison Rockefeller Memorial Highway for its entire length after John Davison Rockefeller . The road enters Cherry Hill and comes to a cloverleaf interchange with CR 636 before crossing under New Jersey Transit 's Atlantic City Line , a short distance to the south of the Cherry Hill Station . In this area , Route 70 passes to the south of the former site of the Garden State Park before crossing CR 644 . Past this intersection , the route narrows to four lanes and turns more to as it comes to the Ellisburg area . In Ellisburg , it has an intersection with Route 41 and the northern terminus of Route 154 . The road runs through more suburban areas as it encounters Interstate 295 at another cloverleaf interchange . A short distance past I @-@ 295 , Route 70 passes over the New Jersey Turnpike without an interchange before widening into an eight @-@ lane highway and continuing east to junctions with CR 674 and CR 673 . Following CR 673 , the road narrows back to four lanes before it encounters CR 600 , a former alignment of the road known as Old Marlton Pike . 
 = = = Burlington County = = = 
 Route 70 crosses the Pennsauken Creek into Evesham Township , Burlington County , running east through more commercial areas within the Marlton section of the township . A short distance later , the route intersects Route 73 at an interchange that was formerly the Marlton Circle . After the Marlton Circle , the road heads east passing through some more commercial areas and then into residential neighborhoods that are separated from the road by trees , narrowing into a two @-@ lane undivided road . It continues into a mix of suburban development and rural woods and farms as it crosses into Medford Township , coming to a crossroads with CR 618 . From this intersection , Route 70 continues east through the Medford area , passing a couple shopping centers before crossing CR 541 . After the CR 541 intersection , the route leaves the suburban development and runs through a mix of woodland and farmland with occasional homes . It enters Southampton Township , where the road enters more wooded surroundings before coming to U.S. Route 206 at the Red Lion Circle . 
 Past here , Route 70 loses the Marlton Pike name and continues east into the heavily wooded Pine Barrens . It passes to the south of the <unk> retirement village before entering predominantly rural areas , with two fire lanes paralleling the road on either side . Route 70 eventually turns slightly to the northeast and forms the border between Southampton Township to the north and Woodland Township to the south . Along this borderline , the route comes to the Four Mile Circle , where it intersects the western terminus of Route 72 as well as CR 644 and CR 646 . Past the traffic circle , Route 70 becomes the border between Pemberton Township to the north and Woodland Township to the south . The road passes to the south of the wooded Presidential Lakes Estates residential development before turning northeast through more of the Pine Barrens entirely within Pemberton Township . The road passes near some cranberry bogs before intersecting CR 530 . At this intersection , CR 530 heads east concurrent with Route 70 . 
 = = = Ocean and Monmouth counties = = = 
 A short distance later , the two routes enter Manchester Township in Ocean County and continue east through a tract of the Brendan T. Byrne State Forest within the Pine Barrens as well as a corner of the Fort Dix Military Reservation . The road eventually reaches the community of Whiting , where it passes commercial development at the intersection with CR 539 . Here , CR 530 turns south to follow CR 539 and Route 70 continues northeast back into the Pine Barrens . The road turns more to the north @-@ northeast before heading east into Lakehurst to the south of the Lakehurst Naval Air Station . In Lakehurst , Route 70 comes to a traffic circle with CR 4 and CR 12 before running through residential and commercial areas of the town . It intersects with the southern terminus of CR 547 , where it widens into a four @-@ lane divided highway . From here , the route crosses over a Conrail Shared Assets Operations railroad line before coming to the Lakehurst Circle , where it intersects the western terminus of Route 37 . 
 Route 70 enters Manchester Township again past this traffic circle and becomes a two @-@ lane undivided road , passing near the wooded residential Leisure Knoll community before crossing CR 571 . Past CR 571 , the route heads through wooded suburban residential and business areas , crossing into Toms River . Here , the road intersects CR 527 and CR 637 before becoming a four @-@ lane divided highway again and encountering U.S. Route 9 at an interchange . Following the US 9 interchange , Route 70 enters Lakewood Township and turns more to the east , crossing CR 623 prior to a partial interchange with the Garden State Parkway . This interchange has access from eastbound Route 70 to the northbound parkway and from the southbound parkway to Route 70 . From here , the route continues into Brick Township and passes several shopping centers , intersecting CR 528 and CR 549 . At the CR 528 intersection , the road is briefly an undivided highway . It turns northeast , crossing the Metedeconk River before intersecting Route 88 . After this intersection , Route 70 passes more inhabited areas separated from the road by trees , crossing both CR 632 and CR 549 Spur . A short distance later , it becomes an undivided road and crosses the Manasquan River on the September 11th Memorial Bridge , entering Brielle , Monmouth County . The September 11th Memorial Bridge is dedicated to residents of Monmouth and Ocean counties who lost their lives in the September 11 attacks . After the bridge , the route turns north through residential areas and becomes a divided highway again , briefly forming the border between Wall Township to the west and Brielle to the east before fully entering Wall Township . Route 70 ends at the former Brielle Circle intersection with Route 34 and Route 35 , where the road continues north as part of Route 35 . 
 Route 70 is a major road providing access between the Philadelphia area and the Jersey Shore resorts , particularly Long Beach Island by way of Route 72 . It is also a congested commercial route within the suburban areas of Philadelphia . 
 = = History = = 
 The Camden , Ellisburg , and Marlton Turnpike was chartered in 1849 as a turnpike that was to run from Camden east to Marlton along what is today Route 70 and CR 601 . The Marlton Pike was taken over by the county in 1907 at a time many other turnpikes became public roads . The current alignment of Route 70 between <unk> ( the west end of the CR 530 concurrency ) and Lakehurst was legislated as a part of pre @-@ 1927 Route 18 in 1923 , a route that was to run from Camden to Toms River . In the 1927 New Jersey state highway renumbering , Route 40 was designated to run from Camden to Lakewood along the current alignment of Route 70 . In addition a spur of this route called Route S40 ( now Route 72 ) was designated to head from the route at Four Mile to Manahawkin . Eventually , the eastern terminus of Route 40 was moved to the Laurelton Circle in Brick Township , where it intersected Route 35 ( now Route 88 ) as well as Route 34 , which continued north from this point ; the western terminus was placed at the Airport Circle with U.S. Route 30 and U.S. Route 130 in Pennsauken , ending concurrent with Route 38 . In the 1953 New Jersey state highway renumbering , Route 40 was renumbered to Route 70 in order to avoid the conflict with U.S. Route 40 in the state . Also , Route 70 was designated onto its current alignment between Route 38 in Pennsauken and Route 34 and Route 35 at the Brielle Circle , removing the concurrency with Route 38 and replacing the portion of Route 34 between the Laurelton Circle and the Brielle Circle . 
 Since 1953 , many changes have occurred to Route 70 . Several traffic circles that had existed on the road had been either modified or replaced by at @-@ grade intersections . The Marlton Circle at Route 73 in Marlton was modified in 1974 to allow Route 73 to run directly straight through the circle . This circle became known for traffic backups and was replaced with an interchange . Construction on this interchange , which cost $ 31 million , began in April 2009 . In May 2010 , the circle was eliminated with a temporary at @-@ grade intersection constructed while the Route 73 bridge over Route 70 was being built . The interchange was completed in June 2011 . Also , the Race Track Circle at the intersection with CR 644 ( Haddonfield Road ) was eventually replaced by an at @-@ grade intersection . The Laurelton Circle at Route 88 , built in 1937 , was replaced by the 1990s . The Ellisburg Circle at Route 41 and Route 154 , was replaced by an intersection with jughandles . The Brielle Circle at the eastern terminus was also converted to an intersection with jughandles in 2001 . In conjunction with eliminating the Brielle Circle , Route 70 was also widened between the intersection with Jack Martin Boulevard in Brick Township and the former circle . In July 2004 , floods caused by heavy rain washed away a bridge along the route in Southampton Township , leading for it to be replaced . The New Jersey Department of Transportation replaced the September 11th Memorial Bridge over the Manasquan River in a $ 52 million project that increased capacity on the bridge and added monumental decorations and increased pedestrian access . Construction was scheduled to be complete in December 2010 ; however , the project was completed ahead of schedule in September 2008 . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 = Ice Cream Freeze ( Let 's Chill ) = 
 " Ice Cream Freeze ( Let 's Chill ) " is a pop song by American recording artist and actress Miley Cyrus , performing as Hannah Montana – the alter ego of Miley Stewart – a character she played on the Disney Channel television series Hannah Montana . The song was written by Matthew Gerrard and Robbie Nevil and produced by Gerrard . It was released on June 20 , 2009 , by Walt Disney Records as a promotional single from the series ' third soundtrack , Hannah Montana 3 . A karaoke version is available in Disney 's Karaoke Series : Hannah Montana 3 . It is an instructional dance song with a country pop sound and lyrics referencing ice cream and other frozen foods . 
 The song garnered negative reactions from contemporary critics but enjoyed humble commercial success for Cyrus in several countries , compared to those of her previous efforts as Montana . " Ice Cream Freeze ( Let 's Chill ) " made its highest peak by charting at number fifty @-@ seven in the Canadian Hot 100 . The song also charted on charts in the United Kingdom and the United States . A music video for " Ice Cream Freeze ( Let 's Chill ) " was released , taken from footage of a concert performance . 
 = = Background = = 
 " Ice Cream Freeze ( Let 's Chill ) " was co @-@ written by Matthew Gerrard and Robbie Nevil , a duo of longtime songwriters for Montana ; Together , they wrote her hit " The Best of Both Worlds " ( 2006 ) . A karaoke version is available in Disney 's Karaoke Series : Hannah Montana 3 . " Ice Cream Freeze ( Let 's Chill ) " has corresponding dance moves designed by Jamal Sims , which are heavily influenced by line dancing . It was first titled " Let 's Chill " and leaked into the Internet in November 2008 , along with six other songs from the soundtrack . The song first premiered on Radio Disney on May 22 , 2009 , in order to promote the soundtrack ; it was afterward released as a promotional single from Hannah Montana 3 on June 30 , 2009 , as part of Radio Disney 's iTunes Pass , an exclusive campaign launched by the iTunes Store . 
 = = Composition = = 
 " Ice Cream Freeze ( Let 's Chill ) " is country pop song with a length of three minutes and seven seconds . According to Allmusic , " Ice Cream Freeze ( Let 's Chill ) " contains dance @-@ pop and teen pop influences in its musical composition . Warren Truitt of About.com also cited dance music as the song 's " craze " . The song is set in common time and has a moderate dance groove tempo . It is written in the key of F major and it follows the chord progression F – E ♭ – B ♭ . Peter Larsen of The Orange County Register believed the song was " more or less literally is about ice cream and other frozen delights " , referencing the lines " Do the ice cream freeze , strike a pose / Can you do the milkshake / Shake it , shake it down low " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 The song garnered negative reactions from contemporary critics . Heather Phares of Allmusic said , " ' Ice Cream Freeze ( Let 's Chill ) , ' [ ... ] sounds extremely similar to the soundtrack 's ' Hoedown Throwdown . ' That feeling of familiarity extends to the songs that haven 't appeared anywhere else . " Warren Truitt of About.com agreed and described the song to be " silly " and " as awkwardly goofy " as " Hoedown Throwdown " . Peter Larsen of The Orange County Register identified the track to be a " crowd pleaser " . 
 = = = Chart performance = = = 
 On the week ending July 25 , 2009 , " Ice Cream Freeze ( Let 's Chill ) " debuted and peaked at number eighty @-@ seven on the Billboard Hot 100 ; in the succeeding week , it dropped from the chart . On the week ending 2009 , the song debuted and peaked at number fifty seven in the Canadian Hot 100 , thus becoming Cyrus ' second highest @-@ charting song as Montana in Canada . The song dropped to number one @-@ hundred in the following week and completely fell the week after . On the week ending August 1 , 2009 , " Ice Cream Freeze ( Let 's Chill ) " entered the UK Singles Chart as number ninety @-@ five . It marked Cyrus ' first entry in the country as Montana since " The Best Both Worlds " , which charted in March 2007 . On the week ending August 8 , 2009 , the song reached its peak on the chart at number ninety . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 Cyrus , dressed as Montana , premiered " Ice Cream Freeze ( Let 's Chill ) " , along with eight other songs , at the concert taping for the third season of Hannah Montana , which was set on October 10 in Irvine , California at the Verizon Wireless Amphitheatre . In the performance , Montana dressed in a tee shirt with a pink star , zebra patterned skirt , cowboy boots and a bejeweled vest and performed the corresponding choreography . Six backup dancers , also costumed by Western clothing , later appeared to perform . Peter Larsen of The Orange County Register recalled his two children enjoying the dance and referred to it as " probably one of the most popular of the eight new songs Miley performs tonight . " The performance was later released as the song 's music video on May 22 , 2009 , on Disney Channel . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = Gray mouse lemur = 
 The gray mouse lemur ( Microcebus murinus ) , grey mouse lemur or lesser mouse lemur , is a small lemur , a type of strepsirrhine primate , found only on the island of Madagascar . Weighing 58 to 67 grams ( 2 @.@ 0 to 2 @.@ 4 oz ) , it is the largest of the mouse lemurs ( genus Microcebus ) , a group that includes the smallest primates in the world . The species is named for its mouse @-@ like size and coloration and is known locally ( in Malagasy ) as <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , and <unk> . The gray mouse lemur and all other mouse lemurs are considered cryptic species , as they are nearly indistinguishable from each other by appearance . For this reason , the gray mouse lemur was considered the only mouse lemur species for decades until more recent studies began to distinguish between the species . 
 Like all mouse lemurs , this species is nocturnal and arboreal . It is very active , and though it forages alone , groups of males and females form sleeping groups and share tree holes during the day . It exhibits a form of dormancy called torpor during the cool , dry winter months , and in some cases undergoes seasonal torpor ( or hibernation ) , which is unusual for primates . The gray mouse lemur can be found in several types of forest throughout western and southern Madagascar . Its diet consists primarily of fruit , insects , flowers , and nectar . In the wild , its natural predators include owls , snakes , and endemic mammalian predators . Predation pressure is higher for this species than among any other primate species , with one out of four individuals taken by a predator each year . This is counterbalanced by its high reproductive rate . Breeding is seasonal , and distinct vocalizations are used to prevent hybridization with species that overlap its range . Gestation lasts approximately 60 days , and typically two young are born . The offspring are usually independent in two months , and can reproduce after one year . The gray mouse lemur has a reproductive lifespan of five years , although captive individuals have been reported to live up to 15 years . 
 Although threatened by deforestation , habitat degradation , and live capture for the pet trade , it is considered one of Madagascar 's most abundant small native mammals . It can tolerate moderate food shortages by experiencing daily torpor to conserve energy , but extended food shortages due to climate change may pose a significant risk to the species . 
 = = Etymology = = 
 The gray or lesser mouse lemur is named for its brownish @-@ gray fur and mouse @-@ like size and appearance . The genus name , Microcebus , derives from the Greek words mikros , meaning " small " , and <unk> , meaning " monkey " . The Latin version of <unk> , <unk> , is a common suffix used for primate names , despite the fact that the gray mouse lemur is a lemur , and not a monkey . The species name , murinus , means " mouse @-@ like " and derives from the Latin word mus , or " mouse " , and the Latin suffix <unk> , which means " like " . 
 The lemur is known locally by several names in Malagasy , depending upon the region . Around Tôlanaro ( Fort Dauphin ) , it is called <unk> [ <unk> ] . In the northern end of its range , it is known as <unk> [ <unk> ] . Around Morondava , it is referred to as <unk> [ <unk> ] , <unk> [ ti ̥ <unk> ] , and <unk> [ <unk> ] . In many cases , these Malagasy names are also used for other visually indistinguishable mouse lemur species that live within its range . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 As its name implies , the gray mouse lemur is a lemur , a type of primate , and belongs to the suborder Strepsirrhini and infraorder Lemuriformes . Within Lemuriformes , it belongs to the family Cheirogaleidae , which contains the mouse lemurs , dwarf lemurs , giant mouse lemurs , fork @-@ marked lemurs , and hairy @-@ eared dwarf lemur . The mouse lemur genus Microcebus includes the smallest primates in the world . Phylogenetic analyses of D @-@ loop DNA sequences of various lemur species suggests that the gray mouse lemur may be most closely related to the reddish @-@ gray mouse lemur ( M. griseorufus ) . 
 First described in 1777 by English illustrator John Frederick Miller , M. murinus remained the only species of its genus , as well as the name used for all mouse lemurs on Madagascar , between the first major taxonomic revision in 1931 and an extensive field study conducted in 1972 . The field study distinguished the brown mouse lemur , M. rufus — then considered a subspecies — as a distinct , sympatric species in the southeastern part of the island . Upon this revision , the gray mouse lemur was thought to account for all mouse lemurs that lived in the drier parts of the north , west , and south , while the brown mouse lemur represented the eastern rainforest mouse lemurs . More recently , scientific understanding of the distribution and diversity of the mouse lemurs has become much more complex . Additional field studies , genetic testing , and resulting taxonomic revisions throughout the 1990s and 2000s identified numerous new mouse lemur species , demonstrating that the genus includes at least 17 cryptic species . 
 = = Anatomy and physiology = = 
 The gray mouse lemur shares many traits with other mouse lemurs , including soft fur , a long tail , long hind limbs , a dorsal stripe down the back ( not always distinct ) , a short snout , rounded skull , prominent eyes , and large , membranous , protruding ears . It has large eyes and a tapetum lucidum to enhance its vision at night . The dorsal coat is brownish @-@ gray with various reddish tones , the flanks are light gray to beige , and the ventral fur has discrete dull beige or whitish @-@ beige patches along portions of the belly . On the rounded face , there is a pale white patch above the nose and between the eyes ; some individuals have dark orbital markings . The furred portions of the hands and feet are off @-@ white . 
 The gray mouse lemur is one of the smallest primates in the world , yet it is also the largest mouse lemur . Its total length is 25 to 28 cm ( 9 @.@ 8 to 11 @.@ 0 in ) , with a head @-@ body length of 12 to 14 cm ( 4 @.@ 7 to 5 @.@ 5 in ) and a tail length of 13 to 14 @.@ 5 cm ( 5 @.@ 1 to 5 @.@ 7 in ) . The average weight for this species is 60 g ( 2 @.@ 1 oz ) , with ranges of 58 and 67 g ( 2 @.@ 0 and 2 @.@ 4 oz ) and 40 and 70 g ( 1 @.@ 4 and 2 @.@ 5 oz ) reported . This is smaller than the world 's smallest monkey , the pygmy marmoset , which ranges between 85 and 140 g ( 3 @.@ 0 and 4 @.@ 9 oz ) . Weight varies by season , with both sexes building fat reserves , up to 35 % of their body weight , in the tail and hind legs prior to the dry season and periods of dormancy . The tail of the gray mouse lemur can increase fourfold in volume during the wet season when it is storing fat . Even in captivity when environmental limitations are not an issue , mouse lemurs have shown a seasonal dietary preference with a greater protein intake during what would be their more active season . 
 Researchers have identified differences in the tooth morphology of the first and second molars between the gray mouse lemur and the reddish @-@ gray mouse lemur . In the reddish @-@ gray mouse lemur , the first lower molar ( m1 ) is squared and both the first and second upper molars ( M1 and M2 ) have slight indentations around the middle of the posterior margin . The gray mouse lemur has a more elongated m1 and lacks the aforementioned indentation on M1 and M2 . In terms of its general dentition , the gray mouse lemur shares the same dental formula as all other members of its family , Cheirogaleidae : 2 @.@ 1 @.@ 3 @.@ 32 @.@ 1 @.@ 3 @.@ 3 × 2 = 36 
 This species has 66 chromosomes , closely resembling the karyotype of the dwarf lemurs ( genus Cheirogaleus ) . Except for the X chromosome , all chromosomes are acrocentric ( with the short arm absent or virtually absent ) . Its genome size is 3 @.@ 12 picograms ( pg ) . 
 = = Ecology = = 
 Like all other members of the family Cheirogaleidae , the gray mouse lemur is nocturnal and arboreal . It inhabits lowland tropical dry forest , sub @-@ arid thorn scrub , gallery forest , spiny forest , eastern littoral forest , dry deciduous forests , semi @-@ humid deciduous , moist lowland forest , transitional forest , and secondary forests or degraded forests ( including plantations ) all ranging up to 800 m ( 2 @,@ 600 ft ) above sea level . The species is more common in secondary forest than in primary forest , particularly bush and scrub habitat , where it occupies a " fine branch " niche , restricting the vertical range to fine branches , fine terminal supports , lianas and dense foliage . These lemurs are usually seen on branches less than 5 cm ( 2 @.@ 0 in ) in diameter . The gray mouse lemur tends to prefer lower levels of the forest and the understory , where branches and vegetation are dense . 
 In secondary forest , it is generally observed from ground level up to 10 m ( 33 ft ) above ground , yet 15 to 30 m ( 50 to 100 ft ) in the canopy of primary forest . Studies have found that the species can spend as much as 40 % of its time below 3 m ( 10 ft ) , with 70 % of its time spent at this level during the end of the dry season , when plant food is limited and insects compose a larger percentage of the diet . The species is more numerous in spiny forest , such as the Andohahela Special Reserve , than in the gallery forest , preferring drier , littoral forest , whereas the brown mouse lemur prefers inland rain forest . 
 The limits of the distribution are poorly understood . It is believed to range from the Onilahy River or Lake <unk> in the south to Ankarafantsika National Park in the north . There is also an isolated and disjointed population in the southeastern part of the island , near Tôlanaro and the Andohahela National Park , up to the Mandena Conservation Zone . Individuals tend to occupy small home ranges of 1 to 2 ha ( 2 @.@ 5 to 4 @.@ 9 acres ) . The gray mouse lemur is also sympatric with the reddish @-@ gray mouse lemur , golden @-@ brown mouse lemur , Madame Berthe 's mouse lemur , and several other cheirogaleid lemurs . In Ankarafantsika National Park , where it coexists with the golden @-@ brown mouse lemur , the gray mouse lemur 's relative population density was highest at higher altitudes and in drier habitat , while the golden @-@ brown mouse lemur preferred the opposite . Another study has looked at the coexistence of the gray mouse lemur and Madame Berthe 's mouse lemur and found small , exclusive clusters of each species and a high degree of feeding niche overlap . 
 The gray mouse lemur can reach high population densities up to several hundred individuals per square kilometer ( up to 167 individuals / km2 at Ankarafantsika National Park to 712 individuals / km2 at Kirindy Mitea National Park ) . This abundance is not uniform and tends to concentrate in " population nuclei " , suggesting that it is difficult to accurately estimate population densities when extrapolating from a small area ( from various studies ) to a large area . The difficulty in finding individuals during some times of the year , particularly during the dry periods , can further complicate the problem of estimating population densities . 
 Mouse lemurs are omnivorous , and favor fruit and insects for the bulk of their diet . The gray mouse lemur may even come down to the ground to catch insect prey , though it quickly returns to the protective cover of the understory to consume its catch . Nectar is also a part of the gray mouse lemur 's diet , making it a potential pollinator for local plant species . A single instance of a male cannibalizing an adult female is known . 
 = = = Predation = = = 
