 Reitz , F.W. , ' <unk> uit die Oranje Vrijstaat ' , Zuid @-@ Afrikaansch Tijdschrift ( December 1890 ) . 
 Reitz , F.W. , Brief van den <unk> F.W. Reitz ... aan den <unk> P.J. <unk> ... ( Dordrecht : <unk> & <unk> [ c . 1900 ] ) , <unk> . 
 Reitz , F.W. & M.T. Steyn , President Marthinus Theunis Steyn , <unk> en <unk> van <unk> in <unk> dagen 33 ( Haarlem 1903 ) . 
 Hofmeyr , J.H. & F.W. Reitz , Het leven van Jan Hendrik Hofmeyr ( Onze Jan ) ( Cape Town : Van de <unk> de Villiers 1913 ) , xii , <unk> . 
 Hofmeyr , J.H. & F.W. Reitz , The life of Jan Hendrik Hofmeyr ( Onze Jan ) ( Cape Town : Van de <unk> de Villiers 1913 ) , xii , <unk> . 
 = = = = Translations = = = = 
 Reitz , F.W. , translator of Jorissen , E.J.P. , <unk> <unk> ( Amsterdam 1897 ) as Reminiscences of a Transvaal judge . Never published , due to the outbreak of the South African War ( Second Anglo @-@ Boer War ) . 
 Reitz , F.W. , translator of <unk> , G.M. , <unk> <unk> van Zuid @-@ Afrika 1486 – 1835 ( Cape Town 1891 ) . 
 = = = = A Century of Wrong = = = = 
 At the advent of the South African War ( Second Anglo @-@ Boer War ) , F.W. Reitz , in his capacity of State Secretary of the South African Republic , published an overview of Anglo @-@ Boer relations in the nineteenth century in Dutch , under the title <unk> eeuw van <unk> . The book was an important propaganda document in the war . 
 The actual authorship of the book is unclear . The second Dutch edition of the book carried the text ' Op last van den <unk> der <unk> , F.W. Reitz ' ( ' By order of the State Secretary of the <unk> , F.W. Reitz ' ) . J.C. Smuts is indicated as author , but probably only edited the introduction and the end of the book , in co @-@ operation with E. J. P. Jorissen . The rest of the text was probably prepared by J. de Villiers Roos . 
 In 1900 , translations appeared in German and English . The English translation only carried the name of Reitz , and has a preface by W.T. Stead . The English edition contained more material than the original Dutch edition ( see number of pages ) . 
 Reitz , F.W. , [ J. de Villiers Roos , J.C. Smuts , E.J.P. Jorissen , ] <unk> eeuw van <unk> ( Pretoria [ 1899 ] ) , <unk> . 
 Reitz , F.W. , [ J. de Villiers Roos , J.C. Smuts , E.J.P. Jorissen , ] Ein Jahrhundert <unk> <unk> : ein <unk> auf die <unk> @-@ <unk> Politik Englands : <unk> <unk> aus dem <unk> , <unk> auf <unk> und unter <unk> von F.W. Reitz ( Berlin : Walther 1900 ) , <unk> . 
 Reitz , F.W. , [ J. de Villiers Roos , J.C. Smuts , E.J.P. Jorissen , ] Century of Wrong , Issued by F. W. Reitz ... With preface by W. T. Stead ( London : Review of Reviews [ 1900 ] ) , xxiii , <unk> . 
 = = = Poetry = = = 
 Reitz , F.W. , ' Klaas <unk> en zijn <unk> ' , Het <unk> 19 July 1870 . [ translation of Robert Burns , ' Tam O <unk> 's Ride ' ] 
 Reitz , F.W. , Die <unk> van <unk> ' , Het <unk> 29 November 1873 . 
 Reitz , F.W. , Klaas <unk> en zijn <unk> and other songs and <unk> of South Africa ( Cape Town 1884 ) 
 Reitz , F.W. ( ed ) , <unk> uitgesogte Afrikaansche gedigte ( Cape Town 1888 ) 
 [ Fifty selected Afrikaner poems ] 
 Second edition : <unk> uitgesogte Afrikaansche gedigte ( Cape Town 1897 ) ; 
 Third edition : <unk> @-@ en @-@ <unk> uitgesogte Afrikaansche gedigte ( Cape Town 1898 ) 
 Reitz , F.W. , <unk> en andere gedigte ( Potchefstroom 1910 , 1911 ) 
 [ War and other poems ] 
 = Geisel School of Medicine = 
 The Geisel School of Medicine is the medical school of Dartmouth College , located in Hanover , New Hampshire , in the United States . The fourth @-@ oldest medical school in the United States , it was founded in 1797 by New England physician Nathan Smith and grew steadily over the course of the 19th century . Several milestones in medical care and research have taken place at Dartmouth , including the first clinical X @-@ ray ( 1896 ) , the first intensive care unit in the United States ( 1955 ) , and the Brattleboro rat ( 1961 ) . 
 Today , Dartmouth 's Geisel School of Medicine continues to grant the Doctor of Medicine ( M.D. ) and Doctor of Philosophy ( Ph.D. ) degrees , as well as a Master of Public Health ( <unk> ) and Master of Science ( M.S. ) degrees . The school has a student body of about 700 students and more than 2 @,@ 300 faculty members and researchers . Geisel organizes research through over a dozen research centers and institutes , receiving more than $ 140 million in grants annually . The Geisel School of Medicine is one of seven Ivy League medical schools and is ranked as a " top medical school " by U.S. News & World Report for both primary care and biomedical research . Dartmouth 's medical school has numerous clinical partners , including Dartmouth @-@ Hitchcock Medical Center , White River Junction Veterans Administration Medical Center , California Pacific Medical Center , and Manchester Veterans Administration Medical Center . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Foundation and early years = = = 
 Dartmouth 's medical school was founded in 1797 as the fourth medical school in the United States , following the University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine ( founded 1765 ) , the medical school of King 's College ( now Columbia University ) ( 1767 ) , and Harvard Medical School ( 1782 ) . The founder was Nathan Smith , a Harvard University and University of Edinburgh Medical School educated physician from Cornish , New Hampshire . Noting the dearth of medical professionals in the rural Connecticut River Upper Valley area , Smith petitioned the Board of Trustees of Dartmouth College in August 1796 to fund the establishment of a medical school to train more physicians for the region . Though Dartmouth College as a whole was financially strapped , the Board approved the request , and Smith began lecturing on November 22 , 1797 . 
 For much of its early life , the school consisted only of Nathan Smith and a small class of students , operating in borrowed space at Dartmouth College . Students of Smith were educated as apprentices , and received a Bachelor of Medicine degree upon graduation . Like Dartmouth College as a whole , the medical school had continual funding shortages . As time passed , however , the popularity of both the medical instruction and the basic sciences taught at the school drew undergraduates and training physicians alike . <unk> funds from the state of New Hampshire , Smith was able to obtain medical equipment and , by 1811 , a dedicated physical plant for the school . 
 Smith acted as the sole administrator and instructor of the medical school until 1810 , when a second faculty member was hired . Smith also revamped the curriculum , allowing the school to begin offering the Doctor of Medicine ( M.D. ) degree in 1812 . Smith ultimately left Dartmouth in 1816 , founding three additional schools of medicine at Yale University , Bowdoin College , and the University of Vermont . 
 = = = Expansion and difficulties = = = 
 Smith 's departure provided for a period of expansion , both among the faculty and the student body . Former students of Nathan Smith 's replaced him on the faculty , drawing medical professionals in the northeast such as Oliver Wendell Holmes , Sr. to join them . The first hospital at the school was founded by DMS alumnus <unk> Crosby in 1838 , who used it to integrate academic instruction with hands @-@ on patient care . In 1870 , Carlton Pennington Frost , DMS ' 57 , replaced Crosby as Dean of the school . Under Frost , the curriculum sustained another revamping , this time into a four @-@ year program that included clinical and academic training . Frost also presided over the establishment of Mary Hitchcock Memorial Hospital in 1893 , built to replace Crosby 's defunct hospital . 
 In 1908 , The Carnegie Foundation for the Advancement of Teaching conducted a survey of medical education institutions in the United States . At the time , the discipline emphasized " bedside teaching " and providing students experience with a broad variety of illnesses and patients . The school 's rural location was deemed too remote for proper clinical training , and the school was advised to stop offering the Doctor of Medicine degree and only provide pre @-@ clinical instruction . The class of 1914 was the last ( until 1974 ) to receive the Doctor of Medicine degree ; subsequent classes of students attended DMS for two years before transferring to other medical schools . The drop of clinical instruction worsened the school 's problems by driving away talented faculty members . 
 After World War II , the tide of the medical discipline had shifted towards research . Although the school was well regarded for preparing students for clinical education at other institutions , its faculty was criticized for its apparent disinterest in research . The school was also criticized for using Dartmouth College 's undergraduate program as a feeder school . Based on these criticisms , DMS was placed on " confidential probation " in 1956 by the Association of American Medical Colleges and the Council on Medical Education . 
 = = = From the " refounding " to present = = = 
 At the time of the probation , Dartmouth College had already anticipated the medical school 's plight , amassing capital to fund a revitalization of the school . In 1956 , the trustees of the College formally agreed to a " refounding " of the school 's academic offerings , physical facilities , and faculty . S. Marsh Tenney , DMS class of 1944 , was appointed to carry out this task . Tenney more than doubled the size of the faculty and the student body , added several new departments , and oversaw the construction of five new campus buildings by 1964 . 
 In the 1960s , due to a national shortage of physicians and government incentives for schools that increased their class sizes , Dartmouth Medical School graduates began to experience difficulty in trying to transfer to other medical school to complete their final two years of medical school as other medical schools had increased their class size and could not accommodate transfer students . In the meantime , Mary Hitchcock Memorial Hospital had grown to be a 400 @-@ bed medical center , and Dartmouth Medical School had established a partnership with a 224 @-@ bed Veterans Administration Hospital in White River Junction , Vermont . The Doctor of Medicine program , now possible with the expanded local medical centers , was reinstated by a vote of the trustees in 1968 . The admission of M.D. candidates resumed in 1970 . Initially , the medical school curriculum was three years in length , unlike most medical schools , but it later was increased to the usual four years in 1979 . 
 A cooperative program with Brown Medical School began in 1981 where students received training at both medical schools . Fifteen to twenty students were selected for the program , which combined the first two years of basic science coursework at Dartmouth with the final two years of clinical coursework at Brown . The program balanced Dartmouth 's greater basic science facilities than Brown , but fewer clinical facilities than available at the urban setting of Brown , which is located in Providence , Rhode Island . Graduates of the program received M.D. degrees from Brown . The program was discontinued in 2010 . 
 In 1991 , the Dartmouth @-@ Hitchcock Medical Center was established on a 225 @-@ acre ( 0 @.@ 91 km2 ) campus in Lebanon , New Hampshire . The three @-@ year project , completed at the cost of $ 228 million , served as a replacement for the Mary Hitchcock Memorial Hospital , which was partially demolished in the early 1990s . A new curriculum was introduced in 1996 entitled " New Directions . " The curriculum , still in place today , seeks to promote small classes , reduce the amount of lectures , and offer students extensive interactive experience with patients . 2009 saw the successful completion of a $ 250 million capital campaign . 
 On April 4 , 2012 , the Dartmouth Medical School was renamed the Audrey and Theodor Geisel School of Medicine in honor of their many years of generosity to the College . 
 = = Campus = = 
 The Geisel School of Medicine has facilities on the campus of Dartmouth College , which is situated in the rural , Upper Valley town of Hanover , New Hampshire as well as at its Lebanon , NH campus at Dartmouth @-@ Hitchcock Medical Center ( DHMC ) . 
 The medical school facilities at Dartmouth College sit in a complex on the north side of Dartmouth 's campus and includes academic , administrative , research , and presentation facilities . Dartmouth Medical School is served by two libraries , the Dana Biomedical Library and the Matthews @-@ Fuller Health Sciences Library , which together offer over 240 @,@ 000 volumes . Dartmouth Medical School offers on @-@ campus housing for first @-@ year students . Off @-@ campus housing is available through Dartmouth College . In addition , the Class of 1978 Life Sciences Center was completed in August 2011 at a cost of $ 92 million , and as part of its design a central lawn is surrounded by the Remsen and Vail Laboratories and Dana . 
 The Dartmouth @-@ Hitchcock Medical Center , centered in nearby Lebanon , New Hampshire , is a main affiliated teaching hospital of the Geisel School of Medicine . Mary Hitchcock Memorial Hospital , DHMC 's 396 @-@ bed inpatient facility , acts as the medical school 's teaching hospital and " primary teaching site " . DHMC 's other constituent elements include the Dartmouth @-@ Hitchcock Clinic ( a network of physicians in Vermont and New Hampshire ) and a Veterans Affairs Medical Center in White River Junction , Vermont . In total , DHMC serves an area with a population of 1 @.@ 6 million . 
 In addition to on @-@ campus instruction in Hanover and Lebanon , third- and fourth @-@ year M.D. students may choose from 75 regional sites for their required clerkships . Most clerkship facilities are located in central New England , although students are also able to clerk at sites in Alaska , Arizona , California , New Mexico , and Florida . 
 = = Academics = = 
 The Geisel School of Medicine offers the four @-@ year Doctor of Medicine ( M.D. ) degree and the Doctor of Philosophy ( PhD ) degree in certain fields . In addition , the school offers two joint @-@ degree programs : the combination M.D. / Ph.D. , for which the Ph.D. can be obtained from any doctoral program at Dartmouth , and the combination MD / MBA , offered in conjunction with the Tuck School of Business . The Dartmouth Institute for Health Policy and Clinical Practice , one of a number of DMS research institutes , offers its own degree programs in evaluative clinical sciences , including a Master of Public Health ( MPH ) , a Master of Science ( M.S. ) , a PhD , post @-@ doctoral fellowships , several joint @-@ degree programs , and a residency program for preventive medicine . Mary Hitchcock Memorial Hospital also offers residencies and fellowships which are administered by Dartmouth Medical School faculty . 
 The curriculum for the Doctor of Medicine degree spans four years , combining required courses with electives . First @-@ year students learn human anatomy and basic biomedical science in classes offered by the basic science departments , while beginning a two @-@ year course of study in clinical studies . Second @-@ year students study pathophysiology and take courses from almost every clinical and basic science department in the school . In their third year , M.D. candidates are required to participate in six eight @-@ week Medical clerkships with area medical institutions , covering both ambulatory clinics and hospitals . The final year is spent on additional clerkships , the designation of an area of focus , and preparation for a post @-@ graduation residency . In addition to imparting medical and clinical knowledge , the M.D. program is designed to teach " interpersonal and communications skills " , " professionalism " , and other practical skills for a medical career . 
 Dartmouth 's Geisel School of Medicine also offers the Doctor of Philosophy degree to train students as biomedical researchers and scientists . The PhD is available in six fields offered by the basic science departments : pharmacology and toxicology , molecular and cell biology , immunology , molecular pathogenesis , systems biology , and experimental and molecular medicine . Research and teaching positions at DMS and its centers and institutes are available to PhD candidates . 
 = = = Organization and research = = = 
 Like the undergraduate portion of Dartmouth College , the Geisel School of Medicine operates on a quarter system . As part of the larger institution , DMS is ultimately administered by Dartmouth 's President and Board of Trustees . The school is directly managed by a Dean who is advised by a 22 @-@ member Board of Overseers . As of the 2008 – 2009 academic year , the school operates on a budget of $ 237 million . 
 Besides research conducted within the infrastructure of academic departments , research at Geisel is also organized around over a dozen research centers and institutes . The centers cover various medical subjects such as neuroscience , oncology ( Norris Cotton Cancer Center ) , psychiatry , and pediatrics . Funded research at Geisel School of Medicine amounted to $ 140 million during the 2012 @-@ 2013 academic year ; 
 = = Publications = = 
 The Medical School publishes a magazine for alumni and friends , Dartmouth Medicine . In addition , the school also publishes an innovative literary journal , Lifelines ( literary journal ) 
 = = = Admissions and rankings = = = 
 In the fall of 2013 , 85 students enrolled in the Doctor of Medicine program from an applicant pool of 4 @,@ 290 , with the Office of Admissions offering an acceptance rate of 6 percent . Applicants from the previous year had an average score in the numerically graded sections of the Medical College Admission Test ( MCAT ) of 33 and an average undergraduate grade point average ( GPA ) of 3 @.@ 65 . Applicants to the M.D. program are expected to have a background in chemistry , biology , physics , and calculus , and are required to have at least three years of undergraduate education . 
 In November 2013 , the nation 's sole medical school accrediting body , the Liaison Committee for Medical Education ( <unk> ) , granted the Dartmouth Geisel School of Medicine a full eight @-@ year term of accreditation — the longest available from the <unk> . None of the residency programs of Mary Hitchcock Medical Center , which are administered by Geisel School of Medicine faculty , are on probation by the Accreditation Council for Graduate Medical Education . 
 For 2014 , the Geisel School of Medicine was ranked by U.S. News & World Report as 34th on the " Top Medical Schools – Research " list and 18th on the " Top Medical Schools – Primary Care " list . 
 = = People = = 
 = = = Student profile and student life = = = 
 The Geisel School of Medicine 's enrollment as of October 2013 totaled 700 students : 360 M.D. candidates and 340 graduate students . In addition to the student body , over 350 resident physicians and research fellows were on campus as of July 2007 . The student population is split approximately evenly between men and women , while about 25 percent of the student body is made up of international or minority students . From an average class size of 75 , over 60 undergraduate institutions and most of the U.S. states are represented . According to The Princeton Review , the small class size at Geisel helps to establish " a strong sense of community and collaborative spirit " . The school offers dozens of community service , recreational , professional , and other student groups . 
 = = = Faculty = = = 
 As of November 2007 , the Geisel School of Medicine employs a staff of 2 @,@ 315 faculty and researchers : 766 full @-@ time faculty , 1 @,@ 301 part @-@ time faculty and non @-@ faculty instructors , and 248 research positions . The ratio of full @-@ time , on @-@ site faculty to students is given by the school as 2 : 1 . Notable current faculty include Stuart Gitlow , palliative care physician Ira Byock , former astronaut and Democratic politician Jay C. Buckey , psychoanalyst Peter A. Olsson , former <unk> member Mark R. <unk> , and Jay Dunlap , professor and chair of genetics at the Dartmouth Geisel School of Medicine and a member of the National Academy of Sciences . Notable former faculty include biochemist Mahlon Hoagland , pathologist and geneticist Kurt Benirschke , and former Surgeon General of the United States C. Everett Koop . 
 = = = Alumni = = = 
 As of June 2013 , the Geisel School of Medicine claims 4 @,@ 891 living graduates active in medicine around the world . Geisel cites its required clerkships as a mechanism for allowing students to make connections and obtain real @-@ world experience . Fourth @-@ year students are prepared for residency with counseling classes ; recent graduates have most commonly taken their residencies at Geisel itself , Harvard Medical School , Tufts University School of Medicine , and Brown Medical School . Alumni of Geisel / Dartmouth Medical School who have become notable medical practitioners , educators and researchers include physician and freethinker Charles Knowlton , consciousness researcher John C. Lilly , physician Robert O. Blood , ophthalmologist and epidemiologist John D. Bullock , and attending physician at the United States Capitol John Francis <unk> . Alumni in other fields include U.S. Representatives Richard S. Molony and Robert Burns , Governor of New Hampshire Noah Martin , and television personality Ian Smith . 
 = Henry Vane the Younger = 
 Sir Henry Vane ( baptised 26 March 1613 – 14 June 1662 ) , son of Henry Vane the Elder ( often referred to as Harry Vane to distinguish him from his father ) , was an English politician , statesman , and colonial governor . He was briefly present in North America , serving one term as the Governor of the Massachusetts Bay Colony , and supported the creation of Roger Williams ' Rhode Island Colony and Harvard College . A proponent of religious tolerance , he returned to England in 1637 following the Antinomian controversy that led to the banning of Anne Hutchinson from Massachusetts . 
 He was a leading Parliamentarian during the English Civil War and worked closely with Oliver Cromwell . He played no part in the execution of King Charles I , and refused to take oaths that expressed approval of the act . Vane served on the Council of State that functioned as the government executive during the Interregnum , but split with Cromwell over issues of governance and removed himself from power when Cromwell dissolved Parliament in 1653 . He returned to power during the short @-@ lived Commonwealth period in 1659 – 1660 , and was arrested under orders from King Charles II following his restoration to the throne . After long debate , Vane was exempted from the Indemnity and Oblivion Act , and was thus denied amnesty granted to most people for their roles in the Civil War and Interregnum . 
 Although he was formally granted clemency by Charles II , he was charged with high treason by Parliament in 1662 . In a court proceeding in which he was denied counsel and the opportunity to properly prepare a defence , he was convicted by a partisan jury . Charles withdrew his earlier clemency , and Vane was beheaded on Tower Hill on 14 June 1662 . 
 Vane was recognised by his political peers as a competent administrator and a wily and persuasive negotiator and politician . His politics was driven by a desire for religious tolerance in an era when governments were used to establish official churches and suppress dissenting views . Although his views were in a small minority , he was able to successfully build coalitions to advance his agenda . His actions were often ultimately divisive , and contributed to both the rise and downfall of the English Commonwealth . His books and pamphlets written on political and religious subjects are still analyzed today , and Vane is remembered in Massachusetts and Rhode Island as an early champion of religious freedom . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Henry Vane was baptised on 26 May 1613 at Debden , Essex . He was the eldest child of Sir Henry Vane the Elder , who came from the landed gentry , and Frances Darcy , who came from minor nobility . The elder Vane used the family 's money to purchase positions at court , rising by 1629 to be Comptroller of the Household . Vane was educated at Westminster School , where his classmates included Arthur Heselrige and Thomas Scot , two other men who would figure prominently in English politics . Vane 's friend and biographer George Sikes wrote that Vane was " [ ignorant ] of God " and of a temperament that made him " acceptable to those they call good fellows " , but that he had a religious awakening at 14 or 15 , after which he " and his former jolly company came to a parting blow . " Vane then enrolled at Magdalen Hall , Oxford , where he studied in spite of his refusal to take the necessary matriculation oaths . He then traveled to Europe , where he was reported to be studying at Leiden and possibly in France and at Geneva . 
 Vane 's father had been upset by his open adoption of Puritan views , fearing this would hamper his opportunities for advancement at court . In 1631 he sent the young Vane to Vienna as an assistant to Robert Anstruther , the English ambassador . This was apparently a quite privileged role , for Vane 's writings of the time include messages written in French and in cipher . During this trip the elder Vane was sent to negotiate with Swedish King Gustavus for an alliance ; King Charles ' unwillingness to act in the matter meant the effort was in vain . He was introduced to the king after returning to England , and encouraged by his father to seek a position in the privy chamber . His father engaged in numerous attempts to get him to give up his nonconformist views , without success . In order to worship as he chose , Vane then decided to go the New World , joining the Puritan migration . 
 = = New England = = 
 Vane left for the Massachusetts Bay Colony , arriving in Boston in October 1635 on a ship also carrying John Winthrop the Younger and Hugh Peter . The elder John Winthrop described Vane as " a young gentleman of excellent parts " , and by the following month he had already been admitted as a freeman in the colony . He began playing a role in its judicial administration , deciding whether legal disputes had sufficient merit to be heard by a full court . Vane was instrumental in brokering the resolution to a dispute between the elder Winthrop and Thomas Dudley concerning matters of judicial conduct . In the spring of 1637 Vane was elected governor of the colony , succeeding John Haynes . The situation he faced was complex , with issues on religious , political and military fronts . His biographers describe his term in office as " disastrous " . 
 The colony was split over the actions and beliefs of Anne Hutchinson . She had come with her husband and children to the colony in 1634 , and began holding Bible sessions at home , gaining a wide audience and sharing her opinions that the colonial leaders labeled as Antinomianism , the view that existing laws and practices were not necessary for salvation . Most of the older colonial leadership , including Dudley and Winthrop , espoused a more Legalist view . Vane was a supporter of Hutchinson , as was at first the influential pastor John Cotton , and this was the faction that propelled Vane into the governor 's seat in 1636 . Vane , however , immediately alienated some of the colonists by insisting on flying the English flag over Boston 's fort . The flag had recently been the subject of controversy , since its depiction of the Cross of St George was seen by many colonists as a symbol of papacy , and John Endecott had notoriously cut the cross out of the Salem militia 's flag . Vane 's popularity went down further when he learned in December 1636 that there were issues in England requiring his presence , and he attempted to resign . Although the court of assistants accepted his resignation , he withdrew it upon the request of the congregation of the Boston church . 
 During Vane 's tenure a dispute with the Pequot tribe of present @-@ day southeastern Connecticut boiled over into war . In 1636 the boat of a Massachusetts trader named John Oldham was found near Block Island , overrun by Indians . Further examination by the discoverers ( after the Indians fled in canoes ) uncovered Oldham 's body on board . The attackers were at the time believed to be from tribes affiliated with the Narragansetts , but Narragansett leaders claimed that those responsible had fled to the protection of the Pequots . The Pequots were aggressively expansionist in their dealings with the surrounding native tribes ( including the Narragansett ) , but had until then generally kept the peace with nearby English colonists . Massachusetts authorities were already angry that the Pequots had failed to turn over men implicated in the killing of another trader on the Connecticut River ; the slaying of Oldham led to calls for action . Despite the fact that Roger Williams had warned him that the Narragansetts were more likely responsible for Oldham 's slaying , Governor Vane in August 1636 placed John Endecott at the head of a 90 @-@ man force to extract justice from the Pequots . Endecott 's heavy @-@ handed expedition did little more than destroy Pequot settlements , and sparked a military backlash . The Pequots struck back at settlements recently established on the Connecticut River by colonists from Massachusetts , and at the Saybrook Colony of the younger John Winthrop . In April 1637 the ostensibly pacifist Vane called a session of the general court that authorized the colonial militia to assist the other New England colonies in continuing the war , which resulted in the destruction of the Pequots as a tribal entity . 
 Vane lost his position to the elder John Winthrop in the 1637 election . The contentious election was marked by a sharp disagreement over the treatment of John Wheelwright , another Hutchinson supporter . Winthrop won in part because the location of the vote was moved to Cambridge , reducing the power of Vane 's Boston support . In the aftermath of the election Anne Hutchinson was put on trial , and eventually banished from the colony . Many of her followers seriously considered leaving after the election . At the urging of Roger Williams , some of these people , including Hutchinson , founded the settlement of Portsmouth on Aquidneck Island in the Narragansett Bay ( later named Rhode Island and joined to Providence to form the Colony of Rhode Island and Providence Plantations ) . Vane decided to return to England , apparently with the notion that he would acquire a royal governorship to trump the colonial administration . Before his departure , he published A Brief Answer to a Certain Declaration , a response to Winthrop 's defense of the Act of Exclusion ; this act was passed after the election to restrict the immigration of people with views not conforming to the colony 's religious orthodoxy . 
 Despite their political differences , Vane and Winthrop developed an epistolary relationship in the following years . Vane 's legacy from his time in the New World includes the colonial legislation appropriating £ 400 for the establishment of an institute of higher learning now known as Harvard University , and his support of Roger Williams in the acquisition of Aquidneck Island from the local Indians that resulted in the formal beginnings of Rhode Island . The surviving accounts do not say that Vane provide the funds for the acquisition ; Williams credits Vane as being " an instrument in the hand of God for procuring this island " . 
 According to historian Michael Winship , Vane 's experiences in Massachusetts significantly radicalized his religious views , in which he came to believe that clergy of all types , including Puritan ministers , " were the second beast of Revelations 13 : 11 " , " pretending to visible <unk> " . This conviction drove his political activities in England , where he sought to minimize the power and influence of all types of clergy . Biographer Violet Rowe writes that " Vane 's guiding principles in religious policy seem to have been two : a rooted distrust of clerical power , whether of bishops or presbyters , and a belief that the State should abstain from interference in church matters altogether . " 
 Vane 's stance can be seen in the way the first Rhode Island patent was drafted in 1643 , when he sat on the Parliamentary committee charged with colonial affairs . Unique among all of the early English colonial charters , it contains provisions guaranteeing freedom of religion . ( Vane assisted Roger Williams again in 1652 , when the latter sought a confirmation of the Rhode Island charter and the revocation of a conflicting charter that had been issued to William Coddington . ) 
 = = Return to England = = 
 On his return to England , he procured , with the assistance of the Earl of Northumberland and his father , a position as Treasurer of the Royal Navy in 1639 . In this position he had the personally distasteful yet highly profitable task of collecting the hated ship money ( a tax to support the Navy imposed by Charles I without Parliamentary approval ) . In June 1640 he was awarded a knighthood by King Charles . He married Frances Wray , daughter of Sir Christopher Wray , on 1 July 1640 , after which his father settled upon him most of the family 's holdings . These included Fairlawn in Kent , and Raby Castle , where Vane would make his home . According to his biographers , the relationship with Frances was anchored by shared spiritual goals and intimacy , and was happy and fulfilling . 
 The connection with the admiralty secured for him election to the Short and Long Parliaments representing Hull . Vane had already formed or renewed associations with prominent opponents of Charles ' policies , including John Pym and John Hampden . In the Short Parliament he was noted to be " capable of managing great affairs " , with a " penetrating judgment " and an " easy and graceful manner of speaking . " With others like Nathaniel Fiennes , he represented a younger generation of Puritans in the leadership of the Long Parliament that effectively managed affairs : as identified by Clarendon in his history , these included Hampden , Pym , and Oliver St John in the Commons , and Earl of Bedford and Viscount Saye and Sele in the Lords . 
 Vane was instrumental in the 1641 impeachment and execution of the Earl of Strafford , a member of the Privy Council . Vane discovered some confidential notes his father had made of a council meeting , and passed them to John Pym . The wording in those notes could be interpreted to mean that Strafford had proposed that Charles use the Irish Army to subjugate England . The evidence against Strafford was weak , and the impeachment failed . Pym consequently orchestrated the passage of a bill of attainder against Strafford , who was then executed in May 1641 . The illicit means by which Pym acquired the notes caused a rift between the Vanes that only healed when the elder Vane eventually came to oppose the king . 
 In the Root and Branch petition debate in the Commons , from December 1640 and into 1641 , Vane supported , as did Nathaniel Fiennes , the call for radical reforms in the Church of England , a position that put Vane in opposition to his father . Amid a sea of complaints about church governance , he and Fiennes in February 1641 were added to a committee that had been established the previous November to draft a report on the state of the kingdom . Their efforts led Vane to introduce the Root and Branch Bill in May 1641 . The debate on the bill was acrimonious , and resulted in a clear indication of parliamentary support for church reform . In its wake mobs invaded churches , removing " scandalous images " and other signs of " popery " . Vane made an impassioned speech that brought him to the front of his faction , claiming episcopacy ( the governing structure of the Church of England ) was a corrupt doctrine " hastening us back again to Rome . " The bill died without a vote in August , when more critical matters arose to occupy Parliament . When Charles went to Scotland to rally Scottish forces to the royalist cause , the Commons began drafting what became known as the Grand Remonstrance . Many historians have claimed Vane had a role in drafting some of its language ; this matter is disputed , but either way Vane did not participate in the debate . Narrowly passed by the Commons in November 1641 , the document catalogued many grievances against the king and church , and served to further polarize political affairs . The king refused to enact any of the requested reforms . Upon his return from Scotland , the king also deprived both Vanes , father and son , of their administrative posts , in revenge for their roles in the execution of Strafford . 
 = = Civil War = = 
 = = = Early years = = = 
 In the first six months of 1642 , relations between the king and Parliament broke down completely , and factions supporting both sides took up arms . Parliament returned Vane to his post as Treasurer of the Navy , where he used connections to bring significant naval support to the Parliamentary side after Charles attempted to arrest five MPs on charges of high treason in December 1641 . In June 1642 Charles rejected the Nineteen Propositions , the last substantive set of demands made by Parliament prior to the outbreak of the First English Civil War . After hostilities began that June with the Siege of Hull , Vane was given a seat on the Committee of Safety , which oversaw Parliamentary military activities . 
 After the failure of the Root and Branch Bill , Parliament in 1643 called together the Westminster Assembly of Divines , a body of lay politicians , lords , and clergy whose purpose was to reform church governance . Vane sat on this body , which met periodically until 1648 , as one of the lay representatives of the Independent faction . Not long after its first meeting in July , Vane was sent at the head of a Parliamentary commission seeking military assistance from the Scots . The Scots , who had been opposed to Charles in the Bishop 's Wars ( 1639 – 40 ) over religious issues , were willing to assist the English Parliament if the latter were willing to allow the extension of the Presbyterian system of church polity to England . Vane was opposed to both Presbyterianism and Episcopalianism , but found a way to finesse an agreement . He proposed that the agreement , which covered a combination of religious and political topics , be called the Solemn League and Covenant , and he introduced slippery language into the agreement concerning " the example of the best Reformed churches " . This language permitted the Scots to believe that their ideas would be adopted , while the English could interpret it to mean that English ( i.e. Independent ) practices could be adopted . The league and covenant were eventually approved by authorities in Scotland , England , and Ireland , and paved the way for Scottish entry into the war . 
 Following Vane 's success in negotiating the Scottish agreement , the death of John Pym at the end of 1643 propelled Vane into the leadership of Parliament , along with Oliver St John , Henry Marten , and Arthur Heselrige . He promoted , and became a chief member of , the Committee of Both Kingdoms , established in February 1644 as a point were English and Scottish authorities could coordinate war activities . Vane was then sent to York in June 1644 , then besieged by three Parliament armies , to urge Sir Thomas Fairfax and the Earl of Manchester to divert some of those forces to face Prince Rupert of the Rhine , who had recently taken Liverpool and was pillaging properties of Parliamentary supporters in Lancashire . While there he also proposed to the generals the establishment of a government without the king . This idea was roundly rejected by the old guard generals who believed Charles could still be accommodated , but found support with the rising star of Oliver Cromwell . 
 On 13 September 1644 Vane acted with St John and Cromwell in the Commons to set up a " Grand Committee for the Accommodation " , designed to find a compromise on religious issues dividing the Westminster Assembly . He sought in its debate to identify loopholes for religious tolerance on behalf of the Independents . This exposed Vane 's opposition to Presbyterianism , and created a rift between the pro @-@ war Independents , led by Vane and Cromwell , and the pro @-@ peace Scots and other supporters of Presbyterianism . The latter included the Earl of Essex , whose failures in the west of England reduced popular support for his cause , even as the military success of Cromwell at Marston Moor raised his profile . Robert Baillie , on the realization that the Parliamentary Independents , despite previous claims of support by Vane , were not on the side of the Scots , wrote " Sir Henry Vane and The Solicitor [ St John ] ... without any regard for us , who have saved their nation and brought their two persons to the height of power now they enjoy and use to our prejudice " . 
 = = = Parliamentary victory = = = 
 Overtures for peace talks were begun in November 1644 between king and Parliament . Vane was one of many negotiators sent to Uxbridge in a failed attempt to negotiate peace . Vane and the Independents were seen by some as a principal reason for the failure of these talks , because the Scots and Charles were prepared to agree on issues of church polity and doctrine and the Independents were not . The talks , which lasted from late January through most of February 1645 , were overshadowed by the execution after impeachment by attainder of Archbishop Laud . 
 Parliament began discussing a reorganization of its military as early as November 1644 , in part to remove some poorly @-@ performing commanders , and to eliminate the regional character of the existing forces . In debate that principally divided the Commons from the Lords , Vane and Cromwell supported passage of the Self @-@ denying Ordinance , forbidding military officers from serving in Parliament , and the establishment of the New Model Army , which would be capable of fighting anywhere in the country . The provisions of the Self @-@ denying Ordinance also extended to individuals ( like Vane ) who held civil service posts , but included exceptions for those ( like Vane ) who had been turned out office by Charles and restored by Parliament . Vane then began drawing on fees and stipends that he had previously refused , and failed to pay half of his treasurer 's fees to Parliament , as required by the law . 
 Following the decisive Parliamentary victory at Naseby in June 1645 , the first phase of the civil war was effectively over , but it dragged on for another year , before Charles surrendered to Scottish army commanders . During this time , a new political faction began to rise within the military . Known as Levellers and led by John Lilburne and others , this populist force was in favour of greater press freedoms , and was opposed to at least some of the privileges of the aristocracy , including the existence of the House of Lords . 
 In January 1646 , amid ongoing peace negotiations , Charles attempted to separate the Independents from other factions by proposing in letters to Vane an alliance with his faction against the Presbyterians . Vane was not amused by this , and responded by pointing out that he preferred the rights of " tender consciences " to be granted by Parliament than by the duplicitous king ( papers exposing the king 's negotiating positions as facades had been captured at Naseby , and had largely silenced the Royalist elements in Parliament ) . The Vane estates were not spared in the maelstrom of war ; Vane 's father reported that Raby Castle had been " visited four times " , suffering damages of £ 16 @,@ 000 . In September 1645 , the Vanes succeeded in getting Parliamentary approval to fortify Raby . 
 = = = Interwar politics = = = 
 By the end of the war the Presbyterian group in the Commons , led by Denzil Holles , William Strode , and Sir Philip Stapleton , was slightly stronger than the Independents . They proceeded to introduce legislation hostile to the views on religious tolerance held by Vane and Independents in the army . Vane apparently came to realize that the Presbyterian actions posed a threat equal to that of the Episcopalians , and that military action , having sidelined the latter , might also work against the former . There was also mutual distrust between Vane and the Levellers , because Vane held the somewhat aristocratic view that voting rights should be reserved to the propertied gentry . The Independents attempted to negotiate terms favourable to them with Charles , but these were unsuccessful . 
 In 1647 Vane and Oliver Cromwell , the leader of the army 's Independents , came to work closely together . The Presbyterian majority sought to disband the army to reduce the threat of those Independents , but issues over pay ( which was in arrears ) , widows ' pensions , and other grievances , prompted the Presbyterians to enter into negotiations with the army . A bitter debate over an army petition led Levellers to charge the Independents , Vane among them , with attempting to " oppress the people " and wanting to " hold the reins of power ... not for a year , but forever . " Cromwell was eventually able to appease the army , but a Parliamentary purge of Independent officers followed , and the army was ordered to disband . Some Parliamentary leaders also began negotiating with the Scots for the return of their army , this time to oppose the English army . The Parliament army mutinied , and under Cromwell 's orders ( possibly prompted by a warning from Vane ) a detachment of troops seized Charles , who had been placed under a comfortable house arrest at Holmby . This forced the Presbyterian leadership to meet the army 's demands for pay . They also established a commission to treat with the army , on which they placed Vane , presumably because of his influence with the military . 
 The negotiations between the army and Parliament were acrimonious . Mobs in Presbyterian @-@ dominated London threatened Vane and other Independents . More than 50 Independent MPs , Vane among them , fled the city on 2 August for the protection of the army . The army then marched on London , with Vane and others at its head , and the Independents were again seated in Parliament . The Parliament then debated the army 's Heads of Proposals for fixing the term and powers of Parliament and church governance . Key among its terms of interest to Vane was one that effectively stripped the church , either Episcopal or Presbyterian , of any coercive powers . The Heads of Proposals was also sent to Charles , who indicated agreement to some of its terms and opposition to others , and proposed further negotiations . 
 The king 's proposal split the Independents between those , such as Vane and Cromwell , who were willing to negotiate with the king , and those who were not . Reverend Hugh Peter spoke out in favor of the " non @-@ addresses " ( i.e. no longer negotiating with the king ) , as did the Levellers . John Lilburne was particularly critical , saying " I clearly see Cromwell 's and Vane 's designs , which is to keep the poor people everlastingly ( if they can ) in bondage and slavery . " In November 1647 , while the debate continued , Charles escaped his confinement at Hampton Court and made his way to the Isle of Wight . There he was recaptured and imprisoned in Carisbrook Castle . Offered proposals by the Scots and the Independents , he chose alliance with the Scots . Sectional violence between royalists , Presbyterians , and Independents , spread throughout the country , although the army maintained a tenuous peace in London . 
 = = = War renewed = = = 
 Violence flared throughout the country as the various factions armed and organized . A mutiny in the Royal Navy in May thrust Vane into attempts to prevent it from spreading , and to regain the support of the mutineers , who had declared for Charles . By mid @-@ July , the army had regained control of most of England , and Cromwell defeated the Scottish army in August at the Battle of Preston . In the tumult , Vane appeared at times to be in opposition to some of the Independent factions , even having a falling out ( quickly healed ) with Cromwell , and many factions came to distrust him . Despite this he was one of the Parliamentary representatives for negotiations with Charles at Newport in September 1648 . He was widely blamed for the failure of those negotiations over his insistence on " an unbounded liberty of conscience " . 
 In the debates of late 1648 concerning the king 's fate , Vane argued that the Parliament should constitute a government without the king " to make themselves the happiest nation and people in the world . " His forceful speech on 2 December suggesting that the king would need to be eliminated as a political force was opposed by others , including Nathaniel Fiennes , who claimed that the concessions the king had made to date were sufficient that an agreement might be reached . Others suggested that rather than dividing the house by opposition to the king , it be divided by separating those who had gained in the war from those who had not , and that financial contributions be made from one group to the other . After an impassioned conciliatory speech by William Prynne , Parliament finally voted on 5 December that the king 's concessions were sufficient , but Clement Walker and other opponents of Vane whispered that both Vanes had abused their positions of power during the war for profit . Walker compiled a long list of MPs he claimed had acted corruptly , but Vane was not on it . Instead , Walker charged the Vanes with benefiting by buying at a discount " sleeping pensions " , or debts owed by the public purse to individuals , and then pursuing payment of them to enrich themselves . There is today no substantive way to assess the validity of Walker 's charges . 
 On 6 December , the military stepped in to take control of matters . Troops led by Thomas Pride surrounded the Houses of Parliament , and systematically arrested arriving MPs who had been supportive of negotiation with the king . Vane did not appear that day — he either was aware of what was going to happen , or he may have stayed away because his side had lost the vote . This action , known as " Pride 's Purge " , resulted in the exclusion of more than 140 MPs . The Parliament that sat became known as the Rump Parliament , and its first main order of business was the trial and execution of King Charles . During this process Vane refused to attend Parliament , although he was present as a spectator when the trial began on 20 January 1649 . He later claimed to oppose putting the king on trial because of " tenderness of blood " , and continued to fulfill the duties of his government posts , signing admiralty papers on the day Charles was executed . 
 = = The Commonwealth and Oliver Cromwell = = 
 After the execution of Charles , the House of Commons voted to abolish both the crown and the House of Lords . To replace the executive functions of the crown , it established a Council of State to which Vane was appointed . He refused to be seated until he could do so without taking any oath , in particular the first one , which required an expression of approval for the regicide . Vane served on many of the council 's committees . In his role on committees overseeing the military he directed the provisioning of supplies for Cromwell 's conquest of Ireland . As a leading member of the committee overseeing the navy ( where he was joined by schoolmate Thomas Scot ) , he directed affairs in the naval First Anglo @-@ Dutch War ( 1652 – 1654 ) . After the navy 's disastrous performance against the Dutch in 1652 , Vane headed the committee that reformed the navy , drafting new Articles of War and formally codifying naval law . Vane 's reforms were instrumental in the navy 's successes later in the war . He was also involved in foreign diplomacy , going on a mission to France ( whose purpose is unknown ) in 1652 to meet with Cardinal de Retz , and traveling again to Scotland to organize the government there after Cromwell 's victories in the Third English Civil War . 
 Vane was also active in domestic affairs . He sat on a committee that disposed of Charles I 's art collection , and made many enemies in his role on the committees for Compounding and Sequestration . These committees , on which Vane had also sat in the 1640s , were responsible for the distribution of assets seized from royalists and other government opponents , and for negotiating with those who had failed to pay taxes and other government charges . Some of the enemies he made while engaged in this work would one day sit in judgment against him . 
 The process by which the Parliament carried out the duties of the executive was cumbersome , and this became an issue with Cromwell and the army , who sought the ability to act more decisively . This attitude drove a wedge between Cromwell and Vane . Under pressure from Cromwell for new elections , the Parliament began to consider proposals for electoral reform . In January 1653 a committee headed by Vane made one such proposal . It called for suffrage to be allowed on the basis of property ownership , and it specifically sought to eliminate a number of so @-@ called " rotten boroughs " , which had small numbers of voters and were controlled by wealthy patrons . The proposal also called for some of the current members , whose republican credentials were deemed suitable , to retain their seats , so that the fledgling commonwealth might , as Harry Marten put it , would be shepherded by " the mother that brought it forth " . This latter clause was specifically proposed at the urging of the army by Vane , who realised that those who were charged with its implementation would be able to retain power . However , Cromwell , seeking a general election , was opposed to this scheme , and the two sides were unable to reconcile . 
 Although Parliamentary leaders , Vane among them , had promised Cromwell on 19 April 1653 to delay action on the election bill , Vane was likely one of the ringleaders that sought to have the bill enacted the next day before Cromwell could react . Cromwell was however alerted by a supporter , and interrupted the proceedings that would otherwise have passed the bill . Bringing troops into the chamber , he put an end to the debate , saying " You are no Parliament . I say you are no Parliament . I will put an end to your sitting . " Vane protested , " This is not honest ; yea , it is against morality and common honesty " , to which Cromwell shouted in response , " O Sir Henry Vane , Sir Henry Vane ; the Lord deliver me from Sir Henry Vane ! " This ended the commonwealth , and Cromwell began to rule as Lord Protector . Vane , " daily missed and courted for his assistance " , was invited to sit on Cromwell 's council , but refused . 
 Effectively in retirement , Vane wrote the Retired Man 's Meditations , published in 1655 amid rumors that Vane was fomenting rebellion against Cromwell , principally among Quakers and Fifth Monarchists . This work , a jargon @-@ laden religious treatise in which Vane wanders between literal and symbolic interpretation of Biblical scriptures , was treated by contemporaries and later analysts , including David Hume , as " absolutely unintelligible " and " <unk> formed " . The same year , after Cromwell called for a fast day to consider methods by which his government might be improved , Vane wrote A Healing Question . In this more carefully structured political work , he proposed a new form of government , insisting as before upon a Parliament supreme over the Army . He was encouraged to publish it by Charles Fleetwood , who had shown it to Cromwell . In a postscript to the work Vane wrote the words " the good old cause " , a coinage that became a rallying cry in the next few years for Vane 's group of republicans . 
 A Healing Question was seen by John Thurloe , Cromwell 's Secretary of State , as a thinly @-@ veiled attack on Cromwell , and its publication prompted a number of opposition political groups to step up their activities . Rumors circulated that protests raised by fringe religious groups like the Anabaptists and Quakers were due to Vane 's involvement , prompting Cromwell 's council to issue an order on 29 July 1656 , summoning Vane to appear . Vane was ordered to post a bond of £ 5 @,@ 000 " to do nothing to the prejudice of the present government and the peace of the Commonwealth " , but refused . He was arrested shortly afterward and imprisoned in Carisbrooke Castle . While there he addressed a letter to Cromwell in which he repudiated the extra @-@ parliamentary authority Cromwell had assumed . Vane was released , still unrepentant , on 31 December 1656 . 
 During Vane 's retirement he established a religious teaching group , which resulted in a group of admirers known as " <unk> " . The Puritan pastor Richard Baxter classified Seekers , <unk> , <unk> and <unk> together , as religious wild men . He also cultivated pamphleteers and other surrogates to promote his political views . Henry Stubbe , introduced to Vane by Westminster head Richard Busby , became a supporter , and defended him in his Essay in Defence of the Good Old Cause , and in Malice <unk> ( 1659 ) . 
 = = Richard Cromwell and after = = 
 Following Oliver Cromwell 's death in September 1658 , his son Richard succeeded him as Lord Protector . The younger Cromwell lacked the political and military skills of his father , and the political factionalism of the earlier Commonwealth began to resurface . When elections were called for a new parliament in December 1658 , Cromwell attempted to prevent the election of both royalists and republicans . Vane , as a leader of the republican faction , was specifically targeted , but managed to win election representing Whitchurch . In the parliament 's session , the republicans questioned Cromwell 's claim to power , argued in favour of limiting it , and spoke against the veto power of the Cromwellian House of Lords , which was packed with supporters of the protector . The republicans were unsuccessful in enacting any substantive changes . 
 Vane formed an alliance with a group of republican military officers known as the Wallingford House party , who met secretly in violation of laws enacted to limit military participation in political matters . The Cromwellian factions in the parliament overreached in their attempts to control republican sentiment in the military , and Cromwell was forced to dissolve the parliament in April 1659 . Cromwell , with little support in the military , abdicated several days later . Following a purge of pro @-@ Cromwell supporters from the military and a widespread pamphleteering campaign , Cromwell 's council recalled the Rump Parliament in May . 
 In the reconstituted Rump Parliament , Vane was appointed to the new council of state . He also served as commissioner for the appointment of army officers , managed foreign affairs , and examined the state of the government 's finances , which were found to be in dismal condition . Through his work General John Lambert was sent to quell Booth 's Rebellion , a royalist uprising in August 1659 . Lambert 's support of non @-@ mainstream religious views like Quakerism , however , ensured his political downfall . After he and other officers were stripped of their command by Parliament in October , they rallied their troops and marched on Parliament , forcibly dissolving it . A committee of safety was formed , composed of the army grandees , and including Vane . He agreed to serve in part because he feared the republican cause was destined to fail without army support . This committee only served until December , when the advance of General George Monck 's army from Scotland led to the melting away of Lambert 's military support , and the restoration of the full Long Parliament . For taking part in the committee of safety , Vane was expelled ( over vocal objections from allies like Heselrige ) from the Commons , and ordered into house arrest at Raby Castle . He went to Raby in February 1660 , but only stayed there briefly , and eventually returned to his house at Hampstead . 
 During the tumultuous year of the late 1650s proposals for how the government should be structured and how powers should be balanced were widely debated , in private , in public debates in Parliament , and through the publication of pamphlets . Vane used all of these methods to promote his ideas . In 1660 he published A Needful Corrective or Balance in Popular Government . This open letter was essentially a response to James Harrington 's The Commonwealth of Oceana , a 1656 treatise describing Harrington 's view of a utopian government , which included limitations on property ownership and a legislature with an elected upper chamber . Harrington 's thesis was that power arose from property ownership , and concentrated land ownership led to oligarchic and monarchic forms of government . Vane disagreed with this , arguing instead that power came from godliness , and presented a somewhat apocalyptic argument in support of his idea . Vane supporter Henry Stubbe stated openly in October 1659 that permanent Senators would be required . These proposals caused a terminal split in Vane 's alliance with Heselrige , whose followers mostly deserted Vane . 
 = = The Restoration = = 
 In March 1660 the Long Parliament finally dissolved itself , and elections were held for the Convention Parliament , which sat in May . This body , dominated by royalists and Presbyterians , formally proclaimed Charles II as king , and he was restored to the throne on 29 May 1660 . In order to minimize acts of reprisal and vengeance for acts taken during the Interregnum , the parliament passed the Indemnity and Oblivion Act , under whose terms most actions were forgiven . Specific exceptions were made for those directly involved in the regicide , and after long debate , Vane was also named as an exception . The act was not passed until August 1660 , and Vane was arrested on 1 July 1660 on the orders of the king and imprisoned in the Tower of London . The parliament , after passing the Indemnity Act , petitioned Charles to grant clemency to Vane and others , asking that his life might be spared . This petition was granted . 
 Despite the clemency , Vane remained in the Tower , and the income from his estates was seized . He suffered the privations of the prison , and was unable to discharge debts that ran to £ 10 @,@ 000 . He was transferred to the Isles of Scilly in October 1661 in order to limit access to him by potential conspirators who might be scheming to free him . He continued to write , principally on religious themes , seeking to come to terms with the political state of affairs and his condition . According to The People 's Case Stated , written by Vane in this time , power originated with God , but resided primarily with the people : " The power which is directive , and states and ascertains the morality of the rule of obedience , is in the hand of God ; but the original , from whence all just power arises , which is <unk> and co @-@ <unk> , is from the will or free gift of the people , who may either keep the power in themselves or give up their subjection and will in the hand of another . " King and people were bound by " the fundamental constitution or compact " , which if the king violated , the people might return to their original right and freedom . 
 Following Vane 's move to Scilly , the Cavalier Parliament passed a resolution in November 1661 demanding his return to the Tower for trial . Charles temporized , and in January 1662 the Parliament renewed the demand . Vane was moved back to the Tower in April 1662 , and on 2 June 1662 he was arraigned on charges of high treason against Charles II . The trial began on 6 June before the Court of King 's Bench , with four judges headed by Lord Chief Justice Robert Foster presiding , and with the king 's attorney general Sir Geoffrey Palmer prosecuting . As was typical of those accused of treason , Vane was denied legal representation . He defended himself against charges of making war against the king during the civil war by asserting the sovereign power of parliament . Accused of imagining the death of the king in 1659 , he argued that it was not possible to commit treason against a king not in possession of the crown . When the prosecution argued that the king was always in de jure possession , Vane pointed out that this rendered invalid the charges that he conspired to keep Charles II from exercising his power . The judges stepped in to point out this was irrelevant . The jury , which was packed with royalists , convicted him after thirty minutes of debate . 
 Vane attempted to appeal his conviction , and tried to get the magistrates to sign a Bill of Exclusion in which Vane catalogued all the problems he saw with his trial . However , the magistrates refused . Informed of Vane 's conduct before and during the trial , Charles II now felt that Vane was too dangerous a man to be left alive , and retracted his clemency . ( Unlike Vane , John Lambert at his trial had thrown himself on the mercy of the court , and was consequently exiled to Guernsey after his conviction . ) Although Vane had been sentenced to the commoner 's death of being hanged and then drawn and quartered , Charles was persuaded to grant him the gentleman 's death of beheading . On 14 June 1662 Vane was taken to Tower Hill and beheaded . Noted diarist Samuel Pepys was there and recorded the event : 
 He made a long speech , many times interrupted by the Sheriff and others there ; and they would have taken his paper out of his hand , but he would not let it go . But they caused all the books of those that writ after him to be given the Sheriff ; and the trumpets were brought under the scaffold that he might not be heard . Then he prayed , and so fitted himself , and received the blow ; but the scaffold was so crowded that we could not see it done .... He had a blister , or issue , upon his neck , which he desired them not hurt : he changed not his colour or speech to the last , but died justifying himself and the cause he had stood for ; and spoke very confidently of his being presently at the right hand of Christ ; and in all things appeared the most resolved man that ever died in that manner , and showed more of heat than <unk> , but yet with all humility and gravity . One asked him why he did not pray for the King . He answered , " Nay , " says he , " you shall see I can pray for the King : I pray God bless him ! " 
 In his final days Vane had made his peace with God , and had also carefully prepared the speech he intended to make at the execution . In order to preserve the speech , he gave copies to close friends who visited him in those days , which were later printed . Many viewed him as a martyr for continuing to espouse his cause , and some thought the king had lost more than he gained by having him executed . His body was returned to his family , who interred him in the church at Shipbourne , near the family estate of Fairlawn in Kent . 
 = = Family = = 
 Vane and his wife Frances had ten children . Of their five sons , only the last , Christopher , had children , and succeeded to his father 's estates . He was created Baron Barnard by William III . 
 = = Works = = 
 A number of Vane 's speeches to Parliament and other bodies were printed during his lifetime or shortly after , including The Speech Intended to Have been Spoken on the Scaffold , published in 1662 . 
 Vane 's other printed works include : 
 A Brief Answer to a Certain Declaration , 1637 
 The Retired Man 's Meditations , 1655 
 A Healing Question <unk> , 1656 
 Of Love of God and Union with God , 1657 ? 
 The Proceeds of the Protector ... Against Sir Henry Vane , Knight , 1658 
 A Needful Corrective or Balance in Popular Government , 1659 
 Two Treatises : " Epistle General to the Mystical Body of Christ " and " The Face of the Times " , 1662 
 The Cause of the People of England Stated , 1689 ( written 1660 @-@ 1662 ; the title may have been intended to be " Case " instead of " Cause " ) 
 A Pilgrimage into the Land of Promise , 1664 
 The Trial of Sir Henry Vane , Knight , 1662 
 The last work contains , in addition to his last speech and details relating to the trial , The People 's Case Stated , The Valley of Jehoshaphat , and Meditations concerning Man 's Life . 
 Some contemporary works were incorrectly attributed to him . Clarendon , in his History of the Rebellion , assigns to Vane credit for one speech in support of the Self @-@ Denying Ordinance ; later historians find this attribution spurious . The Speech against Richard Cromwell is probably the composition of a later writer , while The Light Shining out of Darkness may have been written by Henry Stubbe . 
 = = Reputation = = 
 Vane was widely recognized by contemporary chroniclers as a gifted administrator and a forceful orator . Even the royalist Clarendon had good words for him , and wrote of him as follows : " He had an unusual aspect , which ... made men think there was something in him of the extraordinary ; and his whole life made good that imagination . " Also , Clarendon credited Vane with having possessed " extraordinary parts , a pleasant wit , a great understanding , a temper not to be moved " , and in debate " a quick conception and a very sharp and weighty expression " . The 1662 biography The Life and Death of Sir Henry Vane the Younger by Vane 's chaplain George Sikes included John Milton 's " Sonnet 17 " , written in 1652 in praise of Vane , and presented to Vane that year . 
 The religious writings of Vane were so unusual as to have been found difficult to understand , even baffling , by readers as varied as Richard Baxter , Clarendon , Gilbert Burnet and David Hume , and continue to be seen so today . Civil War historian Blair Worden comments that " Vane 's opaque political ideas and religious beliefs are now barely intelligible " , and biographer David <unk> writes " He presented himself as a ' witness ' of light , as a spiritualist , as one dispensing advanced wisdoms in the epistemological setting of an imminent and apocalyptic age of the Spirit " . 
 Vane 's reputation was at its height in the nineteenth century , especially in the United States . English historian John Andrew Doyle wrote of Vane that he had acquired " a more dazzling reputation than has been granted to the lofty public spirit and statesmanlike foresight of Winthrop . " William Wordsworth referenced Vane in his sonnet Great Men Have Been Among Us ( 1802 ) . Charles Dickens included the exchange between Vane and Cromwell at the end of the Rump Parliament in his A Child 's History of England , part @-@ published in the early 1850s . In English Traits ( 1856 ) , Ralph Waldo Emerson placed Vane on a list of historical English greats . Sean <unk> , a modern British libertarian , notes that Vane was in the vanguard on issues of religious freedom . Although he was " among a small and easily defeated minority " , his successors 150 years later " were responsible for the clearest and most solid safeguards of civil and religious freedom ever adopted into a constitution . " 
 In 1897 the Royal Society of the Arts marked Vane 's demolished Hampstead house on Rosslyn Hill , Vane House , with a blue plaque . 
 James Kendall Hosmer , editing Winthrop 's Journal in 1908 , wrote of Vane : 
 ... his heroic life and death , his services to Anglo @-@ Saxon freedom , which make him a significant figure even to the present moment , may well be regarded as the most illustrious character who touches early New England history . While his personal contact with America was only for a brief space , his life became a strenuous upholding of American ideas : if government of , by , and for the people is the principle which English @-@ speaking men feel especially bound to maintain , the life and death of Vane contributed powerfully to cause this idea to prevail . 
 = Vortigaunt = 
 Vortigaunts are a fictional extra @-@ dimensional species in the Half @-@ Life series of video games by Valve Corporation . In Half @-@ Life and its three expansions , Vortigaunts are frequently encountered by the player as hostile non @-@ player characters . The Vortigaunts are depicted in Half @-@ Life as being an enslaved race in an alternative dimension called Xen , subservient to a large creature called the Nihilanth , which itself is a slave to undisclosed masters . In Half @-@ Life 2 , the Vortigaunts have broken free of their slavery , and actively assist the player and other humans in resisting the Combine occupation of Earth . 
 Vortigaunts are shown as a very communal and cultural race , believing in a force that binds the fabric of the universe and each Vortigaunt together , as well as producing a tradition of poetry and music . Vortigaunts also display the ability to summon and command electrical energy without the need for technology . This ability is used for various activities , such as a means of attack , powering electrical equipment , and healing . 
 The fictional creatures have received a range of critical responses from their various appearances . In addition to their role within the Half @-@ Life series , Vortigaunts have been adapted for machinima productions and have been made into a plush toy by Valve . 
 = = Character design = = 
 Louis Gossett , Jr. provides the voice for the Vortigaunts in Half @-@ Life 2 , and was partially chosen due to his role as the alien in the film Enemy Mine . In Episode Two , the Vortigaunts ' voicing was done by Tony Todd . Graphically , the Vortigaunts in both Half @-@ Life and Half @-@ Life 2 were designed by concept artists <unk> Eng and Chuck Jones . 
 Initially , Vortigaunts were planned to begin Half @-@ Life as enemy non @-@ player characters , which the player has to win over as allies and lead in rebellion . This idea , however , proved impractical and was abandoned in favor of keeping the Vortigaunts as adversaries . The plan re @-@ emerged for Half @-@ Life 2 , in which the species are active allies of the player . The Vortigaunts in Half @-@ Life 2 were originally going to be fully integrated in City 17 alongside the humans under Combine rule . This did not reach fruition ; due to the focus on developing the city combat , the resources to accomplish this were not available . As there were so few resulting Vortigaunts in the city , the developers instead decided to involve the Vortigaunts far more substantially in the sections of the game taking place in the countryside surrounding the city . The few Vortigaunts placed inside the city were used to hint at the story arc for the Vortigaunts later in the game . Midway through Half @-@ Life 2 , the player witnesses a scene with a deceased Vortigaunt in a prison . Originally , the developers were intending to feature this Vortigaunt as an ally character who , if players rescue him , would fight enemy characters alongside the player . The developers liked this idea , but it was too late in the development to attempt this ; instead , the idea was preserved for use in Episode Two . The concept was later showcased in an Episode Two trailer shown at the Games Convention in 2006 . 
 According to series writer Marc Laidlaw , one of the most important goals with Episode Two was to expand on the Vortigaunts as characters , as opposed to just " purveyors of bugbait or Xen <unk> " . As such , Valve added new behaviours , new animations , and new audio to the Vortigaunts . Combine devices called " <unk> @-@ Cells " were to be encountered in Half @-@ Life 2 . They were meant to siphon power from captive Vortigaunts in City 17 . The player would then be able to free Vortigaunts from these devices to gain their assistance . 
 = = Attributes = = 
 = = = Society = = = 
 Vortigaunts are very intelligent and social creatures . In Half @-@ Life , they serve as basic ground units for the Xen forces , often supporting heavier troops fighting the player and the humans in the Black Mesa Research Facility . They are capable of developing intelligent strategies and tactics to take on their enemies . Initially , Vortigaunts are enslaved to the Nihilanth , a large creature on Xen , who , in turn , claims it is a slave to unknown superiors . On Xen , the Vortigaunts are used as factory workers and drones . In Half @-@ Life 2 , Vortigaunts indicate that this slavery has lasted for generations . Despite this , Vortigaunts are shown to have developed an intellectual culture , valuing poetry , music and philosophy . In addition , Vortigaunts practise the husbandry of antlions , large insectoids that live in underground hives , as an ancestral tradition . The death of the Nihilanth at the hands of Gordon Freeman at the end of Half @-@ Life frees the Vortigaunts from their slavery ; consequently the Vortigaunts see Freeman as a messianic figure . 
 Vortigaunts possess their own method of vocal communication , " flux shifting " , which they can be heard using in Half @-@ Life 2 . This method of communication involves both speakers vocalising at the same time and cannot be understood by other species who lack the auditory anatomy to interpret the sounds . In addition to standard conversation , flux shifting can be used by Vortigaunts to communicate over long distances . Vortigaunts use scattered English words in Half @-@ Life to taunt the player , although by Half @-@ Life 2 they have learned to speak at least the English language fluently , albeit using archaic words and grammatical structures . In addition , the Vortigaunts believe in a binding life @-@ force referred to as the " Vortessence " . The exact nature of the Vortessence is left unclear , although it is revealed that Vortigaunts believe the Vortessence is the fabric of the universe and connects everything . 
 = = = Depiction = = = 
 In general , a Vortigaunt is a somewhat humanoid figure with two legs and two arms , but has an additional arm protruding from its thorax . Vortigaunts have mottled green skin and digitigrade legs , allowing them to move quickly . Typically , Vortigaunts have a slightly hunched posture . In addition , Vortigaunts have sharp teeth , clawed hands , strong senses , and their faces are dominated by a large red eye . In Half @-@ Life , this eye is surrounded by five smaller eyes , although , in Half @-@ Life 2 , this has been reduced to three smaller eyes . A key aspect of the Vortigaunts is their ability to summon energy to their command without the need for any equipment . In @-@ game , this ability is most commonly used as a means of attack , with Vortigaunts ' hurling the energy towards foes in the form of green electrical bolts . In addition , Vortigaunts have been shown to be able to use the energy for other purposes , such as assisting in repair work , removing rubble and blockages , recharging the player 's HEV suit or powering up electrical generators . Enslaved Vortigaunts are depicted with green collars and shackles , although the means by which these control Vortigaunts is not explored . Vortigaunts are not typically seen wearing clothing , although several Vortigaunts are observed wearing lab coats and chef 's clothing in the course of Half @-@ Life 2 and its expansions . Vortigaunts are depicted as meat eaters ; the player can observe Vortigaunts ' eating human corpses in Half @-@ Life and cooking headcrabs in Half @-@ Life 2 , although Half @-@ Life 2 also shows Vortigaunts working in kitchens with chef hats , preparing soups and salads , suggesting that Vortigaunts are omnivores . 
 = = Appearances = = 
 = = = Half @-@ Life = = = 
 Vortigaunts are first introduced as one of the primary enemies in Half @-@ Life . They are frequently encountered by players throughout Half @-@ Life and its three expansions , Opposing Force , Blue Shift and Decay . They are portrayed as one of the sentient races of Xen , often working in groups or with more heavily armored Xen troops . In the later stages of Half @-@ Life , Vortigaunts are seen working in factory @-@ like environments , constructing or maturing the more heavily armored Xen troops in cocoon @-@ like capsules under the direction of other aliens in the Xen hierarchy . 
 In the cooperative multiplayer expansion Decay , players have the opportunity to assume the role of two Vortigaunts if they score highly on all missions . In this bonus mission , entitled " Xen Attacks " , two Vortigaunts , designated as Drone Subjects X @-@ <unk> and R @-@ <unk> , are given a mission by the Nihilanth to retrieve a number of crystals stolen from Xen by human scientists from the Black Mesa Research Facility . 
 = = = Half @-@ Life 2 = = = 
 The role of the Vortigaunts is drastically changed in Half @-@ Life 2 . Now acting as allies to the player , Vortigaunts have been freed as a result of protagonist Gordon Freeman killing the Nihilanth at the end of Half @-@ Life . Instead of acting with hostility towards humanity , the Vortigaunts are actively engaged in assisting the human resistance against the Combine , a multi @-@ dimensional empire that has invaded and occupied Earth in between Half @-@ Life and Half @-@ Life 2 . Vortigaunts are frequently seen at resistance compounds and stations , often performing maintenance work or providing help with experiments , and sometimes assist the player by using their energy abilities to recharge the player 's HEV suit . However , a number of Vortigaunts are still in captivity , as at various points in the game , Vortigaunts are shown used as slave labor by the Combine ; for example , one Vortigaunt is seen cleaning the floor of a Combine train station with a broom , wearing a similar collar to those worn in Half @-@ Life . 
 Vortigaunts play a greater part in the story of the series in Half @-@ Life 2 's continuations , Episode One and Episode Two . In Episode One , Vortigaunts use unexplained powers to rescue Alyx Vance , the series ' main female character , from the top of the Combine Citadel in City 17 , saving her from the explosion of the Citadel 's reactor at the end of Half @-@ Life 2 . The Vortigaunts also free Gordon Freeman from the stasis imposed on him at the end of Half @-@ Life 2 by his enigmatic employer , the G @-@ Man , much to the G @-@ Man 's irritation . Episode Two dedicates much of the early part of the game to the Vortigaunts , with a group of four Vortigaunts working to heal Alyx Vance after she is mortally wounded by a Combine Hunter , while tracking and killing the Combine Advisors that fled the Citadel . One Vortigaunt accompanies the player and acts as combat support on an expedition into an antlion hive . In the latter stages of Episode Two , a number of Vortigaunts are observed in the White Forest missile silo , performing various tasks to facilitate the launch of a satellite to close a Combine super portal . 
 = = = Appearances in other media = = = 
 The use of sandbox applications like Garry 's Mod have allowed for the Vortigaunt to be used in a variety of webcomics and machinima productions . For example , in the webcomic Concerned , the inability for the players to harm allied non @-@ player characters such as the Vortigaunt in Half @-@ Life 2 forms a recurring joke , where the protagonist Gordon Frohman constantly tries to shoot Vortigaunts due to their role as enemies in Half @-@ Life . This eventually backfires on him , as when Vortigaunts try to rescue Frohman from the destruction of the Citadel , his hostile nature leads them to simply abandon him to his fate . Vortigaunts are occasionally featured in machinima productions , often taking on the roles of minor characters , such as janitors under Combine jurisdiction . In addition , Vortigaunts are central to one Half @-@ Life single @-@ player modification , POV – Point of View , in which the player assumes the role of a Vortigaunt slave attacking Black Mesa . 
 = = Cultural impact = = 
 = = = Merchandise = = = 
 The character of the Vortigaunt has been popular enough to inspire the creation of a Vortigaunt plush toy . The toy was designed by <unk> Eng and was sold and distributed via Valve 's online store . The toy was released in December 2006 and due to the proximity to Christmas , the Vortigaunt was accompanied by a to @-@ scale Santa Claus hat . Reviews of the plush toy were favorable , praising the toy as sturdy , as well as giving credit for its articulation and detail . 
 = = = Reception = = = 
 The change of the Vortigaunts from enemy characters to allied characters in Half @-@ Life 2 was described as " intriguing " by reviewers , with PC Zone stating that the Vortigaunts were one of the most interesting characters in the game , playing a role " somewhere between Yoda and ET " . 
 The role of the Vortigaunts in Episode Two was met with more approval by critics , who described the Vortigaunt who accompanies the player in the early parts of the game as " a great joy to fight alongside " , praising the improved artificial intelligence and noting that " the fact that they 're not trying to intricately imitate real @-@ life people " significantly aided the presentation of the Vortigaunts . In addition , IGN praised the visual and character overhaul given to the Vortigaunt in Episode Two . 
 = Brazza 's martin = 
 Brazza 's martin ( Phedina brazzae ) is a passerine bird in the swallow family , Hirundinidae . It is 12 cm ( 4 @.@ 25 in ) long with grey @-@ brown upperparts , heavily black @-@ streaked white underparts , and a brownish tint to the breast plumage . The sexes are similar , but juvenile birds have more diffuse breast streaking and reddish @-@ brown edges to the feathers of the back and wings . The song consists of a series of short notes of increasing frequency , followed by a complex buzz that is sometimes completed by a number of clicks . 
 The range of this species falls within the African countries of Angola , the Republic of the Congo , and the Democratic Republic of the Congo . Nesting in burrows in river banks , it lays a clutch of three white eggs . This bird feeds on flying insects , including termites , and may hunt over rivers or open savanna . It forms mixed flocks with other swallows , but is readily identified by its combination of brown upperparts , streaked underparts and a square tail . 
 Although this little @-@ known bird had been classified as Data Deficient by the International Union for Conservation of Nature ( IUCN ) , it actually appears to be common and widespread , and it has been listed as a species of Least Concern since 2008 . There may be some hunting of this martin for food , but the species does not appear to be facing any serious short @-@ term threats . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 The Brazza 's martin was first described in 1886 under its current binomial name by French zoologist Émile Oustalet from a specimen obtained at <unk> in the <unk> District of what is now the Republic of Congo . The genus name , Phedina , is derived from the Greek phaios ( φαιός ) " brown " and the Italian rondine " swallow " . The species name commemorates Italian @-@ born French explorer Pierre Savorgnan de Brazza , later to become governor @-@ general of the French Congo , who collected the type specimen . This species was often called the " Congo martin " , but this invites confusion with the Congo sand martin or Congo martin , Riparia <unk> . 
 The Phedina species are members of the swallow family of birds , and are classed as members of the Hirundininae subfamily , which comprises all swallows and martins except the very distinctive river martins . DNA sequence studies suggest that there are three major groupings within the Hirundininae , broadly correlating with the type of nest built . These groups are the " core martins " , including burrowing species like the sand martin ; the " nest @-@ adopters " , which are birds like the tree swallow that utilise natural cavities ; and the " mud nest builders " , such as the barn swallow , which build a nest from mud . The Phedina species nest in burrows and therefore belong to the " core martins " group . 
 The genus Phedina is thought to be an early offshoot from the main swallow lineage , although the striped plumage of its two species suggests a distant relationship with several streaked African Hirundo species . The only other member of the genus is the Mascarene martin P. borbonica , although in the past it has sometimes been suggested that Brazza 's martin should be moved to its own genus Phedinopsis due to the significant differences in vocalisations and nest type from its relative . The nearest relative of the Phedina martins is the banded martin , Riparia cincta , which appears not to be closely related to the other members of its current genus and resembles Brazza 's martin in nesting habits and vocalisations . The current Association of European Rarities Committees ( AERC ) -recommended practice is to move the banded martin to its own genus as Neophedina cincta , rather than to merge it into Phedina , since the banded martin 's larger size , different bill and nostril shape and non @-@ colonial nesting are differences from the other Phedina species . 
 = = Description = = 
 The Brazza 's martin is 12 cm ( 4 @.@ 25 in ) long with wings averaging 100 @.@ 5 mm ( 4 @.@ 4 in ) . This small hirundine has grey @-@ brown upperparts with a somewhat darker brown head and white underparts heavily streaked with blackish @-@ brown from the throat to vent . There is a brownish tint to the breast plumage . The square tail averages 46 @.@ 8 mm ( 1 @.@ 8 in ) long and has white edges to the brown undertail coverts . The flight feathers are blackish @-@ brown and the bill and legs are black . The eyes are dark brown and the black bill averages 8 @.@ 5 mm ( 0 @.@ 33 in ) long . The sexes are similar , but juvenile birds have more diffuse breast streaking and reddish @-@ brown or buff edges to the feathers of the back and wings . This bird has no subspecies . 
 The song consists of a series of short notes increasing in frequency which are followed by a complex buzz and sometimes completed by a number of clicks . The song becomes increasingly loud , although the final clicks are quite soft . The song is similar to that of the banded martin , and does not resemble the Mascarene martin , suggesting unresolved taxonomic problems . The flight is variously described as heavy , or like that of a sand martin . 
 Brazza 's martin can be distinguished from most other swallows within its range by the heavy streaking on the underparts . Although the lesser striped swallow also has white underparts with dark streaking , it is larger , has a deeply forked tail and a very different plumage , with dark blue upperparts , a red rump and a chestnut head . Compared to the Mascarene martin , this species is smaller , has a plainer back and finer dashing on the throat and chest , but there is no range overlap . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 The distribution of the Brazza 's martin was initially poorly known , and until 1922 the type specimen in the Paris Museum was the only recorded example of this species . A Father <unk> then collected 20 martins near Luluabourg ( now Kananga ) , and this bird is now known to breed in the south of the Democratic Republic of the Congo ( DRC ) , the Republic of the Congo , and in northern Angola . There is one probable sighting from southeast Gabon . 
 In the breeding season this martin is found near rivers with the steep banks that are needed for the nest burrows . Suitable habitat occurs along lowland tropical rivers like the Congo or rivers with sandbanks in the highlands of Angola . The highland locations have wide grassy riverways running through miombo woodlands , whereas the Congo Basin is tropical forest with over 200 cm ( 80 in ) of rain a year . The lowland habitats are a patchwork of dry , seasonally flooded and permanently wet woodland , and seasonally flooded savanna , and the swamp forests contain trees such as Symphonia <unk> , raffia palms and <unk> species , and the riverbanks are often lined with arrowroot . This martin seems to be able to adapt to open savanna habitats containing Hymenocardia acida , in which it will roost overnight when not breeding , and is therefore not heavily dependent on the neighbouring forests as long as the riverine breeding sites survive . 
 = = Behaviour = = 
 In a presumed example of courtship behaviour , a male Brazza 's martin perched about 30 cm ( 1 ft ) away from a female and sang for about ten minutes . As it sang , the male leant towards the female , which caused the still @-@ folded wings and tail to rise relative to the body . The Brazza 's martin nests in the vertical banks of forested rivers from July to October , at the end of the dry season but before the river levels are high enough to cause flooding . A small colony of four pairs was recorded breeding near a rocky outcrop on the side of a valley . 
 The Brazza 's martin nests singly or in loose colonies with sometimes widely separated burrows . The nest is a small heap of soft material such as feathers or dry grass at the end of a typically 50 @-@ cm ( 20 @-@ in ) tunnel . The normal clutch is three white eggs . The eggs measure 18 @.@ 5 x 112 @.@ 5 mm ( 0 @.@ 73 x 0 @.@ 49 in ) and weigh 1 @.@ 5 g ( 0 @.@ 05 oz ) . The incubation and fledging times are unknown , although as with all hirundines the chicks are altricial , hatching naked and blind . 
 As with other swallows , Brazza 's martin feeds on flying insects , including termites , and may hunt over rivers or open savanna . It can occur in single @-@ species flocks or with other swallows including barn swallows , lesser striped swallows , or rock martins . 
 = = Status = = 
 There has been little ornithological research in this part of Africa , and until 2008 the Brazza 's martin was classified as Data Deficient . It was thought to have a much more restricted distribution range , but a 2007 paper presented evidence that extended its known range by 500 km ( 300 mi ) to the north and 175 km ( 90 mi ) southwards , a quadrupling of the area . It has a large range of 402 @,@ 000 km2 ( 155 @,@ 000 sq mi ) although the total population is unknown . Its extensive range and apparently stable population means this bird is classed as Least Concern on the IUCN Red List . 
 It is likely that this species is dug out for food by humans , but its small , dispersed colonies in firm soil suggests that it is a less rewarding target than the densely packed sandbank nests of species such as the African river martin and rosy bee @-@ eater . Breeding colonies in river sandbars are liable to flooding , but neither natural causes nor hunting appear to be having a serious impact , and this species seems under no immediate threat . Its ability to use degraded habitats also aids its survival . The Brazza 's martin is not a protected species in Angola , the DRC , or the Republic of Congo . 
 = Sibling Rivalry ( Family Guy ) = 
 " Sibling Rivalry " is the 22nd episode of the fourth season of the animated comedy series Family Guy . It originally aired on Fox in the United States on March 26 , 2006 . The episode follows Stewie as he battles with his half @-@ brother , Bertram ( voiced by Wallace Shawn ) , who is born to two lesbians after Peter donates sperm . Meanwhile , Lois begins excessive eating after Peter undergoes a vasectomy and loses his interest in sex . 
 The episode was written by Cherry Chevapravatdumrong and directed by Dan Povenmire . The episode received mixed reviews from critics for its storyline and many cultural references . According to Nielsen ratings , it was viewed in 7 @.@ 95 million homes in its original airing . The episode featured guest performances by Randy Crenshaw , Gavin Dunne , Bob Joyce , John Joyce , Phil LaMarr , Rick Logan , Wallace Shawn , Tara Strong , Nicole Sullivan and Wally Wingert , as well as several recurring voice actors for the series . 
 = = Plot = = 
 After a pregnancy scare , Peter reluctantly agrees to get a vasectomy to prevent further repeats . Before the surgery , he agrees to donate sperm , should he and Lois ever decide to have another baby . While in the sperm bank , Peter accidentally destroys all the existing samples , and decides to replace them with his own to prevent himself from getting into trouble . Nine months later , a lesbian couple , who took away some of Peter 's sperm in order to conceive a child , gives birth to Bertram , Stewie 's half @-@ brother who first appeared in the episode " Emission Impossible " . 
 After the vasectomy , Peter loses his sex drive , much to the frustration of Lois , who embraces overeating as a substitute . Peter begins to ridicule Lois due to her weight , but stops shortly after they have sex and discovers they prefer " fat sex " , opposed to their regular sex . Peter attempts to make Lois fatter to feed his sexual urges . After becoming even more enormous , Lois suffers a heart attack during sex ; doctors remove all of the fat from her body , and she returns to her normal weight . 
 Shortly after birth , Bertram declares war with Stewie for control over the playground . They confront each other in the playground with F @-@ 117 Nighthawks and AH @-@ 1 Cobras , firing numerous bullets at each other . After the air battle ends with no winners , Bertram resorts to biological warfare , and infects Stewie with chickenpox . After recovering , Stewie confronts Bertram , and they engage in a sword fight in the play area . Stewie eventually wins by disarming Bertram , and later that night , is seen suspiciously digging a hole with Christopher Moltisanti , but the hole is actually for a young tree . Stewie explains to Christopher that Bertram admitted defeat to Stewie and ran away . 
 = = Production = = 
 The song performed after Lois ' pregnancy test comes back negative was written by Alec Sulkin and Alex Borstein , and sung by professional Hollywood studio singers . Orchestrations in this song were performed by Walter Murphy , and described by show producer Seth MacFarlane to be " wonderful " . The sketch of Peter challenging Lois to a race to Boston was removed from television broadcasting in order to save time . As Lois is slowly racing Peter to Boston , a Shania Twain song can be heard on the radio ; Dan Povenmire states on the DVD commentary that he often gets into trouble for adding pieces of music into an episode when they 're so short , yet cost so much . The producers of both Family Guy and the Ice Age series agreed to collaborate in the episode during its reference to <unk> from the Ice Age series . 
 There was discussion among the producers of the series regarding whether Bertram should be included in the storyline , as he had not appeared in any episodes for several years . An un @-@ used scene was intended for broadcasting which showed Stewie , while trying to find Waldo in an Abercrombie & Fitch catalog , saying to Brian " Oh , turn to the next page . I bet they put him in someone 's utility pocket " , but it was never used as it was not deemed funny enough for the episode . Originally , Peter singing " Milkshake " to inmates at a prison was going to be naked and push his nipples from underneath , but broadcasting standards objected ; as a result , the show broadcasting Peter wearing underpants and pushing his nipples from the side . When Peter and Lois are in the restaurant and Peter leaves to " warn the chef of Lois ' arrival " , Lois was intended to say " If he won 't put something in me , I will " , but the gag was never broadcast . 
 The unsafe homeless man with whom Peter was seen leaving a youth @-@ baseball team in Stewie 's flashback was originally based on John Wayne Gacy , but people claimed he didn 't look scary enough , so Povenmire changed the character completely to that of a homeless man . The idea of Stewie and Bertram laughing as they go down the slide during their sword fight was pitched by Povenmire 's wife and , although negative about the idea at first , Povenmire included it in the episode because the original sketch not going so well . During Peter and Lois ' " fat sex " , Peter repeatedly states " almost , almost " ; originally , there was going to be approximately twice as many of these , but they were never included in the episode . The DVD version of the episode shows Peter arriving at the sperm bank and saying to the receptionist : " I have an appointment to banish a White Russian from my Kremlin " , to which she replies with " This is a sperm bank , you don 't have to use innuendo " , and Peter concludes the conversation with " Where do I <unk> ? " . 
 In addition to the regular cast , actor Randy Crenshaw , actor Gavin Dunne , actor Bob Joyce , actor John Joyce , voice actor Phil LaMarr , actor Rick Logan , actor Wallace Shawn , voice actress Tara Strong , voice actress Nicole Sullivan , and voice actor Wally Wingert guest starred in the episode . Recurring voice actors Ralph Garman , writer Mike Henry , writer Chris Sheridan , writer Danny Smith , writer Alec Sulkin , and writer John Viener made minor appearances . Actor Patrick Warburton appeared in the episode as well . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 When in the children 's park , Stewie quotes " Did ya get me my Cheez Whiz , boy " and a man throws one to him , this is a reference to The Blues Brothers . Stewie and Brian attempting to find diversity in an Abercrombie and Fitch catalogue is a reference to the children 's books series Where 's Wally ? , as well as to a lawsuit alleging a lack of diversity in Abercrombie and Fitch 's hiring practices . Before the battle between Stewie and Bertram , Stewie says " On my signal , unleash hell . " This is a reference to the opening scene of Gladiator . An Ice Age reference is made when <unk> , a character from the films attempts to steal Peter 's nuts . When Stewie invades Bertram 's camp at the end of the episode Bertram quotes Star Wars Episode IV : A New Hope repeating the line Darth Vader says when he senses Obi @-@ Wan Kenobi on the Death Star . When Peter names his kids , Peter mentions the kids from various shows that are currently airing at Nick at Nite . When Brian mentions this , Peter begins naming Street Fighter characters . Brian again points out this fact , after which Peter names various colors . Sauron , the villain from the Lord of the Rings is shown as the Eye of Sauron in a scene where he is trying to find his lost contact lens . A cutaway scene features Peter in a jail surrounded by inmates who force him to strip , squeeze his boobs together , and sing the chorus from Kelis 's 2003 hit “ Milkshake . ” This is possibly an homage to the scene after the credits in the movie Dodgeball : A True Underdog Story in which Ben Stiller does the same thing in his fatsuit . 
 After Bertram 's defeat , the scene cuts away to Stewie and Christopher Moltisanti from The Sopranos digging a hole . The viewer is led to assume that the hole is for Bertram but really it is for a tree Stewie and Christopher are planting . Then Stewie states that Bertram admitted to defeat and ran off after which Christopher calls Bertram a " <unk> . " 
 = = Reception = = 
 " Sibling Rivalry " was watched by 7 @.@ 95 million viewers , making it the 77th most @-@ watched program of the week . In a review of the episode , Bob Sassone of TV Squad noted " If there 's one reason I 'm glad I watched tonight 's episode it 's because I learned exactly how a vasectomy is done , " adding that " Peter is going to have a vasectomy , so he decides to freeze his sperm before he does it . This leads to a hysterical , yet truly gross , scene where Peter knocks over an entire shelf of sperm samples , and has to refill them , um , himself . " Geoffrey D. Roberts of Real Talk Reviews reviewed the episode negatively , writing " many viewers will probably be disappointed with an episode about sibling rivalry between Stewie and newfound half @-@ brother Bertram . Both share the same goal – to rule the Universe . With Bertram nothing more than a <unk> version of his half @-@ brother , it turns out one Stewie Griffin is more than enough . " 
 = Oliver Valentine = 
 Oliver " Ollie " Valentine is a fictional character from the BBC medical drama Holby City , played by actor James Anderson . He first appeared in the eleventh series episode " <unk> With Caution " , broadcast on 9 June 2009 . Oliver was introduced alongside his older sister , Penny ( Emma Catherwood ) , as a Foundation House Officer 1 ( F1 ) on rotation at Holby City Hospital . Series producer Diana Kyle intended their inclusion to have an " instant impact on the wards . " Anderson was selected to play Oliver ; he spent time with a real F1 doctor and trained with the programme 's medical advisors to prepare for the part . It took him around six months to ease into the role , and a further six to feel comfortable in it . 
 Oliver was initially portrayed as " the golden boy " compared to his sister . <unk> charming and medically talented , he nonetheless lacked confidence in his ability . When Oliver reached his F2 training , the series formed an on @-@ screen duo by pairing him with registrar Greg Douglas ( Edward MacLiam ) . Oliver 's lack of competency was highlighted – he endangered patients and landed his colleagues in trouble . In a prominent storyline , Oliver made a series of medical errors , which forced him to admit that he cheated on an exam at medical school . He began a downward spiral , and reached " rock bottom " when Penny was killed off . He was then central to a special flashback episode , which depicted his battle to cope with her death . Though he confessed to Director of Surgery Henrik Hanssen ( Guy Henry ) that he was not truly qualified , Hanssen allowed Oliver to continue practising medicine . 
 Branded a Lothario @-@ type character , Oliver has been involved in several romantic storylines during his tenure ; Anderson has called him " the hospital bike " . In a toy boy storyline with ward sister Chrissie Williams ( Tina Hobley ) , Oliver was seen to compromise his career . He went on to date ward sister Daisha Anderson ( Rebecca Grant ) , kiss registrar Jac Naylor ( Rosie Marcel ) , and earn the unreciprocated affection of ward sister Frieda Petrenko ( Olga Fedori ) , and marry F1 doctor Tara Lo ( Jing Lusi ) . Anderson decided to leave the series in 2012 and filmed his final scenes in March 2013 . Oliver departed in the episode " Mens Sana In <unk> Sano " , dated 9 July 2013 . He returned on 23 December 2014 , for one episode , before making a full time return on 5 May 2015 . 
 Responses to the character have generally been negative , with particular criticism for his poor treatment of Penny . Bree Treacy of RTÉ Ten disliked both Valentines , and Jim Shelley of the Daily Mail described him as a " weasel " . Many have questioned Oliver 's medical skills and labelled him an incompetent doctor – as Daniel Maier of The Guardian put it , he is " a doctor with the blue eyes of Fonda and the medical competence of fondue " . 
 = = Storylines = = 
 Oliver arrives at Holby City Hospital as an F1 doctor , alongside his sister Penny ( Emma Catherwood ) . He acquires Penny 's preferred rotation on the Acute Assessment Unit ( AAU ) , where he develops a flirtatious relationship with ward sister Chrissie Williams ( Tina Hobley ) . Within weeks , their relationship becomes sexual . Chrissie becomes pregnant , but later miscarries . They break up , and Oliver moves on to date ward sister Daisha Anderson ( Rebecca Grant ) . A transfer to the cardiothoracic surgery ward has him working under registrar Jac Naylor ( Rosie Marcel ) . While Daisha spends Christmas with her family in the Philippines , Oliver kisses Jac . Upon her return , Daisha learns of the tryst . Soon thereafter , she is shot during a hostage situation and Oliver struggles to cope . Although she recovers , she opts to leave Holby and move back to the Philippines . 
 Oliver discovers that Penny has been having a relationship with a patient , Scott ( Joshua Bowman ) , endangering her career . She plans to move to Spain with him and abandon her training , but Oliver convinces Scott to leave without her . Keen to earn praise from his consultants , Connie Beauchamp ( Amanda Mealing ) and Elliot Hope ( Paul Bradley ) , Oliver claims Penny 's research as his own , and is awarded her place in an operation . He is promoted to F2 level , and betrays Penny further by revealing her affair with Scott , which results in her failing her cardiothoracic rotation and being moved to the AAU . A rivalry develops between them , but they are forced to call a truce when a series of pranks endanger a patient . 
 Registrar Greg Douglas ( Edward MacLiam ) <unk> his responsibilities by excessively delegating to Oliver ; to his dismay , Connie appoints him as Oliver 's mentor . Oliver pushes himself too far in an attempt to impress Greg , which earns the senior doctor a reprimand for leaving him unsupervised . Oliver tries to earn back Greg 's respect , but panics while attempting to insert a chest drain , and has to be rescued by ward sister Frieda Petrenko ( Olga Fedori ) . He invites her for a drink as thanks , but when Penny discovers that Frieda has romantic feelings for him , Oliver cancels as he does not reciprocate them . Oliver 's confidence is further damaged when he <unk> a case , which results in a mother leaving her son to die alone . He moves back to the AAU , where he is shaken by an encounter with the boy 's mother , which causes him to panic and embarrass himself in theatre . Penny 's career begins to improve , and Oliver resents her when she is given registrar duties for a shift . Having realised that he is close to failing his F2 year , Oliver implicates Penny in a serious surgical error of his own doing , but is caught by registrar Antoine Malick ( Jimmy <unk> ) . 
 When a patient unexpectedly dies in his care , Oliver breaks down . He confesses to Penny that he cheated in medical school by swapping one of their exam papers , so he passed on her merit while she was forced to repeat a year . Furious , Penny tells Oliver that he must confess to Director of Surgery Henrik Hanssen ( Guy Henry ) . He writes a letter of resignation , but deletes it after a positive day working alongside Frieda , who encourages him to repeat his F2 year . After giving Oliver a final chance to confess , Penny is called away to the site of a train crash . Oliver is left alone on AAU , where he successfully performs a difficult procedure . Hopeful that Penny will forgive him , Oliver is devastated to learn that she has been killed in an accident at the crash site . Unable to cope in the aftermath of her death , Oliver turns to drugs and alcohol . He sends Hanssen a letter of resignation , which includes a full confession . His father Tony ( Simon Shepherd ) offers him money to choose a new career , and claims that Oliver always had more potential than Penny . This angers Oliver , who endangers his own life to save a patient and feels reinvigorated . Hanssen is impressed by Oliver 's patient treatment , and overlooks his cheating to allow him a fresh start . 
 Oliver continues and succeeds in his second F2 year under Elliot , who is his mentor . He begins a relationship with F1 Tara Lo ( Jing Lusi ) . He learns she has a brain tumor and becomes fixated on finding a cure . She learns to accept it . Oliver begins spending more time at Tara 's flat and later moves in . Oliver and Tara marry the day before she has a major operation . Oliver and Tara prepare for her operation , but there are complications in surgery and she dies . 
 = = Development = = 
 = = = Creation and characterisation = = = 
 The impending arrival of sibling trainee doctors Oliver and Penny was announced in May 2009 , by executive producer Tony McHale and series producer Diana Kyle . The latter described them both as " full of energy and enthusiasm " , and asserted that they would have an " instant impact on the wards at every level . " They were deemed talented physicians with the desire to achieve by McHale , who noted that " one is more naturally gifted than the other " , and suggested that their personal lives would cause conflict with their professional ones , as they attempted to progress at work . 
 Actor James Anderson was cast as Oliver . Before assuming the role , he shadowed a real F1 doctor on ward rounds – an experience he found difficult . " We were approaching beds in which people were waking up from heart attacks and coming around quite distressed sometimes . It was really difficult to be there with a patient . It 's harder than you think and I got quite emotional . " Anderson underwent such extensive training with the programme 's medical advisors that he jested in June 2009 , " If I started medical training now , I could probably graduate as a doctor coming out of the show ! " The actor experienced " an extended period of anxiety " upon joining the series , and recalls : " It took me about six months to have any sense of what was going on and then the second six months to feel comfortable [ ... ] but only because it 's such a well @-@ oiled machine . You 're coming in as a little cog , so you have to discover how to work in that and that takes a while . " 
 BBC Online described Oliver 's positive qualities as being his " boyishly charming " manner and his general determination . Jane Simon of the Daily Mirror deemed him a " soft touch " when he went to great lengths to help a young patient , and a Daily Mail review suggested that Oliver was " really quite sweet " , despite his apparent smugness . Oliver is flawed by a lack of confidence and his deceptive nature . He has a tendency to land his work colleagues in trouble , which has been conveyed through storylines with Daisha and Greg . What 's on TV highlighted Oliver 's " lack of competence " and called him petulant for betraying Penny after his promotion to F2 level . When his career began to deteriorate , the publication deemed him reckless , then found him hapless in the aftermath of her death , in reference to the way he " [ sank ] into despair , finding comfort in drink , drugs and his dead sister 's flatmate . " The Sunday Mirror 's Kevin O 'Sullivan reflected on Oliver 's development since his arrival , with the observation , " Once he was the strutting ladies ' man of the wards , a veritable medical Casanova who exuded confidence and charm . But time has taken its toll on Oliver Valentine – and now he is just a shadow of his former self " – a devastated and broken man , " tormented by the memory of his sibling and his guilty conscience . " 
 = = = Relationships = = = 
 Introduced as a Lothario @-@ type character , according to Anderson , Oliver " had a reputation for being the hospital bike . " His first relationship developed when he attracted the attention of ward sisters Chrissie Williams and Daisha Anderson . Daisha showed less interest in him than Chrissie , of whose attentiveness Anderson said , " I think any hot @-@ blooded male would find that attractive " . Oliver appeared to ruin his chances with Daisha when he encouraged a patient to complain about her diagnosis – though Anderson noted , " he does apologise to Daisha , and sweetly gives her a cupcake " . This left Chrissie free to pursue Oliver . Before their relationship began , Anderson opined " She 's gorgeous , and Oliver would be a fool not to go out with her . " He thought that Oliver and Chrissie 's " unflappable " natures made them a good fit for one another , though wondered if they were too alike . As an older woman , their relationship was described as a " <unk> storyline " for Chrissie . Hobley admitted to having fun with the storyline due to the real age gap between herself and Anderson . She described Chrissie 's feelings for Oliver , stating : " Chrissie is having a lot of fun with him . But deep down she 's really hoping to find true love – she 's been quite unlucky so far . She 's not getting any younger and she 's worried about missing out on kids . " Producers Kyle and McHale revealed that the pair could have been a " perfect match " , however said the romance would not run smoothly . 
 Anderson believed it was a bad idea for his character to get involved with a work colleague . Oliver began to doubt the relationship , and on Penny 's advice , convinced Chrissie to break up with him without ruining his career . Chrissie took the break up well , and Hobley told What 's on TV that her character did not mind , as " it was only a bit of fun . She never planned on settling down with him . " It was then announced Chrissie would become pregnant with Oliver 's child . Hobley assessed that Chrissie was surprised to learn that she was pregnant , but pleased , as she had lost a baby five years previously and did not think that she was capable of conceiving another . Oliver was displeased by the news , but Chrissie had no expectations that he should provide for her . Her father , nursing consultant Mark Williams ( Robert Powell ) , urged him to " stand up to the mark and be a proper man " . However , soon after , Chrissie miscarried their unborn baby . 
 Oliver went on to share a kiss with Jac , a photograph of which was spread around the hospital by Penny , prompting Oliver to try and hide it from Daisha . Ward sister Frieda Petrenko developed a crush on him , and was pleased when he invited her for a drink , however Oliver did not reciprocate her feelings and later cancelled . Fedori commented in January 2011 that she and Anderson had had little " juicy " material , more " little scenes here and there " . Asked about the future of Frieda and Oliver 's relationship , she was unwilling to divulge potential plots , but noted , " There 's been talk about things heading in all sorts of directions " . 
 Oliver initially had a " friendly rivalry " with sister Penny . Catherwood believes they always had " a really good relationship " . She characterised the siblings ' relationship as " one of constant rivalry but ultimately unconditional support " , and noted , " Everything always comes more easily to Oliver than Penny – she has spent her life playing catch up " . When Penny considered giving her career up over a patient she was romantically involved with , in order to protect her , Oliver ruined the romance . Their relationship remained unaffected by this : Catherwood revealed , " Well they are brother and sister , so you forgive your family for enormous amounts . So it doesn 't affect their relationship , if anything he is there as soon as she breaks down he 's there to catch her , full of apologies and support . " She said the situation would bring them closer together , because it is a typical scenario siblings go through . When Catherwood quit the series , Penny was killed whilst attempting to rescue a patient from a train crash . Her death was not shown on @-@ screen : a conscious decision made by the production team to fully focus on Oliver 's story . Series producer <unk> Craig Brown revealed that the big focus would be on the effect it had on Oliver . Forced to come to terms with her death , he faced an " emotional rollercoaster of feeling that he was second best to her " . 
 = = = Career = = = 
 Having arrived at Holby as an F1 , Oliver quickly progressed onto his F2 training . This resulted in " professional jealousy " forming with Penny , and in retaliation to their disagreements , he put her career in jeopardy by revealing her affair . Registrar Greg Douglas was appointed as Oliver 's mentor . The fast @-@ paced storyline saw Greg initially " kick [ ing ] against his newfound responsibility " , before realising that Oliver could be beneficial to his own career , which resulted in an " unlikely friendship " forming between them . Though a " fairly light , buddy @-@ buddy " storyline to begin with , Anderson felt that filming their scenes was " intensive " . Speaking of their friendship , Anderson explained : " We start off on the wrong foot with each other and we 're competitive , which is unhelpful to the patients and ( initially ) we 're not out to help one another at all . But they have similarities ... in terms of dropping people in it . " The pace of the storyline had to be changed when Anderson injured his knee upon falling down a ten foot cellar . The pair clashed over conflicting medical opinions on patient care , and their friendship soon created a negative effect over Oliver 's work ethic . Greg 's jokes at his expense left Oliver unable to carry out simple procedures correctly . 
 Oliver 's career further deteriorated in early 2011 , when it transpired he was not a qualified doctor . A series of setbacks – failing the exam to progress on to his F3 year , blaming a surgical error on Penny , and the death of a patient in his care – prompted him to admit that he swapped his own exam paper with Penny 's in his final year of medical school . Anderson explained that Oliver could no longer cope with the mounting pressure , hence his confession . Contrasting the siblings , he assessed " [ Oliver ] was seen as the golden boy when he arrived at Holby – but he was trading on his sister 's success . " Issued with the ultimatum of confessing to Director of Surgery Henrik Hanssen , Oliver realised that " he must take responsibility " , lest he " lose the one person who loves him unconditionally . " 
 Believing himself to be in a " impossible dilemma " , Anderson said that Oliver was trying to make good on what he had done by repeating his F2 exams . " By exposing the lie he 'll end his career , Oliver can 't understand why Penny won 't stand by him . " He added that since Oliver made a serious surgical error , his colleagues had lost trust in his medical capability . When a train crash occurred , he was forced to take control of AAU . Anderson explained : " He 's not fully qualified and that 's all he can think about . He 's struggling . " When he saved a patients life , Oliver thought he should keep his job . However , he was then told that Penny had died , news that would " change Oliver 's life forever . " Following Penny 's death , Craig @-@ Brown stated that " whether he 's good enough to stay in medicine will be [ Oliver 's ] big storyline . " The series explored how Oliver coped with her death through a flashback episode . Henry , who plays Hanssen , observed that Oliver 's return to work saw him make multiple mistakes and " hit rock bottom " . Oliver tried to resign from Holby , though before he left he responded to a dangerous RTA call and saved a patient 's life . When he was summoned by Hanssen about his resignation , he was given " fatherly advice " , and the senior doctor " turned a blind eye " to Oliver 's confession . Henry explained that Hanssen " doesn ’ t think a good doctor should lose his chance at a career in medicine " , after learning Oliver risked his own life on the job . 
 = = = Departure and return = = = 
 The character left the show in the episode titled " Mens Sana In <unk> Sano " , which aired on 9 July 2013 . Anderson told producers of his intention to leave one year prior to his departure . They wanted Oliver to leave the show on a positive note and began planning his final storyline . Anderson filmed his final scenes in March 2013 . Producers kept his departure a secret until transmission to surprise viewers . Anderson told Daniel Kilkelly from Digital Spy that Oliver survived the bereavement over the deaths of his sister and wife . Oliver was given redemption in his final scenes so that his fans could believe that he has a future . Oliver resigns and in his final scene tells Elliot that he will return to the hospital . Anderson was pleased that his character has the option of returning in the future . 
 On 30 October 2014 , it was announced that Anderson had reprised his role . Anderson expressed his pleasure at returning to Holby City saying he was " thrilled to be given the opportunity to bring Ollie back " . He said there would be " lots of surprises in store " for his character , who he dubbed " Oliver 2 @.@ 0 " due to him being older and wiser . Anderson had been approached to return numerous times but only agreed mid 2014 . Oliver 's return was planned to last one episode but Anderson was convinced to return permanently . The BBC later released a promotional video publicising the character 's return . Oliver 's return storyline will see him admitted to the hospital suffering from a serious heart condition . Anderson explained that in the fourteen months since his departure from Holby , Oliver has been working abroad in South America , drinking heavily and self @-@ medicating with several drugs . As he was not taking proper care of himself , he contracted a virus which has affected his heart . Ric Griffin ( Hugh Quarshie ) discovers a " bloodied and badly bruised " Oliver near the hospital entrance , and admits him immediately . When it emerges that Oliver 's condition is potentially fatal , he asks Elliot to fit him with his new surgical device . However , Jac refuses to let the surgery go ahead as the device is only in the experimental stage . Anderson said " Oliver knows that the operation shouldn 't go ahead . It 's legally , ethically and morally not a procedure that he should have , but when Jac says no , he 's disappointed and angry . " However , Elliot refuses to give up on Oliver and makes sure the operation goes ahead . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Reviewer 's interpretations of Oliver have generally negative . Early in his tenure , he received positive commentary from Inside Soap , who said , " he may be a whizz @-@ kid trainee doctor , but new Holby recruit Oliver Valentine isn 't all work and no play ! He 's certainly got an eye for the ladies . " Maeve Quigley , writing for the Daily Mirror , opined that Chrissie was more than a match for Oliver . She added that he soon learnt " you underestimate the female staff of Holby at your peril " , after he thought his flirting had Chrissie " wrapped around his little finger . " 
 Also writing for the Daily Mirror , Simon called Oliver and Penny a " medical tag @-@ team " . She found it odd they did not get along professionally because she thought " a brother @-@ sister relationship would be one of the least troublesome at Holby . " A Liverpool Daily Post review said that Oliver made Penny feel about " two inches tall " when he was promoted to F2 , and supported her question " Who needs enemies when I 've got a brother like you ? " Bree Treacy of RTÉ Ten found both of the Valentines annoying . In June 2010 she preferred Penny , " with Oliver definitely getting the award for the most annoying sibling in the hospital " ; the following month she called them irritating and recommended they " get [ their ] acts together " . On the day Oliver admitted to stealing Penny 's exam paper , Daily Mail critic Jim Shelley featured him in his negative " Down " column and branded him a " weasel " . 
 Oliver 's lack of medical ability drew several negative reviews . Referring to his " <unk> @-@ handedness " , Simon described him as " screwing up just about everything he touches " upon his return to the AAU , a sentiment she repeated after Penny 's death . Simon was left baffled when a professor of cardiology was offered the " very best care possible " – which resulted in Oliver treating him . She concluded : " [ this ] begs the question , what 's he doing at Holby being looked after by an F2 ? " The Guardian 's Daniel Maier ridiculed Oliver 's supposed talents , and jested that he was " a doctor with the blue eyes of Fonda and the medical competence of fondue " . One Daily Record columnist said that Oliver " hoped to complete his training on the strength of his nice eyes and pretty " . 
 A special flashback episode , centered on Oliver dealing with the aftermath of Penny 's death , was selected as recommended viewing by What 's on TV , the Liverpool Daily Post , and the Daily Mirror . The Sunday Mirror 's O 'Sullivan called it poignant , and Rachel Mainwaring of the Western Mail wrote , " It 's easy viewing ( apart from the odd gooey scene ) and full of moral as well as medical issues that leaves you shouting at the screen , ' Do the right thing Oliver , tell them the truth . ' " 
 = The Boat Race 1842 = 
 The 6th Boat Race took place on the River Thames on 11 June 1842 . The Boat Race is a side @-@ by @-@ side rowing race between crews from the Universities of Oxford and Cambridge . In a race substantially interrupted by river traffic , Oxford beat Cambridge by a distance of four @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half lengths . 
 = = Background = = 
 The Boat Race , first held in 1829 , is a side @-@ by @-@ side rowing competition between the University of Oxford ( sometimes referred to as the " Dark Blues " ) and the University of Cambridge ( sometimes referred to as the " Light Blues " ) . Cambridge went into the race as reigning champions , having defeated Oxford by 22 lengths in the previous year 's race . They led overall with four wins to Oxford 's one . 
 Cambridge University Boat Club received the challenge to race from the Oxford University Boat Club secretary Fletcher Menzies in late @-@ 1841 , in which it was proposed that a race between the universities should take place in late June or early July of 1842 . Cambridge rejected the suggestion , maintaining that an Easter race would be preferable . A challenge from their captain , John Ridley , was then sent to Leander Club , whose reply bemoaned the fact that they had insufficient numbers to provide an eight , suggesting a four instead . This counteroffer was also rejected and Cambridge offered to row " any eight @-@ oared crew from any club or clubs whatsoever . " After further , somewhat acrimonious discussion , it was agreed that Oxford would challenge Cambridge on 11 June 1842 , with the caveat that the Light Blues would not row on the Thames before 8 June . 
 The race took place on a five @-@ and @-@ three @-@ quarter @-@ mile ( 9 @.@ 2 km ) stretch of the Thames between Westminster Bridge and Putney Bridge . The umpire for the race was W. H. Harrison , Commodore of the Royal Thames Yacht Club . 
 = = Crews = = 
 The Oxford crew weighed an average of 11 st 9 @.@ 375 lb ( 73 @.@ 9 kg ) , about 5 @.@ 5 pounds ( 2 @.@ 5 kg ) per rower more than their Light Blue opposition . None of the Oxford crew had rowed in previous Boat Races while Cambridge saw five return from the previous year 's event , including John M. Ridley and Francis Penrose who had rowed in the 1840 race . 
 = = Race = = 
 Cambridge won the toss and elected to start on the Middlesex side of the river , handing Oxford the Surrey side of the river . Both boats started below the arches of Westminster Bridge . Although Oxford made the better start , Cambridge pulled ahead and led until their course was diverted by river traffic including a steamer and a lighter , allowing the Dark Blues to retake the lead . Between the National Penitentiary and Wandsworth , according to MacMichael " they were not once free from the swell of the steamers " but continued to extend their lead . Once clear of the steamers , Cambridge began to close the gap in the last mile to Putney , but Oxford passed under Putney Bridge with a lead of four @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half lengths in a time of 30 minutes 1 second . It was their first victory since the inaugural race in 1829 , hence their first win on " London water " . 
 = Susan B. Anthony dollar = 
 The Susan B. Anthony dollar was a United States dollar coin minted from 1979 to 1981 , when the series was halted due to poor public reception , and again in 1999 . Proposed as a smaller replacement for the cumbersome Eisenhower dollar , a number of shapes and compositions were tested , but all were opposed by the vending machine industry , a powerful lobby affecting coin legislation . Finally , a round planchet with an eleven @-@ sided inner border was chosen for the smaller dollar . 
 The original design depicted an allegorical representation of Liberty , but organizations and individuals in Congress called for the coin to depict a woman . Several proposals were submitted , and social reformer Susan B. Anthony was selected as the design subject . The reverse design of the Eisenhower dollar was kept . Both sides of the coin were designed by Frank Gasparro , the Chief Engraver of the United States Mint . 
 The Mint struck 500 million coins in anticipation of considerable public demand , but the Susan B. Anthony dollar was poorly received , in part because of confusion caused by its similarity in size and metallic composition to the quarter . Despite its poor reception , the coins began seeing use in vending machines and mass transit systems , gradually depleting the surplus . In 1997 , Congress passed a law authorizing mintage of the gold @-@ colored Sacagawea dollar , but production did not begin quickly enough to meet demand . To fill the gap , a final run of Susan B. Anthony dollars was struck in 1999 ; the series was retired the following year . 
 Special coins for sale to collectors were struck in proof finish through the run of the Susan B. Anthony dollar , and some minting varieties are valuable to collectors . However , most circulation strikes remained in government stockpiles for years after minting , so many are available in uncirculated grades , and the premium over face value is minimal . 
 = = Background = = 
 In the early 1960s , as the price of silver rose , Treasury Department vaults were depleted of silver dollars by the public . No silver dollars had been minted in the United States since 1935 , and a shortage developed in the Western United States , especially in areas in which gambling was common . As a result , Congress voted to authorize production of 45 million new silver Peace dollars on August 3 , 1964 . However , the move drew strong condemnation from critics who believed that the issuance of the coins was influenced by special interests , and that they would be quickly removed from circulation . The dollars were subsequently melted , and the Coinage Act of 1965 , enacted on July 23 , 1965 , outlawed all production of dollar coins for a period of five years . 
 On May 12 , 1969 , the Joint Commission on the Coinage , a panel of 24 individuals organized by the 1965 Coinage Act , recommended resumption of dollar coin production following a study conducted by a Congressional task force . On October 1 and 3 , 1969 , a hearing before the U.S. House of Representatives discussing the proposed legislation to authorize the coin , in a copper @-@ nickel clad composition , with the 1 @.@ 5 @-@ inch ( 38 mm ) diameter of the former silver dollars . A provision was added requiring the coin to depict recently deceased President Dwight D. Eisenhower on the obverse and a design " emblematic of the symbolic eagle of Apollo 11 landing on the moon " on the reverse . President Richard Nixon signed the bill into law on December 31 , 1970 . Both the obverse and reverse designs were created by Frank Gasparro , the Chief Engraver of the United States Mint . 
 The coin , known as the Eisenhower dollar , proved unpopular with the public , and very few circulated in transactions . In 1976 , the Research Triangle Institute conducted a survey of United States coinage . Among other things , they recommended the half dollar , which also saw little use , be entirely eliminated from production , and the size of the dollar be reduced . Their report read in part : 
 A conveniently @-@ sized dollar coin would significantly broaden the capabilities of consumers for cash transactions , especially with machines . Members of the automatic merchandising industry have expressed a strong interest in a smaller dollar , indicating their willingness to adapt their machinery to its use . 
 Numismatic historian David L. Ganz suggested that Eisenhower , a Republican , was chosen as a means of balancing the half dollar , depicting Democrat John F. Kennedy . In a 1977 paper , he agreed with the findings of the Institute , suggesting that both coins should be eliminated ; the half dollar production ceased entirely , and the dollar replaced by one of smaller diameter and with a different design . Treasury officials desired the small dollar coin as a cost @-@ saving measure ; Mint Director Stella Hackel estimated that replacing half of the issued dollar bills with small dollars would save $ 19 million ( $ 68 @.@ 9 million today ) in annual production costs . 
 = = Design history = = 
 = = = Liberty design = = = 
 The Mint began preparation for the reduced @-@ diameter dollar coin in 1976 . Although no legislation had yet been introduced , Treasury officials anticipated a positive reception from Congress , and the coin had near unanimous support from the Mint and the vending machine industry , an influential lobby in the area of coin design and creation . In 1977 , Treasury Secretary Michael Blumenthal publicly endorsed a smaller dollar coin and suggested that an allegorical representation of Liberty would be a suitable subject for the coin . 
 Chief Engraver Gasparro was tasked with creating a design for the proposed coin . His obverse design depicted a bust of Liberty , while his reverse depicted a soaring eagle . The bust was pictured along with a pole , atop which sat a Phrygian cap , a symbol used to represent freedom . Gasparro 's Liberty design was based on a similar obverse that he created for a 1969 American Numismatic Association convention medal . The reverse , depicting an eagle flying above a mountain against the rising sun , was originally created by Gasparro in 1967 for a proposed commemorative half dollar . Describing the reverse design , Gasparro stated that it was meant to symbolize " a new day being born " . 
 The design was reviewed by the Commission of Fine Arts , and in an April 29 , 1976 , letter , Commission member J. Carter Brown praised the design : 
 I believe this would be a superb design for United States Coinage , rooted as it is in a great tradition , being based on the ' Liberty Cap cent ' of 1794 , following Augustin Dupré 's Libertas Americana medal commemorating Saratoga and Yorktown ( 1777 – 1781 ) . 
 A bill to reduce the diameter of the dollar from 1 @.@ 5 inches ( 38 mm ) to 1 @.@ 043 inches ( 26 @.@ 5 mm ) and the weight from 22 @.@ 68 grams to 8 @.@ 5 grams was introduced to the House of Representatives on May 1 , 1978 . The bill was introduced to the Senate on May 3 , and the proposed weight was reduced from 8 @.@ 5 grams to 8 @.@ 1 grams . The Mint conducted experiments involving eight- , ten- , <unk> and thirteen @-@ sided coins , but it was decided that the dollar would be round , as costly modifications would be required to update vending machinery to accept other shapes . Instead , the bill prescribed an eleven @-@ sided inner border , which was intended to aid identification by sight and by feel for the visually handicapped . 
 = = = Selection of Susan B. Anthony = = = 
 Treasury officials officially recommended Gasparro 's design , which they referred to as a " modernized version of the classic Liberty design " . On May 3 , 1978 , Wisconsin 's William Proxmire introduced legislation in the Senate which was identical to the Treasury proposal , except for mandating a design which was altered to social reformer Susan B. Anthony in place of the allegorical Liberty . On May 15 , Representatives Mary Rose Oakar and Patricia Schroeder introduced similar legislation to the House of Representatives . Anthony was also recommended by members of the National Organization for Women , the <unk> 's Caucus , the National Women 's Political Caucus and the League of Women Voters . In support of the proposed legislation , the League addressed a letter to Walter E. <unk> , chairman of the Subcommittee on Historic Preservation and Coinage , reading in part : 
 The League believes that the time has come , and is indeed long past , for the likeness of a prominent American woman to be placed on a denomination of U.S. currency . We believe strongly that the likeness should be that of an actual woman and not that of an imaginary or symbolic figure . Susan B. Anthony contributed immeasurably to the advancement of human dignity in this nation . It is entirely fitting and appropriate that her memory be honored through this measure . 
 In addition , officials tallied suggestions sent to the Mint by the general public as to the subject of the dollar coin , and Susan B. Anthony had received the most support . 
 Gasparro began work on his Susan B. Anthony design in June 1978 , before the legislation was authorized by Congress . He enlisted the help of a friend in conducting research on Anthony , which he felt was necessary before creating the design . He referenced approximately six different images while creating the portrait of Anthony , but it was based largely on just two . Gasparro created several different designs before receiving final approval . One of his portraits , depicting Anthony at age 28 , was shown to Anthony 's great @-@ niece , Susan B. Anthony III , who rejected it on the grounds that it unnecessarily " <unk> " her great @-@ aunt , and she criticized another design depicting Anthony at age 84 , which she believed made her appear too old . Gasparro made several alterations with the intent to depict her at age 50 , at the peak of her influence as a social reformer , but no photographs of her during that period were available . He eventually received approval after modification , later stating his belief that he had accurately portrayed Anthony . 
 Initially , Gasparro expected that Congress would authorize his soaring eagle reverse design to accompany the Susan B. Anthony obverse . However , an amendment introduced by Utah Senator Jake Garn altered the legislation to maintain the Apollo 11 design in use on the Eisenhower dollar reverse . 
 The bill was approved by Congress and signed into law by President Jimmy Carter on October 10 , 1978 , and production of Eisenhower dollars ceased during that year . After he signed the bill into law , Carter issued a statement , saying in part that he was confident that " this act — and the new dollar — will substantially improve our coinage system as well as cutting Government coin production costs . " He went on to declare his approval of the decision to depict Anthony on the coins : 
 I am particularly pleased that the new dollar coin will — for the first time in history — bear the image of a great American woman . The life of Susan B. Anthony exemplifies the ideals for which our country stands . The ' Anthony dollar ' will symbolize for all American women the achievement of their unalienable right to vote . It will be a constant reminder of the continuing struggle for the equality of all Americans . 
 = = = Design criticism = = = 
 Gasparro regarded the Anthony design as the most important of his career . Remarking on the public perception of the coin , Gasparro related that " it 's become part of a social movement . This new dollar 's more than a coin ; it 's an issue . " The decision to use a portrait of Susan B. Anthony in place of the allegorical Liberty was met with criticism by numismatists , who believed that the latter had greater artistic merit . Art critic and numismatist Cornelius Vermeule was critical of the obverse design replacement , as well as the decision to continue use of the Apollo 11 design . Vermeule noted that although Eisenhower 's administration established the National Aeronautics and Space Administration , Anthony had no connection to the moon landing or the U.S. space program . Commenting on the obverse and reverse pairing , he stated his belief that it was " a hasty marriage and a bad one " . Although he believed that Gasparro 's design was well executed , sculptor Robert Weinman criticized the decision to depict Anthony . Concerned about the possibility of other groups seeking representation on the coinage in response to its passage , Weinman characterized the Susan B. Anthony dollar legislation as a " billboard or campaign button approach to a national coin " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The first Susan B. Anthony dollars were struck at the Philadelphia Mint on December 13 , 1978 . First strikes at the Denver and San Francisco Mints followed on January 9 , 1979 and January 29 , respectively . Mint officials feared that the coins would be hoarded upon release , so they ordered the creation of a stockpile consisting of 500 million coins prior to the release date in July 1979 . The dollars all bore a mint mark denoting their place of origin : ' P ' for the Philadelphia Mint , ' D ' for the Denver Mint and ' S ' for the San Francisco Mint . The Anthony dollars were the first coin to bear a ' P ' mint mark since the Jefferson nickels issued during World War II ; other coins struck there were left without a mintmark to note their place of origin . In 1980 , the ' P ' mint mark was added to all other circulating coins , except the cent , struck in Philadelphia . 
 The Treasury Department , in cooperation with the Federal Reserve , undertook a $ 655 @,@ 000 marketing campaign to educate bank employees and members of the public about the new coin , and the vending industry engaged in a $ 100 million effort to retrofit machines to accept the coins . 
 Despite the marketing attempts , the coin received an overwhelmingly negative reception from the public . Less than two millimeters in diameter larger than the quarter and struck in the same copper @-@ nickel composition , the Susan B. Anthony dollar was widely confused for that denomination in transactions . Mint Director Hackel noted the difference in weight and design between the two coins and expressed her belief that the dollar would eventually find favor with the public , suggesting that the coin would become " customary to the American people in time " . In the months following its release , complaints mounted and public transportation and many establishments throughout the country began refusing to accept them in payment . On July 13 , 1979 , California Representative Jerry Lewis introduced a bill to the House of Representatives with the intent to increase the size of the coin to aid identification . Discussing the bill , which was never approved , Lewis remarked that the Anthony dollar had come to be known derisively as the " Carter quarter " , due to its size and association with the President . 
 In total , 757 @,@ 813 @,@ 744 dollars dated 1979 were struck for circulation at the Philadelphia , Denver and San Francisco Mints . Demand remained low through 1980 , and the circulation strikes for that year totaled 89 @,@ 660 @,@ 708 . Due to its persistent unpopularity , production of Anthony dollars for circulation was halted , and 9 @,@ 742 @,@ 000 1981 dollars were struck across all three Mints exclusively for sale to collectors ; this mintage marked the end of production . At the close of production , the Treasury encountered a dilemma : the Mint struck a large amount of dollars in anticipation of great public demand , resulting in a surplus of 520 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 coins in 1981 . Melting the coins was impractical ; the cost of manufacture was approximately 2 cents , and the 98 cents earned from seignorage was applied to the national debt . Had the coins been melted , their seignorage would have been added to the debt . Accordingly , the coins were placed in government storage , to be dispensed as needed . 
 The coin 's design did have repercussions north of the border ; when Canada introduced its new one @-@ dollar coin in 1987 , its dimensions were made similar so that vending machine specifications could be common between nations . 
 = = Reissue = = 
 Despite their unpopularity in transactions , Anthony dollars saw heavy use in over 9 @,@ 000 stamp @-@ <unk> machines situated in United States Postal Service buildings across the country beginning in 1993 . Additionally , the coins saw use with mass transit authorities . Various propositions were discussed in Congress since the last dollars were produced in 1981 , but no action was taken to issue a new coin until the Treasury 's Anthony dollar stores became depleted in the 1990s . In February 1996 , the stores totaled approximately 229 @,@ 500 @,@ 000 , but that number was reduced to approximately 133 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 by the end of 1997 . Faced with the necessity of striking more Susan B. Anthony dollars to fill the demand , the Treasury supported legislation authorizing a new dollar coin that would not be confused with the quarter . Legislation authorizing a dollar coin in a gold @-@ colored composition and with a plain edge was introduced to the House and Senate in 1997 , where it eventually received approval with a provision calling for it to depict Native @-@ American guide Sacagawea . On December 1 , 1997 , President Bill Clinton signed the 50 States Commemorative Coin Program Act into law . The Act , which authorized the creation of the 50 State Quarters program , included a section entitled " United States $ 1 Coin Act of 1997 " . That section officially authorized what became the Sacagawea dollar . 
 Following passage of the act , a series of test strikes depicting Martha Washington were carried out to test a variety of gold @-@ colored metallic compositions . Although the act provided for creation of the new coin , it also allowed striking of the Anthony design until production began on the gold @-@ colored dollar . Nearing depletion of Treasury stores , on May 20 , 1999 , the U.S. Mint announced that production of the Susan B. Anthony dollar would resume . In total , 41 @,@ 368 @,@ 000 Susan B. Anthony dollars were struck for circulation dated 1999 . The design was officially retired in 2000 , when the Sacagawea dollar entered production . 
 = = Collecting = = 
 As few Susan B. Anthony dollars circulated , many remain available in uncirculated condition and are worth little above face value . However , some date and mint mark varieties are relatively valuable . The 1981 coins , having been issued only to collectors , are valued above the other circulation strikes in the series . In addition , a well @-@ known variety of the 1979 circulation strikes on which the date appears nearer the rim commands a higher price than the normal issue . 
 All dates of the dollar also exist in proof finish . The 1999 coins were sold as standalone proof strikes , rather than as part of a larger proof set , as the 1979 , 1980 and 1981 issues were offered . The 1999 proof was minted exclusively at the Philadelphia Mint , and bears a ' P ' mint mark , while all other proof Anthony dollars were minted at San Francisco and bear the ' S ' of that Mint . Some 1979 and 1981 proofs bear a mint mark which was applied to the coinage dies with a different punch , causing them to have a more legible appearance . They are considered scarce and are valued considerably higher than normal proofs of the series . 
 = = Ten Dollar Bill = = 
 On April 20 , 2016 Treasury Secretary Jacob Lew announced that several denominations of United States currency would be redesigned prior to 2020 , the 100th anniversary of the 19th Amendment . The newly designed $ 10 bill will include images which will pay homage to the women 's suffrage movement and feature the images of not only Anthony , but also Sojourner Truth , Lucretia Mott , Elizabeth Cady Stanton , and Alice Paul . 
 = Survivor : Borneo = 
 Survivor : Borneo is the first season of the American CBS competitive reality television series Survivor . It was originally broadcast under the name Survivor but its official title was changed to Survivor : Pulau Tiga to distinguish it from subsequent installments of the series , and then changed again to Survivor : Borneo . The show filmed from March 13 , 2000 through April 20 , 2000 and premiered on May 31 , 2000 . Hosted by Jeff Probst , it consisted of 39 days of gameplay with 16 competitors . It was set in the South China Sea on the remote Malaysian island of Pulau Tiga in the state of Sabah , about 6 miles ( 9 @.@ 7 km ) off the north coast of Borneo , Malaysia . 
 The sixteen contestants were initially separated into two tribes , named Tagi and Pagong , which represented the names of their beaches . When ten players remained , the contestants merged into one tribe , named Rattana . While Tagi and Pagong 's names and makeups were picked by the producers , Rattana was named by contestants Sean Kenniff and Jenna Lewis , because of the large amount of Rattan wood on the island . After 39 days of competition , corporate trainer Richard Hatch was named the Sole Survivor , defeating whitewater rafting guide Kelly <unk> in a 4 – 3 jury vote . 
 On August 23 , 2000 , the Survivor : Borneo finale received the highest ratings of any Survivor episode to date with an average of 51 @.@ 7 million viewers . Nielsen reported that 125 million people watched at least some part of the finale . The season was released on DVD on May 11 , 2004 . In 2006 , it was revealed that Hatch failed to declare his winnings , among other earnings , in his tax return and was sentenced to 51 months imprisonment . 
 = = Production = = 
 In 1998 , CBS offered Mark Burnett the chance to present his idea of this reality show to producers . In October 1999 , CBS held a casting call for a new reality show concept . The idea was Survivor , in which sixteen people would be stuck on an island 20 miles ( 32 km ) away from the mainland of Borneo . Ten main cameras were set on the island that would film the castaways every day . Every three days , a Tribal Council would be held in which one castaway would be voted off the island . The last castaway to be on the island would win $ 1 million . 
 Over 6 @,@ 000 people applied for the show ; 800 were then interviewed in sixteen cities . 48 people were then chosen , and after background checks and psychological evaluations done by the producers , the final sixteen contestants and two alternates were picked . 
 As the survivors awaited the game 's start , Survivor crews prepared the island for reward and immunity challenges , removing any harmful items , checking for any harmful animals in specific locations , and building a Tribal Council set . Camera and other crews were sent to the island three weeks in advance for testing . On the opposite side of the island from the tribes , headquarters were set up for the producers , and crew to live in on the island . This facility included many traditional trailers with running water , televisions , and one phone line . The Tribal Council set was built two hundred yards from the crew 's facility . The Tribal Council set was 30 by 30 feet ( 9 @.@ 1 by 9 @.@ 1 m ) with no walls and only a platform . In the middle of the set was a fire lava pit providing fire for the torches , which represented the castaways ' life in the game . 
 On March 7 , 2000 , the contestants were flown to Los Angeles , then to the city of Kota Kinabalu in Malaysian Borneo . From there , they were taken by boat to their island . Contestants were not allowed to speak to one another until they got on the boat headed towards their beaches . The two tribes shared the island of Tiga , which was divided by over 20 miles ( 32 km ) of forest . The castaways were surrounded by wildlife such as pythons , kraits , adders , monkeys , monitor lizards , and white @-@ bellied sea eagles . The show was set to air in the summer of 2000 . 
 = = Contestants = = 
 There were sixteen contestants overall , divided into two tribes , Pagong and Tagi . After six contestants were eliminated , the tribes were combined , or merged , to form one tribe , Rattana . Seven contestants made up the jury , who ultimately decided who would win the game and the $ 1 million grand prize . 
 = = = Future appearances = = = 
 Rudy Boesch , Richard Hatch , Susan Hawk and Jenna Lewis returned to Survivor for Survivor : All @-@ Stars , respectively placing 17th , 14th , 13th and 3rd . Gervase Peterson returned for Survivor : Blood vs. Water alongside his niece , Marissa , where he placed 3rd . Kelly <unk> returned for Survivor : Cambodia , where she placed 11th . 
 Outside of Survivor , the Borneo cast have made many appearances on other TV programs and film . Notably , Colleen Haskell appeared in a lead role in 2001 film The Animal , opposite actor Rob Schneider . Hatch later competed in the eleventh season of The Apprentice ( known as the fourth season of The Celebrity Apprentice ) and was fired in week 5 , finished in 11th place . Hatch would later appear on the seventeenth season of The Biggest Loser , and finished in 13th place . 
 = = Season summary = = 
 The sixteen contestants were divided into two tribes of eight : Tagi and Pagong . Both tribes fared equally in challenges , but differed in organizational structure . Pagong was dominated by the younger , more carefree members , whereas four contestants on Tagi — Kelly , Richard , Rudy , and Susan — formed an alliance , choosing to vote as a voting bloc to ensure their safety . When ten players remained — five from each tribe — the tribes merged into one , named Rattana . The alliance strategy proved to be successful , and the four took advantage of the other contestants ' lack of voting strategy to gain dominance . There was dissension in the alliance as Kelly was deemed untrustworthy , however she won four consecutive immunity challenges and was ineligible for elimination . 
 When only the four alliance members remained , the vote initially ended in a draw ; close allies Richard and Rudy voted for Susan , and Susan and Kelly voted for Richard . On the <unk> , Kelly decided to switch her vote and Susan was eliminated . After winning the final immunity challenge , Kelly decided to eliminate Rudy because she believed she had a better chance against Richard . At the final Tribal Council , Susan lambasted Kelly for switching her vote and proclaimed her support for Richard . Richard 's strategic prowess and leadership was valued over Kelly 's impressive challenge performances , and the jury awarded him the title of Sole Survivor in a vote of 4 @-@ 3 . 
 In the case of multiple tribes or castaways who win reward or immunity , they are listed in order of finish , or alphabetically where it was a team effort ; where one castaway won and invited others , the invitees are in brackets . 
 = = = Episodes = = = 
 = = = Voting history = = = 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 By the second week , the show had already gained over 18 million viewers , beating out ABC 's show Who Wants to Be a Millionaire ? in ratings . After the season finale , Carter said that Survivor " built over a 13 @-@ week run to what was expected last night to be the biggest single television audience ever assembled for a summer television series , far eclipsed every expectation the network had when it acquired the rights to the show last year . " Leslie Moonves , the president of CBS Television said that " it has beaten our expectations by about double . " The finale of Survivor was watched by 51 @.@ 7 million viewers , the second @-@ highest viewership of any American television episode during the first decade of the 21st century , exceeded only by the finale of Friends . The finale had higher ratings than the World Series , NBA finals , NCAA men 's basketball finals , and Grammy Awards of that year . CBS was able to make the cost of commercial advertisers up to $ 600 @,@ 000 during the season finale . 
 Survivor was the surprise summer hit show of the season garnering an average of 28 @.@ 3 million viewers with a 12 @.@ 1 / 36 share in the 18 / 49 market over its 13 @-@ week run . Thus , it achieved the second @-@ highest ranking and the second @-@ highest amount of average viewers of the entire series , behind The Australian Outback . In addition to the highest amount of finale viewers , it also garnered the highest amount of reunion viewers ( 37 million ) . 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 Survivor : Borneo initially received mixed reactions in the media . Bill Carter , a writer for The New York Times stated that Survivor has " clearly begun to emerge as part of the wider culture , with news and discussion about the show widespread on television and radio talk shows and coverage increasing in newspapers . " On the Late Show with David Letterman , David Letterman began a segment titled , " Top 10 Things That 'll Get You Thrown Off the Survivor Island . " During the first season , USA Today held coverage of the show as if it were a sporting event , listing which participant was voted off . USA Today also held a poll to see who viewers would have voted off . With 26 percent , Susan Hawk won the poll , although it had no effect on the game , as Sue made it to 4th place . CBS 's The Early Show held an interview with each contestant the day after the episode in which they were voted off aired . 
 Survivor : Borneo was criticized by the People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals ( PETA ) in response to footage showing the contestants trapping rats on the island , initially for fish bait but later for human consumption . 
 Susan Hawk 's " snakes and rats " speech given during the final Tribal Council has been cited as one of the greatest and more memorable speeches in the show 's history , 
 Despite the initially mixed reception at the time , Borneo has undergone significant critical reappraisal in later years , and is now considered one of the best seasons of the entire series . Host Jeff Probst consistently ranks it as his favorite , equating it to a " first girlfriend . " Entertainment Weekly columnist Dalton Ross ranks Borneo as tied for first with Survivor : Micronesia , saying " ... Borneo now seems dated and tame by comparison , but it 's the biggest game changer in the past 20 years of television ... If you ask me which is the most important season , well , obviously it 's Borneo . " Borneo is also ranked as the greatest season of the series by Examiner.com and Zap2it , and is ranked second behind Survivor : Heroes vs. Villains by The Wire . Survivor fan site " Survivor Oz " has consistently ranked Borneo in the top 10 in every one of its annual polls ranking all seasons of the series ; it was 5th in 2012 , 6th in 2013 , and 8th in 2014 . Another prominent Survivor fan site , " The Purple Rock Podcast , " ranked Borneo as the 10th best season in 2015 . Fifteen years later , in the CBS Watch official issue commemorating the 15th anniversary and 30th season of Survivor , Borneo was ranked as the 7th @-@ greatest season of the series by a viewer poll . In another poll in the same magazine , Hatch 's win at the end of the season was voted by viewers as the # 5 most memorable moment in the series . Noel Murray of the A.V. Club noted that the 5th episode , " Pulling Your Own Weight " , was one of the season 's most influential segments . In this episode , the Tagi alliance led by Hatch secretly worked together to vote Dirk off the island , surprising many of the remaining contestants who were shocked to discover there was an alliance . Murray noted that while this sentiment towards alliances at the time seemed controversial and against the spirit of the show , it formed the basis for most future Survivor series and reality television in general , and highlighted the lengths that players on reality television shows would go to form such <unk> while deceiving others as to ultimately win the game . 
 = = DVD release = = 
 The DVD release of season one was released by CBS Home Entertainment in the U.S. on May 11 , 2004 , after it had completed broadcast on television . As well as every episode from the season , the DVD release features bonus material including commentary , interviews and behind @-@ the @-@ scenes featurettes . 
 = = Stacey Stillman controversy = = 
 In early 2001 , Borneo contestant Stacey Stillman sued CBS , claiming that executive producer Mark Burnett arranged her exit and orchestrated the show 's outcome . Her 14 @-@ page lawsuit alleged that two of her fellow <unk> , Dirk Been and Sean Kenniff , were persuaded to change their vote from 72 @-@ year @-@ old Rudy Boesch to her . Stillman sought restitution for lost prize money , plus $ 75 @,@ 000 representing out @-@ of @-@ pocket expenses and punitive damages . While CBS and Burnett denied the allegations , Been supported them ; Kenniff admitted talking to Burnett , but told USA Today that the vote wasn 't influenced and Burnett said only to " vote your conscience . " Burnett counter @-@ sued Stillman for at least $ 5 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 . Eventually the case was settled out of court . 
 = Prince Octavius of Great Britain = 
 The Prince Octavius ( 23 February 1779 – 3 May 1783 ) was the 13th child and 8th son of King George III and his queen consort Charlotte of Mecklenburg @-@ Strelitz . Six months after the death of his brother Prince Alfred , Octavius was inoculated with the smallpox virus . Several days later , he became ill . His subsequent death at the age of four devastated his parents , and in particular his father . George bemoaned the death of his son , of whom he was exceedingly fond ; the king 's later bouts of madness would involve hallucinations of his young son . 
 = = Life = = 
 Prince Octavius was born on 23 February 1779 , at Buckingham House , London , England . He was the thirteenth child and eighth son of King George III and his queen consort Charlotte of Mecklenburg @-@ Strelitz . The prince 's name derives from Latin <unk> , the eighth , indicating that he was the eighth son of his parents . 
 Octavius was christened on 23 March 1779 , in the Great Council Chamber at St James 's Palace , by Frederick Cornwallis , The Archbishop of Canterbury . His godparents were The Duke of Brunswick @-@ Wolfenbüttel ( husband of his first cousin twice @-@ removed , for whom The Earl of Hertford , Lord Chamberlain , stood proxy ) ; The Duke of Mecklenburg ( his first cousin once @-@ removed , for whom The Earl of Ashburnham , Groom of the Stole , stood proxy ) ; and The Duchess of Saxe @-@ Weimar @-@ Eisenach ( wife of his sixth cousin , for whom Alicia Wyndham , Countess of Egremont and Lady of the Bedchamber to Queen Charlotte , was proxy ) . 
 King George was extremely devoted to Octavius , who was too young to cause the kinds of trouble that his elder brothers were by the year of his birth . The king was affectionate and indulgent with his young children , and strove to attend their birthday parties and other events organized for their merriment ; on one occasion a friend witnessed a happy domestic scene that involved George " carrying about in his arms by turns Sophia and the last prince , Octavius . " Another witness wrote George and Charlotte " have their Children always playing about them the whole time " ; during most evenings the children were brought to their parents between 6 and 7 O 'clock to play for an hour or two . The king also was kept informed of his children 's educational progress . 
 Octavius was close to his nearest sister Sophia , who called Octavius " her son " , and went with her and their siblings , Elizabeth and Edward to <unk> on the Sussex coast , where he could take in the fresh seaside air during the summer of 1780 . When he was nineteen months old , Octavius became an older brother with the birth of his younger brother Prince Alfred . Octavius was three years of age when Alfred died on 20 August 1782 , and he again became the youngest surviving child . Horace Walpole wrote to Sir Horace Mann that upon Prince Alfred 's death , King George had declared " I am very sorry for Alfred ; but had it been Octavius , I should have died too . " In 1820 , historian Edward Holt would write of the prince 's character , " Though Prince Octavius had not passed his fifth year , he was considered very docile , and possessed good @-@ nature in such an uncommon degree , that he was the delight of all about him . " Biographer John Watkins added Octavius was " reckoned one of the finest of the royal progeny . " 
 = = Death and aftermath = = 
 Six months after Alfred 's death , Octavius and Sophia were taken to Kew Palace in London to be inoculated with the smallpox virus . While Sophia recovered without incident , Octavius became ill and died several days later , around 8 o 'clock PM , on 3 May 1783 , at Kew Palace . He was four years old . As was traditional , the household did not go into mourning for the deaths of royal children under the age of fourteen . 
 Octavius has the distinction of being the last member of the British royal family to suffer from smallpox . On 10 May , he was buried alongside his brother Alfred at Westminster Abbey . Their eldest brother , now King George IV ordered their remains transferred to St. George 's Chapel , Windsor Castle on 11 February 1820 , at about 3 o 'clock . 
 According to Queen Charlotte , Octavius ' death was unexpected ; she wrote to a friend who faced a similar tragedy that " twice have I felt what you do feel , the last time without the least preparation for such a stroke , for in less than eight and forty hours was my son Octavius , in perfect health , sick and struck with death immediately . " The prince 's death had a marked effect , both mentally and physically on Queen Charlotte , who at the time was pregnant with her youngest child Princess Amelia . 
 Octavius 's death devastated his father ; Walpole wrote " the King has lost another little child ; a lovely boy , they say , of whom their Majesties were <unk> fond . " Shortly afterward , King George said " There will be no Heaven for me if Octavius is not there . " The day after his son 's death , the King passed through a room where artist Thomas Gainsborough was completing the finishing touches on a portrait of the family . The King asked him to stop , but when he found out that the painting was of Octavius , allowed the painter to continue . When this same painting was exhibited a week later , Octavius ' sisters were so upset that they broke down and cried in front of everyone . Three months after Octavius ' death , his father was still dwelling on his son , writing to Lord Dartmouth that every day " increases the chasm I feel for want of that beloved object [ Octavius ] . " In later years , King George imagined conversations with his two youngest sons . During one of the king 's bouts of madness in 1788 , George mistook a pillow for Octavius , who by that time had been dead for five years . 
 = = Portraits = = 
 Several portraits of Octavius survive . Five portraits of him alone and one with his brother Alfred are housed in the Royal Collection of the United Kingdom . The first is the more famous painting by Thomas Gainsborough in 1782 , which is part of a series of paintings of the younger royal children . The second one is after the 1782 portrait by Gainsborough ( see above ) and is dated to about 1782 or 1784 . The third portrait is by Benjamin West and was painted shortly before Octavius 's death . Furthermore , among these five portraits , there are two enamels , both after Gainsborough 's 1782 portrait ; one is by William Bone and the other one is by an anonymous master . The sixth and last portrait represents the apotheosis of Octavius and Alfred ( see above ) and was painted by West . Another portrait , this time of Queen Charlotte , features Octavius . Painted in 1779 by West , this is both a portrait of the Queen and her children , who are featured in the background . Prince Octavius is at the centre of the group , wearing baby clothes and riding in a little phaeton . He is pulled along by Prince Ernest and pushed by Prince Adolphus . 
 Two other portraits are housed by the National Portrait Gallery in London . The first is an 1817 engraving by Samuel Freeman , after Gainsborough . The second is another engraving , entitled The Apotheosis of the Princes Octavius and Alfred and of the Princess Amelia , published in 1820 by Robert Hicks . 
 Three more portraits , less known are housed variously overseas . The first one is by West and is housed by the Pennsylvania Academy of Fine Arts . It was painted in 1783 and measures 59 @.@ 21 x 41 @.@ 43 cm . Two more engravings after Gainsborough are scarce throughout the United States . 
 = = Titles , styles , honours and arms = = 
 = = = Titles and styles = = = 
 23 February 1779 – 3 May 1783 : His Royal Highness The Prince Octavius 
 = = Ancestry = = 
 = The Age of Reason = 
 The Age of Reason ; Being an Investigation of True and Fabulous Theology is an influential work written by English and American political activist Thomas Paine . It follows in the tradition of eighteenth @-@ century British deism , and challenges institutionalized religion and the legitimacy of the Bible . Originally distributed as unbound pamphlets , it was published in three parts in 1794 , 1795 , and 1807 . It was a best @-@ seller in the United States , where it caused a short @-@ lived deistic revival . British audiences , however , fearing increased political radicalism as a result of the French Revolution , received it with more hostility . The Age of Reason presents common deistic arguments ; for example , it highlights what Paine saw as corruption of the Christian Church and criticizes its efforts to acquire political power . Paine advocates reason in the place of revelation , leading him to reject miracles and to view the Bible as " an ordinary piece of literature rather than as a divinely inspired text " . It promotes natural religion and argues for the existence of a creator @-@ God . 
 Most of Paine 's arguments had long been available to the educated elite , but by presenting them in an engaging and irreverent style , he made deism appealing and accessible to a mass audience . The book was also inexpensive , putting it within the reach of a large number of buyers . Fearing the spread of what they viewed as potentially revolutionary ideas , the British government prosecuted printers and book @-@ sellers who tried to publish and distribute it . Nevertheless , Paine 's work inspired and guided many free thinkers . 
 = = Historical context = = 
 = = = Intellectual context : eighteenth @-@ century British deism = = = 
 Paine 's book followed in the tradition of early eighteenth @-@ century British deism . These deists , while maintaining individual positions , still shared several sets of assumptions and arguments that Paine articulated in The Age of Reason . The most important position that united the early deists was their call for " free rational inquiry " into all subjects , especially religion . Saying that early Christianity was founded on freedom of conscience , they demanded religious toleration and an end to religious persecution . They also demanded that debate rest on reason and rationality . Deists embraced a Newtonian worldview , and they believed all things in the universe , even God , must obey the laws of nature . Without a concept of natural law , the deists argued , explanations of the workings of nature would descend into irrationality . This belief in natural law drove their skepticism of miracles . Because miracles had to be observed to be validated , deists rejected the accounts laid out in the Bible of God 's miracles and argued that such evidence was neither sufficient nor necessary to prove the existence of God . Along these lines , deistic writings insisted that God , as the first cause or prime mover , had created and designed the universe with natural laws as part of his plan . They held that God does not repeatedly alter his plan by suspending natural laws to ( miraculously ) intervene in human affairs . Deists also rejected the claim that there was only one revealed religious Truth or " one true faith " ; religion could only be " simple , apparent , ordinary , and universal " if it was to be the logical product of a benevolent God . They therefore distinguished between " revealed religions " ( which they rejected ) , such as Christianity , and " natural religion " , a set of universal beliefs derived from the natural world that demonstrated God 's existence ( they were , thus , not atheists ) . 
 While some deists accepted revelation , most argued that revelation 's restriction to small groups or even a single person limited its explanatory power . Moreover , many found the Christian revelations in particular to be contradictory and irreconcilable . According to these writers , revelation could reinforce the evidence for God 's existence already apparent in the natural world , but more often it led to superstition among the masses . Most deists argued that priests had deliberately corrupted Christianity for their own gain by promoting the acceptance of miracles , unnecessary rituals , and illogical and dangerous doctrines ( these accusations were typically referred to as " priestcraft " ) . The worst of these doctrines was original sin . By convincing people that they required a priest 's help to overcome their innate sinfulness , deists argued , religious leaders had enslaved the human population . Deists therefore typically viewed themselves as intellectual liberators . 
 = = = Political context : French revolution = = = 
 By the time Part I of The Age of Reason was published in 1794 , many British and French citizens had become disillusioned by the French Revolution . The Reign of Terror had begun , Louis XVI and Marie Antoinette had been tried and executed and Britain was at war with France . Those few British radicals who still supported the French revolution and its ideals were viewed with deep suspicion by their countrymen . The Age of Reason belongs to this later , more radical stage of the British political reform movement , one that openly embraced republicanism and atheism and is exemplified by such texts as William Godwin 's Political Justice ( 1793 ) . By the middle of the decade , the moderate voices had disappeared : Richard Price , the Dissenting minister whose sermon on political liberty had prompted Edmund Burke 's Reflections on the Revolution in France ( 1790 ) , had died in 1791 , and Joseph Priestley had been forced to flee to America after a Church – and – King mob burned down his home and church . 
 The conservative government , headed by William Pitt , responded to this increasing radicalization by prosecuting several reformers for seditious libel and treason in the famous 1794 Treason Trials . Following the trials and an attack on George III , conservatives were successful in passing the Seditious Meetings Act and the <unk> Practices Act ( also known as the " Two Acts " or the " gagging acts " ) . These acts prohibited freedom of assembly for groups such as the radical London Corresponding Society ( LCS ) and encouraged indictments against radicals for " libelous and seditious " statements . Afraid of prosecution and disenchanted with the French revolution , many reformers drifted away from the cause . The LCS , which had previously unified religious Dissenters and political reformers , fractured when Francis Place and other leaders helped Paine publish The Age of Reason ; the society 's more religious members withdrew in protest and the LCS lost around one @-@ fifth of its membership . 
 = = Publishing history = = 
 In December 1792 , Paine 's Rights of Man , part II was declared seditious in Britain and he was forced to flee to France in order to avoid arrest . Dismayed by the French revolution 's turn toward secularism and atheism , he composed Part I of The Age of Reason in 1792 and 1793 : 
 It has been my intention , for several years past , to publish my thoughts upon religion . . . . The circumstance that has now taken place in France of the total abolition of the whole national order of priesthood , and of everything appertaining to compulsive systems of religion , and compulsive articles of faith , has not only precipitated my intention , but rendered a work of this kind exceedingly necessary , lest in the general wreck of superstition , of false systems of government and false theology , we lose sight of morality , of humanity and of the theology that is true . 
 Although Paine wrote The Age of Reason for the French , he dedicated it to his " Fellow Citizens of the United States of America " , alluding to his bond with the American revolutionaries . 
 It is unclear when exactly Paine drafted Part I although he says in the preface to Part II : 
 Conceiving ... that I had but a few days of liberty , I sat down and brought the work to a close as speedily as possible ; and I had not finished it more than six hours , in the state it has since appeared , before a guard came there , about three in the morning , with an order ... for putting me in <unk> as a foreigner , and conveying me to the prison of the Luxembourg . I contrived , in my way there , to call on Joel Barlow , and I put the Manuscript of the work into his hands ... 
 According to Paine scholars Edward Davidson and William Scheick , he probably wrote the first draft of Part I in late 1793 , but Paine biographer David Hawke argues for a date of early 1793 . It is also unclear whether or not a French edition of Part I was published in 1793 . François <unk> , who translated The Age of Reason into French in 1794 , wrote that it was first published in France in 1793 , but no book fitting his description has been positively identified . Barlow published the first English edition of The Age of Reason , Part I in 1794 in London , selling it for a mere three pence . 
 Meanwhile , Paine , considered too moderate by the powerful Jacobin wing of the French revolutionaries , was imprisoned for ten months in France . He only escaped the guillotine by accident : the sign marking him out for execution was improperly placed on his cell door . When James Monroe , at that time the new American Minister to France , secured his release in 1794 , Paine immediately began work on Part II of The Age of Reason , despite his poor health . Part II was first published in a pirated edition by H.D. Symonds in London in October 1795 . In 1796 Daniel Isaac Eaton published Parts I and II , and sold them at a cost of one shilling and six pence . ( Eaton was later forced to flee to America after being convicted of seditious libel for publishing other radical works . ) Paine himself financed the shipping of 15 @,@ 000 copies of his work to America . Later , Francis Place and Thomas Williams collaborated on an edition which sold about 2 @,@ 000 copies . Williams also produced his own edition , but the British government indicted him and confiscated the pamphlets . 
 In the late 1790s , Paine fled from France to the United States , where he wrote Part III of The Age of Reason : An Examination of the Passages in the New Testament , Quoted from the Old and Called Prophecies Concerning Jesus Christ . Fearing unpleasant and even violent reprisals , Thomas Jefferson convinced him not to publish it in 1802 ; five years later Paine decided to publish despite the backlash he knew would ensue . 
 Following Thomas Williams 's sentence of one year 's hard labor for publishing The Age of Reason in 1797 , no editions were sold openly in Britain until 1818 when Richard Carlile included it in an edition of Paine 's complete works . Carlile charged one shilling and sixpence for the work , and the first run of 1 @,@ 000 copies sold out in a month . He immediately published a second edition of 3 @,@ 000 copies . Like Williams , he was prosecuted for seditious libel and blasphemous libel . The prosecutions surrounding the printing of The Age of Reason in Britain continued for thirty years after its initial release and encompassed numerous publishers as well as over a hundred booksellers . 
 = = Structure and major arguments = = 
 The Age of Reason is divided into three sections . In Part I , Paine outlines his major arguments and personal creed . In Parts II and III he analyzes specific portions of the Bible in order to demonstrate that it is not the revealed word of God . 
 = = = Analysis = = = 
 At the beginning of Part I of the Age of Reason , Paine lays out his personal belief : 
 I believe in one God , and no more ; and I hope for happiness beyond this life . 
 I believe in the equality of man ; and I believe that religious duties consist in doing justice , loving mercy , and endeavouring to make our fellow @-@ creatures happy . 
 But , lest it should be supposed that I believe many other things in addition to these , I shall , in the progress of this work , declare the things I do not believe , and my reasons for not believing them . 
 I do not believe in the creed professed by the Jewish Church , by the Roman Church , by the Greek Church , by the Turkish Church , by the Protestant Church , nor by any church that I know of . My own mind is my own church . 
 All national institutions of churches , whether Jewish , Christian or Turkish , appear to me no other than human inventions , set up to terrify and enslave mankind , and monopolize power and profit . 
 I do not mean by this declaration to condemn those who believe otherwise ; they have the same right to their belief as I have to mine . But it is necessary to the happiness of man that he be mentally faithful to himself . Infidelity does not consist in believing , or in disbelieving ; it consists in professing to believe what he does not believe . 
 Paine 's creed encapsulates many of the major themes of the rest of his text : a firm belief in a creator @-@ God ; a skepticism regarding most supernatural claims ( here the afterlife , later in the text , miracles ) ; a conviction that virtues should be derived from a consideration for others rather than oneself ; an animus against corrupt religious institutions ; and an emphasis on the individual 's right of conscience . 
 = = = Reason and revelation = = = 
 Paine begins The Age of Reason by attacking revelation . Revelation , he maintains , can only be verified by the individual receivers of the message and is therefore weak evidence for God 's existence . Paine rejects prophecies and miracles , writing : " it is revelation to the first person only , and hearsay to every other , and consequently they are not obliged to believe it " . He also points out that the Christian revelations appear to have altered over time to adjust for changing political circumstances . Urging his readers to employ reason rather than to rely on revelation , Paine argues that the only reliable , unchanging and universal evidence of God 's existence is the natural world . " The Bible of the Deist " , he contends , should not be a human invention such as the Bible , but rather a divine invention — it should be " creation " . Paine takes this argument even further , maintaining that the same rules of logic and standards of evidence that govern the analysis of secular texts should be applied to the Bible . In Part II of The Age of Reason , he will do just this , pointing out numerous contradictions in the Bible . For example Thomas Paine notes , " The most extraordinary of all the things called miracles , related in the New Testament , is that of the devil flying away with Jesus Christ , and carrying him to the top of a high mountain , and to the top of the highest pinnacle of the temple , and showing him and promising to him all the kingdoms of the World . How happened it that he did not discover America , or is it only with kingdoms that his sooty highness has any interest ? " 
 = = = = Paine 's analysis of the Bible = = = = 
 After establishing that he would refrain from using extra @-@ Biblical sources to inform his criticism , but would instead apply the Bible 's own words against itself , Paine questions the sacredness of the Bible , analyzing it as one would any other book . For example , in his analysis of the Book of Proverbs he argues that its sayings are " inferior in keenness to the proverbs of the Spaniards , and not more wise and economical than those of the American Franklin " . Describing the Bible as " fabulous mythology " , Paine questions whether or not it was revealed to its writers and doubts that the original writers can ever be known ( he dismisses the idea that Moses wrote the Pentateuch or that the Gospel 's authors are known , for example ) . 
 My intention is to show that those books are spurious , and that Moses is not the author of them ; and still further , that they were not written in the time of Moses , nor till several hundred years afterward ; that they are no other than an attempted history of the life of Moses , and of the times in which he is said to have lived , and also of the times prior thereto , written by some very ignorant and stupid pretenders to authorship , several hundred years after the death of Moses . [ ... ] The books called the Evangelists , and ascribed to Matthew , Mark , Luke , and John , were not written by Matthew , Mark , Luke , and John ; ... they have been manufactured , as the books of the Old Testament have been by other persons than those whose names they bear . 
 Using methods that would not become common in Biblical scholarship until the nineteenth century , Paine tested the Bible for internal consistency and questioned its historical accuracy , concluding that it was not divinely inspired . 
 Paine also argues that the Old Testament must be false because it depicts a tyrannical God . The " history of wickedness " pervading the Old Testament convinced Paine that it was simply another set of human @-@ authored myths . He deplores people 's credulity : " Brought up in habits of superstition , " he wrote , " people in general know not how much wickedness there is in this pretended word of God . " Citing Numbers 31 : 13 – 47 as an example , in which Moses orders the slaughter of thousands of boys and women , and sanctions the rape of thousands of girls , at God 's behest , Paine calls the Bible a " book of lies , wickedness , and blasphemy ; for what can be greater blasphemy than to ascribe the wickedness of man to the orders of the Almighty ! " 
 = = = Religion and the state = = = 
 Paine also attacks religious institutions , indicting priests for their lust for power and wealth and the Church 's opposition to scientific investigation . He presents the history of Christianity as one of corruption and oppression . Paine criticizes the tyrannical actions of the Church as he had those of governments in the Rights of Man and Common Sense , stating that " the Christian theory is little else than the idolatry of the ancient Mythologists , accommodated to the purposes of power and revenue . " This kind of attack distinguishes Paine 's book from other deistic works , which were less interested in challenging social and political hierarchies . He argues that the Church and the State are a single corrupt institution which does not act in the best interests of the people — both must be radically altered : 
 Soon after I had published the pamphlet " Common Sense , " in America , I saw the exceeding probability that a revolution in the system of government would be followed by a revolution in the system of religion . The adulterous connection of Church and State , wherever it has taken place . . . has so effectually prohibited by pains and penalties every discussion upon established creeds , and upon first principles of religion , that until the system of government should be changed , those subjects could not be brought fairly and openly before the world ; but that whenever this should be done , a revolution in the system of religion would follow . Human inventions and priestcraft would be detected ; and man would return to the pure , unmixed and unadulterated belief of one God , and no more . 
 As Jon Mee , a scholar of British radicalism , writes : " Paine believed . . . a revolution in religion was the natural corollary , even prerequisite , of a fully successful political revolution . " Paine lays out a vision of , in Davidson and Scheick 's words , " an age of intellectual freedom , when reason would triumph over superstition , when the natural liberties of humanity would supplant priestcraft and kingship , which were both secondary effects of politically managed foolish legends and religious superstitions . " It is this vision that scholars have called Paine 's " secular millennialism " and it appears in all of his works — he ends the Rights of Man , for example , with the statement : " From what we now see , nothing of reform in the political world ought to be held improbable . It is an age of revolutions , in which everything may be looked for . " Paine " transformed the millennial Protestant vision of the rule of Christ on earth into a secular image of utopia , " emphasizing the possibilities of " progress " and " human perfectibility " that could be achieved by humankind , without God 's aid . 
 = = = Paine 's intellectual debts = = = 
 Although Paine liked to say that he read very little , his writings belie this statement ; The Age of Reason has intellectual roots in the traditions of David Hume , Spinoza , and Voltaire . Since Hume had already made many of the same " moral attacks upon Christianity " that Paine popularized in The Age of Reason , scholars have concluded that Paine probably read Hume 's works on religion or had at least heard about them through the Joseph Johnson circle . Paine would have been particularly drawn to Hume 's description of religion as " a positive source of harm to society " that " led men to be factious , ambitious and intolerant " . More of an influence on Paine than Hume , however , was Spinoza 's Tractatus <unk> @-@ <unk> ( 1678 ) . Paine would have been exposed to Spinoza 's ideas through the works of other eighteenth @-@ century deists , most notably Conyers Middleton . Paine would also more than likely have been familiar with Voltaire 's mocking wit and the works of other deistic French philosophes . 
 Though these larger philosophical traditions are clear influences on The Age of Reason , Paine owes the greatest intellectual debt to the English deists of the early eighteenth century , such as Peter Annet . John Toland had argued for the use of reason in interpreting scripture , Matthew Tindal had argued against revelation , Middleton had described the Bible as mythology and questioned the existence of miracles , Thomas Morgan had disputed the claims of the Old Testament , Thomas Woolston had questioned the believability of miracles and Thomas Chubb had maintained that Christianity lacked morality . All of these arguments appear in The Age of Reason , albeit less coherently . 
 = = Rhetoric and style = = 
 The most distinctive feature of The Age of Reason , like all of Paine 's works , is its linguistic style . Historian Eric Foner argues that Paine 's works " forged a new political language " designed to bring politics to the people , using a " clear , simple and straightforward " style . Paine outlined " a new vision — a utopian image of an egalitarian republican society " and his language reflected these ideals . He originated such phrases as " the rights of man " , " the age of reason " , " the age of revolution " , and " the times that try men 's souls " . Foner also maintains that with The Age of Reason Paine " gave deism a new , aggressive , explicitly anti @-@ Christian tone " . He did this by employing " vulgar " ( that is , " low " or " popular " ) language , an irreverent tone , and even religious rhetoric . 
 In a letter to Elihu Palmer , one of his most loyal followers in America , Paine describes part of his rhetorical philosophy : 
 The hinting and intimidating manner of writing that was formerly used on subjects of this kind [ religion ] , produced skepticism , but not conviction . It is necessary to be bold . Some people can be reasoned into sense , and others must be shocked into it . Say a bold thing that will stagger them , and they will begin to think . 
 Paine 's rhetoric had broad appeal ; his " pithy " lines were " able to bridge working @-@ class and middle @-@ class cultures " and become common quotations . 
 Part of what makes Paine 's style so memorable is his effective use of repetition and rhetorical questions in addition to the profusion of " anecdote , irony , parody , satire , feigned confusion , folk matter , concrete vocabulary , and . . . appeals to common sense " . Paine 's conversational style draws the reader into the text . His use of " we " conveys an " illusion that he and the readers share the activity of constructing an argument " . By thus emphasizing the presence of the reader and leaving images and arguments half @-@ formed , Paine encourages his readers to complete them independently . 
 = = = " Vulgar " language = = = 
 The most distinctive element of Paine 's style in The Age of Reason is its " vulgarity " . In the eighteenth century " vulgarity " was associated with the middling and lower classes and not with obscenity ; thus , when Paine celebrates his " vulgar " style and his critics attack it , the dispute is over class accessibility , not profanity . For example , Paine describes the Fall this way : 
 The Christian Mythologists , after having confined Satan in a pit , were obliged to let him out again to bring on the sequel of the fable . He is then introduced into the Garden of Eden , in the shape of a snake or a serpent , and in that shape he enters into familiar conversation with Eve , who is no way surprised to hear a snake talk ; and the issue of this tête @-@ à @-@ tête is that he persuades her to eat an apple , and the eating of that apple damns all mankind . After giving Satan this triumph over the whole creation , one would have supposed that the Church Mythologists would have been kind enough to send him back again to the pit : or , if they had not done this , that they would have put a mountain upon him ( for they say that their faith can remove a mountain ) , or have put him under a mountain , as the former <unk> had done , to prevent his getting again among the women and doing more mischief . But instead of this they leave him at large , without even obliging him to give his parole — the secret of which is that they could not do without him ; and after being at the trouble of making him , they bribed him to stay . They promised him ALL the Jews , ALL the Turks by anticipation , nine @-@ tenths of the world beside , and Mahomet into the bargain . After this , who can doubt the <unk> of the Christian Mythology ? Having thus made an insurrection and a battle in heaven , in which none of the combatants could be either killed or wounded — put Satan into the pit — let him out again — gave him a triumph over the whole creation — damned all mankind by the eating of an apple , these Christian Mythologists bring the two ends of their fable together . They represent this virtuous and amiable man , Jesus Christ , to be at once both God and Man , and also the Son of God , <unk> begotten , on purpose to be sacrificed , because they say that Eve in her longing had eaten an apple . [ emphasis Paine 's ] 
 The irreverent tone that Paine combined with this vulgar style set his work apart from its predecessors . It took " deism out of the hands of the aristocracy and intellectuals and [ brought ] it to the people " . 
 Paine 's rhetorical appeal to " the people " attracted almost as much criticism as his ridicule of the Bible . Bishop Richard Watson , forced to address this new audience in his influential response to Paine , An Apology for the Bible , writes : " I shall , designedly , write this and the following letters in a popular manner ; hoping that thereby they may stand a chance of being perused by that class of readers , for whom your work seems to be particularly calculated , and who are the most likely to be injured by it . " But it was not only the style that concerned Watson and others , it was also the cheapness of Paine 's book . At one sedition trial in the early 1790s , the Attorney – General tried to prohibit Thomas Cooper from publishing his response to Burke 's Reflections on the Revolution in France , arguing that " although there was no exception to be taken to his pamphlet when in the hands of the upper classes , yet the government would not allow it to appear at a price which would insure its circulation among the people . " Similar concerns drove the prosecution of those who printed , published , and distributed The Age of Reason . 
 = = = Irreverent tone = = = 
 Paine 's style is not only " vulgar " , it is also irreverent . For example , he says that once one dismisses the false idea of Moses being the author of Genesis , " The story of Eve and the serpent , and of Noah and his ark , drops to a level with the Arabian tales , without the merit of being entertaining . " Although many early English deists had relied on ridicule to attack the Bible and Christianity , theirs was a refined wit rather than the broad humor Paine employed . It was the early Deists of the middling ranks , and not the educated elite , who initiated the kind of ridicule Paine would make famous . 
 It was Paine 's " ridiculing " tone that most angered Churchmen . As John Redwood , a scholar of deism , puts it : " the age of reason could perhaps more eloquently and adequately be called the age of ridicule , for it was ridicule , not reason , that endangered the Church . " Significantly , Watson 's Apology directly chastises Paine for his mocking tone : 
 I am unwilling to attribute bad designs , deliberate wickedness , to you or to any man ; I cannot avoid believing , that you think you have truth on your side , and that you are doing service to mankind in endeavouring to root out what you esteem superstition . What I blame you for is this — that you have attempted to lessen the authority of the Bible by ridicule , more than by reason . 
 = = = Religious influences = = = 
 Paine 's Quaker upbringing predisposed him to deistic thinking at the same time that it positioned him firmly within the tradition of religious Dissent . Paine acknowledged that he was indebted to his Quaker background for his skepticism , but the Quakers ' esteem for plain speaking , a value expressed both explicitly and implicitly in The Age of Reason , influenced his writing even more . As the historian E. P. Thompson has put it , Paine " ridiculed the authority of the Bible with arguments which the collier or country girl could understand " . His description of the story of the virgin birth of Jesus demystifies biblical language : it is " an account of a young woman engaged to be married , and while under this engagement she is , to speak plain language , debauched by a ghost " . Quaker conversion narratives also influenced the style of The Age of Reason ; Davidson and Scheick argue that its " introductory statement of purpose , a fervid sense of inward inspiration , a declared expression of conscience , and an evangelical intention to instruct others " resemble the personal confessions of American Quakers . 
 Paine takes advantage of several religious rhetorics beyond those associated with Quakerism in The Age of Reason , most importantly a millennial language that appealed to his lower @-@ class readers . Claiming that true religious language is universal , Paine uses elements of the Christian rhetorical tradition to undermine the hierarchies perpetuated by religion itself . The <unk> quality of Paine 's writing is one of its most recognizable traits . <unk> <unk> , a scholar of the sermon , argues that Paine 's writing often resembles that of the <unk> or " political sermon " . He contends that Paine draws on the Puritan tradition in which " theology was wedded to politics and politics to the progress of the kingdom of God " . One reason Paine may have been drawn to this style is because he may have briefly been a Methodist preacher , although this suspicion cannot be verified . 
 = = Reception and legacy = = 
 The Age of Reason provoked a hostile reaction from most readers and critics , although the intensity of that hostility varied by locality . There were four major factors for this animosity : Paine denied that the Bible was a sacred , inspired text ; he argued that Christianity was a human invention ; his ability to command a large readership frightened those in power ; and his irreverent and satirical style of writing about Christianity and the Bible offended many believers . 
 = = = Britain = = = 
 Paine 's Age of Reason sparked enough anger in Britain to initiate not only a series of government prosecutions but also a pamphlet war . Around 50 unfavorable replies appeared between 1795 and 1799 alone and refutations were still being published in 1812 . Many of these responded specifically to Paine 's attack on the Bible in Part II ( when Thomas Williams was prosecuted for printing Part II , it became clear its circulation had far exceeded that of Part I ) . Although critics responded to Paine 's analysis of the Bible , they did not usually address his specific arguments . Instead , they advocated a literal reading of the Bible , citing the Bible 's long history as evidence of its authority . They also issued ad hominem attacks against Paine , describing him " as an enemy of proper thought and of the morality of decent , enlightened people " . Dissenters such as Joseph Priestley who had endorsed the arguments of the Rights of Man turned away from those presented in The Age of Reason . Even the liberal Analytical Review was skeptical of Paine 's claims and distanced itself from the book . Paine 's deism was simply too radical for these more moderate reformers and they feared being tarred with the brush of extremism . 
 Despite the outpouring of antagonistic replies to The Age of Reason , some scholars have argued that Constantin Volney 's deistic The Ruins ( translations of excerpts from the French original appeared in radical papers such as Thomas Spence 's Pig 's Meat and Daniel Isaac Eaton 's Politics for the People ) was actually more influential than The Age of Reason . According to David <unk> , The Ruins " achieved a popularity in England comparable to Rights of Man itself " . However , one minister complained that " the mischief arising from the spreading of such a pernicious publication [ as The Age of Reason ] was infinitely greater than any that could spring from limited suffrage and <unk> parliaments " ( other popular reform causes ) . 
 It was not until Richard Carlile 's 1818 trial for publishing The Age of Reason that Paine 's text became " the anti @-@ Bible of all lower @-@ class nineteenth @-@ century infidel agitators " . Although the book had been selling well before the trial , once Carlile was arrested and charged , 4 @,@ 000 copies were sold in just a few months . At the trial itself , which created a media frenzy , Carlile read the entirety of The Age of Reason into the court record , ensuring it an even wider publication . Between 1818 and 1822 , Carlile claimed to have " sent into circulation near 20 @,@ 000 copies of the Age of Reason " . Just as in the 1790s , it was the language that most angered the authorities in 1818 . As Joss Marsh , in her study of blasphemy in the nineteenth century , points out , " at these trials plain English was reconfigured as itself ' abusive ' and ' outrageous . ' The Age of Reason struggle almost tolled the hour when the words ' plain , ' ' coarse , ' ' common , ' and ' vulgar ' took on a pejorative meaning . " Carlile was convicted of blasphemy and sentenced to one year in prison , but spent six years instead because he refused any " legal conditions " on his release . 
 Paine 's new rhetoric came to dominate popular nineteenth @-@ century radical journalism , particularly that of freethinkers , Chartists and <unk> . Its legacy can be seen in Thomas Wooler 's radical periodical The Black Dwarf , Richard Carlile 's numerous newspapers and journals , the radical works of William Cobbett , Henry Hetherington 's periodicals the Penny Papers and the Poor Man 's Guardian , the works of the Chartist William Lovett , George Holyoake 's newspapers and books on <unk> , and freethinker Charles Bradlaugh 's New Reformer . A century after the publication of The Age of Reason , Paine 's rhetoric was still being used : George Foote 's " Bible Handbook ( 1888 ) . . . systematically <unk> chapters and verses to bring out ' Contradictions , ' ' <unk> , ' ' Atrocities , ' and ' <unk> , ' exactly in the manner of Paine 's Age of Reason . " The periodical The <unk> ( founded in 1881 by George Foote ) argued , like Paine , that the " absurdities of faith " could be " slain with laughter " . In Britain , it was this freethinking tradition that continued Paine 's legacy . 
 = = = France = = = 
 The Age of Reason , despite having been written for the French , made very little , if any , impact on revolutionary France . Paine wrote that " the people of France were running headlong into atheism and I had the work translated into their own language , to stop them in that career , and fix them to the first article . . . of every man 's creed who has any creed at all – I believe in God " ( emphasis Paine 's ) . Paine 's arguments were already common and accessible in France ; they had , in a sense , already been rejected . 
 While still in France , Paine formed the Church of <unk> with five other families ; this civil religion held as its central dogma that man should worship God 's wisdom and benevolence and imitate those divine attributes as much as possible . The church had no priest or minister , and the traditional Biblical sermon was replaced by scientific lectures or homilies on the teachings of philosophers . It celebrated four festivals honoring St. Vincent de Paul , George Washington , Socrates , and Rousseau . Samuel Adams articulated the goals of this church when he wrote that Paine aimed " to renovate the age by inculcating in the minds of youth the fear and love of the Deity and universal philanthropy " . The church closed , however , in 1801 , when Napoleon concluded a concordat with the Vatican . 
 = = = United States = = = 
 In the United States , The Age of Reason initially caused a deistic " revival " , but was then viciously attacked and soon forgotten . Paine became so reviled that he could still be maligned as a " filthy little atheist " by Theodore Roosevelt over one hundred years later . 
 At the end of the eighteenth century , America was ripe for Paine 's arguments . Ethan Allen published the first American defense of deism , the Oracles of Reason ( 1784 ) , but deism remained primarily a philosophy of the educated elite . Men such as Benjamin Franklin and Thomas Jefferson espoused its tenets , while at the same time arguing that religion served the useful purpose of " social control " . It was not until the publication of Paine 's more entertaining and popular work that deism reached into the middling and lower classes in America . The public was receptive , in part , because they approved of the secular ideals of the French Revolution . The Age of Reason went through seventeen editions and sold thousands of copies in the United States . Elihu Palmer , " a blind renegade minister " and Paine 's most loyal follower in America , promoted deism throughout the country . Palmer published what became " the bible of American deism " , The Principles of Nature , established deistic societies from Maine to Georgia , built Temples of Reason throughout the nation , and founded two deistic newspapers for which Paine eventually wrote seventeen essays . Foner writes that " The Age of Reason became the most popular deist work ever written . . . . Before Paine it had been possible to be both a Christian and a deist ; now such a religious outlook became virtually untenable . " Paine presented deism to the masses and , as in Britain , educated elites feared the consequences of such material in the hands of so many . Their fear helped to drive the backlash which soon followed . 
 Almost immediately after this deistic upsurge , the Second Great Awakening began . George <unk> explains that " the revulsion felt for Paine 's Age of Reason and for other anti @-@ religious thought was so great that a major counter @-@ revolution had been set underway in America before the end of the eighteenth century . " By 1796 every student at Harvard was given a copy of Bishop Watson 's rebuttal of The Age of Reason . In 1815 , Parson Weems , an early American novelist and moralist , published God 's Revenge Against Adultery , in which one of the major characters " owed his early downfall to reading ' <unk> 'S AGE OF <unk> ' " . Paine 's " libertine " text leads the young man to " bold slanders of the bible " , even to the point that he " threw aside his father 's good old family bible , and for a surer guide to pleasure took up the AGE OF <unk> ! " 
 Paine could not publish part III of The Age of Reason in America until 1807 because of the deep antipathy against him . Hailed only a few years earlier as a hero of the American Revolution , Paine was now lambasted in the press and called " the scavenger of faction " , a " <unk> @-@ <unk> <unk> [ sic ] rogue " , a " loathsome reptile " , a " demi @-@ human <unk> " , " an object of disgust , of abhorrence , of absolute loathing to every decent man except the President of the United States [ Thomas Jefferson ] " . In October 1805 John Adams wrote to his friend Benjamin Waterhouse , an American physician and scientist : 
 I am willing you should call this the Age of <unk> as you do , and would not object if you had named it the Age of Folly , Vice , Frenzy , Brutality , Daemons , Buonaparte [ sic ] , Tom Paine , or the Age of the Burning Brand from Bottomless Pit , or anything but the Age of Reason . I know not whether any man in the world has had more influence on its inhabitants or affairs for the last thirty years than Tom Paine . There can be no severer satyr [ sic ] on the age . For such a mongrel between pig and puppy , begotten by a wild boar on a bitch wolf , never before in any age of the world was suffered by the <unk> of mankind , to run through such a career of mischief . Call it then the Age of Paine . 
 Adams viewed Paine 's Age of Reason not as the embodiment of the Enlightenment but as a " betrayal " of it . Despite all of these attacks , Paine never wavered in his beliefs ; when he was dying , a woman came to visit him , claiming that God had instructed her to save his soul . Paine dismissed her in the same tones that he had used in The Age of Reason : " pooh , pooh , it is not true . You were not sent with any such impertinent message . . . . <unk> , He would not send such a foolish ugly old woman as you about with His message . " 
 The Age of Reason was largely ignored after 1820 , except by radical groups in Britain and freethinkers in America , among them Robert G. Ingersoll and the American abolitionist Moncure Daniel Conway , who edited his works and wrote the first biography of Paine , favorably reviewed by The New York Times . Not until the publication of Charles Darwin 's The Origin of Species in 1859 , and the large @-@ scale abandonment of the literal reading of the Bible that it caused in Britain , did many of Paine 's ideas take hold . As writer Mark Twain said , " It took a brave man before the Civil War to confess he had read the Age of Reason ... I read it first when I was a cub pilot , read it with fear and hesitation , but marveling at its fearlessness and wonderful power . " Paine 's criticisms of the church , the monarchy , and the aristocracy appear most clearly in Twain 's A Connecticut Yankee in King Arthur 's Court ( 1889 ) . 
 Paine 's text is still published today , one of the few eighteenth @-@ century religious texts to be widely available . Its message still resonates , evidenced by Christopher Hitchens 's statement that " if the rights of man are to be upheld in a dark time , we shall require an age of reason " . His 2006 book on the Rights of Man ends with the claim that " in a time . . . when both rights and reason are under several kinds of open and covert attack , the life and writing of Thomas Paine will always be part of the arsenal on which we shall need to depend . " 
 = = Modern reprints of The Age of Reason = = 
 Paine , Thomas . The Age of Reason . Ed . Kerry Walters . Peterborough : Broadview Press , 2011 . ISBN 978 @-@ 1 @-@ <unk> @-@ 045 @-@ 1 . 
 Paine , Thomas . The Age of Reason , The Complete Edition World Union of Deists , 2009 . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ <unk> @-@ 35 @-@ 3 
 Paine , Thomas . The Age of Reason . Ed . Philip Sheldon Foner . New York : Citadel Press , 1974 . ISBN 0 @-@ 8065 @-@ <unk> @-@ 4 . 
 Paine , Thomas . Thomas Paine : Collected Writings . Ed . Eric Foner . Library of America , 1995 . ISBN 1 @-@ <unk> @-@ 03 @-@ 5 . 
 Paine , Thomas . The Life and Major Writings of Thomas Paine . Ed . Philip S. Foner . Replica Books , 2000 . ISBN 0 @-@ <unk> @-@ 0077 @-@ 2 . 
 Paine , Thomas . The Thomas Paine Reader . Eds . Michael Foot and Isaac <unk> . New York : Penguin Books , 1987 . ISBN 0 @-@ 14 @-@ <unk> @-@ 3 . 
 = Deeping Fen = 
 Deeping Fen is a low @-@ lying area in the South Holland district of Lincolnshire , England , which covers approximately 47 square miles ( 120 km2 ) . It is bounded by the River Welland and the River Glen , and is extensively drained , but the efficient drainage of the land exercised the minds of several of the great civil engineers of the 17th and 18th centuries . 
 Drainage schemes were first authorised during the reign of Queen Elizabeth I , but from 1632 , a group of Adventurers took control of the drainage , in return for which they were granted land . They faced the problem that the outfalls of the River Welland and the River Glen were not sufficiently low to enable proper drainage by gravity , and most schemes included improvement to the rivers . John Perry , an engineer of some repute , who had set the standard for engineering reports in 1727 , began work in 1730 , and was followed by John Grundy , Sr. , a pioneer in applying scientific principles to civil engineering problems . His son , John Grundy , Jr . , was another capable engineer , who was retained as a consultant after he resigned as full @-@ time Surveyor of Works . 
 In 1800 the civil engineers William Jessop and John Rennie assisted local engineers with plans for improvements , the chief of which was for a steam pumping station . This plan was not implemented immediately , but two steam engines fitted with scoop wheels were installed at Pode Hole in 1823 . The pumping station was the largest in the Fens at the time , and remained so for many years . Steam gradually gave way to diesel engines and scoop wheels were replaced by centrifugal pumps , and the diesel engines were then replaced by electric motors . However , the beam engine and scoop wheel at Pinchbeck Marsh , which ran from 1833 to 1952 , was not scrapped , and can be visited by the public . 
 From 1801 the fen was managed by trustees , appointed under the terms of an act of Parliament obtained in that year , and this remained the case until 1939 when the administrative structure was replaced by the Welland & Deepings Internal Drainage Board . 
 = = Location = = 
 Deeping Fen is a low @-@ lying area bounded by the River Welland and the River Glen , which meet at its northern tip , covering around 47 square miles ( 120 km2 ) . It was originally an extra @-@ parochial liberty , as it was formed of waste land which had previously belonged to a number of other parishes , but because it had been reclaimed by Adventurers , was free from land tax and ecclesiastical tithes . About half of the fen became the parish of Deeping St Nicholas in 1846 , which became a civil parish in reforms authorised by an act of Parliament of 1856 . 
 The name of the fen is derived from the Old English ' <unk> ' , which means a " deep or Low place " . The village was listed as " <unk> " in the Domesday Book , an inventory of the country compiled in 1086 . 
 = = History = = 
 People of Market Deeping , Deeping Gate and Deeping St James , together with other villages along the River Welland , presented a petition to Elizabeth I , requesting that the fens should be drained , as the banks of the river and of the neighbouring River Glen were in a poor state of repair . They suggested that Thomas Lovell should undertake the work , which he did , at a cost of £ 12 @,@ 000 , for which he received 15 @,@ 000 acres ( 6 @,@ 100 ha ) of the land which was reclaimed as a result of the work . Unrest in the early 1600s resulted in most of the works being destroyed , but in 1632 a group of adventurers led by the Earl of Bedford were granted permission to drain Deeping Fen , South Fen and Croyland . The work included making the Welland deeper and wider from Deeping St James to its outfall beyond Spalding , and the construction of side drains . These included a drain running from Pode Hole to below Spalding , which is still known as Vernatt 's Drain , after one of the adventurers called Sir Philibert <unk> . Although declared completed in 1637 , efficient drainage would have to wait until the construction of Pode Hole pumping station in 1827 . 
 The drainage of the fen was again addressed in 1664 , when the Deeping Fen Act awarded the Earl of Manchester and others 10 @,@ 000 acres ( 4 @,@ 000 ha ) of land in return for the drainage works . They were also obliged to maintain the banks of the Welland . The inadequacy of its outfall and a spate of bad weather stopped them from completing their task . They tried renting out the land they had been granted , but many tenants were unable to pay the rent , due to the poor state of the drainage which reduced crop yields . In April 1729 , the Deeping Fen Adventurers received a letter from Captain John Perry , expressing the opinion that the only way to improve the drainage was to improve the river outfalls , and proposing the construction of scouring sluices on the river at Spalding , on Vernatt 's drain at its outfall , and on the River Glen at Surfleet . Perry was an engineer of some repute , who had set the standard for engineering reports in 1727 , when he published his recommendations for the North Level of the Fens . His plans were approved , and the Adventurers offered to give him land covering nearly 6 @,@ 000 acres ( 2 @,@ 400 ha ) in payment for the work . He sold one third of the land to finance the project , and began work in 1730 . Cowbit sluice on the Welland had six 6 @-@ foot ( 1 @.@ 8 m ) wide gates which were operated by chains connected to a treadwheel . At high tide , water was penned in Cowbit Wash , between banks which were set well back from the main channel . At low tide , the sluice gates were opened , and the flow scoured out silt from the river bed for some 3 miles ( 4 @.@ 8 km ) downstream . Perry died in February 1733 , before the other works were completed , and was buried in Spalding churchyard . 
 = = = Scientific Drainage = = = 
 Perry was succeeded by John Grundy , Sr. , who had arrived in the region in 1731 at the request of the Duke of Buccleuch , who wanted his estates surveyed . Perry was building the Spalding sluice at the time , and Grundy 's work allowed him to study drains , banks , sluices and outfalls . He formed the opinion that mathematical and philosophical principles should be applied to the drainage of low @-@ lying regions . In 1733 , he surveyed the parish of Moulton , a little further downstream , to assess how drainage could be improved for the Commissioners of Sewers . He demonstrated the use of a telescopic spirit level , which enabled him to achieve accurate levels , with errors of less than 1 inch per mile ( 2 cm per km ) . Next he addressed the issue of flow in open drains . Using his mathematical principles , he calculated that water in a drain which was 4 miles ( 6 @.@ 4 km ) long , and had a fall of 12 inches ( 30 cm ) over its length should travel at around 4 feet per second ( 1 @.@ 2 m / s ) , taking 1 hour and 28 minutes to travel the length of the drain . Observations in the field showed him that other factors , such as fluid friction , resulted in the actual flow rate being less than half of this . He published a paper of his findings in April 1734 , and insisted that accurate mapping and levels , together with physical observation of drains and rivers , were essential to deciding how fenland could best be drained . In the same month , he began working for the Adventurers of Deeping Fen , to produce a drainage scheme . He spent some time mapping 22 miles ( 35 km ) of the Welland , and his chief recommendation was for a reservoir and sluice at the outfall of the River Glen , which would enable the outfall to be scoured at low tide , by releasing water from the reservoir . 
 In July 1737 Grundy and Humphry Smith set out their plans for the fen , and a bill was put before Parliament , to allow the Adventurers to raise the £ 15 @,@ 000 estimated cost by taxes . The act was granted in 1738 , and Smith and Grundy were appointed " Surveyors and Agents of Deeping Fen . " They oversaw a programme of repairs to the Deeping Bank , which ran for 12 miles ( 19 km ) along the south @-@ eastern edge of the fen , protecting it from the Welland . John <unk> did the same for the Country Bank , which ran for 6 miles ( 9 @.@ 7 km ) on the far side of the river . Grundy made the river deeper above Spalding , and also constructed a sluice and reservoir at the mouth of the Glen . The reservoir covered 8 acres ( 3 @.@ 2 ha ) and provided water to scour the channel below the sluice . Two drainage mills were constructed , each with a 16 @-@ foot ( 4 @.@ 9 m ) scoop wheel , one on Vernatt 's Drain and the other on Hill 's Drain . The bed of the Glen had also been regraded and its banks raised by 1742 , when Smith retired and Grundy took sole charge of the works . He oversaw the job of making the Welland through Spalding deeper and wider , and suggested that the outfall of Vernatt 's Drain should be moved 2 @.@ 5 miles ( 4 @.@ 0 km ) downstream from its existing position . Although not implemented immediately , his son completed this task in 1774 . Grundy died in 1748 , having been a pioneer in applying scientific principles to civil engineering problems . 
 = = = Civil Engineers = = = 
 John Grundy , Jr . , took over as Surveyor of Works after the death of his father in 1748 , and spent nearly £ 10 @,@ 000 on repairs to the Deeping Bank and the Country bank between then and 1764 . He rebuilt Perry 's sluice on the Welland soon after 1750 , with taller doors and a set of tide gates to prevent the tide moving upstream . In 1755 three more drainage mills were built on Hills Drain , while a sluice on the Forty Foot Drain followed in 1758 . From 1759 to 1761 he was engaged in lowering the bed of the Welland below the outfall sluice by 2 @.@ 5 feet ( 0 @.@ 76 m ) . After 1764 , Thomas Hogard became the Surveyor of Works , but Grundy continued to act as a consultant engineer . 
 Hogard devised a scheme to cut a new channel from the junction of the Welland and the Glen to Wyberton , on the estuary of the River Witham below Boston . At the end of the 7 @.@ 5 @-@ mile ( 12 @.@ 1 km ) cut , there would be a huge sluice and a navigation lock . The Adventurers asked Thomas Tofield for a second opinion , who suggested a shorter 5 @-@ mile ( 8 @.@ 0 km ) cut from Spalding to Fosdyke . They requested help from Grundy , who proposed a 1 @.@ 5 @-@ mile ( 2 @.@ 4 km ) cut to Fosdyke , and that the outfall of Vernatt 's drain should be moved downstream as his father had suggested . Improvements to the drain were carried out under an act of Parliament obtained in 1774 , and an act was obtained in 1794 to sanction the Wyberton cut , although the work was not carried out , and Grundy 's shorter cut was built under a new act of 1801 . 
 The fen was inundated in 1798 , and the civil engineers William Jessop and John Rennie were asked to assist the local engineers Edward Hare and George Maxwell . There was a clear understanding that the outfalls were too high to allow proper drainage by gravity , and two possible solutions were considered . The first was an outfall at a lower level , which would involve hugh expense in its construction , and the second , favoured by Jessop and Rennie , was the provision of steam pumping engines at Pode Hole . These would pump water from the internal drains of the fen to Vernatt 's Drain , and the lower internal water levels would allow the existing wind @-@ powered drainage mills to work efficiently . A report was produced , which formed the basis for the Deeping Fen Act of 1801 . The channel of the Welland above Spalding was made deeper , the north bank was made stronger , and the North and South Drove Drains which crossed the fen to join Vernatt 's Drain at Pode Hole were made deeper . At the time there were no steam engines working in the fens , and Rennie 's recommendation of a steam pumping station at Pode Hole was not implemented . 
 = = = Pumping Stations = = = 
 After reports by Rennie and Thomas Pear in 1815 , and by Rennie alone in 1818 and 1820 , the provision of steam engines was authorised by an act in 1823 . The land which formed the North Drove was at a lower level to that in the South Drove , and so it was intended to keep the water at different levels in each drain , so that a less powerful engine could be built to pump the South Drove Drain . By the time the details had been finalised , engines of 60 horsepower ( 45 kW ) and 80 horsepower ( 60 kW ) were ordered . Both engines were beam engines . The larger one was manufactured by Butterley , was called the Holland engine , and drove a scoop wheel which was 28 feet ( 8 @.@ 5 m ) in diameter . The wheel had 40 scoops and lifted the water by 5 feet ( 1 @.@ 5 m ) . The smaller engine , which was called the Kesteven engine , was made by Fenton & Murrey , and drove a similar scoop wheel . They were operational by August 1825 , having cost £ 26 @,@ 673 . The pumping station was the largest in the Fens at the time , and remained so for many years . 
 Upgrading of the plant occurred several times . The Kesteven and Holland engines were overhauled in 1881 and 1883 respectively . Flow into the wheel pits was restricted by the provision of shuttles , and rising breasts were fitted on the outflow , so that the height at which the water was discharged could be varied as the water level in Vernatt 's drain varied . Five new boilers , which could supply either engine , were fitted in 1883 , and had been replaced by five more some time before 1928 , for the new boilers failed in that year . The Kesteven engine had its scoop wheel removed , although the rest of the plant was not scrapped until 1952 . 
 Two 100 @-@ horsepower ( 75 kW ) twin @-@ cylinder diesel engines were installed to aid the steam plant , the first in 1914 and the second in 1920 . They were made by Mirrlees , and were scrapped in 1956 . Following the demise of the steam engines , a Mirrlees 250 @-@ horsepower ( 190 kW ) five @-@ cylinder diesel engine , which drove a 54 @-@ inch ( 140 cm ) pump was obtained . The first electric pump was installed in 1939 , to be joined by three more in 1957 , once the Mirrlees engines had been decommissioned . A new engine house was built in 1964 , which held two 650 @-@ horsepower ( 480 kW ) Ruston diesel engines driving 60 @-@ inch ( 150 cm ) Gwynnes Limited pumps , and a third 410 @-@ horsepower ( 310 kW ) Ruston unit , fitted with a 50 @-@ inch ( 130 cm ) Gwynnes pump . The remaining Mirrlees engine and the first electric pump were scrapped at this time . 
 = = = Other Districts = = = 
 Pinchbeck South Fen is a region covering 1 @,@ 700 acres ( 690 ha ) lying on the west side of Vernatt 's Drain . It was originally managed as the Fourth District by the Deeping Fen trustees , but was independent in 1828 , when the occupants approached the trustees with a plan to drain some of the water from the fen to the Pode Hole pumps . A tunnel already existed under Vernatt 's drain , and so the trustees agreed . However , the charges levied by the trustees for this service rose dramatically , so that the South Fen residents decided to build their own pumping engine at Pode Hole in 1830 . A Fenton & Murray beam engine driving a 20 @-@ foot ( 6 @.@ 1 m ) scoop wheel was installed , at a cost of £ 3 @,@ 000 , which was considerably less than the charge the trustees wanted to make . The engine was replaced by a suction gas engine and Ruston pump in 1919 , which was decommissioned in 1943 when a Petter oil engine with a 20 @-@ inch ( 51 cm ) Gwynnes pump was installed . This only lasted for ten years , as two electric motors driving 24 @-@ inch ( 61 cm ) and 20 @-@ inch ( 51 cm ) pumps were fitted in 1953 . 
 Pinchbeck Marsh was also part of Deeping Fen , but following the failure of the work carried out under the 1801 Act to effectively drain the area , an act of Parliament was obtained in 1832 to create a separate district , called the Spalding and Pinchbeck District , or Blue Gowt , as water from the 6 @,@ 000 acres ( 2 @,@ 400 ha ) feeds into the River Glen from the Blue Gowt Drain . A 20 @-@ horsepower ( 15 kW ) Butterley beam engine driving a 22 @-@ foot ( 6 @.@ 7 m ) scoop wheel was installed in 1833 . Although a new boiler was installed in 1895 , the engine and wheel continued to operate until 1952 , making it the last beam engine and scoop wheel combination to be used in the Fens , and also the one which ran for the longest time . Its function was replaced by the two electric pumps fitted in 1953 , which also pump the Pinchbeck South Fen , but the plant was retained , and is now open to the public , although the steam engine is now turned by an electric motor . 
 The management of Deeping Fen by trustees , appointed under the terms of the 1801 Act , continued until they were replaced in 1939 by the Deeping Fen , Spalding and Pinchbeck Internal Drainage Board , subsequently renamed the Welland & Deepings Internal Drainage Board . 
 = Red @-@ capped robin = 
 The red @-@ capped robin ( Petroica goodenovii ) is a small passerine bird native to Australia . Found in drier regions across much of the continent , it inhabits scrub and open woodland . Like many brightly coloured robins of the family Petroicidae , it is sexually dimorphic . Measuring 10 @.@ 5 – 12 @.@ 5 cm ( 4 – 5 in ) in length , the robin has a small thin black bill , and dark brown eyes and legs . The male has a distinctive red cap and red breast , black upperparts , and a black tail with white tips . The underparts and shoulders are white . The female is an undistinguished grey @-@ brown . This species uses a variety of songs , and males generally sing to advertise territories and attract females . Birds are encountered in pairs or small groups , but the social behaviour has been little studied . 
 The position of the red @-@ capped robin is unclear ; it and its relatives are unrelated to European or American robins but appear to be an early offshoot of the songbird infraorder Passerida . The red @-@ capped robin is a predominantly ground @-@ feeding bird and its prey consists of insects and spiders . Although widespread , it is uncommon in much of its range and has receded in some areas from human activity . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 The red @-@ capped robin was described by Nicholas Aylward Vigors and Thomas Horsfield in 1827 , having been collected in the northern Spencer Gulf in South Australia . They named it Muscicapa goodenovii , and placed it among the Old World flycatcher family Muscicapidae . The specific epithet goodenovii honours the Reverend Samuel Goodenough , Bishop of Carlisle and first treasurer of the Linnean Society . 
 The red @-@ capped robin was later moved to the genus Petroica ; the generic name is derived from the Ancient Greek words <unk> " rock " and oikos " home " , from the bird 's habit of sitting on rocks . Within the genus , it is one of five red- or pink @-@ breasted species colloquially known as " red robins " as distinct from the " yellow robins " of the genus Eopsaltria . It is not closely related to the American robin or the European robin ; however , it is named after the European robin . Molecular research ( and current consensus ) places the Red @-@ capped robin and its relatives — the Australian robin family Petroicidae — as a very early offshoot of the Passerida , or " advanced " songbirds , within the songbird lineage . 
 No subspecies are recognised , and the only geographic variation recorded in plumage is a tendency for females from more arid regions to have paler plumage . Testing of the nuclear and mitochondrial DNA of Australian members of the genus Petroica suggests the red @-@ capped robin 's closest relative within the genus is the scarlet robin . 
 Officially known as the red @-@ capped robin , it has also been referred to as redhead , <unk> , robin red @-@ breast or red @-@ throated robin . <unk> is a name used in the Kimberley . Across southwestern Australia , it was known as <unk> by the local indigenous people . 
 = = Description = = 
 The smallest of the red robins , the red @-@ capped robin is 10 @.@ 5 – 12 @.@ 5 cm ( 4 – 5 in ) long with a wingspan of 15 – 19 @.@ 5 cm ( 6 – 8 in ) , and weighs around 7 – 9 g ( 0 @.@ 25 – 0 @.@ 31 oz ) . Males and females are of similar size . It has longer legs than the other robins of the genus Petroica . The male has a distinctive scarlet cap and breast . Its upperparts are jet black with white shoulder bars , and its tail black with white tips . The underparts and shoulder are white . All colours are sharply delineated from one another . The female is an undistinguished grey @-@ brown above with a reddish tint to the crown , and paler underneath with dark brown wings and pale buff wing patch . Some females have a reddish tint to the breast . Both sexes have a small black bill , and dark brown eyes and legs . Immature birds initially resemble the female ; it is only with their second moult , which takes place at around or just over a year of age that males adopt their distinctive adult plumage . The red @-@ capped robin moults once a year , after the breeding season which takes place between December and April . 
 Two red keto @-@ carotenoid pigments , <unk> and <unk> , are responsible for the redness in the red @-@ capped robin 's plumage . The birds are unable to synthesize these compounds themselves , and hence need to obtain them from their food . Carotenoids are costly to metabolise and are also required for use in immune function , hence birds need to be in good condition to have enough left for use in red feathers . This makes red plumage a good advertisement to prospective mates . A 2001 field study at Terrick Terrick National Park in Victoria found that males who had greater reproductive success and were in better condition moulted into a brighter plumage the following year . However , male age and condition at the time were more likely to predict mating success for the following breeding season . Adult males can breed at one year of age and may do so while yet in non @-@ breeding plumage , but they are less successful at reproducing at this age . The oldest recorded age is 5 years and 7 months for a bird banded near Beverley , Western Australia , in 1990 . 
 A variety of calls have been recorded , described as ' tinkle ' and ' blurt ' songs . These are similar across mainland Australia but distinct on Rottnest Island ; on the isolated island , birds rarely linked successive songs . 
 This species may be confused with the related flame robin ( P. phoenicea ) and scarlet robin ( P. boodang ) , but the male can be distinguished by its red crown ( white in the other two species ) and smaller size ; furthermore , the male flame robin has dark grey rather than black upperparts . Female and immature birds are harder to distinguish , but can be differentiated by the reddish tinge of the crown and whiter underparts . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 The red @-@ capped robin is found across Australia except for Tasmania , Cape York , the Top End and most of the Kimberley ( there have been occasional sightings in the southernmost parts ) . Offshore populations exist on Rottnest Island , as well as <unk> and Pearson Islands off the Eyre Peninsula , but it is not found on Kangaroo Island . Although widespread , it is uncommon in many areas ; it is rare east of the Great Dividing Range , in coastal regions in the south of the continent , and in the northern parts of its range — it is seldom encountered north of 20 ° S. Its movements are generally poorly known , particularly outside the breeding season . It is sedentary in much the southern parts of its range , although the red @-@ capped robin is a spring and summer visitor to the Nullarbor Plain and Adelaide region in South Australia , and central Victoria . It is a winter visitor in the northern parts of its range . 
 The red @-@ capped robin prefers more arid habitat than its relatives , and inhabits dryer areas while the scarlet robin occupies wetter forests where they co @-@ occur . The red @-@ capped robin 's preferred habitat is dry Acacia , Callitris or mixed scrubland or woodland , dominated by such species as mulga ( Acacia aneura ) , Georgina <unk> ( Acacia <unk> ) , raspberry jam ( Acacia acuminata ) , black cypress @-@ pine ( Callitris <unk> ) , white cypress @-@ pine ( C. <unk> ) , and slender cypress @-@ pine ( C. preissii ) with understory shrubs such as Cassia , hop @-@ bush ( Dodonaea ) , emu bush ( Eremophila ) and spinifex ( Triodia ) . 
 = = = Threats = = = 
 The species has generally fared badly with human change to the landscape . Once common on the Cumberland Plain in Sydney 's western suburbs , it has now almost disappeared from the Sydney Basin . It has also disappeared from the vicinity of Rockhampton in Queensland , and declined on Rottnest Island , and in the Wheatbelt region of Western Australia . Field studies in small patches of remnant vegetation indicate reduced survival rates there . 
 The feral cat is known to prey on the red @-@ capped robin , and several bird species including the Australian raven ( Corvus coronoides ) , grey shrike @-@ thrush ( Colluricincla harmonica ) , grey butcherbird ( Cracticus torquatus ) and white @-@ browed babbler ( <unk> superciliosus ) raid nests and take young . There is one record of a brown @-@ headed honeyeater ( Melithreptus brevirostris ) feeding on an egg . Predation is the commonest cause of nest failure . 
 = = Behaviour = = 
 The red @-@ capped robin is generally encountered alone or in pairs , although groups of up to eight birds — a mated pair and their young — may be seen in autumn and winter . The species may join mixed @-@ species flocks with other small insectivorous passerines ; species recorded include the willie wagtail ( Rhipidura leucophrys ) , southern whiteface ( <unk> leucopsis ) , rufous whistler ( <unk> rufiventris ) and black @-@ faced woodswallow ( Artamus cinereus ) in Queensland , and the chestnut @-@ rumped thornbill ( Acanthiza <unk> ) , buff @-@ rumped thornbill ( A. <unk> ) or inland thornbill ( A. apicalis ) in Western Australia . 
 The red @-@ capped robin typically perches in a prominent location low to the ground , often flicking its wings and tail . It is very active and does not stay still for long . The female has been reported as being fairly tame , while the male is more wary of human contact . 
 The red @-@ capped robin is territorial during the breeding season ; the area occupied has been measured between 0 @.@ 25 and 1 @.@ 2 ha ( 0 @.@ 6 – 3 acres ) . A pair lives and forages within their territory before dispersing in autumn . The male proclaims ownership by singing loudly from a suitable perch at the territory boundary , and confronts other males with a harsh scolding call should they make an incursion . Two males have been seen to face one another 30 cm to 1 m ( 12 – 40 in ) apart , flicking wings and manoeuvring for position in a threat display while the female is incubating her eggs . Both sexes also react to the playback of song recordings . The male will also defend against incursions by male scarlet robins , and conversely avoid foraging in the latter species ' territories . Most juvenile red @-@ capped robins are unable to live in territories occupied by adult birds , and need to travel to find unoccupied land ; the furthest dispersal recorded to date has been 36 km ( 22 mi ) , from Terrick Terrick National Park across farmland to <unk> State Forest in northern Victoria . 
 = = = Feeding = = = 
 The diet consists of insects and other small arthropods . One study of red @-@ capped robin faeces conducted near <unk> , Western Australia , revealed 96 % of their diet was made up of beetles , while ants made up the remainder . Other prey recorded include spiders , and insects such as grasshoppers including the Australian Plague Locust ( <unk> <unk> ) , adult and larval butterflies and moths , including geometer moths , dragonflies and damselflies , mantises , antlions , true bugs , including <unk> bugs of the family <unk> and shield bugs , various types of beetles , earwigs , and flies such as blow @-@ flies and horse @-@ flies . 
 The red @-@ capped robin mostly pounces on prey on the ground , although it can swoop and catch creatures while airborne . Less often , it gleans ( takes prey while perched ) in low @-@ lying vegetation , almost always less than 3 m ( 10 ft ) above the ground . The prey is most commonly on the ground when caught , although airborne insects are sometimes taken . A low branch may be used as a vantage point in hunting . 
 = = = Breeding = = = 
 The breeding season takes place over five months from August to January with up to three broods raised . The male proposes suitable nest sites to the female by rubbing his body over a suitable tree fork , all the while trilling continuously . He may indicate several sites before the female ultimately makes the decision where to build , at which point she constructs the nest alone . The nest is a neat , deep cup made of soft dry grass and bark . Spider webs , feathers and fur are used for binding or filling , and the nest is generally placed in a tree fork or even a mistletoe bush . It may be decorated with lichen and camouflaged to blend in with its surroundings . Two to three dull white eggs tinted bluish , greyish or brownish and splotched with dark grey @-@ brown are laid on consecutive days , measuring 16 mm × 13 mm ( 0 @.@ 6 × 0 @.@ 5 in ) . Females alone develop brood patches and incubate , although both sexes feed the young . The male will keep lookout either on the nest or perched on a nearby branch , rather than brood while the female is foraging , and parents will feed young and dart off quickly if there are predators in the vicinity . Extra @-@ pair mating and fertilisation is fairly common , with 23 % of nestlings and 37 % of broods having a different father to the one rearing them , and there is some evidence that extra @-@ pair couplings are more likely to produce male birds . 
 Like all passerines , the chicks are altricial ; they are born blind and covered only by a thin layer of down . By seven days , they are stretching wings and preening , and at two weeks they are able to fly . Parents feed young for at least three weeks after leaving the nest , and have been recorded giving them spiders , and insects such as flies and moths . Males take over feeding young when females begin <unk> for the next brood . In a field study near Cooma in southern New South Wales , fledglings were observed to disperse from the natal territory after four to six weeks for a single brood year , and in less than a week on both occasions in a pair which raised two broods in the season . The long breeding season and multiple broods therein are an adaptation to mild climate and high levels of predation . Despite this , on average only two young are successfully fledged per year . 
 The brush cuckoo ( Cacomantis variolosus ) , pallid cuckoo ( C. pallidus ) , Horsfield 's bronze cuckoo ( Chrysococcyx basalis ) , and black @-@ eared cuckoo ( C. <unk> ) have been recorded as brood parasites of the red @-@ capped robin ; female cuckoos lay their eggs in robin nests , which are then raised by the robins as their own . Red @-@ capped robins have been observed to be particularly aggressive in driving Horsfield 's bronze cuckoos from their territories in Terrick Terrick National Park in a field study , and no nests were found parasitised there . 
 = History of the Montreal Canadiens = 
 The Montreal Canadiens ice hockey club , formally Le Club de Hockey Canadien , was founded on December 4 , 1909 . The Canadiens are the oldest professional hockey franchise in the world . Created as a founding member of the National Hockey Association ( NHA ) with the aim of appealing to Montreal 's francophone population , the Canadiens played their first game on January 5 , 1910 , and captured their first Stanley Cup in 1916 . The team left the NHA and helped found the National Hockey League ( NHL ) in 1917 . They returned to the Stanley Cup finals in 1919 , but their series against the Seattle Metropolitans was canceled without a winner due to the Spanish flu pandemic that killed defenceman Joe Hall . The Canadiens have won the Stanley Cup 24 times : once while part of the National Hockey Association ( NHA ) , and 23 times as members of the NHL . With 25 NHL titles overall , they are the most successful team in league history . 
 The Canadiens ' home rink , the Montreal Arena , was destroyed by fire in January 1918 . The team moved into the Jubilee Arena , which subsequently burned down in 1919 . After spending seven seasons in the Mount Royal Arena , the Canadiens moved into the Montreal Forum in 1926 , sharing it with the rival Montreal Maroons until 1938 . After 72 years in the Forum , they moved to the Bell Centre in 1996 . The club struggled during the Great Depression , nearly relocating to Cleveland , Ohio , in 1935 and contemplated suspending operations in 1939 . Their fortunes rebounded following World War II as they reached the Stanley Cup finals each year from 1951 to 1960 , winning six championships , including a record five consecutive titles from 1956 to 1960 . 
 Maurice " Rocket " Richard emerged as the team 's star in the 1940s , and during the 1944 – 45 season became the first player in NHL history to score 50 goals in a single season . Richard sparked the Richard Riot in March 1955 when he was suspended for attacking a linesman . The incident highlighted growing tensions between French Quebec and English Canada , and is regarded as one of the first manifestations of Quebec 's Quiet Revolution . In 1959 , Jacques Plante revolutionized the game when he became the first goaltender to consistently wear a mask during play . Under general manager Sam Pollock , the Canadiens won nine championships between 1964 and 1978 . The 1976 – 77 team , often regarded as the greatest in NHL history , won 60 games while losing only 8 , a record for fewest losses in an 80 @-@ game season . With the entry of the World Hockey Association 's Quebec Nordiques to the NHL in 1979 , a rivalry grew between the Canadiens and the Nordiques , peaking in 1984 when the Canadiens eliminated the Nordiques in six games , but not before the Good Friday Massacre made headlines . 
 Led by goaltender Patrick Roy , the Canadiens won their 23rd Stanley Cup in 1986 and their 24th in 1993 . Roy won the Conn Smythe Trophy as the playoffs ' most valuable player both times . The 1993 team set an NHL record with 10 consecutive overtime victories in one playoff year and is the most recent Canadian team to win the Stanley Cup . In 2003 , Montreal participated in the first regular season outdoor game in NHL history , defeating the Edmonton Oilers in the Heritage Classic . 
 The Hockey Hall of Fame has inducted over 50 former Canadiens players , as well as ten executives . The team has retired 15 numbers , representing 17 players , and has honoured ten off @-@ ice personnel in its Builder 's Row . 
 = = Founding = = 
 In November 1909 , industrialist Ambrose O 'Brien of Renfrew , Ontario , was in Montreal to purchase supplies for a railway contract . At the request of the Renfrew Creamery Kings hockey team , he attended the Eastern Canada Hockey Association ( ECHA ) meetings , held at the Windsor Hotel , to represent Renfrew in its application to join the league . At the meeting , the ECHA team owners rejected Renfrew 's application . Later that day the ECHA 's owners chose to disband their league and form the Canadian Hockey Association ( CHA ) in a bid to exclude the Montreal Wanderers , who had upset the other owners when they moved into a smaller arena that would reduce the visiting team 's share of gate receipts . In the lobby of the hotel , O 'Brien met Jimmy Gardner , manager of the Wanderers , and discussed forming a new league which would include Renfrew , the Wanderers , and two teams that O 'Brien owned in the Ontario mining towns of Cobalt and Haileybury . Gardner suggested that O 'Brien start a team of francophone players based in Montreal , forming a rivalry with the Wanderers . As a result , the National Hockey Association ( NHA ) was founded on December 2 , 1909 , and Les Canadiens were created two days later , initially financed by O 'Brien with the intent of transferring ownership to francophone sportsmen in Montreal as soon as possible . 
 At the time , francophone teams were not considered to be good enough to play with the top anglophone teams : the Montreal Gazette warned potential fans of the new team not to get too excited , as " French @-@ Canadian players of class are not numerous " . The Canadiens stocked their team with francophone stars including Newsy Lalonde , Georges Poulin and Didier Pitre . Before being allowed to play , Pitre had to resolve a lawsuit with the Montreal Nationals , to whom he was already under contract . 
 = = 1910 – 17 : National Hockey Association = = 
 The Canadiens played their first game on January 5 , 1910 , coached by Jack Laviolette . Before a sellout crowd of 3 @,@ 000 , they defeated Cobalt 7 – 6 in overtime . The victory was erased from the history books shortly after , as the CHA collapsed after only two weeks of play , and the NHA chose to restart the season after absorbing the CHA 's Ottawa Senators and the Montreal Shamrocks . The Canadiens ' first game of the new season was played January 19 , a 9 – 4 loss to the Renfrew Creamery Kings . They lost three more games before finally recording their first victory of the new season on February 7 , when they defeated the Haileybury Hockey Club by a score of 9 – 7 . They won only two of their 12 games that season , and finished last in the eight @-@ team league . 
 George Kennedy , owner of the Club <unk> Canadien ( CAC ) , claimed rights to the " Canadiens " team name following the season . He settled the dispute by buying the team from O 'Brien for $ 7 @,@ 500 . That same year , the team adopted its now @-@ famous red sweater with a blue stripe across the front . In the middle of the stripe was an elongated red C encompassing a red A to represent the CAC . 
 The Canadiens reached the playoffs for the first time in 1913 – 14 when they tied the Toronto Blueshirts for the league lead with 26 points . The two teams played a two @-@ game series for the championship , with the winner based on total goals . Georges Vezina shut out the Blueshirts 2 – 0 in the first game , but the Canadiens were defeated 6 – 0 in the second and lost the series . Two years later , in 1915 – 16 , the Canadiens won the NHA championship , the O 'Brien Cup , with a 16 – 7 – 1 record , three wins better than the second place Senators . The title earned the Canadiens their first berth in the Stanley Cup finals , where they faced the Portland Rosebuds of the Pacific Coast Hockey Association ( PCHA ) . With the best @-@ of @-@ five series tied at two wins apiece , the deciding game was held at Westmount Arena in Montreal on March 30 , 1916 . Montreal 's Goldie <unk> scored the winning goal with less than four minutes to play , giving the Canadiens their first Stanley Cup championship . 
 In 1916 , the CAC faced financial difficulty after a January fire destroyed its gymnasium and the Montreal Canadians lacrosse team failed . Kennedy separated the hockey club from the CAC and incorporated it in March 1916 as " Le club de Hockey Canadien " . The Canadiens changed their logo to a red " C " interlocked with a white " H " . The H in the logo stands for " hockey , " though the long @-@ standing misconception that it stands for " Habitants " led to the team being nicknamed " the Habs " . 
 The NHA met its demise in the winter of 1917 following several long @-@ running disputes between Blueshirts owner Eddie Livingstone and the league 's other four teams over who owned the rights to various players . Kennedy especially disliked Livingstone , and the two nearly came to blows numerous times during league meetings . However , the Canadiens , Wanderers , Senators and Quebec Bulldogs discovered that while they were united in their distaste for Livingstone , the league constitution didn 't allow them to simply vote him out . To solve this problem , on November 26 they created a new league , the National Hockey League ( NHL ) , and didn 't invite Livingstone to join them . They nominally remained members of the NHA and had enough votes to suspend the league 's operations , effectively leaving Livingstone in a one @-@ team league . Kennedy was the dominant force in the new league ; he not only owned the Canadiens , but had loaned Tommy Gorman the money he used to buy the Senators . However , the four teams still desired to have a team from Toronto in their league . They also needed a fourth team to balance the schedule after financial difficulties forced the Bulldogs to suspend operations ( as it turned out , they wouldn 't take the ice until 1919 ) . With this in mind , they granted a " temporary " franchise to the Toronto Arena Company , which eventually evolved into the Canadiens ' rivals , the Toronto Maple Leafs . 
 = = 1917 – 32 : early National Hockey League = = 
 Joe Malone recorded five goals for the Canadiens in their NHL debut , a 7 – 4 victory over the Senators , en route to a league leading 44 goal season . The fledgling league nearly collapsed on January 2 , 1918 , after a fire destroyed the Montreal Arena , home to both the Wanderers and the Canadiens . The Canadiens relocated to the 3 @,@ 000 @-@ seat Jubilee Arena , but the Wanderers ceased operations , reducing the NHL to three teams . Playing a revamped split season schedule , Montreal won the first half title , but lost the league championship to second half winning Toronto by a score of 10 – 7 in a two @-@ game , total goals series . 
 The Canadiens won the NHL championship against the Senators in 1918 – 19 , and traveled west to meet the PCHA champion Seattle Metropolitans for the Stanley Cup . The series is best remembered for its cancellation due to the Spanish flu pandemic . Several players from both teams became ill , prompting health officials in Seattle to cancel the sixth , and deciding , game . With his entire team either in the hospital or confined to bed , Kennedy attempted to borrow players from the PCHA 's Victoria Aristocrats , only to be turned down by PCHA president Frank Patrick . With no way to field a team , Kennedy announced he was forfeiting the game — and the Cup — to the Metropolitans . However , the Metropolitans turned it down ; coach Pete Muldoon felt that with the Canadiens decimated by the flu , it wouldn 't be sportsmanlike to claim the title . Star defenceman Joe Hall never recovered , and died on April 5 , 1919 . 
 During the following summer , the Jubilee Rink burned down , forcing the Canadiens to build Mount Royal Arena as a replacement . The team also lost their star player Malone , who had been on loan from the dormant Bulldogs as Quebec rejoined the league in 1919 – 20 . Kennedy died in 1921 ; he had never recovered from the 1919 flu . His widow sold the team to Leo Dandurand , former player Joseph Cattarinich and Louis A. Letourneau . 
 Regarded as one of the NHL 's first superstars , Howie Morenz made his debut in 1923 – 24 alongside Aurel Joliat . The club placed second in the league to Ottawa , but defeated the Senators in the playoffs to win the league championship and reach the Stanley Cup final . Montreal hosted the 1924 Stanley Cup Finals against the Calgary Tigers of the Western Canada Hockey League ( WCHL ) . The Canadiens won the best @-@ of @-@ three series in two games , and captured their second Stanley Cup . Morenz was the offensive star of the series , scoring a hat trick in game one and a goal in game two . 
 The Montreal Forum , which in later decades became synonymous with the Canadiens , was opened in 1924 to house the expansion Montreal Maroons . The Canadiens were invited to inaugurate the arena as the natural ice surface at the Mount Royal Arena was not ready to host NHL games . The team played the first game in Forum history on November 29 , 1924 , a 7 – 1 victory over the Toronto St. Patricks . The Canadiens took residence at the Forum in 1926 , sharing it with the Maroons until the latter ceased operations in 1938 . 
 For the 1924 – 25 season , the Canadiens celebrated their world champion status with a special jersey design . The team moved their CH logo to their sleeves and played with a large world globe logo crest on their jersey fronts . Montreal finished third in the league standings and defeated Toronto in the semi @-@ final . The players on the first place Hamilton Tigers refused to participate in a playoff series unless they were paid an additional $ 200 each . When they failed to relent on their demands , NHL president Frank Calder suspended the entire team , and declared the Canadiens to be the league champions . The Habs thus traveled to the Pacific Coast to play the WCHL 's Victoria Cougars in the 1925 Stanley Cup Final . The Cougars won the best @-@ of @-@ five series 3 – 1 ; it was the last time a non @-@ NHL team won the Stanley Cup . 
 Georges Vezina collapsed during the first game of the 1925 – 26 season . He was diagnosed with tuberculosis and never played again , succumbing to the illness in March 1926 . In his honour , the team donated a new award to the league , the Vezina Trophy , to be given to the goaltender who allowed the fewest goals over the course of the season . The first recipient was his replacement , George Hainsworth . Vezina was inducted into the Hockey Hall of Fame upon its creation in 1945 . 
 During the 1927 – 28 season , Morenz became the first player in NHL history to score 50 points in a single season . Morenz was the first NHL player to score a second Stanley Cup winning goal , with the Canadiens ' victory in the 1930 Stanley Cup Finals over the Boston Bruins . The Bruins , who finished with a 38 – 5 – 1 record and at one point during the season went 23 games without a defeat , lost consecutive games to Montreal in the finals , 3 – 0 and 4 – 3 . The Canadiens became the fourth team in Stanley Cup history to repeat as champions , defeating the Chicago Black Hawks in five games to capture the 1931 Stanley Cup Championship . 
 = = 1932 – 46 : Howie Morenz and Rocket Richard = = 
 Attendance was in decline across the league as the Great Depression took hold . The Habs posted a losing record in 1932 – 33 , leading to still smaller crowds . Averaging only 2 @,@ 000 fans per game , the team sold Morenz to the Chicago Black Hawks in 1934 as part of an effort to cut costs . The move was not a popular one , and fans voiced their opinion of the deal by giving Morenz a standing ovation when he scored against the Canadiens on the last day of the 1934 – 35 season . 
 With losses of $ 60 @,@ 000 over the previous two seasons , the Canadiens were put up for sale in 1935 . Dandurand and Cattarinich entered negotiations to sell the club and move it to Cleveland , Ohio , but a syndicate of local Montreal businessmen led by Maurice Forget and Ernest Savard stepped forward to buy the team and prevent the transfer . The Canadiens struggled on the ice , finishing with the worst record in the league in 1935 – 36 . The new owners asked Cecil Hart to coach the team , in the hopes that he would bring the Habs back to respectability . Hart agreed with one stipulation : that the Canadiens bring back Morenz . The team agreed , and acquired an overjoyed Morenz in a trade with the New York Rangers . 
 Morenz 's return to Montreal lasted less than a season : in January 1937 , while being checked by Chicago 's Earl Seibert , his skate caught on the ice and Morenz broke his leg in four places . He never recovered , and died of a coronary embolism on March 8 . Aurel Joliat offered a different explanation of his death : " Howie loved to play hockey more than anyone ever loved anything , and when he realized that he would never play again , he couldn 't live with it . I think Howie died of a broken heart . " On the day of his funeral , 50 @,@ 000 people filed past Morenz 's casket at centre ice of the Montreal Forum to pay their last respects to the man the media called " the Babe Ruth of hockey " . A benefit game in November 1937 raised $ 20 @,@ 000 for Morenz 's family as the NHL All @-@ Stars defeated the Montreal Canadiens 6 – 5 . Morenz was one of the first players elected to the Hockey Hall of Fame when it was created in 1945 . 
 The Canadiens continued to finish near the bottom of the league standings for several seasons . The low point came in 1939 – 40 : Babe Siebert , who was named the Habs ' coach following his retirement as a player in 1939 , drowned before the season began , and Pit Lepine was named as his replacement . With an aging roster , the Canadiens finished last , winning only 10 games . That team 's .260 winning percentage is still the worst in franchise history . Largely due to the team 's poor play , the Canadiens only drew 3 @,@ 000 fans per game , leading Savard and his partners to consider suspending operations at least for the duration of World War II . Instead , they sold the franchise to the team 's landlord , the Canadian Arena Company . 
 At this point , relief arrived from an unexpected quarter — Maple Leafs owner Conn Smythe . The Depression had already forced three teams to either shut down outright or suspend operations never to return . Additionally , the New York Americans had been wards of the league since 1936 , and it was considered to be only a matter of time before they folded ( they eventually did , in 1942 ) . Smythe did not want to see the Canadiens fold , and suggested that the Arena Company hire the Maple Leafs ' former coach , Dick Irvin . Irvin was a proven winner , having led the Maple Leafs to seven finals and one Cup in nine years . The Arena Company readily accepted Smythe 's suggestion , and turned to Irvin to lead the once @-@ proud team 's revitalization . 
 By 1943 , the war effort had a devastating effect on many rosters . The Red Wings lost nine players and the Maple Leafs lost six to the military . The Rangers lost ten players and had to be persuaded by the other teams not to suspend operations . In contrast , the Canadiens lost only one key player in Ken Reardon . Young phenom Maurice Richard tried to enlist , but was turned down due to his medical history . Canadiens General Manager Tommy Gorman reportedly ensured his players obtained jobs in key wartime industries to avoid conscription . 
 Led by the " Punch Line " of Richard , Toe Blake and Elmer Lach , the Habs won their fifth Stanley Cup in 1944 , losing only five games in the regular season . In 1944 – 45 , the team won 38 games and lost only eight , and Richard was the focus of the media and fans as he attempted to be the first player in league history to score 50 goals in a 50 @-@ game season . Richard set a single @-@ game scoring record , recording five goals and three assists in a 9 – 1 victory over Detroit on December 28 , 1944 . He later broke Joe Malone 's goal scoring record when he scored his 45th goal , after which opposing teams did all they could to prevent him from reaching the 50 @-@ goal mark . He was slashed , elbowed and held as no team wanted to be known as the one that gave up the milestone goal . Richard finally scored his 50th goal in Boston at 17 : 45 of the third period of Montreal 's final game of the season . The record , previously considered nearly impossible to achieve , elevated Richard to the status of provincial hero in Quebec . 
 = = 1946 – 67 : the Original Six = = 
 Prior to the expansion of the NHL in 1967 , the league was reduced to six franchises , which would become known after 1967 as the " Original Six " . Frank J. Selke replaced Tommy Gorman as general manager of the Canadiens in 1946 , and held the post until 1964 . Selke spent several years attempting to sign teenage star Jean Beliveau to play for the Canadiens . Beliveau played brief stints with the Habs in 1950 and 1952 , but his loyalty to the Quebec Aces of the Quebec Senior Hockey League led him to turn the Canadiens down repeatedly when they pressed him to move to Montreal full @-@ time . The Canadiens finally bought the entire Quebec senior league in 1953 and turned it professional in order to bring Beliveau into the fold , and he signed a five @-@ year contract for $ 100 @,@ 000 . He spent his entire 18 @-@ year , Hall of Fame NHL career with the Habs . 
 In March 1955 , Richard was suspended for the remainder of the season , including the playoffs , after he received a match penalty for slashing Boston 's Hal Laycoe and subsequently punching a linesman who intervened . The suspension touched off a wave of anger toward league president Clarence Campbell , who was warned not to attend a scheduled game in Montreal after receiving numerous death threats , mainly from French @-@ Canadians accusing him of anti @-@ French bias . Campbell dismissed the warnings , and attended the March 17 game as planned . His presence at the game was perceived by many fans as a provocation and he was booed and pelted with eggs and fruit . An hour into the game , a fan lobbed a tear @-@ gas bomb in Campbell 's direction , causing fire officials to clear the building . Fans leaving the Forum were met by a growing mob of angry demonstrators who overwhelmed the 250 police officers on the scene and rioted outside of the Forum . Seventy people were arrested , 37 people injured , 50 stores were looted and $ 100 @,@ 000 in property damage was reported as a result of the melee , which became known as l 'affaire Richard , or the Richard Riot . The incident highlighted the growing cultural gap between French Quebec and English Canada and the riot is often described as an early manifestation of Quebec 's Quiet Revolution . 
 The following day , Richard went on a French @-@ language Montreal radio station to ask the fans to stop rioting and instead to support the Canadiens in the playoffs . He also said he would accept his punishment and return the following year to win the Cup . While the Canadiens were defeated in the 1955 Stanley Cup Finals , Richard led Montreal to the 1956 Stanley Cup as he promised . 
 The 1955 – 56 season was the first as head coach for Toe Blake , who was hired to help control Richard 's temper . The 1956 victory began an unprecedented streak of five consecutive Stanley Cups for the Canadiens from 1956 to 1960 ; the 1960 final was Montreal 's tenth consecutive appearance in the championship series . Richard , the first player to score 500 career goals in NHL history , retired in 1960 with 544 career goals and was elected to the Hockey Hall of Fame in 1961 . The customary three @-@ year waiting period was waived in honour of his accomplishments . 
 Goaltender Jacques Plante had been wearing a mask during practices for some time , but did not wear it during games due to the objections of Blake and Selke who held the traditional view that players should not wear facial protection . That changed on November 1 , 1959 , after he was struck in the face early in a game at Madison Square Garden . As teams did not dress backup goaltenders during this time , the game was delayed 20 minutes while doctors frantically stitched Plante up . When Blake asked him if he was ready to return to play , Plante refused to return to the ice unless he was allowed to wear a mask . Blake was livid , but agreed only if Plante removed the mask when his face was healed . Wearing the mask , Plante led the Canadiens on an 18 game unbeaten streak . He finally removed the mask at Blake 's urging and promptly lost the next game . Defeated , Blake relented . Plante 's mask became a permanent fixture as he led the Canadiens to their fifth consecutive Stanley Cup . Other goalies followed Plante 's lead soon after . 
 When the NHL instituted the NHL Amateur Draft in 1963 , the Canadiens were given the option to replace their regular first selection with two " Cultural Picks " that could be used to draft up to two French @-@ Canadian players before any other team made any selections . The team used one cultural pick in 1968 , and both in 1969 , when it drafted Rejean Houle and Marc Tardif , two top prospects . This option was eliminated after the 1969 draft . 
 Selke retired in 1964 and was succeeded by Sam Pollock . Often named the best general manager in NHL history , Pollock led the Canadiens to nine Stanley Cup championships in his 14 years at the helm of the team . One of his key tactics was trading aging stars to expansion teams for draft picks , which led to the team drafting future Hall of Famers Guy Lafleur , Larry Robinson and Ken Dryden . The Canadiens won consecutive titles in 1965 and 1966 , and entered the 1967 Stanley Cup Final against Toronto as a heavy favourite . The City of Montreal was so confident in the Canadiens that they had already built a space for the Stanley Cup on the Expo 67 site , but the Canadiens fell to the Maple Leafs , in the last NHL finals of the Original Six era . 
 = = 1967 – 79 : expansion era = = 
 The NHL doubled in size to 12 teams in 1967 – 68 and organized itself into two divisions : the East Division , with the original six teams , and the West Division , which contained the six expansion franchises . The playoff format was constructed so that an established team would face an expansion team in the Stanley Cup Finals . The Canadiens recovered from their loss in 1967 to sweep the St. Louis Blues four games to none in both 1968 and 1969 for their 15th and 16th championships . 
 The Canadiens missed the playoffs entirely in 1969 – 70 , losing the last playoff spot in the East on a tiebreaker . On the last day of the season , New York defeated the Red Wings 9 – 5 , tying Montreal in points and obtaining a five @-@ goal lead on the Canadiens in total goals scored for the season . Montreal needed to win its game against the Black Hawks , or score at least five goals to qualify for the postseason . Trailing 5 – 2 with eight minutes to play , head coach Claude Ruel pulled his goaltender for an extra skater and watched Montreal surrender five empty net goals while scoring none to lose the game 10 – 2 and the final playoff spot to the Rangers . It was the only time between 1948 and 1995 that the Canadiens failed to make the playoffs . 
 The team rebounded in 1970 – 71 , winning its 17th Stanley Cup . Rookie Ken Dryden had played only six games in his NHL career when he was named the starting goaltender for the playoffs . He led the team to series wins over Boston , Minnesota and Chicago , winning the Conn Smythe Trophy as the most valuable player of the playoffs . Team captain Jean Beliveau , the fourth player in league history to score 500 career goals , announced his retirement following the season . Despite his Cup triumph , Al MacNeil was removed as coach after just one season amidst conflicts with several players , including Henri Richard , who described MacNeil as being " incompetent " during the playoffs . MacNeil was replaced by Scotty Bowman , a Montreal native and former Blues coach . Bowman coached the Canadiens for eight seasons , winning five Stanley Cups , including four in a row from 1976 to 1979 . 
 Following the success of the Summit Series in 1972 , a series of exhibition games between NHL and Soviet league clubs known as the Super Series was launched . On New Year 's Eve 1975 , the Canadiens met the Soviet Red Army in a game that is considered to be one of the greatest ever played . A contest between the two greatest hockey teams in the world , the match ended in a 3 – 3 draw following Soviet goaltender Vladislav Tretiak 's 35 @-@ save performance . 
 The 1976 – 77 Canadiens won 60 games in an 80 @-@ game schedule , losing only eight times , and just once at home . Guy Lafleur led the league in scoring , and won the Hart , Lester B. Pearson , Art Ross and Conn Smythe trophies ; Dryden won the Vezina Trophy , Bowman the Jack Adams Award and Larry Robinson the James Norris Memorial Trophy . The Canadiens were so dominant that Dryden complained to The Hockey News that he was " a little bored " by the lack of competition . The 1976 – 77 Canadiens are widely considered to be the greatest team in NHL history , though arguments exist for the 1955 – 56 and 1975 – 76 Canadiens teams as well . 
 The 1978 – 79 season capped Montreal 's run of four consecutive championships in dramatic fashion . Facing the Bruins in the seventh game of the league semi @-@ finals , Montreal trailed 4 – 3 with less than two minutes to play when Boston head coach Don Cherry accidentally sent too many players onto the ice during a line change , drawing what would become one of the most famous penalties in NHL history , and eventually costing Cherry his job . During the subsequent power play , Lafleur scored the game @-@ tying goal with 74 seconds remaining in regulation time , and Yvon Lambert scored in overtime to win the game and series . The Canadiens proceeded to defeat the Rangers for the Cup in five games . 
 The Canadiens ' dominance in the late 1970s was due in part to the presence of the rival World Hockey Association ( WHA ) ( which had begun play in 1972 ) — the Canadiens were far more successful compared to other NHL teams in resisting WHA efforts to lure away top talent . The Canadiens played a central role in the 1979 merger with the WHA , which added the Edmonton Oilers , Hartford Whalers , Quebec Nordiques and Winnipeg Jets to the NHL . After years of talks , a merger agreement was reached between the two leagues , but the NHL 's governors rejected the deal by one vote . Most of the NHL 's American teams were in favour of the merger in part because they thought it would help them challenge Montreal 's dominance , whereas against the deal were the Canadiens , who , along with the Vancouver Canucks and Toronto Maple Leafs , opposed splitting Hockey Night in Canada television revenues six ways instead of three . Upon hearing the result of the vote , fans in Edmonton , Quebec and Winnipeg launched a massive boycott of products sold by Molson , owners of the Canadiens since 1978 . The boycott , along with pressure from the Canadian House of Commons , led Montreal and Vancouver to reverse their positions when a re @-@ vote was held on March 22 , 1979 , allowing the merger to pass . 
 = = 1980 – 96 : transitions = = 
 The Canadiens entered the 1980s in transition , as Dryden , Lemaire and team captain Yvan Cournoyer announced their retirements in 1979 , and Serge Savard followed suit in 1981 . A trade during the 1982 – 83 season sent Rod Langway and Doug Jarvis to the Washington Capitals . Among their replacements were Swedish star Mats Naslund and forward Guy Carbonneau . Bob Gainey was appointed by the club to succeed Savard as team captain . Guy Lafleur remained the team 's offensive star , recording his 1,000th career point in 1981 in just 720 games , the fastest anyone had reached that milestone in NHL history , and a record that stood until broken by Wayne Gretzky in 1984 . 
 Doug Wickenheiser was selected by Montreal with the first pick at the 1980 NHL Entry Draft . The decision was highly controversial as the fans in Montreal had hoped the team would take francophone star Denis Savard . Wickenheiser 's transition to the NHL was difficult ; his popularity was harmed by comparisons of his struggles to Savard 's immediate success with the Black Hawks . He was traded to the Blues midway through the 1983 – 84 season . 
 Gainey explained the changing fortunes of the franchise following their playoff defeat at the hands of the Nordiques in 1982 : " We can 't put on our sweaters anymore and expect to win . " The Canadiens ' mystique had been broken by consecutive playoff losses to the upstart Minnesota North Stars , the Oilers and the Nordiques . The loss to Quebec in 1982 was the culmination of a vicious series where the players attempted to hurt and intimidate their opponents , while the media argued over which team better represented francophone Quebec . Montreal 's growing rivalry with Quebec peaked two years later in 1984 when they eliminated the Nordiques in six games , but not before the Good Friday Massacre made headlines . A hit by Quebec 's Dale Hunter on Montreal goaltender Steve Penney sparked a bench @-@ clearing brawl at the end of the second period . A second brawl , including some players who were ejected as a result of the first , erupted before the start of the third period . Ten players were ejected from the game , and 198 penalties in minutes were handed out as a result of the incidents , which proved a turning point in the game as Montreal scored five third period goals to win . 
 Rookie goaltender Patrick Roy led the Canadiens to their 23rd Stanley Cup championship in 1986 over the Calgary Flames in the first all @-@ Canadian Stanley Cup final since 1967 . The 1986 Canadiens were young and led by rookie head coach Jean Perron and forward Claude Lemieux , in addition to Roy , who became the youngest player in NHL history to win the Conn Smythe Trophy . Brian Skrudland , another rookie , scored the game @-@ winning goal just nine seconds into overtime of the second game of the finals — the fastest overtime goal in NHL history . The two teams met again in the 1989 Stanley Cup Finals , the most recent all @-@ Canadian Stanley Cup final , with the Flames emerging victorious in six games . It was the only time a visiting team defeated the Canadiens to win the Cup on Forum ice . 
 The Stanley Cup celebrated its 100th anniversary in 1993 , returning again to Canada with the Canadiens ' 24th Stanley Cup victory , the most recent NHL championship won by a Canadian team . After losing the first game of their Adams Division semi @-@ final to the Quebec Nordiques in overtime , the Canadiens won ten overtime games en route to the title , setting an NHL record for most consecutive overtime victories in a playoff year . As with the 1986 championship , the team was led by Roy , who won his second Conn Smythe Trophy . The defining moment of the 1993 Stanley Cup Finals occurred in the second game , with less than two minutes to play and Montreal trailing the series 1 – 0 and the game 2 – 1 . Attempting to gain an advantage for his team , head coach Jacques Demers called for a measurement of Los Angeles Kings forward Marty McSorley 's stick . Referee Kerry Fraser determined that the blade had an illegal curve , and assessed a penalty against McSorley . Montreal scored on the power play to tie the game , and then won in overtime 3 – 2 , to tie the series . Montreal also won Games 3 and 4 in overtime before eliminating the Kings in Game 5 , 4 – 1 . The celebration was marred by one of the worst riots in Montreal history , as fans rioted through downtown Montreal causing over $ 2 @.@ 5 million in property damage and 168 injuries . 
 The Canadiens failed to repeat their success in 1993 – 94 , as the team was eliminated from the playoffs by the Bruins in seven games . Montreal 's loss in Game 6 was the last playoff game ever played at the Montreal Forum . The team missed the playoffs entirely in 1994 – 95 , the first time in 25 years the Canadiens did not qualify , and the third time in 55 seasons . Montreal rebounded to make the playoffs in 1995 – 96 , but the future of the team was altered on December 2 , 1995 , when the Canadiens were embarrassed 11 – 1 by the Red Wings . Patrick Roy allowed nine goals on 26 shots before he was pulled in the second period to mock cheers from the Montreal crowd . Roy was furious , and felt that head coach Mario Tremblay deliberately left him in to be embarrassed . After reaching the bench , he moved past Tremblay to Canadiens President Ronald Corey , who was seated in the first row , and declared , " This is my last game in Montreal . " 
 Four days later , Roy was dealt to the Colorado Avalanche with Mike Keane in exchange for Jocelyn Thibault , Martin Rucinsky and Andrei Kovalenko . The deal vaulted the Avalanche , the former Nordiques , to the 1996 Stanley Cup . Roy won another title with the Avalanche in 2001 along with a third Conn Smythe Trophy before retiring in 2003 with more wins than any NHL goaltender . The Canadiens , meanwhile , fell into an extended stretch of mediocrity , missing the playoffs in four of their next ten seasons and failing to advance past the second round of the playoffs until 2010 . The team 's lack of playoff success brought an end to its streak of winning a Stanley Cup in each decade from the 1910s to the 1990s . 
 The sport 's changing economics led the Canadiens to build a new arena in 1996 to increase revenue . The final game at the Forum was held March 11 , 1996 , a 4 – 1 victory over the Dallas Stars . Following the game , an elaborate ceremony was held with many of the franchise 's greatest members welcomed onto the rink . The most boisterous response was reserved for Maurice Richard , who received a ten @-@ minute standing ovation . Finally , Emile Bouchard , the oldest living former captain , came onto the ice bearing a lit torch , and it was passed in a symbolic trail through the Canadiens ' history : Bouchard passed it to Richard , who passed it to Jean Beliveau , and so on in chronological order to each former captain present , ending with Pierre Turgeon . In 72 years at the Forum , the Canadiens won over 1 @,@ 500 games and captured 22 Stanley Cups . 
 = = 1996 – 2009 : new home and new owners = = 
 Five days after the closing of the Montreal Forum , the Canadiens played its first game at the Molson Centre ( since renamed the Bell Centre ) . With a capacity of 22 @,@ 500 , the Bell Centre claims to be the largest indoor arena in North America . In the inaugural game , Montreal defeated the Rangers 4 – 2 , with the first goal scored by Vincent <unk> . The Canadiens struggled to achieve playoff success in the new arena : by 2002 , they had won only a single playoff round since their 1993 championship . 
 Montreal finished in last place in the Northeast Division in 1998 – 99 and missed the playoffs . Their 75 points was the lowest total in 40 years . The season concluded with rumours of the team being sold and relocated if it did not receive government subsidies to help alleviate pressures from Quebec 's tax system and the record @-@ low value of the Canadian dollar . The Canadiens denied the report , however Molson hired investment bank Morgan Stanley to examine its future involvement in sports . Montreal missed the playoffs again the next two seasons , and annual losses of $ 10 – $ 12 million and a desire to focus on its core brewing business led Molson to put the franchise up for sale in the summer of 2001 . 
 When no local buyers emerged for the team and a proposed Canadian government assistance program for the six remaining Canadian teams was canceled following public disapproval , it was feared that the Canadiens would follow the Winnipeg Jets and Quebec Nordiques in relocating to the United States . American businessman George N. Gillett Jr. purchased an 80 @.@ 1 % share of the team and 100 % of the Molson Centre for $ 275 million . As part of the deal , Molson retained 19 @.@ 9 % of the team and were granted the right of first refusal for any future sale by Gillett ; in addition , the NHL Board of Governors would be required to unanimously approve any attempt to move to a new city . 
 Prior to the 2001 – 02 season , the club announced that captain Saku Koivu had been diagnosed with non @-@ Hodgkin lymphoma and would miss the entire season . Koivu managed to return with three games left in the regular season , and along with goaltender Jose Theodore , who would win the Hart Trophy that year , led the Canadiens into the playoffs for the first time in four seasons . The eighth @-@ seeded Canadiens upset the Boston Bruins in the first round of the playoffs , and Koivu led the team in playoff scoring with 10 points in 12 games . In recognition of his tenacity in returning from cancer treatment , the league voted Koivu as the Bill Masterton Memorial Trophy winner for dedication and perseverance . 
 The first outdoor hockey game in NHL history , the Heritage Classic , was held on November 22 , 2003 , in Edmonton , Alberta , at Commonwealth Stadium . The Canadiens defeated the Oilers 4 – 3 in front of an NHL @-@ record crowd of 57 @,@ 167 , who braved temperatures of − 20 ° C ( − 4 ° F ) . The success of the Heritage Classic led to the creation of the Winter Classic , an annual outdoor game held since 2008 . 
 The 2004 – 05 NHL lockout cancelled the season entirely . After the Montreal Expos franchise departed for Washington , D.C. , in 2005 , the Canadiens acquired former Expos mascot Youppi to serve as their first @-@ ever mascot . Having missed the playoffs in 2006 – 07 , the Canadiens rebounded to win their first division title in 15 years in 2007 – 08 , as well as their first regular season conference title since 1989 . 
 = = 2009 @-@ present : Molson family acquires team = = 
 Ownership of the Canadiens once again passed to the Molson family in 2009 after Gillett sold the team , Bell Centre , and Gillett Entertainment Group to a partnership headed by Geoff Molson and including his brothers Andrew and Justin . The sale price was estimated at over $ 600 million . Unlike the pre @-@ Gillett era , the team is now privately owned by the Molson family and not by the Molson brewery , which is now a division of Molson Coors . The reputed sale price reflected a return to profitability , due both to a new collective bargaining agreement after the 2004 – 05 lockout that fixed player costs to revenues and to a rise in the value of the Canadian dollar back to at or near parity with the U.S. dollar . 
 On the ice , the team reached the 2010 playoffs as the eighth seed for the second year in a row , yet upset the top @-@ seeded Washington Capitals and the defending champion Pittsburgh Penguins in the first two rounds . The Habs lost the Eastern Conference finals to the Philadelphia Flyers . 
 The NHL revived the Heritage Classic concept , with the Canadiens facing the Calgary Flames at McMahon Stadium in Calgary on February 20 , 2011 . The Flames defeated the Canadiens , by a score of 4 – 0 , before a crowd of 41 @,@ 022 spectators . The 2011 Heritage Classic was the second outdoors game held during the 2010 – 11 season , following the 2011 NHL Winter Classic . 
 The Habs finished the 2011 – 12 season last in their conference for the first time in over 80 years , as injuries decimated the team all season . After a disappointing season , the Canadiens started over in the front office . They fired General Manager Pierre Gauthier , and Marc Bergevin was named the new general manager on May 2 , 2012 . The search then began for a new head coach and on June 5 , Michel Therrien was named the new head coach . This would be Therrien 's second stint as the Canadiens head coach after he previously coached the team from 2000 to 2003 ; and Randy <unk> and Randy Ladouceur were relieved of their assistant coaching duties . On June 15 , Gerard Gallant , J. J. <unk> and Clement Jodoin were added to Montreal 's coaching staff as assistant coaches . 
 The team rebounded in the lockout @-@ shortened 2012 – 13 season , moving up from 15th place to second , but lost 4 – 1 in the first round against the Ottawa Senators , their fourth @-@ straight playoff series loss . Defenceman P. K. Subban was awarded the James Norris Memorial Trophy as the League 's best defenseman , the first since Chris Chelios in 1989 . The next season , the Canadiens made the playoffs yet again following a 100 @-@ point season and in the first round , eliminated the Tampa Bay Lightning in a four @-@ game series sweep . They then faced the reigning Presidents ' Trophy @-@ winning Boston Bruins , and eliminated them in seven games to make the Eastern Conference Finals for the second time since their 1993 Stanley Cup victory and the first time since 2010 . During game 1 against New York Rangers , Chris <unk> ran into Carey Price injuring his leg . Carey Price wouldn 't return with the Canadiens as they fell to the New York Rangers in six games . 
 In the 2014 – 15 season , the team won their third division title since 1992 and proceeded to defeat the Senators in six games in the first round . However , they lost in the second round to the Lightning in six games . The season was successful due to a strong performance by goaltender Carey Price , who won the Vezina Trophy , the Hart Memorial Trophy and the Ted Lindsay Award , in addition to sharing the William M. Jennings Trophy for the fewest goals allowed during the regular season . 
 The Habs started the 2015 – 16 season with a nine @-@ game winning streak , and posted an 18 @-@ 4 @-@ 3 record in the first two months of the season . However , after winning 19 of their first 26 games , the team struggled offensively and lost many players , including Price , to injuries . The Canadiens ultimately finished sixth in the Atlantic Division and did not qualify for the playoffs for the first time since the 2011 @-@ 12 season . The team participated for the first time in the NHL Winter Classic , defeating the Boston Bruins . 
 = = Retired numbers = = 
 The Canadiens have retired 15 numbers , honouring 18 players . Howie Morenz 's number 7 was the first jersey to be retired , shortly after his death in 1937 . Maurice Richard 's number 9 followed in 1960 ; his 544 career goals are a franchise record . Henri Richard , brother of Maurice , was honoured in 1975 with the retirement of his number 16 , after 21 seasons and 11 Stanley Cups with the Canadiens . Henri holds the franchise games @-@ played record with 1256 . 
 Jean Beliveau 's number 4 was retired in 1971 after he left the game as the all @-@ time leading scorer in Stanley Cup playoff history . Beliveau was offered , but declined , the position of Governor General of Canada in 1994 ; he is the only hockey player known to have been asked to serve in this capacity . Guy Lafleur 's number 10 followed in February 1985 after his first retirement . Lafleur was a six @-@ time All @-@ Star with the Canadiens , and won three scoring titles and two most valuable player awards . Also in 1985 , Doug Harvey 's number 2 was raised to the rafters . The defenceman won six Norris Trophies as the NHL 's top defenceman in seven years between 1955 and 1961 . Jacques Plante 's number 1 was retired on October 17 , 1995 . Plante revolutionized the way goaltenders played the game , and he leads the Canadiens with 314 career wins . 
 Leading up to their centennial year , the Canadiens retired the jerseys of several players . They began with three former greats during the 2005 – 06 season . Montreal first retired the number 12 in honour of both Dickie Moore and Yvan Cournoyer . Moore was a member of the Canadiens ' dynasty of 1956 – 1960 , while Cournoyer won ten titles between 1965 and 1979 . Bernie Geoffrion was the third player honoured by the Canadiens . Nicknamed " Boom Boom " , Geoffrion was considered the innovator of the slapshot . He died on March 11 , 2006 , the same day his number 5 was retired . 
 Serge Savard 's number 18 was retired on November 18 , 2006 . Known for the " <unk> spin @-@ a @-@ rama , " where he protected the puck by spinning around to avoid opponents , Savard also served as the team 's general manager for ten years . His defensive partner Larry Robinson 's number 19 was retired one year later , as was Bob Gainey 's number 23 . Gainey was considered one of the game 's elite defensive forwards , winning four Selke Trophies and five Stanley Cups before serving as coach and general manager of the team . Patrick Roy 's number 33 was retired on November 22 , 2008 . Roy 's jersey retirement was a return " back to the Canadiens family " for the Hall of Fame goaltender , who had not maintained a relationship with the organization after his trade demand in 1995 . Emile Bouchard 's number 3 , and Elmer Lach 's number 16 were retired on December 4 , 2009 , as part of the team 's centennial celebration . ( Lach had played as 16 before Richard did . ) They retired Guy Lapointe 's number 5 during the 2014 – 15 season . 
 = = = Builders Row = = = 
 The Canadiens created " Builders Row " in 2006 to honour the off @-@ ice members of the club who helped lead the team to success . Seven people were initially inducted : team founder Ambrose O 'Brien ; former owners Leo Dandurand , Joseph Cattarinich , Louis A. Letourneau and Hartland Molson ; former team president Donat Raymond ; and special advisor William Northey . In 2008 , the team added its three legendary coaches to the Row : Dick Irvin Sr. , Toe Blake and Scotty Bowman . The three served a combined 36 years behind the Canadiens ' bench from 1940 to 1979 . 
 = = Hockey Hall of Famers = = 
 The Hockey Hall of Fame was created in 1945 with nine initial player inductees , including two Canadiens : Howie Morenz and Georges Vezina . Morenz was considered hockey 's first superstar , and in 1950 was voted the top hockey player of the half @-@ century . Vezina perfected the " stand up " style of goaltending in an era when goaltenders were not allowed to drop to their knees to cover the puck , and became the standard by which future goaltenders judged themselves . 
 Maurice Richard , inducted in 1961 , and Jean Beliveau , inducted in 1972 , are two of ten players for whom the selection committee has waived the otherwise @-@ mandatory three @-@ year waiting period before being eligible for induction . Defenceman Doug Harvey was unanimously elected in 1973 , one year after being denied entry due to his drinking habits . Angered by the snub , Harvey refused his induction , stating that he planned to go fishing instead of attending the induction ceremony . Guy Lafleur was one of three players in NHL history ( along with Gordie Howe and Mario Lemieux ) to return to playing after being elected . Lafleur , who had first retired in 1984 after growing frustrated with the Canadiens ' defence @-@ focused system , returned to the league days after his 1988 election , playing for the New York Rangers and Quebec Nordiques before finally retiring in 1991 . 
 As of 2009 , over 50 former Canadiens players have been elected to the Hall of Fame . 
 Source : Hockey Hall of Fame 
 = Tell Brak = 
 Tell Brak ( Nagar , Nawar ) was an ancient city in Syria . Its remains constitute a tell located in the Upper Khabur region , near the modern village of Tell Brak , 50 kilometers north @-@ east of Al @-@ <unk> city , Al @-@ <unk> Governorate . The city 's original name is unknown . During the second half of the third millennium BC , the city was known as Nagar and later on , Nawar . 
 Starting as a small settlement in the seventh millennium BC , Tell Brak evolved during the fourth millennium BC into one of the biggest cities in Northern Mesopotamia , and interacted with the cultures of southern Mesopotamia . The city shrank in size at the beginning of the third millennium BC with the end of Uruk period , before expanding again around c . 2600 BC , when it became known as Nagar , and was the capital of a regional kingdom that controlled the Khabur river valley . Nagar was destroyed around c . 2300 BC , and came under the rule of the Akkadian Empire , followed by a period of independence as a Hurrian city @-@ state , before contracting at the beginning of the second millennium BC . Nagar prospered again by the 19th century BC , and came under the rule of different regional powers . In c . 1500 BC , Tell Brak was a center of Mitanni before being destroyed by Assyria c . 1300 BC . The city never regained its former importance , remaining as a small settlement , and abandoned at some points of its history , until disappearing from records during the early Abbasid era . 
 Different peoples inhabited the city , including the <unk> , Semites and the Hurrians . Tell Brak was a religious center from its earliest periods ; its famous Eye Temple is unique in the Fertile Crescent , and its main deity , Belet @-@ Nagar , was revered in the entire Khabur region , making the city a pilgrimage site . The culture of Tell Brak was defined by the different civilizations that inhabited it , and it was famous for its <unk> style , equids and glass . When independent , the city was ruled by a local assembly or by a monarch . Tell Brak was a trade center due to its location between Anatolia , the Levant and southern Mesopotamia . It was excavated by Max Mallowan in 1937 , then regularly by different teams between 1979 and 2011 , when the work stopped due to the Syrian Civil War . 
 = = History = = 
 Tell Brak is the current name of the tell . East of the mound lies a dried lake named " <unk> " which was recorded as " Lacus <unk> " ( the lake of Brak ) in the Roman map Tabula <unk> . The lake was probably named after Tell Brak which was the nearest camp in the area . The name " Brak " might therefore be an echo of the most ancient name which is unknown . 
 = = = Early settlement = = = 
 The earliest period A , is dated to the proto Halaf culture c . 6500 BC , when a small settlement existed . Many objects dated to that period were discovered including the Halaf pottery . By 5000 BC , Halaf culture transformed into Northern Ubaid , and many Ubaid materials were found in Tell Brak . Excavations and surface survey of the site and its surroundings , unearthed a large platform of <unk> bricks that dates to late Ubaid , and revealed that Tell Brak developed as an urban center slightly earlier than better known cities of southern Mesopotamia , such as Uruk . 
 = = = The first city = = = 
 In southern Mesopotamia , the original Ubaid culture evolved into the Uruk period . The people of the southern Uruk period used military and commercial means to expand the civilization . In Northern Mesopotamia , the post Ubaid period is designated Late Chalcolithic / Northern Uruk period , during which , Tell Brak , whose original name is unknown , started to expand . 
 Period Brak E witnessed the building of the city 's walls , and Tell Brak expansion beyond the mound to form a lower town . By the late 5th millennium BC , Tell Brak reached the size of c . 55 hectares . Area TW of the tell ( see the map for Tell Brak 's areas ) revealed the remains of a monumental building with two meters thick walls and a basalt threshold . In front of the building , a sherd paved street was discovered , leading to the northern entrance of the city . 
 The city continued to expand during period F , and reached the size of 130 hectares . Four mass graves dating to c . 3800 – 3600 BC were discovered in the surroundings of the tell , and they suggest that the process of urbanization was accompanied by internal social stress , and an increase in the organization of warfare . The first half of period F ( designated <unk> ) , saw the erection of the Eye Temple , which was named for the thousands of small alabaster " Eye idols " figurines discovered in it . Those idols were also found in area TW . 
 Interactions with the Mesopotamian south grew during the second half of period F ( designated <unk> ) c . 3600 BC , and an Urukean colony was established in the city . With the end of Uruk culture c 3000 BC , Tell Brak 's Urukean colony was abandoned and deliberately leveled by its occupants . Tell Brak contracted during the following periods H and J , and became limited to the mound . Evidence exists for an interaction with the Mesopotamian south during period H , represented by the existence of materials similar to the ones produced during the southern <unk> Nasr period . The city remained a small settlement during the <unk> 5 period , with a small temple and associated sealing activities . 
 = = = Kingdom of Nagar = = = 
 Around c . 2600 BC , a large administrative building was built and the city expanded out of the tell again . The revival is connected with the Kish civilization , and the city was named " Nagar " , which might be of <unk> origin and mean a " cultivated place " . Amongst the important buildings dated to the kingdom , is an administrative building or temple named the " Brak Oval " , located in area TC . The building have a curved exterior wall reminiscent of the <unk> " Oval Temple " in central Mesopotamia . However , aside from the wall , the comparison between the two buildings in terms of architecture is difficult , as each building follows a different plan . 
 The oldest references to Nagar comes from Mari and tablets discovered at Nabada . However , the most important source on Nagar come from the archives of Ebla . Most of the texts record the ruler of Nagar using his title " En " , without mentioning a name . However , the text from Mari record king Amar @-@ An , who could be identical to Mara @-@ Il , a king of Nagar mentioned in one of Ebla 's texts . Thus , Mara @-@ Il is the only king known by name for pre @-@ Akkadian Nagar , he ruled a little more than a generation before the kingdom 's destruction , and was most probably the " En " recorded in the other texts , including the ones from Nabada . 
 At its height , Nagar encompassed most of the southwestern half of the Khabur Basin , and was a diplomatic and political equal of the Eblaite and Mariote states . The kingdom included many subordinate cities such as <unk> , and most importantly Nabada , which was a city @-@ state annexed by Nagar , and served as a provincial capital . Nagar was involved in the wide diplomatic network of Ebla , and the relations between the two kingdoms involved both confrontations and alliances . A text from Ebla mention a victory of Ebla 's king ( perhaps Irkab @-@ Damu ) over Nagar . However , a few years later , a treaty was concluded , and the relations progressed toward a dynastic marriage between princess <unk> @-@ Damu of Ebla , and prince <unk> @-@ <unk> , Nagar 's monarch 's son . 
 Nagar was defeated by Mari in year seven of the Eblaite vizier Ibrium 's term , causing the blockage of trade routes between Ebla and southern Mesopotamia via upper Mesopotamia . Later , Ebla 's king Isar @-@ Damu concluded an alliance with Nagar and Kish against Mari , and the campaign was headed by the Eblaite vizier Ibbi @-@ Sipish , who led the combined armies to victory in a battle near Terqa . Afterwards , the alliance attacked the rebellious Eblaite vassal city of Armi . Ebla was destroyed approximately three years after Terqa 's battle , and soon after , Nagar followed in c . 2300 BC . Large parts of the city were burned , an act attributed either to Mari , or Sargon of Akkad . 
 = = = Akkadian period = = = 
 Following its destruction , Nagar was rebuilt by the Akkadian empire , to form a center of the provincial administration . The city included the whole tell and a lower town at the southern edge of the mound . Two public buildings were built during the early Akkadian periods , one complex in area SS , and another in area FS . The building of area FS included its own temple and might have served as a caravanserai , being located near the northern gate of the city . The early Akkadian monarchs were occupied with internal conflicts , and Tell Brak was temporarily abandoned by Akkad at some point preceding the reign of Naram @-@ Sin . The abandonment might be connected with an environmental event , that caused the desertification of the region . 
 The destruction of Nagar 's kingdom created a power vacuum in the Upper Khabur . The Hurrians , formerly concentrated in Urkesh , took advantage of the situation to control the region as early as Sargon 's latter years . Tell Brak was known as " Nawar " for the Hurrians , and kings of Urkesh took the title " King of Urkesh and Nawar " , first attested in the seal of Urkesh 's king Atal @-@ Shen . 
 The use of the title continued during the reigns of Atal @-@ Shen 's successors , <unk> and Tish @-@ Atal , who ruled only in Urkesh . The Akkadians under Naram @-@ Sin incorporated Nagar firmly into their empire . The most important Akkadian building in the city is called the " Palace of Naram @-@ Sin " , which had parts of it built over the original Eye Temple . Despite its name , the palace is closer to a fortress , as it was more of a fortified depot for the storage of collected tribute rather than a residential seat . The palace was burned during Naram @-@ Sin 's reign , perhaps by a <unk> attack , and the city was burned toward the end of the Akkadian period c . 2193 BC , probably by the <unk> . 
 = = = Post @-@ Akkadian kingdom = = = 
 The Akkadian period was followed by period N , during which Nagar was the center of an independent Hurrian dynasty , evidenced by the discovery of a seal , recording the name of king <unk> @-@ <unk> of Nagar , who ruled during or slightly after the reign of Naram @-@ Sin 's son Shar @-@ Kali @-@ Sharri . The view that Tell Brak came under the control of Ur III is refused , and evidence exists for a Hurrian rebuilding of Naram @-@ Sin 's palace , erroneously attributed by Max Mallowan to Ur @-@ Nammu of Ur . Period N saw a reduction in the city 's size , with public buildings being abandoned , and the lower town evacuated . Few short lived houses were built in area CH during period N , and although greatly reduced in size , archaeology provided evidence for continued occupation in the city , instead of abandonment . 
 = = = Foreign rule and later periods = = = 
 During period P , Nagar was densely populated in the northern ridge of the tell . The city came under the rule of Mari , and was the site of a decisive victory won by Yahdun @-@ Lim of Mari over Shamshi @-@ Adad I of Assyria . Nagar lost its importance and came under the rule of <unk> in the 18th century BC . The name " Nagar " ceased occurring following the Old Babylonian period , however , the city continued to exist as Nawar , under the control of Mitanni . 
 During period Q , Tell Brak was an important trade city in the Mitanni state . A two story palace was built c . 1500 BC in the northern section of the tell , in addition to an associated one roomed temple . However , the rest of the tell was not occupied , and a lower town extended to the north but is now all but destroyed through modern agriculture . Two Mitannian legal documents , bearing the names of kings <unk> and <unk> , were recovered from the city , which was destroyed between <unk> and 1275 BC , in two waves , first at the hands of the Assyrian king Adad @-@ <unk> I , then by his successor Shalmaneser I. 
 Little evidence of an occupation on the tell exists following the destruction of the Mitannian city , however , a series of small villages existed in the lower town during the Assyrian periods . The remains of a Hellenistic settlement were discovered on a nearby satellite tell , to the northwestern edge of the main tell . However , excavations recovered no ceramics of the Parthian @-@ Roman or Byzantine @-@ Sasanian periods , although sherds dating to those periods are noted . In the middle of the first millennium AD , a fortified building was erected in the northeastern lower town . The building was dated by Antoine <unk> to the Justinian era ( sixth century AD ) , on the basis of its architecture . The last occupation period of the site was during the early Abbasid Caliphate 's period , when a canal was built to provide the town with water from the nearby <unk> River . 
 = = Society = = 
 = = = People and language = = = 
 The <unk> were the indigenous people of Neolithic northern Syria , who later adopted the southern <unk> culture . Contact with the Mesopotamian south increased during the early and middle Northern Uruk period , and southern people moved to Tell Brak in the late Uruk period , forming a colony , which produced a mixed society . The Urukean colony was abandoned by the colonist toward the end of the fourth millennium BC , leaving the indigenous Tell Brak a much contracted city . The pre @-@ Akkadian kingdom 's population was Semitic , and spoke its own East Semitic dialect of the Eblaite language used in Ebla and Mari . The <unk> dialect is closer to the dialect of Mari rather than that of Ebla . 
 No Hurrian names are recorded in the pre @-@ Akkadian period , although the name of prince <unk> @-@ <unk> is difficult to understand as Semitic . During the Akkadian period , both Semitic and Hurrian names were recorded , as the Hurrians appears to have taken advantage of the power vacuum caused by the destruction of the pre @-@ Akkadian kingdom , in order to migrate and expand in the region . The post @-@ Akkadian period Tell Brak had a strong Hurrian element , and Hurrian named rulers , although the region was also inhabited by Amorite tribes . A number of the Amorite Banu @-@ Yamina tribes settled the surroundings of Tell Brak during the reign of Zimri @-@ Lim of Mari , and each group used its own language ( Hurrian and Amorite languages ) . Tell Brak was a center of the Hurrian @-@ Mitannian empire , which had Hurrian as its official language . However , Akkadian was the region 's international language , evidenced by the post @-@ Akkadian and Mitannian eras tablets , discovered at Tell Brak and written in Akkadian . 
 = = = Religion = = = 
 The findings in the Eye Temple indicate that Tell Brak is among the earliest sites of organized religion in northern Mesopotamia . It is unknown to which deity the Eye Temple was dedicated , and the " Eyes " figurines appears to be votive offerings to that unknown deity . Michel <unk> hypothesized that the temple was the center of the Sumerian <unk> or the Semitic Ishtar , and that the " Eyes " figurines were a representation of an all @-@ seeing female deity . 
 During the pre @-@ <unk> kingdom 's era , <unk> , an old cultic center of northern Syria , served as a pilgrimage center for Nagar . The Eye Temple remained in use , but as a small shrine , while the goddess Belet @-@ Nagar became the kingdom 's paramount deity . The temple of Belet @-@ Nagar is not identified but probably lies beneath the Mitannian palace . The Eblaite deity Kura was also venerated in Nagar , and the monarchs are attested visiting the temple of the Semitic deity Dagon in Tuttul . During the Akkadian period , the temple in area FS was dedicated to the Sumerian god <unk> , the patron of animals and countrysides . Tell Brak was an important religious Hurrian center , and the temple of Belet @-@ Nagar retained its cultic importance in the entire region until the early second millennium BC . 
 = = = Culture = = = 
 Northern Mesopotamia evolved independently from the south during the Late Chalcolithic / early and middle Northern Uruk ( 4000 @-@ 3500 BC ) . This period was characterized by a strong emphasis on holy sites , among which , the Eye Temple was the most important in Tell Brak . The building containing " Eyes " idols in area TW was wood paneled , whose main room had been lined with wooden panels . The building also contained the earliest known semi columned facade , which is a character that will be associated with temples in later periods . 
 By late Northern Uruk and especially after 3200 BC , northern Mesopotamia came under the full cultural dominance of the southern Uruk culture , which affected Tell Brak 's architecture and administration . The southern influence is most obvious in the level named the " Latest <unk> Nasr " of the Eye Temple , which had southern elements such as cone mosaics . The Uruk presence was peaceful as it is first noted in the context of feasting ; commercial deals during that period were traditionally ratified through feasting . The excavations in area TW revealed feasting to be an important local habit , as two cooking facilities , large amounts of grains , skeletons of animals , a domed backing oven and <unk> fire pets were discovered . Among the late Uruk materials found at Tell Brak , is a standard text for educated scribes ( the " Standard Professions " text ) , part of the standardized education taught in the 3rd millennium BC over a wide area of Syria and Mesopotamia . 
 The pre @-@ Akkadian kingdom was famed for its acrobats , who were in demand in Ebla and trained local Eblaite entertainers . The kingdom also had its own local <unk> style called the " Brak Style " , which was distinct from the southern sealing variants , employing soft circled shapes and sharpened edges . The Akkadian administration had little effect on the local administrative traditions and sealing style , and Akkadian seals existed side by side with the local variant . The Hurrians employed the Akkadian style in their seals , and Elamite seals were discovered , indicating an interaction with the western Iranian Plateau . Tell Brak provided great knowledge on the culture of Mitanni , which produced glass using sophisticated techniques , that resulted in different varieties of multicolored and decorated shapes . Samples of the elaborate <unk> ware were discovered , in addition to seals that combine distinctive Mitannian elements with the international motifs of that period . 
 = = = = Wagons = = = = 
 Seals from Tell Brak and Nabada dated to the pre @-@ Akkadian kingdom , revealed the use of four @-@ wheeled wagons and war carriages . Excavation in area FS recovered clay models of equids and wagons dated to the Akkadian and post @-@ Akkadian periods . The models provides information about the types of wagons used during that period ( 2350 @-@ 2000 BC ) , and they include four wheeled vehicles and two types of two wheeled vehicles ; the first is a cart with fixed seats and the second is a cart where the driver stands above the axle . The chariots were introduced during the Mitanni era , and none of the pre @-@ Mitanni carriages can be considered chariots , as they are mistakenly described in some sources . 
 = = Government = = 
 The first city had the characteristics of large urban centers , such as monumental buildings , and seems to have been ruled by a kinship based assembly , headed by elders . The pre @-@ Akkadian kingdom was decentralized , and the provincial center of Nabada was ruled by a council of elders , next to the king 's representative . The <unk> monarchs had to tour their kingdom regularly in order to assert their political control . During the early Akkadian period , Nagar was administrated by local officials . However , central control was tightened and the number of Akkadian officials increased , following the supposed environmental event that preceded the construction of Naram @-@ Sin 's palace . The post @-@ Akkadian Nagar was a city @-@ state kingdom , that gradually lost its political importance during the early second millennium BC , as no evidence for a king dating to that period exists . 
 = = = Rulers of Tell Brak = = = 
 = = Economy = = 
 Throughout its history , Tell Brak was an important trade center ; it was an <unk> of obsidian trade during the Chalcolithic , as it was situated on the river crossing between Anatolia , the Levant and southern Mesopotamia . The countryside was occupied by smaller towns , villages and hamlets , but the city 's surroundings were empty within three kilometers . This was probably due to the intensive cultivation in the immediate hinterland , in order to sustain the population . The city manufactured different objects , including chalices made of obsidian and white marble , faience , flint tools and shell inlays . However , evidence exists for a slight shift in production of goods toward manufacturing objects desired in the south , following the establishment of the Uruk colony . 
 Trade was also an important economic activity for the pre @-@ Akkadian kingdom of Nagar , which had Ebla and Kish as major partners . The kingdom produced glass , wool , and was famous for breeding and trading in the <unk> , a hybrid of a donkey and a female onager . Tell Brak remained an important commercial center during the Akkadian period , and was one of Mitanni 's main trade cities . Many objects were manufactured in Mitannian Tell Brak , including furniture made of ivory , wood and bronze , in addition to glass . The city provided evidence for the international commercial contacts of Mitanni , including Egyptian , Hittite and Mycenaean objects , some of which were produced in the region to satisfy the local taste . 
 = = = Equids = = = 
 The <unk> of pre @-@ Akkadian Nagar were used for drawing the carriages of kings before the domestication of the horse , and a royal procession included up to fifty animals . The <unk> of Nagar were in great demand in the Eblaite empire ; they cost two kilos of silver , fifty times the price of a donkey , and were imported regularly by the monarchs of Ebla to be used as transport animals and gifts for allied cities . The horse was known in the region during the third millennium BC , but was not used as a draught animal before c . 18th century BC . 
 = = Site = = 
 = = = Excavations = = = 
 Tell Brak was excavated by the British archaeologist Sir Max Mallowan , husband of Agatha Christie , in 1937 and 1938 . The Eye Temple was the first building unearthed and some artifacts from that initial excavation are now preserved in the British Museum 's collection , including the famous Tell Brak Head . 
 A team from the Institute of Archaeology of the University of London , led by David and Joan Oates , worked in the tell for 14 seasons between 1976 and 1993 . After 1993 , excavations were conducted by a number of filed directors under the general guidance of David ( until 2004 ) and Joan Oates . Those directors included Roger Matthews ( between 1994 @-@ 1996 ) , for the McDonald Institute for Archaeological Research of the University of Cambridge ; Geoff <unk> ( between 1998 @-@ 2002 ) and Helen McDonald ( between 2000 @-@ 2004 ) , for the British Institute for the Study of Iraq and the Metropolitan Museum of Art . In 2006 , Augusta McMahon became field director , also sponsored by the British Institute for the Study of Iraq . A regional archaeological field survey in a 20 km ( 12 mi ) radius around Brak was supervised by Henry T. Wright ( between 2002 – 2005 ) . Many of the finds from the excavations at Tell Brak are on display in the Deir ez @-@ Zor Museum . The most recent excavations took place in the spring of 2011 , but archaeological work is currently suspended due to the ongoing Syrian Civil War . 
 = = = Syrian Civil War = = = 
 According to the Syrian authorities , the camp of archaeologists was looted , along with the tools and ceramics kept in it . The site changed hands between the different combatants , mainly the Kurdish People 's Protection Units and the Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant . In early 2015 , Tell Brak was taken by the Kurdish forces after light fighting with the Islamic State . 
 = Dodo Marmarosa = 
 Michael " Dodo " Marmarosa ( December 12 , 1925 – September 17 , 2002 ) was an American jazz pianist , composer , and arranger . 
 Originating in Pittsburgh , Pennsylvania , Marmarosa became a professional musician in his mid @-@ teens , and toured with several major big bands , including those led by Tommy Dorsey , Gene Krupa , and Artie Shaw into the mid @-@ 1940s . He moved to Los Angeles in 1945 , where he became increasingly interested and involved in the emerging bebop scene . During his time on the West Coast , he recorded in small groups with leading bebop and swing musicians , including Howard McGhee , Charlie Parker , and Lester Young , as well as leading his own bands . 
 Marmarosa returned to Pittsburgh due to health reasons in 1948 . He began performing much less frequently , and had a presence only locally for around a decade . Friends and fellow musicians had commented from an early stage that Marmarosa was an unusual character . His mental stability was probably affected by being beaten into a coma when in his teens , by a short @-@ lived marriage followed by permanent separation from his children , and by a traumatic period in the army . He made comeback recordings in the early 1960s , but soon retreated to Pittsburgh , where he played occasionally into the early 1970s . From then until his death three decades later , he lived with family and in veterans ' hospitals . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Marmarosa was born in Pittsburgh , Pennsylvania on December 12 , 1925 . He had " Italian working @-@ class parents " – Joseph and Carmella . He was the middle of three children , between sisters Audrey and Doris , and grew up in the East Liberty neighborhood of Pittsburgh . Marmarosa attended Peabody High School . He received the uncomplimentary nickname " Dodo " as a child because of his large head , short body , and bird @-@ like nose . 
 Although he had stated an interest in playing the trumpet , Marmarosa 's parents persuaded him to take up the piano , which he began at the age of 9 . He received classical music lessons , but was influenced by the jazz playing of Art Tatum , Teddy Wilson , and others after fellow pianist Erroll Garner , four years Marmarosa 's elder , introduced him to their music . Marmarosa practiced a lot , until his left and right hands were equally strong . 
