 Due to its long association with Ubico 's government , the United Fruit Company ( UFC ) was seen as an impediment to progress by Guatemalan revolutionaries after 1944 . This image was worsened by the company 's discriminatory policies towards its colored workers . Thanks to its position as the country 's largest landowner and employer , the reforms of Arévalo 's government affected the UFC more than other companies . Among other things , the labor code passed by the government allowed its workers to strike when their demands for higher wages and job security were not met . The company saw itself as being specifically targeted by the reforms , and refused to negotiate with the numerous sets of strikers , despite frequently being in violation of the new laws . The company 's labor troubles were compounded in 1952 when Jacobo Árbenz passed Decree 900 , the agrarian reform law . Of the 550 @,@ 000 acres ( 220 @,@ 000 ha ) that the company owned , 15 % were being cultivated ; the rest of the land , which was idle , came under the scope of the agrarian reform law . 
 = = = Lobbying the United States = = = 
 The United Fruit Company responded with intensive lobbying of members of the United States government , leading many U.S. congressmen and senators to criticize the Guatemalan government for not protecting the interests of the company . The Guatemalan government responded by saying that the company was the main obstacle to progress in the country . American historians observed that " To the Guatemalans it appeared that their country was being mercilessly exploited by foreign interests which took huge profits without making any contributions to the nation 's welfare . " In 1953 , 200 @,@ 000 acres ( 81 @,@ 000 ha ) of uncultivated land was expropriated by the government , which offered the company compensation at the rate of 2 @.@ 99 U.S. dollars to the acre ( 7 @.@ 39 U.S. dollars per hectare ) , twice what the company had paid when it bought the property . More expropriation occurred soon after , bringing the total to over 400 @,@ 000 acres ( 160 @,@ 000 ha ) ; the government offered compensation to the company at the rate at which the UFC had valued its own property for tax purposes . This resulted in further lobbying in Washington , particularly through Secretary of State John Foster Dulles , who had close ties to the company . The company began a public relations campaign to discredit the Guatemalan government ; it hired public relations expert Edward Bernays , who ran a concerted campaign of misinformation to portray the company as the victim of the Guatemalan government for several years . The company stepped up its efforts after Dwight Eisenhower had been elected in 1952 . These included commissioning a research study on Guatemala from a firm known to be hawkish , which produced a 235 @-@ page report that was highly critical of the Guatemalan government . Historians have stated that the report was full of " exaggerations , scurrilous descriptions and bizarre historical theories . " The report nonetheless had a significant impact on the members of Congress that it was sent to . Overall , the company spent over a half @-@ million U.S. dollars to influence both lawmakers and members of the public in the U.S. that the Guatemalan government needed to be overthrown . 
 = = Operation PBFORTUNE = = 
 The U.S. government had become more hostile to the new Guatemalan government over the years of Arévalo 's presidency . This was due partly to the intensification of the cold war , as well as a reduction in the massive concessions that the United Fruit Company had enjoyed under Ubico . In addition , the company carried out an intensive lobbying campaign within the U.S. to discredit the Guatemalan government . The worries of the U.S. increased after the election of Jacobo Árbenz in 1951 and his enactment of Decree 900 , the agrarian reform law , in 1952 . The new law benefited approximately half a million people ; several hundred thousand acres of uncultivated land belonging to the United Fruit Company were expropriated . The compensation it was granted was based on the valuation the company had used for its tax payments . Since this was a major undervaluation , the company was unhappy with its compensation , and intensified its lobbying against the Guatemalan government in Washington . 
 In April 1952 Anastasio Somoza García , the U.S.-backed dictator of Nicaragua , made his first state visit to the U.S. Somoza made several public speeches praising the United States , and was awarded a medal by New York City . During a meeting with Truman and his senior staff , Somoza said that if the U.S. gave him the arms , he would " clean up Guatemala . " The proposal did not receive much immediate support , but Truman instructed the CIA to follow up on it . The CIA contacted Carlos Castillo Armas , the Guatemalan army officer who had been exiled from the country in 1949 following a failed coup attempt against the president . In the belief that Armas would lead a coup with or without CIA assistance , the CIA created a plan to supply him with weapons and 225 @,@ 000 U.S. dollars . 
 The coup was planned in detail over the next few weeks by the CIA , the United Fruit Company , and Somoza . The CIA contacted Marcos Pérez Jiménez and Rafael Trujillo the U.S.-supported right @-@ wing dictators of Venezuela and the Dominican Republic , respectively . The two dictators were supportive of the plan , and agreed to contribute some funding . Although PBFORTUNE was officially approved on September 9 , 1952 , various planning steps had been taken earlier in the year . In January 1952 , officers in the CIA 's Directorate of Plans compiled a list of " top flight Communists whom the new government would desire to eliminate immediately in the event of a successful anti @-@ Communist coup . " The CIA plan called for the assassination of over 58 Guatemalans , as well as the arrest of many others . 
 The CIA put the plan into motion in late 1952 . A freighter that had been borrowed from the United Fruit Company was specially refitted and loaded with weapons in New Orleans under the guise of agricultural machinery , and set sail for Nicaragua . The State Department became aware that many details of the plan had already become public knowledge , thanks to Somoza discussing it openly with his government officials . This came to the attention of Dean Acheson , the secretary of state , who called off the plot . The freighter was redirected to Panama , where the arms were unloaded . The CIA continued to support Castillo Armas ; it granted him a retainer of 3000 U.S. dollars a month , and gave him the resources to maintain his rebel force . 
 = = Operation PBSUCCESS = = 
 = = = Genesis = = = 
 In addition to the lobbying of the United Fruit Company , several other factors also led the United States to launch the coup that toppled Árbenz in 1954 . The U.S. government had also grown more suspicious of the Guatemalan Revolution as the Cold War developed and the Guatemalan government clashed with U.S. corporations on an increasing number of issues . The Cold War predisposed the Truman administration to see the Guatemalan government as communist . Arévalo 's support for the Caribbean Legion also worried the Truman administration , which saw it as a vehicle for communism , rather than as the anti @-@ dictatorial force it was conceived as . Until the end of its term , the Truman administration relied on purely diplomatic and economic means to try and reduce the communist influence . The United States had refused to sell arms to the Guatemalan government after 1944 ; in 1951 it began to block weapons purchases by Guatemala from other countries . The enactment of the agrarian reform law in 1952 provoked Truman to authorize Operation PBFORTUNE . Although this was quickly aborted , tension between the U.S. and Guatemala continued to rise , especially with the legalization of the communist Guatemalan Party of Labour and its inclusion in the government coalition for the elections of January 1953 . Articles published in the U.S. press often reflected this predisposition to see communist influence ; for example , a New York Times article about the visit to Guatemala by Chilean poet Pablo Neruda highlighted Neruda 's communist beliefs while neglecting to mention his reputation as the greatest living poet from Latin America . 
 In November 1952 , Dwight Eisenhower was elected president of the U.S. Eisenhower 's campaign had included a pledge for a more active anti @-@ communist policy , promising to rollback , rather than contain , communism . The campaign had been influenced by the rise of McCarthyism in the U.S. government , and so Eisenhower was more willing to use the CIA to remove governments the U.S. disliked . Several figures in his administration , including Secretary of State John Foster Dulles and his brother and CIA director Allen Dulles had close ties to the United Fruit Company . The Dulles brothers had worked for the law firm of Sullivan & Cromwell , and in that capacity had arranged several deals for the UFC . Undersecretary of state Bedell Smith later became a director of the UFC , while the wife of the UFC public relations director was Eisenhower 's personal assistant . These personal connections meant that the Eisenhower administration tended to conflate the interests of the UFC with U.S. national security interests , and made it more willing to overthrow the Guatemalan government . The successful CIA operation to overthrow the democratically @-@ elected Prime Minister of Iran also strengthened Eisenhower 's belief in using the CIA to effect political change . 
 = = = Planning = = = 
 The CIA operation to overthrow Jacobo Árbenz , code @-@ named Operation PBSUCCESS , was authorized by Eisenhower in August 1953 . The operation was granted a budget of 2 @.@ 7 million U.S. dollars for " psychological warfare and political action . " The total budget has been estimated at between 5 and 7 million dollars , and the planning employed over 100 CIA agents . In addition , the operation recruited scores of individuals from among Guatemalan exiles and the populations of the surrounding countries . The operational headquarters for the Operation was in the town of Opa @-@ locka , Florida . The plans included drawing up lists of people within Árbenz ' government to be assassinated if the coup were to be carried out . Manuals of assassination techniques were compiled , and lists were also made of people whom the junta would dispose of . The U.S. State department created a team of diplomats who would support PBSUCCESS . The leader of this team was John Peurifoy , who took over as the U.S. ambassador in Guatemala in October 1953 , an appointment which signaled the solidifying U.S. plot . Another member the team was William D. Pawley , a wealthy American businessman and diplomat , with extensive knowledge of the aviation industry . Peurifoy was a militant anti @-@ communist , and had proven to be willing to work with the CIA during his previous posting in Greece . Under his tenure diplomatic relations with Guatemala soured further , with the exception of relations between the U.S. government and the Guatemalan military . In a report to Dulles , Peurifoy stated that he was " definitely convinced that if [ Árbenz ] is not a communist , then he will certainly do until one comes along . " Within the CIA , the person heading the operation was CIA deputy director Frank Wisner , who had worked in the U.S. intelligence service since World War II . The field commander was U.S. army Colonel Albert Haney , who was then chief of the CIA station in South Korea . Haney reported directly to Wisner , thereby separating Operation PBSUCCESS from the CIA 's Latin American division , a decision which created some tension within the agency . 
 The CIA operation was complicated by the launch of a premature coup on 29 March 1953 , when a futile raid against the Army garrison at Salamá , in the central Guatemalan department of Baja Verapaz . The rebellion was swiftly crushed , and a number of participants arrested . This incident resulted in a number of CIA agents and allies being imprisoned , weakening the coup effort . Thus the CIA came to rely more heavily on the Guatemalan exile @-@ groups and their anti @-@ democratic allies in Guatemala . The CIA considered several candidates to lead the coup . Miguel Ydígoras Fuentes , the conservative candidate who had lost the 1950 election to Árbenz , held favor with the Guatemalan opposition but was rejected for his role in the Ubico regime , as well as his European visage , which was unlikely to appeal to the majority mixed @-@ race mestizo population . Another popular candidate was the coffee planter Juan Córdova Cerna , who had briefly served in Arévalo 's cabinet before becoming the legal adviser to the UFC . The death of his son in an anti @-@ government uprising in 1950 turned him against the government , and he had planned the small unsuccessful coup in Salamá in 1953 before fleeing to join Castillo Armas in exile . Although his status as a civilian gave him an advantage over Castillo Armas , he was diagnosed with throat cancer in 1954 , taking him out of the reckoning . This led to the selection of Carlos Castillo Armas , the lieutenant of Francisco Javier Arana and had been exiled following the failed coup in 1949 . Armas had been on the CIA payroll since the aborted Operation PBFORTUNE in 1951 . 
 Castillo Armas was given enough money to recruit a small force of approximately 150 mercenaries from among Guatemalan exiles and the populations of nearby countries . This band was called the " Army of Liberation . " The CIA established training camps in Nicaragua and Honduras , and supplied them with weapons as well as several bombers . Prior to the invasion of Guatemala the U.S. signed military agreements with both those countries , allowing it to move heavier arms freely . These preparations were only superficially covert : the CIA intended Árbenz to find out about them , as a part of its plan to convince the Guatemalan people that the overthrow of Árbenz was a fait accompli . Additionally , the CIA made covert contact with a number of church leaders throughout the Guatemalan countryside , and persuaded them to incorporate anti @-@ government messages into their sermons . 
 = = = Caracas conference and U.S. propaganda = = = 
 While the preparations for Operation PBSUCCESS were being carried out , the U.S. government began a series of public statements denouncing the Guatemalan government , and alleging that it had been infiltrated by communists . The U.S. State department also asked the Organization of American States to modify the agenda of the Tenth Inter @-@ American Conference , which was scheduled to be held in Caracas in March 1954 , requesting the addition of an item entitled " Intervention of International Communism in the American Republics , " which was widely seen as a move targeting Guatemala . In January 1954 , the Guatemalan government published documents leaked to it by a member of Castillo Armas ' team who had turned against him . A spate of arrests followed of allies of Castillo Armas within Guatemala , and the government issued statements implicating a " Government of the North " in a plot to overthrow Árbenz . The U.S. government denied the allegations , and the U.S. media uniformly took the side of the government ; even publications which had until then provided relatively balanced coverage of Guatemala , such as the Christian Science Monitor , suggested that Árbenz had succumbed to communist propaganda . Several congressmen in the U.S. also stated that the allegations from the Guatemalan government proved that it had become communist . At the conference in Caracas , the various Latin American governments sought economic aid from the U.S. , while seeking to maintain the principle of non @-@ intervention by the U.S. government in their internal affairs . The aim of the U.S. government was to pass a resolution condemning the supposed spread of communism in the Western Hemisphere . The Guatemalan foreign minister Guillermo Toriello argued strongly against the resolution , stating that it represented the " internationalization of McCarthyism . Despite support among the delegates for Toriello 's views , the resolution passed with only Guatemala voting against , because of the votes of dictatorships dependent on the U.S. and the threat of economic pressure applied by Dulles . Although support among the delegates for Dulles ' strident anti @-@ communism was less strong than Dulles and Eisenhower had hoped for , the conference represented a success for the U.S. , because it had been able to make concrete Latin American views on communism . 
 The U.S. had stopped selling arms to Guatemala in 1951 while signing bilateral defense agreements and increasing arms shipments to Honduras and Nicaragua , and promising the Guatemalan military that they too could obtain arms if Árbenz were deposed . In 1953 , the State Department aggravated the American arms embargo by thwarting Árbenz Government arms purchases from Canada , Germany , and Rhodesia . By 1954 Árbenz had become desperate for weapons , and decided to acquire them secretly from Czechoslovakia , which would have been the first time that a Soviet bloc country shipped weapons to the Americas , an action seen as establishing a communist beachhead in the Americas . The weapons were delivered to Guatemala at the Atlantic Ocean port of Puerto Barrios , by the Swedish freight ship MS Alfhem , which sailed from the port of Szczecin in the People 's Republic of Poland . The U.S. tried and failed to intercept the shipment despite imposing a naval quarantine on Guatemala , which violated international law at the time . In the words of the New York Times , the weapons were " worthless military junk " . The shipment of these weapons was portrayed by the CIA as Soviet interference in the United States ' backyard , and acted as the final spur for the CIA to launch its coup . 
 U.S. rhetoric abroad also had an effect on the Guatemalan military . The military had always been anti @-@ communist , and John Peurifoy had been applying a lot of pressure to high @-@ ranking officers since his arrival in Guatemala in October 1953 . Árbenz had intended the shipment of weapons from the Alfhem to be used to bolster peasant militia , in the event of army disloyalty , but the U.S. informed the Guatemalan army chiefs of the shipment , forcing Árbenz to hand them over to the military , and deepening the rift between him and the chiefs of his army . 
 = = = Castillo Armas ' invasion = = = 
 Castillo Armas ' force of 480 men had been split into four teams , ranging in size from 198 to 60 . On 15 June 1954 these four forces left their bases in Honduras and El Salvador , and assembled in various towns just outside the Guatemalan border . The largest force was supposed to attack the Atlantic harbor town of Puerto Barrios , while the others attacked the smaller towns of <unk> , Jutiapa , and Zacapa , the Guatemalan army 's largest frontier post . The invasion plan quickly faced difficulties ; the 60 @-@ man force was intercepted and jailed by Salvadoran policeman before it got to the border . At 8 : 20 am on 18 June 1954 , Castillo Armas led his invading troops over the border . Ten trained saboteurs preceded the invasion , with the aim of blowing up railways and cutting telegraph lines . At about the same time , Castillo Armas ' planes flew over a pro @-@ government rally in the capital . Castillo Armas ' demanded Árbenz ' immediate surrender . The invasion provoked a brief panic in the capital , which quickly decreased as the rebels failed to make any striking moves . <unk> down by supplies and a lack of transportation , Castillo Armas ' forces took several days to reach their targets , although their planes blew up a bridge on 19 June . 
 When the rebels did reach their targets , they met with further setbacks . The force of 122 men targeting Zacapa were intercepted and decisively beaten by a small garrison of 30 Guatemalan soldiers , with only 30 rebels escaping death or capture . The force that attacked Puerto Barrios was dispatched by policemen and armed dockworkers , with many of the rebels fleeing back to Honduras . In an effort to regain momentum , the rebel planes tried air attacks on the capital . These attacks caused little material damage , but they had a significant psychological impact , leading many citizens to believe that the invasion force was more powerful than it actuality was . The rebel bombers needed to fly out of the Nicaraguan capital of Managua ; as a result , they had a limited payload . A large number of them substituted dynamite or Molotov cocktails for bombs , in an effort to create loud bangs with a lower payload . The planes targeted ammunition depots , parade grounds , and other visible targets . Early in the morning of 27 June 1954 , a CIA Lockheed P @-@ <unk> Lightning attacked Puerto San José and dropped napalm bombs on the British cargo ship , SS <unk> , on charter to the U.S. company W.R. Grace and Company Line , which was being loaded with Guatemalan cotton and coffee . This incident cost the CIA one million U.S. dollars in compensation . On 22 June , another rebel plane bombed the Honduran town of San Pedro de Copán ; Dulles claimed the attack had been by the Guatemalan air force , thus avoiding diplomatic consequences . The handful of bombers that the rebel forces had begun with were shot down by the Guatemalan army within a few days , causing Castillo Armas to demand more from the CIA . Eisenhower quickly agreed to provide these additional planes , bolstering the rebel force . William Pawley had a crucial role to play in the delivery of these aircraft . 
 = = = Psychological warfare = = = 
 Castillo Armas ' army of 480 men was not large enough to defeat the Guatemalan military , even with U.S. supplied planes . Therefore , the plans for Operation PBSUCCESS called for a campaign of psychological warfare , which would present Castillo Armas ' victory as a fait accompli to the Guatemalan people , and would force Árbenz to resign . The U.S. propaganda campaign had begun well before the invasion , with the USIA writing hundreds of articles on Guatemala based on CIA reports , and distributing tens of thousands of leaflets throughout Latin America . The CIA persuaded the governments that were friendly to it to screen video footage of Guatemala that supported the U.S. version of events . 
 The success of the Alfhem in evading the U.S. effort to stop it led to the U.S. escalating its intimidation of Guatemala through the use of its navy . On 24 May , the U.S. launched Operation <unk> BAKER , a naval blockade of Guatemala . Ships and submarines patrolled the Guatemalan coasts , and all approaching ships were stopped and searched . This included ships from Britain and France , which was a violation of international law at the time . Britain and France did not protest very strongly , in the hope that the U.S. would not interfere with their efforts to subdue rebellious colonies in the Middle East . The intimidation was not solely naval ; on 26 May one of Castillo Armas planes flew over the capital , dropping leaflets that exhorted people to struggle against communism and support Castillo Armas . 
 The most wide @-@ reaching psychological weapon was the radio station known as the " Voice of Liberation . " This station began broadcasting on 1 May 1954 , carrying anti @-@ communist messages , telling its listeners to resist the Árbenz government and support the liberating forces of Castillo Armas . The station claimed to be broadcasting from deep within the jungles of the Guatemalan hinterland , a message which many listeners chose to believe . In actuality , the broadcasts were concocted in Miami by Guatemalan exiles , flown to Central America , and broadcast through a mobile transmitter . The station made an initial broadcast that was repeated four times , after which it took to transmitting two @-@ hour bulletins twice a day . The transmissions were initially only heard intermittently in Guatemala City ; a week later , the CIA significantly increased their transmitting power , allowing clear reception in the Guatemalan capital . The radio broadcasts have been given a lot of credit by historians for the success of the coup , due to the unrest they created through the country . They were unexpectedly assisted by the outage of the government @-@ run radio station , which stopped transmitting for three weeks while a new antenna was being fitted . These transmissions continued throughout the conflict , broadcasting news of rebel troops converging on the capital , and contributing to massive demoralization among both the army and the civilian population . 
 = = = Guatemalan response = = = 
 The Árbenz Government originally meant to repel the invasion by arming the military @-@ age populace , the workers ' militia , and the Guatemalan Army . Resistance from the armed forces , as well as public knowledge of the secret arms purchase , compelled the President to supply arms only to the Army . From the beginning of the invasion Árbenz was confident that Castillo Armas could be defeated militarily , and expressed this confidence in public . He was worried that a defeat for Castillo Armas would provoke a U.S. invasion . This also contributed to his decision not to arm civilians initially ; lacking a military reason to do so , this could have cost him the support of the army . Carlos Enrique Díaz , the chief of the Guatemalan armed forces , also told Árbenz that arming the civilians would be unpopular within the army , and that " the army [ would ] do its duty . " 
 Árbenz instead told Díaz to select officers to lead a counter @-@ attack . Díaz chose a corps of officers who were all known to be men of personal integrity , and who were loyal to Árbenz . On the night of 19 June , most of the Guatemalan troops in the capital region left for Zacapa , joined by smaller detachments from other garrisons . Árbenz stated that " the invasion was a farce . " He worried that if it was defeated on the Honduran border , Honduras would use it as an excuse to declare war on Guatemala , which would lead to a U.S. invasion . Due to the rumours spread by the Voice of Liberation , peasants throughout the countryside were worried that a fifth column attack was imminent , and so large numbers went to the government and asked for weapons to defend their country . They were repeatedly told that the army was " successfully defending our country . " Nonetheless , peasant volunteers assisted the government war effort , manning roadblocks and donating supplies to the army . Weapons shipments dropped by rebel planes were intercepted and turned over to the government . 
 The Árbenz government also pursued diplomatic means to try and end the invasion . It sought support from El Salvador and Mexico ; Mexico declined to get involved , and the Salvadoran government merely reported the Guatemalan effort to John Peurifoy . Árbenz ' largest diplomatic initiative was in taking the issue to the United Nations Security Council . On 18 June the Guatemalan foreign minister petitioned the Council to " take measures necessary ... to put a stop to the aggression , " which he said Nicaragua and Honduras were responsible for , along with " certain foreign monopolies which have been affected by the progressive policy of my government . " The security council looked at Guatemala 's complaint at an emergency session on 20 June . The debate was lengthy and heated , with Nicaragua and Honduras denying any wrongdoing , and the U.S. stating that Eisenhower 's role as a general in World War II demonstrated that he was against imperialism . The Soviet Union was the only country to support Guatemala . When the U.S. and its allies proposed referring the matter to the Organization of American States , the USSR vetoed the proposal . Guatemala continued to press for a Security Council investigation , a proposal that received the support of Britain and France . On 24 June the U.S. vetoed the proposal , exercising its veto against its allies for the first time in United Nations history . The U.S. accompanied this with threats to the foreign offices of both countries that the U.S. would stop supporting their other initiatives . United Nations Secretary General Dag Hammarskjöld called the U.S. position " the most serious blow so far aimed at the [ United Nations ] . " A fact @-@ finding mission was set up by the Inter @-@ American Peace Committee ; the United States used its influence to delay the entry of the committee until the coup was complete and the military dictatorship installed . 
 = = = Árbenz ' resignation = = = 
 Árbenz was initially confident that his army would quickly dispatch the rebel force . The victory of a small garrison of 30 soldiers over the 180 strong rebel force outside Zacapa strengthened his belief . By 21 June , Guatemalan soldiers had gathered at Zacapa under the command of Colonel Víctor M. León , who was believed to be loyal to Árbenz . León reported to Árbenz that the counter @-@ attack would be delayed due to logistical reasons , but stated that this was not reason to worry , and that Castillo Armas would be defeated very soon . Other members of the government were not so certain . Army Chief of Staff <unk> inspected the troops at Zacapa on 23 June , and returned to the capital believing that the army would not fight . Afraid of a U.S. intervention in Castillo Armas ' favor , he did not tell Árbenz of his suspicions . The leaders of the communist party also began to have their suspicions . Alvarado Monzón , the acting secretary general of the <unk> , sent a member of the central committee to Zacapa to investigate . He returned on 25 June , reporting that the army was highly demoralized , and would not fight . Monzón reported this to Árbenz , who quickly sent another investigator . He , too , returned the same report ; additionally , he brought a message back to Árbenz from the officers at Zacapa , asking Árbenz to resign . The officers believed that given U.S. support for the rebels , defeat was inevitable , and Árbenz was to blame for it . He stated that if Árbenz did not resign , the army was likely to strike a deal with Castillo Armas , and march on the capital with him . 
 During this period , Castillo Armas had begun to intensify his aerial attacks , with the extra planes that Eisenhower had approved . They had limited material success ; many of their bombs were surplus material from World War II , and failed to explode . Nonetheless , they had a significant psychological impact . On 25 June , the same day that he received the army 's ultimatum , Árbenz learned that Castillo Armas had scored what later proved to be his only military victory , defeating the Guatemalan garrison at Chiquimula . Historian Piero Gleijeses has stated that if it were not for U.S. support for the rebellion , the officer corps of the Guatemalan army would have remained loyal to Árbenz because , although they were not uniformly his supporters , they were more wary of Castillo Armas , and also had strong nationalist views . As it was , they believed that the U.S. would intervene militarily , leading to a battle they could not win . 
 On the night of 25 June , Árbenz called a meeting of the senior leaders of the government , the political parties , and the labor unions . Colonel Díaz was also present . The President told them that the army at Zacapa had abandoned the government , and that the civilian population needed to be armed in order to defend the country . Díaz raised no objections , and the unions pledged several thousand troops between them . When the troops were mustered the next day , only a few hundred showed up . The civilian population of the capital had fought alongside the Guatemalan Revolution twice before ; during the popular uprising of 1944 , and again during the attempted coup of 1949 . On both those occasions some of the army had fought alongside the citizenry ; intimidated by the United States , the army refused to fight on this occasion , and the union members were reluctant to fight both the invasion and their own military . Seeing this , Díaz reneged on his support of the president , and began plotting to overthrow Árbenz with the assistance of other senior army officers . They informed Peurifoy of this plan , asking him to stop the hostilities in return for Árbenz ' resignation . Peurifoy promised to arrange a truce , and the plotters went to Árbenz and informed him of their decision . Árbenz , utterly exhausted and seeking to preserve at least a measure of the democratic reforms that he had brought , agreed without demur . After informing his cabinet of his decision , he left the presidential palace at 8 pm on 27 June 1954 , having taped a resignation speech that was broadcast an hour later . In it , he stated that he was resigning in order to eliminate the " pretext for the invasion , " and that he wished to preserve the gains of the October Revolution . He walked to the nearby Mexican Embassy , seeking political asylum . Two months later he was granted safe conduct out of the country , and flew to exile in Mexico . 
 = = = Military governments = = = 
 Immediately after the President announced his resignation , Díaz announced on the radio that he was taking over the presidency , and that the army would continue to fight against the invasion of Castillo Armas . Two days later Peurifoy told Díaz that he had to resign because , in the words of the CIA officer who spoke to Díaz , he was " not convenient for American foreign policy . " Peurifoy castigated Díaz for allowing Árbenz to criticize the United States in his resignation speech ; meanwhile , a U.S.-trained pilot dropped a bomb on the army 's main powder magazine , in order to intimidate the colonel . Díaz initially attempted to placate Peurifoy by forming a three @-@ person junta , which he led ; Peurifoy continued to insist that Díaz resign , and he was overthrown by a rapid bloodless coup led by <unk> Hernán Monzón Aguirre , a more pliable army colonel . Díaz later stated that Peurifoy had presented him with a list of names , and demanded that all of them be shot by the next day , because they were communists ; Díaz had refused , turning Peurifoy further against him . On 17 June , the army leaders at Zacapa had begun to negotiate with Castillo Armas . They signed a pact , known as the Pacto de Las Tunas , three days later , which placed the army at Zacapa under Castillo Armas , in return for a general amnesty . The army returned to its barracks a few days later , " despondent , with a terrible sense of defeat . " 
 Although Monzón was staunchly anti @-@ communist and repeatedly spoke of his loyalty to the U.S. , he was unwilling to hand over power to Castillo Armas . The fall of Díaz had led Peurifoy to believe that the CIA should make way and let the U.S. State Department play the lead role in negotiating with the new government of Guatemala . The State Department asked Óscar Osorio , the dictator of El Salvador , to invite all players to talk in San Salvador . Osorio agreed , and Monzón and Castillo Armas arrived in the Salvadoran capital on 30 June . Peurifoy initially remained in Guatemala City , to avoid the appearance of a heavy U.S. role ; he was forced to travel to San Salvador when the negotiations came close to breaking down on the first day . In the words of Dulles , Peurifoy 's role was to " crack some heads together . " Neither Monzón nor Castillo Armas could have remained in power without U.S. support , and thus Peurifoy was able to force an agreement , which was announced at 4 : 45 am on 2 July . Under the agreement , Castillo Armas and his subordinate Major Enrique Trinidad Oliva joined the three person junta headed by Monzón , with Monzón remaining president . On 7 July Colonels Dubois and Cruz Salazar , Monzón 's supporters on the junta , resigned , according to the secret agreement they had made without Monzón 's knowledge . Outnumbered , Monzón also resigned , allowing Castillo Armas to be unanimously elected president of the junta . The two colonels were paid 100 @,@ 000 U.S. dollars apiece for their cooperation . The U.S. promptly recognized the new government on 13 July . Elections were held in early October , from which all political parties were barred from participating . Castillo Armas was the only candidate ; he won the election with 99 % of the vote , completing his transition into power . 
 = = = Reactions = = = 
 The Guatemalan coup d 'état was reviled internationally , with the French and British press , Le Monde and The Times , attacking the United States ' coup as a " modern form of economic colonialism " . In Latin America , public and official opinions expressed much political criticism of the U.S. , and Guatemala became symbolic to many of armed resistance to the perceived U.S. hegemony over Latin America . British Prime Minister Clement Attlee called it " a plain act of aggression . " The Secretary General of the United Nations , Dag Hammarskjöld ( 1953 – 61 ) , said that the paramilitary invasion with which the U.S. deposed the elected government of Guatemala was a geopolitical action that violated the human rights stipulations of the UN Charter . Even the usually pro – U.S. newspapers of West Germany condemned the Guatemalan coup d 'état . Kate Doyle , the Director of the Mexico Project of the National Security Archives , said that the 1954 Guatemalan coup d 'état was the definitive deathblow to democracy in the Republic of Guatemala . The coup had broad support among politicians in the United States . Historian Piero Gleijeses writes that the foreign policy of both major U.S. political parties had consisted of an intransigent assertion of U.S. hegemony over Central America , making it predisposed to seeing a communist threat where none existed . Thus Eisenhower 's continuation of the Monroe Doctrine had continued bipartisan support . The coup met with strong negative reactions in Latin America ; a wave of anti @-@ United States protests followed the overthrow of Árbenz . These sentiments persisted for several decades afterwards ; historians have pointed to the coup as a reason for the hostile reception given to U.S. Vice President Richard Nixon when he visited Latin America four years later . A State Department study found that negative public reactions to the coup had occurred in eleven Latin American countries , including a few that were otherwise pro @-@ American . 
 = = Operation PBHISTORY = = 
 Operation PBHISTORY was an effort by the CIA to analyze documents from the Árbenz government to justify the 1954 coup after the fact . Due to the quick overthrow of the Árbenz government , the CIA believed that the government would not have been able to destroy any incriminating documents , and that these could be analyzed to demonstrate Árbenz ' supposed ties to the Soviet Union . The CIA also believed that it could better understand the workings of Latin American communist parties , on which subject the CIA had very little real information . A final motivation was that international responses to the coup had been very negative , even among allies of the U.S. , and the CIA wished to counteract the anti @-@ U.S. sentiment . The operation began on 4 July 1954 with the arrival of four CIA agents in Guatemala City , led by a specialist in the structure of communist parties . Targets included Árbenz ' personal belongings , police documents , and the headquarters of the Guatemalan Party of Labour . Although the initial search failed to find any links to the Soviet Union , the CIA decided to extend the operation , and on 4 August a much larger team was deployed , with members from many government departments , including the state department and the U.S. information agency . The task force was given the cover name " Social Research Group . " In order to avoid confrontation with Guatemalan nationalists , the CIA opted to leave the documents in Guatemalan possession , instead funding the creation of a Guatemalan intelligence agency that would try to dismantle the communist organizations . The Comite ' de Defensa Nacional Contra el <unk> ( National Committee for Defense against Communism ) was created on 20 July , and granted a great deal of power over military and police functions . The personnel of the new agency were also put to work analyzing the same documents . 
 The document processing phase of the operation was terminated on 28 September 1954 , having examined 500 @,@ 000 documents . There was tension between the different U.S. government agencies about using the information ; the CIA wished to use it to subvert communists , whereas USIA wished to use it for propaganda . The CIA 's leadership of the operation allowed it to retain control over any documents deemed necessary for clandestine operations . A consequence of PBHISTORY was the opening of a CIA file on Ernesto Che Guevara . In the subsequent decade , the documents gathered were used by the authors of several books , most frequently with covert CIA assistance , which described the Guatemalan Revolution and the 1954 coup in terms favorable to the CIA . Despite the efforts of the CIA , both international and academic reaction to U.S. policy remained highly negative . Even books partially funded by the CIA were somewhat critical of the role played by the CIA . PBHISTORY failed in its chief objective ; finding convincing evidence that Guatemalan communists had been instruments of the Soviet Union , and found scant evidence of any connection to Moscow whatsoever . The Soviet description of the coup , that the U.S.A. had crushed a democratic revolution to protect the United Fruit Company 's control over the Guatemalan economy , became much more widely accepted . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 = = = Political legacy = = = 
 The 1954 coup had a large political fallout both inside and outside Guatemala . The relatively easy overthrow of Árbenz , coming soon after the similar overthrow of the democratically elected Iranian Prime Minister in 1953 , made the CIA overconfident in its abilities , which led to the Bay of Pigs disaster in 1961 . Among the civilians living in Guatemala City during the coup was a twenty @-@ five @-@ year @-@ old Ernesto Che Guevara . After a couple of abortive attempts to fight on the side of the government , Guevara took shelter at the embassy of Argentina , before eventually being granted safe passage to Mexico , where he would join the Cuban Revolution . His experience of the Guatemalan coup was a large factor in convincing him " of the necessity for armed struggle ... against imperialism " , and would inform his successful military strategy during the Cuban Revolution . Árbenz ' experience during the Guatemalan coup also helped Fidel Castro 's Cuban regime in thwarting the CIA invasion . Throughout the years of the Guatemalan Revolution , both United States policy makers and the U.S. media had tended to believe the theory of a communist threat . When Árbenz had announced evidence of U.S. complicity in the Salama incident , it had been dismissed , and virtually the entire U.S. press portrayed Castillo Armas invasion as a dramatic victory against communism . The press in Latin America were less restrained in their criticism of the U.S. , and the coup resulted in lasting anti @-@ United States sentiment in the region . 
 Within Guatemala , Castillo Armas worried that he lacked popular support , and thus tried to eliminate all opposition . He promptly arrested several thousand opposition leaders , branding them communists , repealed the constitution of 1945 , and granted himself virtually unbridled power . Concentration camps were built to hold the prisoners when the jails overflowed . Acting on the advice of Dulles , Castillo Armas also detained a number of citizens trying to flee the country . He also created a National Committee of Defense Against Communism , with sweeping powers of arrest , detention , and deportation . Over the next few years , the committee investigated nearly 70 @,@ 000 people . Many were imprisoned , executed , or " disappeared " , frequently without trial . He outlawed all political parties , labor unions , and peasant organizations . Castillo Armas ' dependence on the officer corps and the <unk> who had put him in power led to widespread corruption , and the Eisenhower administration was soon subsidizing the Guatemalan government with many millions of U.S. dollars . Castillo Armas also reversed the agrarian reforms of Árbenz , leading the U.S. embassy to comment that it was a " long step backwards " from the previous policy . The United Fruit Company also did not profit from the coup ; despite regaining most of its privileges , its profits continued to decline , and it was eventually merged with another company to save itself from bankruptcy . Despite the influence which some of the local Catholic Church leaders had in the coup , anti @-@ Catholic restrictions which had been enforced under previous governments in Guatemala would resume by the 1960s , as many anti @-@ communist governments felt the Church had too much sympathy towards socialist parties . 
 = = = Civil War in Guatemala = = = 
 The rolling @-@ back of the progressive policies of the civilian governments resulted in a series of leftist insurgencies in the countryside , beginning in 1960 . This triggered the thirty @-@ six @-@ year Guatemalan Civil War , between the U.S.-backed military government of Guatemala and the leftist insurgencies , which frequently had a large degree of popular support . The largest of these movements was led by the Guerrilla Army of the Poor , which at its largest point had 270 @,@ 000 members . The civil war ran from 1960 to 1996 . By the end of it 200 @,@ 000 civilians were dead . During the civil war , atrocities against civilians were committed by both sides ; 93 % of these violations were committed by the United States @-@ backed military , which included a genocidal scorched @-@ earth campaign against the indigenous Maya population in the 1980s . The violence was particularly brutal during the presidencies of Ríos Montt and Lucas García . Numerous other human rights violations were committed , including massacres of civilian populations , rape , aerial bombardment , and forced disappearances , leading Gleijeses to write that Guatemala was " ruled by a culture of fear , " and that it held the " macabre record for human rights violations in Latin America . " These violations were partially the result of a particularly brutal counter @-@ insurgency strategy adopted by the government . The civil war came to an end in 1996 , with a peace accord between the guerrillas and the government of Guatemala , which included an amnesty for all the fighters , both among the military and the guerrillas . 
 = = = Apologies = = = 
 In March 1999 , US President Bill Clinton apologized to the Guatemalan government for the atrocities committed by the US @-@ backed dictatorships . 
 In October 2011 , the government of Guatemala formally apologized to Juan Jacobo Árbenz , the son of the deposed President , Jacobo Árbenz . At the same time , the textbooks used in the public school system were revised to portray Árbenz in a positive light , depicting him as a Guatemalan patriot . A highway was also renamed in his honor . The Árbenz family continue to request an apology from the government of the United States for having overthrown the government of Guatemala in 1954 . 
 = William the Carpenter = 
 William the Carpenter ( fl . 1087 – 1102 ) , viscount of Melun , was a French nobleman who participated in the Reconquista in Spain and on the First Crusade . He was notorious for defecting from the army both in Spain and on the crusade , but he was also known for his strength in battle , whence he earned his nickname " the Carpenter . " He returned to the Holy Land after the crusade , and nothing further is known of his life or death . 
 = = Life = = 
 = = = Succession = = = 
 His specific origins are unclear ; according to the seventeenth @-@ century genealogist Père Anselme , he was the son of Ursio I , viscount of Melun , a town about 50 kilometres outside Paris in the Brie region of the French Vexin , which was later known as the Île @-@ de @-@ France . Anselme believed William succeeded his father in 1084 , and was later succeeded by his own son , Ursio II . However , in the nineteenth century , Adolphe <unk> showed that Anselme misread the charters he was using ; all that is known for certain is that Ursio was viscount in 1085 and William was viscount in 1094 . There is no definite record of an Ursio II , and after William there is no viscount known until Adam , who married the daughter of the previous , unnamed viscount in 1138 . William was presumably related to Ursio but his specific relationship to him and the other viscounts is unknown . 
 According to twelfth @-@ century chronicler Robert the Monk , William was " of royal stock " and was related to Hugh I , Count of Vermandois and Hugh 's brother King Philip I of France . 
 = = = Military exploits = = = 
 According to twelfth @-@ century monk Guibert of Nogent , William was " powerful in words , but less so in action ... a man who set out to do things too great for him . " William was a member of the French contingent which marched into Spain in 1087 to assist Alfonso VI of Castile with the siege of Tudela against the Almoravids . He may have been one of the leaders , along with Eudes I , Duke of Burgundy , who was the nephew of Alfonso 's wife Constance . The French army never made it to Tudela and withdrew with little success . Guibert says that William " retreated like a wretch , leaving countless men stranded by his flight . " William 's actions in Spain may have been the inspiration for the character of <unk> in the Chanson de Roland , which was possibly written in the early twelfth @-@ century , based on similar events that had occurred during the reign of Charlemagne centuries earlier . 
 In France , Guibert says he engaged in petty warfare against other nobles and " criminal looting " of the countryside , in contravention of the Peace and Truce of God . In 1096 he joined the First Crusade , and " took from his poor neighbors the little that they had to provide himself shamefully with provisions for the journey . " He participated in the attacks on Jews at Mainz , led by Emich of <unk> . Emich 's army later battled against the Hungarians , during which William " beheaded the chief of the Hungarian army , who was a member of the [ King Coloman 's ] counsel , a distinguished man with dazzling snow @-@ white hair . " After the dispersal of Emich 's army following this battle , William and the other French leaders joined the army of his relative Hugh of Vermandois . Hugh 's army marched south into Italy , and at Bari , Hugh sent William across the sea to Dyrrhachium as an ambassador to the Byzantine governor of the city . William then travelled to Constantinople with Hugh , and he was among the men who came to meet Godfrey of Bouillon when Godfrey arrived at the city later in the year . 
 No further mention of William is made until the Siege of Antioch in 1098 . The crusaders had successfully taken the city , but were then besieged themselves by a large Muslim army led by Kerbogha of Mosul . The crusaders suffered from lack of supplies , and there were many desertions ; William fled Antioch in January 1098 , along with the French monk Peter the Hermit , who had led his own army to Constantinople before the main crusaders arrived there . William was probably a member of Bohemond of Taranto 's army at this point , because Bohemond sent his nephew Tancred to find them , and they were brought back to Bohemond 's camp . Robert the Monk assumes that William fled because " he had never before experienced such suffering from hunger . " William " spent the whole of the night ... in Bohemond 's tent , lying on the ground like a piece of rubbish . " Bohemond rebuked him as a " wretched disgrace to the whole Frankish army " , and mentioned his desertion of the French army in Spain in 1087 . The other leaders asked Bohemond to spare him and William suffered no further punishment . However , William was so ashamed that he deserted the army again . 
 Albert of Aachen says William 's second desertion occurred in June 1098 , along with William of Grand @-@ Mesnil , a relative of Bohemond . On the road away from Antioch , they joined Stephen of Blois , another leader of the crusade who had also fled the siege . They travelled back towards Constantinople , but on the way met Emperor Alexius I Comnenus , who was advancing to Antioch with a relief army . They convinced him of the futility of the crusader siege and the emperor turned back to Constantinople . 
 William apparently returned to the Holy Land in the Crusade of 1101 . The First Crusade had successfully conquered Jerusalem , and those who had returned home before completing the journey were often shamed into going on crusade a second time ; some of them , like Stephen of Blois , were killed on their second journey . William , however , survived to participate in the politics of the newfound Kingdom of Jerusalem ; he was among the men who petitioned King Baldwin I to restore <unk> of Pisa as Latin Patriarch of Jerusalem . He was also present at Baldwin I 's siege of Ascalon in 1102 . William may have settled in the north , in the crusader Principality of Antioch as a vassal of Bohemond , because he appears as a witness in a charter from Antioch in 1101 . 
 = = Nickname = = 
 William 's actions at the Siege of Antioch are known from the Gesta Francorum , an anonymous chronicle written by an Italo @-@ Norman eyewitness . The Gesta was very popular in Europe after the crusade , but was considered crudely written by more refined readers . It was later rewritten and expanded by more educated writers , including the French monks Robert and Guibert , both of whom were eager to add information about French crusaders like William . According to Robert , William " acquired the name of ' Carpenter ' because nobody wanted to take him on in battle — <unk> was no breastplate , helmet or shield which could withstand the shattering impact of his lance or sword . " Guibert says that he " was called the Carpenter , not because he was a craftsman in wood , but because he prevailed in battle like a carpenter , by cutting men down " , and has Bohemond ask : " what kind of Carpenter did we have , who , like a construction @-@ worker with a pick @-@ axe , hacked away , with lances and swords , at the backs of the Gentiles ? " Christopher Tyerman interprets this as William 's " skills as a battlefield butcher " . Edward Gibbon , apparently misunderstanding Guibert , thought the nickname came " from the weighty strokes of his axe " . 
 = I 'll Make a Man Out of You = 
 " I 'll Make a Man out of You " is a song written by composer Matthew Wilder and lyricist David Zippel for Walt Disney Pictures ' 36th animated feature film Mulan ( 1998 ) . Appearing on the film 's soundtrack Mulan : An Original Walt Disney Records Soundtrack , " I 'll Make a Man Out of You " is performed by American singer Donny Osmond as the singing voice of Captain Li Shang in lieu of American actor BD Wong , who provides the character 's speaking voice . The song also features appearances by Lea Salonga as Mulan , Eddie Murphy as Mushu , and Harvey Fierstein , Jerry Tondo and Wilder himself as Yao , Chien @-@ Po and Ling , respectively . 
 " I 'll Make a Man Out of You " was written to replace the song " We 'll Make a Man of You " after the film 's original songwriter Stephen Schwartz departed from the project in favor of working on DreamWorks ' The Prince of Egypt ( 1998 ) . Prior to Mulan , Osmond had auditioned for the role of Hercules in Disney 's Hercules ( 1997 ) , a role for which he was ultimately turned down by the directors because they felt that he sounded too old . Disney eventually cast Osmond as the singing voice of Shang because his singing voice is similar to Wong 's speaking voice . An up @-@ tempo military @-@ style song , " I 'll Make a Man Out of You " is performed by Shang during a rigorous training montage in which his young , inexperienced soldiers attempt to justify their worth . The song 's title is considered ironic because Mulan , who relies on intelligence , ultimately proves more competent than her male comrades . 
 " I 'll Make a Man Out of You " has received mostly positive reviews from film and music critics , some of whom dubbed it the film 's best song , while praising Osmond 's performance . Critics have also drawn comparisons between the song and Disney 's Hercules , while likening Mulan 's role and transformation to actress Demi Moore 's performance as Lieutenant Jordan O 'Neil in the film G. I. Jane ( 1997 ) . The song has since appeared on several " best of " Disney songs lists , including those of Total Film and the New York Post . Discussed by film critics , film historians , academic journalists and feminists , the song has gone on to be recorded and covered in several different languages — namely Mandarin , Cantonese and Spanish — by entertainers Jackie Chan and Cristian Castro , respectively . 
 = = Background = = 
 " I 'll Make a Man Out of You " was written by composer Matthew Wilder and lyricist David Zippel , who were hired to write the songs for Mulan because , according to co @-@ director Tony Bancroft , " Disney was trying to find different songwriters that ... would give kind of different sound to each of the songs . " While Zippel , a Broadway lyricist , was recruited because the directors were impressed by the songwriter 's work on Disney 's Hercules ( 1997 ) , at the time Wilder , a pop singer and record producer , was best known for his hit single " Break My Stride " . Bancroft believes that , although the songwriters " had two different sensibilities ... I think the [ y ] blend worked well together , especially on [ ' I 'll Make a Man Out of You ' ] " . 
 Originally , songwriter Stephen Schwartz , who had just recently worked as a lyricist opposite composer Alan Menken on Disney 's Pocahontas ( 1995 ) and The Hunchback of Notre Dame ( 1996 ) , was slated to write the lyrics for Mulan , but he was replaced by Zippel " at the last moment . " Schwartz had written a song called " We 'll Make a Man of You " for " when Mulan is trying to learn to be a soldier " . The song was eventually replaced by Wilder and Zippel 's " I 'll Make a Man Out of You " when Schwartz was forced to resign from Mulan by Disney executives Peter Schneider and Michael Eisner because the songwriter had also agreed to write the songs for rival film studio DreamWorks ' animated feature film The Prince of Egypt ( 1998 ) . According to The Musical Theater of Stephen Schwartz : From Godspell to Wicked and Beyond , Schwartz believed that he would have been able to work on both films simultaneously , but ultimately chose The Prince of Egypt instead because he felt pressured by Disney . 
 Before Mulan , American singer Donny Osmond had auditioned for the lead role of Hercules in Hercules , a role for which he was ultimately not cast because the directors felt that is voice sounded " too old " and " too deep " for the character . Osmond later revealed in an interview with People that he was so embarrassed by his Hercules audition that he had nearly considered ending his singing career prematurely . A few months later , Disney contacted Osmond with interest in casting him as the singing voice of Shang after comparing his audition tapes to BD Wong and determining that both actors have " very similar voices . " In one scene , Osmond 's character , Shang , is hit in the stomach while singing " I 'll Make a Man Out of You " . In order to sound as realistic as possible , Osmond punched himself in the stomach several times while recording the song . 
 = = Context and use in Mulan = = 
 " I 'll Make a Man Out of You " is performed by Captain Li Shang during Mulan 's training montage , which has also been identified as the film 's " boot camp sequence . " The scene explores Shang 's attempt to train his newly recruited squadron of incompetent soldiers in the hopes of ultimately transforming into a skilled army . Occupying a significant portion of the film 's plot , Shang promises to turn his team of " rag @-@ tag recruits " into men . The musical number is used to " compress dramatic time or narrate " in a more compelling way than had solely dialogue been used . The scene begins with Shang shooting an arrow into the top of a tall pole and challenging all of his soldiers to retrieve it , each of whom fail until Mulan eventually succeeds . According to the book Into the Closet : Cross @-@ Dressing and the Gendered Body in Children 's Literature and Film by Victoria Flanagan , Mulan is successful in retrieving the arrow because she uses " an ingenuity that is based upon her ability to incorporate aspects of femininity into her masculine performance . " By the end of the scene , all of the soldiers have improved dramatically and the results of their practice and training are finally revealed . In what Joshua and Judges author <unk> Brenner called " a humorous reversal toward the end of the movie , " Mulan and her male comrades disguise themselves as concubines in order to infiltrate the palace and rescue the emperor while " I 'll Make a Man Out of You " reprises in the background . 
 Critics have observed ways in which the scene explores Mulan 's growth and transformation as the character evolves from a clumsy , inexperienced recruit into one of the army 's most skilled soldiers , in spite of her gender . According to the book Literacy , Play and Globalization : Converging <unk> in Children 's Critical and Cultural Performances , the montage depicts Mulan 's gender as " an obstacle to overcome . " Author Phyllis <unk> wrote in her book Beyond Adaptation : Essays on Radical Transformations of Original Works , " The need for inexperienced young men to go through a rigorous training results in a sequence common to many films , " and that the scene " show 's the challenges Ping / Mulan faces due to her " inexperience . As observed by Juanita Kwok in the book Film Asia : New Perspectives on Film for English , the irony of the scene lies within the fact that " Mulan proves herself more competent than any of the men . " The author also observed that the scene 's first refrain accompanies shots of Shang , while its second " coincides with Mulan climbing to the top of the pole . " Additionally , while the earlier , all @-@ female musical number " Honor to Us All " " functions as an account of the <unk> of female gender , " " I 'll Make a Man Out of You " " juxtaposes and makes explicit the contention that gender is a cultural product , " according to Johnson Cheu , author of Diversity in Disney Films : Critical Essays on Race , Ethnicity , Gender , Sexuality and Disability . The Representation of Gender in Walt Disney 's " Mulan " believes that the song emphasizes desirable masculine traits , namely " discipline ... tranquility , celerity , strength and fearlessness , " while Shang , according to Putting the Grail Back into Girl Power : How a Girl Saved Camelot , and why it Matters , " views [ femininity ] as comparable to weakness . " In her article Disney 's " Mulan " — the " True " <unk> Heroine ? , Lisa Brocklebank argued the song explores themes such as <unk> , ostracism and abjection . 
 Critics have drawn similarities between the " I 'll Make a Man Out of You " sequence and Hercules ' training montage in Disney 's Hercules ( 1997 ) , as well as actress Demi Moore 's role as Lieutenant Jordan O 'Neil in the film G. I. Jane ( 1997 ) . In the book Ways of Being Male : Representing Masculinities in Children 's Literature , author John Stephens wrote that although both Mulan and Hercules depict " the active male body as spectacle , " Mulan 's is less " straight @-@ forward " due to the character 's gender . Michael Dequina of The Movie Report observed that " Mulan 's transformation is highly reminiscent of Demi Moore 's in last year 's Disney drama G.I. Jane , but Mulan <unk> that film 's hour @-@ long toughening process by efficiently covering the same ground during a single , rousing musical number . " 
 = = Music and lyrics = = 
 Written in common time at a tempo of 110 beats per minute and starting out in the key of G major , " I 'll Make a Man Out of You " has been identified as a " heroic power ballad " and anthem that features an upbeat , " thumping " rhythm . The Disney Song Encyclopedia described the song as a " rhythmic military song . " Beginning with " a military @-@ style drum " introduction , " I 'll Make a Man Out of You " , which is immediately preceded by the emotional ballad " Reflection " on the film 's soundtrack album , " breaks up the slower pace of the songs , " according to <unk> Similar to the song " A Girl Worth Fighting For " , the " ironically titled " " I 'll Make a Man Out of You " " play [ s ] off Mulan 's secret " because Shang is unaware that she is actually a girl , as observed by Jeffrey Gantz of The Phoenix . Johnson Cheu , author of Diversity in Disney Films : Critical Essays on Race , Ethnicity , Gender , Sexuality and Disability , received the song as a counterpart to the all @-@ female musical number " Honor to Us All " . Going into the last verse , the song 's key shifts up to A ♭ major and later towards the end , " the backing track falls into silence and [ Osmond 's ] vocals come to the fore . " Osmond 's vocal range spans one octave , from D3 to F4 . Beginning with two verses , followed by a bridge , a refrain , a final verse and repeated choruses , the song is a total of three minutes and twenty @-@ one seconds in length . 
 Entertainment Weekly identified the number as the film 's " rambunctious peak . " According to Victoria Flanagan , author of Into the Closet : Gender and Cross @-@ dressing in Children 's Fiction : Cross @-@ Dressing and the Gendered Body in Children 's Literature and Film , " I 'll Make a Man Out of You " is " a playful parody of conventional masculinity . " The lyric " I 'll make a man out of you " is constantly repeated and reinforced by Shang . According to author John Stephens of Ways of Being Male : Representing Masculinities in Children 's Literature , the song 's lyrics " initially define masculinity in opposition to femininity , " with its first verse beginning , " Let 's get down to business / To defeat the Huns / Did they send me daughters / When I asked for sons ? " Its chorus reads , " You must be swift as the coursing river / With all the force of the great typhoon / With all the strength of a raging fire / Mysterious as the dark side of the moon " which , according to Ways of Being Male : Representing Masculinities in Children 's Literature , " <unk> masculinity by asserting that it embodies the speed , strength and power of the natural world , and yet contains this within an aura of tranquility and mystery . " According to Beyond Adaptation : Essays on Radical Transformations of Original Works , these lyrics " add a hint of darkness as they celebrate male prowess " by suggesting that one who has " acquired fiery strength " is also " untamed as the moon 's dark side . " The song has been noted by the New York Post for its " slew of one @-@ liners from supporting characters . " According to The Phoenix , Osmond performs the song 's lyrics with " grit . " Meanwhile , the singer is backed up by a macho @-@ sounding choir repeatedly chanting " Be a man ! " 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 " I 'll Make a Man Out of You " has been met with mostly positive reviews from both film and music critics . Irving Tan of Sputnikmusic wrote , " there hasn 't been a single chorus in all of post @-@ Mulan pop music that has managed to rival the roaring power in the refrain . " Scott Chitwood of ComingSoon.net reviewed " I 'll Make a Man Out of You " as " a stirring , testosterone filled piece , " describing the scene as " amusing . " Owen Gleiberman of Entertainment Weekly wrote that the song " has a comparable infectious punch , " concluding , " it 's the only song in the movie that escapes Disneyfied blandness . " Jeff Vice of the Deseret News observed that Wong and Osmond 's " voices sound eerily similar . " Tom Henry of The Blade enjoyed Osmond 's delivery , describing the singer 's performance as " solid . " Lloyd <unk> of The Register @-@ Guard called " I 'll Make a Man Out of You " a favorite of his . While exploring " The History of Movie Training Montages " , Chris Giblin of Men 's Fitness opined , " Mulan served as proof that the fitness montage can work amazingly well in movies for kids . " Giblin continued , " it has the best lyrics of any serious fitness / sports montage song . Overall , a very strong montage . " Disney.com itself cites " I 'll Make a Man Out of You " as a " song that was so epic , so legendary , that it requires an out loud sing along anytime we hear it . " 
 Despite dubbing the film 's songs its " weak link , " TV Guide wrote that the musical numbers are " crafted with a knowing , almost camp wink that 's totally in keeping with the subtext of the film , " concluding that " I 'll Make a Man Out of You " sounds like " a Village People original . " Writing for The Seattle Times , Moira Macdonald criticized Wilder and Zippel 's songs as " forgettable , " calling " I 'll Make a Man Out of You " " annoying . " The Phoenix 's Jeffrey Gantz wrote that although " Donny Osmond shows some grit , but he 's still the voice of the <unk> West . " <unk> 's Jason <unk> commented , " Unfortunately , the voice of Donny Osmond , relegated to anthems such as ' I 'll Make a Man Out of You ' doesn 't really enhance the story line " . 
 = = = Accolades and recognition = = = 
 Total Film ranked " I 'll Make a Man Out of You " twenty @-@ ninth on its list of the " 30 Best Disney Songs " . Similarly , M ranked the song twentieth on its list of the " Top 20 Disney Songs of All Time " . Author Stephanie <unk> cited " Did they send me daughters when I asked for sons ? " as her favourite lyric . Gregory E. Miller of the New York Post cited I 'll Make a Man Out of You " as one of " The best ( and the most underrated ) Disney songs , " writing , " Captain Shang ’ s battle @-@ preparation anthem is the movie ’ s most quotable , with a memorable chorus and a slew of one @-@ liners from supporting characters . " PopSugar ranked the song the nineteenth " Catchiest Disney Song " . On Empire 's list of the twenty " Most Awesome Training Montages In Cinema History " , " I 'll Make a Man Out of You " was ranked 14th . The author identified it as " a solid training montage in which Mulan and her friends go from hapless <unk> to fearless warriors in just over two minutes . " Similarly , Men 's Fitness also ranked " I 'll Make a Man Out of You " among the greatest training montages in film history . Stephen <unk> of Sneaker Report wrote that " Training montages aren ’ t limited to just live @-@ action movies . With movies like Mulan and Hercules , Disney mastered the art of the montage in their animated films . " 
 = = Covers and parodies = = 
 When Mulan was released in China , Hong Kong actor Jackie Chan was hired to dub the voice of Shang and record " I 'll Make a Man Out of You " in Mandarin and Cantonese . The special edition DVD release of Mulan features a music video of Chan performing the song . The video also depicts Chan performing martial arts @-@ inspired choreography . Positively received , Scott Chitwood of ComingSoon.net called Chan 's rendition " a fun addition for Chan fans , " while Nancy Churnin of The Dallas Morning News wrote that he performed the song " very ably . " Mexican singer Cristian Castro , who voiced Shang in the film 's Latin American release , recorded " I 'll Make a Man Out of You " in Spanish , entitled " Hombres de Acción <unk> hoy " . 
 In October 2014 , a parody of " I 'll Make a Man Out of You " was uploaded to YouTube entitled " I 'll Make a ' Mon Out of You " . A mashup of Mulan and the popular Pokémon franchise , the video features Digimon <unk> attempting to masquerade as Pokémon Meowth in lieu of Mulan , while Ash occupies the role of Shang as his trainer , according to Smosh . 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Credits adapted from the website <unk> . 
 Donny Osmond – lead vocals 
 Lea Salonga , Eddie Murphy , Harvey Fierstein , Jerry Tondo and Matthew Wilder – additional vocals 
 Matthew Wilder – songwriting and producing 
 David Zippel – songwriting 
 = Tropical Storm Katrina ( 1999 ) = 
 Tropical Storm Katrina was a short @-@ lived , weak tropical cyclone that produced minor damage across areas previously devastated by Hurricane Mitch in 1998 . Forming out of a broad area of low pressure in the southwestern Caribbean Sea on October 28 , 1999 , the disorganized tropical storm made landfall near Puerto Cabezas , Nicaragua with winds of 40 mph ( 65 km / h ) on October 30 before weakening to a tropical depression . The remnants of the storm persisted until November 1 , at which time it was absorbed by a cold front on the northern end of the Yucatán Peninsula . 
 Throughout Central America , Katrina produced heavy rains , estimated up to 15 in ( 380 mm ) in mountainous areas , triggering mudslides and flash flooding . Unlike Mitch , little damage resulted from Katrina and no fatalities were reported . Due to the lack of damage caused by the storm , the name was not retired and was re @-@ used during 2005 at which time it was retired due to catastrophic damage in the United States . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 Tropical Storm Katrina originated out of the remnants of a cold front tracking southward through the Caribbean Sea on October 22 . By October 26 , a broad area of low pressure , associated with disorganized shower and thunderstorm activity , developed over the southwestern Caribbean Sea . The following day , a surface low pressure became apparent after the system showed signs of rotation near the northern Panama coastline . On October 28 , a hurricane hunter flight into the circulation revealed a well @-@ defined low pressure system and resulting in the system being declared Tropical Depression Fifteen while situated roughly 175 mi ( 280 km ) east of Bluefields , Nicaragua . The center of the newly classified depression was situated on the western edge of deep convection . The depression tracked slowly towards the northeast in response to the mid @-@ level flow it was embedded within . 
 By the morning of October 29 , a tropical wave , tracking towards the west , began to interact with the depression and leading to forecasters discussing a possible merger of the two systems . An upper @-@ level anticyclone over the eastern Caribbean produced significant wind shear over the depression , preventing the center from moving under the deep convection . However , a large convective banding feature developed to the north of the system . Several hours later , hurricane hunters flew through the storm and recorded surface winds of 40 mph ( 65 km / h ) and a barometric pressure of 999 mbar ( hPa ; 29 @.@ 5 inHg ) , leading to the upgrade of the depression to a tropical storm . At this time , the storm received the name Katrina and peaked in intensity . By 0000 UTC on October 30 , the center of Katrina made landfall near Puerto Cabezas , Nicaragua at peak intensity . Within three hours , the storm weakened to a depression due to interaction with the mountains of Nicaragua and convection was limited to a small area on the western side of the center of circulation . 
 Katrina continued to track over Central America for most of October 30 and began to accelerate . Roughly 24 hours after landfall , the depression moved back over water , in the Gulf of Honduras ; however , by this time , there was no convection remaining around the system . The acceleration of the storm was due to a regeneration of the low @-@ level circulation northward . Due to unfavorable conditions , the weakened system failed to regenerate convection before moving back over land near the northern Belize @-@ Mexico border . Around this time , forecasters reported that the depression would re @-@ intensify once in the Gulf of Mexico before transitioning into an extratropical cyclone . Although situated over land , the depression began to regenerate convection , leading to increased rainfall over the Yucatan Peninsula . By the evening of November 1 , the depression weakened again and moved into the Gulf of Mexico ; however , unlike previous forecasts , the circulation was absorbed by a cold front hours later . 
 = = Preparations and Impact = = 
 Despite being a very weak storm , forecasters were wary about Katrina , as Central America was devastated by Hurricane Mitch exactly one year earlier . There was considerable fear of additional flash flooding and mudslides across the mountainous region . Immediately after being declared a tropical depression , a tropical storm warning was issued for Nicaragua , and it was extended to the San Andrés islands of Colombia shortly afterward . Officials in Honduras evacuated 71 families from the district of Colón and another 17 families from other at @-@ risk areas . Along the coastline of Honduras , a red alert was declared as torrential rains were anticipated to produce deadly mudslides in areas still recovering from Mitch nearly one year ago . 
 Overall , damage was minimal as a result of Katrina . Only a few small mudslides were reported , along with some minor flooding , as the storm tracked across Central America . It was estimated that between 10 and 15 inches ( 250 to 375 mm ) of rain fell across parts of the region as a result of Katrina , with one report of 3 @.@ 58 inches ( 91 mm ) in six hours from the island of San Andrés east of Nicaragua . Roughly 1 @,@ 200 people were evacuated to emergency shelters in Honduras due to flooding . At least five bridges sustained damage and the cities of <unk> and Trujillo were isolated as the Aguán and <unk> rivers overflowed their banks . The water pipes recently constructed after being destroyed by Hurricane Mitch , worth HNL 170 @,@ 000 ( US $ 9 @,@ 000 ) were once again destroyed by Katrina . The most severely affected area in Honduras was the Valle del Aguán . 
 Between October 30 and November 1 , the remnants of Katrina produced widespread moderate rainfall across the Yucatan Peninsula , peaking at 6 @.@ 32 in ( 161 mm ) in <unk> . Moisture from the remnants of the storm enhanced rainfall across southern Florida in association with the cold front that absorbed the system . Already saturated by previous rains , the National Weather Service issued flood watches for the region as torrential rains were expected to fall in relation to the system . 
 Following the storm , the United Nations deployed field assessment teams to survey the damage caused by Katrina . The International Organization for Migration helped relocate affected families and construct at least 300 new residences for victims of Katrina and Hurricane Mitch the year prior . The Pan American Health Organization also deployed assessment teams to survey the area for the possibility of post @-@ storm diseases . Due to the lack of any significant damage , the name Katrina was not retired and was re @-@ used in the 2005 season ; however , due to the catastrophic damage caused by the storm , it was retired in 2006 and was replaced with the name Katia . 
 = The Glenlivet distillery = 
 The Glenlivet distillery is a distillery near <unk> in Moray , Scotland that produces single malt Scotch whisky . It is the oldest legal distillery in the parish of Glenlivet , and the production place of the Scottish whisky of the same name . It is described in packaging and advertising as " The single malt that started it all " . It was founded in 1824 and has operated almost continuously since . The distillery remained open throughout the Great Depression and its only closure came during World War II . The Glenlivet distillery has grown in the post @-@ war period to become one of the biggest single malt distilleries in order to keep up with global demand ; The Glenlivet brand is the biggest selling single malt whisky in the United States and the second biggest selling single malt brand globally . 
 Today , the distillery is owned by the French alcoholic beverages company Pernod Ricard and they oversee the distillery 's production of 5 @,@ 900 @,@ 000 proof litres per annum . The majority of this – enough for 6 million bottles – is sold as The Glenlivet single malt , with the remainder being used in Pernod Ricard 's blended whisky brands . 
 = = Production = = 
 The distillery draws water from Josie 's Well and other springs a short distance from the distillery . The malt comes from Crisp Maltings , Portgordon . Glenlivet 's stills are lantern shaped with long , narrow necks , all of which helps to produce a light tasting spirit . 
 The distillery has 4 wash stills each with a capacity of 15 @,@ 000 litres and 4 spirit stills with a capacity of 10 @,@ 000 litres . 
 Spirit from the distillery is then matured in oak casks formerly used to mature bourbon , as is normal throughout the industry , with some products being finished in casks previously used to store sherry and port . 
 Glenlivet is categorised as a Speyside distillery . The Glenlivet range consists of 12 Years , 15 Years , 16 Years Nàdurra , 18 Years , 21 years , and 25 years , with a number of limited edition whiskies such as the Cellar Collection . Glenlivet also produces a range for the travel retail and duty @-@ free shop markets , which differs slightly from the normal range . 
 The main product range from the distillery is The Glenlivet range of single malt scotch whisky , but whisky from the distillery is also used in the production of Pernod Ricard 's other brands , including Chivas Regal and Royal Salute whisky brands . 
 Bottling of The Glenlivet took place at a Chivas Brothers bottling plant at Newbridge just outside Edinburgh , but that plant was sold at the end of 2009 with bottling to be transferred to other Chivas Brothers plants . 
 In 2008 , The Glenlivet announced expansion plans for the distillery to keep up with increased demand . This includes the installation of a new mash tun , new stills and new wash backs . 
 = = History = = 
 Illicit distilleries were commonplace throughout the Speyside area from medieval times but were largely made redundant with the passing of the Excise Act in 1823 . It was under this legislation that legal distilleries could be formed , subject to holding a license . Alexander Gordon , 4th Duke of Gordon , was allegedly instrumental in the passing of this legislation . Although there is no historical record of his involvement in the issue , his tenant , George Smith , who was operating an illicit distillery at the time , became the first person in Glenlivet to apply for and receive a license to legally produce spirit . This would prove to be an unpopular decision ; every other distiller was operating illegally at the time and hoping the new Excise Act would be repealed , something which would not happen if some distillers accepted the new law . Threats were made against George Smith , so George Gordon provided Smith with two pistols to be used to ensure both his own safety and that of the distillery . In 1824 , The Glenlivet distillery was established at Upper Drumin by George and his youngest son John Gordon Smith . 
 George Smith established a second distillery during 1849 , named the Cairngorm @-@ <unk> Distillery but by 1855 or 1856 , both distilleries were running at full capacity , and were unable to meet rising demand . The operation of two separate sites was also proving difficult and expensive , so plans were formed around the same time to build a new , larger distillery further down the hill at Minmore . Construction of this new distillery was underway when the old Upper Drumin distillery was destroyed by fire during 1858 . Construction of the new Minmore distillery was sped up and salvageable equipment from the Upper Drumin distillery was transferred to the new <unk> distillery . The <unk> distillery was closed at the same time and the best parts of the equipment were also transferred to the Minmore plant . Production commenced at the new plant during 1859 and it was around the same time the legal entity of George & J.G. Smith , Ltd. was formed . 
 George Smith died in 1871 and his son John Gordon Smith inherited the distillery . The quality of the product from their distillery had resulted in the other distilleries in the area renaming their products to " Glenlivet " and by the time of George 's death , several distillers were doing so . J.G. Smith decided to take legal action and tried to claim ownership on The Glenlivet name , this legal action was only partially successful - the verdict forced other distillers in the area to stop calling their whisky Glenlivet and gave J.G. Smith and the blender Andrew Usher sole permission to use the brand , but permitted other distilleries to <unk> their distillery name with the " Glenlivet " name , which resulted in new distillery names such as The Glen Moray @-@ Glenlivet Distillery , a distillery which is situated nearby . 
 The distillery remained open throughout the Great Depression , an event which affected many other distilleries ; it wasn 't until the Second World War that the distillery was mothballed for the first time , by Government decree . In the aftermath of World War Two , Britain was heavily indebted and needed to export large quantities of goods to earn foreign revenue ( mainly United States dollars ) . Distilling was an ideal industry with whisky much in demand overseas . Distilling restrictions were rapidly lifted and output from the distillery was at pre @-@ war levels by 1947 , despite ongoing barley , fuel , and manpower limitations . Bread rationing was retained until 1948 in order to ensure supplies of grain for the distilleries . 
 Glenlivet Distillery ( George & J.G. Smith , Ltd . ) merged with the Glen Grant Distillery ( J. & J. Grant Glen Grant , Ltd . ) in 1953 to form The Glenlivet and Glen Grant Distillers , Ltd .. The company would go on to merge with Hill Thomson & Co . , Ltd. and <unk> @-@ Glenlivet Distilleries , Ltd. in 1970 before changing their name to Glenlivet Distillers Ltd in 1972 . The company was then purchased by Canadian drinks and media company Seagram in 1977 . Seagram 's alcohol production interests were acquired by Pernod Ricard and Diageo during 2000 , with ownership of Glenlivet Distillers passing to Pernod Ricard . Glen Grant Distillery was sold to Campari Group in 2005 . 
 The Glenlivet is the best selling malt whisky in the United States , and the fourth best selling in the UK with a 7 % market share . The Glenlivet is the world 's second best selling single malt whisky , and current global sales total 6 million bottles per annum . 
 = = Extension = = 
 A new extension with an additional <unk> , eight <unk> and 6 stills was opened by the Prince of Wales on 5 June 2010 . The capacity of the distillery has been increased by 75 % 
 = = Products = = 
 Core Range 
 The Glenlivet 12 Year Old 
 The Glenlivet 15 Year Old French Oak Reserve 
 The Glenlivet Nàdurra 16 Year Old 
 The Glenlivet 18 Year Old 
 The Glenlivet Archive 21 Year Old 
 The Glenlivet XXV 25 Year Old 
 Limited Releases - Cellar Collection 
 The Glenlivet Cellar Collection 1972 Cask Strength 
 The Glenlivet Cellar Collection 1959 Cask Strength 
 The Glenlivet Cellar Collection 1964 Cask Strength 
 The Glenlivet Cellar Collection 1967 
 The Glenlivet Cellar Collection French Oak Finish 1983 
 The Glenlivet Cellar Collection American Oak Finish 30 Year Old 
 Travel Retail 
 These <unk> are only available through the travel retail market , such as airports and ferries . 
 The Glenlivet 12 Year Old First Fill 
 The Glenlivet 15 Year Old 
 Other products 
 Glenlivet <unk> 1940 / 2010 ( 45 @.@ 9 % , Gordon & MacPhail , Generations , sherry butt , C # 339 , 100 <unk> . ) 
 Glenlivet Alpha 
 = = Awards and reviews = = 
 Glenlivet 's offerings have frequently been reviewed at spirit ratings competitions , generally garnering relatively high praise . The Glenlivet <unk> is perhaps the most highly decorated of the offerings , winning five double golds from the San Francisco World Spirits Competition between 2005 and 2012 and yielding only slightly less impressive scores from the Beverage Testing Institute and Wine <unk> . The <unk> <unk> earned a double gold medal at the 2010 San Francisco World Spirits Competition and a score of 94 ( out of 100 ) in the same year from the Beverage Testing Institute . Other notable results include : 
 The Glenlivet <unk> Single Malt : Four silver medals and a gold between 2005 and 2010 at the San Francisco World Spirits Competition . 
 The Glenlivet <unk> French Oak Reserve Single Malt : gold medal at the 2009 San Francisco World Spirits Competition . 
 The Glenlivet <unk> Nàdurra Single Malt : silver medal at the 2009 San Francisco World Spirits Competition . 
 The Glenlivet <unk> Single Malt : two double golds , one gold , and one silver medal from the San Francisco World Spirits Competition between 2007 and 2010 and scores of 94 and 93 from the Beverage Testing Institute between 2009 and 2010 . 
 The Glenlivet XXV ( <unk> ) Single Malt : silver medal at the 2009 San Francisco World Spirits Competition and a score of 95 from the Beverage Testing Institute in 2010 . 
 = Jesus College Boat Club ( Oxford ) = 
 Jesus College Boat Club ( commonly abbreviated to JCBC ) is a rowing club for members of Jesus College , Oxford , one of the constituent colleges of the University of Oxford . The club was formed in 1835 , but rowing at the college predates the club 's foundation : a boat from the college was involved in the earliest recorded races between college crews at Oxford in 1815 , when it competed against Brasenose College . In the early years of rowing at Oxford , Jesus was one of the few colleges that participated in races . Neither the men 's nor the women 's 1st VIIIs have earned the title of " Head of the River " , which is gained by winning Eights Week — the main inter @-@ college rowing competition at Oxford . 
 A number of college members have rowed for the university against Cambridge University in the Boat Race and the Women 's Boat Race . Barney Williams , a Canadian rower who studied at the college , won a silver medal in rowing at the 2004 Summer Olympics , and participated in the Boat Race in 2005 and 2006 . Other students who rowed while at the college have achieved success in other fields , including John Sankey , who became Lord Chancellor , Alwyn Williams , who became Bishop of Durham , and Maurice Jones , who became Principal of St David 's College , Lampeter . Another college rower , James Page , was appointed Secretary of the Amateur Rowing Association and coached both the Oxford and Cambridge University boat clubs . 
 The college boathouse , which is shared with the boat club of Keble College , is in Christ Church Meadow , on the Isis ( as the River Thames is called in Oxford ) . It dates from 1964 and replaced a moored barge used by spectators and crew @-@ members . The last college barge had been purchased from one of the Livery Companies of the City of London in 1911 . It is now a floating restaurant further down the Thames at Richmond , and for some years was painted in the college colours of green and white . 
 = = History = = 
 The early records of the club have been lost , but there are references to a Jesus College boat in material that survives from the early 19th century . There are references to " pleasure boating " at Oxford in letters and poems written in the late 18th century , but races between crews from different colleges did not start until the early 19th century . Rowing in eights ( boats with eight oarsmen , each pulling one oar , and steered by a coxswain ) began at Eton , where there is a record of the school owning three eights by 1811 , and then progressed to Oxford . The first record of an inter @-@ college race , between eights from Jesus College and Brasenose College , dates from 1815 . These may have been the only two colleges who had boats racing at that time , and the Brasenose boat was usually victorious . There were few rowers , and races between fours ( boats with four oarsmen and a coxswain ) tended to attract more interest than races between eights . Students would row to the inn at Sandford @-@ on @-@ Thames , a few miles south of Oxford , and race each other on the way back . The races would start at Iffley Lock and finish at King 's Barge , off Christ Church Meadow . Flags hoisted on the barge would indicate the finishing order of the crews . Crews would set off one behind the other , the trailing boat ( s ) trying to catch , or " bump " , the boat ahead . The bumped boat and the bumping boat would then drop out and the bumping boat would start the next day 's race ahead of the bumped boat . The aim was to become the lead boat , known as Head of the River . For identification , crews wore college colours and emblazoned the rudder of the boat with the college coat of arms . Crews from Jesus College painted leeks ( an emblem of Wales ) on their oars for further distinction . In early races , some rowers wore high hats while others , including the Jesus crews , wore Tam o <unk> in college colours ( green with a white band for Jesus ) ; crews from Jesus College wore these until at least 1847 . 
 In 1822 , crews from Jesus and Brasenose raced each other to become Head of the River . One Brasenose rower apparently " caught a crab " , slowing the boat . The Brasenose boat was bumped by the Jesus boat , but rowed on regardless and claimed that it was still Head of the River . Jesus and Brasenose men competed over which college 's flag should be hoisted to denote the winning boat . One of the Brasenose crew ended the dispute by saying " <unk> homines tot sententiae , different men have different opinions , some like leeks and some like onions " , referring to the emblem on the Jesus oars , and it was agreed to row the race again . The Brasenose crew won the rematch . The incident has been said to be shown in an 1822 picture , the earliest depiction of an eights race at Oxford , painted by I. T. Serres ( Marine Painter to George IV ) . However , the print was published on 1 March 1822 and it would have taken several months to prepare and engrave . It also shows a summer scene . Both of these points suggest that the print depicts either an imaginary scene or an unrecorded event from 1821 . 
 Races gradually became more formalised , and regulations were introduced prohibiting colleges from using professional rowers or members of other colleges . A race for the colleges ' second boats ( Torpids ) was introduced in 1826 , and eventually boats with less than eight oars were excluded from the races . During the late 1820s and early 1830s , Jesus did not take part in races , but the college was mentioned as having a second boat by 1836 . The formal foundation of the club dates from 1835 , and official records of inter @-@ college races begin in 1837 . The Jesus College 1st VIII started the competition that year in second position , behind the Christ Church 1st VIII , but after being bumped on successive nights by Exeter , Balliol and Queen 's colleges , Jesus took no further part in that year 's competition . In 1838 , the Jesus College boat rowed in last place on one evening , but did not participate in the races again until 1844 . The club 's fortunes varied in the years thereafter . In 1859 , the eight achieved an unusual " <unk> " ( catching the crew that had started three places ahead of them , after the boat immediately ahead of it had bumped the boat it was chasing ) and so went up three positions in one race . However , the college boat did not compete in 1860 and it finished in last place in 1864 . From 1864 onwards , said Ernest Hardy ( in his 1899 history of the college ) , " the boating record of the College has not been good " – the college did not take part in the races in many years , and it seldom improved its position by more than one or two places when it did participate . The college resumed regular participation in the races in 1882 ; although it was in last place in 1889 , the college improved its position , and went up by nine places between 1894 and 1896 . Hardy also commented that the 1896 Jesus College boat had a reputation of being one of the faster boats in the university . The crew entered for the Ladies ' Challenge Plate at the Henley Regatta , but lost to Eton , the eventual winners . 
 By 1930 , the college 1st VIII had reached its highest position on the river for thirty years . In 1947 , the college chaplain Leslie Cross presented a new set of oars to the club . He retired that year , and the college magazine , noting that Cross had been a particularly generous supporter of the club , stated that the oars had already been used to good purpose . The 1st VIII progressed further in the 1950s , making five bumps in 1951 and four in 1952 to reach the first division , with a high point of seventh in 1957 . It later returned to the second division , before re @-@ entering the first division in 1970 . Its highest position in recent years was seventh in the first division in 2000 ; it has been back in the second division since 2004 , and finished eighth in the second division in 2011 . 
 Women were first admitted to Jesus College in 1974 ; the college was one of the first five men 's colleges to do so . The women 's 1st VIII was Head of the River in Torpids between 1980 and 1983 . In 1993 , the women 's 1st VIII won their " blades " in the first divisions of both Torpids and Eights Week , an achievement that led to the crew being described in the Jesus College Record as vying " not just for the College team of the decade , but perhaps for the team of the last three decades " , in any sport . The same crew also won the Novices ' Trophy at the Wallingford Regatta in the same year . The women 's 1st VIII has not maintained its position since then . After some years in the third division , it ended the 2011 Eights Week in twelfth place in the second division , winning blades in the process . 
 = = Club structure and finance = = 
 All members of the college who have coxed or rowed in a JCBC boat are Ordinary Members of the Boat Club , a status that they retain until one month after leaving the college . The club is run by a committee , consisting of a President , the Men 's and Women 's Captains of Boats , Men 's and Women 's Vice @-@ Captains of Boats , Captain of <unk> , Treasurer , Secretary , Boathouse Safety Officer , Kit Officer , and two Social Secretaries . Members of the committee hold office for one year , starting on Sunday of the sixth week of Trinity Term – the day after the last day of Eights Week . The Senior Member of the club is Peter Mirfield , a Fellow and Tutor in Law at the college . 
 The college uses a proportion of student fees to fund social and sporting activity . The allocation for sport , including rowing , is overseen by the Committee of Amalgamated Clubs , which has representatives from the Junior and Middle Common Rooms ( for undergraduates and postgraduates ) as well as from the college 's sport clubs . 
 Old Members of the college who rowed when they were students can join the Cadwallader Club . The club , which was revitalised in 1974 and organises an annual dinner for members , also receives contributions for the Cadwallader Trust ; this has been a registered charity since December 1982 and supports rowing at the college both with capital expenditure and training costs . In the year ending 5 April 2008 , the trust 's expenditure was £ 19 @,@ 001 . Members of the Cadwallader Club have helped to provide new boats and blades for the men 's and the women 's 1st VIIIs , and on the Saturday of Eights Week 2008 , the trust presented the boat club with a new coxed four , named Cadwallader . Cadwallader Club members are also non @-@ voting members of the boat club . 
 = = Rowers = = 
 D. W. Griffith , the stroke of the Jesus College boat , was present at the inaugural meeting of the Oxford University Boat Club on 23 April 1839 . However , Jesus College oarsmen played an infrequent part in university rowing in the 19th century . No Jesus College student served on the OUBC committee between 1839 and 1899 , the last year for which Sherwood gives records . Two students from the college ( W. S. Thompson and E. W. Davies ( cox ) ) were part of the losing Oxford crew in the second Oxford – Cambridge boat race in 1836 . Between 1858 and 1899 , seven others trialled , unsuccessfully , for places in the Oxford University crew . Since then , college representation in the Boat Race has been more frequent : M. L. Thomas and D. R. Glynne Jones ( 1952 ) and M.L. Thomas ( President , 1953 ) ; Boris <unk> ( 1992 , 1993 and 1995 ) ; the Canadian 2004 Olympic rowing silver medallist Barney Williams ( 2005 and 2006 ) ; and Brodie Buckland ( 2007 ) . Justin Hutchinson rowed for Oxford 's reserve crew , known as Isis , in the 2002 and 2003 Boat Races , as did Tim Farquharson , an undergraduate studying Engineering Science , in 2009 . Various women have won their " Blue " for competing in the Women 's Boat Race against Cambridge : Anna Bean and Ann <unk> ( 1989 ) ; Louise Sanford ( 1997 ) ; and Claire Weaver ( 1998 ) . 
 Some prominent individuals rowed while they were students at the college . The historian Albert Pollard was Captain of Boats in 1890 , having rowed in the boat that was last on the river in 1889 . Alwyn Williams ( later Bishop of Durham ) , who was a student from 1906 to 1911 , was captain of the Boat Club , as was James Page ( " Freddie " ) , who went on to become secretary of the Amateur Rowing Association from 1952 to 1972 and a rowing coach for both Oxford and Cambridge Boat Clubs . Maurice Jones ( later Principal of St David 's College , Lampeter ) was a cox , as were Gordon Roe ( later Bishop of Huntingdon ) and the chemist Frank Greenaway . John Sankey ( later Lord Chancellor ) rowed in a Torpid boat that went down four places , whilst the boat in which the baritone David Ffrangcon Davies rowed went up five places in Torpids and four in Eights Week . Angus Buchanan , who won the Victoria Cross in 1916 during the First World War , rowed in a college four in 1919 , despite having been blinded in 1917 . Anton <unk> ( later Commander of the Ceylon Army ) rowed at bow in a college four . 
 = = College barges = = 
 Colleges began to keep barges moored on the side of the river on Christ Church Meadow from 1839 ; these would be used for crews to change , for spectators to watch the races and for social functions . Jesus shared a barge with New , St John 's and Pembroke after 1857 . In 1911 , Jesus purchased their own barge from Salters , at a cost of £ <unk> ( approximately £ 86 @,@ 300 as of 2016 ) . It had previously been owned by one of the Livery Companies of the City of London and had been used in the days when the Lord Mayor 's Show took place on the River Thames in London rather than through the streets . After sinking in 1955 , it was salvaged and restored . In 1964 , the college replaced the barge with a boathouse , which is shared with the boat club of Keble College ) . The barge was moved to Maidenhead where it was later restored . It returned to Oxford in 1987 , but was badly damaged by fire in January 1988 . After further restoration , it was moved to Richmond @-@ upon @-@ Thames , where it is moored alongside Richmond Bridge and used as a restaurant . The barge was decorated for some years in the college colours of green and white , with a Welsh red dragon on the prow ; by 2009 , however , it had been repainted with blue instead of green . 
 = Stark Raving Dad = 
 " Stark Raving Dad " is the first episode of the third season of American animated television series The Simpsons . It first aired on the Fox network in the United States on September 19 , 1991 . In the episode , main character Homer Simpson is mistaken for a " free @-@ thinking anarchist " and sent to a mental institution , where he shares a room with a large white man named Leon Kompowsky who pretends to be American pop star Michael Jackson . Meanwhile , because he normally forgets her birthday , Bart promises his sister Lisa that he will get her the best present ever . 
 Al Jean and Mike Reiss wrote the episode while Rich Moore served as director . Michael Jackson guest @-@ starred in the episode as the speaking voice of Leon Kompowsky . For contractual reasons , he was credited as John Jay Smith in the closing credits , and his role in the episode was not officially confirmed until later . Jackson was a fan of the show and called creator Matt Groening one night offering to do a guest spot . Jackson pitched several story ideas for the episode and wrote the song " Happy Birthday Lisa " that is featured in the plot . He also stipulated that he would provide Kompowsky 's speaking voice , but his singing voice would be performed by a sound @-@ alike ( Kipp Lennon ) because he wanted to play a joke on his brothers . The episode contains references to many aspects of Jackson 's career , with Kompowsky singing portions of the songs " Billie Jean " and " Ben " . 
 " Stark Raving Dad " received generally positive reviews from critics , particularly for the writing and Jackson 's performance . A sequel to the episode was later written , in which Kompowsky was to be voiced by Prince rather than Jackson , but it was never produced . During the January 30 , 1992 , rerun of the episode , a short alternate opening aired before the credits ; the opening was in response to a speech made by President George Bush three days earlier , in which he said Americans needed to be " a lot more like the Waltons and a lot less like the Simpsons " . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Lisa wakes up Bart to remind him that her birthday is nearing , and that he forgets it every year . Bart promises to get her a present this year . Meanwhile , Homer discovers that all of his white shirts have turned pink because Bart put his red hat in with the laundry . Homer has no choice but to wear a pink shirt to work and as a result , his co @-@ workers poke fun at him . Mr. Burns suspects him of being a " free @-@ thinking anarchist " . Homer is sent home with a 20 @-@ question psychiatric quiz that he has to fill in so that Dr. Marvin Monroe can assess his sanity . Homer is too lazy to finish the quiz on his own and lets Bart fill it in . When Dr. Monroe sees the results , he determines that Homer is insane . Homer is sent to a mental institution , and is put in a cell with a large white man who seems to believe he is Michael Jackson ( referred to as " the big white guy who thinks he 's the little black guy " ) , and who introduces himself as such . Apparently , somehow never having heard of Michael Jackson , Homer believes him and quickly befriends him . 
 Marge , upon hearing what has happened , comes to the institution and is able to convince Homer 's doctors that he is not insane . Homer bids farewell to Michael , who reveals that he is only in the mental institution voluntarily . Homer decides to let him stay in the family home . He calls and tells Bart that he is bringing Michael to stay for a few days . Against Homer and Michael 's wishes , Bart tells his friend Milhouse and soon all of Springfield turns up outside of the Simpson family 's home to see Michael . The level of excitement is deflated when Homer introduces Michael and they realize he is an impostor . The townspeople become angry at Bart and leave . At the same time , Lisa comes out of the house and is upset with Bart because he has yet again failed to acknowledge her birthday , because of his excitement over Michael Jackson 's arrival . 
 After overhearing Lisa write in a letter that she is disowning Bart as a brother , the faux Michael convinces Bart to let him help . Together they write and perform a song for Lisa 's birthday called " Happy Birthday Lisa " . Lisa is thrilled and hugs her brother , saying that he has given her the best present ever . Afterwards , Michael reveals that his real name is Leon Kompowsky , a bricklayer from Paterson , New Jersey . He explains that he had been very angry for most of his life , but found some peace in talking in Jackson 's voice because it made everyone around him happy . Leon bids farewell to the Simpsons and walks off down the road , singing Lisa 's birthday song to himself in his normal voice . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Stark Raving Dad " was written specifically for Michael Jackson , a fan of the show , who had called Groening one night and offered to do a guest spot . The offer was accepted and a script was written by Al Jean and Mike Reiss , based on an idea pitched by James L. Brooks . Creator Matt Groening and co @-@ executive producer Sam Simon also contributed significantly to the writing of the episode . In an early version of the script , Homer decided to take his alcoholic friend Barney Gumble in for rehab , but while there Homer began acting crazily so the doctors assumed he was the one to be committed . It was later changed to Homer being hospitalized for wearing a pink shirt , an idea pitched by Brooks . Michael Jackson pitched several story ideas for the episode , such as Bart telling everyone in town that Michael Jackson was coming to his house . He also requested that there be a scene in which he and Bart wrote a song together and asked that a joke about Prince be changed to one about Elvis Presley . 
 According to Jean , Jackson would not commit to the episode until after a read @-@ through of the script was done . The read was held at Jackson 's manager Sandy Gallin 's house , and Dan Castellaneta ( who provides the voice for Homer ) was 30 minutes late . Jean recalls that " no one said a word , we just sat there waiting " . Following the read , Jackson stipulated his conditions : he would record his speaking parts but not receive credit , and his singing voice would be performed by a sound @-@ alike . Leon Kompowsky 's singing parts were performed by Kipp Lennon , because Jackson wanted to play a joke on his brothers and fool them into thinking the impersonator was him . Lennon recorded his lines at the same time as Jackson , who found the impersonations humorous . Jackson showed up for the recording session alone and did not use the special trailer that was set up for him . According to Jean , Jackson did record versions of the singing parts , and while there have been rumors that those parts were the ones used in the final episode , The Simpsons music editor Chris Ledesma has stated the Lennon versions were used . Kompowsky 's normal speaking voice , which is heard at the end of the episode , was recorded by cast member Hank Azaria . The episode originally was supposed to end with Kompowsky singing a portion of " Man in the Mirror " in his Michael Jackson voice as he walked down the road , but it was changed to him singing the beginning of " Happy Birthday Lisa " . 
 " Stark Raving Dad " was the final episode in the season two production run , but aired as the premiere of season three , over a year after it was completed . Michael Jackson was credited with pseudonym John Jay Smith in the closing credits . At the time , the producers of the show were legally prevented from confirming that Jackson guest starred , although many media sources assumed it was really him . Similarly , in season two , actor Dustin Hoffman had guest starred in the episode " Lisa 's Substitute " under the name " Sam Etic " . After " Stark Raving Dad " , the producers decided that if a celebrity wished to guest star on the show , they had to be willing to be credited under their real name . 
 Jackson was a fan of Bart , and in addition to doing a guest spot on the show , he wanted to give Bart a number one single . He therefore co @-@ wrote the song " Do the Bartman " , which was released as a single around the same time that the episode was produced . Jackson could not take credit for his work on the song due to contractual reasons . Jackson also wrote the song " Happy Birthday Lisa " , which was later included in the album Songs in the Key of Springfield . A version of the song was reportedly scheduled to be included on a bonus disk in the October 2001 special edition of Jackson 's 1991 album Dangerous . However , the bonus disk was eventually dropped from the release . Jackson died on June 25 , 2009 , and the Fox network re @-@ aired the episode on July 5 as a tribute to him . The producers had intended to air the episode on June 28 , 2009 , three days after Jackson 's death , but could not resolve issues with syndication rights in time . The music video for " Do the Bartman " was aired on that date instead . The producers screened the episode first , and the only change made , which was unrelated to Jackson , was the blurring of a phone number . 
 This was the first episode to broadcast in Dolby Surround . 
 = = = Alternate opening = = = 
 The January 30 , 1992 rerun of the episode featured a brief alternate opening , which was written in response to a comment made by the President of the United States , George Bush , three days earlier . The show had previously had a " feud " with the President 's wife Barbara Bush when , in the October 1 , 1990 edition of People , she called The Simpsons " the dumbest thing [ she ] had ever seen " . The writers decided to respond by privately sending a polite letter to Bush in which they posed as Marge Simpson . Bush immediately sent a reply in which she apologized . Later , on January 27 , 1992 , George Bush made a speech during his re @-@ election campaign which included the statement " we are going to keep on trying to strengthen the American family , to make American families a lot more like the Waltons and a lot less like the Simpsons . " 
 The writers decided that they wanted to respond quickly like Barbara Bush had to them . However , each episode of The Simpsons takes more than six months to produce , so it is difficult for the show to comment on current events . The writers therefore decided to add a brief response to the next broadcast of The Simpsons , which was a rerun of " Stark Raving Dad " on January 30 . Nancy Cartwright , the voice of Bart , was quickly called in so she could record a line . 
 The broadcast included a new tongue @-@ in @-@ cheek opening . The scene begins in the Simpsons ' living room where the family is watching Bush 's speech . When Bush says " to make American families a lot more like the Waltons and a lot less like the Simpsons " , Bart replies , " Hey , we 're just like the Waltons . We 're praying for an end to the Depression , too . " The opening is featured on the season four DVD boxset . 
 = = Unproduced sequel = = 
 A year after the episode aired , the writers decided to make a sequel where Leon Kompowsky returns , this time acting like the musician Prince . The script was written by freelance writers and polished by Conan O 'Brien . According to Reiss , the plot of the episode saw Kompowsky / Prince manage to get everyone in the town to " loosen up , become more flamboyant and become more sexually open " . 
 The script was sent to Prince who agreed to voice the character and sent back a page of notes about what he would be wearing in various scenes . The writers were confused when the notes did not correspond to the script and they discovered that Prince was referring to a script that had been written by someone else . Prince disliked the Simpsons writers ' script and demanded the other one be made into an episode , but the writers refused . The episode eventually fell through and never made it past written form . It became one of the few completed scripts never to be produced . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 Like all episodes of The Simpsons , " Stark Raving Dad " features a variety of references to popular culture . As Bart fills out the 20 @-@ question psychiatry quiz , Homer watches America 's Funniest Home Videos where the three nominated clips are all violent . Many of the scenes in the mental institution are references to the film One Flew Over the Cuckoo 's Nest . Several of the characters at the institution are based on those in the film , such as Chief . Floyd from the film Rain Man also appears at the mental home . When Marge calls the institution , a muzak version of " Crazy " , sung by Patsy Cline , can be heard over the phone . In the shot of the crowd that awaits Michael Jackson 's arrival outside of the Simpson family 's home , a man is holding a " John 3 : 16 " sign in reference to <unk> Stewart , who was famous for holding a similar sign at sporting events . 
 Many aspects of Jackson 's career are referenced in the episode . Kompowsky mentions several things which made Jackson famous , including Motown 25 : Yesterday , Today , Forever , " Beat It " , and " Thriller " . He also sings portions of the songs " Billie Jean " and " Ben " and performs the moonwalk . When Homer starts mumbling in his sleep , Kompowsky tells his stuffed animal : " Bubbles , it 's going to be a long night . " Bubbles is the name of Jackson 's chimpanzee . Kompowsky also says he was upset when " his " 1979 album Off the Wall only received one Grammy Award nomination ; the writers had read that the real Jackson was genuinely upset . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In its original airing on the Fox network , " Stark Raving Dad " acquired a 13 @.@ 9 Nielsen rating and 23 percent share of the audience . It was viewed in approximately 12 @.@ 8 million homes , finishing the week ranked 33rd . The episode finished second in its time slot behind the season premiere of The Cosby Show , which ranked eighth for the week with a 19 @.@ 7 rating and 31 percent share . The Simpsons was the second highest rated show on Fox the week it aired , behind Married ... with Children . 
 The episode has been generally well received , being praised by many critics for its writing . In a 2009 review for Slate , Josh Levin wrote that " The greatness of ' Stark Raving Dad ' has a lot more to do with The Simpsons ' writing staff than with Jackson 's voice @-@ over talents . The show 's <unk> came up with a plot device far more ingenious than simply dropping the singer into Springfield . " Monica Collins of the Boston Herald also enjoyed the episode . On the day it first aired , she wrote that " This episode is vintage Simpsons , crammed with divinely vulgar visual oddities . And Michael Jackson , of course , is just so weird anyway that he fits right in . " Mark <unk> of The Times @-@ Picayune commented that " throwaway lines on The Simpsons are funnier than the big punchlines on most so @-@ called comedy series ; [ this episode ] has layers of humor , satirical touches that enrich the story lines , " singling out jokes like the America 's Funniest Home Video parody . " The laughs are literally non @-@ stop , and Jackson 's unmistakable vocal presence [ ... ] adds a thousand watts of star power . " In 2011 , Television Blend 's Eric Eisenberg named " Stark Raving Dad " the best episode of the entire series . He praised it for being heartful and stated that what " prevents the episode from seeming artificial or manipulative is that the writing in the episode earns the earnest moments " , and further elaborates that while " strong emotions might be the hallmark of ' Stark Raving Dad , ' it would be a sincere mistake to ignore how funny it is . " He concluded that the episode " is perfectly constructed , is filled with both deep belly laughs and tears , and is simply the greatest episode of The Simpsons " 
 In a DVD audio commentary , writer Mike Reiss said he felt that Michael Jackson is " not a terrific actor [ ... ] but he did fine . He was really nice , he was a great sport . " In 2006 , Jackson was named the fifth @-@ best Simpsons guest star by IGN . Tom <unk> of Best Week Ever called Jackson 's guest appearance the " cleverest [ ... ] ever on The Simpsons " . Writing for IGN , Robert Canning said in a 2009 review that " Stark Raving Dad " is a " solid , funny and touching episode " and described Jackson 's performance as " heartfelt yet self @-@ parodying " . In a 2011 article , Andrew Martin of Prefix Mag named Michael Jackson his second favorite musical guest on The Simpsons out of a list of ten . 
 In 2003 , DVD Movie Guide 's Colin Jacobson commented that the episode was a good start to season three , but it " gets sappy on more than a few occasions , and it lacks the acerbic bite of the series ' best shows . Nonetheless , it tosses out some good laughs , and the guest appearance by Jackson — under a pseudonym — works well ; Michael shows an ability to mock himself that still surprises me . " In a 2004 review for Digitally Obsessed , Nate Meyers wrote that " there are many funny gags in this episode , especially in the first act when Homer gets a tour of the [ mental ] hospital . Some clever references are made to One Flew Over the Cuckoo 's Nest , but the second half of the episode is not especially funny . The jokes seem forced and there is too much of an effort to <unk> the relationship between Bart and Lisa , causing the show to lose its narrative drive . " In 2007 , Ben Rayner of the Toronto Star listed " Stark Raving Dad " as one of the three worst episodes of The Simpsons . 
 In a 2009 article for TV Squad , Mike Moody said the episode 's " sweetest moment " is at the end when Kompowsky and Bart perform the birthday song for Lisa . Likewise , writer Al Jean listed that scene as one of his five favorite moments from The Simpsons in 2003 . The reaction to the song " Happy Birthday Lisa " was mixed . Ben Rayner called it a " crap tune " , and Chris <unk> of Maclean 's magazine wrote that " Stark Raving Dad " is " an unbearably sappy episode , and that birthday song for Lisa is just ... bad . " Dave Walker of The Times @-@ Picayune , however , listed the episode as one of Jackson 's " many memorable TV moments " and called the song " unforgettable " . 
 = Pancreatic cancer = 
 Pancreatic cancer arises when cells in the pancreas , a glandular organ behind the stomach , begin to multiply out of control and form a mass . These cancerous cells have the ability to invade other parts of the body . There are a number of types of pancreatic cancer . The most common , pancreatic adenocarcinoma , accounts for about 85 % of cases , and the term " pancreatic cancer " is sometimes used to refer only to that type . These adenocarcinomas start within the part of the pancreas which makes digestive enzymes . Several other types of cancer , which collectively represent the majority of the non @-@ adenocarcinomas , can also arise from these cells . 1 @-@ 2 % of cases of pancreatic cancer are neuroendocrine tumors , which arise from the hormone @-@ producing cells of the pancreas . These are generally less aggressive than pancreatic adenocarcinoma . 
 Signs and symptoms of the most common form of pancreatic cancer may include yellow skin , abdominal or back pain , unexplained weight loss , light @-@ colored stools , dark urine and loss of appetite . There are usually no symptoms in the disease 's early stages , and symptoms that are specific enough to suggest pancreatic cancer typically do not develop until the disease has reached an advanced stage . By the time of diagnosis , pancreatic cancer has often spread to other parts of the body . 
 Pancreatic cancer rarely occurs before the age of 40 , and more than half of cases of pancreatic adenocarcinoma occur in those over 70 . Risk factors for pancreatic cancer include tobacco smoking , obesity , diabetes , and certain rare genetic conditions . About 25 % of cases are linked to smoking , and 5 – 10 % are linked to inherited genes . Pancreatic cancer is usually diagnosed by a combination of medical imaging techniques such as ultrasound or computed tomography , blood tests , and examination of tissue samples ( biopsy ) . The disease is divided into stages , from early ( stage I ) to late ( stage IV ) . Screening the general population has not been found to be effective . 
 The risk of developing pancreatic cancer is lower among non @-@ smokers , and people who maintain a healthy weight and limit their consumption of red or processed meat . A smoker 's chance of developing the disease decreases if they stop smoking , and almost returns to that of the rest of the population after 20 years . Pancreatic cancer can be treated with surgery , radiotherapy , chemotherapy , palliative care , or a combination of these . Treatment options are partly based on the cancer stage . Surgery is the only treatment that can cure pancreatic adenocarcinoma , and may also be done to improve quality of life without the potential for cure . Pain management and medications to improve digestion are sometimes needed . Early palliative care is recommended even for those receiving treatment that aims for a cure . 
 In 2012 , pancreatic cancers of all types were the seventh most common cause of cancer deaths , resulting in 330 @,@ 000 deaths globally . Pancreatic cancer is the fifth most common cause of death from cancer in the United Kingdom , and the fourth most common in the United States . The disease occurs most often in the developed world , where about 70 % of the new cases in 2012 originated . Pancreatic adenocarcinoma typically has a very poor prognosis : after diagnosis , 25 % of people survive one year and 5 % live for five years . For cancers diagnosed early , the five @-@ year survival rate rises to about 20 % . Neuroendocrine cancers have better outcomes ; at five years from diagnosis , 65 % of those diagnosed are living , though survival varies considerably depending on the type of tumor . 
 = = Types = = 
 The many types of pancreatic cancer can be divided into two general groups . The vast majority of cases ( about 99 % ) occur in the part of the pancreas which produces digestive enzymes , known as the exocrine component . There are several sub @-@ types of exocrine pancreatic cancers , but their diagnosis and treatment have much in common . The small minority of cancers that arise in the hormone @-@ producing ( endocrine ) tissue of the pancreas have different clinical characteristics . Both groups occur mainly ( but not exclusively ) in people over 40 , and are slightly more common in men , but some rare sub @-@ types mainly occur in women or children . 
 = = = Exocrine cancers = = = 
 The exocrine group is dominated by pancreatic adenocarcinoma ( variations of this name may add " invasive " and " ductal " ) , which is by far the most common type , representing about 85 % of all pancreatic cancers . Nearly all these start in the ducts of the pancreas , and pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma is often abbreviated as <unk> . This is despite the fact that the tissue from which it arises – the pancreatic ductal epithelium – represents less than 10 % of the pancreas by cell volume . This cancer originates in the ducts that carry secretions ( such as enzymes and bicarbonate ) away from the pancreas . About 60 – 70 % of adenocarcinomas occur in the ' head ' of the pancreas . 
 The next most common type , acinar cell carcinoma of the pancreas , arises in the clusters of cells that produce these enzymes , and represents 5 % of exocrine pancreas cancers . Like the ' functioning ' endocrine cancers described below , acinar cell carcinomas may cause over @-@ production of certain molecules , in this case digestive enzymes , which may cause symptoms such as skin rashes and joint pain . 
 <unk> account for 1 % of pancreatic cancers , and they have a better prognosis than the other exocrine types . 
 <unk> is a rare form , mostly occurring in childhood , and with a relatively good prognosis . Other exocrine cancers include adenosquamous carcinomas , signet ring cell carcinomas , <unk> carcinomas , colloid carcinomas , undifferentiated carcinomas , and undifferentiated carcinomas with <unk> @-@ like giant cells . Solid <unk> tumor is a rare low @-@ grade neoplasm that mainly affects younger women , and generally has a very good prognosis . 
 Pancreatic mucinous cystic neoplasms are a broad group of pancreas tumors that have varying malignant potential . They are being detected at a greatly increased rate as CT scans become more powerful and common , and discussion continues as how best to assess and treat them , given that many are benign . 
 = = = Neuroendocrine = = = 
 The small minority of tumors that arise elsewhere in the pancreas are mainly pancreatic neuroendocrine tumors ( PanNETs ) . Neuroendocrine tumors ( <unk> ) are a diverse group of benign or malignant tumors that arise from the body 's neuroendocrine cells , which are responsible for integrating the nervous and endocrine systems . <unk> can start in most organs of the body , including the pancreas , where the various malignant types are all considered to be rare . PanNETs are grouped into ' functioning ' and ' non @-@ functioning ' types , depending on the degree to which they produce hormones . The functioning types secrete hormones such as insulin , gastrin , and glucagon into the bloodstream , often in large quantities , giving rise to serious symptoms such as low blood sugar , but also favoring relatively early detection . The most common functioning PanNETs are <unk> and <unk> , named after the hormones they secrete . The non @-@ functioning types do not secrete hormones in a sufficient quantity to give rise to overt clinical symptoms . For this reason , non @-@ functioning PanNETs are often diagnosed only after the cancer has spread to other parts of the body . 
 As with other neuroendocrine tumors , the history of the terminology and classification of PanNETs is complex . PanNETs are sometimes called " islet cell cancers " , even though it is now known that they do not actually arise from islet cells as previously thought . 
 = = Signs and symptoms = = 
 Since pancreatic cancer usually does not cause recognizable symptoms in its early stages , the disease is typically not diagnosed until it has spread beyond the pancreas itself . This is one of the main reasons for the generally poor survival rates . Exceptions to this are the functioning PanNETs , where over @-@ production of various active hormones can give rise to symptoms ( which depend on the type of hormone ) . 
 Bearing in mind that the disease is rarely diagnosed before the age of 40 , common symptoms of pancreatic adenocarcinoma occurring before diagnosis include : 
 Pain in the upper abdomen or back , often spreading from around the stomach to the back . The location of the pain can indicate the part of the pancreas where a tumor is located . The pain may be worse at night and may increase over time to become severe and unremitting . It may be slightly relieved by bending forward . In the UK , about half of new cases of pancreatic cancer are diagnosed following a visit to a hospital emergency department for pain or jaundice . In up to two @-@ thirds of people abdominal pain is the main symptom , for 46 % of the total accompanied by jaundice , with 13 % having jaundice without pain . 
 Jaundice , a yellow tint to the whites of the eyes or skin , with or without pain , and possibly in combination with darkened urine . This results when a cancer in the head of the pancreas obstructs the common bile duct as it runs through the pancreas . 
 Unexplained weight loss , either from loss of appetite , or loss of exocrine function resulting in poor digestion . 
 The tumor may compress neighboring organs , disrupting digestive processes and making it difficult for the stomach to empty , which may cause nausea and a feeling of fullness . The undigested fat leads to foul @-@ smelling , fatty feces that are difficult to flush away . <unk> is common . 
 At least 50 % of people with pancreatic adenocarcinoma have diabetes at the time of diagnosis . While long @-@ standing diabetes is a known risk factor for pancreatic cancer ( see Risk factors ) , the cancer can itself cause diabetes , in which case recent onset of diabetes could be considered an early sign of the disease . People over 50 who develop diabetes have eight times the usual risk of developing pancreatic adenocarcinoma within three years , after which the relative risk declines . 
 = = = Other findings = = = 
 Trousseau 's syndrome , in which blood clots form spontaneously in the portal blood vessels , the deep veins of the extremities , or the superficial veins anywhere on the body , may be associated with pancreatic cancer , and is found in about 10 % of cases . 
 Clinical depression has been reported in association with pancreatic cancer in some 10 – 20 % of cases , and can be a hindrance to optimal management . The depression sometimes appears before the diagnosis of cancer , suggesting that it may be brought on by the biology of the disease . 
 Other common manifestations of the disease include : weakness and tiring easily ; dry mouth ; sleep problems ; and a palpable abdominal mass . " 
 = = = Symptoms of spread ( metastasis ) = = = 
 The spread of pancreatic cancer to other organs ( metastasis ) may also cause symptoms . Typically , pancreatic adenocarcinoma first spreads to nearby lymph nodes , and later to the liver or to the peritoneal cavity , large intestine or lungs . It is uncommon for it to spread to the bones or brain . 
 Cancers in the pancreas may also be secondary cancers that have spread from other parts of the body . This is uncommon , found in only about 2 % of cases of pancreatic cancer . Kidney cancer is by far the most common cancer to spread to the pancreas , followed by colorectal cancer , and then cancers of the skin , breast , and lung . Surgery may be performed on the pancreas in such cases , whether in hope of a cure or to alleviate symptoms . 
 = = Risk factors = = 
 Risk factors for pancreatic adenocarcinoma include : 
 Age , gender , and ethnicity ; the risk of developing pancreatic cancer increases with age . Most cases occur after age 65 , while cases before age 40 are uncommon . The disease is slightly more common in men than women , and in the United States is over 1 @.@ 5 times more common in African Americans , though incidence in Africa is low . 
 Cigarette smoking is the best @-@ established avoidable risk factor for pancreatic cancer , approximately doubling risk among long @-@ term smokers , the risk increasing with the number of cigarettes smoked and the years of smoking . The risk declines slowly after smoking cessation , taking some 20 years to return to almost that of non @-@ smokers . 
 Obesity ; a BMI greater than 35 increases relative risk by about half . 
 Family history ; 5 – 10 % of pancreatic cancer cases have an inherited component , where people have a family history of pancreatic cancer . The risk escalates greatly if more than one first @-@ degree relative had the disease , and more modestly if they developed it before the age of 50 . Most of the genes involved have not been identified . Hereditary pancreatitis gives a greatly increased lifetime risk of pancreatic cancer of 30 – 40 % to the age of 70 . Screening for early pancreatic cancer may be offered to individuals with hereditary pancreatitis on a research basis . Some people may choose to have their pancreas surgically removed to prevent cancer developing in the future . 
 Pancreatic cancer has been associated with the following other rare hereditary syndromes : <unk> – <unk> syndrome due to mutations in the <unk> tumor suppressor gene ( very rare , but a very strong risk factor ) ; dysplastic nevus syndrome ( or familial atypical multiple mole and melanoma syndrome , <unk> @-@ PC ) due to mutations in the CDKN2A tumor suppressor gene ; autosomal recessive ataxia @-@ telangiectasia and autosomal dominantly inherited mutations in the BRCA2 gene and <unk> gene ; hereditary non @-@ polyposis colon cancer ( Lynch syndrome ) ; and familial <unk> polyposis . PanNETs have been associated with multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1 ( MEN1 ) and von Hippel Lindau syndromes . 
 Chronic pancreatitis appears to almost triple risk , and as with diabetes , new @-@ onset pancreatitis may be a symptom of a tumor . The risk of pancreatic cancer in individuals with familial pancreatitis is particularly high . 
 Diabetes mellitus is a risk factor for pancreatic cancer and ( as noted in the Signs and symptoms section ) new @-@ onset diabetes may also be an early sign of the disease . People who have been diagnosed with Type 2 diabetes for longer than ten years may have a 50 % increased risk , as compared with non @-@ diabetics . 
 Specific types of food ( as distinct from obesity ) have not been clearly shown to increase the risk of pancreatic cancer . Dietary factors for which there is some evidence of slightly increased risk include processed meat , red meat , and meat cooked at very high temperatures ( e.g. by frying , broiling or barbecuing ) . 
 = = = Alcohol = = = 
 Drinking alcohol excessively is a major cause of chronic pancreatitis , which in turn predisposes to pancreatic cancer . However , considerable research has failed to firmly establish alcohol consumption as a direct risk factor for pancreatic cancer . Overall , the association is consistently weak and the majority of studies have found no association , with smoking a strong confounding factor . The evidence is stronger for a link with heavy drinking , of at least six drinks per day . 
 = = Diagnosis = = 
 The symptoms of pancreatic adenocarcinoma do not usually appear in the disease 's early stages , and are individually not distinctive to the disease . The symptoms at diagnosis vary according to the location of the cancer in the pancreas , which anatomists divide ( from left to right on most diagrams ) into the thick head , the neck , and the tapering body , ending in the tail . 
 Regardless of a tumour 's location , the most common symptom is unexplained weight loss , which may be considerable . A large minority ( between 35 % and 47 % ) of people diagnosed with the disease will have had nausea , vomiting or a feeling of weakness . Tumors in the head of the pancreas typically also cause jaundice , pain , loss of appetite , dark urine , and light @-@ colored stools . Tumors in the body and tail typically also cause pain . 
 People sometimes have recent onset of atypical type 2 diabetes that is difficult to control , a history of recent but unexplained blood vessel inflammation caused by blood clots ( thrombophlebitis ) known as Trousseau sign , or a previous attack of pancreatitis . A doctor may suspect pancreatic cancer when the onset of diabetes in someone over 50 years old is accompanied by typical symptoms such as unexplained weight loss , persistent abdominal or back pain , indigestion , vomiting , or fatty feces . Jaundice accompanied by a painlessly swollen gallbladder ( known as Courvoisier 's sign ) may also raise suspicion , and can help differentiate pancreatic cancer from gallstones . 
 Medical imaging techniques , such as computed tomography ( CT scan ) and endoscopic ultrasound ( EUS ) are used both to confirm the diagnosis and to help decide whether the tumor can be surgically removed ( its " <unk> " ) . Magnetic resonance imaging and positron emission tomography may also be used , and magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography may be useful in some cases . Abdominal ultrasound is less sensitive and will miss small tumors , but can identify cancers that have spread to the liver and build @-@ up of fluid in the peritoneal cavity ( ascites ) . It may be used for a quick and cheap first examination before other techniques . 
 A biopsy by fine needle aspiration , often guided by endoscopic ultrasound , may be used where there is uncertainty over the diagnosis , but a histologic diagnosis is not usually required for removal of the tumor by surgery to go ahead . 
 Liver function tests can show a combination of results indicative of bile duct obstruction ( raised conjugated bilirubin , γ @-@ glutamyl transpeptidase and alkaline phosphatase levels ) . CA19 @-@ 9 ( carbohydrate antigen 19 @.@ 9 ) is a tumor marker that is frequently elevated in pancreatic cancer . However , it lacks sensitivity and specificity , not least because 5 % of people lack the Lewis ( a ) antigen and cannot produce CA19 @-@ 9 . It has a sensitivity of 80 % and specificity of 73 % in detecting pancreatic adenocarcinoma , and is used for following known cases rather than diagnosis . 
 The most common form of pancreatic cancer ( adenocarcinoma ) is typically characterized by moderately to poorly differentiated glandular structures on microscopic examination . There is typically considerable <unk> or formation of a dense fibrous stroma or structural tissue consisting of a range of cell types ( including <unk> , macrophages , lymphocytes and mast cells ) and deposited material ( such as type I collagen and <unk> acid ) . This creates a tumor microenvironment that is short of blood vessels ( <unk> ) and so of oxygen ( tumor hypoxia ) . It is thought that this prevents many chemotherapy drugs from reaching the tumor , as one factor making the cancer especially hard to treat . 
 = = Staging = = 
 = = = Exocrine cancers = = = 
 Pancreatic cancer is usually staged following a CT scan . The most widely used cancer staging system for pancreatic cancer is the one formulated by the American Joint Committee on Cancer ( AJCC ) together with the Union for International Cancer Control ( UICC ) . The AJCC @-@ UICC staging system designates four main overall stages , ranging from early to advanced disease , based on TNM classification of Tumor size , spread to lymph Nodes , and Metastasis . 
 To help decide treatment , the tumors are also divided into three broader categories based on whether surgical removal seems possible : in this way , tumors are judged to be " resectable " , " borderline resectable " , or " unresectable " . When the disease is still in an early stage ( AJCC @-@ UICC stages I and II ) , without spread to large blood vessels or distant organs such as the liver or lungs , surgical resection of the tumor can normally be performed , if the patient is willing to undergo this major operation and is thought to be sufficiently fit . The AJCC @-@ UICC staging system allows distinction between stage III tumors that are judged to be " borderline resectable " ( where surgery is technically feasible because the celiac axis and superior mesenteric artery are still free ) and those that are " unresectable " ( due to more locally advanced disease ) ; in terms of the more detailed TNM classification , these two groups correspond to T3 and T4 respectively . 
 Pancreatic cancer staging ( TNM classification ) 
 Locally advanced adenocarcinomas have spread into neighboring organs , which may be any of the following ( in roughly decreasing order of frequency ) : the duodenum , stomach , transverse colon , spleen , adrenal gland , or kidney . Very often they also spread to the important blood or lymphatic vessels and nerves that run close to the pancreas , making surgery far more difficult . Typical sites for metastatic spread ( stage IV disease ) are the liver , peritoneal cavity and lungs , all of which occur in 50 % or more of fully advanced cases . 
 = = = PanNETs = = = 
 The 2010 WHO classification of tumors of the digestive system grades all the pancreatic neuroendocrine tumors ( PanNETs ) into three categories , based on their degree of cellular differentiation ( from " NET G1 " through to the poorly differentiated " NET G3 " ) . The U.S. National Comprehensive Cancer Network recommends use of the same AJCC @-@ UICC staging system as pancreatic adenocarcinoma . Using this scheme , the stage @-@ by @-@ stage outcomes for PanNETs are dissimilar to those of the exocrine cancers . A different TNM system for PanNETs has been proposed by the European Neuroendocrine Tumor Society . 
 = = Precursors = = 
 = = = Exocrine cancers = = = 
 These cancers are thought to arise from several types of precancerous lesions within the pancreas . But these lesions do not always progress to cancer , and the increased numbers detected as a by @-@ product of the increasing use of CT scans for other reasons are not all treated . Apart from pancreatic serous <unk> ( <unk> ) , which are almost always benign , three types of precancerous lesion are recognized . 
 The first is pancreatic intraepithelial neoplasia . These are microscopic abnormalities in the pancreas , which are often found in autopsies of people with no diagnosed cancer . These may progress from low to high grade and then to a tumor . More than 90 % of cases at all grades carry a faulty KRAS gene , while in grades 2 and 3 damage to three further genes – CDKN2A ( p16 ) , p53 and SMAD4 – are increasingly often found . 
 Secondly , <unk> papillary mucinous neoplasms ( <unk> ) are macroscopic lesions , which occur in about 2 % of all adults , rising to about 10 % by age 70 , and have about a 25 % risk of developing into invasive cancer . They also very often have KRAS gene mutations , in about 40 – 65 % of cases , and in the <unk> Gs alpha subunit and <unk> , affecting the Wnt signaling pathway . Even if removed surgically , there remains a considerably increased risk of pancreatic cancer developing subsequently . 
 The last type , pancreatic mucinous cystic neoplasms ( <unk> ) mainly occur in women , and may remain benign or progress to cancer . If they become large , cause symptoms , or have suspicious features , they can usually be successfully removed by surgery . 
 The genetic events found in ductal adenocarcinoma have been well characterized , and complete <unk> sequencing has been done for the common types of tumor . Four genes have each been found to be mutated in the majority of adenocarcinomas : KRAS ( in 95 % of cases ) , CDKN2A ( also in 95 % ) , TP53 ( 75 % ) , and SMAD4 ( 55 % ) . The last of these are especially associated with a poor prognosis . SWI / <unk> mutations / deletions occur in about 10 – 15 % of the adenocarcinomas . The genetic alterations in several other types of pancreatic cancer and precancerous lesions have also been researched . 
 = = = PanNETs = = = 
 The genes often found mutated in PanNETs are different from those in pancreatic adenocarcinoma . For example , KRAS mutation is normally absent . Instead , hereditary MEN1 gene mutations give rise to MEN1 syndrome , in which primary tumors occur in two or more endocrine glands . About 40 – 70 % of people born with a MEN1 mutation eventually develop a <unk> . Other genes that are frequently mutated include <unk> , mTOR and <unk> . 
 = = Prevention and screening = = 
 Apart from not smoking , the American Cancer Society recommends keeping a healthy weight , and increasing consumption of fruits , vegetables , and whole grains , while decreasing consumption of red and processed meat , although there is no consistent evidence this will prevent or reduce pancreatic cancer specifically . A 2014 review of research concluded that there was evidence that consumption of citrus fruits and curcumin reduced risk of pancreatic cancer , while there was possibly a beneficial effect from whole grains , folate , selenium , and non @-@ fried fish . 
 In the general population , screening of large groups is not currently considered effective , although newer techniques , and the screening of tightly targeted groups , are being evaluated . Nevertheless , regular screening with endoscopic ultrasound and MRI / CT imaging is recommended for those at high risk from inherited genetics . 
 = = Management = = 
 = = = Exocrine cancer = = = 
 A key assessment that is made after diagnosis is whether surgical removal of the tumor is possible ( see Staging ) , as this is the only cure for this cancer . Whether or not surgical resection can be offered depends on how much the cancer has spread . The exact location of the tumor is also a significant factor , and CT can show how it relates to the major blood vessels passing close to the pancreas . The general health of the person must also be assessed , though age in itself is not an obstacle to surgery . 
 Chemotherapy and , to a lesser extent , radiotherapy are likely to be offered to most people , whether or not surgery is possible . Specialists advise that the management of pancreatic cancer should be in the hands of a multidisciplinary team including specialists in several aspects of oncology , and is therefore best conducted in larger centers . 
 = = = = Surgery = = = = 
 Surgery with the intention of a cure is only possible in around one @-@ fifth ( 20 % ) of new cases . Although CT scans help , in practice it can be difficult to determine whether the tumor can be fully removed ( its " <unk> " ) , and it may only become apparent during surgery that it is not possible to successfully remove the tumor without damaging other vital tissues . Whether or not surgical resection can be offered depends on various factors , including the precise extent of local anatomical adjacency to , or involvement of , the venous or arterial blood vessels , as well as surgical expertise and a careful consideration of projected post @-@ operative recovery . The age of the person is not in itself a reason not to operate , but their general performance status needs to be adequate for a major operation . 
 One particular feature that is evaluated is the encouraging presence , or discouraging absence , of a clear layer or plane of fat creating a barrier between the tumor and the vessels . Traditionally , an assessment is made of the tumor 's proximity to major venous or arterial vessels , in terms of " abutment " ( defined as the tumor touching no more than half a blood vessel 's circumference without any fat to separate it ) , " encasement " ( when the tumor encloses most of the vessel 's circumference ) , or full vessel involvement . A resection that includes encased sections of blood vessels may be possible in some cases , particularly if preliminary neoadjuvant therapy is feasible , using chemotherapy and / or radiotherapy . 
 Even when the operation appears to have been successful , cancerous cells are often found around the edges ( " margins " ) of the removed tissue , when a pathologist examines them microscopically ( this will always be done ) , indicating the cancer has not been entirely removed . Furthermore , cancer stem cells are usually not evident microscopically , and if they are present they may continue to develop and spread . An exploratory laparoscopy ( a small , camera @-@ guided surgical procedure ) may therefore be performed to gain a clearer idea of the outcome of a full operation . 
 For cancers involving the head of the pancreas , the Whipple procedure is the most commonly attempted curative surgical treatment . This is a major operation which involves removing the pancreatic head and the curve of the duodenum together ( " <unk> @-@ <unk> " ) , making a bypass for food from the stomach to the jejunum ( " gastro @-@ <unk> " ) and attaching a loop of jejunum to the cystic duct to drain bile ( " <unk> @-@ <unk> " ) . It can be performed only if the person is likely to survive major surgery and if the cancer is localized without invading local structures or <unk> . It can therefore be performed only in a minority of cases . Cancers of the tail of the pancreas can be resected using a procedure known as a distal <unk> , which often also entails removal of the spleen . Nowadays , this can often be done using minimally invasive surgery . 
 Although curative surgery no longer entails the very high death rates that occurred until the 1980s , a high proportion of people ( about 30 – 45 % ) still have to be treated for post @-@ operative sickness that is not caused by the cancer itself . The most common complication of surgery is difficulty in emptying the stomach . Certain more limited surgical procedures may also be used to ease symptoms ( see Palliative care ) . For instance , if the cancer is invading or compressing the duodenum or colon . In such cases , bypass surgery might overcome the obstruction and improve quality of life but is not intended as a cure . 
 = = = = Chemotherapy = = = = 
 After surgery , adjuvant chemotherapy with gemcitabine or 5 @-@ FU can be offered if the person is sufficiently fit , after a recovery period of one to two months . In people not suitable for curative surgery , chemotherapy may be used to extend life or improve its quality . Before surgery , neoadjuvant chemotherapy or <unk> may be used in cases that are considered to be " borderline resectable " ( see Staging ) in order to reduce the cancer to a level where surgery could be beneficial . In other cases neoadjuvant therapy remains controversial , because it delays surgery . 
 <unk> was approved by the United States Food and Drug Administration ( FDA ) in 1997 , after a clinical trial reported improvements in quality of life and a 5 @-@ week improvement in median survival duration in people with advanced pancreatic cancer . This was the first chemotherapy drug approved by the FDA primarily for a <unk> clinical trial endpoint . Chemotherapy using gemcitabine alone was the standard for about a decade , as a number of trials testing it in combination with other drugs failed to demonstrate significantly better outcomes . However , the combination of gemcitabine with erlotinib was found to increase survival modestly , and erlotinib was licensed by the FDA for use in pancreatic cancer in 2005 . 
 The FOLFIRINOX chemotherapy regimen using four drugs was found more effective than gemcitabine , but with substantial side effects , and is thus only suitable for people with good performance status . This is also true of protein @-@ bound paclitaxel ( nab @-@ paclitaxel ) , which was licensed by the FDA in 2013 for use with gemcitabine in pancreas cancer . By the end of 2013 , both FOLFIRINOX and nab @-@ paclitaxel with gemcitabine were regarded as good choices for those able to tolerate the side @-@ effects , and gemcitabine remained an effective option for those who were not . A head @-@ to @-@ head trial between the two new options is awaited , and trials investigating other variations continue . However , the changes of the last few years have only increased survival times by a few months . Clinical trials are often conducted for novel adjuvant therapies . 
 = = = = Radiotherapy = = = = 
 The role of radiotherapy as an auxiliary ( adjuvant ) treatment after potentially curative surgery has been controversial since the 1980s . The European Society for Medical Oncology recommends that adjuvant radiotherapy should only be used for people enrolled in clinical trials . However , there is a continuing tendency for clinicians in the US to be more ready to use adjuvant radiotherapy than those in Europe . Many clinical trials have tested a variety of treatment combinations since the 1980s , but have failed to settle the matter conclusively . 
 Radiotherapy may form part of treatment to attempt to shrink a tumor to a resectable state , but its use on unresectable tumors remains controversial as there are conflicting results from clinical trials . The preliminary results of one trial , presented in 2013 , " markedly reduced enthusiasm " for its use on locally advanced tumors . 
 = = = PanNETs = = = 
 Treatment of PanNETs , including the less common malignant types , may include a number of approaches . Some small tumors of less than 1 <unk> that are identified incidentally , for example on a CT scan performed for other purposes , may be followed by watchful waiting . This depends on the assessed risk of surgery which is influenced by the site of the tumor and the presence of other medical problems . Tumors within the pancreas only ( localized tumors ) , or with limited metastases , for example to the liver , may be removed by surgery . The type of surgery depends on the tumor location , and the degree of spread to lymph nodes . 
 For localized tumors , the surgical procedure may be much less extensive than the types of surgery used to treat pancreatic adenocarcinoma described above , but otherwise surgical procedures are similar to those for exocrine tumors . The range of possible outcomes varies greatly ; some types have a very high survival rate after surgery while others have a poor outlook . As all this group are rare , guidelines emphasize that treatment should be undertaken in a specialized center . Use of liver transplantation may be considered in certain cases of liver metastasis . 
 For functioning tumors , the somatostatin analog class of medications , such as octreotide , can reduce the excessive production of hormones . <unk> can slow tumor growth . If the tumor is not amenable to surgical removal and is causing symptoms , targeted therapy with <unk> or <unk> can reduce symptoms and slow progression of the disease . Standard cytotoxic chemotherapy is generally not very effective for PanNETs , but may be used when other drug treatments fail to prevent the disease from progressing , or in poorly differentiated <unk> cancers . 
 Radiation therapy is occasionally used if there is pain due to anatomic extension , such as metastasis to bone . Some PanNETs absorb specific peptides or hormones , and these PanNETs may respond to nuclear medicine therapy with <unk> peptides or hormones such as <unk> ( iodine @-@ 131 @-@ MIBG ) . <unk> ablation ( RFA ) , <unk> , and hepatic artery embolization may also be used . 
 = = = Palliative care = = = 
 Palliative care is medical care which focuses on treatment of symptoms from serious illness , such as cancer , and improving quality of life . Because pancreatic adenocarcinoma is usually diagnosed after it has progressed to an advanced stage , palliative care as a treatment of symptoms is often the only treatment possible . 
 Palliative care focuses not on treating the underlying cancer , but on treating symptoms such as pain or nausea , and can assist in decision @-@ making , including when or if hospice care will be beneficial . Pain can be managed with medications such as opioids or through procedural intervention , by a nerve block on the celiac plexus ( CPB ) . This alters or , depending on the technique used , destroys the nerves that transmit pain from the abdomen . CPB is a safe and effective way to reduce the pain , which generally reduces the need to use opioid painkillers , which have significant negative side effects . 
 Other symptoms or complications that can be treated with palliative surgery are obstruction by the tumor of the intestines or bile ducts . For the latter , which occurs in well over half of cases , a small metal tube called a stent may be inserted by endoscope to keep the ducts draining . Palliative care can also help treat depression that often comes with diagnosis of pancreatic cancer . 
 Both surgery and advanced inoperable tumors often lead to digestive system disorders from a lack of the exocrine products of the pancreas ( exocrine insufficiency ) . These can be treated by taking <unk> which contains manufactured pancreatic enzymes , and is best taken with food . Difficulty in emptying the stomach ( delayed gastric emptying ) is common and can be a serious problem , involving hospitalization . Treatment may involve a variety of approaches , including draining the stomach by nasogastric aspiration and drugs called proton @-@ pump inhibitors or H2 antagonists , which both reduce production of gastric acid . 
 = = Outcomes = = 
 Pancreatic adenocarcinoma and the other less common exocrine cancers have a very poor prognosis , as they are normally diagnosed at a late stage when the cancer is already locally advanced or has spread to other parts of the body . Outcomes are much better for PanNETs : many are benign and completely without clinical symptoms , and even those cases not treatable with surgery have an average five @-@ year survival rate of 16 % , although the outlook varies considerably according to the type . 
 For locally advanced and metastatic pancreatic adenocarcinoma , which together represent over 80 % of cases , numerous recent trials comparing chemotherapy regimes have shown increased survival times , but not to more than one year . Overall five @-@ year survival for pancreatic cancer in the US has improved from 2 % in cases diagnosed in 1975 – 77 , and 4 % in 1987 – 89 diagnoses , to 6 % in 2003 – 09 . In the less than 20 % of cases of pancreatic adenocarcinoma with a diagnosis of a localized and small cancerous growth ( less than 2 cm in Stage T1 ) , about 20 % of Americans survive to five years . 
 = = Distribution = = 
 As of 2012 , pancreatic cancer resulted in 330 @,@ 000 deaths globally , up from 310 @,@ 000 in 2010 and 200 @,@ 000 in 1990 . In 2014 , an estimated 46 @,@ 000 people in the US are expected to be diagnosed with pancreatic cancer and 40 @,@ 000 to die of it . Although it accounts for only 2 @.@ 5 % of new cases , pancreatic cancer is responsible for 6 % of cancer deaths each year . It is the seventh highest cause of death from cancer worldwide . 
 Globally pancreatic cancer is the 11th most common cancer in women and the 12th most common in men . The majority of recorded cases occur in developed countries . People from the United States have an average lifetime risk of about 1 in 67 ( or 1 @.@ 5 % ) of developing the disease , slightly higher than the figure for the UK . The disease is more common in men than women , though the difference in rates has narrowed over recent decades , probably reflecting earlier increases in female smoking . In the United States the risk for African Americans is over 50 % greater than for whites , but the rates in Africa and East Asia are much lower than those in North America or Europe . The United States , Central and eastern Europe , and Argentina and Uruguay all have high rates . 
 Pancreatic cancer is the 10th most common cancer in the UK ( around 8 @,@ 800 people were diagnosed with the disease in 2011 ) , and it is the 5th most common cause of cancer death ( around 8 @,@ 700 people died in 2012 ) . 
 = = = PanNETs = = = 
 The annual incidence of clinically recognized PanNETs is low ( about 5 per one million person @-@ years ) and is dominated by the non @-@ functioning types . Somewhere between 45 % and 90 % of PanNETs are thought to be of the non @-@ functioning types . Studies of autopsies have uncovered small PanNETs rather frequently , suggesting that the prevalence of tumors that remain inert and asymptomatic may be relatively high . Overall PanNETs are thought to account for about 1 to 2 % of all pancreatic tumors . The definition and classification of PanNETs has changed over time , affecting what is known about their epidemiology and clinical relevance . 
 = = History = = 
 The earliest recognition of pancreatic cancer has been attributed to the 18th @-@ century Italian scientist Giovanni Battista Morgagni , the historical father of modern @-@ day anatomic pathology , who claimed to have traced several cases of cancer in the pancreas . Many 18th and 19th @-@ century physicians were skeptical about the existence of the disease , given the similar appearance of pancreatitis . Some case reports were published in the 1820s and 1830s , and a genuine histopathologic diagnosis was eventually recorded by the American clinician Jacob Mendes Da Costa , who also doubted the reliability of Morgagni 's interpretations . By the start of the 20th century , cancer of the head of the pancreas had become a well @-@ established diagnosis . 
 Regarding the recognition of PanNETs , the possibility of cancer of the islet cells was initially suggested in 1888 . The first case of <unk> due to a tumor of this type was reported in 1927 . Recognition of a non @-@ insulin @-@ secreting type of <unk> is generally ascribed to the American surgeons , R. M. Zollinger and E. H. Ellison , who gave their names to Zollinger – Ellison syndrome , after postulating the existence of a gastrin @-@ secreting pancreatic tumor in a report of two cases of unusually severe peptic ulcers published in 1955 . In 2010 , the WHO recommended that PanNETs be referred to as " neuroendocrine " rather than " endocrine " tumors . 
 The first reported partial pancreaticoduodenectomy was performed by the Italian surgeon Alessandro <unk> in 1898 , but the patient only survived 18 days before succumbing to complications . Early operations were compromised partly because of mistaken beliefs that people would die if their duodenum were removed , and also , at first , if the flow of pancreatic juices stopped . Later it was thought , also mistakenly , that the pancreatic duct could simply be tied up without serious adverse effects ; in fact it will very often leak later on . In 1907 – 08 , after some more unsuccessful operations by other surgeons , experimental procedures were tried on corpses by French surgeons . 
 In 1912 the German surgeon Walther <unk> was the first to remove large parts of the duodenum and pancreas together ( en bloc ) . This was in Breslau , now Wrocław in Poland . In 1918 it was demonstrated in operations on dogs that total removal of the duodenum is compatible with life , but this was not reported in human surgery until 1935 , when the American surgeon Allen Oldfather Whipple published the results of a series of three operations at Columbia Presbyterian Hospital in New York . Only one of the patients had the duodenum totally removed , but he survived for two years before dying of metastasis to the liver . The first operation was unplanned , as cancer was only discovered in the operating theatre . Whipple 's success showed the way for the future , but the operation remained a difficult and dangerous one until recent decades . He published several refinements to his procedure , including the first total removal of the duodenum in 1940 , but he only performed a total of 37 operations . 
 The discovery in the late 1930s that vitamin K prevented bleeding with jaundice , and the development of blood transfusion as an everyday process , both improved post @-@ operative survival , but about 25 % of people never left hospital alive as late as the 1970s . In the 1970s a group of American surgeons wrote urging that the procedure was too dangerous and should be abandoned . Since then outcomes in larger centers have improved considerably , and mortality from the operation is often less than 4 % . In 2006 a report was published of a series of 1 @,@ 000 consecutive <unk> performed by a single surgeon from Johns Hopkins Hospital between 1969 and 2003 . The rate of these operations had increased steadily over this period , with only three of them before 1980 , and the median operating time reduced from 8 @.@ 8 hours in the 1970s to 5 @.@ 5 hours in the 2000s , and mortality within 30 days or in hospital was only 1 % . Another series of 2 @,@ 050 operations at the Massachusetts General Hospital between 1941 and 2011 showed a similar picture of improvement . 
 Small precancerous neoplasms for many pancreatic cancers are being detected at greatly increased rates by modern medical imaging . One type , the <unk> papillary mucinous neoplasm ( <unk> ) was first described by Japanese researchers in 1982 . It was noted in 2010 that : " For the next decade , little attention was paid to this report ; however , over the subsequent 15 years , there has been a virtual explosion in the recognition of this tumor . " 
 = = Research directions = = 
 Worldwide efforts on many levels are underway to understand pancreatic cancer , but progress has been slow , particularly into understanding the disease 's causes . There are several fundamental unanswered questions . The nature of the changes that lead to the disease are being intensely investigated , such as the roles played by genes such as KRAS and p53 . A key question is the timing of events as the disease develops and progresses – particularly the role of diabetes , and how and when the disease spreads . 
 Research on early detection is ongoing . For instance , the European Registry of Hereditary <unk> and Familial Pancreatic Cancer ( <unk> ) trial is aiming to determine whether regular screening is appropriate for people with a family history of the disease , or who have hereditary pancreatitis . The knowledge that new onset of diabetes can be an early sign of the disease could facilitate timely diagnosis and prevention if a workable screening strategy can be developed . 
 Another area of interest is in assessing whether keyhole surgery ( laparoscopy ) would be better than Whipple 's procedure in treating the disease surgically , particularly in terms of recovery time . Irreversible electroporation is a relatively novel ablation technique that has shown promise in <unk> and prolonging survival in persons with locally advanced disease . It is especially suitable for treatment of tumors that are in proximity to peri @-@ pancreatic vessels without risk of vascular trauma . The limited success of outcomes after surgery has led to a number of trials that were running in 2014 to test outcomes using chemotherapy or <unk> before surgery . This had previously not been found to be helpful , but is being trialed again , using drug combinations which have emerged from the many trials of post @-@ operative therapies , such as FOLFIRINOX . 
 Efforts are underway to develop new drugs . Some of these involve targeted therapies against the cancer cells ' molecular mechanisms . Others aim to target the highly resistant cancer stem cells . Still others aim to affect the non @-@ neoplastic stroma and microenvironment of the tumor , which is known to influence cell proliferation and metastasis . A further approach involves the use of immunotherapy , such as oncolytic viruses . 
 = Eddie Hill = 
 Eddie Hill ( born March 6 , 1936 ) is a retired American drag racer who won numerous drag racing championships on land and water . Hill had the first run in the four second range ( 4 @.@ 990 seconds ) , which earned him the nickname " Four Father of Drag Racing . " His other nicknames include " The Thrill " , " <unk> Hill " , and " Fast Eddie " . In 1960 , he set the NHRA record for the largest improvement in the elapsed time ( e.t. ) when he drove the quarter mile in 8 @.@ 84 seconds to break the previous 9 @.@ 40 @-@ second record . 
 Hill raced at open competitions and Top Fuel events from 1955 until he retired in 1966 . After opening a motorcycle shop , he returned several years later to race motorcycles . He started racing drag boats after attending a drag boat event in 1974 and he won championships in all of the major boat drag racing sanctioning bodies . Hill set the lowest wet elapsed time ( e.t. ) record with a 5 @.@ 16 @-@ second run , which was lower than the land drag racing record of 5 @.@ 39 seconds . He quit water drag racing after he suffered broken bones at a crash in Arizona and returned to land drag racing in 1985 . Initially underfunded and unsuccessful , Hill set the all @-@ time speed record at a National Hot Rod Association ( NHRA ) event in 1987 , becoming the first person to hold both the land and water speed records simultaneously . In 1993 , Hill became the NHRA 's oldest Top Fuel champion . When Hill retired in 1999 , he had won 12 national season point championships on land or water , and had won more than 100 trophies in motorcycles and 86 drag events between his land and water careers . 
 = = Racing career = = 
 In 1947 , 11 @-@ year @-@ old Hill won the Tri @-@ State Motor Scooter Flat Track championship in Shreveport , Louisiana . After graduating from Longview High School , he graduated from college in 1957 with an industrial technology degree from Texas A & M University . 
 = = = Land drag racing = = = 
 Hill 's entered his first drag race at the Flying Fish Lodge in <unk> , Texas in 1955 . Hill drove his home @-@ built hot rod to the track and won the event . The hot rod had a Model T frame and an Oldsmobile V8 engine . In 1958 , he built his second dragster using parts that his employer allowed him to scavenge while working as a sales engineer at a foundry in Wichita Falls , Texas . He used the dragster to set the Texas state low elapsed time ( e.t. ) that year with a 9 @.@ 93 @-@ second pass . The following year , Hill won the state championship with a 9 @.@ 25 @-@ second pass at 161 miles per hour ( 259 kilometers per hour ) . Hill won his first national event in 1959 in a Hot Gas race at an American Hot Rod Association ( <unk> ) national championship event in Great Bend , Kansas . Hill earned $ 500 for an appearance at Inyokern , California to race Jack Chrisman and his Sidewinder dragster . One of his four passes in the 1960 event set the B / Gas dragster record at 163 @.@ 04 mph ( 262 @.@ 39 km / h ) , so Hill quit his job to become a full @-@ time drag racer . Later that season he set the a new A / Gas low e.t. at 8 @.@ 84 seconds and set the speed record in the class at 161 @.@ 29 mph ( 259 @.@ 57 km / h ) . 
 Hill spent four months designing and seven months building another home @-@ built dragster called the Double Dragon . The machine had two engines , with each engine having its own ring gear and pinion , clutch , and driveshaft . He used four rear racing slick tires in open competitions for faster passes , and two rear slicks in match competitions to produce <unk> passes . The machine ripped up the starting line at the 1961 NHRA Nationals at Indianapolis . In 1962 , Hill ran 202 @.@ 70 mph ( 326 @.@ 21 km / h ) two years after Chris <unk> had the first 200 mph ( 320 km / h ) pass and two years before Don <unk> had the first official 200 mph ( 320 km / h ) <unk> . A speed or e.t. record is first certified official after it is backed up by a different pass within one percent . Hill built his first Top Fuel dragster in 1963 using a Pontiac engine . He had nearly completed a jet @-@ engine powered ultralight dragster in 1963 when the NHRA outlawed all aircraft engines . He built two more Top Fuel Hemi @-@ powered <unk> before he had an engine fire at Green Valley Race City in 1966 . " It was one of those fireballs that you couldn 't see through , " Hill said . " I locked up the brakes , and it felt like I needed to turn the wheel to the left , but for some reason , I didn 't . I had to do something that was counterintuitive , and it spooked me . " Hill had managed to steer straight down a course that was lined with trees . Hill had been using the Double Dragon to win matches , which were used to finance his Top Fuel dragster . The Double Dragon had been destroyed in a wreck two months before this fire . The fire tapped his finances and his resolve to drag race . 
 = = = Motorcycle racing = = = 
 He stopped racing and opened a motorcycle dealership in Wichita Falls in 1966 . The dealership is still open ( as of 2008 ) , and it is now the oldest Honda and Kawasaki dealership in Texas . He soon wanted to race again , so he built his own motorcycle and began racing as a 30 @-@ year @-@ old . He raced in numerous types of motorcycle racing : cross country , drag racing , hare scramble , motocross , road racing , and short track . When Hill participated in a Daytona race in 1971 , he had an opening lap at 151 mph ( 243 km / h ) , which was faster than factory rider Gary Nixon . Hill continued to race motorcycles and in 1972 and won the Texas state road racing championship . Hill won over 100 trophies in his motorcycle career . 
 = = = Boat drag racing = = = 
 Hill attended his first boat drag racing event in 1974 at Austin , Texas . He thought the drivers were " crazy " after he saw a driver being thrown from his boat during a crash . Less than a month later , Hill had stopped motorcycle racing to drag race boats , despite not being able to swim . " Once I hit the water with the boat , I never went back to motorcycles , " Hill recalled . " The power , speed , and acceleration were all things that I had missed since I quit drag racing . " He began racing in a non @-@ blown hydroplane , winning in his first event . In his third race he set the class top speed . In 1975 , he set the Southern Drag Boat Association ( SDBA ) speed record at 137 @.@ 46 mph ( 221 @.@ 22 km / h ) . In 1976 , he switched to nitromethane fuel and set the SDBA record with a 171 @.@ 81 mph ( 276 @.@ 50 km / h ) run . He was the SDBA top <unk> and won the National Drag Boat Association ( NDBA ) World Fuel & Gas championship . He repeated as champion in both series in 1977 , setting the NDBA record with a 170 @.@ 45 mph ( 274 @.@ 31 km / h ) run . 
 Hill raced an all white blown @-@ fuel hydroplane from 1978 to 1984 . He won 55 of 103 races during that time . Hill captured four American Drag Boat Association ( ADBA ) championships and was the SDBA top points earner in five consecutive years . In 1982 , his Top Fuel hydroplane went 229 @.@ 00 mph ( 368 @.@ 54 km / h ) at an NDBA event to set the world 's record for a quarter mile water drag at Chowchilla , California . It was recorded in the Guinness Book of World Records , and it was not broken for 10 years . Hill also set speed records that year in the SDBA ( 220 @.@ 76 mph ) , ADBA ( 215 @.@ 82 mph ) , and International Hot Boat Association ( <unk> ) ( 212 @.@ 78 mph ) . He became the only racer to hold records in all four associations simultaneously . He won the NDBA Nationals four times including three straight from 1982 until 1984 . In 1983 and 1984 , Hill won the World Series of Drag Boat Racing championship . The series features two races in each of the four major drag boat racing sanctioning bodies . He won 17 races between 1983 and 1984 , and made 29 of 34 final rounds . Before he quit boat drag racing , he had an elapsed time of 5 @.@ 16 seconds in the wet quarter mile at Firebird Lake in Chandler , Arizona . The e.t. was quicker than Gary Beck 's 5 @.@ 39 @-@ second NHRA Top Fuel dragster record , the first time that the water record was lower than the land record . Hill quit boat racing in October 1984 after a crash at 217 miles per hour . " It was a perfect run , " Hill recalled . " I started to settle the boat back into the water , and then it took off . " His Texas A & M ring was torn off his hand ; he suffered seven broken bones , a concussion , & eye injuries . He spent five days in the hospital and was not fully recovered for a year . 
 = = = Return to drag racing = = = 
 Hill decided to come back into drag racing for 1985 . He purchased Dan <unk> 's Top Fuel car and salvaged the drag boat engine from the bottom of the lake . He joined one of the most underfunded and least competitive Top Fuel teams . Hill would have quit early in the 1986 season had he not gotten some tuning advice from a competitor that helped make his car more competitive . Fifteen races after returning , he finally got out of the first round at the 1986 Mile High Nationals . Hill made it to the final round of competition , losing to Larry Minor when he lost reverse after his burnout . At the 1987 Chief Auto Parts Nationals , where he was runner @-@ up , Hill set an NHRA record of 285 @.@ 98 mph ( 460 @.@ 24 km / h ) In doing so , he became the first person to hold both the land and water quarter mile drag racing speed records simultaneously . 
 Hill won the first of his thirteen NHRA national events when he beat Joe Amato in final of the 1988 Mac Tools <unk> . Amato and Hill met in four final rounds that season , with Hill winning three . On April 9 , 1988 , he set the first four second elapsed time ( 4 @.@ 990 seconds ) at the International Hot Rod Association ( <unk> ) Texas Nationals . Hill made the run on only seven cylinders ; the post @-@ run computer readout showed his # 7 cylinder failed at launch . Six months later , Hill recorded a 4 @.@ 936 @-@ second e.t. at the NHRA <unk> at Houston on October 9 , 1988 . Hill set the record as the oldest Top Fuel champion when he won the season championship as a 57 @-@ year @-@ old . It was his twelfth championship . Hill won a record @-@ tying six of seven national events and 15 events overall . Hill finished in the Top 10 in Top Fuel points for all but one of the years between 1987 and 1995 . Between 1994 and 1999 , Hill won his final two events in seven finals . When Hill won the 1996 Mile High Nationals , he set the record for the oldest Top Fuel event winner at age 60 . He retired in 1999 . 
 = = " Eddie Hill Rule " = = 
 Hill was qualifying for a 1997 event at Sonoma when his car suffered severe vibration as he crossed the finish line . The car went out of control and was completely destroyed . Hill had two broken toes and a shoulder contusion , which were not serious injuries . The run had been fast enough to make Hill the fastest qualifier , and Hill wanted to race his backup car in the first round on the day after the accident . The NHRA had a rule that the car used for qualifying had to be used in the event , so the sanctioning body did not allow him to compete . The rule was changed after the event to allow racers to race on race day even if they do not use the same car . 
 = = Innovations = = 
 In 1960 , he became the first driver to heat his rear tires with a burnout and he was the first driver to use smaller front tires on a dragster in 1958 . Hill introduced the aerodynamic front wing to <unk> and charcoal masks for driver safety . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Hill is married to <unk> Hill . They met at a boat drag racing event and were married on Valentine 's Day in 1984 . She had several roles during his career , including team co @-@ owner , starting line navigator , record taker , pit crew member , business manager , marketing , and public relations . She has written about drag racing in National Dragster , <unk> , and Christian Motorsports magazines . Eddie has a daughter named Sabrina and a son named Dustin . 
 = = Awards = = 
 NHRA ranked him 14th on their Top 50 drivers in 2001 . He was inducted in the NHRA Drag Racing Hall of Fame in 1978 , and the Texas Motor Sports Hall of Fame in 2007 . In 2000 , he was inducted in Don <unk> ' International Drag Racing Hall of Fame . Hill was inducted into the Motorsports Hall of Fame of America in 2002 . After he was notified of his nomination , he said 
 " It 's so much more satisfying to get this award now than posthumously . This way I 'll be able to enjoy it . Honestly , it was a sobering moment when they called and told me I was being inducted along with some of the people I admired most growing up . It gives you reason to pause for a moment and reflect that maybe some good was accomplished along the way . " 
 In 1988 , Hill was selected by Car Craft magazine , Hot Rod Magazine , and the International Hot Rod Association as the Person of the Year . Car Craft magazine 's readers voted him the Top Fuel Driver of the Year after he won the 1993 championship . 
 = Taylor Swift ( album ) = 
 Taylor Swift is the debut studio album by American singer @-@ songwriter Taylor Swift , released on October 24 , 2006 , by Big Machine Records . Swift was 16 years old at the time of the album 's release and wrote its songs during her freshman year of high school . Swift has writing credits on all of the album 's songs , including those co @-@ written with Liz Rose . Swift experimented with several producers , ultimately choosing Nathan Chapman , who had produced her demo album . Musically , the album is country music styled , and lyrically it speaks of romantic relationships , a couple of which Swift wrote from observing relationships before being in one . Lyrics also touch on Swift 's personal struggles in high school . 
 Five singles were released from the album , all of which have been certified platinum by the RIAA . " Tim McGraw " was released as the lead single and reached the top ten on Billboard 's Hot Country Songs . " Teardrops on My Guitar " was released as the second single and was the album 's best @-@ charting song on the Billboard Hot 100 . " Our Song " was released as the third single from the album and was Swift 's first number one on Billboard 's Hot Country Songs chart . It made her the youngest person to single @-@ handedly write and perform a number one song on the Hot Country Songs chart . " Picture to Burn " and " Should 've Said No " were released as the fourth single and fifth singles from the album , respectively , and both were successful on the country charts in the United States . Swift promoted the album by performing on tour as the opening act for artists such as Rascal Flatts , George Strait , Brad Paisley , and Tim McGraw and Faith Hill . 
 Taylor Swift was received positively by contemporary critics , who praised Swift 's talent at such a young age . The album enjoyed commercial success and launched Swift 's career in country music . In the United States , it topped the Top Country Albums Chart for 24 non @-@ consecutive weeks , and was certified five times platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) for sales of over 5 million copies . Taylor Swift has logged 275 weeks on the Billboard Top 200 chart as of early 2013 , making it one of the 12 longest @-@ running albums in the chart 's 57 @-@ year history . The album was also successful outside of Swift 's native country , notably , Canada , Australia , and the United Kingdom . The album has sold over six million copies worldwide as of January 2015 . 
 = = Background = = 
 Taylor Swift is from Reading , Pennsylvania and developed an early interest in country music and songwriting . When she was eleven , she and her family made their first visit to Nashville , Tennessee in pursuit of a record deal , though nothing came out of it . Swift was judged and neglected by record labels for being too young . In regards to the labels which rejected her , she said , 
 " I can understand . They were afraid to put out a 13 @-@ year @-@ old . They were afraid to put out a 14 @-@ year @-@ old . Then they were afraid to put out a 15 @-@ year @-@ old . Then they were nervous about putting out a 16 @-@ year @-@ old . And I 'm sure if I hadn 't signed with Scott Borchetta [ head of Big Machine Records ] , everybody would be afraid to put out a 17 @-@ year @-@ old . " 
 = = Development and music = = 
 Swift wrote " Tim McGraw " during her freshman year , knowing that she and her senior boyfriend , Brandon <unk> , would break up at the end of the year when he left for college . Rose said Swift showed up at her after school job writing songs for Sony / ATV " with the idea and the melody . She knew exactly what she wanted . " The nostalgic song describes a summer romance and Swift 's hope that when <unk> " think [ s ] Tim McGraw " he would " think [ her ] favorite song " – McGraw 's " Can 't Tell Me Nothin " – and remember her . Conversely , " Picture to Burn " describes a girl furious after a break @-@ up . Swift says that while the song is about " just being mad " and is " completely , brutally honest " ; she gave it a comedic edge . While at work after school , Swift " found [ her ] self just sitting there with [ her ] guitar going , ' I hate his stupid truck that he doesn 't let me drive . He 's such a redneck ! Oh my God ! ' , " a line which developed into the song 's chorus . The up @-@ tempo song is heavy with banjos and drums , while the chorus is marked by distorted guitars and big vocals . 
 The singer penned the autobiographical song " The Outside " as an outlet at age twelve , the year she began writing her own songs . Like many of the other songs she wrote early on , the song describes the unhappiness and loneliness Swift felt when her love of country music alienated her from her peers . Swift wrote " Tied Together with a Smile " the day she learned one of her best friends was bulimic , a fact which shocked her . She recalled , " How can somebody that seems so strong have such a horrible , horrible weakness ? Something that is killing her . " The lyrics to " Tied Together with a Smile " describe a beautiful girl trying to hide her inner turbulence and mourn that " You 're tied together with a smile / But you 're coming undone " . Swift commented , " I always thought that one of the biggest overlooked problems American girls face is insecurity . " She wrote " Should 've Said No " according to " something really , really dramatic and crazy happening to [ her ] and [ her ] needing to address it in the form of music " . The song was a last minute addition to Taylor Swift : Swift had written it two days before mastering was scheduled and booklets were about to be printed ; she then called her producer and completed the song overnight . 
 " Mary 's Song ( Oh My My My ) " was actually inspired by her next @-@ door neighbors ' long lasting marriage , being the opposite of what tabloids <unk> on . Swift wrote " Our Song " for her freshman year of high school talent show with no intentions of including it on the album . She claimed she " just knew there was something about it " and chose to include it on Taylor Swift . " I wrote it about this guy I was dating , and how we didn 't have a song . So I went ahead and wrote us one . " The song is a narrative and describes a young couple who use the events in their lives in place of a regular song . The banjo @-@ riddled song is placed at the end of the album due to its closing lyrics , a request to " play it again " . " Invisible " is ballad describing loneliness and heartache of going unnoticed . Sean Dooley of About.com writes , the " piano @-@ driven song [ ... ] perfectly captures the awkward teenage angst we all endure — or have endured — at one time or another . " 
 = = Recording = = 
 While recording her demo album , Swift worked with demo producer Nathan Chapman , whom she met in a little shed behind a publishing company she was at . Swift said , " I 'd always go in there and play him some new songs , and the next week he would have this awesome track , on which he played every instrument , and it sounded like a record . We did this for a period of a year to two years before I got my record deal . " 
 To record Taylor Swift , she had to choose which album producer she would work with : " Then , all of a sudden , it was , ' OK , we 're going to use this producer ' or ' We 're going to use that producer . ' " After experimenting with different producers , originating from Nashville , Swift chose Chapman because of the unique sound he put into songs . Big Machine Records was skeptical about hiring Chapman because he had never done a studio album prior to Taylor Swift , only demos . Swift described the songs he produced as " the right chemistry hit [ ting ] " and therefore , Big Machine Records accepted Chapman producing some of the album 's songs . In the end , Chapman produced all but one of the tracks on Taylor Swift . Recording was executed during a four @-@ month period before 2006 was over . 
 = = Packaging and release = = 
 Taylor Swift was released on October 24 , 2006 with eleven tracks . Swift was highly involved in the album packaging , designing doodle graphics herself . She also personally capitalized specific letters in the lyrics from each song to spell out hidden messages , a feat she would also execute for her succeeding albums . On November 6 , 2007 , the album was re @-@ released under the title Taylor Swift Deluxe Edition for a limited time . The deluxe edition contained three new songs : " I 'm Only Me When I 'm with You " , " Invisible " and " A Perfectly Good Heart " , the radio edits for " Picture to Burn " , " Teardrops on My Guitar " , and " Our Song " , and Swift 's first phone conversation with Tim McGraw . The re @-@ release also bared a bonus DVD with all of Swift 's music videos at the time ( " Tim McGraw " , " Teardrops on My Guitar " , and " Our Song " ) , behind @-@ the @-@ scenes footage of " Teardrops on My Guitar " and " Our Song " music videos , and a performance of " Picture to Burn " , among other material . The American retail company Target released an exclusive version of Taylor Swift Deluxe Edition , with performances of Swift during McGraw and Hill 's Soul2Soul II Tour . A third and final re @-@ release appeared on March 18 , 2008 with the three new songs from the Taylor Swift Deluxe Edition and a pop version of " Teardrops on My Guitar " . A karaoke version of Taylor Swift was released on January 27 , 2009 , containing the first fourteen tracks from the album on both CD + G and DVD . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Taylor Swift received positive reviews from contemporary critics . Jeff Tamarkin of AllMusic described Swift as " a fresh , still girlish voice , full of hope and naïveté , but it 's also a confident and mature one " . He said her " talent to be reckoned " was portrayed through the songs " Tim McGraw " , " The Outside " , and " Mary 's Song ( Oh My My My ) " . Tamarkin criticized producer Nathan Chapman for applying " a gloss that not all [ songs ] really require and in some cases would do better to shed " . Rick Bell of Country Standard Time gave a positive review , saying that Swift had " smart songwriting " and that " her deeply personal , self @-@ penned songs , particularly ' The Outside ' and ' Our Song ' " were " stirring . " He compared her sound to Cyndi Thomson and Hilary Duff . Chris Neal of Country Weekly said that Swift " demonstrat [ es ] an honesty , intelligence and idealism with which listeners of any age will be able to connect " and added that " the more thoughtful material suggests a talent poised to last well past high school . " Ken Rosenbaum of The Toledo Blade wrote Swift " deftly handles lyrics and subjects in that shadowy area between teenager and womanhood . " 
 = = Commercial performance = = 
 On the week ending November 11 , 2006 , Taylor Swift debuted at number nineteen on the Billboard 200 due to sales of 40 @,@ 000 copies . It reached its highest sales week on the week ending January 5 , 2008 with 187 @,@ 000 copies sold . After sixty @-@ three weeks on the Billboard 200 , on the week ending January 19 , 2008 , the album reached its charting peak at number five due to sales of 47 @,@ 000 copies . Taylor Swift marked the longest stay on the Billboard 200 by any album released in the decade . So far the album has stayed on the chart for 277 weeks . The album topped Billboard 's Top Country Albums Chart for twenty @-@ four non @-@ consecutive weeks . On the week ending August 2 , 2008 , Swift 's EP Beautiful Eyes replaced Taylor Swift as the chart 's number one album . With Taylor Swift charting at number two , Swift became the first artist to hold the first two positions on Top Country Albums since LeAnn Rimes charted in 1997 with Blue ( 1996 ) and Unchained Melody : The Early Years ( 1997 ) . On February 17 , 2014 , the album was certified five times platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America for the shipment and sales of 5 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 copies . As of December 2015 , the album has sold 5 @.@ 56 million copies in the United States . 
 Like their last album , this one also features CDVU + that includes more than 30 pages of bonus features with an exclusive video performance , 60 printable photos , complete album lyrics , downloadable graphics , and hidden links . In addition , the packaging of the album is made from 100 % recycled materials . 
 After six years of its release , Taylor Swift made debuted at number thirty @-@ eight on the New Zealand Albums Chart . Taylor Swift peaked at number fourteen on the Canadian Albums Chart and at number @-@ one on the Canadian Country Albums Chart . Taylor Swift was certified platinum by the Canadian Recording Industry Association ( CRIA ) for the shipment of 80 @,@ 000 copies . In Australia , Taylor Swift peaked at number thirty @-@ three on the main chart and at number three on the country @-@ genre chart . On the week ending September 5 , 2009 , it entered the UK Albums Chart at number 88 ; the following week , it reached its peak at number 81 . The album has been certified Gold by the British Phonographic Industry ( BPI ) for sales of more than 100 @,@ 000 copies . 
 = = Singles = = 
 " Tim McGraw " was released as the lead single from Taylor Swift on June 19 , 2006 . The song was critically appreciated for Swift 's delivery . " Tim McGraw " enjoyed commercial success , peaking at number forty on the Billboard Hot 100 and at number six on Billboard 's Hot Country Songs ; it was certified platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) for the shipment of 2 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 copies . 
 " Teardrops on My Guitar " was released as the second single from Taylor Swift . " Teardrops on My Guitar " received critical success for its memorable chorus and crossover potential , as well as commercial success by becoming the best @-@ charting single from Taylor Swift on the Billboard Hot 100 , peaking at number thirteen . It became Swift 's first pop crossover hit , peaking at number eleven on the now @-@ canceled Pop 100 chart . The song was certified double platinum by the RIAA for the shipment of 3 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 copies . " Teardrops on My Guitar " peaked at number forty @-@ five in Canada and at number fifty @-@ one in the United Kingdom . 
 " Our Song " was released as the third single from the album . The song was critically favored , being described as " gem " . " Our Song " peaked at number sixteen on the Billboard Hot 100 and was certified <unk> platinum by the RIAA ; it also became Swift 's first @-@ number one on Hot Country Songs . The song peaked at number thirty on the Canadian Hot 100 , becoming the best @-@ charting single from Taylor Swift in Canada . 
 " Picture to Burn " was released as the fourth single from Taylor Swift . " Picture to Burn " was appreciated by contemporary critics for lyrics reflecting feminism . It became a fourth consecutive top ten single for Swift on the United States ' chart Hot Country Songs and was certified double platinum by the RIAA . 
 " Should 've Said No " was released as the fifth and final single from the album . In the United States , " Should 've Said No " became Swift 's second number @-@ one on Hot Country Songs and was certified double platinum by the RIAA . The song made its highest international peak in the New Zealand Singles Chart , at number eighteen . 
 = = Promotion = = 
 Swift 's first broadcast performance of " Tim McGraw " was on October 24 , 2006 on Good Morning America . Other songs from Taylor Swift have been performed on television programs , award shows , and festivals such as The Megan Mullally Show , the New Faces Show , America 's Got Talent , TRL , the 2008 CMT Music Awards , and the Academy of Country Music . Swift spent much of 2006 promoting " Tim McGraw " and Taylor Swift in a radio tour . In regards to the extensive radio tour , Swift commented , " Radio tours for most artists last six weeks . Mine lasted six months . That 's because I wanted it to . I wanted to meet every single one of the people that was helping me out . " 
 Swift also promoted the album by performing as an opening act for several country artists ' concert tours . She opened for Rascal Flatts on several dates , from October 19 to November 3 , 2006 , included on the Me and My Gang Tour ( 2006 – 07 ) , performing a total of five songs from the album . She also served as opening act on twenty dates for George Strait 's 2007 United States tour , and selected dates for Brad Paisley 's Bonfires & Amplifiers Tour ( 2007 – 08 ) ; Swift served as an opening act during all 2007 legs of the tour . During mid @-@ 2007 , Swift engaged as the opening act on several dates for Tim McGraw 's and Faith Hill 's joint tour , Soul2Soul II Tour ( 2006 – 07 ) . Swift again opened for Flatts for their Still Feels Good Tour in 2008 . In addition , Swift performed six songs from Taylor Swift on her first headlining tour , the Fearless Tour ( 2009 – 10 ) . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 Notes 
 " I 'd Lie " was available as an exclusive download for copies of the album purchased at Best Buy during the first week of release . 
 Initial pressings of the deluxe edition replaced the original versions of " Teardrops on My Guitar " and " Our Song " with their respective radio single versions . Later deluxe pressings also replaced " Picture to Burn " with its country radio edit and scrapped the bonus DVD and Swift 's phone call with McGraw and replaced them with the pop version of " Teardrops on My Guitar " . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 As listed in liner notes . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = = Chart precession and succession = = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = Rock Me ( One Direction song ) = 
 " Rock Me " is a song by English @-@ Irish boy band One Direction from their second studio album , Take Me Home ( 2012 ) . It was written by Peter Svensson , Sam Hollander , Lukasz Gottwald , Henry Walter , Breanna Smith , and Allan Grigg , with production handled by Dr. Luke , <unk> and Kool Kojak . Created in one day , Grigg carried out the mid @-@ tempo beat , Hollander conceptualised the title and the pop rock melody " just came " . Its clapping riff has been noted as similar to that of the Queen 1977 single " We Will Rock You " . 
 The song garnered mostly positive reviews from music critics , who centred on production quality and its rock elements . Upon the release of Take Me Home , " Rock Me " debuted at number one on the US Bubbling Under Hot 100 Singles chart due to strong digital download sales , and ultimately peaked at number 98 on the US Billboard Hot 100 . 
 = = Background and conception = = 
 " Rock Me " came together in a single @-@ day collaboration between guitarist Peter Svensson of the Swedish band the Cardigans , Sam Hollander , and Allan ' Kool Kojak ' Grigg for One Direction 's second studio album , Take Me Home , which was released in November 2012 . First , Grigg carried out its mid @-@ tempo beat . " If you can slow a song down to mid @-@ tempo , the girls are just gonna lose their minds , " Grigg told Time magazine in 2012 . Svensson reflected that Hollander " had an idea for a title that 's like ' rock me ' instead of ‘ rock you , ’ and the melody just came . " Co @-@ producers Lukasz ' Dr. Luke ' Gottwald and Henry ' <unk> ' Walter ended up with writing credits on the finished recording too — " standard operating practice , now that the sound of a song has as much to do with its identity as its lyrics or melody , " according to Time magazine correspondent Douglas Wolk . 
 = = Composition and lyrical interpretation = = 
 " Rock Me " is a mid @-@ tempo pop rock song . Chris Payne of Billboard noted that the song deviates from One Direction 's signature bubblegum pop sound , a notion shared by Al Fox for BBC Music , who dubbed it " vaguely rockier " . The song 's clapping riff are similar to those of the Queen 1977 single " We Will Rock You " . According to the digital sheet music published at Musicnotes.com by Sony / ATV Music Publishing , One Direction 's vocal range in the song span from the note of F3 to C5 . Instrumentation includes guitar strings , piano lines and vocals . Written in the key of Ab major , the beat is set in common time and moves at a moderate 84 beats per minute . 
 It also incorporates a Queen @-@ referencing chorus : " I want you to rock me , yeah , I want you to hit the pedal , heavy metal , show me you care . " The track 's lyricism regards a nostalgic message about a former significant other and a blatant double entendre for sexual intercourse . In the regard to its double entendre , Grigg noted , " but at the same time , there 's a vulnerability in it that 's , like , so sweet for girls . It 's a little self @-@ deprecating . There 's not a lot of overt machismo in the song " . " I approached it like high school , " said Hollander : " On the first record , they were freshmen , innocent and wide @-@ eyed . Now it 's sophomore year , there are parties and driver ’ s licenses , and the world is theirs for the taking . That 's what I wanted to capture " . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 The song garnered mostly positive reviews from critics , who centred on production quality and its rock elements . The New Zealand Herald writer Lydia Jenkin deemed " Rock Me " one of " the most banal songs ever written " , but noted that the group " know what teenage girls want to hear . " Idolator critic Sam Lansky praised the track as " irresistible " and commended its sonic palette as " explosively punchy " . Writing for HitFix , Melinda Newman favoured its " nearly hypnotic anthemic " beat , and noted that " Rock Me " seems perfectly tailored to become a live staple . Ben Rayner of the Toronto Star thought the song 's Queen @-@ references are " clever " , assessing : " to show that One Direction ’ s puppeteers aren 't totally operating on autopilot . " Robert Copsey from Digital Spy opined that the song 's " simple @-@ yet @-@ genius catchiness " is its strongest attribute . Billboard reviewer Chris Payne applauded its rock elements , regarding it as " welcome " deviation from Take Me Home 's predominant bubblegum pop sound . In contrast to the positive reception , Alexis Petridis , writing for The Guardian , criticised the song as " excruciating " , describing its lyricism as tedious and uninspiring . 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 In the week of 18 November 2012 , " Rock Me " debuted at number one on the US Bubbling Under Hot 100 Singles chart due to strong digital download sales . As a result of an " end @-@ of @-@ year download rush " in the week ending 30 December 2012 , the track entered the US Billboard Hot 100 at number 98 , marking its peak position . 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = John Lerew = 
 John Margrave Lerew , DFC ( 20 August 1912 – 24 February 1996 ) was an officer and pilot in the Royal Australian Air Force ( RAAF ) during World War II , and later a senior manager in the International Civil Aviation Organization ( ICAO ) . As commander of No. 24 Squadron , based in New Britain , he became famous in the annals of Air Force history for his irreverent response to orders by headquarters in Australia during the Battle of Rabaul in January 1942 . After his squadron was directed to assist in repelling the invading Japanese fleet with its one serviceable bomber , and to keep its damaged airfield open , Lerew signalled headquarters with the ancient Latin phrase supposedly used by gladiators honouring their Emperor : " Morituri vos salutamus " ( " We who are about to die salute you " ) . He also defied an order to abandon his staff , and organised their escape from Rabaul . 
 In February 1942 , Lerew led a low @-@ level bombing raid on enemy shipping in New Guinea that set two vessels on fire . He was shot down but managed to evade capture , and returned to safety nine days after being reported missing . Awarded the Distinguished Flying Cross , he subsequently commanded the RAAF 's first flying safety directorate . After leaving the Air Force in 1946 as a group captain , Lerew took up a position with the newly formed ICAO in Canada . He was responsible for several of its administrative and technical reforms , and rose to Chief of Flight Branch in 1969 . Retiring from ICAO in 1972 , he travelled extensively before settling in Vancouver , where he died in 1996 at the age of eighty @-@ three . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Born in Hamilton , Victoria , Lerew was the son of William Margrave Lerew , a chemist and veterinary surgeon who had emigrated from England with his two brothers . The family was of French Huguenot extraction , the original name being Le Roux . John Lerew was educated at Scotch College , Melbourne , where he was a member of the cadets . He studied part @-@ time for a bachelor 's degree in civil engineering at the University of Melbourne , concurrently serving approximately two years in the militia with various units including the 39th Battalion , 3rd Division Artillery Survey Unit , and Melbourne University Regiment . He also developed a love of fast cars , joining a racing team and placing third in the 1930 Australian Grand Prix . 
 On 19 November 1932 , Lerew enlisted as an air cadet in the RAAF active reserve , known as the Citizen Air Force ( CAF ) . He had marched into Victoria Barracks on a whim and asked to see the person in charge of Air Force recruiting . He was shown to the office of Squadron Leader Raymond Brownell , also a former Scotch College boy , who admitted him . Lerew undertook flying instruction on the 1933 ' B ' course conducted by No. 1 Squadron at RAAF Station Laverton , and was commissioned a pilot officer on 1 April . He transferred from the CAF to the Permanent Air Force on 20 May 1935 , following graduation from university , and was promoted flying officer on 1 July . Posted to No. 1 Aircraft Depot , he was raised to probationary flight lieutenant in 1936 . The rank became substantive the following year , when he was appointed Staff Officer Directorate of Works and Buildings at RAAF Headquarters , Melbourne , responsible for selection and improvement of airfield sites . 
 = = World War II = = 
 <unk> was still based in Melbourne when World War II broke out in September 1939 . He was promoted squadron leader in June 1940 , and the same month took charge of No. 1 Aircraft Park in Geelong . One of his initial tasks was to test fly the first Fairey Battle single @-@ engined light bomber assembled in Australia . He was posted to No. 2 Aircraft Depot at RAAF Station Richmond , New South Wales , in September 1940 , and shortly afterwards undertook a survey of the Solomon Islands and the island of New Britain , including its capital Rabaul . Lerew was given command of No. 24 Squadron in May 1941 , and raised to temporary wing commander in October . 
 No. 24 Squadron 's complement in November 1941 consisted of one Fairey Battle , three De Havilland Moth Minor biplane trainers , five Lockheed Hudson twin @-@ engined light bombers , and eleven CAC Wirraway monoplane trainers . The two @-@ seat Wirraways were expected to be employed in operations as fighters , but were suitable for such a role " only in the minds of the Air Board " , in the words of RAAF historian Alan Stephens . On 1 December , RAAF Headquarters in Melbourne put Lerew 's squadron on notice for deployment to Rabaul as an advance garrison in the defence of northern Australia . 
 = = = Preparations at Rabaul = = = 
 No. 24 Squadron 's Hudsons began moving to Vunakanau airfield , Rabaul , from RAAF Station Townsville in far @-@ north Queensland on 5 December 1941 . By the middle of the month they had been joined by the unit 's Wirraways . Vunakanau afforded little shelter for staff or aircraft , and Japanese reconnaissance planes were already active in the vicinity , suggesting an attack was imminent . No. 24 Squadron began carrying out reconnaissance missions with its Hudsons , and on one occasion attempted to bomb an enemy ship without success . RAAF Headquarters threatened to relieve Lerew for his apparent lack of results and delays in communications , and demanded to know his excuses . Possessed of what the official history of the RAAF in World War II described as an " impish irreverence " , Lerew listed among his reasons " disappointment in the lack of assistance rendered by the Almighty " . He later reported that he was being caused " more worry " by his own headquarters in " the south than from the enemy situated in the north " . 
 No. 24 Squadron 's strength at the beginning of 1942 was four Hudsons , six Wirraways , and 130 staff . On New Year 's Day , Lerew led the Hudsons on a raid against <unk> Island , igniting a fuel dump that was still burning when the squadron returned to follow up the attack two days later . During 4 – 7 January , Vunakanau airfield suffered four raids by unescorted Japanese bombers , destroying all but one of the Hudsons . Although the Wirraways were scrambled to intercept attackers on several occasions , their rate of climb was so poor that only once did one of them manage to engage an enemy seaplane , without result ; this action , on 6 January , was the first air @-@ to @-@ air combat between RAAF and Japanese forces . At this point , Lerew signalled headquarters for six " modern fighters " with which to defend his airfield ; none were forthcoming . 
 Squadron Leader Arch Tindal , Northern Area Command Armaments Officer , added his weight to Lerew 's pleas for modern aircraft . Tindal had arrived to inspect No. 24 Squadron in the middle of an enemy attack on 3 January , and immediately leapt into the nearest Wirraway to attempt an interception . He later submitted a report to headquarters at Townsville , echoing Lerew 's concerns regarding the Wirraway 's capabilities and warning that " Rabaul is now wide open to bombing attack " . Despite this , morale remained high in the unit ; Lerew remarked on the devil @-@ may @-@ care attitude of his personnel , who frequently waited until the last moment to take cover during air raids . On 17 January , Lerew was able to gain sufficient height in his Wirraway to confront a Japanese seaplane in a head @-@ on attack , but his .303 machine @-@ gun ammunition was not sufficient to bring it down . In 1956 , while at a conference in Tokyo , he coincidentally met the Japanese plane 's pilot , who informed him that his lone assault had damaged an engine and killed two crewmen , adding that Lerew was " the bravest enemy I ever faced " . 
 = = = Invasion of Rabaul = = = 
 On 20 January , a force of over 100 Japanese aircraft , comprising bombers , dive bombers and fighter escort , converged on Rabaul . It was led by Commander Mitsuo <unk> , who had controlled the attack on Pearl Harbor on 7 December 1941 . Two patrolling Wirraways of No. 24 Squadron attacked the first wave of Japanese raiders . Lerew 's six remaining Wirraways then scrambled , one crashing on take @-@ off . Of the seven that were airborne , three were shot down into the sea by Mitsubishi Zero fighters , two others crash landed with severe damage , one escaped with minor damage , and one remained unscathed . The ten @-@ minute action killed six RAAF aircrew and wounded five . An Australian soldier on the ground later recalled , " We sat at our guns , shocked by the massacre we had just observed " . The Japanese fighters compounded the humiliation by executing aerobatics over the bombed airfield . Lerew signalled headquarters , " Two Wirraways useless defence . Will you now please send some fighters ? " , receiving the reply , " Regret inability to supply fighters . If we had them you would get them . " The next day he was ordered to attack the approaching Japanese fleet with " all available aircraft " . As his two serviceable Wirraways had no bomb racks , this left only the one remaining Hudson with which to execute the order ; it duly took off to search for the enemy ships but was unable to locate them by nightfall , and returned to base . 
 It was following a further directive from headquarters on 21 January 1942 to keep his airfield " open " , that Lerew , after discussion with his intelligence staff , sent the signal that made him famous : " Morituri vos salutamus " . The message flummoxed headquarters , until an officer familiar with Latin decoded it as the legendary phrase used by ancient gladiators to honour their Emperor : " We who are about to die salute you ! " Lerew also chose to ignore two other orders received from headquarters , firstly to turn his remaining ground staff and aircrew into infantrymen to assist with the army 's defence and secondly to leave Rabaul in his remaining Hudson to take command of a new squadron in Port Moresby , New Guinea . To the first order he replied that trained RAAF crews would be more valuable in future actions than in a last @-@ ditch effort to repel the invader at Rabaul ; to the second he simply turned a " blind eye " , refusing to escape alone in the only aircraft left that could evacuate his personnel . On 22 January , he sent off ninety @-@ six staff in the Hudson and in flying boats called in from Port Moresby . Others escaped overland or in boats ; Lerew 's careful planning helped ensure that only three of his men were captured by the Japanese . 
 = = = Later war service = = = 
 Following the evacuation of Rabaul , Lerew took command of a composite squadron in Port Moresby which later became No. 32 ( General Reconnaissance ) Squadron . On 11 February 1942 , he led a flight of three Hudsons in a raid on Gasmata harbour , making what the official history of the RAAF in World War II described as " the first mast @-@ height attack on enemy shipping in the New Guinea campaign " . Having set two ships on fire , the Hudsons were attacked by enemy fighters and two were shot down , including Lerew 's . With his aircraft in flames , he ordered his crew to bail out of the rear hatch while he parachuted from the front window . Lerew landed in the jungle and narrowly avoided capture before making his way to a Coastwatcher post and returning to Port Moresby in a schooner , nine days after having been posted missing ; his crew members had died . On 7 April , Lerew was awarded the Distinguished Flying Cross for " outstanding courage , determination , skill and tenacity in the course of bombing raids on enemy positions in New Britain " . The success of the Gasmata operation prompted the Chief of the Air Staff to commend Lerew 's squadron for the " effort required by both crews and ground personnel owing to our small numbers and general condition " . 
 Returning to Australia , Lerew held various base commands including RAAF Station Townsville , RAAF Station Nowra in New South Wales , and Batchelor Airfield near Darwin , Northern Territory . He led No. 7 Squadron , operating Bristol Beauforts out of first Nowra and then Townsville , from August to December 1942 . He then returned to RAAF Station Laverton to take charge of No. 1 Aircraft Depot ( No. 1 AD ) . Lerew 's biographer , Lex <unk> , speculated of this quick succession of postings across the country : " ... it is easy to assume that this Wing Commander whose critical reports were seen by the War Cabinet , and who had twice escaped the enemy at close quarters , was not to be allowed personal contact with the media of the day until his experiences were no longer topical and were overtaken by more recent momentous events " . Though degree @-@ qualified in civil engineering , Lerew believed he was underused in the technical environment of No. 1 AD , and sought another overseas posting . Nevertheless , his tenure at Laverton helped prepare him for his later flying safety work . In September 1943 , he investigated the crash of a Vultee Vengeance flown by an experienced aviator , and found that when rolling the aircraft to the right it was possible for the pilot 's movements to release his safety harness , making it impossible for him to remain in his seat and control the aircraft . Lerew designed and developed a clip to prevent a recurrence of this mishap , which was later adopted worldwide for all such harnesses . 
 Lerew was posted to RAAF Overseas Headquarters , London , in December 1943 . He travelled via the United States , meeting film stars Bing Crosby , Bob Hope , and Dorothy Lamour on the set of Road to Utopia at Los Angeles in February 1944 . In London , he undertook study of RAF and USAAF methods of operations , as well as diplomatic duties . Of the invasion of France on 6 June 1944 , he wrote : " There has been no rejoicing . A hushed quietness has descended over London and all of England . Most people have relatives in it , and there is only one wish : that is , that it will end quickly . It is depressing to be playing no part in it . " Later in the year , Lerew was invested with his Distinguished Flying Cross by King George VI at Buckingham Palace . He returned to Australia in early 1945 , and married Laurie Steele , the Australian @-@ born widow of a Royal Air Force night @-@ fighter pilot , having met her when he was stationed in England . The couple had two daughters , but eventually divorced . In March , Lerew took part in the investigation into the crash of a Hudson carrying Major General George Vasey ; he determined that the pilot 's lack of experience in instrument flying had been a factor , and recommended further such training for RAAF flight crew . Promoted group captain , he formed the Directorate of Flying Safety in June 1945 and served as its inaugural Director . Believing that the promotion of flying safety in the RAAF cut across both administrative and operational spheres , and aware of the notorious feud between the service 's two senior officers , Air Vice Marshals George Jones and Bill Bostock , Lerew had proposed that the new directorate be placed squarely under the auspices of Jones as Chief of the Air Staff , with authority to demand free access to information from all other directorates . 
 = = Post @-@ war career and later life = = 
 Dubious about the prospects for advancement in the post @-@ war military , Lerew applied for a role in the recently established Provisional International Civil Aviation Organisation ( PICAO ) in March 1946 , while still Director of Flying Safety in the RAAF . He had just been appointed Air Officer Commanding North @-@ Western Area in Darwin on 7 October 1946 when PICAO offered him the position of Technical Officer , which he accepted . He left the RAAF on 8 November 1946 , emigrating to Montreal , Canada , to take up his new employment with PICAO , which became ICAO in 1947 . Appointed Chief of Aerodromes , Air Routes and Ground Aids Section in January 1951 , he conducted assessments of airfields throughout the world , and led the team that recommended <unk> be developed as Athens ' international airport . Lerew received credit for several of ICAO 's accomplishments over the next decade , including various administrative reforms within the organisation and finalising a standard runway approach lighting system in 1953 following five years of disagreement among members . A colleague remembered him as having " that very fortunate duality of personality , being serious , efficient and knowledgeable in his official capacity , with an equally inherent twin ability to really liven things up off @-@ duty " . 
 In Mexico on 20 August 1966 , Lerew married Josephine Henriette Oude <unk> , a Dutch national he had met three years earlier . He was promoted ICAO 's Chief of Flight Branch in April 1969 , in which capacity he served until retiring from the organisation in 1972 . In retirement , Lerew and his wife restored houses and travelled extensively . Their expeditions resulted in two narrow escapes , in December 1974 when they tired of the oppressively humid weather in Darwin and left just before Cyclone Tracy struck on Christmas Day , and in February 1976 when they decided to camp well away from Lake Atitlan , Guatemala , which was devastated soon after by an earthquake that left over 22 @,@ 000 people dead . The couple eventually settled in Vancouver , where John Lerew died of cancer on 24 February 1996 , aged eighty @-@ three . He was survived by Josephine and the children of his first marriage . 
 = Allied naval bombardments of Japan during World War II = 
 During the last weeks of World War II , warships of the United States Navy , the British Royal Navy , and the Royal New Zealand Navy bombarded industrial and military facilities in Japan . Most of these bombardments involved battleships and caused heavy damage to several of the factories targeted , as well as nearby civilian areas . A major goal of the attacks was to provoke the Japanese military into committing some of its reserve force of aircraft into battle . However , the Japanese did not attempt to attack the Allied bombardment forces , and none of the involved warships suffered any damage . 
 The major bombardments began on 14 and 15 July 1945 , when US Navy warships attacked the cities of Kamaishi and Muroran . The next attack was made by a joint American and British force against the city of Hitachi during the night of 17 / 18 July . Groups of cruisers and destroyers subsequently shelled the Nojima Saki and Shionomisaki areas on 18 July and the night of 24 / 25 July , respectively . On 29 July , American and British warships attacked Hamamatsu , and on the night of 30 / 31 several American destroyers shelled Shimizu . The final bombardment took place on 9 August , when Kamaishi was attacked again by American , British and New Zealand warships . Two US Navy submarines conducted small @-@ scale attacks during June and July 1945 ; one of the submarines also landed a small raiding party . 
 The Allied naval bombardments disrupted industrial production in the cities targeted , and convinced many Japanese civilians that the war was lost . As many as 1 @,@ 739 Japanese were killed in the attacks , and up to 1 @,@ 497 were wounded . The only Allied casualties were 32 prisoners of war , who were killed in the bombardments of Kamaishi . 
 = = Background = = 
 By mid @-@ 1945 , cities and industrial facilities in the Japanese home islands were under sustained attack from United States Army Air Forces ( USAAF ) B @-@ 29 Superfortress heavy bombers based in the Mariana Islands . Attacks by Allied submarines and surface ships had also cut most of the country 's trade routes , and US Navy aircraft carrier task groups had raided locations in the home islands on several occasions . Shortages of fuel had confined most of the Imperial Japanese Navy 's surviving ships to port and forced them and the Imperial Japanese Army Air Service to hold its air units in reserve against the Allied invasion that was expected to be launched late in the year . Prior to the war , the Japanese military had assessed that coastal artillery was no longer suited to the country 's circumstances . As a result , only a few strategic ports were protected by artillery capable of engaging enemy warships , and most of these guns were of relatively small calibers . 
 During the Pacific War , the US Navy 's fast battleships had mainly been used to escort the groups of aircraft carriers that formed the United States Pacific Fleet 's main striking force . They had also occasionally bombarded Japanese positions near the shore , and had fought some actions with Japanese warships . 
 Allied naval commanders decided to use battleships to conduct a series of attacks against Japanese coastal cities in mid @-@ 1945 . It was hoped that the Japanese military would respond to these bombardments by attacking the Allied forces with the aircraft that were being held in reserve to respond to the planned invasion of Japan , thereby exposing these aircraft to destruction by Allied fighter aircraft . However , the Japanese Imperial General Headquarters had anticipated that the Allies would conduct bombardments and other operations with this goal , and decided to not attack naval forces operating off Japan . Instead , the aircraft would remain in reserve until Allied landing operations in the home islands began . 
 = = Bombardments = = 
 = = = First attack on Kamaishi = = = 
 On 1 July 1945 , the United States Third Fleet sortied from Leyte Gulf in the Philippines under the command of Admiral William Halsey to attack the Japanese home islands . Halsey 's plans included the use of battleships and cruisers to bombard military facilities and factories . To prepare for these attacks , US Navy submarines sailed into Japan 's inshore waters to search for naval mines . USAAF B @-@ 29 Superfortress and B @-@ 24 Liberator aircraft also conducted photo reconnaissance flights over much of Japan in search of airfields and facilities which could be attacked by the Third Fleet . 
 The Third Fleet 's main component , Task Force 38 ( TF 38 ) , began striking targets in Japan on 10 July under the command of Vice Admiral John S. McCain . On this day , aircraft flying from the Task Force 's aircraft carriers attacked facilities around Tokyo . Task Force 38 sailed north , and on 14 July began raids on Hokkaido and northern Honshu . These areas were outside the range of the B @-@ 29 Superfortress bombers , and had at that point not been attacked in the war . The American aircraft met little opposition , and sank 11 warships and 20 merchant ships . A further eight warships and 21 merchant ships were damaged , and the carrier aviators claimed to have destroyed 25 Japanese aircraft . 
 The first Allied bombardment of a Japanese coastal town was conducted on 14 July in conjunction with the air attacks on Hokkaido and northern Honshu . A bombardment group commanded by Rear Admiral John F. Shafroth designated Task Unit 34 @.@ 8 @.@ 1 ( TU 34 @.@ 8 @.@ 1 ) was detached from TF 38 to attack the iron works at Kamaishi in northern Honshu . At the time the city had a population of 40 @,@ 000 and the iron works was among the largest in Japan . However , due to shortages of coking coal and other raw materials , the iron works was running at less than half its capacity . TU 34 @.@ 8 @.@ 1 comprised the battleships USS South Dakota , Indiana and Massachusetts as well as the heavy cruisers USS Quincy and Chicago and nine destroyers . Allied prisoners of war had been assigned to work at the Nippon Steel Company , and were housed in two camps in Kamaishi . 
 The bombardment group opened fire on the ironworks at 12 : 10 p.m. from a range of 29 @,@ 000 yd ( 27 @,@ 000 m ) . The ships then moved closer to the city , but did not cross the 100 @-@ fathom line as no minesweepers were available to clear the area of mines . The bombardment lasted for over two hours , during which time the force made six passes across the mouth of Kamaishi 's harbor and fired 802 16 @-@ inch ( 410 mm ) shells , 728 8 @-@ inch ( 200 mm ) shells and 825 5 @-@ inch ( 130 mm ) shells . While most of the shells landed within the grounds of the ironworks , the concussion from their explosions caused kitchen fires to break out across Kamaishi . The resulting smoke prevented US Navy aircraft from being able to support or spot for the warships , which continued to fire accurately on predetermined targets . No Japanese aircraft or coastal guns responded to this bombardment . Allied aircraft photographed the ironworks following the attack , but photo interpreters underestimated the extent to which they had been damaged . This was one of the first times that photographic intelligence had been used to determine the extent of damage from a naval bombardment , and the interpreters placed too much weight on the fact that none of the ironworks ' buildings had been destroyed . The Allies learned after the war that the ironworks had been extensively damaged and forced to cease production for a period . This resulted in a loss of the equivalent of four weeks of pig iron production and two @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half months of coke production . Five Allied prisoners of war were killed by the bombardment . 
 = = = Muroran = = = 
 On the night of 14 / 15 July , another bombardment unit — TU 34 @.@ 8 @.@ 2 — was detached from TF 38 to attack the town of Muroran on the south @-@ east coast of Hokkaido . TU 34 @.@ 8 @.@ 2 was commanded by Rear Admiral Oscar C. Badger and comprised the battleships Iowa , Missouri and Wisconsin , the light cruisers Atlanta and Dayton , and eight destroyers . Admiral Halsey accompanied this force on board Missouri . The targets of this attack were the Japan Steel Company 's facilities and the Wanishi Iron Works . Also that night , a force of four cruisers and six destroyers cruised along the east coast of Honshu seeking to attack Japanese shipping but did not locate any targets . 
 TU 34 @.@ 8 @.@ 2 's bombardment began at dawn on 15 July . The three battleships fired 860 16 @-@ inch ( 410 mm ) shells at the city from a range of 28 @,@ 000 – 32 @,@ 000 yd ( 26 @,@ 000 – 29 @,@ 000 m ) . Aerial observation and spotting of damage was made difficult by hazy conditions , and only 170 shells landed within the grounds of the two plants . Nevertheless , considerable damage was inflicted on the industrial facilities , resulting in the loss of two @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half months of coke production and slightly less pig iron production . Damage to buildings across the city was also extensive . As with the bombardment of Kamaishi , photo interpreters underestimated the scale of the damage . TU 34 @.@ 8 @.@ 2 was highly vulnerable to air attack throughout the more @-@ than @-@ six @-@ hour period in which it was visible from the shore of Hokkaido , and Halsey later wrote that these were the longest hours of his life . The failure of the Japanese to attack his ships convinced Halsey that they were preserving aircraft for use against the Allied invasion force . On 15 July , aircraft flying from TF 38 's aircraft carriers struck again at Hokkaido and northern Honshu , devastating the fleet of ships that carried coal between the two islands . 
 = = = Hitachi = = = 
 The attacks on Hokkaido and northern Honshu ended on 15 July , and TF 38 sailed away from the Japanese coast to refuel and rendezvous with the main body of the British Pacific Fleet , which was designated Task Force 37 ( TF 37 ) . On the morning of 17 July , the British and American carriers attacked targets to the north of Tokyo . Later that day , TU 34 @.@ 8 @.@ 2 detached from the carrier force to bombard targets around the city of Hitachi , which is located about 80 mi ( 130 km ) northeast of Tokyo . This force was commanded by Rear Admiral Badger and comprised the battleships Iowa , Missouri , Wisconsin , North Carolina , Alabama , and HMS King George V , light cruisers Atlanta and Dayton , and eight American and two British destroyers . King George V and her two escorts sailed astern of the American force , and operated independently . Halsey again accompanied this force on board Missouri . 
 The bombardment of the Hitachi area took place on the night of 17 / 18 July . Rain and fog made locating the targets difficult and prevented spotting aircraft from flying , but several carrier aircraft flew protective patrols over the bombardment force . The Allied warships opened fire at 11 : 10 p.m. , and aimed at their targets using radar and LORAN . The attackers targeted nine industrial facilities , and King George V was assigned similar targets to those engaged by the American battleships . By the time the bombardment ceased at about 1 : 10 a.m. , the American battleships had fired 1 @,@ 238 16 @-@ inch ( 410 mm ) shells , and the British battleship 267 14 @-@ inch ( 360 mm ) shells . The two light cruisers also fired 292 6 @-@ inch ( 150 mm ) shells at radar and electronics installations south of Hitachi . All firing was conducted at a range of 23 @,@ 000 – 35 @,@ 000 yd ( 21 @,@ 000 – 32 @,@ 000 m ) from the targets . 
 The attack on Hitachi had mixed results . Only three of the bombardment 's nine targets were hit , and the overall damage to the city 's industrial area was assessed as " slight " . However , the attack inflicted considerable damage on the city 's urban area and essential services . This damage was greatly increased by a B @-@ 29 raid on Hitachi on the night of 18 / 19 July that destroyed or damaged 79 percent of the city 's urban area . The official history of the US Navy in World War II states that " individual Japanese " considered the naval bombardment to have been more terrifying than the air attack . 
 = = = Nojima Saki and Shionomisaki = = = 
 On 18 July , TFs 37 and 38 conducted further air strikes in the Tokyo area , with the American force 's main effort being an attempt to sink the Japanese battleship Nagato at Yokosuka Naval Base . That night , Cruiser Division 17 ( CruDiv 17 ) , which comprised the light cruisers USS Astoria , Pasadena , Springfield and Wilkes @-@ Barre and six destroyers under the command of Rear Admiral J. Cary Jones , fired 240 6 @-@ inch ( 150 mm ) shells at a radar station on Cape Nojima over a five @-@ minute period but did not score any hits . 
 After completing its strikes on the Tokyo region , the Allied fleet conducted an at @-@ sea replenishment from 21 to 23 July before attacking Kure and the Inland Sea from the 24th to the 28th of the month . On the night of 24 / 25 July , CruDiv 17 patrolled the Kii Channel and bombarded the naval seaplane base at Kushimoto , a landing field near Cape Shionomisaki , and a radio station . This attack lasted for only four minutes and caused little damage . 
 = = = Hamamatsu = = = 
 On 29 July , a group of warships was detached from the main body of the Allied fleet to bombard the city of Hamamatsu , which lies on the south coast of Honshu between Nagoya and Tokyo . This force comprised the same ships which had attacked Kamaishi on 14 July with the addition of King George V and the destroyers HMS Ulysses , Undine and Urania ; the four British ships were designated Task Unit 37 @.@ 1 @.@ 2 ( TU 37 @.@ 1 @.@ 2 ) . The city had previously suffered extensive damage from air attacks . 
 The British and American ships engaged their targets independently . King George V opened fire at the Japan Musical Instrument Company 's Plant No. 2 ( which was being used to manufacture aircraft propellers ) at 11 : 19 p.m. from a range of 20 @,@ 075 yd ( 18 @,@ 357 m ) . The battleship fired 265 14 @-@ inch ( 360 mm ) rounds at the plant in 27 minutes and was able to make use of artillery spotting aircraft , with visibility being good . Even so , little damage was inflicted on the facility . Massachusetts fired at Plant No. 1 but scored only a small number of hits . Despite the limited physical damage , the shelling caused increased labor absenteeism and disruption to vital services that caused the factory to cease production . The American ships also shelled the Imperial Government Railway locomotive works and three other industrial facilities . 
 Of these targets , the locomotive works ceased operations for about three months due to damage , but two of the other facilities had almost ceased production before the attack and the third was not damaged . Two bridges on the important Tōkaidō Main Line were fired upon but not hit , though damage to rail infrastructure in Hamamatsu closed the line for 66 hours . During the bombardment Undine twice opened fire on small groups of ships that were probably fishing boats . No Japanese aircraft or shore batteries responded to the Allied attack . The bombardment of Hamamatsu was the last time a British battleship fired its guns in anger . 
 = = = Shimizu = = = 
 The next bombardment of Japan took place on the night of 30 / 31 July . On that night Destroyer Squadron 25 ( <unk> 25 ) , which was commanded by Captain J.W. <unk> aboard USS John Rodgers , searched the Suruga Gulf for Japanese shipping to attack . No ships were located , and in the early hours of 31 July the squadron sailed deep into the gulf and fired 1 @,@ 100 rounds of 5 @-@ inch ( 130 mm ) shells during seven minutes at a railway yard and aluminum plant in the town of Shimizu . While the aluminum plant was hit , this was of little importance as it had almost ceased production due to a shortage of raw materials . No damage was caused to the rail yard . 
 = = = Second attack on Kamaishi = = = 
 During the last days of July and into early August , the Allied fleet sailed away from the Japanese coast to avoid a typhoon and allow the ships to replenish their stocks of fuel and ammunition . The fleet then sailed north and , on both 9 and 10 August , the carrier aircraft attacked a large concentration of Japanese aircraft on airfields in northern Honshu . The carrier pilots claimed the destruction of 720 Japanese aircraft in this operation . 
 As part of these operations off northern Japan , Kamaishi was bombarded again on 9 August in the mistaken belief that the iron works had not been badly damaged . TU 34 @.@ 8 @.@ 1 conducted this attack , and comprised the ships that had bombarded the city in July with the addition of the heavy cruisers USS Boston and Saint Paul , British light cruiser HMS Newfoundland , Royal New Zealand Navy light cruiser HMNZS Gambia and destroyers HMS Terpsichore , Termagant and Tenacious . King George V did not participate in this action as mechanical problems affecting two of her propeller shafts meant that she was unable to sail at the speed specified for the bombardment force . 
 The Allied ships opened fire on the iron works and docks in Kamaishi at 12 : 54 p.m. The bombardment was conducted from an average range of 14 @,@ 000 yd ( 13 @,@ 000 m ) and lasted for almost two hours . During this time , the ships made four passes across Kamaishi harbor and fired 803 16 @-@ inch ( 410 mm ) shells , 1 @,@ 383 8 @-@ inch ( 200 mm ) shells and 733 6 @-@ inch ( 150 mm ) shells . Gambia fired the final shots of the attack . During the bombardment , several Japanese aircraft approached the Allied ships and two were shot down by Allied naval fighters . This bombardment caused more damage than the attack conducted in July , and large quantities of pig iron were destroyed . The sounds of this bombardment were broadcast live on radio in the United States via a radio relay on board Iowa . One of the prisoner of war camps in Kamaishi was destroyed by the Allied attack , resulting in the deaths of 27 Allied prisoners . 
 A further bombardment by King George V , three light cruisers and escorting destroyers was planned to be conducted against an unspecified Japanese target on 13 August . This attack was cancelled due both to the battleship 's mechanical problems and the atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki . The Allied fleet did not conduct any other bombardments as Japan surrendered on 15 August . 
 = = = Submarine attacks = = = 
 Two US Navy submarines attacked locations in the Japanese home islands during June and July 1945 . On 20 June USS Barb arrived off Japan 's northern islands under the command of Commander Gene <unk> . For this patrol the submarine had been fitted with an experimental 5 @-@ inch ( 130 mm ) rocket launcher intended for shore bombardments . Shortly after midnight on 22 June the submarine fired 12 rockets at the town of Shari in north @-@ east Hokkaido . Barb then proceeded north , and on 2 July bombarded the town of Kaiyo in south @-@ east Sakhalin with its deck gun . This attack destroyed three sampans docked in the town , damaged a seal rookery and caused several fires to break out . The next day the submarine fired more rockets at the town of <unk> . A party of eight men from Barb was landed on the east coast of Sakhalin on 23 July and planted demolition charges on a railroad track . Shortly after the men began rowing back to the submarine the charges were triggered by a passing train ; 150 people , including civilians , were killed . On 24 July , Barb fired 32 rockets at the town of Shiritori and 12 rockets at <unk> . As the submarine returned to base it shelled the towns of <unk> on 25 July and <unk> the next day . 
 The other submarine bombardment took place during the morning of 24 June , when USS <unk> fired some shells at the island of Hirado Shima in the Tsushima Strait between Japan and Korea . This attack sought to convince the Japanese that a force of American submarines that had been operating in the Sea of Japan would attempt to depart via the Tsushima Strait , instead of their actual route far to the north through the La Pérouse Strait between Honshu and Sakhalin . 
 = = Results = = 
 Although the naval bombardments did not result in the reaction the Allies were hoping for from the Japanese military , they disrupted the country 's steel industry . While several of the factories attacked were operating at reduced capacity , the important Kamaishi and Wanishi Iron Works suffered heavy damage when they were bombarded in July and August . During both these attacks , the Allied gunnery was accurate and focused on the factories ' coke batteries , which were critical to continued production . Post @-@ war assessments found that the damage caused to industrial buildings by even 16 @-@ inch ( 410 mm ) naval shells was less than that which could be inflicted by the 2 @,@ 000 lb ( 910 kg ) and 1 @,@ 000 lb ( 450 kg ) general @-@ purpose bombs that were used by Allied naval aircraft . While this supported a view put forward by Vice Admiral McCain that the aircraft assigned to protect the bombardment forces could have caused more damage than the ships themselves , the post @-@ war United States Strategic Bombing Survey judged that the naval bombardments were justified as there had been little risk to the ships involved . 
 The bombardments also affected Japanese morale . Japanese civilians who experienced both air and naval bombardment found the naval attacks to be more terrifying due to their unpredictability and longer duration . Several of the industrial facilities that suffered little damage in bombardments incurred a significant loss in production due to absenteeism and reduced productivity . This was not the case for all facilities that were attacked though , and the morale among workers in two of the bombarded factories was reported to have increased . The appearance of Allied warships just off the coast also convinced many Japanese that the war had been lost . However , such attitudes did not contribute to bringing the war to an end as the views of civilians had little influence on the Japanese Government 's decision to surrender . 
 In 1949 , the Japanese Economic Stabilization Agency calculated that the Allied naval bombardments and other forms of attack other than bombing had caused 3 @,@ 282 casualties , representing 0 @.@ 5 percent of all casualties inflicted by the Allies in the Japanese home islands . The casualties attributed to naval bombardments and other causes included 1 @,@ 739 fatalities , 46 persons who were still classified as missing and 1 @,@ 497 people who were wounded . 
 = Donegal fiddle tradition = 
 The Donegal fiddle tradition is the way of playing the fiddle that is traditional in County Donegal , Ireland . It is one of the distinct fiddle traditions within Irish traditional music . 
 The distinctness of the Donegal tradition developed due to the close relations between Donegal and Scotland , and the Donegal repertoire and style has influences from Scottish fiddle music . For example , in addition to the standard tune types such as Jigs and Reels , the Donegal tradition also has Highlands ( influenced by the Scottish Strathspey ) . The distinctiveness of the Donegal tradition led to some conflict between Donegal players and representatives of the mainstream tradition when Irish traditional music was organised in the 1960s . 
 The tradition has several distinguishing traits compared to other fiddle traditions such as the <unk> <unk> style of southern <unk> , most of which involves styles of bowing and the ornamentation of the music , and rhythm . Due to the frequency of double stops and the strong bowing it is often compared to the Cape Breton tradition . Another characteristic of the style is the rapid pace at which it tends to proceed . Modern players , such as the fiddle group Altan , continue to be popular due to a variety of reasons . 
 Among the most famous Donegal style players are John Doherty from the early twentieth century and James Byrne , Paddy Glackin , Tommy Peoples and Mairéad Ní Mhaonaigh in recent decades . 
 = = History = = 
 The fiddle has ancient roots in Ireland , the first report of bowed instruments similar to the violin being in the Book of Leinster ( ca . 1160 ) . The modern violin was ubiquitous in Ireland by the early 1700s . However the first mention of the fiddle being in use in Donegal is from the blind harper Arthur O 'Neill who in his 1760 memoirs described a wedding in <unk> as having " plenty of pipers and fiddlers " . Donegal fiddlers participated in the development of the Irish music tradition in the 18th century during which jigs and <unk> and later reels and hornpipes became the dominant musical forms . However , Donegal musicians , many of them being fishermen , also frequently travelled to Scotland , where they acquired tune types from the Scottish repertoire such as the Strathspey which was integrated into the Donegal tradition as " Highland " tunes . The Donegal tradition derives much of its unique character from the synthesis of Irish and Scottish stylistic features and repertoires . Aoidh notes however that while different types of art music were commonly played among the upper classes of Scottish society in the 18th century , the Donegal tradition drew exclusively from the popular types of Scottish music . Like some Scottish fiddlers ( who , like Donegal fiddlers , tend to use a short bow and play in a straight @-@ ahead fashion ) , some Donegal fiddlers worked at imitating the sound of the bagpipes . Workers from Donegal would bring their music to Scotland and also bring back Scottish tunes with them such music of J. Scott Skinner and Mackenzie Murdoch . Lilting , unaccompanied singing of wordless tunes , was also an important part of the Donegal musical tradition often performed by women in social settings . Describing the musical life of Arranmore Island in the late 19th century singer <unk> Rua Nic <unk> describes the most popular dances : " The Sets , the Lancers , the Maggie <unk> [ i.e. , Maggie <unk> ] the Donkey , the Mazurka and the Barn dances " . Among the travelling fiddlers of the late 19th century players such as John <unk> McGinley , Anthony <unk> , the <unk> and the <unk> are best known . As skill levels increased through apprenticeships several fiddle masters appeared such as the Cassidy 's , Connie Haughey , Jimmy Lyons and <unk> McShane of Teelin and Francie Dearg and Mickey Bán Byrne of <unk> . These virtuosos played unaccompanied listening pieces in addition to the more common dance music . 
 The influences between Scotland and Donegal went both ways and were furthered by a wave of immigration from Donegal to Scotland in the 19th century ( the regions share common names of dances ) , as can be heard in the volume of <unk> , <unk> , marches , and Donegal 's own strong piping tradition , has influenced and been influenced by music , and by the sounds , ornaments , and repertoire of the <unk> <unk> , the traditional bagpipes of Ireland and Scotland . There are other differences between the Donegal style and the rest of Ireland . Instruments such as the tin whistle , flute , concertina and accordion were very rare in Donegal until modern times . Traditionally the <unk> mór and the fiddle were the only instruments used and the use of pipe or fiddle music was common in old wedding customs . Migrant workers carried their music to Scotland and also brought back a number of tunes of Scottish origin . The Donegal fiddlers may well have been the route by which Scottish tunes such as Lucy Campbell , Tarbolton Lodge ( Tarbolton ) and The <unk> ( The Flogging Reel ) , that entered the Irish repertoire . These players prided themselves on their technical abilities , which included playing in higher positions ( fairly uncommon among traditional Irish fiddlers ) , and sought out material which would demonstrate their skills . 
 As Irish music was consolidated and organised under the Comhaltas <unk> Éireann movement in the 1960s , both strengthened the interest in traditional music but sometimes conflicted with the Donegal tradition and its social conventions . The rigidly organised sessions of the Comhaltas reflected the traditions of Southern Ireland and Donegal fiddlers like John Doherty considered the National repertoire with its strong focus on reels to be less diverse than that of Donegal with its varied rhythms . Other old fiddlers dislike the ways <unk> sessions were organised with a committee player , often not himself a musician , in charge . Sometimes Comhaltas representatives would even disparage the Donegal tradition , with its Scottish flavour , as being un @-@ Irish , and prohibit them from playing local tunes with Scottish genealogies such as the " Highlands " at Comhaltas sessions . This sometimes cause antagonism between Donegal players and the main organisation of <unk> music in <unk> . 
 Outside of the Comhaltas movement however , Donegal fiddling stood strong with Paddy Glackin of <unk> <unk> and the Bothy Band and later Tommy Peoples also with the Bothy Band and Mairead Ni Mhaonaigh with Altan , who all drew attention and prestige to the Donegal tradition within folk music circles throughout Ireland . 
 = = Description of style = = 
 The Donegal style of fiddling is a label often applied to music from this area , though one also might plausibly identify several different , but related , styles within the county . To the extent to which there is one common style in the county , it is characterised by a rapid pace ; a tendency to be more un @-@ swung in the playing of the fast dance tune types ( reel and jigs ) ; short ( non @-@ slurred ) , aggressive bowing , sparse ornamentation , the use of bowed triplets more often than trills as ornaments , the use of double stops and droning ; and the occurrence of " playing the octave " , with one player playing the melody and the other playing the melody an octave lower . None of these characteristics are universal , and there is some disagreement as to the extent to which there is a common style at all . In general , however , the style is rather aggressive . 
 Another feature of Donegal fiddling that makes it distinctive among Irish musical traditions is the variety of rare tune types that are played . Highlands , a type of tune in 4 / 4 time with some similarities to Scottish <unk> , which are also played in Donegal , are one of the most commonly played types of tune in the county . Other tune types common solely in the county include <unk> , also called " Germans , " and mazurkas . 
 = = Fiddlers of the Donegal tradition = = 
 = = = Historical = = = 
 There are a number of different strands to the history of fiddle playing in County Donegal . Perhaps the best @-@ known and , in the last half of the twentieth century , the most influential has been that of the Doherty family . Hugh Doherty is the first known musician of this family . Born in 1790 , he headed an unbroken tradition of fiddlers and pipers in the Doherty family until the death , in 1980 , of perhaps the best @-@ known Donegal fiddler , John Doherty . John , a travelling tinsmith , was known for his extremely precise and fast <unk> and bow @-@ work and vast repertoire , and is considered to be one of the greatest Irish fiddlers ever recorded . John 's older brother , Mickey , was also recorded and , though Mickey was another of the great Irish fiddlers , his reputation has been overshadowed by John 's . 
 There is no single Donegal style but several distinctive styles . These styles traditionally come from the geographical isolated regions of Donegal including Inishowen , eastern Donegal , The Rosses and <unk> , <unk> , Teelin , <unk> , <unk> , Ballyshannon and <unk> . Even with improved communications and transport , these regions still have recognisably different ways of fiddle playing . Notable deceased players of the older Donegal styles include <unk> ( " <unk> " ) Boyle , Francie Byrne , Con Cassidy , Frank Cassidy , James Byrne ( 1946 – 2008 ) , and P.V. O 'Donnell ( 2011 ) . Currently living Donegal fiddlers , include , Vincent Campbell , John Gallagher , Paddy Glackin , Danny O 'Donnell , and Tommy Peoples . 
 = = = Modern = = = 
 Fiddle playing continues to be popular in Donegal . The three fiddlers of the Donegal " supergroup " Altan , Mairéad Ní Mhaonaigh , Paul O 'Shaughnessy , and Ciarán <unk> , are generally admired within Donegal . An example of another fiddler @-@ player from Donegal is Liz Doherty . 
 The fiddle , and traditional music in general , remained popular in Donegal not only because of the international coverage of certain artists but because of local pride in the music . Traditional music <unk> are still common place both in pubs and in houses . The Donegal fiddle music has been influenced by recorded music , but this is claimed to have had a positive impact on the tradition . Modern Donegal fiddle music is often played in concerts and recorded on albums . 
 = 1903 Tour de France = 
 The 1903 Tour de France was the first cycling race set up and sponsored by the newspaper L 'Auto , ancestor of the current daily , L 'Équipe . It ran from 1 to 19 July in six stages over 2 @,@ 428 km ( 1 @,@ 509 mi ) , and was won by Maurice Garin . 
 The race was invented to boost the circulation of L 'Auto , after its circulation started to plummet from competition with the long @-@ standing Le Vélo . Originally scheduled to start in June , the race was postponed one month , and the prize money was increased , after a disappointing level of applications from competitors . The 1903 Tour de France was the first stage road race , and compared to modern Grand Tours , it had relatively few stages , but each was much longer than those raced today . The cyclists did not have to compete in all six stages , although this was necessary to qualify for the general classification . 
 The pre @-@ race favourite , Maurice Garin , won the first stage , and retained the lead throughout . He also won the last two stages , and had a margin of almost three hours over the next cyclist . The circulation of L 'Auto increased more than sixfold during and after the race , so the race was considered successful enough to be rerun in 1904 , by which time Le Vélo had been forced out of business . 
 = = Origin = = 
 After the Dreyfus affair separated advertisers from the newspaper Le Vélo , a new newspaper L 'Auto @-@ Vélo was founded in 1900 , with former cyclist Henri Desgrange as editor . After being forced to change the name of the newspaper to L 'Auto in 1903 , Desgrange needed something to keep the cycling fans ; with circulation at 20 @,@ 000 , he could not afford to lose them . 
 When Desgrange and young employee <unk> Lefèvre were returning from the Marseille – Paris cycling race , Lefèvre suggested holding a race around France , similar to the popular six @-@ day races on the track . Desgrange proposed the idea to the financial controller Victor Goddet , who gave his approval , and on 19 January 1903 , the Tour de France was announced in L 'Auto . 
 It was to have been a five @-@ week race , from 1 June to 5 July , with an entry fee of 20 francs . These conditions attracted very few cyclists : one week before the race was due to start , only 15 competitors had signed up . Desgrange then rescheduled the race from 1 to 19 July , increased the total prize money to 20 @,@ 000 francs , reduced the entry fee to 10 francs and guaranteed at least five francs a day to the first 50 cyclists in the classification . After that , 79 cyclists signed up for the race , of whom 60 actually started the race . 
 <unk> <unk> became the director , judge and time @-@ keeper ; Henri Desgrange was the directeur @-@ général , although he did not follow the race . 
 = = Rules and course = = 
 The 1903 Tour de France was run in six stages . Compared to modern stage races , the stages were extraordinarily long , with an average distance of over 400 km ( 250 mi ) , compared to the 171 km ( 106 mi ) average stage length in the 2004 Tour de France ; cyclists had one to three rest days between each stage , and the route was largely flat , with only one stage featuring a significant mountain . The cyclists were not grouped in teams but raced as individuals , and paid a fee of ten francs ( € 87 @.@ 50 at 2003 prices ) to compete in the race for general classification , or five francs to enter a single stage . Because the stages were so long , all but the first started before dawn : the last stage started at 21 : 00 the night before . 
 The first Tour de France crossed no mountain passes , but several lesser cols . The first was the col des <unk> ( 712 m ( 2 @,@ 336 ft ) ) , on the opening stage from Paris to Lyon , on what is now the old road from Autun to Lyon . The stage from Lyon to Marseille included the col de la République ( 1 @,@ 161 m ( 3 @,@ 809 ft ) ) , also known as the col du Grand Bois , at the edge of St @-@ Etienne . 
 In 1903 , it was normal for a professional cyclist to hire pacers , who would lead them during the race . Desgrange forbade this : it was originally intended that in the final , longest , stage pacers would be allowed , but this was rescinded after the fifth stage . 
 To ensure that the cyclists rode the entire route , stewards were stationed at various points around the course . The yellow jersey for the leader in the general classification had not yet been introduced , but the leader was identified by a green armband . 
 The fastest eight cyclists on each stage received a prize between 50 francs and 1 @,@ 500 francs , varying per stage . The fourteen best cyclists in the general classification received a prize from 3 @,@ 000 francs for the winner to 25 francs for fourteenth place . The remaining seven cyclists to finish in the general classification each received 95 francs , 5 francs for each of the 19 days that the race took , provided that they had not won more than 200 francs in prize money and did not have an average speed below 20 km / h ( 12 mph ) on any stage . 
 = = Participants = = 
 In contrast to modern stage races , a cyclist who gave up during a stage was allowed to start again the next stage , although he would no longer be in contention for the general classification . Thus Hippolyte Aucouturier , who gave up during the first stage , was able to return , and won the second and third stages . Charles Laeser , winner of the fourth stage , had not completed the third stage . 
 Sixty cyclists , all professionals or semi @-@ professionals , started the race , of whom 49 were French , 4 Belgian , 4 Swiss , 2 German , and one Italian ; 21 of them were sponsored by bicycle manufacturers , while 39 entered without commercial support . 24 other cyclists took advantage of the opportunity to enter specific stages : one rode in both the second and fourth stages , and additionally three cyclists took part in the second stage , one in the third stage , fifteen in the fourth stage only , and a further four only competed in the fifth stage . 
 = = Race details = = 
 The pre @-@ race favourites for the victory were Maurice Garin and Hippolyte Aucouturier . Garin dominated the race from the start by winning the first stage , a 471 km ( 293 mi ) parcours from Paris to Lyon . The stage started at 15 : 16 , and the cyclists initially rode with a speed of 35 km / h . The first cyclists abandoned after around 50 km ( 31 mi ) . At 23 : 00 , Garin and Emile Pagie , leading the race , reached the control point in Nevers . Garin expected at that point that they would finish at 8 : 00 the next morning . During the night , Garin 's main rival , Aucouturier , had stomach cramps , and was unable to finish the stage . Also during that first stage , the first breach of the rules occurred : Jean Fischer had used a car as pacer , which was illegal . Pagie fell down , but got up again ; he and Garin kept leading the race during the night . Around 9 : 00 in the morning , both reached Lyon . Garin got away from Pagie , and finished one minute ahead . 
 Although Aucouturier had abandoned in the first stage , and so was not eligible for the general classification , he could still start the rest of the stages . In the second stage , Aucouturier was able to win the sprint . In the third stage , the cyclists who were competing for the general classification started one hour earlier than the other cyclists , including Aucouturier . At the end of that stage , a group of four cyclists had broken away , and Eugène <unk> won the sprint . Aucouturier finished 27 minutes later , but this meant that he had run the course 33 minutes faster , so he was declared the winner of the stage . Garin retained the lead , helped by a crash of second @-@ placed Pagie in the second stage , which eliminated him from the race . In the fourth stage , Aucouturier had a clear lead and seemed set to win a third successive stage , but was caught using the slipstream of a car , and was removed from the race . Swiss Charles Laeser ( who had abandoned in the 3rd stage ) took the victory , becoming the first non @-@ French winner . As in the third stage , the cyclists departed in two groups , and Laeser was in the second group because he was no longer contending for the general classification . Laeser finished more than 50 minutes after a group of six cyclists , but he had travelled the distance 4 minutes faster than them , so he was declared the winner . 
 At that point , Garin was leading , with Émile Georget almost two hours behind . In the fifth stage , Georget had two flat tires , and fell asleep when he stopped at the side of the road to rest ; he failed to finish . Thus Garin extended his lead by winning this stage , carrying nearly three hours ' advantage into the final day 's racing . Garin had requested other cyclists in the leading group to let him win the stage , but Fernand Augereau refused to do this . Garin then had Lucien Pothier throw down his bicycle in front of Augereau , who fell , and Garin then bent Augereau 's rear wheel . Augereau quickly obtained a spare bike and continued to the finish , however Garin easily won the sprint . Augereau still received a prize of 100 francs from Velo @-@ Sport Nantes for the fastest final kilometer of the stage in the Nantes velodrome . The last stage was the longest , at 471 km ( 293 mi ) , and ran from Nantes to the small town of Ville @-@ d 'Avray , which lies between Versailles and Paris , instead of at the Parc des Princes velodrome . This was because of a bylaw forbidding road races to end on cycling tracks ( a bylaw subsequently repealed in light of the race 's success ) . Garin took his third stage win , and sealed overall victory by 2 hours 59 minutes 31 seconds : this remains the greatest margin of victory in the Tour de France . After celebrating with champagne , the riders cycled to Parc des Princes , where they made several laps of honour before an adoring crowd , to the sound of a bugle . 
 = = Results = = 
 = = = Stage results = = = 
 In 1903 , there was no distinction in the rules between plain stages and mountain stages ; the icons shown here indicate whether the stage included mountains . 
 = = = General classification = = = 
 There were 21 cyclists who had completed all six stages . For these cyclists , the times taken for each stage were added up for the general classification . The cyclist with the least accumulated time was the winner . The cyclists officially were not grouped in teams ; some cyclists had the same sponsor , even though they were not allowed to work together . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 The circulation of L 'Auto increased significantly due to this event ; a special edition of 130 @,@ 000 copies was made after the race was over , and normal circulation increased from 25 @,@ 000 to 65 @,@ 000 . The big success made sure that the Tour de France was scheduled again for 1904 . The cyclists had also become national heroes . Maurice Garin returned for the 1904 Tour de France but his title defence failed when he was disqualified . With the prize money that he won in 1903 , which totalled 6 @,@ 075 francs , ( approximately US $ 40 @,@ 000 and GBP £ 23 @,@ 000 in 2006 values ) Garin later bought a gas station , where he worked for the rest of his life . 
 = Switzerland = 
 Switzerland ( / <unk> / ) , officially the Swiss Confederation ( Latin : Confoederatio Helvetica , hence its abbreviation CH ) , is a federal republic in Europe . While still named the " Swiss Confederation " for historical reasons , modern Switzerland is a federal directorial republic consisting of 26 cantons , with Bern as the seat of the federal authorities , called ' " federal city " ( German : <unk> , French : Ville <unk> , Italian : <unk> <unk> ) . The country is situated in Western and Central Europe , and is bordered by Italy to the south , France to the west , Germany to the north , and Austria and Liechtenstein to the east . Switzerland is a landlocked country geographically divided between the Alps , the Swiss Plateau and the Jura , spanning an area of 41 @,@ 285 km2 ( 15 @,@ 940 sq mi ) . While the Alps occupy the greater part of the territory , the Swiss population of approximately eight million people is concentrated mostly on the plateau , where the largest cities are to be found : among them are the two global and economic centers Zürich and Geneva . 
 The establishment of the Swiss Confederation is traditionally dated to 1 August 1291 , which is celebrated annually as the Swiss National Day . The country has a long history of armed neutrality — it has not been in a state of war internationally since 1815 — and did not join the United Nations until 2002 . Nevertheless , it pursues an active foreign policy and is frequently involved in peace @-@ building processes around the world . In addition to being the birthplace of the Red Cross , Switzerland is home to numerous international organizations , including the second largest UN office . On the European level , it is a founding member of the European Free Trade Association , but notably it is not part of the European Union , nor the European Economic Area . However , the country does participate in the Schengen Area and the EU 's single market through a number of bilateral treaties . 
 Spanning the intersection of Germanic and Romance Europe , Switzerland comprises four main linguistic and cultural regions : German , French , Italian and Romansh . Although the majority of the population are German speaking , Swiss national identity is rooted in a common historical background , shared values such as federalism and direct democracy , and Alpine symbolism . Due to its linguistic diversity , Switzerland is known by a variety of native names : Schweiz [ <unk> ] ( German ) ; Suisse [ <unk> ( ə ) ] ( French ) ; Svizzera [ <unk> ] ( Italian ) ; and <unk> [ <unk> ] or [ <unk> ] ( Romansh ) . 
 Switzerland is one of the most developed countries in the world , with the highest nominal wealth per adult and the eighth @-@ highest per capita gross domestic product according to the IMF . Switzerland ranks at or near the top globally in several metrics of national performance , including government transparency , civil liberties , quality of life , economic competitiveness , and human development . Zürich and Geneva have each been ranked among the top cities in the world in terms of quality of life , with the former ranked second globally , according to Mercer . 
 = = Etymology = = 
 The English name Switzerland is a compound containing Switzer , an obsolete term for the Swiss , which was in use during the 16th to 19th centuries . The English adjective Swiss is a loan from French Suisse , also in use since the 16th century . The name Switzer is from the Alemannic <unk> , in origin an inhabitant of Schwyz and its associated territory , one of the <unk> cantons which formed the nucleus of the Old Swiss Confederacy . The name originates as an exonym , applied pars pro toto to the troops of the Confederacy . The Swiss began to adopt the name for themselves after the Swabian War of 1499 , used alongside the term for " Confederates " , Eidgenossen ( literally : comrades by oath ) , used since the 14th century . 
 The toponym Schwyz itself was first attested in 972 , as Old High German <unk> , ultimately perhaps related to <unk> " to burn " , referring to the area of forest that was burned and cleared to build . The name was extended to the area dominated by the canton , and after the Swabian War of 1499 gradually came to be used for the entire Confederation . The Swiss German name of the country , <unk> , is homophonous to that of the canton and the settlement , but distinguished by the use of the definite article ( d <unk> for the Confederation , but simply Schwyz for the canton and the town ) . 
 The Latin name Confoederatio Helvetica was <unk> and introduced gradually after the formation of the federal state in 1848 , harking back to the Napoleonic Helvetic Republic , appearing on coins from 1879 , inscribed on the Federal Palace in 1902 and after 1948 used in the official seal . ( The ISO banking code , " CHF " for the Swiss franc , is taken from the state 's Latin name ) . Helvetica is derived from the Helvetii , a Gaulish tribe living on the Swiss plateau before the Roman era . 
 Helvetia appears as a national personification of the Swiss confederacy in the 17th century with a 1672 play by Johann Caspar <unk> . 
 = = History = = 
 Switzerland has existed as a state in its present form since the adoption of the Swiss Federal Constitution in 1848 . The precursors of Switzerland established a protective alliance at the end of the 13th century ( 1291 ) , forming a loose confederation of states which persisted for centuries . 
 = = = Early history = = = 
 The oldest traces of hominid existence in Switzerland date back about 150 @,@ 000 years . The oldest known farming settlements in Switzerland , which were found at <unk> , have been dated to around 5300 BC . 
 The earliest known cultural tribes of the area were members of the Hallstatt and La Tène cultures , named after the archaeological site of La Tène on the north side of Lake Neuchâtel . La Tène culture developed and flourished during the late Iron Age from around 450 BC , possibly under some influence from the Greek and Etruscan civilisations . One of the most important tribal groups in the Swiss region was the Helvetii . Steadily harassed by the Germans , in 58 BC the Helvetii decided to abandon the Swiss plateau and migrate to western Gallia , but Julius Caesar 's armies pursued and defeated them at the Battle of Bibracte , in today 's eastern France , forcing the tribe to move back to its original homeland . In 15 BC , Tiberius , who was destined to be the second Roman emperor and his brother , Drusus , conquered the Alps , integrating them into the Roman Empire . The area occupied by the Helvetii — the namesakes of the later Confoederatio Helvetica — first became part of Rome 's Gallia Belgica province and then of its Germania Superior province , while the eastern portion of modern Switzerland was integrated into the Roman province of Raetia . Sometime around the start of the Common Era , the Romans maintained a large legionary camp called Vindonissa , now a ruin at the confluence of the <unk> and Reuss rivers , near the town of Windisch , an outskirt of <unk> . 
 The first and second century AD were an age of prosperity for the population living on the Swiss plateau . Several towns , like Aventicum , Iulia Equestris and Augusta Raurica , reached a remarkable size , while hundreds of agricultural estates ( <unk> <unk> ) were founded in the countryside . 
 In about 260 AD , the fall of the Agri <unk> territory north of the Rhine transformed today 's Switzerland into a frontier land of the Empire . Repeated raids by the Alamanni tribes provoked the ruin of the Roman towns and economy , forcing the population to find shelter near Roman fortresses , like the Castrum <unk> near Augusta Raurica . The Empire built another line of defense at the north border ( the so @-@ called Donau @-@ Iller @-@ Rhine @-@ Limes ) , but at the end of the fourth century the increased Germanic pressure forced the Romans to abandon the linear defence concept , and the Swiss plateau was finally open to the settlement of German tribes . 
 In the Early Middle Ages , from the end of the 4th century , the western extent of modern @-@ day Switzerland was part of the territory of the Kings of the Burgundians . The Alemanni settled the Swiss plateau in the 5th century and the valleys of the Alps in the 8th century , forming Alemannia . Modern @-@ day Switzerland was therefore then divided between the kingdoms of Alemannia and Burgundy . The entire region became part of the expanding Frankish Empire in the 6th century , following Clovis I 's victory over the Alemanni at <unk> in 504 AD , and later Frankish domination of the Burgundians . 
 Throughout the rest of the 6th , 7th and 8th centuries the Swiss regions continued under Frankish hegemony ( Merovingian and Carolingian dynasties ) . But after its extension under Charlemagne , the Frankish empire was divided by the Treaty of Verdun in 843 . The territories of present @-@ day Switzerland became divided into Middle Francia and East Francia until they were reunified under the Holy Roman Empire around 1000 AD . 
 By 1200 , the Swiss plateau comprised the dominions of the houses of Savoy , <unk> , Habsburg , and Kyburg . Some regions ( Uri , Schwyz , Unterwalden , later known as <unk> ) were accorded the Imperial immediacy to grant the empire direct control over the mountain passes . With the extinction of its male line in 1263 the Kyburg dynasty fell in AD 1264 ; then the Habsburgs under King Rudolph I ( Holy Roman Emperor in 1273 ) laid claim to the Kyburg lands and annexed them extending their territory to the eastern Swiss plateau . 
 = = = Old Swiss Confederacy = = = 
 The Old Swiss Confederacy was an alliance among the valley communities of the central Alps . The Confederacy facilitated management of common interests and ensured peace on the important mountain trade routes . The Federal Charter of 1291 agreed between the rural communes of Uri , Schwyz , and Unterwalden is considered the confederacy 's founding document , even though similar alliances are likely to have existed decades earlier . 
 By 1353 , the three original cantons had joined with the cantons of Glarus and Zug and the Lucerne , Zürich and Bern city states to form the " Old Confederacy " of eight states that existed until the end of the 15th century . The expansion led to increased power and wealth for the confederation . By 1460 , the confederates controlled most of the territory south and west of the Rhine to the Alps and the Jura mountains , particularly after victories against the Habsburgs ( Battle of <unk> , Battle of <unk> ) , over Charles the Bold of Burgundy during the 1470s , and the success of the Swiss mercenaries . The Swiss victory in the Swabian War against the Swabian League of Emperor Maximilian I in 1499 amounted to de facto independence within the Holy Roman Empire . 
 The Old Swiss Confederacy had acquired a reputation of invincibility during these earlier wars , but expansion of the confederation suffered a setback in 1515 with the Swiss defeat in the Battle of Marignano . This ended the so @-@ called " heroic " epoch of Swiss history . The success of Zwingli 's Reformation in some cantons led to inter @-@ cantonal religious conflicts in 1529 and 1531 ( Wars of Kappel ) . It was not until more than one hundred years after these internal wars that , in 1648 , under the Peace of Westphalia , European countries recognized Switzerland 's independence from the Holy Roman Empire and its neutrality . 
 During the Early Modern period of Swiss history , the growing authoritarianism of the <unk> families combined with a financial crisis in the wake of the Thirty Years ' War led to the Swiss peasant war of 1653 . In the background to this struggle , the conflict between Catholic and Protestant cantons persisted , erupting in further violence at the First War of <unk> , in 1656 , and the Toggenburg War ( or Second War of <unk> ) , in 1712 . 
 = = = Napoleonic era = = = 
 In 1798 , the revolutionary French government conquered Switzerland and imposed a new unified constitution . This centralised the government of the country , effectively abolishing the cantons : moreover , Mülhausen joined France and <unk> valley , the Cisalpine Republic , separating from Switzerland . The new regime , known as the Helvetic Republic , was highly unpopular . It had been imposed by a foreign invading army and destroyed centuries of tradition , making Switzerland nothing more than a French satellite state . The fierce French suppression of the <unk> Revolt in September 1798 was an example of the oppressive presence of the French Army and the local population 's resistance to the occupation . 
 When war broke out between France and its rivals , Russian and Austrian forces invaded Switzerland . The Swiss refused to fight alongside the French in the name of the Helvetic Republic . In 1803 Napoleon organised a meeting of the leading Swiss politicians from both sides in Paris . The result was the Act of Mediation which largely restored Swiss autonomy and introduced a Confederation of 19 cantons . Henceforth , much of Swiss politics would concern balancing the cantons ' tradition of self @-@ rule with the need for a central government . 
 In 1815 the Congress of Vienna fully re @-@ established Swiss independence and the European powers agreed to permanently recognise Swiss neutrality . Swiss troops still served foreign governments until 1860 when they fought in the Siege of Gaeta . The treaty also allowed Switzerland to increase its territory , with the admission of the cantons of Valais , Neuchâtel and Geneva . Switzerland 's borders have not changed since , except for some minor adjustments . 
 = = = Federal state = = = 
 The restoration of power to the <unk> was only temporary . After a period of unrest with repeated violent clashes such as the <unk> of 1839 , civil war ( the Sonderbundskrieg ) broke out in 1847 when some Catholic cantons tried to set up a separate alliance ( the Sonderbund ) . The war lasted for less than a month , causing fewer than 100 casualties , most of which were through friendly fire . Yet however minor the Sonderbundskrieg appears compared with other European riots and wars in the 19th century , it nevertheless had a major impact on both the psychology and the society of the Swiss and of Switzerland . 
 The war convinced most Swiss of the need for unity and strength towards its European neighbours . Swiss people from all strata of society , whether Catholic or Protestant , from the liberal or conservative current , realised that the cantons would profit more if their economic and religious interests were merged . 
 Thus , while the rest of Europe saw revolutionary uprisings , the Swiss drew up a constitution which provided for a federal layout , much of it inspired by the American example . This constitution provided for a central authority while leaving the cantons the right to self @-@ government on local issues . Giving credit to those who favoured the power of the cantons ( the Sonderbund <unk> ) , the national assembly was divided between an upper house ( the Council of States , two representatives per canton ) and a lower house ( the National Council , with representatives elected from across the country ) . Referenda were made mandatory for any amendment of this constitution . 
 A system of single weights and measures was introduced and in 1850 the Swiss franc became the Swiss single currency . Article 11 of the constitution forbade sending troops to serve abroad , though the Swiss were still obliged to serve Francis II of the Two Sicilies with Swiss Guards present at the Siege of Gaeta in 1860 , marking the end of foreign service . 
 An important clause of the constitution was that it could be re @-@ written completely if this was deemed necessary , thus enabling it to evolve as a whole rather than being modified one amendment at a time . 
 This need soon proved itself when the rise in population and the Industrial Revolution that followed led to calls to modify the constitution accordingly . An early draft was rejected by the population in 1872 but modifications led to its acceptance in 1874 . It introduced the facultative referendum for laws at the federal level . It also established federal responsibility for defense , trade , and legal matters . 
 In 1891 , the constitution was revised with unusually strong elements of direct democracy , which remain unique even today . 
 = = = Modern history = = = 
 Switzerland was not invaded during either of the world wars . During World War I , Switzerland was home to Vladimir <unk> Ulyanov ( Vladimir Lenin ) and he remained there until 1917 . Swiss neutrality was seriously questioned by the Grimm – Hoffmann Affair in 1917 , but it was short @-@ lived . In 1920 , Switzerland joined the League of Nations , which was based in Geneva , on condition that it was exempt from any military requirements . 
 During World War II , detailed invasion plans were drawn up by the Germans , but Switzerland was never attacked . Switzerland was able to remain independent through a combination of military deterrence , concessions to Germany , and good fortune as larger events during the war delayed an invasion . Under General Henri Guisan central command , a general mobilisation of the armed forces was ordered . The Swiss military strategy was changed from one of static defence at the borders to protect the economic heartland , to one of organised long @-@ term attrition and withdrawal to strong , well @-@ stockpiled positions high in the Alps known as the Reduit . Switzerland was an important base for espionage by both sides in the conflict and often mediated communications between the Axis and Allied powers . 
 Switzerland 's trade was blockaded by both the Allies and by the Axis . Economic cooperation and extension of credit to the Third Reich varied according to the perceived likelihood of invasion and the availability of other trading partners . Concessions reached a peak after a crucial rail link through Vichy France was severed in 1942 , leaving Switzerland completely surrounded by the Axis . Over the course of the war , Switzerland interned over 300 @,@ 000 refugees and the International Red Cross , based in Geneva , played an important part during the conflict . Strict immigration and asylum policies as well as the financial relationships with Nazi Germany raised controversy , but not until the end of the 20th century . 
 During the war , the Swiss Air Force engaged aircraft of both sides , shooting down 11 intruding Luftwaffe planes in May and June 1940 , then forcing down other intruders after a change of policy following threats from Germany . Over 100 Allied bombers and their crews were interned during the war . During 1944 – 45 , Allied bombers mistakenly bombed a few places in Switzerland , among which were the cities of Schaffhausen , Basel and Zürich . 
 After the war , the Swiss government exported credits through the charitable fund known as the <unk> and also donated to the Marshall Plan to help Europe 's recovery , efforts that ultimately benefited the Swiss economy . 
 During the Cold War , Swiss authorities considered the construction of a Swiss nuclear bomb . Leading nuclear physicists at the Federal Institute of Technology Zürich such as Paul Scherrer made this a realistic possibility . However , financial problems with the defense budget prevented the substantial funds from being allocated , and the Nuclear Non @-@ Proliferation Treaty of 1968 was seen as a valid alternative . All remaining plans for building nuclear weapons were dropped by 1988 . 
 Switzerland was the last Western republic to grant women the right to vote . Some Swiss cantons approved this in 1959 , while at the federal level it was achieved in 1971 and , after resistance , in the last canton Appenzell Innerrhoden ( one of only two remaining Landsgemeinde ) in 1990 . After obtaining suffrage at the federal level , women quickly rose in political significance , with the first woman on the seven member Federal Council executive being Elisabeth Kopp , who served from 1984 – 1989 , and the first female president being Ruth Dreifuss in 1999 . 
 Switzerland joined the Council of Europe in 1963 . In 1979 areas from the canton of Bern attained independence from the Bernese , forming the new canton of Jura . On 18 April 1999 the Swiss population and the cantons voted in favour of a completely revised federal constitution . 
 In 2002 Switzerland became a full member of the United Nations , leaving the Vatican City as the last widely recognised state without full UN membership . Switzerland is a founding member of the EFTA , but is not a member of the European Economic Area . An application for membership in the European Union was sent in May 1992 , but not advanced since the EEA was rejected in December 1992 when Switzerland was the only country to launch a referendum on the EEA . There have since been several referenda on the EU issue ; due to a mixed reaction from the population the membership application has been frozen . Nonetheless , Swiss law is gradually being adjusted to conform with that of the EU , and the government has signed a number of bilateral agreements with the European Union . Switzerland , together with Liechtenstein , has been completely surrounded by the EU since Austria 's entry in 1995 . On 5 June 2005 , Swiss voters agreed by a 55 % majority to join the Schengen treaty , a result that was regarded by EU commentators as a sign of support by Switzerland , a country that is traditionally perceived as independent and reluctant to enter supranational bodies . 
 = = Geography = = 
 Extending across the north and south side of the Alps in west @-@ central Europe , Switzerland encompasses a great diversity of landscapes and climates on a limited area of 41 @,@ 285 square kilometres ( 15 @,@ 940 sq mi ) . The population is about 8 million , resulting in an average population density of around 195 people per square kilometre ( 500 / sq mi ) . The more mountainous southern half of the country is far more sparsely populated than the northern half . In the largest Canton of Graubünden , lying entirely in the Alps , population density falls to 27 / km ² ( 70 / sq mi ) . 
 Switzerland lies between latitudes 45 ° and 48 ° N , and longitudes 5 ° and 11 ° E. It contains three basic topographical areas : the Swiss Alps to the south , the Swiss Plateau or Central Plateau , and the Jura mountains on the west . The Alps are a high mountain range running across the central @-@ south of the country , comprising about 60 % of the country 's total area . The majority of the Swiss population live in the Swiss Plateau . Among the high valleys of the Swiss Alps many glaciers are found , totalling an area of 1 @,@ 063 square kilometres ( 410 sq mi ) . From these originate the headwaters of several major rivers , such as the Rhine , Inn , Ticino and Rhône , which flow in the four cardinal directions into the whole of Europe . The hydrographic network includes several of the largest bodies of freshwater in Central and Western Europe , among which are included Lake Geneva ( also called le Lac <unk> in French ) , Lake Constance ( known as Bodensee in German ) and Lake Maggiore . Switzerland has more than 1500 lakes , and contains 6 % of Europe 's stock of fresh water . Lakes and glaciers cover about 6 % of the national territory . The largest lake is Lake Geneva , in western Switzerland shared with France . The Rhône is both the main source and outflow of Lake Geneva . Lake Constance is the second largest Swiss lake and , like the Lake Geneva , an intermediate step by the Rhine at the border to Austria and Germany . While the Rhône flows into the Mediterranean Sea at the French Camargue region and the Rhine flows into the North Sea at Rotterdam in the Netherlands , about 1000 km apart , both springs are only about 22 km apart from each other in the Swiss Alps . 
 48 of Switzerland 's mountains are 4 @,@ 000 metres ( 13 @,@ 000 ft ) above sea in altitude or higher . At 4 @,@ 634 m ( 15 @,@ 203 ft ) , Monte Rosa is the highest , although the Matterhorn ( 4 @,@ 478 m or 14 @,@ 692 ft ) is often regarded as the most famous . Both are located within the Pennine Alps in the canton of Valais , on the border with Italy . The section of the Bernese Alps above the deep glacial Lauterbrunnen valley , containing 72 waterfalls , is well known for the Jungfrau ( 4 @,@ 158 m or 13 @,@ 642 ft ) Eiger and Mönch , and the many picturesque valleys in the region . In the southeast the long Engadin Valley , encompassing the St. Moritz area in canton of Graubünden , is also well known ; the highest peak in the neighbouring Bernina Alps is Piz Bernina ( 4 @,@ 049 m or 13 @,@ 284 ft ) . 
 The more populous northern part of the country , comprising about 30 % of the country 's total area , is called the Swiss Plateau . It has greater open and hilly landscapes , partly forested , partly open pastures , usually with grazing herds , or vegetables and fruit fields , but it is still hilly . There are large lakes found here and the biggest Swiss cities are in this area of the country . 
 = = = Climate = = = 
 The Swiss climate is generally temperate , but can vary greatly between the localities , from glacial conditions on the mountaintops to the often pleasant near Mediterranean climate at Switzerland 's southern tip . There are some valley areas in the southern part of Switzerland where some cold @-@ hardy palm trees are found . Summers tend to be warm and humid at times with periodic rainfall so they are ideal for pastures and grazing . The less humid winters in the mountains may see long intervals of stable conditions for weeks , while the lower lands tend to suffer from inversion , during these periods , thus seeing no sun for weeks . 
 A weather phenomenon known as the <unk> ( with an identical effect to the chinook wind ) can occur at all times of the year and is characterised by an unexpectedly warm wind , bringing air of very low relative humidity to the north of the Alps during rainfall periods on the southern face of the Alps . This works both ways across the alps but is more efficient if blowing from the south due to the steeper step for oncoming wind from the south . Valleys running south to north trigger the best effect . The driest conditions persist in all inner alpine valleys that receive less rain because arriving clouds lose a lot of their content while crossing the mountains before reaching these areas . Large alpine areas such as Graubünden remain drier than pre @-@ alpine areas and as in the main valley of the Valais wine grapes are grown there . 
 The wettest conditions persist in the high Alps and in the Ticino canton which has much sun yet heavy bursts of rain from time to time . Precipitation tends to be spread moderately throughout the year with a peak in summer . Autumn is the driest season , winter receives less precipitation than summer , yet the weather patterns in Switzerland are not in a stable climate system and can be variable from year to year with no strict and predictable periods . 
 = = = Environment = = = 
 Switzerland 's ecosystems can be particularly fragile , because the many delicate valleys separated by high mountains often form unique ecologies . The mountainous regions themselves are also vulnerable , with a rich range of plants not found at other altitudes , and experience some pressure from visitors and grazing . The climatic , geological and topographical conditions of the alpine region make for a very fragile ecosystem that is particularly sensitive to climate change . Nevertheless , according to the 2014 Environmental Performance Index , Switzerland ranks first among 132 nations in safeguarding the environment , due to its high scores on environmental public health , its heavy reliance on renewable sources of energy ( hydropower and geothermal energy ) , and its control of greenhouse gas emissions . 
 = = Politics = = 
 The Federal Constitution adopted in 1848 is the legal foundation of the modern federal state . It is among the oldest constitutions in the world . A new Constitution was adopted in 1999 , but did not introduce notable changes to the federal structure . It outlines basic and political rights of individuals and citizen participation in public affairs , divides the powers between the Confederation and the cantons and defines federal jurisdiction and authority . There are three main governing bodies on the federal level : the bicameral parliament ( legislative ) , the Federal Council ( executive ) and the Federal Court ( judicial ) . 
 The Swiss Parliament consists of two houses : the Council of States which has 46 representatives ( two from each canton and one from each half @-@ canton ) who are elected under a system determined by each canton , and the National Council , which consists of 200 members who are elected under a system of proportional representation , depending on the population of each canton . Members of both houses serve for 4 years . When both houses are in joint session , they are known collectively as the Federal Assembly . Through referendums , citizens may challenge any law passed by parliament and through initiatives , introduce amendments to the federal constitution , thus making Switzerland a direct democracy . 
 The Federal Council constitutes the federal government , directs the federal administration and serves as collective Head of State . It is a collegial body of seven members , elected for a four @-@ year mandate by the Federal Assembly which also exercises oversight over the Council . The President of the Confederation is elected by the Assembly from among the seven members , traditionally in rotation and for a one @-@ year term ; the President chairs the government and assumes representative functions . However , the president is a primus inter pares with no additional powers , and remains the head of a department within the administration . 
 The Swiss government has been a coalition of the four major political parties since 1959 , each party having a number of seats that roughly reflects its share of electorate and representation in the federal parliament . The classic distribution of 2 CVP / PDC , 2 SPS / PSS , 2 FDP / PRD and 1 SVP / UDC as it stood from 1959 to 2003 was known as the " magic formula " . Following the 2015 Federal Council elections , the seven seats in the Federal Council were distributed as follows : 
 1 seat for the Christian Democratic People 's Party ( CVP / PDC ) , 
 2 seats for the Free Democratic Party ( FDP / PRD ) , 
 2 seats for the Social Democratic Party ( SPS / PSS ) , 
 2 seats for the Swiss People 's Party ( SVP / UDC ) . 
 The function of the Federal Supreme Court is to hear appeals against rulings of cantonal or federal courts . The judges are elected by the Federal Assembly for six @-@ year terms . 
 = = = Direct democracy = = = 
 Direct democracy and federalism are hallmarks of the Swiss political system . Swiss citizens are subject to three legal jurisdictions : the municipality , canton and federal levels . The 1848 / 1999 federal constitution defines a system of direct democracy ( sometimes called half @-@ direct or representative direct democracy because it is aided by the more commonplace institutions of a representative democracy ) . The instruments of this system at the federal level , known as popular rights ( German : <unk> , French : droits populaires , Italian : <unk> <unk> ) , include the right to submit a federal initiative and a referendum , both of which may overturn parliamentary decisions . 
 By calling a federal referendum , a group of citizens may challenge a law passed by parliament , if they gather 50 @,@ 000 signatures against the law within 100 days . If so , a national vote is scheduled where voters decide by a simple majority whether to accept or reject the law . Any 8 cantons together can also call a constitutional referendum on a federal law . 
 Similarly , the federal constitutional initiative allows citizens to put a constitutional amendment to a national vote , if 100 @,@ 000 voters sign the proposed amendment within 18 months . The Federal Council and the Federal Assembly can supplement the proposed amendment with a counter @-@ proposal , and then voters must indicate a preference on the ballot in case both proposals are accepted . Constitutional amendments , whether introduced by initiative or in parliament , must be accepted by a double majority of the national popular vote and the cantonal popular votes . 
 = = = Administrative divisions = = = 
 The Swiss Confederation consists of 20 cantons and 6 half cantons : 
 * These cantons are known as half @-@ cantons and are thus represented by only one councillor ( instead of two ) in the Council of States . 
 The cantons have a permanent constitutional status and , in comparison with the situation in other countries , a high degree of independence . Under the Federal Constitution , all 26 cantons are equal in status . Each canton has its own constitution , and its own parliament , government and courts . However , there are considerable differences between the individual cantons , most particularly in terms of population and geographical area . Their populations vary between 15 @,@ 000 ( Appenzell Innerrhoden ) and 1 @,@ 253 @,@ 500 ( Zürich ) , and their area between 37 km2 ( 14 sq mi ) ( Basel @-@ Stadt ) and 7 @,@ 105 km2 ( 2 @,@ 743 sq mi ) ( Graubünden ) . The Cantons comprise a total of 2 @,@ 485 municipalities . Within Switzerland there are two enclaves : <unk> belongs to Germany , Campione d 'Italia belongs to Italy . 
 = = = Foreign relations and international institutions = = = 
 Traditionally , Switzerland avoids alliances that might entail military , political , or direct economic action and has been neutral since the end of its expansion in 1515 . Its policy of neutrality was internationally recognised at the Congress of Vienna in 1815 . Only in 2002 did Switzerland become a full member of the United Nations and it was the first state to join it by referendum . Switzerland maintains diplomatic relations with almost all countries and historically has served as an intermediary between other states . Switzerland is not a member of the European Union ; the Swiss people have consistently rejected membership since the early 1990s . However , Switzerland does participate in the Schengen Area . 
 A large number of international institutions have their seats in Switzerland , in part because of its policy of neutrality . Geneva is the birthplace of the Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement and the Geneva Conventions and , since 2006 , hosts the United Nations Human Rights Council . Even though Switzerland is one of the most recent countries to have joined the United Nations , the Palace of Nations in Geneva is the second biggest centre for the United Nations after New York , and Switzerland was a founding member and home to the League of Nations . 
 Apart from the United Nations headquarters , the Swiss Confederation is host to many UN agencies , like the World Health Organization ( WHO ) , the International Labour Organization ( ILO ) , the International Telecommunication Union ( ITU ) , the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees ( UNHCR ) and about 200 other international organisations , including the World Trade Organization and the World Intellectual Property Organization . The annual meetings of the World Economic Forum in Davos bring together top international business and political leaders from Switzerland and foreign countries to discuss important issues facing the world , including health and the environment . Additionally the headquarters of the Bank for International Settlements ( BIS ) are located in Basel since 1930 . 
 Furthermore , many sport federations and organisations are located throughout the country , such as the International Basketball Federation in Geneva , the Union of European Football Associations ( UEFA ) in Nyon , the International Federation of Association Football ( FIFA ) and the International Ice Hockey Federation both in Zürich , the International Cycling Union in Aigle , and the International Olympic Committee in Lausanne . 
 = = = Military = = = 
 The Swiss Armed Forces , including the Land Forces and the Air Force , are composed mostly of conscripts , male citizens aged from 20 to 34 ( in special cases up to 50 ) years . Being a landlocked country , Switzerland has no navy ; however , on lakes bordering neighbouring countries , armed military patrol boats are used . Swiss citizens are prohibited from serving in foreign armies , except for the Swiss Guards of the Vatican , or if they are dual citizens of a foreign country and reside there . 
 The structure of the Swiss militia system stipulates that the soldiers keep their Army issued equipment , including all personal weapons , at home . Some organizations and political parties find this practice controversial but mainstream Swiss opinion is in favour of the system . Compulsory military service concerns all male Swiss citizens ; women can serve voluntarily . Men usually receive military conscription orders for training at the age of 18 . About two thirds of the young Swiss are found suited for service ; for those found unsuited , various forms of alternative service exist . Annually , approximately 20 @,@ 000 persons are trained in recruit centres for a duration from 18 to 21 weeks . The reform " Army XXI " was adopted by popular vote in 2003 , it replaced the previous model " Army 95 " , reducing the effectives from 400 @,@ 000 to about 200 @,@ 000 . Of those , 120 @,@ 000 are active in periodic Army training and 80 @,@ 000 are non @-@ training reserves . 
 Overall , three general <unk> have been declared to ensure the integrity and neutrality of Switzerland . The first one was held on the occasion of the Franco @-@ Prussian War of 1870 – 71 . The second was in response to the outbreak of the First World War in August 1914 . The third mobilisation of the army took place in September 1939 in response to the German attack on Poland ; Henri Guisan was elected as the General @-@ in @-@ Chief . 
 Because of its neutrality policy , the Swiss army does not currently take part in armed conflicts in other countries , but is part of some peacekeeping missions around the world . Since 2000 the armed force department has also maintained the Onyx intelligence gathering system to monitor satellite communications . 
 Following the end of the Cold War there have been a number of attempts to curb military activity or even abolish the armed forces altogether . A notable referendum on the subject , launched by an anti @-@ militarist group , was held on 26 November 1989 . It was defeated with about two thirds of the voters against the proposal . A similar referendum , called for before , but held shortly after the 11 September attacks in the US , was defeated by over 78 % of voters . 
 Gun politics in Switzerland are unique in Europe in that a relatively high percentage ( 29 % ) of citizens are legally armed . The large majority of firearms kept at home are militia @-@ issued weapons , but ammunition is not issued . 
 = = Economy and labour law = = 
 Switzerland has a stable , prosperous and high @-@ tech economy and enjoys great wealth , being ranked as the wealthiest country in the world per capita in multiple rankings . In 2011 it was ranked as the wealthiest country in the world in per capita terms ( with " wealth " being defined to include both financial and non @-@ financial assets ) , while the 2013 Credit Suisse Global Wealth Report showed that Switzerland was the country with the highest average wealth per adult in 2013 . It has the world 's nineteenth largest economy by nominal GDP and the thirty @-@ sixth largest by purchasing power parity . It is the twentieth largest exporter , despite its small size . Switzerland has the highest European rating in the Index of Economic Freedom 2010 , while also providing large coverage through public services . The nominal per capita GDP is higher than those of the larger Western and Central European economies and Japan . If adjusted for purchasing power parity , Switzerland ranks 8th in the world in terms of GDP per capita , according to the World Bank and IMF ( ranked 15th according to the CIA <unk> ) . 
 The World Economic Forum 's Global Competitiveness Report currently ranks Switzerland 's economy as the most competitive in the world , while ranked by the European Union as Europe 's most innovative country . For much of the 20th century , Switzerland was the wealthiest country in Europe by a considerable margin ( by GDP – per capita ) . In 2007 the gross median household income in Switzerland was an estimated 137 @,@ 094 USD at Purchasing power parity while the median income was 95 @,@ 824 USD . Switzerland also has one of the world 's largest account balances as a percentage of GDP . 
 Switzerland is home to several large multinational corporations . The largest Swiss companies by revenue are <unk> , <unk> , Nestlé , Novartis , Hoffmann @-@ La Roche , ABB , <unk> Energy Group and Adecco . Also , notable are UBS AG , Zurich Financial Services , Credit Suisse , Barry <unk> , Swiss Re , Tetra Pak , The Swatch Group and Swiss International Air Lines . Switzerland is ranked as having one of the most powerful economies in the world . 
 Switzerland 's most important economic sector is manufacturing . Manufacturing consists largely of the production of specialist chemicals , health and pharmaceutical goods , scientific and precision measuring instruments and musical instruments . The largest exported goods are chemicals ( 34 % of exported goods ) , machines / electronics ( 20 @.@ 9 % ) , and precision instruments / watches ( 16 @.@ 9 % ) . Exported services amount to a third of exports . The service sector – especially banking and insurance , tourism , and international organisations – is another important industry for Switzerland . 
 Around 3 @.@ 8 million people work in Switzerland ; about 25 % of employees belonged to a trade union in 2004 . Switzerland has a more flexible job market than neighbouring countries and the unemployment rate is very low . The unemployment rate increased from a low of 1 @.@ 7 % in June 2000 to a peak of 4 @.@ 4 % in December 2009 . The unemployment rate is 3 @.@ 2 % in 2014 . Population growth from net immigration is quite high , at 0 @.@ 52 % of population in 2004 . The foreign citizen population was 21 @.@ 8 % in 2004 , about the same as in Australia . GDP per hour worked is the world 's 16th highest , at 49 @.@ 46 international dollars in 2012 . 
 Switzerland has an overwhelmingly private sector economy and low tax rates by Western World standards ; overall taxation is one of the smallest of developed countries . Switzerland is a relatively easy place to do business , currently ranking 20th of 189 countries in the Ease of Doing Business Index . The slow growth Switzerland experienced in the 1990s and the early 2000s has brought greater support for economic reforms and harmonization with the European Union . According to Credit Suisse , only about 37 % of residents own their own homes , one of the lowest rates of home ownership in Europe . Housing and food price levels were 171 % and 145 % of the EU @-@ 25 index in 2007 , compared to 113 % and 104 % in Germany . 
 The Swiss Federal budget had a size of 62 @.@ 8 billion Swiss francs in 2010 , which is an equivalent 11 @.@ 35 % of the country 's GDP in that year ; however , the regional ( canton ) budgets and the budgets of the municipalities are not counted as part of the federal budget and the total rate of government spending is closer to 33 @.@ 8 % of GDP . The main sources of income for the federal government are the value @-@ added tax ( 33 % ) and the direct federal tax ( 29 % ) and the main expenditure is located in the areas of social welfare and finance & tax . The expenditures of the Swiss Confederation have been growing from 7 % of GDP in 1960 to 9 @.@ 7 % in 1990 and to 10 @.@ 7 % in 2010 . While the sectors social welfare and finance & tax have been growing from 35 % in 1990 to 48 @.@ 2 % in 2010 , a significant reduction of expenditures has been occurring in the sectors of agriculture and national defense ; from 26 @.@ 5 % in to 12 @.@ 4 % ( estimation for the year 2015 ) . 
 Agricultural protectionism — a rare exception to Switzerland 's free trade policies — has contributed to high food prices . Product market liberalisation is lagging behind many EU countries according to the OECD . Nevertheless , domestic purchasing power is one of the best in the world . Apart from agriculture , economic and trade barriers between the European Union and Switzerland are minimal and Switzerland has free trade agreements worldwide . Switzerland is a member of the European Free Trade Association ( EFTA ) . 
 = = = Education and science = = = 
 Education in Switzerland is very diverse because the constitution of Switzerland delegates the authority for the school system to the cantons . There are both public and private schools , including many private international schools . The minimum age for primary school is about six years in all cantons , but most cantons provide a free " children 's school " starting at four or five years old . Primary school continues until grade four , five or six , depending on the school . Traditionally , the first foreign language in school was always one of the other national languages , although recently ( 2000 ) English was introduced first in a few cantons . 
 At the end of primary school ( or at the beginning of secondary school ) , pupils are separated according to their capacities in several ( often three ) sections . The fastest learners are taught advanced classes to be prepared for further studies and the matura , while students who assimilate a little more slowly receive an education more adapted to their needs . 
 There are 12 universities in Switzerland , ten of which are maintained at cantonal level and usually offer a range of non @-@ technical subjects . The first university in Switzerland was founded in 1460 in Basel ( with a faculty of medicine ) and has a tradition of chemical and medical research in Switzerland . The largest university in Switzerland is the University of Zurich with nearly 25 @,@ 000 <unk> Swiss Federal Institute of Technology Zurich ( ETHZ ) and the University of Zurich are listed 20th and 54th respectively , on the 2015 Academic Ranking of World Universities . In addition , ETHZ " consistently ranks the top university in continental Europe " and University of Zurich ( <unk> ) is ranked among the world ’ s top universities . 
 The two institutes sponsored by the federal government are the Swiss Federal Institute of Technology Zurich ( ETHZ ) in Zürich , founded 1855 and the <unk> in Lausanne , founded 1969 as such , which was formerly an institute associated with the University of Lausanne . 
 In addition , there are various Universities of Applied Sciences . In business and management studies , the University of St. Gallen , ( <unk> ) is ranked 329th in the world according to QS World University Rankings and the International Institute for Management Development ( IMD ) , was ranked first in open programs worldwide by the Financial Times . Switzerland has the second highest rate ( almost 18 % in 2003 ) of foreign students in tertiary education , after Australia ( slightly over 18 % ) . 
 As might befit a country that plays home to innumerable international organizations , the Graduate Institute of International and Development Studies , located in Geneva , is not only continental Europe 's oldest graduate school of international and development studies , but also widely believed to be one of its most prestigious . 
 Many Nobel Prize laureates have been Swiss scientists . They include the world @-@ famous physicist Albert Einstein in the field of physics , who developed his Special relativity while working in Bern . More recently Vladimir Prelog , Heinrich Rohrer , Richard Ernst , Edmond Fischer , Rolf <unk> and Kurt Wüthrich received Nobel Prizes in the sciences . In total , 113 Nobel Prize winners in all fields stand in relation to Switzerland and the Nobel Peace Prize has been awarded nine times to organisations residing in Switzerland . 
 Geneva and the nearby French department of Ain co @-@ host the world 's largest laboratory , CERN , dedicated to particle physics research . Another important research center is the Paul Scherrer Institute . Notable inventions include lysergic acid diethylamide ( LSD ) , the scanning tunneling microscope ( Nobel prize ) and Velcro . Some technologies enabled the exploration of new worlds such as the pressurized balloon of Auguste Piccard and the <unk> which permitted Jacques Piccard to reach the deepest point of the world 's oceans . 
 Switzerland Space Agency , the Swiss Space Office , has been involved in various space technologies and programs . In addition it was one of the 10 founders of the European Space Agency in 1975 and is the seventh largest contributor to the ESA budget . In the private sector , several companies are implicated in the space industry such as Oerlikon Space or Maxon Motors who provide spacecraft structures . 
 = = = Switzerland and the European Union = = = 
 Switzerland voted against membership in the European Economic Area in a referendum in December 1992 and has since maintained and developed its relationships with the European Union ( EU ) and European countries through bilateral agreements . In March 2001 , the Swiss people refused in a popular vote to start accession negotiations with the EU . In recent years , the Swiss have brought their economic practices largely into conformity with those of the EU in many ways , in an effort to enhance their international competitiveness . The economy grew at 3 % in 2010 , 1 @.@ 9 % in 2011 , and 1 % in 2012 . Full EU membership is a long @-@ term objective of some in the Swiss government , but there is considerable popular sentiment against this supported by the conservative SVP party . The western French @-@ speaking areas and the urban regions of the rest of the country tend to be more pro @-@ EU , however with far from any significant share of the population . 
 The government has established an Integration Office under the Department of Foreign Affairs and the Department of Economic Affairs . To minimise the negative consequences of Switzerland 's isolation from the rest of Europe , Bern and Brussels signed seven bilateral agreements to further liberalise trade ties . These agreements were signed in 1999 and took effect in 2001 . This first series of bilateral agreements included the free movement of persons . A second series covering nine areas was signed in 2004 and has since been ratified , which includes the Schengen Treaty and the Dublin Convention besides others . They continue to discuss further areas for cooperation . 
 In 2006 , Switzerland approved 1 billion francs of supportive investment in the poorer Southern and Central European countries in support of cooperation and positive ties to the EU as a whole . A further referendum will be needed to approve 300 million francs to support Romania and Bulgaria and their recent admission . The Swiss have also been under EU and sometimes international pressure to reduce banking secrecy and to raise tax rates to parity with the EU . Preparatory discussions are being opened in four new areas : opening up the electricity market , participation in the European <unk> project Galileo , cooperating with the European centre for disease prevention and recognising certificates of origin for food products . 
 On 27 November 2008 , the interior and justice ministers of European Union in Brussels announced Switzerland 's accession to the Schengen passport @-@ free zone from 12 December 2008 . The land border checkpoints will remain in place only for goods movements , but should not run controls on people , though people entering the country had their passports checked until 29 March 2009 if they originated from a Schengen nation . 
 On 9 February 2014 , Swiss voters narrowly approved by 50 @.@ 3 % a ballot initiative launched by the national conservative Swiss People 's Party ( SVP / UDC ) to restrict immigration , and thus reintroducing a quota system on the influx of foreigners . This initiative was mostly backed by rural ( 57 @.@ 6 % approvals ) , suburban ( 51 @.@ 2 % approvals ) , and isolated cities ( 51 @.@ 3 % approvals ) of Switzerland as well as by a strong majority ( 69 @.@ 2 % approval ) in the canton of Ticino , while metropolitan centres ( 58 @.@ 5 % rejection ) and the French @-@ speaking part ( 58 @.@ 5 % rejection ) of Switzerland rather rejected it . Some news commentators claim that this proposal de facto contradicts the bilateral agreements on the free movement of persons from these respective countries . 
 = = = Energy , infrastructure and environment = = = 
 Electricity generated in Switzerland is 56 % from hydroelectricity and 39 % from nuclear power , resulting in a nearly CO2 @-@ free electricity @-@ generating network . On 18 May 2003 , two anti @-@ nuclear initiatives were turned down : Moratorium Plus , aimed at forbidding the building of new nuclear power plants ( 41 @.@ 6 % supported and 58 @.@ 4 % opposed ) , and Electricity Without Nuclear ( 33 @.@ 7 % supported and 66 @.@ 3 % opposed ) . 
 The former ten @-@ year moratorium on the construction of new nuclear power plants was the result of a citizens ' initiative voted on in 1990 which had passed with 54 @.@ 5 % Yes vs. 45 @.@ 5 % No votes . Plans for a new nuclear plant in the Canton of Bern have been put on hold after the accident at the Fukushima Daiichi power plant in 2011 . The Swiss Federal Office of Energy ( <unk> ) is the office responsible for all questions relating to energy supply and energy use within the Federal Department of Environment , Transport , Energy and Communications ( <unk> ) . The agency is supporting the 2000 @-@ watt society initiative to cut the nation 's energy use by more than half by the year 2050 . 
 On 25 May 2011 the Swiss government announced that it plans to end its use of nuclear energy in the next 2 or 3 decades . " The government has voted for a <unk> because we want to ensure a secure and autonomous supply of energy " , Energy Minister Doris <unk> said that day at a press conference in Bern . " Fukushima showed that the risk of nuclear power is too high , which in turn has also increased the costs of this energy form . " The first reactor would reportedly be taken offline in 2019 and the last one in 2034 . Parliament will discuss the plan in June 2011 , and there could be a referendum as well . 
 The most dense rail network in Europe of 5 @,@ 063 km ( 3 @,@ 146 mi ) carries over 350 million passengers annually . In 2007 , each Swiss citizen travelled on average 2 @,@ 258 km ( 1 @,@ 403 mi ) by rail , which makes them the keenest rail users . The network is administered mainly by the Federal Railways , except in Graubünden , where the 366 km ( 227 mi ) narrow gauge railway is operated by the Rhaetian Railways and includes some World Heritage lines . The building of new railway base tunnels through the Alps is under way to reduce the time of travel between north and south through the <unk> project . 
 Swiss private @-@ public managed road network is funded by road tolls and vehicle taxes . The Swiss autobahn / autoroute system requires the purchase of a vignette ( toll sticker ) — which costs 40 Swiss francs — for one calendar year in order to use its roadways , for both passenger cars and trucks . The Swiss autobahn / autoroute network has a total length of 1 @,@ 638 km ( 1 @,@ 018 mi ) ( as of 2000 ) and has , by an area of 41 @,@ 290 km2 ( 15 @,@ 940 sq mi ) , also one of the highest motorway densities in the world . Zürich Airport is Switzerland 's largest international flight gateway , which handled 22 @.@ 8 million passengers in 2012 . The other international airports are Geneva Airport ( 13 @.@ 9 million passengers in 2012 ) , <unk> Basel @-@ Mulhouse @-@ Freiburg which is located in France , Bern Airport , Lugano Airport , St. Gallen @-@ Altenrhein Airport and Sion Airport . Swiss International Air Lines is the flag carrier of Switzerland . Its main hub is Zürich . 
 Switzerland has one of the best environmental records among nations in the developed world ; it was one of the countries to sign the Kyoto Protocol in 1998 and ratified it in 2003 . With Mexico and the Republic of Korea it forms the Environmental Integrity Group ( <unk> ) . The country is heavily active in recycling and anti @-@ littering regulations and is one of the top recyclers in the world , with 66 % to 96 % of recyclable materials being recycled , depending on the area of the country . The 2014 Global Green Economy Index ranked Switzerland among the top 10 green economies in the world . 
 In many places in Switzerland , household rubbish disposal is charged for . Rubbish ( except dangerous items , batteries etc . ) is only collected if it is in bags which either have a payment sticker attached , or in official bags with the surcharge paid at the time of purchase . This gives a financial incentive to recycle as much as possible , since recycling is free . Illegal disposal of garbage is not tolerated but usually the enforcement of such laws is limited to violations that involve the unlawful disposal of larger volumes at traffic intersections and public areas . Fines for not paying the disposal fee range from CHF 200 – 500 . 
 Switzerland also has internationally the most efficient system to recycle old newspapers and cardboard materials . Publicly organised collection by volunteers and economical railway transport logistics started as early as 1865 under the leadership of the notable industrialist Hans Caspar Escher ( Escher Wyss AG ) when the first modern Swiss paper manufacturing plant was built in <unk> . 
 = = Demographics = = 
 In 2012 , Switzerland 's population slightly exceeded eight million . In common with other developed countries , the Swiss population increased rapidly during the industrial era , quadrupling between 1800 and 1990 . Growth has since stabilized , and like most of Europe , Switzerland faces an aging population , albeit with consistent annual growth projected into 2035 , due mostly to immigration and a fertility rate close to replacement level . 
 As of 2012 , resident foreigners made up 23 @.@ 3 % of the population , one of the largest proportions in the developed world . Most of these ( 64 % ) were from European Union or EFTA countries . Italians were the largest single group of foreigners , with 15 @.@ 6 % of total foreign population , followed closely by Germans ( 15 @.@ 2 % ) , immigrants from Portugal ( 12 @.@ 7 % ) , France ( 5 @.@ 6 % ) , Serbia ( 5 @.@ 3 % ) , Turkey ( 3 @.@ 8 % ) , Spain ( 3 @.@ 7 % ) , and Austria ( 2 % ) . Immigrants from Sri Lanka , most of them former Tamil refugees , were the largest group among people of Asian origin ( 6 @.@ 3 % ) . 
 Additionally , the figures from 2012 show that 34 @.@ 7 % of the permanent resident population aged 15 or over in Switzerland ( around 2 @.@ 33 million ) , had an immigrant background . A third of this population ( 853 @,@ 000 ) held Swiss citizenship . Four fifths of persons with an immigration background were themselves immigrants ( first generation foreigners and native @-@ born and naturalised Swiss citizens ) , whereas one fifth were born in Switzerland ( second generation foreigners and native @-@ born and naturalised Swiss citizens ) . 
 In the 2000s , domestic and international institutions expressed concern about what was perceived as an increase in xenophobia , particularly in some political campaigns . In reply to one critical report , the Federal Council noted that " racism unfortunately is present in Switzerland " , but stated that the high proportion of foreign citizens in the country , as well as the generally unproblematic integration of foreigners " , underlined Switzerland 's openness . 
 = = = Languages = = = 
 Switzerland has four official languages : principally German ( spoken by 63 @.@ 5 % of the population in 2013 ) ; French ( 22 @.@ 5 % ) in the west ; and Italian ( 8 @.@ 1 % ) in the south . The fourth official language , Romansh ( 0 @.@ 5 % ) , is a Romance language spoken locally in the southeastern trilingual canton of Graubünden , and is designated by Article 4 of the Federal Constitution as a national language along with German , French , and Italian , and in Article 70 as an official language if the authorities communicate with persons who speak Romansh . However , federal laws and other official acts do not need to be decreed in Romansh . 
 In 2013 , the languages most spoken at home among permanent residents aged 15 and older were Swiss German ( 60 @.@ 1 % ) , French ( 23 @.@ 4 % ) , Standard German ( 10 @.@ 1 % ) , and Italian ( 8 @.@ 4 % ) . More than two @-@ fifths ( 42 @.@ 6 % ) of the permanent resident population indicated speaking more than one language regularly . Other languages spoken at home included English ( 4 @.@ 6 % ) , Portuguese ( 3 @.@ 5 % ) , Albanian ( 2 @.@ 6 % ) , Serbian and Croatian ( 2 @.@ 5 % ) , Spanish ( 2 @.@ 2 % ) , and Turkish ( 1 @.@ 3 % ) . 
 The federal government is obliged to communicate in the official languages , and in the federal parliament simultaneous translation is provided from and into German , French and Italian . 
