 Late 20th @-@ century technical examination has shown significant differences in technique and style between the panels of individual diptychs . The technical inconsistencies may be the result of the workshop system , in which the more prosaic passages were often completed by assistants . A change in style between panels can be seen , according to historian John Hand , because the divine panel was usually based on general designs sold on the open market , with the donor panel added after a patron was found . 
 Few intact diptychs survive . As with altarpieces , the majority were later separated and sold as single " genre " pictures . In the workshop system some were interchangeable , and the religious works may have been paired with newly commissioned donor panels . Later many diptychs were broken apart , thus creating two saleable works from one . During the Reformation , religious scenes were often removed . 
 = = = Portraiture = = = 
 Secular portraiture was a rarity in European art before 1430 . The format did not exist as a separate genre and was only found infrequently at the highest end of the market in betrothal portraits or royal family commissions . While such undertakings may have been profitable , they were considered a lower art form and the majority of surviving pre @-@ 16th @-@ century examples are unattributed . Large numbers of single devotional panels showing saints and biblical figures were being produced , but depictions of historical , known individuals did not begin until the early 1430s . Van Eyck was the pioneer ; his seminal 1432 Léal Souvenir is one of the earliest surviving examples , emblematic of the new style in its realism and acute observation of the small details of the sitter 's appearance . His Arnolfini Portrait is filled with symbolism , as is the Madonna of Chancelor Rolin , commissioned as testament to Rolin 's power , influence , and piety . 
 Van der Weyden developed the conventions of northern portraiture and was hugely influential on the following generations of painters . Rather than merely follow van Eyck 's meticulous attention to detail , van der Weyden created more abstract and sensual representations . He was highly sought after as a portraitist , yet there are noticeable similarities in his portraits , likely because he used and reused the same underdrawings , which met common ideals of rank and piety . These were then adapted to show the facial characteristics and expressions of the particular sitter . 
 Petrus Christus placed his sitter in a naturalistic setting rather than a flat and featureless background . This approach was in part a reaction against van der Weyden , who , in his emphasis on sculptural figures , utilised very shallow pictorial spaces . In his 1462 Portrait of a Man , Dieric Bouts went further by situating the man in a room complete with a window that looks out at a landscape , while in the 16th century , the full @-@ length portrait became popular in the north . The latter format was practically unseen in earlier northern art , although it had a tradition in Italy going back centuries , most usually in fresco and illuminated manuscripts . Full @-@ length portraits were reserved for depictions of the highest echelon of society , and were associated with princely displays of power . Of the second generation of northern painters , Hans Memling became the leading portraitist , taking commissions from as far as Italy . He was highly influential on later painters and is credited with inspiring Leonardo 's positioning of the Mona Lisa in front of a landscape view . Van Eyck and van der Weyden similarly influenced the French artist Jean Fouquet and the Germans Hans <unk> and Martin Schongauer among others . 
 The Netherlandish artists moved away from the profile view – popularised during the Italian Quattrocento – towards the less formal but more engaging three @-@ quarter view . At this angle , more than one side of the face is visible as the sitter 's body is rotated towards the viewer . This pose gives a better view of the shape and features of the head and allows the sitter to look out towards the viewer . The gaze of the sitter rarely engages the viewer . Van Eyck 's 1433 Portrait of a Man is an early example , which shows the artist himself looking at the viewer . Although there is often direct eye contact between subject and viewer , the look is normally detached , aloof and uncommunicative , perhaps to reflect the subject 's high social position . There are exceptions , typically in bridal portraits or in the case of potential betrothals , when the object of the work is to make the sitter as attractive as possible . In these cases the sitter was often shown smiling , with an engaging and radiant expression designed to appeal to her intended . 
 Around 1508 , Albrecht Dürer described the function of portraiture as " preserving a person 's appearance after his death " . Portraits were objects of status , and served to ensure that the individual 's personal success was recorded and would endure beyond his lifetime . Most portraits tended to show royalty , the upper nobility or princes of the church . The new affluence in the Burgundian Netherlands brought a wider variety of clientele , as members of the upper middle class could now afford to commission a portrait . As a result , more is known about the appearance and dress of the region 's people than at any time since the late Roman period . Portraits did not generally require lengthy sittings ; typically a series of preparatory drawings were used to flesh out the final panel . Very few of these drawings survive , a notable exception being van Eyck 's study for his Portrait of Cardinal Niccolò Albergati . 
 = = = Landscape = = = 
 Landscape was a secondary concern to Netherlandish painters before the mid 1460s . Geographical settings were rare and when they did appear usually consisted of glimpses through open windows or arcades . They were rarely based on actual locations ; the settings tended to be largely imagined , designed to suit the thematic thrust of the panel . Because most of the works were donor portraits , very often the landscapes were tame , controlled and served merely to provide a harmonious setting for the idealised interior space . In this , the northern artists lagged behind their Italian counterparts who were already placing their sitters within geographically identifiable and closely described landscapes . Some of the northern landscapes are highly detailed and notable in their own right , including van Eyck 's unsentimental c . 1430 Crucifixion and Last Judgement diptych and van der Weyden 's widely copied 1435 – 40 Saint Luke Drawing the Virgin . 
 Van Eyck was almost certainly influenced by the Labours of the Months landscapes the Limbourg brothers painted for the Très Riches Heures du Duc de Berry . The influence can be seen in the illuminations painted in the Turin @-@ Milan Hours , which show rich landscapes in the tiny bas de page scenes . These , according to Pächt , should be defined as early examples of Netherlandish landscape painting . The landscape tradition in illuminated manuscripts would continue for at least the next century . Simon Bening " explored new territory in the genre of landscape " , seen in several of the leaves he painted for the c . 1520 Grimani Breviary . 
 From the late 15th century a number of painters emphasised landscape in their works , a development led in part by the shift in preference from religious iconography to secular subjects . Second @-@ generation Netherlandish painters applied the mid @-@ 14th @-@ century dictum of natural representation . This was born of the rising affluence of the region 's middle class , many of whom had now travelled south and seen countryside noticeably different from their flat homeland . At the same time , the later part of the century saw the emergence of specialisation and a number of masters focused on detailing landscape , most notably Konrad Witz in the mid @-@ 15th century , and later Joachim Patinir . Most innovations in this format came from artists living in the Dutch regions of the Burgundian lands , most notably from Haarlem , Leiden and ' s @-@ Hertogenbosch . The significant artists from these areas did not slavishly reproduce the scenery before them , but in subtle ways adapted and modified their landscapes to reinforce the emphasis and meaning of the panel they were working on . 
 Patinir developed what is now called the world landscape genre , which is typified by biblical or historical figures within an imagined panoramic landscape , usually mountains and lowlands , water and buildings . Paintings of this type are characterised by an elevated viewpoint , with the figures dwarfed by their surroundings . The format was taken up by , among others , Gerard David and Pieter Bruegel the Elder , and became popular in Germany , especially with painters from the Danube school . Patinir 's works are relatively small and use a horizontal format ; this was to become so standard for landscapes in art that it is now called " landscape " format in ordinary contexts , but at the time it was a considerable novelty , as the vast majority of panel paintings before 1520 were vertical in format . World landscape paintings retain many of the elements developed from the mid @-@ 15th century , but are composed , in modern cinematic terms , as a long rather than a medium shot . The human presence remained central rather than serving as mere <unk> . Hieronymus Bosch adapted elements of the world landscape style , with the influence especially notable in his single @-@ panel paintings . 
 The most popular subjects of this type include the Flight into Egypt and the plight of hermits such as Saints Jerome and Anthony . As well as connecting the style to the later Age of Discovery , the role of Antwerp as a booming centre both of world trade and cartography , and the wealthy town @-@ dweller 's view of the countryside , art historians have explored the paintings as religious metaphors for the pilgrimage of life . 
 = = Relationship to the Italian Renaissance = = 
 The progressions in northern art developed almost simultaneously with the early Italian Renaissance . The philosophical and artistic traditions of the Mediterranean were not however part of the northern heritage , to the extent that many elements of Latin culture were actively disparaged in the north . The role of Renaissance humanism in art , for example , was less pronounced in the Low Countries than in Italy . Local religious trends had a strong influence on early northern art , as can be seen in the subject matter , composition and form of many late 13th- and early 14th @-@ century artworks . The northern painters ' doctrine was also built on elements of recent Gothic tradition , and less on the classical tradition prevalent in Italy . 
 While devotional paintings – especially altarpieces – remained dominant in Early Netherlandish art , secular portraiture became increasingly common in both northern and southern Europe as artists freed themselves from the prevailing idea that portraiture should be restricted to saints and other religious figures . In Italy this development was tied to the ideals of humanism . 
 Italian influences on Netherlandish art are first apparent in the late 15th century , when some of the painters began to travel south . This also explains why a number of later Netherlandish artists became associated with , in the words of art historian Rolf <unk> , " picturesque gables , bloated , barrel @-@ shaped columns , droll cartouches , ' twisted ' figures , and stunningly unrealistic colours – actually employ [ ing ] the visual language of Mannerism " . Wealthy northern merchants could afford to buy paintings from the top tier of artists . As a result , painters became increasingly aware of their status in society : they signed their works more often , painted portraits of themselves , and became well @-@ known figures because of their artistic activities . 
 The northern masters were greatly admired in Italy . According to Friedländer they exercised a strong influence over 15th @-@ century Italian artists , a view Panofsky agrees with . However , Italian painters began to move beyond Netherlandish influences by the 1460s , as they concentrated on composition with a greater emphasis on harmony of parts belonging together – " that elegant harmony and grace ... which is called beauty " , evident , for example , in Andrea Mantegna 's Entombment . By the early 16th century the reputation of the northern masters was such that there was an established north @-@ south trade in their works , although many of the paintings or objects sent south were by lesser artists and of lower quality . Innovations introduced in the north and adopted in Italy included the setting of figures in domestic interiors and the viewing of interiors from multiple vantage points , through openings such as doors or windows . Hugo van der Goes ' Portinari Altarpiece , in Florence 's Uffizi , played an important role in introducing Florentine painters to trends from the north , and artists like Giovanni Bellini came under the influence of northern painters working in Italy . 
 Memling successfully merged the two styles , exemplified in his Virgin and Child with Two Angels . By the mid @-@ 16th @-@ century , however , Netherlandish art was seen as crude ; Michelangelo claimed it was appealing only to " monks and friars " . At this point northern art began to fall almost completely out of favour in Italy . By the 17th century , when Bruges had lost its prestige and position as the pre @-@ eminent European trading city ( the rivers silted and ports were forced to close ) , the Italians dominated European art . 
 = = Destruction and dispersal = = 
 = = = Iconoclasm = = = 
 Religious images came under close scrutiny as actually or potentially idolatrous from the start of the Protestant Reformation in the 1520s . Martin Luther accepted some imagery , but few Early Netherlandish paintings met his criteria . Andreas Karlstadt , Huldrych Zwingli and John Calvin were wholly opposed to public religious images , above all in churches , and Calvinism soon became the dominant force in Netherlandish Protestantism . From 1520 , outbursts of reformist iconoclasm broke out across much of Northern Europe . These might be official and peaceable , as in England under the Tudors and the English Commonwealth , or unofficial and often violent , as in the <unk> or " Iconoclastic Fury " in 1566 in the Netherlands . On 19 August 1566 , this wave of mob destruction reached Ghent , where Marcus van <unk> chronicled the events . He wrote of the Ghent Altarpiece being " taken to pieces and lifted , panel by panel , into the tower to preserve it from the rioters " . Antwerp saw very thorough destruction in its churches in 1566 , followed by more losses in the Spanish Sack of Antwerp in 1576 , and a further period of official iconoclasm in 1581 , which now included city and guild buildings , when Calvinists controlled the city council . 
 Many thousands of religious objects and artefacts were destroyed , including paintings , sculptures , altarpieces , stained glass , and crucifixes , and the survival rate of works by the major artists is low – even Jan van Eyck has only some 24 extant works confidently attributed to him . The number grows with later artists , but there are still anomalies ; Petrus Christus is considered a major artist , but is given a smaller number of works than van Eyck . In general the later 15th century works exported to southern Europe have a much higher survival rate . 
 Many of the period 's artworks were commissioned by clergy for their churches , with specifications for a physical format and pictorial content that would complement existing architectural and design schemes . An idea of how such church interiors might have looked can be seen from both van Eyck 's Madonna in the Church and van der Weyden 's Exhumation of St Hubert . According to Nash , van der Weyden 's panel is an insightful look at the appearance of pre @-@ Reformation churches , and the manner in which images were placed so that they resonated with other paintings or objects . Nash goes on to say that , " any one would necessarily be seen in relation to other images , repeating , enlarging , or diversifying the chosen themes " . Because iconoclasts targeted churches and cathedrals , important information about the display of individual works has been lost , and with it , insights about the meaning of these artworks in their own time . Many other works were lost to fires or in wars ; the break @-@ up of the Valois Burgundian state made the Low Countries the cockpit of European conflict until 1945 . Van der Weyden 's The Justice of Trajan and Herkinbald polyptych is perhaps the most significant loss ; from records it appears to have been comparable in scale and ambition to the Ghent Altarpiece . It was destroyed by French artillery during the bombardment of Brussels in 1695 , and is today known only from a tapestry copy . 
 = = = Documentation = = = 
 There have been significant challenges for art historians in establishing the names of Netherlandish masters and attributing specific works . The historical record is very poor , such that some major artists ' biographies are still bare outlines , while attribution is an ongoing and often contentious debate . Even the most widely accepted attributions are typically only as a result of decades of scientific and historical research originating from after the start of the 20th century . Some painters , such as Adriaen <unk> and Ambrosius Benson of Bruges , who were mass @-@ producing panels to be sold at fair stalls , have had as many as 500 painting attributed to them . 
 The avenues for research have been limited by many historical factors . Many archives were destroyed in bombing campaigns in the two world wars , and a great number of works for which records do exist are themselves lost or destroyed . The record @-@ keeping in the region was inconsistent , and often the export of works by major artists was , owing to the pressures of commercial demand , not adequately recorded . The practice of signing and dating works was rare until the 1420s , and while the inventories of collectors may have elaborately described the works , they attached little importance to recording the artist or workshop that produced them . Surviving documentation tends to come from inventories , wills , payment accounts , employment contracts and guild records and regulations . 
 Because Jan van Eyck 's life is well documented in comparison to his contemporary painters , and because he was so clearly the period 's innovator , a great number of works were attributed to him after art historians began to research the period . Today Jan is credited with about 26 – 28 extant works . This reduced number in part follows from the identification of other mid @-@ 15th @-@ century painters such as van der Weyden , Christus and Memling , while Hubert , so highly regarded by late @-@ 19th @-@ century critics , is now relegated as a secondary figure with no works definitively attributed to him . Many early Netherlandish masters have not been identified , and are today known by " names of convenience " , usually of the " Master of ... " format . The practice lacks an established descriptor in English , but the " notname " term is often used , a derivative of a German term . Collecting a group of works under one notname is often contentious ; a set of works assigned one notname could have been produced by various artists whose artistic similarities can be explained by shared geography , training , and response to market @-@ demand influences . Some major artists who were known by pseudonyms are now identified , sometimes controversially , as in the case of Campin , who is usually , but not always , associated with the Master of <unk> . 
 Many unidentified late @-@ 14th- and early @-@ 15th @-@ century northern artists were of the first rank , but have suffered academic neglect because they have not been attached to any historical person ; as Nash puts it , " much of what cannot be firmly attributed remains less studied " . Some art historians believe that this situation has fostered a lack of caution in connecting works with historical persons , and that such connections often rest on tenuous circumstantial evidence . The identities of a number of well @-@ known artists have been founded on the basis of a single signed , documented or otherwise attributed work , from which follow further attributions based on technical evidence and geographical proximity . The so @-@ called Master of the Legend of the Magdalen , who may have been Pieter van <unk> , is one of the more notable examples ; others include Hugo van der Goes , Campin , Stefan Lochner and Simon Marmion . 
 The lack of surviving theoretical writing on art and recorded opinion from any of the pre @-@ 16th century major artists presents still more difficulties in attribution . Dürer , in 1512 , was the first artist of the era to properly set down in writing his theories of art , followed by Lucas de Heere in 1565 and Karel van Mander in 1604 . Nash believes a more probable explanation for the absence of theoretical writing on art outside Italy is that the northern artists did not yet have the language to describe their aesthetic values , or saw no point in explaining in writing what they had achieved in painting . Surviving 15th @-@ century appreciations of contemporary Netherlandish art are exclusively written by Italians , the best known of which include Cyriacus Ancona in 1449 , Bartolommeo Fazio in 1456 , and Giovanni Santi in 1482 . 
 = = Rediscovery = = 
 The dominance of Northern Mannerism in the mid @-@ 16th century was built on a subversion of the conventions of Early Netherlandish art , which in turn fell out of public favour . Yet it remained popular in some royal art collections ; Mary of Hungary and Philip II of Spain both sought out Netherlandish painters , sharing a preference for van der Weyden and Bosch . By the early 17th century , no collection of repute was complete without 15th- and 16th @-@ century northern European works ; the emphasis however tended to be on the Northern Renaissance as a whole , more towards the German Albrecht Dürer , by far the most collectable northern artist of the era . Giorgio Vasari in 1550 and Karel van Mander ( c . 1604 ) placed the art works of era at the heart of Northern Renaissance art . Both writers were instrumental in forming later opinion about the region 's painters , with emphasis on van Eyck as the innovator . 
 The Netherlandish painters were largely forgotten in the 18th century . When Musée du Louvre was converted to an art gallery during the French Revolution , Gerard David 's Marriage at Cana – then attributed to van Eyck – was the only piece of Netherlandish art on display there . More large panels were added to the collection after the French conquered the Low Countries . These works had a profound effect on German literary critic and philosopher Karl Schlegel , who after a visit in 1803 wrote an analysis of Netherlandish art , sending it to Ludwig Tieck , who had the piece published in 1805 . 
 In 1821 Johanna Schopenhauer became interested in the work of Jan van Eyck and his followers , having seen early Netherlandish and Flemish paintings in the collection of the brothers <unk> and Melchior Boisserée in Heidelberg . Schopenhauer did primary archival research because there was very little historical record of the masters , apart from official legal documents . She published Johann van Eyck und seine <unk> in 1822 , the same year Gustav Friedrich Waagen published the first modern scholarly work on early Netherlandish painting , Ueber Hubert van Eyck und Johann van Eyck ; Waagen 's work drew on Schlegel and Schopenhauer 's earlier analyses . Waagen went on to become director of the Gemäldegalerie in Berlin , amassing a collection of Netherlandish art , including most of the Ghent panels , a number of van der Weyden triptychs , and a Bouts altarpiece . Subjecting the works to meticulous analysis and examination in the course of acquisition , based on distinguishing characteristics of individual artists , he established an early scholarly system of classification . 
 In 1830 the Belgian Revolution split Belgium from the Netherlands of today and created divisions between the cities of Bruges ( home of van Eyck and Memling ) , Antwerp ( Matsys ) , Brussels ( van der Weyden and Bruegel ) and Leuven ( Bouts ) . As the newly created state of Belgium sought to establish a cultural identity , Memling 's reputation came to equal that of van Eyck in the 19th century . Memling was seen as the older master 's match technically , and as possessing a deeper emotional resonance . When in 1848 the collection of Prince Ludwig of Oettingen @-@ Wallerstein at Schloss Wallerstein was forced onto the market , his cousin Prince Albert arranged a viewing at Kensington Palace ; though a catalogue of works attributed to the School of Cologne , Jan van Eyck and van der Weyden was compiled by Waagen , there were no other buyers so Albert purchased them himself . At a period when London 's National Gallery sought to increase its prestige , Charles Eastlake purchased Rogier van der Weyden 's The Magdalen Reading panel in 1860 from Edmond <unk> 's " small but choice " collection of early Netherlandish paintings . 
 Netherlandish art became popular with museum @-@ goers in the late 19th century . At the beginning of the 20th century , van Eyck and Memling were the most highly regarded , with van der Weyden and Christus little more than footnotes . Later many of the works then attributed to Memling were found to be from van der Weyden or his workshop . In 1902 , Bruges hosted the first exhibition of Netherlandish art with 35 @,@ 000 visitors , an event that was a " turning point in the appreciation of early Netherlandish art " . For a number of reasons , the chief of which was the difficulty of securing paintings for the exhibition , only a few of van Eyck 's and van der Weyden 's panels were displayed , while almost 40 of Memling 's pieces were shown . Nevertheless , van Eyck and van der Weyden , to an extent , were then considered the first rank of Netherlandish artists . 
 The Bruges exhibition renewed interest in the period and initiated scholarship that was to flourish in the 20th century . Johan Huizinga was the first historian to place Netherlandish art squarely in the Burgundian period – outside of nationalistic borders – suggesting in his book The Waning of the Middle Ages , published in 1919 , that the flowering of the school in the early 15th century resulted wholly from the tastes set by the Burgundian court . Another exhibition visitor , Georges Hulin de Loo , published an independent critical catalogue highlighting the large number of mistakes in the official catalogue , which had used attributions and descriptions from the owners . He and Max Friedländer , who visited and wrote a review of the Bruges exhibition , went on to become leading scholars in the field . 
 = = Scholarship and conservation = = 
 The most significant early research of Early Netherlandish art occurred in the 1920s , in German art historian Max Jakob Friedländer 's pioneering <unk> der <unk> <unk> des 15 @.@ und 16 . Jahrhunderts . Friedländer focused on the biographical details of the painters , establishing attribution , and examining their major works . The undertaking proved extremely difficult , given the scant historical record of even the most significant artists . Fellow @-@ German Erwin Panofsky 's analysis in the 1950s and 1960s followed and in many ways challenged Friedländer 's work . Writing in the United States , Panofsky made the work of the German art historians accessible to the English @-@ speaking world for the first time . He effectively legitimized Netherlandish art as a field of study , and raised its status to something similar to the early Italian renaissance . 
 Panofsky was one of the first art historians to abandon formalism . He built on Friedländer 's attempts at attribution , but focused more on social history and religious iconography . Panofsky developed the terminology with which the Netherlandish paintings are usually described , and made significant advances identifying the rich religious symbolism especially of the major altarpieces . Panofsky was the first scholar to connect the work of Netherlandish painters and illuminators , noticing the considerable overlap . He considered the study of manuscripts to be integral to the study of panels , though in the end came to view illumination as less significant than panel painting – as a prelude to the truly significant work of the northern artists of the 15th and 16th centuries . 
 Otto Pächt and Friedrich Winkler continued and developed on Panofsky 's work . They were key in identifying sources of iconography and ascribing attribution , or at least differentiating anonymous masters under names of convenience . The paucity of surviving documentation has made attribution especially difficult , a problem compounded by the workshop system . It was not until the late 1950s , after the research of Friedländer , Panofsky and Meyer Schapiro , that the attributions generally accepted today were established . 
 More recent research from art historians such as Lorne Campbell relies on X @-@ ray and infrared photography to develop an understanding of the techniques and materials used by the painters . The conservation of the Ghent Altarpiece in the mid @-@ 1950s pioneered methodologies and scholarship in technical studies . Examination of paint layers and <unk> was later applied to other Netherlandish works , allowing for more accurate attributions . Van Eyck 's work , for example , typically shows underdrawings unlike Christus ' work . These discoveries , too , hint at the relationships between the masters of the first rank and those in the following generations , with Memling 's underdrawings clearly showing van der Weyden 's influence . 
 Scholarship since the 1970s has tended to move away from a pure study of iconography , instead emphasizing the paintings ' and artists ' relation to the social history of their time . According to Craig Harbison , " Social history was becoming increasingly important . Panofsky had never really talked about what kind of people these were . " Harbison sees the works as objects of devotion with a " prayer book mentality " available to middle @-@ class burghers who had the means and the inclination to commission devotional objects . Most recent scholarship is moving away from the focus on religious iconography ; instead , it investigates how a viewer is meant to experience a piece , as with donor paintings that were meant to elicit the feeling of a religious vision . James Marrow thinks the painters wanted to evoke specific responses , which are often hinted at by the figures ' emotions in the paintings . 
 = Blood Knights = 
 Blood Knights is a hack and slash action role @-@ playing game for Microsoft Windows , PlayStation 3 ( through PlayStation Network ) , and Xbox 360 ( through Xbox Live Arcade ) . The game was developed by German studio <unk> Interactive and published by Kalypso Media , also from Germany . Blood Knights was released on 1 November 2013 for the Xbox 360 , 13 November 2013 for the PC , and 19 November 2013 for the PlayStation 3 , with an ESRB rating of Mature . 
 The game features two playable characters : Jeremy , a vampire hunter , and Alysa , a vampire that Jeremy became ritually bound to , on a quest to retrieve an artifact that can cause cataclysms . The game features both single player and local cooperative gameplay ( co @-@ op ) modes , but does not allow for online co @-@ op . Blood Knights received generally negative reviews upon release , with a large number of critics faulting the game for showing a lack of creativity and having uninteresting gameplay . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 The game combines platformer , role @-@ playing , and combat elements . Players move about several levels , including a forest and a castle , using precision jumping and puzzle solving to move about the level . Players can discover equipable weapons and armor that improves effectiveness in combat by exploring levels for chests . Combat takes the form of set piece battles , in which a number of enemies appear and must be defeated before the player can continue to progress through the area . These enemies include human outlaws , demons , werewolves , and other vampires . The game also contains boss battles , in which the player must defeat a significantly stronger enemy that is aided by normal enemies . 
 Players assume control of Jeremy , a sword @-@ wielding , melee @-@ focused character , and Alysa , who uses crossbows to deliver ranged attacks . The game can be played as a single player game , in which the player alternates between controlling Jeremy and Alysa , or as a local co @-@ op game , in which two players play cooperatively , with one controlling each character . Blood Knights does not support online co @-@ op . Like most hack and slash games , the control scheme is minimal . When controlling Jeremy , players can chain attacks using one button ( the X button on the Xbox 360 ) , and can use a number of special attacks that have a cooldown timer , including a heavy blow , a whirlwind attack , and a power that draws distant enemies to Jeremy . While controlling Alysa , the game functions as a twin @-@ stick shooter , in which movement is controlled by one thumbstick or set of keys , and firing weapons is controlled by the other thumbstick or another set of keys . Alysa also has special attacks , including the ability to fire flaming arrows and a grenade attack . In single player gameplay , the player can switch between Jeremy and Alysa by pressing a button ( the Y button on the Xbox 360 ) . Players can transfer health , in the form of blood , between the two playable characters , healing one at the expense of the other . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Blood Knights takes place in a fictional version of Earth in which humans and vampires are at war . The main character , Jeremy , is the captain of a holy order that fights vampires . At the beginning of the game , the order travels to a set of ruins to protect the Blood Seal , a powerful artifact , from being captured by the vampires . The order suffers heavy losses in the attempt , and in desperation the priest Bartholomew uses a ritual to bind Jeremy to the vampire Alysa . During the course of Jeremy 's attempt to retrieve the seal , he is turned into a vampire , and the vampires seize the seal themselves . With the seal removed from its resting place , the moon begins to crack apart , causing unpredictable and violent tides . Because Jeremy has been turned into a vampire himself , Bartholomew and another member of the holy order , Castello , kick Jeremy and Alysa into an abyss inside the ruins , abandoning them for dead . Castello assumes Jeremy 's place as the captain of the order . 
 Jeremy and Alysa escape the ruins and pursue the vampires that stole the Blood Seal . Castello and the holy order are also pursuing the vampires . Jeremy and Alysa reach <unk> , a human stronghold . In order to pass through the town , the pair must first rescue the town 's sheriff , who went into a nearby forest with the town guard in an attempt to kill the powerful vampire Blood Fox . Jeremy and Alysa defeat Blood Fox , and in the town , Jeremy encounters Bartholomew , who split from Castello after an argument . Bartholomew tasks <unk> with recovering the Relic of Light , a powerful weapon that can be used against the vampires , in order to prove that Jeremy is still loyal to the order . 
 After retrieving the weapon , Jeremy is informed that the Lords of Pikehold , a group of knights that defends the area , have defeated the vampire army carrying the blood seal . On his way to Pikehold Castle , Jeremy is then ambushed by Castello . The pair fight Castello , who falls off a cliff after being defeated . Inside Pikehold Castle , Jeremy discovers that the Lords of Pikehold have become thralls to a succubus . Jeremy and Alysa defeat the Lords of Pikehold and the succubus , who informs Jeremy that the Blood Seal has been taken by a vampire mage to the top of a mountain . 
 Bartholomew meets Jeremy and Alysa at the top of the mountain , and informs the pair that the vampires have already summoned a powerful demon that will slaughter mankind . Bartholomew has called upon the army of Rome , led by the powerful First Paladin of Rome , to defeat the demon . Jeremy , knowing that the First Paladin of Rome would kill him and Alysa on sight , sets off to defeat the demon before the army of Rome arrives . When Jeremy and Alysa confront the demon , it explains that it was summoned because the humans have become too numerous , and with increased numbers they have gone from fearing vampires to hunting them . Jeremy and Alysa kill the demon and Bartholomew recovers the Blood Seal . As he does this , the First Paladin of Rome arrives and demands the seal for himself . Bartholomew gives the seal to Jeremy instead , and battles the Paladin to delay the army of Rome . 
 Jeremy travels back to the ruins from the beginning of the game , only to find that the army of Rome has beaten him there . Jeremy and Alysa meet the First Paladin in the Blood Seal 's resting chamber . The Paladin explains that he wishes to destroy the seal , causing a great deluge that will bring the people , who had stopped believing the Church 's teachings , back under the Church 's influence . Jeremy refuses to allow the Paladin to do this , and the Paladin attacks . After being injured , the Paladin pulls back and Castello appears and attacks . Jeremy and Alysa kill Castello , and the Paladin re @-@ enters the fight . Jeremy and Alysa appear to severely wound the First Paladin , but he boasts that vampires cannot kill him , as he is under the protection of Rome . Bartholomew emerges from behind the Blood Seal 's resting place and slits the First Paladin 's throat from behind , killing him . Bartholomew claims that although the Blood Seal was destroyed in battle , the moon will heal itself . He reveals that while he has heard that it can be done , he does not personally know how to turn Jeremy back into a human , and unless he is human , the bond between him and Alysa cannot be undone . The game ends with Jeremy and Alysa agreeing to work together to find a way to reverse Jeremy 's transformation into a vampire . 
 = = Development = = 
 Blood Knights went through a number of delays before being published . Announced by German publisher <unk> entertainment in July 2012 , the game was originally scheduled for release in the summer of 2012 . In a Game Informer article published on 3 September 2012 , the release date was given as 31 October 2012 ( Halloween ) . This date was later shifted back to December 2012 , citing " legal negotiations " , and then to 20 February 2013 , citing a need for more development time . 20 February passed with neither the release of the game nor an announcement by the developer or publisher , although both Xbox.com and Amazon.de now listed release dates in mid @-@ march . Developer <unk> Interactive then announced a release date of 19 March 2013 . On 5 March 2013 , Deck 13 founder Jan Klose explained that the release date remained uncertain , expecting the game to be released no later than mid @-@ May 2013 . Klose called the game 99 @.@ 9 % complete , and blamed the delays on financial difficulties at <unk> entertainment , which necessitated that Deck 13 become a co @-@ publisher and take on responsibilities that the studio not planned for . The game was eventually released by a different publisher , Kalypso Media , as the first game under their digital @-@ only label " <unk> Games " . The game was finally released on 1 November 2013 for the Xbox 360 , 13 November 2013 for the PC , and 19 November 2013 for the PlayStation 3 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Blood Knights received mixed to poor reviews upon release . At Metacritic , a video game review aggregator , the Xbox 360 version of the game received an average score of 45 out of 100 , based on 7 reviews . The UK Official Xbox Magazine remarked that " Blood Knights holds as much annoyance as satisfaction " , while the US version of Official Xbox Magazine contended that " Blood Knights is too easy to ever become actively irritating , but its deficit of danger makes it too darn dull to hold even a devoted horror nut ’ s attention for long " . 
 Critics took issue with the game 's lack of originality . Henry Kelly of The Digital Fix comments that " The character models are quite basic and unimaginative - Jeremy has typically harsh features and the female characters are given skimpy outfits to show off their stereotyped fantasy physiques " . X @-@ ONE Magazine calls the game an " unashamed clone of Diablo " , which borrows mechanics , naming conventions , and character archetypes from Diablo . The gameplay was considered by critics to be too easy , with a terrible enemy AI that made combat unchallenging , interspersed with what Henry Kelly called " painfully simple non @-@ puzzles " . Other components that faced criticism included the shallowness of the RPG elements , the lack of online co @-@ op , and the dialogue , which was considered poorly written and occasionally poorly acted . 
 Reviewers did , however , have positive things to say about the game 's co @-@ op system , lack of online support notwithstanding . Cameron Lewis of Official Xbox Magazine US , in the summary of his review , noted that " complementary characters make local co @-@ op effective " . The UK version of the magazine called the co @-@ op " pleasant " , while X @-@ ONE Magazine felt that the mode gave the game more substance . 
 = New York State Route 31F = 
 New York State Route 31F ( NY 31F ) is an east – west state highway located in the vicinity of Rochester , New York , in the United States . The western terminus of the route is at an intersection with NY 96 north of the Monroe County village of Pittsford . Its eastern terminus is at a junction with NY 31 in the Wayne County village of Macedon . Along the way , NY 31F serves the villages of East Rochester and Fairport and connects to Interstate 490 ( I @-@ 490 ) in the town of Pittsford . From Fairport eastward , NY 31F roughly parallels the Erie Canal , which the route crosses over twice : once west of Fairport and again north of Macedon . 
 The origins of NY 31F date back to 1908 when the modern alignment of the route was designated as part of Route 20 by the New York State Legislature . Route 20 , an unsigned legislative route , was rerouted in 1921 to use NY 31 and NY 250 between Macedon and Fairport instead . The section of Route 20 's pre @-@ 1921 alignment west of modern NY 350 received a designation c . 1931 when it became part of New York State Route 33B , an alternate route of NY 33 ( now NY 441 ) that extended from Pittsford to Walworth via Macedon Center . NY 33 was truncated to end in Rochester in 1949 , at which time NY 33B was renumbered to NY 31F and rerouted to end in Macedon . 
 = = Route description = = 
 Upon separating from NY 96 in the town of Pittsford directly in front of St. John Fisher College , NY 31F becomes Fairport Road , the name that the route dons for its first 3 @.@ 4 miles ( 5 @.@ 5 km ) . The highway , four lanes wide , heads east , skirting the southern edge of the St. John Fisher campus for a half @-@ mile ( 0 @.@ 8 km ) before connecting to I @-@ 490 at exit 25 . Past the expressway , NY 31F begins to straddle the boundary line between the village of East Rochester and the town of Pittsford . After intersecting NY 153 , the primary roadway linking East Rochester and the village of Pittsford , NY 31F passes to the south of the East Rochester Union Free School District campus prior to leaving the vicinity of the village and entering Perinton . 
 Within Perinton , the route initially passes through residential areas similar to those located in East Rochester and Pittsford but soon enters a heavily commercial area centered on the intersection between NY 31F and Jefferson Avenue . During this stretch , the route passes under the CSX Transportation @-@ owned West Shore Subdivision railroad line , here situated on a large embankment . At the eastern edge of the commercial strip , NY 31F narrows to two lanes and crosses over the Erie Canal into Fairport , where it becomes West Church Street . 
 NY 31F continues through the residential western portion of the village to an intersection with NY 250 ( South Main Street ) just south of the village 's business district and adjacent to the First Baptist Church of Fairport . After crossing NY 250 , NY 31F becomes East Church Street and begins to parallel the canal as both exit the village . Now solely in Perinton once more , NY 31F cuts to the north along Turk Hill Road , crossing the Erie Canal and the Rochester Subdivision , CSX 's main line through the Rochester area , on a large overpass . The route resumes its eastward path at an intersection with High Street in the northeast corner of the village , becoming Macedon Center Road in the process . 
 East of Fairport , the route becomes predominantly rural in nature in a stark departure from its first 6 miles ( 10 km ) . NY 31F heads east on a nearly @-@ linear routing through eastern Perinton and the Wayne County town of Macedon to the hamlet of Macedon Center , located at the junction of NY 31F and Canandaigua Road . Not long after , NY 31F encounters NY 350 . Here , NY 31F and NY 350 turn south , concurrently following Ontario Center Road for 1 @.@ 75 miles ( 2 @.@ 82 km ) to the village of Macedon , where both NY 31F and NY 350 terminate at NY 31 . During this final stretch , NY 31F passes under the CSX main line and over the Erie Canal once again . 
 Maintenance of NY 31F is split between the New York State Department of Transportation ( NYSDOT ) , the village of Fairport , and Monroe County . The highway is state @-@ maintained from NY 96 east to the Fairport village line , at which point ownership and maintenance of the road shifts to the village . NY 31F becomes a state highway once again at NY 250 and remains NYSDOT @-@ maintained until it turns north onto the county @-@ owned and maintained Turk Hill Road . While on Turk Hill Road , NY 31F overlaps with County Route 50 , the designation assigned to the entire length of Turk Hill Road within Monroe County . The remainder of NY 31F east of Turk Hill Road is state @-@ maintained . 
 = = History = = 
 All of what is now NY 31F was originally designated as part of Route 20 , an unsigned legislative route , by the New York State Legislature in 1908 . Route 20 entered the village of Macedon on modern NY 31 and continued westward to Rochester on current NY 96 . On March 1 , 1921 , Route 20 was realigned to utilize modern NY 31 and NY 250 between Macedon and Fairport . Although all of modern NY 31F was part of a legislative route at one time and was state @-@ maintained west of Fairport and from Macedon Center to Macedon by 1926 , it was not assigned a posted route number until the 1930s . 
 The portion of current NY 31F west of NY 350 in the town of Macedon was designated as part of NY 33B c . 1931 . NY 33B continued north from Macedon on modern NY 350 to an intersection with NY 33 ( now NY 441 ) in Walworth . NY 350 was assigned by the following year ; however , it was initially confined to the segment it now shares with NY 31F between NY 31 in the village of Macedon and then @-@ NY 33B . NY 350 was extended northward to Ontario Center in the early 1940s , overlapping NY 33B from Macedon to Walworth . NY 33 was truncated westward to Rochester on January 1 , 1949 . As a result , NY 33B was renumbered to NY 31F and rerouted east of Macedon Center to travel south along NY 350 to Macedon , where it connected to NY 31 . 
 The first section of the Eastern Expressway ( now I @-@ 490 ) opened in the mid @-@ 1950s , extending from NY 31F south to NY 96 in Bushnell 's Basin . Initially , NY 96 was realigned to follow the freeway between the two locations and Fairport Road between the north end of the freeway and its original routing on East Avenue . As a result , NY 31F was truncated to begin at the new freeway . The latter change was short @-@ lived , however , as NY 31F was re @-@ extended to its original terminus c . 1957 after NY 96 was moved onto a northwestern extension of the Eastern Expressway to what is now the Can of Worms in Rochester . 
 NY 31F originally ran through the center of Fairport , turning north at NY 250 and sharing Main Street with NY 250 on a short concurrency between Church Street and High Street . NY 31F turned east at High Street and followed it to Turk Hill Road , where NY 31F continued east on its current alignment . The route was realigned onto its current alignment through Fairport on April 1 , 1984 , as a result of a highway maintenance swap between the state of New York and the village of Fairport . In the swap , ownership and maintenance of High Street was transferred from the state to Fairport in exchange for control over the portion of East Church Street between NY 250 and Turk Hill Road . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 = Malvern College = 
 Malvern College is an independent coeducational day and boarding school in Malvern , Worcestershire , England . It is a public school in the British sense of the term and is a member of the Rugby Group and of the Headmasters ' and Headmistresses ' Conference . Since its foundation in 1865 , it has remained on the same grounds , which are located near the town centre of Great Malvern . The campus , now covering some 250 acres ( 101 ha ) , is set against the backdrop of the Malvern Hills . 
 There are currently about 670 pupils enrolled at the school , aged between 13 and 18 . Additionally , there are about 310 pupils aged from 3 to 13 at The Downs , Malvern College Prep School , in nearby Colwall in Herefordshire . Across the two schools , in total , there are nearly 1000 pupils . 
 Among the alumni of the College are at least two Commonwealth Prime Ministers , two Nobel Laureates ( five Nobel Prizes including prep school alumni ) , an Olympic Gold medalist and many other notable persons from various fields . The novelist C. S. Lewis , author of The Chronicles of Narnia , is a former pupil of the school . 
 In collaboration with its Chinese partners , the College has two schools in China , Malvern College Qingdao and Malvern College Chengdu . A third school in Cairo , Egypt is under construction , and Malvern College Hong Kong had been allocated a new site in Tai Po , New Territories , Hong Kong , adjacent to the Hong Kong Science Park . 
 = = History = = 
 Set in the Malvern Hills , the school 's location owes much to Malvern 's emergence in the nineteenth century as a fashionable spa resort , appreciated for its unpolluted air and the healing qualities of its famous spring water . The school opened its doors for the first time on 25 January 1865 under the headship of the Rev. Arthur Faber . Initially , there were only twenty @-@ four boys , of whom eleven were day boys , six masters and two houses , named Mr McDowall 's ( No.1 ) and Mr Drew 's ( No.2 ) , but the new school 's expansion was rapid . One year later , there were sixty @-@ four boys . By 1875 , there were 200 on the Roll and five boarding houses ; by the end of the 19th century , the numbers had risen to more than 400 boys and ten houses . American poet Henry Longfellow visited the school in 1868 , Prince and Princess Christian on speech @-@ day in 1870 and The Duke and Duchess of Teck visited in 1891 with their daughter , Princess May ( later Queen Mary ) . Lord Randolph Churchill 's speech @-@ day comments on education in 1889 were reported in The Times . The school was one of the twenty four Public Schools listed in the Public Schools Yearbook of 1889 and was incorporated by Royal Charter in 1928 . Further expansion of pupil numbers and buildings continued between the end of the First World War in 1918 and the start of the Second World War in 1939 . During the two Wars , 457 and 258 former pupils , respectively , gave their lives . Seven former pupils were among ' the few ' who took part in the Battle of Britain . 
 Following the onset of World War II , the College premises were requisitioned by the Admiralty between October 1939 and July 1940 , with the result that the school was temporarily relocated to Blenheim Palace . In 1942 , its premises were again needed for governmental use , on this occasion by the TRE and , from May 1942 to July 1946 , the school was housed with Harrow School . QinetiQ , a private sector successor to the government 's original research facility , is still sited on former college land . 
 Having traditionally been a school for boys aged from 13 to 18 years old , in 1992 it merged with Ellerslie Girls ’ School and Hillstone prep school to become a coeducational school for pupils aged 3 to 18 years old . The college also departed from the full boarding tradition of the English public school and allows day pupils , although over two thirds of pupils still choose to board . In September 2008 , the College 's Prep School merged with The Downs prep school on the latter 's nearby site in Colwall , Herefordshire to form The Downs , Malvern College Prep School . 
 = = = Recent developments = = = 
 The year 2008 also saw the start of a multimillion @-@ pound development scheme that included a new sports complex , new athletics and viewing facilities at the pitches and two new boarding houses . The sports complex and new houses were opened in October 2009 by The Duke of York . Ellerslie House was opened for girls , commemorating the eponymous former girls ' school , and the other new house has become the new permanent residence for the boys of No. 7 . 
 In 2010 part of the school suffered very serious damage when fire broke out on 10 April in one of the boarding houses . The 1871 Grade II listed building which was the boarding house for 55 girls and living accommodation of the <unk> and her family , was almost completely destroyed . Over 70 firefighters and 13 fire engines from Malvern , Worcester and Stourport @-@ on @-@ Severn depots fought the blaze . 
 = = The Downs = = 
 The original preparatory school , Hillstone , opened in 1883 . When the college went coeducational , Hillstone was absorbed into Malvern to become its prep department . The prep school merged with The Downs , a Quaker school founded in 1900 , and the new school is now known as The Downs Malvern . 
 Boarding is available to pupils in the prep school aged 7 and above . They reside in a separate boarding house known as The Warren . 
 = = Governance = = 
 The school is governed by a College Council of approximately fifteen members , chaired since 2002 by Lord MacLaurin , a former pupil himself . <unk> and former cricketer Antony Clark joined the school as Headmaster in 2008 . 
 = = Educational and social care standards = = 
 An Ofsted report , following an October 2010 inspection , rated the school 's services against specific criteria and assigned an overall quality rating of Grade 1 ( outstanding ) . This compares to an overall rating of Grade 2 ( good ) in the previous report published in 2008 . In the latest report , " organisation " and health and safety provision were upgraded to Grade 1 while boarding accommodation was rated Grade 2 . Other areas assessed included " helping children to achieve " , to " make a positive contribution " and to " enjoy what they do " and these remained Grade 1 ( outstanding ) . The report states that four recommendations made in Ofsted 's last report had all been addressed and that the school " delivers an outstanding service that continues to be developed " . 
 = = Curriculum = = 
 While academic success is considered important , emphasis is also placed on the all @-@ round development of the individual rather than on academic results alone . In the Sixth Form , courses are offered at A @-@ Level in art , business studies , classical civilisation , design and technology , drama and theatre studies , economics , English literature , geography , Greek , history , history of art , key skills , Latin , mathematics , modern languages ( French , German , Spanish ) , music , music technology , physical education , politics and the sciences ( biology , chemistry , physics ) . Further courses are available at International Baccalaureate level and special arrangements are sometimes made for other courses upon request . 
 = = Academic performance = = 
 In both the 2008 and 2010 Ofsted reports , a Grade 1 ( outstanding ) rating was assigned for " helping children to achieve " , to " make a positive contribution " and to " enjoy what they do " . In 2010 , the school was , according to OFSTED , ranked 28th among private schools for value added to its student 's A Level results , placing it within the top 5 % nationally . In 2011 , it was 79th among co @-@ ed independent boarding schools for A @-@ Level results . The school 's pupils have achieved particularly good results at IB level . In 2011 , the school was ranked 18th for the average grades of its IB pupils . In 2012 , The Independent review of both A level and IB results , based on government issued statistics , ranked Malvern 32nd in the UK with 1080 @.@ 7 points , ahead of Harrow ( 34th ) , Winchester ( 73rd ) , Eton ( 80th ) and Wellington ( 89th ) . 
 = = Admission = = 
 Generally , parents register their children up to two years in advance , in order to secure a place at age 13 , through sitting a Common Entrance exam , or via the award of an open Academic Scholarship . Sixth Form entry is gained either through a scholarship exam , or by tests in the subjects to be studied . <unk> are available for new entrants , and subject scholarships are awarded for Art , Drama , Music , Science / Technology and Sport . 
 = = Sport = = 
 The school has a strong sporting tradition . For boys ' sports , some Malvernians would consider the College to be best known as a football school although its cricket sides have also produced players who have gone on to play at international level . Traditionally , sport for boys used to be split between the original ' major sports ' of football , cricket , and rackets ( rugby was added later ) , and ' minor sports ' . Colours were awarded for each major sport , as appropriate . After 1995 , the distinction between ' major sport ' and ' minor sport ' was removed . The girls ' main sports are hockey and lacrosse in the winter , lacrosse and netball in the Lent Term and tennis and rounders in the summer . 
 The College also plays a multitude of other sports such as Rackets , Fives , Athletics , Tennis , Squash , Croquet , Basketball , Badminton and Polo . Some boys ' hockey and girls ' football are played . 
 On 16 October 2009 , a new sports complex and hospitality suite was opened by The Duke of York . The opening was attended by several well known sports personalities including athlete Dame Kelly Holmes , cricketers Michael Vaughan and Graham Gooch , footballer Peter Shilton , rugby union player Jason Leonard , athlete Christina Boxer and hockey player Rachel Walker . The indoor complex , which was built on the site of the old sports hall and swimming pool , offers an 8 court sports hall , a dance studio and fitness suite , a climbing wall , two squash courts , a shooting range , a large function suite , and a 6 lane swimming pool and its facilities are also available for use by the wider community . They are also used by Worcestershire County Cricket Club for their winter training programme . In February 2010 , the school also hosted the England Blind Cricket squad for training sessions . 
 In November 2010 Vera Hughes opened the two newly refurbished Rackets courts . The courts were named after her husband Ron Hughes who was the Rackets Professional at Malvern from 1956 until 1986 The courts are now both tournament quality . 
 = = Activities = = 
 Activities offered in addition to the academic curriculum include sports ( see above ) , Combined Cadet Force ( CCF ) , the Duke of Edinburgh 's Award , First Aid , Orchestra / Band , Orienteering , Outdoor Pursuits , Photography , Practical Engineering , Riding , and Skiing . A wider range of activities depending on the demand may also be available and include , Ballet / Dance , Ceramics , Chess , Choir , Climbing , Community Service , Current Affairs , Dancing , Debating / Public Speaking , Design / Technology , Drama / Theatre Studies , Life Saving , First Aid , Outdoor Pursuits , Photography , Practical Engineering , Textiles , and Young Enterprise . 
 Facilities are also available ( in some cases , by prior arrangement ) for independent extra @-@ curricular activities such as journalism and music rehearsal . 
 = = Year names = = 
 = = Houses = = 
 A House is a component of the school community and a place where pupils reside and engage in private study . Normally , a pupil remains at his chosen House until he or she leaves the school . Each house has its own colours . Competitions are regularly arranged between the Houses in a range of academic , artistic and sporting activities . With the exceptions of School House and Ellerslie House , the eleven houses at Malvern are named with numbers 1 to 9 , a system which used to be used at Roedean School , a girls ' school founded by the sisters of the Old Malvernian judge Sir Paul Ogden Lawrence . The houses , in order of foundation are : 
 = = Traditions = = 
 = = = Events = = = 
 Commemoration Day 
 The main social event of the school calendar Commemoration Day , or " <unk> " as it is known in the school , celebrates the founding of the school . A service is held where prizes are awarded . A cricket match then takes place between the 1st cricket XI and the Free Foresters . The inter @-@ house Athletics competition and the Summer Concert take place on the Friday before <unk> . It is held on the Saturday of Half @-@ term in the Summer term . 
 The CVS Ball 
 The School Council organises a charity ball , a black tie themed event that takes place in the 5th week of every Autumn Term . A similar event called The Autumn Ball is held for the Lower School . 
 The inter @-@ house Singing Cup Competition 
 This is held annually in the winter term . It is one of a number of different inter @-@ house events on the school social calendar . 
 The Ledder 
 The Ledder , or Ledbury Run , is a 7 @.@ 5 @-@ mile ( 12 @.@ 1 km ) cross country race that starts in the town of Ledbury , goes over the Malvern Hills and finishes on the Senior , the main cricket pitch in the centre of the College . The first 9 runners receive Ledder Caps . In its early days there was no organised route and pupils simply had to get back to college as fast as they could . 
 Remembrance Sunday 
 On the Sunday closest to 11 November , known as Remembrance Sunday , the entire college assembles in front of St. George to await a procession of parents , alumni , guests and teachers . Two minutes silence is followed by The Last Post and a reading . Representatives of the student body ( the Senior Chapel Prefect , who is the Head Boy or Girl ) and of the Old Malvernian Society then place wreaths at the foot of St. George . A memorial service follows in the chapel for the more than 400 Malvernians who lost their lives in the Great War . 
 = = = Carmen <unk> = = = 
 The school song was written and composed by two masters , M. A. Bayfield and R. E. Lyon . It was first sung on speech day in 1888 . 
 <unk> , O <unk> , 
 Iam <unk> <unk> <unk> , 
 <unk> <unk> <unk> , 
 <unk> , <unk> <unk> , 
 Age soror <unk> <unk> , 
 <unk> <unk> <unk> , 
 Quae nos <unk> , haec <unk> , 
 Quae nos <unk> , <unk> . 
 The same song became the school song of Eastbourne College when Bayfield became headmaster there in 1895 . 
 = = Innovations = = 
 The College has a history of innovation in the field of education . In 1963 , it was the first independent school to have a language laboratory . It is thought to be the first school in the country to have had a careers service . Under the direction of John Lewis , a former master , it pioneered Nuffield Physics in the 1960s , Science in Society in the 1970s , and the Diploma of Achievement in the 1990s . At the beginning of the 1990s , Malvern College became one of the first schools in Britain to offer the choice between the International Baccalaureate and A @-@ Levels in the Sixth Form . The school was one of the first boys ' public schools to become fully coeducational from the preparatory department all the way to sixth form . 
 Each summer the staff and some older pupils run a summer school , Young Malvern , which incorporates many sports , activities and learning experiences . Malvern College is one of the two schools in the country ( the other being Dulwich College ) to offer Debating in the curriculum and pupils participate in regional and national competitions including the Debating Matters competition and the Three Counties Tournament . The subject is compulsory at Foundation Year level . 
 = = Notable alumni = = 
 The school 's alumni ( " old boys " ) are known as Old Malvernians , or <unk> . The Malvernian Society holds many annual reunions and events and Old Malvernians , including former pupils of The Downs , Hillstone , and Ellerslie schools which have merged with Malvern College , benefit from a remission in fees for their own children . Other Old Malvernian clubs and societies include OM Lodge , Court Games , Golf , Sailing , Shooting , the Old Malvernians Cricket Club , and the Old Malvernians Football Club , a record breaking club competing in the Arthurian League . 
 Old Malvernians have been instrumental in the formation of sporting and charitable organisations such as Blackburn Rovers FC and the Docklands Settlements . 
 At least two of the school 's former pupils have become Nobel Laureates . Some past pupils are royalty from various nations , and others have become Heads of State , military officers , jurists , authors , and sportspeople . 
 = 3 Juno = 
 Juno , minor @-@ planet designation 3 Juno in the Minor Planet Center catalogue system , is an asteroid in the asteroid belt . Juno was the third asteroid discovered , on 1 September 1804 by German astronomer Karl L. Harding . It is the 11th @-@ largest asteroid , and one of the two largest stony ( S @-@ type ) asteroids , along with 15 <unk> . It is estimated to contain 1 % of the total mass of the asteroid belt . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Discovery = = = 
 Juno was discovered in 1804 by Karl Ludwig Harding . It was the third asteroid found , but was initially considered to be a planet ; it was reclassified as an asteroid and minor planet during the 1850s . 
 = = = Name = = = 
 3 Juno is named after the mythological Juno , the highest Roman goddess . The adjectival form is <unk> ( <unk> ) . 
 With two exceptions , ' Juno ' is the international name , subject to local variation : Italian <unk> , French Junon , Russian <unk> , etc . Its planetary symbol is <unk> . An older symbol , still occasionally seen , is <unk> ( ) . 
 = = Characteristics = = 
 Juno is one of the larger asteroids , perhaps tenth by size and containing approximately 1 % the mass of the entire asteroid belt . It is the second @-@ most @-@ massive S @-@ type asteroid after 15 <unk> . Even so , Juno has only 3 % the mass of Ceres . 
 The orbital period of 3 Juno is 4 @.@ <unk> years . 
 Amongst S @-@ type asteroids , Juno is unusually reflective , which may be indicative of distinct surface properties . This high albedo explains its relatively high apparent magnitude for a small object not near the inner edge of the asteroid belt . Juno can reach + 7 @.@ 5 at a favourable opposition , which is brighter than Neptune or Titan , and is the reason for it being discovered before the larger asteroids Hygiea , Europa , Davida , and Interamnia . At most oppositions , however , Juno only reaches a magnitude of around + 8 @.@ 7 — only just visible with binoculars — and at smaller elongations a 3 @-@ inch ( 76 mm ) telescope will be required to resolve it . It is the main body in the Juno family . 
 Juno was originally considered a planet , along with 1 Ceres , 2 Pallas , and 4 Vesta . In 1811 , Schröter estimated Juno to be as large as 2290 km in diameter . All four were reclassified as asteroids as additional asteroids were discovered . Juno 's small size and irregular shape preclude it from being designated a dwarf planet . 
 Juno orbits at a slightly closer mean distance to the Sun than Ceres or Pallas . Its orbit is moderately inclined at around 12 ° to the ecliptic , but has an extreme eccentricity , greater than that of Pluto . This high eccentricity brings Juno closer to the Sun at perihelion than Vesta and further out at aphelion than Ceres . Juno had the most eccentric orbit of any known body until 33 <unk> was discovered in 1854 , and of asteroids over 200 km in diameter only 324 <unk> has a more eccentric orbit . 
 Juno rotates in a prograde direction with an axial tilt of approximately 50 ° . The maximum temperature on the surface , directly facing the Sun , was measured at about 293 K on October 2 , 2001 . Taking into account the heliocentric distance at the time , this gives an estimated maximum temperature of 301 K ( + 28 ° C ) at perihelion . 
 Spectroscopic studies of the <unk> surface permit the conclusion that Juno could be the progenitor of chondrites , a common type of stony meteorite composed of iron @-@ bearing silicates such as olivine and pyroxene . Infrared images reveal that Juno possesses an approximately 100 km @-@ wide crater or ejecta feature , the result of a geologically young impact . 
 = = Observations = = 
 Juno was the first asteroid for which an occultation was observed . It passed in front of a dim star ( SAO <unk> ) on February 19 , 1958 . Since then , several occultations by Juno have been observed , the most fruitful being the occultation of SAO <unk> on December 11 , 1979 , which was registered by 18 observers . Juno occulted the magnitude 11 @.@ 3 star <unk> <unk> on July 29 , 2013 , and <unk> <unk> on July 30 , 2013 . 
 Radio signals from spacecraft in orbit around Mars and on its surface have been used to estimate the mass of Juno from the tiny perturbations induced by it onto the motion of Mars . Juno 's orbit appears to have changed slightly around 1839 , very likely due to perturbations from a passing asteroid , whose identity has not been determined . 
 In 1996 , Juno was imaged by the Hooker Telescope at Mount Wilson Observatory at visible and near @-@ IR wavelengths , using adaptive optics . The images spanned a whole rotation period and revealed an irregular shape and a dark albedo feature , interpreted as a fresh impact site . 
 = Seal of Indiana = 
 The Seal of the State of Indiana is used by the Governor of Indiana to certify official documents . The seal has gone through several revisions since the region was a part of the Northwest Territory . It is likely the original seal , which is similar to the current one , was created by William Henry Harrison during his administration of the Indiana Territory . The current design of the seal was standardized by the Indiana General Assembly in 1963 . 
 = = Usage = = 
 The state seal is maintained by the Governor of Indiana . It is used to certify the authenticity of official state documents . The seal is placed on departmental reports , bills the Governor signs into law , and official communications from the Governor to other high @-@ ranking office holders . The seal is also used on all commissions granted by the state as proof of the commission 's authority . 
 = = History = = 
 The United States Congress passed legislation on May 8 , 1792 , that directed the U.S. Secretary of State to " provide proper seals for the several and respective public offices in the said Territories " . Indiana was part of the Northwest Territory at that time and a seal was created by the United States Department of State to be used on official papers of the territory . The original seal was maintained by Governor Arthur St. Clair and the first recorded use was in a proclamation made on July 26 , 1788 . 
 On May 10 , 1800 , the Indiana Territory was created by an act of Congress , but no provision for an official seal was included in the measure . The earliest recorded use of Indiana Territory 's seal was on court documents that were signed by Governor William Henry Harrison in January 1801 . The seal he used was an adaptation of the original seal created for the Northwest Territory . Although its origin is uncertain , it is likely that it was Harrison who made the alterations . 
 The constitution of 1816 contained a clause that stated the governor should maintain a state seal and use it in official communication . The design of the seal was first proposed during the first session of the Indiana General Assembly in 1816 . On November 22 , 1816 , representative Davis Floyd of Harrison County proposed the adoption of a seal with a design he referred to as " A forest and a <unk> felling a tree , a buffalo leaving the forest and fleeing through the plain to a distant forest , and sun in the west with the word Indiana . " The bill was put through a joint conference of both houses of the General Assembly and funds where voted to purchase a printer to create the seal . 
 In 1819 , the state seal was part of a state crisis . Lieutenant Governor Christopher Harrison became acting @-@ governor when Governor Jonathan Jennings was away conducting negotiations with northern Indiana 's native tribes . When Jennings returned , Harrison refused to step down as governor , claiming that Jennings ' actions had invalidated his governorship . Harrison seized the state seal and set up his own governor 's office . After several weeks of debate in the state legislature , Harrison was forced to return the seal to Jennings and vacate the office of the governor . 
 During 1895 , Robert S. Hatcher , the reading clerk of the Indiana Senate , was directed to ascertain the legal status of the design of the state seal . After a thorough review , Hatcher found that the laws that authorized the seal did not explicitly state what its design should be . He recommended that a bill be passed to standardize the seal . Senator McCord submitted legislation for that purpose , but no action was taken on it . 
 On January 28 , 1905 , an article ran in the Indianapolis News containing information on the origin of the seal , some of it dubious . The article received much attention and started an informal inquiry into the history of the seal , and namely to discover if the sun in the seal was rising or setting . Jacob Piatt Dunn , the preeminent Indiana historian of the time , consulted several history and arrived at the conclusion that the sun was rising . Dunn cited the fact the state was young , and the mountains were to the east of the state , not the west — clearly indicating the sun was rising . 
 The current design of the seal was standardized by the Indiana General Assembly in 1963 . During the meeting of the General Assembly , Representative Taylor I. Morris introduced legislation to standardize the design of the state seal . His bill described a seal that depicts a woodsman chopping a sycamore tree , while an American Bison runs in the foreground and the sun rises in the background . The leaves of the state tree , the tulip , were to be the border design . The bill passed the assembly that session and became law . 
 In 2004 , the 1963 statute came under criticism because it states the sun in the state seal is setting rather than rising . A thorough investigation by the Indiana Historical Bureau into the history of the seal led to the discovery that original seal was created with the intention that the sun should , in fact , be depicted as rising . In both 2004 and 2005 legislation was introduced to change the wording of the statute , but as of 2008 no action had been taken to correct the error . 
 = = Current statute = = 
 The law created to standardize the state seal has been in effect since 1963 . The stature states : 
 Indiana State Code : IC 1 @-@ 2 @-@ 4 @-@ 1 
 The official seal for the state of Indiana shall be described as follows : A perfect circle , two and five eighths ( 2 5 / 8 ) inches in diameter , inclosed by a plain line . Another circle within the first , two and three eighths ( 2 3 / 8 ) inches in diameter inclosed by a beaded line , leaving a margin of one quarter ( 1 / 4 ) of an inch . In the top half of this margin are the words " Seal of the State of Indiana " . 
 At the bottom center , 1816 , flanked on either side by a diamond , with two ( 2 ) dots and a leaf of the tulip tree ( <unk> tulipifera ) , at both ends of the diamond . The inner circle has two ( 2 ) trees in the left background , three ( 3 ) hills in the center background with nearly a full sun setting behind and between the first and second hill from the left . 
 There are fourteen ( 14 ) rays from the sun , starting with two ( 2 ) short ones on the left , the third being longer and then alternating , short and long . There are two ( 2 ) sycamore trees on the right , the larger one being nearer the center and having a notch cut nearly half way through , from the left side , a short distance above the ground . The woodsman is wearing a hat and holding his ax nearly perpendicular on his right . The ax blade is turned away from him and is even with his hat . 
 The buffalo is in the foreground , facing to the left of front . His tail is up , front feet on the ground with back feet in the air , as he jumps over a log . 
 The ground has shoots of blue grass , in the area of the buffalo and woodsman . 
 = = Iconography = = 
 The sun rising in the picture represents that Indiana has a bright future ahead and is just beginning . The mountains it rises over are a representation of the Allegheny Mountains showing that Indiana is in the west . The <unk> represents civilization subduing the wilderness that was Indiana . The buffalo represents the wilderness fleeing westward away from the advancing civilization . 
 = = Government Seals of Indiana = = 
 = Shelby Corcoran = 
 Shelby Corcoran is a recurring fictional character from the Fox musical comedy @-@ drama series Glee . Portrayed by actress Idina Menzel , Shelby was introduced in the fourteenth episode of the show as the coach of Vocal Adrenaline , a rival show choir to New Directions , the show 's primary musical group . Fans had lobbied for Menzel to be cast as Rachel Berry 's ( Lea Michele ) biological mother , due to the strong physical resemblance between Menzel and Michele . After it is revealed that Shelby is , in fact , Rachel 's biological mother , Shelby discloses that she had signed a contract that stated that she could not seek out her daughter until she was eighteen . She tells Rachel that instead of trying to act like mother and daughter , they should just be grateful that they have met , and maintain their distance . 
 In the season one finale , Shelby adopts Quinn and Puck 's newborn daughter , Beth . She leaves Vocal Adrenaline before the beginning of the next school year . Shelby returns in the second episode of the third season , having been recruited to lead a second glee club at McKinley High by Sugar Motta 's father when Sugar is refused entry into New Directions . Shelby offers to include both Quinn and Puck in Beth 's life . Struggling at being a mother , she forms a romantic bond with eighteen @-@ year @-@ old student Puck , leading to a sexual relationship before she tells him that their relationship is a mistake and resigns from McKinley in the eighth episode . While Menzel 's musical performances on the show have been lauded , Shelby 's storylines were characterized as rushed , incomprehensible and polarizing by contemporary reviewers . 
 = = Storylines = = 
 Shelby Corcoran is introduced in the fourteenth episode of the series as the coach of Vocal Adrenaline , a rival show choir to New Directions , the show 's primary musical group . New Directions ' director , Will ( Matthew Morrison ) , on a visit to Carmel High School , meets Shelby and they end up at his apartment making out , but Will is unable to continue and tells her about his relationship problems . Shelby suggests that as Will had been with Terri ( Jessalyn Gilsig ) since he was fifteen and has immediately moved on to a new relationship , he ought to take some time out for himself . She later observes as New Directions ' star singer , Rachel Berry ( Lea Michele ) , and Vocal Adrenaline 's Jesse St. James ( Jonathan Groff ) kiss , and exchanges knowing looks with Jesse . In " Dream On " , Rachel confides in Jesse of her lifelong dream to discover the identity of her mother . While they are searching through boxes of records from her basement , Jesse takes a cassette tape from his jacket and pretends that it came from the box . The tape is labeled as a message from mother to daughter . Rachel refuses to listen to the tape , stating that she is not ready . Jesse later meets with Shelby , who reveals that she is Rachel 's biological mother , but a contractual agreement with Rachel 's two fathers prevents her from meeting with Rachel until she is 18 . She implores Jesse to convince Rachel to listen to the tape . Back at Rachel 's house , Jesse starts the tape playing as Rachel enters her bedroom , then leaves her to listen to it . On the tape , Shelby sings " I Dreamed a Dream " , leading to a duet with Rachel in a dream sequence , ending with Rachel back in her room in tears . 
 While subsequently spying on a Vocal Adrenaline rehearsal , Rachel realizes that Shelby is her biological mother . After introducing herself , Will meets with Shelby , concerned that she is not as invested in forging a relationship as Rachel is . Shelby confesses that she can no longer have children , but wishes she could have her baby back , rather than the now fully grown Rachel , whom she feels does not need her . She tells Rachel that instead of trying to act like mother and daughter , they should just be grateful that they have met , and maintain their distance . Rachel hugs her goodbye , and they duet on an acoustic version of " Poker Face " . In " Journey to Regionals " , the show 's first season finale , Rachel asks Shelby to help coach New Directions , but Shelby tells Rachel that she 's tired of coaching glee clubs , and is stepping down as Vocal Adrenaline 's coach to settle down and start a family . Shelby adopts Quinn 's ( Dianna Agron ) baby , whom she names Beth at Puck 's ( Mark Salling ) request . 
 Shelby returns in the second episode of the third season , " I Am Unicorn " , having been headhunted to coach a second glee club at McKinley High financed by Sugar Motta 's ( Vanessa Lengies ) wealthy and doting father . Shelby reaches out to Rachel , Puck and Quinn . She lets Puck see Beth , but rejects Quinn 's desire to do likewise due to Quinn 's bad @-@ girl attitude , appearance and behavior . Quinn quickly resumes her normal appearance , but reveals to Puck she is only pretending to behave in order to take Beth back from Shelby , and intends to pursue full custody . After Puck tells Shelby of Quinn 's true intentions , Shelby informs Quinn that she does not want her in Beth 's life . Shelby tells Puck that she is struggling at being a mother ; as the episode ends , they kiss . Puck falls in love with her , but Shelby tells him in " Mash Off " that the kiss was a mistake . She compounds the mistake in " I Kissed a Girl " when she sleeps with him , and resigns from McKinley in the eighth episode , " Hold On to Sixteen " . In the season four " Sweet Dreams " episode , which establishes that she is living in New York with Beth and is running a day care business , she tells Rachel to be original in her choice of music at her audition for the role of Fanny Brice in the upcoming Broadway revival of Funny Girl . 
 = = Development = = 
 During its initial run of episodes , Glee fans lobbied for the Broadway actress ( Idina Menzel ) to be cast as the biological mother of Rachel Berry , due to the strong resemblance between her and Michele . Series creator Ryan Murphy commented to the media that he had met with Menzel , by December 2009 , the break in the first season , but had not yet decided upon a role for her . The actress was ultimately cast as the coach of rival glee club Vocal Adrenaline , with Murphy comparing her character to Faye Dunaway 's character , Diana Christensen , in Network . Menzel makes her first appearance in " Hell @-@ O " . On July 15 , 2011 , it was announced that Menzel would be returning to Glee in the third season " for a major arc that could span as many as 10 @-@ 12 episodes " . Murphy was quoted as saying , " I 'm really excited [ ... ] that Idina is joining the family again . We missed her last year and we 're happy that she is coming back . " The article also noted that her character , Shelby , would be " returning from New York to Ohio to join William McKinley High School as a new teacher " . Menzel herself said that she would " be back and forth in Glee all throughout the season " , which she was " very excited about " . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Upon the character 's introduction , Lisa Respers France of CNN wrote that she was " praying " that Shelby would turn out to be Rachel 's biological mother , noting the stark resemblance between the two actresses . The A.V. Club author Todd VanDerWerff deemed the make @-@ out sequence between Shelby and Will nonsensical , but wrote that Menzel brought " such an air of authority to what she 's doing that the scene still plays . " The revelation that Shelby is Rachel 's biological mother , in the " Dream On " episode , was greeted as poignant and realistic by VanDerWeff , and as " great " and humanizing by Entertainment Weekly 's Tim Stack . Respers France was so impressed with the storyline that she was initially concerned it may be a dream sequence , and Eric Goldman of IGN found it the episode 's strongest attribute . Both James Poniewozik of Time and VanDerWerff praised the Rachel / Shelby storyline in " Theatricality " . The former commended Michele and Menzel for conveying " straight emotion " and the latter asserted that the storyline was " very well @-@ handled , another emotional story that the series is mostly nailing the execution of " . In contrast , BuddyTV editor Henrik Batallones criticized the storyline , suggesting that it was rushed and would have been better stretched out across the remainder of the season . VanDerWerff wrote that he did not " completely buy " Shelby 's " sudden " decision to adopt Beth in " Journey to Regionals " . 
 Samantha Urban of The Dallas Morning News dismissed the fact that Shelby had been hired to form a second glee club at McKinley as " mind @-@ bogglingly idiotic " . Amy Reiter of the Los Angeles Times found the idea incomprehensible , and Vanity Fair 's Brett Berk wrote , " Given Will 's ongoing struggles to fill his own crooning baker 's dozen , this is about as realistic a plan as Michele Bachmann starting a rival chapter of PFLAG at Liberty University . " Vicki Hyman of The Star @-@ Ledger characterized the notion of " Shelby deciding to give up a burgeoning Broadway career because she was missing her daughter grow up " to take a part @-@ time job in Lima as " ridiculous " , and the whole scenario as " more than a little bizarre " . Puck and Shelby 's kiss in the " Pot o ' Gold " episode was characterized as " creepy " and " super awkward " by AOLTV 's Crystal Bell , as either " super creepy " or " romantic " by BuddyTV 's John Kubicek , and as " groan @-@ inducing " in the " You 're actually going to go there ? " vein by IGN journalist Robert Canning . Critics were polarized by Puck and Shelby 's sexual encounter in the " I Kissed a Girl " episode . Kubicek declared that " the dumbest storyline Glee has ever done gets even dumber , " MTV contributor Kevin Sullivan called it " the most divisive plot line of the season " , and Bell asked , " Instead of these super creepy scenes between Puck and Shelby , can we please get more screen time for Shelby and Rachel ? " 
 = = Musical performances = = 
 Michele and Menzel 's " I Dreamed a Dream " duet attracted critical praise . Aly Semigran of MTV proclaimed that the performance represented " what musical theater lovers ' dreams are made of . " At the time , Raymund Flandez of The Wall Street Journal described the number as one of the most poignant duets the series had done , and concluded that " the vulnerability they conveyed is stunning in its simplicity and perfection . " Respers France said that the two outdid themselves , Bobby Hankinson of the Houston Chronicle praised Menzel 's " awesome voice " , and Gerrick D. Kennedy of the Los Angeles Times wrote , " Menzel and Michele together ? Singing ? Die with me . Again , soundtrack please " . VanDerWerff spoke of " absolute perfection " , while Blair Baldwin of Zap2it acclaimed it as " an ideal pairing of wicked @-@ great vocalists , " and as the show 's best musical sequence since its inception . 
 The acoustic performance of Lady Gaga 's " Poker Face " , in the " Theatricality " episode , sung by Rachel and Shelby was met with mixed reviews . Menzel opined that the sexual meaning of the song is different in the context of the show , calling it " actually very simple and truthful . " Both Mary Hanrahan of Broadway World and Kevin Coll of Fused Film noted that it was well done , but badly matched with the mother – daughter scene and storyline . Despite considering the track 's lyricism " a tad weird " in a mother – daughter context , Stack gave the performance an " A + " , named it one of his " all @-@ time favorite Glee moments " , and called their vocal performance " incredible " , as did Hankinson , who additionally applauded the duet 's " beautiful " arrangement and favored it as the installment 's best musical number . VanDerWeff said the " incredibly bizarre " selection " worked because Menzel and Michele sold it " . 
 The duet of " Somewhere " , in the " I Am Unicorn " episode , featuring Rachel and Shelby was generally complimented . Both Anthony Benigno , writing for The Faster Times , and Rae Votta of Billboard compared it favorably to their previous duet , " Poker Face " , from season one . Benigno gave the performance a " B + " , while Michael Slezak of TVLine gave it an " A − " and praised their " powerful , evocative voices " . Rolling Stone 's Erica Futterman was not impressed and characterized it as " Lite FM snooze that does nothing to showcase these Broadway belters in a new and exciting way " , and Amy Lee of The Huffington Post named it " pretty bland " . Flandez , however , hailed the duet as " pitch @-@ perfect " and " so sublime it makes you catch your breath " . 
 The mash @-@ up of " You and I " by Lady Gaga and another " You and I " by Eddie Rabbitt and Crystal Gayle , in the " Mash Off " episode , performed by Menzel and Morrison was well received by critics . Berk said that the mash @-@ up " almost worked " , while Los Angeles Times writer L 'Oreal Thompson praised the vocals of Menzel : " It 's official . Shelby sings Gaga as good as , if not better than , Gaga sings Gaga . " Slezak awarded the performance a " B " grade , and opined : " I loved the audacity of mashing up Lady Gaga with an Eddie Rabbit – Crystal Gayle chestnut , and the results had the sheen of ' 70s a.m. radio fare . Shelby 's voice was almost too crystal clear for the Gaga half of the composition . " Futterman said that Menzel " can kill a Gaga ballad " , and while she " outshines " Morrison , he " complements her nicely " . Entertainment Weekly journalist Abby West gave the mash @-@ up a " B + " , called it " really well @-@ done " and said it was " elevated " by Menzel 's voice . Sullivan wanted Menzel to interpret more songs by Lady Gaga . Votta , however , described the sequence as " horrendous " . 
 = Tern = 
 Terns are seabirds in the family Sternidae that have a worldwide distribution and are normally found near the sea , rivers , or wetlands . Previously considered a subfamily of the gulls , Laridae , they are now usually given full family status and divided into eleven genera . They are slender , lightly built birds with long , forked tails , narrow wings , long bills , and relatively short legs . Most species are pale grey above and white below , with a contrasting black cap to the head , but the marsh terns , the Inca tern , and some noddies have dark plumage for at least part of the year . The sexes are identical in appearance , but young birds are readily distinguishable from adults . Terns have a non @-@ breeding plumage , which usually involves a white forehead and much @-@ reduced black cap . 
 The terns are birds of open habitats that typically breed in noisy colonies and lay their eggs on bare ground with little or no nest material . Marsh terns construct floating nests from the vegetation in their wetland habitats , and a few species build simple nests in trees , on cliffs or in crevices . The white tern , uniquely , lays its single egg on a bare tree branch . Depending on the species , one to three eggs make up the clutch . Most species feed on fish caught by diving from flight , but the marsh terns are insect @-@ eaters , and some large terns will supplement their diet with small land vertebrates . Many terns are long @-@ distance migrants , and the Arctic tern may see more daylight in a year than any other animal . 
 Terns are long @-@ lived birds and are relatively free from natural predators and parasites ; most species are declining in numbers due directly or indirectly to human activities , including habitat loss , pollution , disturbance , and predation by introduced mammals . The Chinese crested tern is in a critical situation and three other species are classed as endangered . International agreements provide a measure of protection , but adults and eggs of some species are still used for food in the tropics . The eggs of two species are eaten in the West Indies because they are believed to have aphrodisiac properties . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 The Charadriiformes order of birds contains 18 coastal seabird and wader families . Within the order , the terns form a lineage with the gulls , and , less closely , with the skimmers , skuas , and auks . Early authors such as Conrad Gessner , Francis Willughby , and William Turner did not clearly separate terns from gulls , but Linnaeus recognised the distinction in his 1758 Systema Naturae , placing the gulls in the genus Larus and the terns in Sterna . He gave Sterna the description rostrum <unk> , " awl @-@ shaped bill " , referring to the long , pointed bills typical of this group of birds , a feature that distinguishes them from the thicker @-@ billed gulls . Behaviour and morphology suggest that the terns are more closely related to the gulls than to the skimmers or skuas , and although Charles Lucien Bonaparte created the family Sternidae for the terns in 1838 , for many years they were considered to be a subfamily , <unk> , of the gull family , Laridae . Relationships between various tern species , and between the terns and the other Charadriiformes , were formerly difficult to resolve because of a poor fossil record and the misidentification of some finds . 
 Following genetic research in the early twenty @-@ first century , the terns are now usually treated as a separate family : Sternidae . Most terns were formerly treated as belonging to one large genus , Sterna , with just a few dark species placed in other genera ; in 1959 , only the noddies and the Inca tern were excluded from Sterna . A recent analysis of DNA sequences supported the splitting of Sterna into several smaller genera . One study of part of the cytochrome b gene sequence found a close relationship between terns and a group of waders in the suborder <unk> . These results are in disagreement with other molecular and morphological studies , and have been interpreted as showing either a large degree of molecular convergent evolution between the terns and these waders , or the retention of an ancient genotype . 
 The word " stearn " was used for these birds in Old English as early as the eighth century , and appears in the poem The Seafarer , written in the ninth century or earlier . Variants such as " <unk> " occurred by the eleventh century , although the older form lingered on in Norfolk dialect for several centuries . As now , the term was used for the inland black tern as well as the marine species . Some authorities consider " <unk> " and similar forms to be variants of " stearn " , while others derive the English words from Scandinavian equivalents such as Danish and Norwegian <unk> or Swedish <unk> , and ultimately from Old Norse <unk> . Linnaeus adopted " stearn " or " sterna " ( which the naturalist William Turner had used in 1544 as a Latinisation of an English word , presumably " stern " , for the black tern ) or a North Germanic equivalent for his genus name Sterna . 
 = = = Species = = = 
 The cladogram shows the relationships between the tern genera , and the currently recognised species , based on mitochondrial DNA studies , are listed below : 
 Genus Anous — noddies 
 Brown noddy ( Anous <unk> ) 
 Black noddy ( A. minutus sometimes considered to be a subspecies of the lesser noddy ) 
 Lesser noddy ( A. tenuirostris ) 
 Genus Procelsterna — noddies 
 Blue noddy ( Procelsterna <unk> ) 
 Grey noddy ( P. <unk> sometimes considered to be a subspecies of the blue noddy ) 
 Genus Gygis — noddies 
 White tern ( Gygis alba ) 
 Genus Onychoprion — brown @-@ backed terns 
 Spectacled tern ( Onychoprion lunatus ) 
 <unk> tern ( O. <unk> ) 
 Sooty tern ( O. fuscatus ) 
 Aleutian tern ( O. <unk> ) 
 Genus Sternula — little white terns 
 Fairy tern ( Sternula nereis ) 
 Damara tern ( S. <unk> ) 
 Little tern ( S. albifrons ) 
 Saunders 's tern ( S. <unk> formerly considered to be a subspecies of the little tern ) 
 Least tern ( S. antillarum formerly considered to be a subspecies of the little tern ) 
 Yellow @-@ billed tern ( S. <unk> ) 
 Peruvian tern ( S. <unk> ) 
 Genus <unk> — large @-@ billed terns 
 Large @-@ billed tern ( <unk> simplex ) 
 Genus Hydroprogne — Caspian terns 
 Caspian tern ( Hydroprogne caspia ) 
 Genus <unk> — gull @-@ billed terns 
 Gull @-@ billed tern ( <unk> nilotica ) 
 Genus <unk> — Inca terns 
 Inca tern ( <unk> <unk> ) 
 Genus Chlidonias — marsh terns 
 Black tern ( Chlidonias niger ) 
 White @-@ winged tern ( or white @-@ winged black tern C. leucopterus ) 
 <unk> tern ( C. hybridus ) 
 Black @-@ fronted tern ( C. <unk> sometimes placed in Sterna ) 
 Genus Thalasseus — crested terns 
 Lesser crested tern ( Thalasseus bengalensis ) 
 Royal tern ( T. maximus ) 
 Greater crested tern ( or swift tern , T. bergii ) 
 Chinese crested tern ( T. <unk> ) 
 Elegant tern ( T. elegans ) 
 Sandwich tern ( T. sandvicensis ) 
 Cabot 's tern ( T. <unk> newly split from T. sandvicensis ) 
 Genus Sterna — large white terns 
 Forster 's tern ( Sterna forsteri ) 
 Snowy @-@ crowned tern ( S. <unk> ) 
 Common tern ( S. hirundo ) 
 <unk> tern ( S. <unk> ) 
 White @-@ fronted tern ( S. striata ) 
 Black @-@ naped tern ( S. <unk> ) 
 South American tern ( S. <unk> ) 
 Antarctic tern ( S. vittata ) 
 Kerguelen tern ( S. virgata ) 
 Arctic tern ( S. paradisaea ) 
 River tern ( S. aurantia ) 
 Black @-@ bellied tern ( S. <unk> possibly Chlidonias ) 
 White @-@ cheeked tern ( S. <unk> possibly Chlidonias ) 
 In addition to extant species , the fossil record includes a Miocene <unk> , Sterna <unk> @-@ edwardsii . 
 The genera Anous , Procelsterna and Gygis are collectively known as noddies , the Chlidonias species are the marsh terns , and all other species comprise the sea terns . 
 = = Description = = 
 Terns range in size from the least tern , at 23 cm ( 9 @.@ 1 in ) in length and weighing 30 – 45 g ( 1 @.@ 1 – 1 @.@ 6 oz ) , to the Caspian tern at 48 – 56 cm ( 19 – 22 in ) , 500 – 700 g ( 18 – 25 oz ) . They are longer @-@ billed , lighter @-@ bodied , and more streamlined than gulls , and their long tails and long narrow wings give them an elegance in flight . Male and female plumages are identical , although the male can be 2 – 5 % larger than the female and often has a relatively larger bill . Sea terns have deeply forked tails , and at least a shallow " V " is shown by all other species . The noddies ( genera Anous , Procelsterna and Gygis ) have unusual notched @-@ wedge shaped tails , the longest tail feathers being the middle @-@ outer , rather than the central or outermost . Although their legs are short , terns can run well . They rarely swim , despite having webbed feet , usually landing on water only to bathe . 
 The majority of sea terns have light grey or white body plumage as adults , with a black cap to the head . The legs and bill are various combinations of red , orange , yellow , or black depending on species . The pale plumage is conspicuous from a distance at sea , and may attract other birds to a good feeding area for these fish @-@ eating species . When seen against the sky , the white underparts also help to hide the hunting bird from its intended prey . The Inca tern has mainly dark plumage , and three species that mainly eat insects , the black tern , white @-@ winged tern , and black @-@ bellied tern , have black underparts in the breeding season . The Anous noddies have dark plumage with a pale head cap . The reason for their dark plumage is unknown , but it has been suggested that in tropical areas , where food resources are scarce , the less conspicuous colouration makes it harder for other noddies to detect a feeding bird . Plumage type , especially the head pattern , is linked to the phylogeny of the terns , and the pale @-@ capped , dark @-@ bodied noddies are believed to have diverged earlier than the other genera from an ancestral white @-@ headed gull , followed by the partially black @-@ headed Onychoprion and Sternula groupings . 
 Juvenile terns typically have <unk> or yellow @-@ tinged upperparts , and the feathers have dark edges that give the plumage a scaly appearance . They have dark bands on the wings and short tails . In most species , the subsequent moult does not start until after migration , the plumage then becoming more like the adult , but with some retained juvenile feathers and a white forehead with only a partial dark cap . By the second summer , the appearance is very like the adult , and full mature plumage is usually attained by the third year . After breeding , terns moult into a winter plumage , typically showing a white forehead . Heavily worn or aberrant plumages such as melanism and albinism are much rarer in terns than in gulls . 
 = = = Voice = = = 
 Terns have a wide repertoire of vocalisations . For example , the common tern has a distinctive alarm , kee @-@ yah , also used as a warning to intruders , and a shorter <unk> , given as an individual takes flight in response to a more serious threat ; this <unk> the usually noisy colony while its residents assess the danger . Other calls include a down @-@ slurred <unk> given when an adult is approaching the nest with a fish , and a kip uttered during social contact . Parents and chicks can locate one another by call , and siblings also recognise each other 's vocalisations from about the twelfth day after hatching , which helps to keep the brood together . 
 Vocal differences reinforce species separation between closely related birds such as the least and little terns , and can help humans distinguish similar species , such as common and Arctic terns , since flight calls are unique to each species . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 Terns have a world @-@ wide distribution , breeding on all continents including Antarctica . The northernmost and southernmost breeders are the Arctic tern and Antarctic tern respectively . Many terns breeding in temperate zones are long @-@ distance migrants , and the Arctic tern probably sees more annual daylight than any other animal as it migrates from its northern breeding grounds to Antarctic waters , a return journey of more than 30 @,@ 000 km ( 19 @,@ 000 mi ) . A common tern that hatched in Sweden and was found dead five months later on Stewart Island , New Zealand , must have flown at least 25 @,@ 000 km ( 16 @,@ 000 mi ) . Actual flight distances are , of course , much greater than the shortest possible route . Arctic terns from Greenland were shown by radio geolocation to average 70 @,@ 000 km ( 43 @,@ 000 mi ) on their annual migrations . 
 Most terns breed on open sandy or rocky areas on coasts and islands . The yellow @-@ billed , large @-@ billed , and black @-@ fronted terns breed only on rivers , and common , least and little terns also sometimes use inland locations . The marsh terns , Trudeau 's tern and some Forster 's terns nest in inland marshes . The black noddy and the white tern nest above ground level on cliffs or in trees . Migratory terns move to the coast after breeding , and most species winter near land , although some marine species , like the Aleutian tern , may wander far from land . The sooty tern is entirely oceanic when not breeding , and healthy young birds are not seen on land for up to five years after fledging until they return to breed . They lack waterproof plumage , so they cannot rest on the sea . Where they spend the years prior to breeding is unknown . 
 = = Behaviour = = 
 = = = Breeding = = = 
 Terns are normally monogamous , although trios or female @-@ female pairings have been observed in at least three species . Most terns breed annually and at the same time of year , but some tropical species may nest at intervals shorter than 12 months or asynchronously . Most terns become sexually mature when aged three , although some small species may breed in their second year . Some large sea terns , including the sooty and bridled terns , are four or older when they first breed . Terns normally breed in colonies , and are site @-@ faithful if their habitat is sufficiently stable . A few species nest in small or dispersed groups , but most breed in colonies of up to a few hundred pairs , often alongside other seabirds such as gulls or skimmers . Large tern species tend to form larger colonies , which in the case of the sooty tern can contain up to two million pairs . Large species nest very close together and sit tightly , making it difficult for aerial predators to land among them . Smaller species are less closely packed and mob intruders . Peruvian and Damara terns have small dispersed colonies and rely on the cryptic plumage of the eggs and young for protection . 
 The male selects a territory , which he defends against conspecifics , and re @-@ establishes a pair bond with his mate or attracts a new female if necessary . Courtship involves ritualised flight and ground displays , and the male often presents a fish to his partner . Most species have little or no nest , laying the eggs onto bare ground , but Trudeau 's tern , Forster 's tern and the marsh terns construct floating nests from the vegetation in their wetland habitats . Black and lesser noddies build nests of twigs , feathers and excreta on tree branches , and brown , blue , and grey noddies make rough platforms of grass and seaweed on cliff ledges , in cavities or on other rocky surfaces . The Inca tern nests in crevices , caves and disused burrows , such as that of a Humboldt penguin . The white tern is unique in that it lays its single egg on a bare tree branch . 
 Tropical species usually lay just one egg , but two or three is typical in cooler regions if there is an adequate food supply . The time taken to complete the clutch varies , but for temperate species incubation takes 21 – 28 days . The eggs of most gulls and terns are brown with dark splotches , so they are difficult for predators to spot on the beach . The precocial chicks fledge in about four weeks after hatching . Tropical species take longer because of the poorer food supply . Both parents incubate the eggs and feed the chicks , although the female does more incubating and less fishing than her partner . Young birds migrate with the adults . Terns are generally long @-@ lived birds , with individuals typically returning for 7 – 10 breeding seasons . Maximum known ages include 34 for an Arctic tern and 32 for a sooty . Although several other species are known to live in captivity for up to 20 years , their greatest recorded ages are underestimates because the birds can outlive their rings . Interbreeding between tern species is rare , and involves closely related species when it occurs . Hybrids recorded include common tern with roseate , Sandwich with lesser @-@ crested , and black with white @-@ winged . 
 = = = Feeding = = = 
 Most terns hunt fish by diving , often hovering first , and the particular approach technique used can help to distinguish similar species at a distance . Sea terns often hunt in association with porpoises or predatory fish , such as bluefish , tuna or <unk> , since these large marine animals drive the prey to the surface . Sooty terns feed at night as the fish rise to the surface , and are believed to sleep on the wing since they become waterlogged easily . Terns of several species will feed on invertebrates , following the plough or hunting on foot on mudflats . The marsh terns normally catch insects in the air or pick them off the surface of fresh water . Other species will sometimes use these techniques if the opportunity arises . An individual tern 's foraging efficiency increases with its age . 
 The gull @-@ billed tern is an opportunist predator , taking a wide variety of prey from marine , freshwater and terrestrial habitats . Depending on what is available it will eat small crabs , fish , crayfish , grasshoppers and other large insects , lizards and amphibians . Warm @-@ blooded prey includes mice and the eggs and chicks of other beach @-@ breeding birds ; least terns , little terns and members of its own species may be victims . The greater crested tern will also occasionally catch unusual vertebrate species such as agamid lizards and green sea turtle hatchlings , and follows trawlers for discards . 
 The eyes of terns cannot accommodate under water , so they rely on accurate sighting from the air before they plunge @-@ dive . Like other seabirds that feed at the surface or dive for food , terns have red oil droplets in the cones of their retinas ; birds that have to look through an air / water interface have more deeply coloured carotenoid pigments in the oil drops than other species . The pigment also improves visual contrast and sharpens distance vision , especially in hazy conditions , and helps terns to locate shoals of fish , although it is uncertain whether they are sighting the phytoplankton on which the fish feed , or other feeding birds . The red colouring reduces ultraviolet sensitivity , which in any case is an adaptation more suited to terrestrial feeders like the gulls , and this protects the eye from UV damage . 
 = = Predators and parasites = = 
 The inaccessibility of many tern colonies gave them a measure of protection from mammalian predators , especially on islands , but introduced species brought by humans can seriously affect breeding birds . These can be predators such as foxes , raccoons , cats and rats , or animals that destroy the habitat , including rabbits , goats and pigs . Problems arise not only on formerly mammal @-@ free islands , as in New Zealand , but also where an alien carnivore , such as the American mink in Scotland , presents an unfamiliar threat . 
 Adult terns may be hunted by owls and raptors , and their chicks and eggs may be taken by herons , crows or gulls . Less obvious nest predators include ruddy turnstones in the Arctic , and gull @-@ billed terns in little tern colonies . Adults may be robbed of their catch by avian kleptoparasites such as frigatebirds , skuas , other terns or large gulls . 
 External parasites include chewing lice of the genus <unk> , feather lice and fleas such as Ceratophyllus borealis . Lice are often host specific , and the closely related common and Arctic terns carry quite different species . Internal parasites include the crustacean <unk> <unk> , and tapeworms such as <unk> intestinalis and members of the genera Diphyllobothrium and <unk> . Terns are normally free of blood parasites , unlike gulls that often carry Haemoproteus species . An exception is the brown noddy , which sometimes harbours protozoa of that genus . In 1961 the common tern was the first wild bird species identified as being infected with avian influenza , the <unk> variant being found in an outbreak involving South African birds . Several species of terns have been implicated as carriers of West Nile virus . 
 = = Relationships with humans = = 
 Terns and their eggs have long been eaten by humans and island colonies were raided by sailors on long voyages since the eggs or large chicks were an easily obtained source of protein . Eggs are still illegally harvested in southern Europe , and adults of wintering birds are taken as food in West Africa and South America . The roseate tern is significantly affected by this hunting , with adult survival 10 % lower than would otherwise be expected . In the West Indies , the eggs of roseate and sooty terns are believed to be aphrodisiacs , and are disproportionately targeted by egg collectors . Tern skins and feathers have long been used for making items of clothing such as capes and hats , and this became a large @-@ scale activity in the second half of the nineteenth century when it became fashionable to use feathers in <unk> . This trend started in Europe but soon spread to the Americas and Australia . White was the preferred colour , and sometimes wings or entire birds were used . 
 Terns have sometimes benefited from human activities , following the plough or fishing boats for easy food supplies , although some birds get trapped in nets or swallow plastic . Fishermen looked for feeding tern flocks , since the birds could lead them to fish shoals . Overfishing of small fish such as sand eels can lead to steep declines in the colonies relying on these prey items . More generally , the loss or disruption to tern colonies caused by human activities has caused declines in many species . Pollution has been a problem in some areas , and in the 1960s and 1970s DDT caused egg loss through thinning of the shells . In the 1980s , <unk> caused severe declines in the Great Lakes area of the US . Because of their sensitivity to pollutants , terns are sometimes used as indicators of contamination levels . 
 Habitat enhancements used to increase the breeding success of terns include floating nest platforms for black , common and Caspian terns , and artificial islands created for a number of different species . More specialised interventions include providing nest boxes for roseate terns , which normally nest in the shelter of <unk> vegetation , and using artificial eelgrass mats to encourage common terns to nest in areas not vulnerable to flooding . 
 = = Conservation status = = 
 A number of terns face serious threats , and the Chinese crested tern is classed as " critically endangered " by BirdLife International . It has a population of fewer than 50 birds and a breeding range of just 9 km2 ( 3 @.@ 5 mi2 ) . It is declining due to egg collection , human disturbance and the loss of coastal wetlands in China . Three other species are categorised as " endangered " , with declining populations of less than 10 @,@ 000 birds . The South Asian black @-@ bellied tern is threatened by habitat loss , egg collecting for food , pollution and predation . In New Zealand , the black @-@ fronted tern is facing a rapid fall in numbers due to predation by introduced mammals and Australian magpies . Disturbance by cattle and sheep and by human activities is also a factor . The Peruvian tern was initially damaged by the collapse of <unk> stocks in 1972 , but breeding colonies have subsequently been lost due to building , disturbance and pollution in their coastal wetlands . 
 The Australasian fairy tern is described as " vulnerable " . Disturbance by humans , dogs and vehicles , predation by introduced species and inappropriate water level management in South Australia are the main reasons for its decline . Five species are " near threatened " , indicating less severe concerns or only potential vulnerability . The elegant tern is so categorised because 95 % of the population breeds on one island , Isla Rasa in the Gulf of California , and the Kerguelen tern has a population of less than 5 @,@ 000 adults breeding on small and often stormy Pacific islands . Three species , the Inca , Damara , and river terns , are expected to decline in the future due to habitat loss and disturbance . Some tern subspecies are endangered , including the California least tern and the Easter Island race of the grey noddy . 
 Most tern species are declining in numbers due to the loss or disturbance of breeding habitat , pollution and increased predation . Gull populations have increased over the last century because of reduced persecution and the availability of food from human activities , and terns have been forced out of many traditional nesting areas by the larger birds . A few species are defying the trend and showing local increases , including the Arctic tern in Scandinavia , Forster 's tern around the Great Lakes , the Sandwich tern in eastern North America and its yellow @-@ billed subspecies , the Cayenne tern , in the Caribbean . 
 Terns are protected by international legislation such as the Agreement on the Conservation of African @-@ Eurasian Migratory Waterbirds ( AEWA ) and the US @-@ Canada Migratory Bird Treaty Act of 1918 . Parties to the <unk> agreement are required to engage in a wide range of conservation strategies described in a detailed action plan . The plan is intended to address key issues such as species and habitat conservation , management of human activities , research , education , and implementation . The North American legislation is similar , although there is a greater emphasis on protection . 
 = Jane Eyre ( 1910 film ) = 
 Jane Eyre is a 1910 American silent short classic drama produced by the Thanhouser Film Corporation . Adapted from Charlotte Brontë 's 1847 novel , Jane Eyre , the film mirrors the events and plot of the original book . The writer of the scenario is unknown , but Lloyd Lonergan probably adapted the work . The film 's director is often and erroneously claimed to be Theodore Marston , but Barry O 'Neil or Lloyd B. Carleton are possible candidates . The cast of the film was credited , an act rare and unusual in the era . 
 This was the first American , first English language and second or third worldwide movie adaptation , of at least 27 film and television versions – of the novel . Such repeated dissemination has made the Brontë sisters ' two major works ubiquitous . 
 The single reel film , approximately 1000 feet long , was released on May 6 , 1910 . It was later credited by Edwin Thanhouser as marking the assured success of the company . The popularity of the production resulted in the production of additional copies , so the Thanhouser company had more orders than could be filled . Critical reception to the film was generally positive , but with some minor criticisms . The film is presumed lost . 
 = = Plot = = 
 This shortened and streamlined version of Jane Eyre follows the overall themes of the original novel . The condensed events were summarized and the official synopsis was published in the The Moving Picture World . It states : " Jane Eyre is left an orphan and penniless at the age of 14 . She is adopted by her uncle , who has ample means of providing for her , and who also loves her dearly . Her uncle 's kin , however , consider her adoption as an intrusion , do all in their power to prevent her becoming a member of the family . But her uncle insists on her remaining , and during his lifetime she receives some degree of kindness and consideration . Unfortunately , Uncle Reed dies and leaves Jane without a friend in the world . She is sent to an orphan asylum by her unfeeling aunt . Five years later she leaves the asylum to [ accept ] the position of governess to Lord Rochester 's little niece . The child is the daughter of Rochester 's dead brother . Her mother has become insane and is living in Lord Rochester 's home , under his protection . " 
 " Jane is engaged by Lord Rochester 's housekeeper , during his absence from home , and her first meeting with her employer is both exciting and romantic . She is sitting by the edge of the road reading when Lord Rochester rides up to his ancestral home . The sight of his huge dog , coming upon her suddenly , so startles Jane that she jumps to her feet , causing Lord Rochester 's horse to shy and throw its rider . He injures his ankle , and has to be assisted to remount by ' the little witch , ' as he calls her , who is the cause of his accident . One evening the maniac escapes from her nurse and sets fire to the room in which Lord Rochester has fallen asleep . He is saved from a horrible death by Jane . When next Jane 's haughty aunt and cousins call upon Lord Rochester , they are just in time to be introduced to his bride , who is none other than the despised Jane Eyre . " 
 = = Cast = = 
 Marie Eline as a young Jane Eyre 
 Gloria Gallop as <unk> Reed 
 Frank H. Crane as Lord Rochester ( Mr. Rochester in original ) 
 Amelia Barleon as Mrs. Rochester 
 Charles Compton as John Reed 
 Martin Faust as Uncle Reed 
 Irma Taylor 
 Alphonse Ethier 
 William Garwood 
 = = Production = = 
 The scenario for the film was adapted from Charlotte Brontë 's 1847 novel Jane Eyre . Brontë 's work was modeled after her own life . The book was considered a classic for many decades before the Thanhouser adaptation . The film adaptation was not the first , the earliest known adaption being a 1909 Italian silent film . The writer of the scenario is unknown , but it may have been Lloyd Lonergan . Lonergan was an experienced newspaperman still employed by The New York Evening World while writing scripts for the Thanhouser productions . He was the most important script writer for Thanhouser , averaging 200 scripts a year from 1910 to 1915 . 
 There has been considerable debate over the identity of the film 's director . Most commonly , the directional credit is given to Theodore Marston . The apparent origin of this error is from the American Film @-@ Index 1908 – 1915 . Film historian Q. David Bowers consulted one of the co @-@ authors of the book , Gunnar Lundquist , and confirmed that the credit of Marston was in error . Theodore Marston worked with Pathé , Kinemacolor , Vitagraph and other companies , but there is no record of Marston working with Thanhouser . This error has persisted in the following decade in several publications . Also , I <unk> del cinema : <unk> per <unk> al primo <unk> di film also credits Marston . Among the more prominent citations of Marston 's role at Thanhouser is in American Silent Horror , Science Fiction and Fantasy Feature Films , 1913 – 1929 by John T. <unk> . While the director of the film is not known , two Thanhouser directors are possible . Barry O 'Neil was the stage name of Thomas J. McCarthy , who would direct many important Thanhouser pictures , including its first two @-@ reeler , Romeo and Juliet . Lloyd B. Carleton was the stage name of Carleton B. Little , a director who would stay with the Thanhouser Company for a short time , moving to Biograph Company by the summer of 1910 . Bowers does not attribute either as the director for this particular production nor does Bowers credit a cameraman . Blair Smith was the first cameraman of the Thanhouser company , but he was soon joined by Carl Louis Gregory who had years of experience as a still and motion picture photographer . The role of the cameraman was uncredited in 1910 productions . 
 Cast in the role of a young Jane Eyre was Marie Eline , soon to be known and famous as the " Thanhouser Kid " . Almost nothing is known about Gloria Gallop 's role or work in the Thanhouser productions , but she is credited with the minor filler subject , The Cigars His Wife Brought and this film . Frank H. Crane was an early leading man of the Thanhouser company and was already credited in four previous films by the company . Amelia Barleon was a minor actress at Thanhouser with more stage experience . It is unknown how many films she appeared in , but this is credited as her first and The Winter 's Tale as her second and last . Charles Compton may have had his film career start in this Thanhouser production , but he was better known for his juvenile roles on the stage . Bowers credits Martin J. Faust as one of the most important actors in for Thanhouser in 1910 and 1911 , but Faust 's role in productions were often went uncredited . Both Irma Taylor and <unk> Ethier were actors that appeared in Thanhouser productions with few credits . The last identified member of the cast is William Garwood , who was among the most important actors at Thanhouser . He joined the company in late 1909 and remained until 1911 before returning in 1912 . This is known as his first credited work with Thanhouser . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 The single reel film , approximately 1 @,@ 000 feet ( 300 m ) long , was released on May 6 , 1910 . Publicity for the release of this film was handled by Bert Adler and was successful in generating trade interest and promised a better work then Thanhouser 's St. Elmo from the previous month . The high expectations for the film were picked up and included in subsequent articles in The Moving Picture World and The New York Dramatic Mirror in advance of its release . Also , the players in the production were credited for their work , something which was rare and unusual at the time . Edwin Thanhouser would later mark Jane Eyre as the point in which he became confident in the success of the company . The release saw the new company suddenly having more orders than it could fill and the laboratory had to work overtime to produce additional prints to meet the demand . The popularity of the stage production in advertisements makes identifying the showings of the film more difficult than other Thanhouser productions of the time , but theaters across the nation displayed advertisements for the film . Theaters include Indiana , Kansas , Missouri , and North Carolina . 
 Jane Eyre helped secure the future of the Thanhouser Company and reviewers were largely positive with only minor criticism about the acting or photography . The Morning Telegraph said the production was excellent save for the lack of emotion displayed over the death of Uncle Reed . There were two reviews of the film in The Moving Picture World , both of which were positive . The first review was positive for its acting and clear adaption , but cautioned itself against further flattery of Edwin Thanhouser 's new company . The reviewer noted there were signs of inexperience the company 's best work – in the fall from the horse having been depicted as instead as a clumsy dismount . The second review was much more positive , it praised the adaptation and acting , but found the photography to not be of the same standard as its previous work . The film is presumed lost . 
 = Attachment disorder = 
 Attachment disorder is a broad term intended to describe disorders of mood , behavior , and social relationships arising from a failure to form normal attachments to primary care giving figures in early childhood . Such a failure would result from unusual early experiences of neglect , abuse , abrupt separation from caregivers between 6 months and three years of age , frequent change or excessive numbers of caregivers , or lack of caregiver responsiveness to child communicative efforts resulting in a lack of basic trust . A problematic history of social relationships occurring after about age three may be distressing to a child , but does not result in attachment disorder . 
 The term attachment disorder is used to describe emotional and behavioral problems of young children , and also applied to school @-@ age children , teenagers and adults . The specific difficulties implied depend on the age of the individual being assessed , and a child 's attachment @-@ related behaviors may be very different with one familiar adult than with another , suggesting that the disorder is within the relationship and interactions of the two people rather than an aspect of one or the other personality . No list of symptoms can legitimately be presented but generally the term attachment disorder refers to the absence or distortion of age appropriate social behaviors with adults . For example , in a toddler , attachment @-@ disordered behavior could include a failure to stay near familiar adults in a strange environment or to be comforted by contact with a familiar person , whereas in a six @-@ year @-@ old attachment @-@ disordered behavior might involve excessive friendliness and inappropriate approaches to strangers . 
 There are currently two main areas of theory and practice relating to the definition and diagnosis of attachment disorder , and considerable discussion about a broader definition altogether . The first main area is based on scientific enquiry , is found in academic journals and books and pays close attention to attachment theory . It is described in ICD @-@ 10 as reactive attachment disorder , or " RAD " for the inhibited form , and disinhibited attachment disorder , or " DAD " for the disinhibited form . In DSM @-@ IV @-@ TR both comparable inhibited and disinhibited types are called reactive attachment disorder or " RAD " . 
 The second area is controversial and considered pseudoscientific . It is found in clinical practice , on websites and in books and publications , but has little or no evidence base . It makes controversial claims relating to a basis in attachment theory . The use of these controversial diagnoses of attachment disorder is linked to the use of pseudoscientific attachment therapies to treat them . 
 Some authors have suggested that attachment , as an aspect of emotional development , is better assessed along a spectrum than considered to fall into two non @-@ overlapping categories . This spectrum would have at one end the characteristics called secure attachment ; midway along the range of disturbance would be insecure or other undesirable attachment styles ; at the other extreme would be non @-@ attachment . Agreement has not yet been reached with respect to diagnostic criteria . 
 Finally , the term is also sometimes used to cover difficulties arising in relation to various attachment styles which may not be disorders in the clinical sense . 
 = = Attachment and attachment disorder = = 
 Attachment theory is primarily an evolutionary and ethological theory . In relation to infants , it primarily consists of proximity seeking to an attachment figure in the face of threat , for the purpose of survival . Although an attachment is a " tie , " it is not synonymous with love and affection , despite their often going together and a healthy attachment is considered to be an important foundation of all subsequent relationships . Infants become attached to adults who are sensitive and responsive in social interactions with the infant , and who remain as consistent caregivers for some time . Parental responses lead to the development of patterns of attachment which in turn lead to ' internal working models ' which will guide the individual 's feelings , thoughts and expectations in later relationships . 
 A fundamental aspect of attachment is called basic trust . Basic trust is a broader concept than attachment in that it extends beyond the infant @-@ caregiver relationship to " ... the wider social network of trustable and caring others . " and " ... links confidence about the past with faith about the future . " " Erikson argues that the sense of trust in oneself and others is the foundation of human development " and with a balance of mistrust produces hope . 
 In the clinical sense , a disorder is a condition requiring treatment as opposed to risk factors for subsequent disorders . There is a lack of consensus about the precise meaning of the term ' attachment disorder ' although there is general agreement that such disorders only arise following early adverse caregiving experiences . Reactive attachment disorder indicates the absence of either or both the main aspects of proximity seeking to an identified attachment figure . This can occur either in institutions , or with repeated changes of caregiver , or from extremely neglectful primary caregivers who show persistent disregard for the child 's basic attachment needs after the age of 6 months . Current official classifications of RAD under DSM @-@ IV @-@ TR and ICD @-@ 10 are largely based on this understanding of the nature of attachment . 
 The words attachment style or pattern refer to the various types of attachment arising from early care experiences , called secure , anxious @-@ ambivalent , anxious @-@ avoidant , ( all organized ) , and disorganized . Some of these styles are more problematic than others , and , although they are not disorders in the clinical sense , are sometimes discussed under the term ' attachment disorder ' . 
 Discussion of the disorganized attachment style sometimes includes this style under the rubric of attachment disorders because disorganized attachment is seen as the beginning of a developmental trajectory that will take the individual ever further from the normal range , culminating in actual disorders of thought , behavior , or mood . Early intervention for disorganized attachment , or other problematic styles , is directed toward changing the trajectory of development to provide a better outcome later in the person 's life . 
 Zeanah and colleagues proposed an alternative set of criteria ( see below ) of three categories of attachment disorder , namely " no discriminated attachment figure " , " secure base distortions " and " disrupted attachment disorder " . These classifications consider that a disorder is a variation that requires treatment rather than an individual difference within the normal range . 
 = = Classification = = 
 ICD @-@ 10 describes Reactive Attachment Disorder of Childhood , known as RAD , and Disinhibited Disorder of Childhood , less well known as DAD . DSM @-@ IV @-@ TR also describes Reactive Attachment Disorder of Infancy or Early Childhood . It divides this into two subtypes , <unk> Type and Disinhibited Type , both known as RAD . The two classifications are similar and both include : 
 markedly disturbed and developmentally inappropriate social relatedness in most contexts , 
 the disturbance is not accounted for solely by developmental delay and does not meet the criteria for Pervasive Developmental Disorder , 
 onset before 5 years of age , 
 requires a history of significant neglect , and 
 implicit lack of identifiable , preferred attachment figure . 
 ICD @-@ 10 includes in its diagnosis psychological and physical abuse and injury in addition to neglect . This is somewhat controversial , being a commission rather than omission and because abuse in and of itself does not lead to attachment disorder . 
 The inhibited form is described as " a failure to initiate or respond ... to most social interactions , as manifest by excessively inhibited responses " and such infants do not seek and accept comfort at times of threat , alarm or distress , thus failing to maintain ' proximity ' , an essential element of attachment behavior . The disinhibited form shows " indiscriminate sociability ... excessive familiarity with relative strangers " ( DSM @-@ IV @-@ TR ) and therefore a lack of ' specificity ' , the second basic element of attachment behavior . The ICD @-@ 10 descriptions are comparable . ' Disinhibited ' and ' inhibited ' are not opposites in terms of attachment disorder and can co @-@ exist in the same child . The inhibited form has a greater tendency to ameliorate with an appropriate caregiver whilst the disinhibited form is more enduring . 
 While RAD is likely to occur following neglectful and abusive childcare , there should be no automatic diagnosis on this basis alone as children can form stable attachments and social relationships despite marked abuse and neglect . Abuse can occur alongside the required factors but on its own does not explain attachment disorder . Experiences of abuse are associated with the development of disorganised attachment , in which the child prefers a familiar caregiver , but responds to that person in an unpredictable and somewhat bizarre way . Within official classifications , attachment disorganization is a risk factor but not in itself an attachment disorder . Further although attachment disorders tend to occur in the context of some institutions , repeated changes of primary caregiver or extremely neglectful identifiable primary caregivers who show persistent disregard for the child 's basic attachment needs , not all children raised in these conditions develop an attachment disorder . 
 = = Boris and Zeanah 's typology = = 
 Many leading attachment theorists , such as Zeanah and Leiberman , have recognized the limitations of the DSM @-@ IV @-@ TR and ICD @-@ 10 criteria and proposed broader diagnostic criteria . There is as yet no official consensus on these criteria . The APSAC Taskforce recognised in its recommendations that " attachment problems extending beyond RAD , are a real and appropriate concern for professionals working with children " , and set out recommendations for assessment . 
 Boris and Zeanah ( 1999 ) , have offered an approach to attachment disorders that considers cases where children have had no opportunity to form an attachment , those where there is a distorted relationship , and those where an existing attachment has been abruptly disrupted . This would significantly extend the definition beyond the ICD @-@ 10 and DSM @-@ IV @-@ TR definitions because those definitions are limited to situations where the child has no attachment or no attachment to a specified attachment figure . 
 Boris and Zeanah use the term " disorder of attachment " to indicate a situation in which a young child has no preferred adult caregiver . Such children may be indiscriminately sociable and approach all adults , whether familiar or not ; alternatively , they may be emotionally withdrawn and fail to seek comfort from anyone . This type of attachment problem is parallel to Reactive Attachment Disorder as defined in DSM and ICD in its inhibited and disinhibited forms as described above . 
 Boris and Zeanah also describe a condition they term " secure base distortion " . In this situation , the child has a preferred familiar caregiver , but the relationship is such that the child cannot use the adult for safety while gradually exploring the environment . Such children may endanger themselves , may cling to the adult , may be excessively compliant , or may show role reversals in which they care for or punish the adult . 
 The third type of disorder discussed by Boris and Zeanah is termed " disrupted attachment " . This type of problem , which is not covered under other approaches to disordered attachment , results from an abrupt separation or loss of a familiar caregiver to whom attachment has developed . The young child 's reaction to such a loss is parallel to the grief reaction of an older person , with progressive changes from protest ( crying and searching ) to despair , sadness , and withdrawal from communication or play , and finally detachment from the original relationship and recovery of social and play activities . 
 Most recently , Daniel Schechter and Erica <unk> have shown a relationship between maternal violence @-@ related posttraumatic stress disorder and secure base distortion ( see above ) which is characterized by child recklessness , separation anxiety , hypervigilance , and role @-@ reversal . 
 = = Problems of attachment style = = 
 The majority of 1 year old children can tolerate brief separations from familiar caregivers and are quickly comforted when the caregivers return . These children also use familiar people as a " secure base " and return to them periodically when exploring a new situation . Such children are said to have a secure attachment style , and characteristically continue to develop well both cognitively and emotionally . 
 Smaller numbers of children show less positive development at age 12 months . Their less desirable attachment styles may be predictors of poor later social development . Although these children 's behavior at 12 months is not a serious problem , they appear to be on developmental trajectories that will end in poor social skills and relationships . Because attachment styles may serve as predictors of later development , it may be appropriate to think of certain attachment styles as part of the range of attachment disorders . 
 Insecure attachment styles in toddlers involve unusual reunions after separation from a familiar person . The children may snub the returning caregiver , or may go to the person but then resist being picked up . They may reunite with the caregiver , but then persistently cling to him / her , and fail to return to their previous play . These children are more likely to have later social problems with peers and teachers , but some of them spontaneously develop better ways of interacting with other people . 
 A small group of toddlers show a distressing way of reuniting after a separation . Called a disorganized / disoriented style , this reunion pattern can involve looking dazed or frightened , freezing in place , backing toward the caregiver or approaching with head sharply averted , or showing other behaviors that seem to imply fearfulness of the person who is being sought . Disorganized attachment has been considered a major risk factor for child psychopathology , as it appears to interfere with regulation or tolerance of negative emotions and may thus foster aggressive behavior . Disorganized patterns of attachment have the strongest links to concurrent and subsequent psychopathology , and considerable research has demonstrated both within @-@ the @-@ child and environmental correlates of disorganized attachment . 
 = = Diagnosis = = 
 Recognised assessment methods of attachment styles , difficulties or disorders include the Strange Situation procedure ( Mary Ainsworth ) , the separation and reunion procedure and the Preschool Assessment of Attachment ( " <unk> " ) , the Observational Record of the Caregiving Environment ( " <unk> " ) and the Attachment Q @-@ sort ( " AQ @-@ sort " ) . More recent research also uses the Disturbances of Attachment Interview or " DAI " developed by <unk> and Zeanah , ( 1999 ) . This is a semi @-@ structured interview designed to be administered by clinicians to caregivers . It covers 12 items , namely having a discriminated , preferred adult , seeking comfort when distressed , responding to comfort when offered , social and emotional reciprocity , emotional regulation , checking back after venturing away from the care giver , reticence with unfamiliar adults , willingness to go off with relative strangers , self endangering behavior , excessive clinging , vigilance / <unk> and role reversal . 
 = = Treatment = = 
 There are a variety of mainstream prevention programs and treatment approaches for attachment disorder , attachment problems and moods or behaviors considered to be potential problems within the context of attachment theory . All such approaches for infants and younger children concentrate on increasing the responsiveness and sensitivity of the caregiver , or if that is not possible , changing the caregiver . Such approaches include ' Watch , wait and wonder , ' manipulation of sensitive responsiveness , modified ' Interaction Guidance , ' . ' Preschool Parent Psychotherapy , ' . Circle of Security ' , Attachment and <unk> Catch @-@ up ( ABC ) , the New Orleans Intervention , and Parent @-@ Child psychotherapy . Other known treatment methods include Developmental , Individual @-@ difference , Relationship @-@ based therapy ( DIR ) ( also referred to as Floor Time ) by Stanley Greenspan , although DIR is primarily directed to treatment of pervasive developmental disorders Some of these approaches , such as that suggested by Dozier , consider the attachment status of the adult caregiver to play an important role in the development of the emotional connection between adult and child . This includes foster parents , as children with poor attachment experiences often do not elicit appropriate caregiver responses from their attachment behaviors despite ' normative ' care . 
 Treatment for reactive attachment disorder for children usually involves a mix of therapy , counseling , and parenting education . These must be designed to make sure the child has a safe environment to live in and to develop positive interactions with caregivers and improves their relationships with their peers . 
 Medication can be used as a way to treat similar conditions , like depression , anxiety , or hyperactivity ; however , there is no quick fix for treating reactive attachment disorder . A pediatrician may recommend a treatment plan . For example , a mix of family therapy , individual psychological counseling , play therapy , special education services and parenting skills classes . . 
 = = Possible mechanisms = = 
 One study has reported a connection between a specific genetic marker and disorganized attachment ( not RAD ) associated with problems of parenting . Another author has compared atypical social behavior in genetic conditions such as Williams syndrome with behaviors symptomatic of RAD . 
 Typical attachment development begins with unlearned infant reactions to social signals from caregivers . The ability to send and receive social communications through facial expressions , gestures and voice develops with social experience by seven to nine months . This makes it possible for an infant to interpret messages of calm or alarm from face or voice . At about eight months , infants typically begin to respond with fear to unfamiliar or startling situations , and to look to the faces of familiar caregivers for information that either justifies or soothes their fear . This developmental combination of social skills and the emergence of fear reactions results in attachment behavior such as proximity @-@ seeking , if a familiar , sensitive , responsive , and cooperative adult is available . Further developments in attachment , such as negotiation of separation in the toddler and preschool period , depend on factors such as the caregiver 's interaction style and ability to understand the child 's emotional communications . 
 With insensitive or unresponsive caregivers , or frequent changes , an infant may have few experiences that encourage proximity seeking to a familiar person . An infant who experiences fear but who cannot find comforting information in an adult 's face and voice may develop atypical ways of coping with fearfulness such as the maintenance of distance from adults , or the seeking of proximity to all adults . These symptoms accord with the DSM criteria for reactive attachment disorder . Either of these behavior patterns may create a developmental trajectory leading ever farther from typical attachment processes such as the development of an internal working model of social relationships that facilitates both the giving and the receiving of care from others . 
 Atypical development of fearfulness , with a constitutional tendency either to excessive or inadequate fear reactions , might be necessary before an infant is vulnerable to the effects of poor attachment experiences . 
 Alternatively , the two variations of RAD may develop from the same inability to develop " stranger @-@ wariness " due to inadequate care . Appropriate fear responses may only be able to develop after an infant has first begun to form a selective attachment . An infant who is not in a position to do this cannot afford not to show interest in any person as they may be potential attachment figures . Faced with a swift succession of carers the child may have no opportunity to form a selective attachment until the possible biologically @-@ determined sensitive period for developing stranger @-@ wariness has passed . It is thought this process may lead to the disinhibited form . 
 In the inhibited form infants behave as if their attachment system has been " switched off " . However the innate capacity for attachment behavior cannot be lost . This may explain why children diagnosed with the inhibited form of RAD from institutions almost invariably go on to show formation of attachment behavior to good carers . However children who suffer the inhibited form as a consequence of neglect and frequent changes of caregiver continue to show the inhibited form for far longer when placed in families . 
 Additionally , the development of Theory of Mind may play a role in emotional development . Theory of Mind is the ability to know that the experience of knowledge and intention lies behind human actions such as facial expressions . Although it is reported that very young infants have different responses to humans than to non @-@ human objects , Theory of Mind develops relatively gradually and possibly results from predictable interactions with adults . However , some ability of this kind must be in place before mutual communication through gaze or other gesture can occur , as it does by seven to nine months . Some neurodevelopmental disorders , such as autism , have been attributed to the absence of the mental functions that underlie Theory of Mind . It is possible that the congenital absence of this ability , or the lack of experiences with caregivers who communicate in a predictable fashion , could underlie the development of reactive attachment disorder . 
 = = <unk> diagnoses and treatment = = 
 In the absence of officially recognized diagnostic criteria , and beyond the ambit of the discourse on a broader set of criteria discussed above , the term attachment disorder has been increasingly used by some clinicians to refer to a broader set of children whose behavior may be affected by lack of a primary attachment figure , a seriously unhealthy attachment relationship with a primary caregiver , or a disrupted attachment relationship . Although there are no studies examining diagnostic accuracy , concern is expressed as to the potential for over @-@ diagnosis based on broad checklists and ' snapshots ' . This form of therapy , including diagnosis and accompanying parenting techniques , is scientifically unvalidated and is not considered to be part of mainstream psychology or , despite its name , to be based on attachment theory , with which it is considered incompatible . It has been described as potentially abusive and a pseudoscientific intervention , that has resulted in tragic outcomes for children . 
 A common feature of this form of diagnosis within attachment therapy is the use of extensive lists of " symptoms " which include many behaviours that are likely to be a consequence of neglect or abuse , but are not related to attachment , or not related to any clinical disorder at all . Such lists have been described as " wildly inclusive " . The APSAC Taskforce ( 2006 ) gives examples of such lists ranging across multiple domains from some elements within the DSM @-@ IV criteria to entirely non @-@ specific behavior such as developmental lags , destructive behaviors , refusal to make eye contact , cruelty to animals and siblings , lack of cause and effect thinking , preoccupation with fire , blood and gore , poor peer relationships , stealing , lying , lack of a conscience , persistent nonsense questions or incessant chatter , poor impulse control , abnormal speech patterns , fighting for control over everything , and hoarding or gorging on food . Some checklists suggest that among infants , " prefers dad to mom " or " wants to hold the bottle as soon as possible " are indicative of attachment problems . The APSAC Taskforce expresses concern that high rates of false positive diagnoses are virtually certain and that posting these types of lists on web sites that also serve as marketing tools may lead many parents or others to conclude inaccurately that their children have attachment disorders . " 
 There is also a considerable variety of treatments for alleged attachment disorders diagnosed on the controversial alternative basis outlined above , popularly known as attachment therapy . These therapies have little or no evidence base and vary from talking or play therapies to more extreme forms of physical and coercive techniques , of which the best known are holding therapy , <unk> , rage @-@ reduction and the Evergreen model . In general these therapies are aimed at adopted or fostered children with a view to creating attachment in these children to their new caregivers . Critics maintain these therapies are not based on an accepted version of attachment theory . The theoretical base is broadly a combination of regression and catharsis , accompanied by parenting methods which emphasise obedience and parental control . These therapies concentrate on changing the child rather than the caregiver . An estimated six children have died as a consequence of the more coercive forms of such treatments and the application of the accompanying parenting techniques . 
 Two of the most well @-@ known cases are those of Candace <unk> in 2001 and the <unk> in 2003 through 2005 . Following the associated publicity , some advocates of attachment therapy began to alter views and practices to be less potentially dangerous to children . This change may have been hastened by the publication of a Task Force Report on the subject in January 2006 , commissioned by the American Professional Society on the Abuse of Children ( APSAC ) which was largely critical of attachment therapy , although these practices continue . In April 2007 , <unk> , an organisation originally set up by attachment therapists , formally adopted a White Paper stating its unequivocal opposition to the use of coercive practices in therapy and parenting . 
 = Adam Levine = 
 { { Infobox person | name 
 = Adam Levine | image = 
 <unk> | caption 
 = Adam Levine in 2011 | birth _ name = 
 Adam Noah Levine | birth _ date 
 = ( 1979 @-@ 03 @-@ 18 ) March 18 , 1979 | birth _ place = 
 Los Angeles , California , U.S. 
 | occupation = 
 Adam Noah Levine ( born March 18 , 1979 ) is an American singer and songwriter . He is the lead singer for the Los Angeles pop rock band Maroon 5 . 
 Born and raised in Los Angeles California , Levine began his musical career in 1994 , when he co @-@ founded the alternative rock band Kara 's Flowers , of which he was the lead vocalist and guitarist . The band split up after their only album , The Fourth World ( released in 1997 ) , which did not gain popularity . In 2001 , the group was reformed – with guitarist James Valentine joining the line @-@ up – and began a new , musical chapter , changing their name to Maroon 5 . In 2002 , the band released their first album , Songs About Jane , which went multi @-@ platinum in the US . Since then , they have released four more albums , It Won 't Be Soon Before Long ( 2007 ) , Hands All Over ( 2010 ) , Overexposed ( 2012 ) and V ( 2014 ) . As part of Maroon 5 , Levine has received three Grammy Awards , two Billboard Music Awards , two American Music Awards , an MTV Video Music Award and a World Music Award . 
 Since 2011 , Levine has served as a coach on NBC 's reality talent show The Voice . The winners of the first , fifth and ninth seasons , Javier Colon , Tessanne Chin and Jordan Smith , were on his team . In 2012 , he made his acting debut as a recurring character in the horror television show American Horror Story : Asylum for the series ' second season . He also starred in the film Begin Again . 
 As an entrepreneur , Levine launched his own eponymous fragrance line in 2013 . The same year , he collaborated with K @-@ Mart and <unk> to develop his menswear collection . He also owns a record label , 222 Records . In 2013 , The Hollywood Reporter reported that " sources familiar with his many business dealings " estimated Levine would earn more than $ 35 million that year . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Adam Noah Levine was born in Los Angeles on March 18 , 1979 to Fred Levine , the founder of retail chain M. Fredric , and Patsy ( née Noah ) Levine , an admissions counselor . He has two uncles , journalist and author Timothy Noah and television producer and writer Peter Noah . He is also the nephew of economist Jordan Levine . He has two brothers , Michael and Sam . Levine 's parents divorced when he was seven . Growing up , he spent weekdays with his mother and weekends with his father . He underwent therapy for his parents ' divorce , but called it a " waste of time " explaining that his parents could not " accept the fact that I might have been OK with it . I cried my eyes out and kicked and screamed and said , ' Why ? ' and all the things you do when you find out . A few days later I was fine but I still had to go to therapy . " 
 Levine describes his family as " very musical " and credits his mother with " start [ ing ] me out on the path " . He also attributes his mother 's idols – Simon & Garfunkel , Fleetwood Mac and , most notably , The Beatles – to shaping his musical style , calling them " a huge part of my upbringing " . He attended Brentwood School , where he met Jesse Carmichael and Mickey Madden , his future bandmates . He carried his musical interests to high school , where he states he was " a little rebellious . I didn 't want to do the things they were teaching me ... [ music ] consumed my every thought . " 
 Levine used hallucinogenic drugs in his adolescence . In an interview with Q , he said that using mushrooms " really forced me to look at myself " but added that he had never abused drugs . On Jimmy Kimmel Live ! , he stated that he stopped using prescription drugs after his first experience with prescription drug Ambien , which left him unconscious for an hour . 
 Levine 's father and maternal grandfather are Jewish , while his maternal grandmother was Protestant . Levine considers himself Jewish , though according to an interview with The Jewish Chronicle , he " has rejected formal religious practice for a more generalized , spiritual way of life " . He chose not to have a Bar Mitzvah as a child , explaining : " I felt as though a lot of kids were trying to cash in ... I just don 't think it 's the most respectful way to deal with God and beliefs and years and years and years of cultural heritage . " 
 = = Kara 's Flowers = = 
 In September 1995 , Levine , along with Mickey Madden , Jesse Carmichael , and Ryan Dusick , another Brentwood High student , formed garage band Kara 's Flowers . The group played their first gig at the Whisky a Go Go , a nightclub in West Hollywood , California , with Levine on vocals and guitar . In 1997 , the band was discovered while they were performing at a beach party in Malibu by independent producer Tommy Allen . Allen , along with his partner John DeNicola , had the band record an 11 @-@ track album . Owing to a string of industry showcases in Los Angeles , they were signed on to Reprise Records through producer Rob Cavallo . In 1997 , Kara 's Flowers released their first album , titled The Fourth World . That same year , the band appeared on an episode of the drama series Beverly Hills , 90210 . After their graduation , the band toured in support of their debut . Despite high expectations , the album had little success , selling about 5 @,@ 000 copies , and its only single , " Soap Disco " , failed commercially . Finally , on Cavallo 's exit from the label , Reprise decided to drop the band . Disappointed with the results of their album , the band broke up . Later , Levine would say of the experience : " Kara ’ s Flowers was just floating up the wall beneath the sticks . Make a record quickly , put it out . No touring base , no nothing . Just try to make it happen right out of the gate and it just doesn ’ t work " . 
 = = Maroon 5 and mainstream success = = 
 After the break up of Kara 's Flowers , Levine , along with Carmichael , left Los Angeles to pursue further studies in New York . On MTV News , in 2002 , he said : " That 's when I started waking up to the whole hip @-@ hop , R & B thing . We had friends named Chaos and Shit . It was not Brentwood High " . After dropping out of Five Towns College , in Dix Hills , Long Island , New York , where he and Jesse Carmichael spent a semester , they reunited with Mickey Madden and Ryan Dusick to form a band once more . They experimented with several styles , including country and folk , before deciding groove @-@ based music would become their genre . Levine explained the need for a makeover for the band : " We were just so sick of being a typical rock ' n <unk> band ... I felt like I needed to look elsewhere for vocal inspiration . " The band put together a demo that was rejected by several labels , before falling into the hands of Octone Records executives James Diener , Ben Berkman , and David Boxenbaum . Following Berkman 's advice , the band added a fifth member , James Valentine , and was renamed Maroon 5 . In an interview with HitQuarters , Berkman explained that Levine " seemed to be a very shy , shoe @-@ gazing type ... a fifth member could play the guitar to free up the singer [ Levine ] , so he could be the star I perceived him to be " . 
 Around this time , Levine had been working as a writer 's assistant on the CBS television show Judging Amy , whose producer Barbara Hall was his family friend . While on the show , he would spend time writing songs about his ex @-@ girlfriend Jane . These songs were put into Maroon 5 's debut album Songs About Jane , which was released in June 2002 . The album slowly gained airplay , and eventually became a sleeper hit , selling an estimated 10 million copies and becoming the tenth best @-@ selling album of 2004 , two years after its release . In 2005 , Maroon 5 won their first Grammy Award , for Best New Artist . The next year , they won the Grammy Award for Best Pop Performance by a Duo or Group with Vocals for the second Songs About Jane single " This Love " . 
 By 2006 , the band started recording once again , and in May 2007 , Maroon 5 's second album It Won 't Be Soon Before Long was released . Levine described the album as " a vast improvement " , explaining : " I think this record is a little more self @-@ confident and powerful lyrically " . To support the album , the band performed on a " six @-@ date club tour " in which they visited small venues in Boston , San Francisco , Los Angeles , Minneapolis , Miami , and New York City in early June 2007 . The album and its lead , third and penultimate singles ( " Makes Me Wonder " , " Won 't Go Home Without You " and " If I Never See Your Face Again " , respectively ) each received Grammy nominations , although only " Makes Me Wonder " secured a win . 
 After winding down from a world tour in support It Won 't Be Soon Before Long , the band began recording in Switzerland in 2009 , in collaboration with record producer and songwriter Robert John " Mutt " Lange . Levine said Lange " worked me harder than anyone ever has " . In 2010 , Maroon 5 released their third studio album , Hands All Over . The album did not initially meet expectations . In an interview with Los Angeles Times , Levine explained that the album suffered from being " all these disparate ideas and songs that didn 't make any sense together " . After the moderate success of the album 's first three singles , the band released " Moves like Jagger " which Levine classified as " one of those songs that was definitely a risk ; it 's a bold statement " . The single became a success worldwide ; it was the ninth @-@ best @-@ selling digital single of 2011 with sales of 8 @.@ 5 million copies and , as of 2012 , the eighth @-@ best @-@ selling digital single of all time . Levine later credited the song with " totally reviving the band " . 
 Since " Moves Like Jagger " was the first time Maroon 5 had collaborated with an outside writer , the band decided to attempt it again on their next album , entitled Overexposed . Its title is supposedly an allusion to Levine 's public ubiquity . In an interview with Rolling Stone , he opined that is their most dance @-@ driven album ever , commenting : " It 's very much an old @-@ fashioned disco tune . I have a love / hate relationship with it - but mostly I love it " . The album and its lead single " Payphone " gave Maroon 5 their second Grammy Award for Best Pop Vocal Album and Best Pop Duo / Group Performance nominations . In support of Overexposed , the band conducted the Overexposed Tour from 2012 – 13 ( with the European leg extending to 2014 due to scheduling conflicts ) , and also headlined the 12th Annual Honda Civic Tour , which included The Voice contestant Tony Lucca . 
 Over 2014 , Maroon 5 continued their collaboration with Ryan Tedder , Max Martin and others to release their fifth studio album , entitled V. Levine acknowledged that they followed the same song @-@ writing process that they tried with Overexposed , saying : " We developed a really nice system on the last record — we found songs we were passionate about , developed them and put our stamp on them [ ... ] this time we kept it going but looked for different types of songs . " Five singles were released from it . In support of the album , the band undertook the Maroon 5 World Tour 2015 , which kicked off with a show in Dallas in February 2015 . 
 In 2007 , Levine had stated that he believed Maroon 5 was reaching its peak and might make one more album before disbanding . He was quoted explaining : " Eventually I want to focus on being a completely different person because I don 't know if I want to do this into my 40s and 50s and beyond " . But in 2010 , he dispelled any rumors of the band breaking up , saying : " I love what I do and think that , yes , it might be tiring and complicated at times [ but ] we don 't have any plans on disbanding any time soon " . He has also turned down the idea of having a solo career , stating that " there will never be a solo record . I would sooner have another band " . 
 = = Other work = = 
 = = = Musical collaborations = = = 
 Levine has collaborated with several musical artists . In 2005 , he was featured on the song " Live Again " by hip @-@ hop duo Ying Yang Twins . The same year , he appeared on Kanye West 's album Late Registration , on the third single , " Heard ' Em Say " , a collaboration Levine called " very pure and very easy " . The song was created during an airplane flight that he and West shared , and its refrain was later used for the Maroon 5 song " Nothing Lasts Forever " from It Won 't Be Soon Before Long . He also appeared on Alicia Keys ' third album Alicia Keys : MTV Unplugged , as part of the cover of The Rolling Stones song " Wild Horses " . Around the same time , he featured on fellow Octone Records singer K 'naan 's single " Bang Bang " . In 2009 , he recorded " <unk> " , a song for Slash 's first solo album Slash ( 2010 ) . In February 2010 , he was among approximately 80 musicians who sang on the charity @-@ single remake of " We Are the World " , called " We Are the World 25 for Haiti " . In 2011 , he appeared on the Gym Class Heroes song , " Stereo Hearts " . He also worked with hip @-@ hop artist 50 Cent on his song " My Life " , recording the vocals almost two years before it was released as a single in 2012 , which included rapper Eminem . He is also featured as a singer for his band 's song " She Will Be Loved " in the music rhythm game , Band Hero . In 2015 , Adam Levine was featured on duo , R. City 's , single , " Locked Away " . 
 = = = TV and media = = = 
 Levine has made four notable comic appearances on television . During 2007 , he appeared in the 33rd season premiere of Saturday Night Live in an SNL Digital Short called Iran So Far , performing with Andy Samberg , Fred Armisen and Jake Gyllenhaal . Levine played himself while singing a humorous bridge to a " love song " for Mahmoud Ahmadinejad . In 2008 , he performed on Comedy Central 's " Night of Too Many Stars " . He also had a cameo on Jimmy Kimmel Live ! for the night of stars and endorsed Barack Obama in the 2008 Presidential Election . In 2013 , he hosted Saturday Night Live and featured alongside Kendrick Lamar on Lonely Island 's digital short " YOLO " , which parodies the acronym for You Only Live Once . His hosting was generally disliked by reviewers , who called it " mediocre " and " subpar " . 
 Since its inception in 2011 , Levine has served as a contestant judge / coach on the reality talent TV show , The Voice . The winner of the first season , Javier Colon , was on his team , as was the Season 5 winner , Tessanne Chin and Season 9 winner Jordan Smith . The Voice has been credited with reviving Maroon 5 's " faltering " career after the sub @-@ par sales of Hands All Over as well as increasing Levine 's popularity . According to polling firm E @-@ Poll Market Research , awareness of Levine has nearly tripled since he joined the show . He has also been described as the " breakout " star of the series , with # <unk> and @ <unk> scoring a respective 203 @,@ 000 and 2 @.@ 14 million Twitter mentions in the show 's third season , higher than all the other coaches . In 2013 , The Hollywood Reporter estimated that Levine was paid $ 10 – 12 million for each season of The Voice . 
 In 2012 , Levine appeared as a recurring character in American Horror Story : Asylum , the second season of the anthology series . He plays Leo Morrison , a newly @-@ wed photographer visiting modern @-@ day Briarcliff Manor , an insane asylum , on honeymoon with wife . Teresa , played by Jenna Dewan @-@ Tatum . The scenes were shot around his summer touring schedule . In an interview with E ! , he said of his role : " It sounded like so much fun and that 's why I wanted to do it ... this sounds , like , hysterical , funny , dark and cool and right up my alley " . However , he admitted to not being a fan of the show nor horror genre in general , stating he didn 't watch the episodes because " it 's just so weird and disturbing " . 
 In June 2012 , Levine was cast in the musical romance @-@ drama film Begin Again . The film was directed by John Carney and had Keira Knightley and Mark Ruffalo play the lead roles . In it , he plays Dave Kohl , Knightley 's songwriting partner and former boyfriend of five years , who leaves her behind on finding success in the music industry . The film premiered at the 2013 Toronto International Film Festival to generally favorable reviews from critics . 
 In November 2013 , Levine was named People magazine 's Sexiest Man Alive , becoming the first singer and the second non @-@ actor ( after John F. Kennedy , Jr . ) to claim the title . He was ranked # 41 on Glamour 's " Sexiest Men of 2012 " list . In 2008 , he appeared on People 's " Single and Sexy Men " list . He was elected TV 's Most Crushworthy Male Reality Host / Judge in a poll held by Zap2it . In April 2012 , Shalom Life ranked him Number 7 on its list of " Top 50 Hottest Jewish men in the world " . Levine stripped naked for testicular cancer awareness for a centerfold in Cosmopolitan UK 's February 2011 issue . 
 In June 2016 , sources close to Levine stated he was considering not returning to The Voice after the murder of former contestant Christina <unk> , citing his feelings of guilt over the singer 's death and his belief that The Voice should do more to protect its current and former contestants . 
 = = = Business ventures and endorsements = = = 
 In October 2008 , Levine collaborated with First Act to create the First Act 222 Guitar , which was fashioned to his specifications . The guitar was made available for purchase at Target retail stores . Two years later , he launched his own fashion line , entitled " 222 " , at the Project Trade Show in Las Vegas . The collection is a minimalistic line of jeans , basic T @-@ shirts and leather jackets , a style he described as " simple and pure and durable " . The venture was organized in partnership with his father , Fred Levine ( who operates a chain of specialty boutiques ) , and his cousin , Sami Cooper . 
 In June 2011 , Levine took part in an educational campaign to raise awareness of Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder . The project , titled " Own It " , was created by Shire and organized in collaboration with the Attention Deficit Disorder Association ( <unk> ) , Children and Adults with Attention Deficit / Hyperactivity Disorder ( <unk> ) . The project targets people who were previously diagnosed with the disorder , focusing on how it may continue into adulthood . Levine , who himself was diagnosed with it as a teenager , said , " This campaign is important to me because it can help young adults and adults realize that there 's a chance they may still have ADHD if they had it as a kid " . In connection to this , he wrote an article in <unk> Magazine about his personal experience with it . 
 Levine founded his own record label , 222 Records , in February 2012 . He stated that he was inspired to start the label to sign on Rozzi Crane , an USC music student he discovered through a mutual friend . She became the first singer signed on to the label , followed by Glee actor Matthew Morrison , Mexican artist Diego <unk> and The Voice season 2 contestant and part of Team Adam , the singer Tony Lucca . It was reported that he was negotiating further with potential distributors , as well as organizing staff , to operate as a full @-@ fledged record company with departments such as marketing , radio and publicity . 
 In 2013 , Levine collaborated with ID Perfumes to create his debut eponymous scent . The line was launched at the Premiere Fragrance Installation in Los Angeles in February 2013 . The fragrance range , consisting of scents for both for men and women , is sold through Macy 's department stores in microphone @-@ shaped bottles . Speaking at its launch , Levine said : " The task was to make something that I would wear . So that was a process and we finally came to a great conclusion and it smells great " The fragrance garnered media attention for contradicting his tweet the previous year , in which he said that he wanted to " put an official ban on celebrity fragrances . <unk> by death from this point forward " . 
 In 2013 , Adam Levine became a celebrity spokesperson for Proactiv , a well @-@ known company with acne @-@ fighting products . In the commercial , Adam shares details about his acne experiences in high school , and promotes Proactiv Plus . 
 In 2013 , it was announced that Levine would be entering a partnership with Sears Holdings to launch a multi @-@ department lifestyle brand to develop apparel and accessories collections . The company , which owns Kmart and <unk> , a shopping social platform , also included rapper Nicki Minaj in the same contract . The menswear collection was launched on October 1 that year and conducts business via 500 Kmart stores across the US , as well as online . In an official statement , Levine said : " Partnering with <unk> to develop this line was an exciting opportunity for me and I am really looking forward to diving into the process of designing an apparel and accessory collection " . In an interview with People , he commented further , " it was cool that they really promoted creative control . I like to be involved with process rather than just phoning it in " . 
 = = Artistry = = 
 Levine 's interest in music started at around ten years of age , when he first started playing the guitar . He found music an outlet for feelings , stating : " I picked up a guitar and that was it . I fell so madly in love with it , it 's all I did " . He performed his first professional gig at The Troubadour when he was twelve , but was so nervous he played with his back to the audience . Throughout his childhood , he had been influenced by the diverse groups like the Beatles , Fleetwood Mac , The Who , Pearl Jam , Soundgarden , Alice in Chains , and Nirvana , and , in high school , by Bob Marley , Bill Withers , Al Green , Stevie Wonder , Marvin Gaye and Michael Jackson . He also incorporated elements of The Police and Prince into his music . In an interview with Billboard , he explained the diversity of his influences : " I love every single kind of music ... even the most saccharine , sugary pop song can be the greatest thing ever . But so can a 25 @-@ minute crazy avant @-@ garde fusion gnarly Herbie Hancock jam from the ' 70s " . 
 Levine remembers that listening to " Are You That Somebody ? " by Aaliyah convinced him to pursue a more soulful sound than that of his then @-@ band Kara 's Flowers . His move to New York introduced him to a new music scene that involved hip @-@ hop , R & B , gospel and soul music . He took to changing his musical style , extensively emulating Stevie Wonder . Subsequently , Songs About Jane was released , deemed " bluesy funk " and similar to Busted 's music . Critics also drew comparisons between Levine and Jamiroquai singer Jay Kay . 
 While earlier work was deemed " vaguely funky white @-@ soul " and " rock " , recent ones have been judged to have a more reggae , anthemic pop sound , evoking comparisons to Coldplay . Levine refuses to fit his music into a genre , saying : " There 's so much variety in music , it 's silly to belong to a specific club and try to sound a certain way " . He considers himself an orthodox lyricist sticking to conventional themes , acknowledging : " Romance , love , the lack thereof are still very big themes . I haven 't figured out a way to use everything yet . As a songwriter , I 'm still limited to that one thing . " He also claims he does not like mincing words , stating in a Rolling Stone interview : " I was so sick of typical lyrics like ' Ooh , baby ' and ' I love you ' and all this vague shit . I thought the more explicit I got without being totally explicit was a nice approach " . 
 Levine is tenor , he has a 3 and a half octave vocal range and has been noted for his falsettos . Salon wrote : " When he ’ s crooning come @-@ ons , his voice lends the music a satisfying lewdness , a sense of sticky physicality that gives his snaky hooks a <unk> urgency . " In a review of It Won 't Be Soon Before Long , Entertainment Weekly described his vocals as " smug , R & B @-@ slick deadpan ... there 's a twisted logic to his dispassionate delivery " . In another review , Allmusic noted that " he knows that he 's a pop guy , somewhat in the tradition of Hall & Oates , but he isn 't trying to be retro , he 's ... making records that are melodic , stylish , and soulful " . In a review of the 2013 Honda Civic Tour , The Boston Globe also commented positively on his on @-@ stage presence , which " exude [ s ] a sense of up @-@ for @-@ anything playfulness ... combined with a rock solid work ethic and a clear love for their audiences and performing " . 
 Levine 's popularity outside of his musical work has seen him tagged as a " stand @-@ alone star " , which critics say have pushed other members of Maroon 5 to the backseat , even in their music . Their guitarist Valentine noted that his vocals were a central aspect around which their music revolved . Conversely , others opine that Levine 's fame has been a boost to the band , with Paper writing : " Maroon 5 has managed to ebb and flow with the times ... thanks in no small part to their frontman 's uncanny ability to be extremely entertaining " . Delta Sky described him as " a natural , if slightly neurotic , leading man " . He claims that the image was consciously cultivated , explaining : " We talked about it a long time ago and decided I would step out , for us , not for me or my own ego ... We wanted there to be a frontman " . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 In early 2010 , while performing at the Sports Illustrated Swimsuit Issue release party in Las Vegas , Levine met Russian Sports Illustrated swimsuit cover @-@ model Anne <unk> . They began a relationship which ended in April 2012 . 
 Levine began dating Namibian Victoria 's Secret model <unk> Prinsloo in May 2012 . They broke up in March 2013 , but later reconciled and subsequently became engaged in July that year . The couple were married on July 19 , 2014 in Cabo San Lucas , Mexico . In March 2016 , it was announced that the couple are expecting their first child together . 
 Levine practices yoga under instructor Chad Dennis and has stated that " yoga will drastically improve you in every way imaginable " . He began the practice as a way to improve his back pain and eventually replaced his weightlifting with yoga . 
 Levine , whose brother openly identifies as gay , is an outspoken supporter of same @-@ sex marriage and LGBT rights . In 2011 , he made a video on Maroon 5 's official YouTube account in support of the It Gets Better Project . In January 2012 , he announced that Maroon 5 had changed the location of their post @-@ Grammy Awards show because of the " unnamed Los Angeles restaurant 's backing of Proposition 8 " . 
 In 2013 , Levine was mentioned in a hostile work environment lawsuit filed in Los Angeles Superior Court by an unnamed security guard who claimed that Universal Music Publishing Group 's Santa Monica location was " infiltrated with pervasive drug use where you could smell marijuana seeping from various offices and openly used in common areas , and lounges " . The guard claimed that when she complained about the cannabis smoke coming from one of the studios , she was told that " it 's Adam Levine ... if he wants to come to the lobby and do a line of cocaine on the floor , it 's OK " . In an official statement to The Hollywood Reporter , <unk> described the allegations as " absurd " . 
 = = Discography = = 
 = = = Singles as an artist = = = 
 = = = Guest appearances = = = 
 = = Filmography = = 
 = = = Film = = = 
 = = = Television = = = 
 = = = Video games = = = 
 = Chrysler Building = 
 The Chrysler Building is an Art Deco @-@ style skyscraper located on the East Side of Midtown Manhattan in New York City , at the intersection of 42nd Street and Lexington Avenue in the Turtle Bay neighborhood . At 1 @,@ 046 feet ( 319 m ) , the structure was the world 's tallest building for 11 months before it was surpassed by the Empire State Building in 1931 . 
 It is the tallest brick building in the world , albeit with a steel frame . After the destruction of the World Trade Center , it was again the second @-@ tallest building in New York City until December 2007 , when the spire was raised on the 1 @,@ 200 @-@ foot ( 365 @.@ 8 m ) Bank of America Tower , pushing the Chrysler Building into third position . In addition , The New York Times Building , which opened in 2007 , is exactly level with the Chrysler Building in height . Both buildings were then pushed into fourth position , when the under @-@ construction One World Trade Center surpassed their height , and then to fifth position by 432 Park Avenue which was completed in 2015 . 
 The Chrysler Building is a classic example of Art Deco architecture and considered by many contemporary architects to be one of the finest buildings in New York City . In 2007 , it was ranked ninth on the List of America 's Favorite Architecture by the American Institute of Architects . It was the headquarters of the Chrysler Corporation from 1930 until the mid @-@ 1950s . Although the building was built and designed specifically for the car manufacturer , the corporation did not pay for the construction of it and never owned it , as Walter P. Chrysler decided to pay for it himself , so that his children could inherit it . 
 = = History = = 
 The Chrysler Building was designed by architect William Van Alen for a project of Walter P. Chrysler . When the ground breaking occurred on September 19 , 1928 , there was an intense competition in New York City to build the world 's tallest skyscraper . Despite a frantic pace ( the building was built at an average rate of four floors per week ) , no workers died during the construction of this skyscraper . 
 = = = Design beginnings = = = 
 Van Alen 's original design for the skyscraper called for a decorative jewel @-@ like glass crown . It also featured a base in which the showroom windows were tripled in height and topped by 12 stories with glass @-@ wrapped corners , creating an impression that the tower appeared physically and visually light as if floating in mid @-@ air . The height of the skyscraper was also originally designed to be 246 meters ( 807 ft ) . However , the design proved to be too advanced and costly for building contractor William H. Reynolds , who disapproved of Van Alen 's original plan . The design and lease were then sold to Walter P. Chrysler , who worked with Van Alen and redesigned the skyscraper for additional stories ; it was eventually revised to be 282 m ( 925 ft ) tall . As Walter Chrysler was the chairman of the Chrysler Corporation and intended to make the building into Chrysler 's headquarters , various architectural details and especially the building 's gargoyles were modeled after Chrysler automobile products like the hood ornaments of the Plymouth ; they exemplify the machine age in the 1920s ( see below ) . 
 = = = Construction = = = 
 Construction commenced on September 19 , 1928 . In total , 391 @,@ 881 rivets were used and approximately 3 @,@ 826 @,@ 000 bricks were manually laid , to create the non @-@ loadbearing walls of the skyscraper . Contractors , builders and engineers were joined by other building @-@ services experts to coordinate construction . 
 Prior to its completion , the building stood about even with a rival project at 40 Wall Street , designed by H. Craig Severance . Severance increased the height of his project and then publicly claimed the title of the world 's tallest building . ( This distinction excluded structures that were not fully habitable , such as the Eiffel Tower . ) In response , Van Alen obtained permission for a 38 @-@ meter ( 125 ft ) long spire and had it secretly constructed inside the frame of the building . The spire was delivered to the site in four different sections . On October 23 , 1929 , the bottom section of the spire was hoisted to the top of the building 's dome and lowered into the 66th floor of the building . The other remaining sections of the spire were hoisted and riveted to the first one in sequential order in just 90 minutes . 
 = = = Completion = = = 
 Upon completion on May 27 , 1930 , the added height of the spire allowed the Chrysler Building to surpass 40 Wall Street as the tallest building in the world and the Eiffel Tower as the tallest structure . It was the first man @-@ made structure to stand taller than 1 @,@ 000 feet ( 305 m ) . Van Alen 's satisfaction in these accomplishments was likely muted by Walter Chrysler 's later refusal to pay the balance of his architectural fee . Less than a year after it opened to the public on May 27 , 1930 , the Chrysler Building was surpassed in height by the Empire State Building , but the Chrysler Building is still the world 's tallest steel @-@ supported brick building . As of November 2 , 2011 , the building 's height was surpassed by the under construction One World Trade Center at the height of 1 @,@ 106 feet . 
 = = = Property = = = 
 The east building wall of the base out of which the tower rises runs at a slant to the Manhattan street grid , following a property line that predated the Commissioners ' Plan of 1811 . The land on which the Chrysler Building stands was donated to The Cooper Union for the Advancement of Science and Art in 1902 . The land was originally leased to William H. Reynolds , but , when he was unable to raise money for the project , the building and the development rights to the land were acquired by Walter P. Chrysler in 1928 . Contrary to popular belief , the Chrysler Corporation was never involved in the construction or ownership of the Chrysler Building , although it was built and designed for the corporation and served as its headquarters until the mid @-@ 1950s . It was a project of Walter P. Chrysler for his children . 
 The ownership of the building has changed several times . The Chrysler family sold the building in 1953 to William Zeckendorf , and in 1957 , it was purchased by Sol Goldman and Alex DiLorenzo , and owned by Massachusetts Mutual Life Insurance Company . The lobby was refurbished and the facade renovated in 1978 – 1979 . The building was bought by Jack Kent Cooke in 1979 . The spire underwent a restoration that was completed in 1995 . In 1998 , Tishman Speyer Properties and the Travelers Insurance Group bought the Chrysler Building and the adjoining Kent Building in 1997 for about $ 220 million ( equal to $ 320 million in 2015 ) from a consortium of banks and the estate of Jack Kent Cooke . Tishman Speyer Properties had negotiated a 150 @-@ year lease from the Cooper Union , and the college continues to own the land under the Chrysler Building . Cooper Union 's name is on the deed . 
 In 2001 , a 75 % stake in the building was sold , for US $ 300 million ( equal to $ 400 million in 2015 ) , to <unk> , the German arm of an Atlanta @-@ based investment fund . On June 11 , 2008 it was reported that the Abu Dhabi Investment Council was in negotiations to buy <unk> 's 75 % economic interest , and a 15 % interest from Tishman Speyer Properties in the building , and a share of the <unk> retail structure next door for US $ 800 million . On July 9 , 2008 it was announced that the transaction had been completed , and that the Abu Dhabi Investment Council was now the 90 % owner of the building . 
 = = Architecture = = 
 The Chrysler Building is considered a leading example of Art Deco architecture . The corners of the 61st floor are graced with eagles ; on the 31st floor , the corner ornamentation are replicas of the 1929 Chrysler radiator caps . The building is constructed of masonry , with a steel frame , and metal cladding . The building currently contains a total of 3 @,@ 862 windows on its facades . Inside , there are four banks of 8 elevators designed by the Otis Elevator Corporation . The building was declared a National Historic Landmark in 1976 , and a New York City Landmark in 1978 . 
 The Chrysler Building is also renowned and recognized for its terraced crown . Composed of seven radiating terraced arches , Van Alen 's design of the crown is a cruciform groin vault constructed into seven concentric members with transitioning setbacks , mounted up one behind another . The stainless @-@ steel cladding is ribbed and riveted in a radiating sunburst pattern with many triangular vaulted windows , transitioning into smaller segments of the seven narrow setbacks of the facade of the terraced crown . The entire crown is clad with silvery " <unk> KA @-@ 2 " metal , an austenitic stainless steel developed in Germany by Krupp and marketed under the trade name " <unk> " ( a German acronym for <unk> Stahl , meaning " non @-@ rusting steel " ) . 
 When the building first opened , it contained a public viewing gallery on the 71st floor , which was closed to the public in 1945 . This floor is now the highest occupied floor of the Chrysler Building , it was occupied by an office space management firm in 1986 . The private Cloud Club occupied a three @-@ floor high space from the 66th – 68th floors , but closed in the late 1970s . Above the 71st floor , the stories of the building are designed mostly for exterior appearance , functioning mainly as landings for the stairway to the spire . These top stories are very narrow with low , sloped ceilings , and are useful only for holding radio @-@ broadcasting and other mechanical and electrical equipment . Television station WCBS @-@ TV ( Channel 2 ) originally transmitted from the top of the Chrysler in the 1940s and early 1950s , before moving to the Empire State Building . For many years , <unk> @-@ FM and <unk> ( now WKTU ) also used the Chrysler Building as a transmission site , but they also moved to the Empire State Building by the 1970s . There are currently no commercial broadcast stations located at the Chrysler Building . 
 There are two sets of lighting in the top spires and decoration . The first are the V @-@ shaped lighting inserts in the steel of the building itself . Added later were groups of floodlights that are on mast arms directed back at the building . This allows the top of the building to be lit in many colors for special occasions . 
 = = Representation = = 
 The Chrysler Building has been shown in several movies that take place in New York . In the summer of 2005 , New York 's own Skyscraper Museum asked one hundred architects , builders , critics , engineers , historians , and scholars , among others , to choose their 10 favorites among 25 New York towers . The Chrysler Building came in first place as 90 % of them placed the building in their top @-@ 10 favorite buildings . 
 The Chrysler Building 's distinctive profile has inspired similar skyscrapers worldwide , including One Liberty Place in Philadelphia . 
 = = Tenants = = 
 Blank Rome 
 <unk> Partners 
 Regus 
 Troutman Sanders 
 Reprieve ( organisation ) 
 YES Network 
 = = Gallery = = 
 = Il ritorno d 'Ulisse in patria = 
 Il ritorno d 'Ulisse in patria ( SV 325 , The Return of Ulysses to his Homeland ) is an opera consisting of a prologue and five acts ( later revised to three ) , set by Claudio Monteverdi to a libretto by Giacomo Badoaro . The opera was first performed at the Teatro Santi Giovanni e Paolo in Venice during the 1639 – 1640 carnival season . The story , taken from the second half of Homer 's Odyssey , tells how constancy and virtue are ultimately rewarded , treachery and deception overcome . After his long journey home from the Trojan Wars Ulisse , king of Ithaca , finally returns to his kingdom where he finds that a trio of villainous suitors are importuning his faithful queen , Penelope . With the assistance of the gods , his son Telemaco and a staunch friend Eumete , Ulisse vanquishes the suitors and recovers his kingdom . 
 Il ritorno is the first of three full @-@ length works which Monteverdi wrote for the burgeoning Venetian opera industry during the last five years of his life . After its initial successful run in Venice the opera was performed in Bologna before returning to Venice for the 1640 – 41 season . Thereafter , except for a possible performance at the Imperial court in Vienna late in the 17th century , there were no further revivals until the 20th century . The music became known in modern times through the 19th @-@ century discovery of an incomplete manuscript score which in many respects is inconsistent with the surviving versions of the libretto . After its publication in 1922 the score 's authenticity was widely questioned , and performances of the opera remained rare during the next 30 years . By the 1950s the work was generally accepted as Monteverdi 's , and after revivals in Vienna and Glyndebourne in the early 1970s it became increasingly popular . It has since been performed in opera houses all over the world , and has been recorded many times . 
 Together with Monteverdi 's other Venetian stage works , Il ritorno is classified as one of the first modern operas . Its music , while showing the influence of earlier works , also demonstrates Monteverdi 's development as a composer of opera , through his use of fashionable forms such as arioso , duet and ensemble alongside the older @-@ style recitative . By using a variety of musical styles , Monteverdi is able to express the feelings and emotions of a great range of characters , divine and human , through their music . Il ritorno has been described as an " ugly duckling " , and conversely as the most tender and moving of Monteverdi 's surviving operas , one which although it might disappoint initially , will on subsequent hearings reveal a vocal style of extraordinary eloquence . 
 = = Historical context = = 
 Monteverdi was an established court composer in the service of Duke Vincenzo Gonzaga in Mantua when he wrote his first operas , L 'Orfeo and L 'Arianna , in the years 1606 – 08 . After falling out with Vincenzo 's successor , Duke Francesco Gonzaga , Monteverdi moved to Venice in 1613 and became director of music at St Mark 's Basilica , a position he held for the rest of his life . Alongside his steady output of madrigals and church music , Monteverdi continued to compose works for the stage , though not actual operas . He wrote several ballets and , for the Venice carnival of 1624 – 25 , Il combattimento di Tancredi e Clorinda ( " The Battle of Tancred and Clorinda " ) , a hybrid work with some characteristics of ballet , opera and oratorio . 
 In 1637 fully @-@ fledged opera came to Venice with the opening of the Teatro San Cassiano . Sponsored by the wealthy Tron family , this theatre was the first in the world specifically devoted to opera . The theatre 's inaugural performance , on 6 March 1637 , was L <unk> by Francesco Manelli and Benedetto Ferrari . This work was received with great enthusiasm , as was the same pair 's La Maga <unk> the following year . In rapid succession three more opera houses opened in the city , as the ruling families of the Republic sought to express their wealth and status by investing in the new musical fashion . At first , Monteverdi remained aloof from these activities , perhaps on account of his age ( he was over 70 ) , or perhaps through the dignity of his office as maestro di capella at St. Mark 's . Nevertheless , an unidentified contemporary , commenting on Monteverdi 's silence , opined that the maestro might yet produce an opera for Venice : " God willing , one of these nights he too will step onto the stage . " This remark proved prescient ; Monteverdi 's first public contribution to Venetian opera came in the 1639 – 40 carnival season , a revival of his L 'Arianna at the Teatro San Moisè . 
 L 'Arianna was followed in rapid succession by three brand new Monteverdi operas , of which Il ritorno was the first . The second , Le nozze d ' Enea in Lavinia ( " The Marriage of Aeneas to Lavinia " ) , was performed during the 1640 – 41 carnival ; Monteverdi 's music is lost , but a copy of the libretto , of unknown authorship , survives . The last of the three , written for the 1642 – 43 carnival , was L 'incoronazione di Poppea ( " The Coronation of Poppea " ) , performed shortly before the composer 's death in 1643 . 
 = = Creation = = 
 = = = Libretto = = = 
 Giacomo Badoaro ( 1602 – 1654 ) was a prolific poet in the Venetian dialect who was a member of the Accademia degli Incogniti , a group of free @-@ thinking intellectuals interested in promoting musical theatre in Venice — Badoaro himself held a financial interest in the Teatro <unk> . Il ritorno was his first libretto ; he would later , in 1644 , write another Ulysses @-@ based libretto for Francesco Sacrati . The text of Il ritorno , originally written in five acts but later reorganised as three , is a generally faithful adaptation of Homer 's Odyssey , Books 13 – 23 , with some characterisations altered or expanded . Badoaro may have been influenced in his treatment of the story by the 1591 play Penelope by Giambattista della Porta . The libretto was written with the express purpose of tempting Monteverdi to enter the world of Venetian opera , and it evidently captured the elderly composer 's imagination . Badoaro and Monteverdi used a classical story to illustrate the human condition of their own times . 
 The Monteverdi scholar Ellen Rosand has identified 12 versions of the published libretto that have been discovered in the years since the first performance . Most of these appear to be 18th @-@ century copies , possibly from a single source ; some are literary versions , unrelated to any theatrical performances . All but one of the 12 identify Badoaro as the author , while the other gives no name . Only two refer to Monteverdi as the composer , though this is not significant — composers ' names were rarely given on printed librettos . The texts are all generally the same in each case , and all differ from the one surviving copy of Monteverdi 's musical score , which has three acts instead of five , a different prologue , a different ending , and many scenes and passages either omitted or rearranged . Some of the libretto copies locate the opera 's first performance at Teatro San Cassiano , although Teatro SS Giovanni e Paolo is now generally accepted as the opening venue . 
 = = = Composition = = = 
 It is not known when Monteverdi received the libretto from Badoaro , but this was presumably during or before 1639 since the work was being prepared for performance in the 1639 – 40 carnival . In keeping with the general character of Venetian opera , the work was written for a small band — around five string players and various continuo instruments . This reflected the financial motives of the merchant princes who were sponsoring the opera houses — they demanded commercial as well as artistic success , and wanted to minimise costs . As was common at the time , precise instrumentation is not indicated in the score , which exists in a single handwritten manuscript discovered in the Vienna National Library in the 19th century . 
 A study of the score reveals many characteristic Monteverdi features , derived from his long experience as a composer for the stage and of other works for the human voice . Rosand believes that rather than casting doubts on Monteverdi 's authorship , the significant differences between the score and the libretto might lend support to it , since Monteverdi was well known for his adaptations of the texts presented to him . Ringer reinforces this , writing that " Monteverdi boldly reshaped Badoaro 's writing into a coherent and supremely effective foundation for a music drama " , adding that Badoaro claimed that he could no longer recognise the work as his own . Contemporaries of the composer and the librettist saw an identification between Ulysses and Monteverdi ; both are returning home — " home " in Monteverdi 's case being the medium of opera which he had mastered and then left , 30 years earlier . 
 = = = Authenticity = = = 
 Before and after the publication of the score in 1922 , scholars questioned the work 's authenticity , and its attribution to Monteverdi continued to be in some doubt until the 1950s . The Italian musicologist Giacomo <unk> maintained , on the basis of a 1942 performance in Milan , that the work was simply not good enough to be by Monteverdi . Apart from the stylistic differences between Il ritorno and Monteverdi 's other surviving late opera , L 'incoronazione di Poppea , the main issue which raised doubts was the series of discrepancies between the score and the libretto However , much of the uncertainty concerning the attribution was resolved through the discovery of contemporary documents , all confirming Monteverdi 's role as the composer . These documents include a letter from the unknown librettist of Le nozze d 'Enea in Lavinia , which discusses Monteverdi 's setting of Il ritorno . There is also Badoaro 's preface to the Il ritorno libretto , addressed to the composer , which includes the wording " I can firmly state that my Ulysses is more indebted to you than ever was the real Ulysses to the ever @-@ gracious Minerva " . A 1644 letter from Badoaro to Michelangelo Torcigliani contains the statement " Il ritorno d 'Ulisse in patria was embellished with the music of Claudio Monteverdi , a man of great fame and enduring name " . Finally , a 1640 booklet entitled Le <unk> della Musica indicates the Badoaro @-@ Monteverdi pairing as the creators of the opera . In the view of conductor and instrumentalist Sergio Vartolo , these findings establish Monteverdi as the principal composer " beyond a shadow of a doubt " . Although parts of the music may be by other hands , there is no doubt that the work is substantially Monteverdi 's and remains close to his original conception . 
 = = Roles = = 
 The work is written for a large cast — thirty roles including small choruses of heavenly beings , sirens and Phaecians — but these parts can be organised among fourteen singers ( three sopranos , two mezzo @-@ sopranos , one alto , six tenors and two basses ) by appropriate doubling of roles . This approximates to the normal forces employed in Venetian opera . In the score , the role of Eumete changes midway through Act II from tenor to soprano castrato , suggesting that the surviving manuscript may have been created from more than one source . In modern performances the latter part of Eumete 's role is usually transposed to a lower range , to accommodate the tenor voice throughout . 
 = = Synopsis = = 
 The action takes place on and around the island of Ithaca , ten years after the Trojan Wars . English translations used in the synopsis are from Geoffrey Dunn 's version , based on Raymond Leppard 's 1971 edition , and from Hugh Ward @-@ Perkins 's interpretation issued with Sergio Vartolo 's 2006 recording for Brilliant Classics . Footnotes provide the original Italian . 
 = = = Prologue = = = 
 The spirit of human frailty ( L <unk> <unk> ) is mocked in turn by the gods of Time ( Tempo ) , Fortune ( Fortuna ) and Love ( Amore ) . Man , they claim , is subject to their whims : " From Time , ever fleeting , from Fortune 's caresses , from Love and its arrows ... No mercy from me ! " They will render man " weak , wretched and bewildered . " 
 = = = Act 1 = = = 
 In the palace at Ithaca , Penelope mourns the long absence of Ulysses : " The awaited one does not return , and the years pass by . " Her grief is echoed by her nurse , Ericlea . As Penelope leaves , her attendant Melanto enters with Eurimaco , a servant to Penelope 's importunate suitors . The two sing passionately of their love for each other ( " You are my sweet life " ) . The scene changes to the <unk> coast , where the sleeping Ulisse is brought ashore by the Phaecians ( <unk> ) , whose action is in defiance of the wishes of gods Giove and Nettuno . The Phaecians are punished by the gods who turn them and their ship to stone . Ulysses awakes , cursing the Phaecians for abandoning him : " To your sails , <unk> <unk> , may Boreas be ever hostile ! " From the goddess Minerva , who appears disguised as a shepherd boy , Ulisse learns that he is in Ithaca , and is told of " the unchanging constancy of the chaste Penelope " , in the face of the persistent <unk> of her evil suitors . Minerva promises to lead Ulisse back to the throne if he follows her advice ; she tells him to disguise himself so that he can penetrate the court secretly . Ulisse goes to seek out his loyal servant Eumete , while Minerva departs to search for Telemaco , Ulisse 's son who will help his father reclaim the kingdom . Back at the palace , Melanto tries vainly to persuade Penelope to choose one of the suitors : " Why do you disdain the love of living suitors , expecting comfort from the ashes of the dead ? " In a wooded grove Eumete , banished from court by the suitors , revels in the pastoral life , despite the mockery of Iro , the suitors ' parasitic follower , who sneers : " I live among kings , you here among the herds . " After Iro is chased away , Ulisse enters disguised as a beggar , and assures Eumete that his master the king is alive , and will return . Eumete is overjoyed : " My long sorrow will fall , vanquished by you . " 
 = = = Act 2 = = = 
 Minerva and Telemaco return to Ithaca in a chariot . Telemaco is greeted joyfully by Eumete and the disguised Ulisse in the woodland grove : " O great son of Ulysses , you have indeed returned ! " After Eumete goes to inform Penelope of Telemaco 's arrival a bolt of fire descends on Ulisse , removing his disguise and revealing his true identity to his son . The two celebrate their reunion before Ulisse sends Telemaco to the palace , promising to follow shortly . In the palace , Melanto complains to Eurimaco that Penelope still refuses to choose a suitor : " In short , <unk> , the lady has a heart of stone . " Soon afterwards Penelope receives the three suitors ( <unk> , <unk> , <unk> ) , and rejects each in turn despite their efforts to enliven the court with singing and dancing : " Now to enjoyment , to dance and song ! " After the suitors ' departure Eumete tells Penelope that Telemaco has arrived in Ithaca , but she is doubtful : " Such uncertain things redouble my grief . " Eumete 's message is overheard by the suitors , who plot to kill Telemaco . However , they are unnerved when a symbolic eagle flies overhead , so they abandon their plan and renew their efforts to capture Penelope 's heart , this time with gold . Back in the woodland grove , Minerva tells Ulisse that she has organised a means whereby he will be able to challenge and destroy the suitors . Resuming his beggar 's disguise , Ulisse arrives at the palace , where he is challenged to a fight by Iro , ( " I will pluck out the hairs of your beard one by one ! " ) , a challenge he accepts and wins . Penelope now states that she will accept the suitor who is able to string Ulisse 's bow . All three suitors attempt the task unsuccessfully . The disguised Ulisse then asks to try though renouncing the prize of Penelope 's hand , and to everyone 's amazement he succeeds . He then angrily denounces the suitors and , summoning the names of the gods , kills all three with the bow : " This is how the bow wounds ! To death , to havoc , to ruin ! " 
 = = = Act 3 = = = 
 Deprived of the suitors ' patronage , Iro commits suicide after a doleful monologue ( " O grief , O torment that saddens the soul ! " ) Melanto , whose lover Eurimaco was killed with the suitors , tries to warn Penelope of the new danger represented by the unidentified slayer , but Penelope is unmoved and continues to mourn for Ulisse . Eumete and Telemaco now inform her that the beggar was Ulisse in disguise , but she refuses to believe them : " Your news is persistent and your comfort hurtful . " The scene briefly transfers to the heavens , where <unk> , having been solicited by Minerva , persuades Giove and <unk> that Ulisse should be restored to his throne . Back in the palace the nurse Ericlea has discovered Ulisse 's identity by recognising a scar on his back , but does not immediately reveal this information : " Sometimes the best thing is a wise silence . " Penelope continues to disbelieve , even when Ulisse appears in his true form and when Ericlea reveals her knowledge of the scar . Finally , after Ulisse describes the pattern of Penelope 's private bedlinen , knowledge that only he could possess , she is convinced . Reunited , the pair sing rapturously to celebrate their love : " My sun , long sighed for ! My light , renewed ! " 
 = = Reception and performance history = = 
 = = = Early performances = = = 
 Il ritorno was first staged during the 1639 – 40 Venice carnival by the theatrical company of Manelli and Ferrari , who had first brought opera to Venice . The date of the Il ritorno première is not recorded . According to Carter the work was performed at least ten times during its first season ; it was then taken by Manelli to Bologna , and played at the Teatro <unk> before returning to Venice for the 1640 – 41 carnival season . From markings in the extant score , it is likely that the first Venice performances were in five acts , the three @-@ act form being introduced either in Bologna or in the second Venice season . A theory offered by Italian opera historian Nino Pirrotta that the Bologna performance was the work 's première is not supported by subsequent research . The opera 's revival in Venice only one season after its première was very unusual , almost unique in the 17th century , and testifies to the opera 's popular success — Ringer calls it " one of the most successful operas of the century " . Carter offers a reason for its appeal to the public : " The opera has enough sex , gore and elements of the supernatural to satisfy the most jaded Venetian palate . " 
 The venue for Il ritorno 's première was at one time thought to be the Teatro Cassiano , but scholarly consensus considers it most likely that both the 1639 – 40 and 1640 – 41 performances were at the Teatro SS Giovanni e Paolo . This view is supported by a study of the performance schedules for other Venice operas , and by the knowledge that the Manelli company had severed its connection with the Teatro Cassiano before the 1639 – 40 season . The Teatro SS Giovanni e Paolo , owned by the Grimani family , would also be the venue for the premières of Monteverdi 's Le nozze d 'Enea and Poppea . In terms of its staging Il ritorno is , says Carter , fairly undemanding , requiring three basic sets — a palace , a seascape and a woodland scene — which were more or less standard for early Venetian opera . It did , however , demand some spectacular special effects : the <unk> ship turns to stone , an airborne chariot transports Minerva , a bolt of fire transforms Ulisse . 
 After the Venice 1640 – 41 revival there is no record of further performances of Il ritorno in Venice , or elsewhere , before the discovery of the music manuscript in the 19th century . The <unk> of this manuscript in Vienna suggests that at some time the opera was staged there , or at least contemplated , perhaps before the Imperial court . The Monteverdi scholar Alan Curtis dates the manuscript 's arrival in Vienna to 1675 , during the reign of the Emperor Leopold I who was a considerable patron of the arts , and opera in particular . 
 = = = Modern revivals = = = 
 The Vienna manuscript score was published by Robert Haas in 1922 . Publication was followed by the first modern performance of the opera , in an edition by Vincent d 'Indy , in Paris on 16 May 1925 . For the next half @-@ century performances remained rare . The BBC introduced the opera to British listeners with a radio broadcast on 16 January 1928 , again using the d 'Indy edition . The Italian composer Luigi Dallapiccola prepared his own edition , which was performed in Florence in 1942 , and Ernst Krenek 's version was shown in Wuppertal , Germany , in 1959 . The first British staging was a performance at St. Pancras Town Hall , London , on 16 March 1965 , given with the English Chamber Orchestra conducted by Frederick Marshall . 
 The opera entered a wider repertory in the early 1970s , with performances in Vienna ( 1971 ) and Glyndebourne ( 1972 ) . The Vienna performance used a new edition prepared by Nikolaus Harnoncourt , whose subsequent partnership with the French opera director Jean @-@ Pierre <unk> led to the staging of the opera in many European cities . <unk> 's 1978 presentation in Edinburgh was later described as " infamous " ; at the time , critic Stanley Sadie praised the singers but criticised the production for its " frivolity and indeed coarseness " . In January 1974 Il ritorno received its United States première at Washington 's Kennedy Center , on the basis of the Harnoncourt edition . More recently the opera has been performed at the New York Lincoln Center by New York City Opera , and at other venues throughout the United States . A 2006 Welsh National Opera production by David Alden , designed by Ian McNeil , featured neon signs , stuffed cats , a Neptune in flippers and a wet suit , Minerva in the form of the aviatrix Amelia Earhart , and Jupiter as a small @-@ time hustler , an interpretation defended by the critic Anna Picard – " the gods were always contemporary fantasies , while an abandoned wife and a humbled hero are <unk> . " 
 The German composer Hans Werner Henze was responsible for the first two @-@ act version , which was produced at the Salzburg Festival on 11 August 1985 , with divided critical reaction . Two @-@ act productions have since become increasingly common . The South African artist and animator William Kentridge devised a version of the opera based on the use of puppets and animated film , using around half of the music . This version was shown in Johannesburg in 1998 and then toured the world , appearing at New York 's Lincoln Center in 2004 and at the Edinburgh Festival in 2009 . 
 = = Music = = 
 According to Denis Arnold , although Monteverdi 's late operas retain elements of the earlier Renaissance intermezzo and pastoral forms , they may be fairly considered as the first modern operas . In the 1960s , however , music reviewer Richard Johnson found it necessary to warn prospective Il ritorno listeners that if they expected to hear opera akin to Verdi , Puccini or Mozart , they would be disappointed : " You have to submit yourself to a much slower pace , to a much more chaste conception of melody , to a vocal style that is at first or second hearing merely like dry declamation and only on repeated hearings begins to assume an extraordinary eloquence . " A few years later , Jeremy Noble in a Gramophone review wrote that Il ritorno was the least known and least performed of Monteverdi 's operas , " quite frankly , because its music is not so consistently full of character and imagination as that of Orfeo or Poppea . " Arnold called the work an " ugly duckling " . Later analysts have been more positive ; to Mark Ringer Il ritorno is " the most tender and moving of Monteverdi 's operas " , while in Ellen Rosand 's view the composer 's ability to portray real human beings through music finds its fullest realisation here , and in Poppea a few years later . 
 The music of Il ritorno shows the unmistakable influence of the composer 's earlier works . Penelope 's lament , which opens Act I , is reminiscent both of Orfeo 's <unk> il mio ben and the lament from L 'Arianna . The martial @-@ sounding music which accompanies references to battles and the killing of the suitors , derives from Il combattimento di Tancredi e Clorinda , while for the song episodes in Il ritorno Monteverdi draws in part on the techniques which he developed in his 1632 vocal work <unk> musicale . In typical Monteverdi fashion the opera 's characters are vividly portrayed in their music . Penelope and Ulisse , with what is described by Ringer as " honest musical and verbal declamation " , overcome the suitors whose styles are " exaggerated and ornamental " . Iro , perhaps " the first great comic character in opera " , opens his Act 3 monologue with a wail of distress that stretches across eight bars of music . Penelope begins her lament with a reiteration of E flats that , according to Ringer , " suggest a sense of motionless and emotional stasis " that well represents her condition as the opera begins . At the work 's end , her travails over , she unites with Ulisse in a duet of life @-@ affirming confidence which , Ringer suggests , no other composer bar Verdi could have achieved . 
 Rosand divides the music of Il ritorno into " speech @-@ like " and " musical " utterances . Speech , usually in the form of recitative , delivers information and moves the action forward , while musical utterances , either formal songs or occasional short outbursts , are lyrical passages that enhance an emotional or dramatic situation . This division is , however , less formal than in Monteverdi 's earlier L 'Orfeo ; in Il ritorno information is frequently conveyed through the use of arioso , or even aria at times , increasing both tunefulness and tonal unity . As with Orfeo and Poppea , Monteverdi differentiates musically between humans and gods , with the latter singing music which is usually more profusely melodic — although in Il ritorno , most of the human characters have some opportunity for lyrical expression . According to the reviewer Iain Fenlon , " it is Monteverdi 's mellifluous and flexible recitative style , capable of easy movement between declamation and arioso , which remains in the memory as the dominant language of the work . " Monteverdi 's ability to combine fashionable forms such as the chamber duet and ensembles with the older @-@ style recitative from earlier in the century further illustrate the development of the composer 's dramatic style . Monteverdi 's trademark feature of " <unk> concitato " ( rapid repetition of notes to suggest dramatic action or excitement ) is deployed to good effect in the fight scene between Ulisse and Iro , and in the slaying of the suitors . Arnold draws attention to the great range of characters in the opera — the divine , the noble , the servants , the evil , the foolish , the innocent and the good . For all of these " the music expresses their emotions with astonishing accuracy . " 
 = = List of musical items = = 
 The following is a list of the " scenes " into which the libretto is divided . Each separate scene is typically a mixture of musical elements : recitative , arioso , arietta and sometimes ensemble , with occasional instrumental interludes . 
 = = Recording history = = 
 The first recording of the opera was issued in 1964 by Vox , a version which incorporated substantial cuts . The first complete recording was that of Nikolaus Harnoncourt and Concentus Musicus Wien in 1971 . Raymond Leppard 's 1972 Glyndebourne version was recorded in a concert performance in the Royal Albert Hall ; the following year the same Glyndebourne cast was recorded in a full stage performance . Leppard 's third Glyndebourne version was issued in 1980 , when the orchestration with strings and brass drew critical comment from Denis Arnold in his Gramophone review : " Too much of the music left with a simple basso continuo line in the original has been fully orchestrated with strings and brass , with the result that the expressive movement between recitative , arioso and aria is obscured . " Much the same criticism , says Arnold , may be levelled at Harnoncourt 's 1971 recording . 
 Among more recent issues is the much praised 1992 René Jacobs performance with Concerto Vocale , " a recording that all serious <unk> will wish to return to frequently " , according to Fenlon . Jacobs 's version is in the original five @-@ act form , and uses music by Luigi Rossi and Giulio Caccini for some choruses which appear in the libretto but which are missing from Monteverdi 's score . More than thirty years after his first issue , Harnoncourt 's 2002 version , with Zurich Opera , was recorded live in DVD format . While the quality of the vocal contributions were praised , Harnoncourt 's " big @-@ band score " and bold instrumentation were highlighted by Gramophone critic Jonathan Freeman @-@ Attwood as a likely source of future debate . 
 = = Editions = = 
 Since the publication of the Vienna manuscript score in 1922 the opera has been edited frequently , sometimes for specific performances or recordings . The following are the main published editions of the work , to 2010 . 
 Robert Hass ( Vienna , 1922 in the series <unk> der <unk> in Österreich ) 
 Vincent d 'Indy ( Paris , 1926 ) 
 Gian Francesco Malipiero ( Vienna , 1930 in Claudio Monteverdi : <unk> le opere ) 
 Luigi Dallapiccola ( Milan , 1942 ) 
 Ernst Krenek ( Wuppertal , 1959 ) 
 Nikolaus Harnoncourt ( Vienna , 1971 ) 
 Raymond Leppard ( London , 1972 ) 
 Hans Werner Henze ( Salzburg , 1985 ) 
 Alan Curtis ( London , 2002 ) 
 = Ion Creangă = 
 Ion Creangă ( Romanian pronunciation : [ iˈon <unk> ̯ <unk> ] ; also known as Nică al lui Ștefan a Petrei , Ion <unk> and Ioan Ștefănescu ; March 1 , 1837 or June 10 , 1839 – December 31 , 1889 ) was a Moldavian @-@ born Romanian writer , raconteur and schoolteacher . A main figure in 19th century Romanian literature , he is best known for his Childhood Memories volume , his novellas and short stories , and his many anecdotes . Creangă 's main contribution to fantasy and children 's literature includes narratives structured around eponymous protagonists ( " Harap Alb " , " Ivan Turbincă " , " Dănilă Prepeleac " , " Stan Pățitul " ) , as well as fairy tales indebted to conventional forms ( " The Story of the Pig " , " The Goat and Her Three Kids " , " The Mother with Three Daughters @-@ in @-@ Law " , " The Old Man 's Daughter and the Old Woman 's Daughter " ) . Widely seen as masterpieces of the Romanian language and local humor , his writings occupy the middle ground between a collection of folkloric sources and an original contribution to a literary realism of rural inspiration . They are accompanied by a set of contributions to erotic literature , collectively known as his " corrosives " . 
 A defrocked Romanian Orthodox priest with an unconventional lifestyle , Creangă made an early impact as an innovative educator and textbook author , while pursuing a short career in nationalist politics with the Fracțiunea liberă și independentă group . His literary debut came late in life , closely following the start of his close friendship with Romania 's national poet Mihai Eminescu and their common affiliation with the influential conservative literary society Junimea . Although viewed with reserve by many of his colleagues there , and primarily appreciated for his records of oral tradition , Creangă helped propagate the group 's cultural guidelines in an accessible form . Later criticism has often described him , alongside Eminescu , Ion Luca Caragiale and Ioan Slavici , as one of the most accomplished representatives of Junimist literature . 
 Ion Creangă was posthumously granted several honors , and is commemorated by a number of institutions in both Romania and neighboring Moldova . These include the Bojdeuca building in Iași , which , in 1918 , was opened as the first memorial house in Romania . His direct descendants include Horia Creangă , one of the leading Romanian architects during the interwar period . 
 = = Biography = = 
 = = = Background and family = = = 
 Ion Creangă was born in Humulești , a former village which has since been incorporated into Târgu Neamț city , the son of Orthodox trader Ștefan sin Petre <unk> and his wife Smaranda . His native area , bordering on heavily forested areas , was in the Eastern Carpathian foothills , and included into what was then the principality of Moldavia . The surrounding region 's population preserved an archaic way of life , dominated by shepherding , textile manufacturing and related occupations , and noted for preserving the older forms of local folklore . Another characteristic of the area , which left an impression on Creangă 's family history , was related to the practice of transhumance and the links between ethnic Romanian communities on both sides of the mountains , in Moldavia and Transylvania : on his maternal side , the writer descended from Maramureș @-@ born peasants , while , according to literary historian George Călinescu , his father 's origin may have been further southwest , in Transylvania @-@ proper . 
 The family had reached a significant position within their community : Ștefan sin Petre had made a steady income from his itinerant trade in wool , while his wife was the descendant of the <unk> of <unk> , a family of community leaders . The latter 's members included Moldavian Metropolitan Iacob <unk> , as well as Smaranda 's father , <unk> David , and her uncle <unk> <unk> , a monk at Neamț Monastery . Proud of this tradition , it was her who insisted for her son to pursue a career in the Church . According to his own recollection , the future writer was born on March 1 , 1837 — a date which has since been challenged . Creangă 's other statements mention March 2 , 1837 , or an unknown date in 1836 . The exactitude of other accounts is equally unreliable : community registers from the period gave the date of June 10 , 1839 , and mention another child of the same name being born to his parents on February 4 , 1842 ( the more probable birth date of Creangă 's younger brother <unk> ) . The imprecision also touches other aspects of his family life : noting the resulting conflicts in data , Călinescu decided that it was not possible for one to know if the writer 's parents were married to each other ( and , if so , if they were on their first marriage ) , nor how many children they had together . At a time when family names were not legally required , and people were primarily known by various nicknames and patronymics , the boy was known to the community as Nică , a <unk> formed from Ion , or more formally as Nică al lui Ștefan a Petrei ( " Nică of Ștefan of Petru " , occasionally Nic @-@ a lui Ștefan a Petrei ) . 
 = = = Childhood , youth and ordination = = = 
 After an idyllic period , which is recounted in the first section of his Childhood Memories , Ion Creangă was sent to primary school , an institution then in the care of Orthodox Church authorities , where he became noted for his rebellious attitude and appetite for truancy . Among his colleagues was a female student , <unk> <unk> ( known later as Smaranda <unk> ) , for whom he developed an affection which lasted into his adult life , over decades in which the two no longer saw each other . He was taught reading and writing in Cyrillic alphabet through peer tutoring techniques , before the overseeing teacher , Vasile a <unk> , was lassoed off the street and conscripted by the Moldavian military at some point before 1848 . After another teacher , whom the Memories portray as a drunk , died from cholera in late 1848 , David Creangă withdrew his grandson from the local school and took him to a similar establishment in <unk> , handing him into the care of a middle @-@ aged woman , <unk> . Ion Creangă spent several months at <unk> 's remote house on the Bistrița River , before the proximity of goats resulted in a scabies infection and his hastened departure for <unk> , where he cured himself using birch extract , a folk remedy mastered by his maternal grandmother <unk> . 
 After returning to school between late 1849 and early 1850 , Creangă was pulled out by his financially struggling father , spent the following period working in wool @-@ spinning , and became known by the occupational nickname <unk> ( " Spinster " ) . He only returned in third grade some four years later , having been sent to the Târgu Neamț public school , newly founded by Moldavian Prince Grigore Alexandru Ghica as part of the Regulamentul Organic string of reforms . A colleague of future philosopher Vasile <unk> in the class of priest and theologian Isaia " Popa <unk> " <unk> , Creangă was sent to the Fălticeni seminary in 1854 . After having been registered as Ioan Ștefănescu ( a variant of his given name and a family name based on his patronymic ) , the adolescent student eventually adopted his maternal surname of Creangă . According to Călinescu , this was done either " for aesthetic reasons " ( as his new name , literally meaning " branch " or " bough " , " sounds good " ) or because of a likely discovery that Ștefan was not his real father . Dan Grădinaru , a researcher of Creangă 's work , believes that the writer had a special preference for the variant Ioan , generally used in more learned circles , instead of the variant Ion that was consecrated by his biographers . 
 Having witnessed , according to his own claim , the indifference and mundane preoccupations of his peers , Creangă admitted to having taken little care in his training , submitting to the drinking culture , playing practical jokes on his colleagues , and even shoplifting , while pursuing an affair with the daughter of a local priest . According to his own statement , he was a philanderer who , early in his youth , had already " caught the scent " of the <unk> ( the skirt in traditional costumes ) . In August 1855 , circumstances again forced him to change schools : confronted with the closure of his Fălticeni school , Creangă left for the Central Seminary attached to <unk> Monastery , in Moldavia 's capital of Iași . Ștefan sin Petre 's 1858 death left him without means of support , and he requested being directly ordained , but , not being of the necessary age , was instead handed a certificate to attest his school attendance . He was soon after married , after a brief courtship , to the 15 @-@ year @-@ old Ileana , daughter of Priest Ioan Grigoriu from the church of the Forty Saints , where he is believed to have in training as a schoolteacher . The ceremony took place in August 1859 , several months after the personal union between Moldavia and its southern neighbor Wallachia , effected by the election of Alexandru Ioan Cuza as Domnitor . Having been employed as a cantor by his father in law 's church , he was ordained in December of the same year , assigned to the position of deacon in Holy Trinity Church , and , in May 1860 , returned to Forty Saints . 
 Relations between Creangă and Grigoriu were exceptionally tense . Only weeks after his wedding , the groom , who had probably agreed to marriage only because it could facilitate succeeding Grigoriu , signed a complaint addressed to Metropolitan <unk> Miclescu , denouncing his father in law as " a killer " , claiming to have been mistreated by him and cheated out of his wife 's dowry , and demanding to be allowed a divorce . The response to this request was contrary to his wishes : he was ordered into isolation by the <unk> , the supreme ecclesiastical court , being allowed to go free only on promise to reconcile with Grigoriu . 
 = = = Beginnings as schoolteacher and clash with the Orthodox Church = = = 
 In 1860 , Creangă enlisted at the Faculty of Theology , part of the newly founded University of Iași , and , in December 1860 , fathered a son , Constantin . His life still lacked in stability , and he decided to move out of Grigoriu 's supervision and into <unk> Church , before his position as deacon was cut out of the budget and his belongings were evicted out of his temporary lodging in 1864 . He contemplated leaving the city , and even officially requested a new assignment in the more remote <unk> . Since January 1864 , when the Faculty of Theology had been closed down , he had been attending Iași 's Trei <unk> Monastery normal school ( <unk> or Trei <unk> ) , where he first met the young cultural figure Titu Maiorescu , who served as his teacher and supervisor , and whence he graduated as the first in his class ( June 1865 ) . Embittered by his own experience with the education system , Creangă became an enthusiastic promoter of Maiorescu 's ideas on education reform and modernization , and in particular of the new methods of teaching reading and writing . During and after completing normal school , he was assigned to teaching positions at <unk> . While there , he earned the reputation of a demanding teacher ( notably by accompanying his reports on individual students with characterizations such as " idiot " , " impertinent " or " envious " ) . Accounts from the period state that he made use of corporal punishment in disciplining his pupils , and even surpassed the standards of violence accepted at the time . 
 In parallel , he was beginning his activities in support of education reform . By 1864 , he and several others , among them schoolteacher V. Răceanu , were working on a new primer , which saw print in 1868 under the title Metodă nouă de <unk> și <unk> pentru <unk> <unk> I <unk> ( " A New Method of Writing and Reading for the Use of 1st Grade Primary Course Students " ) . It mainly addressed the issues posed by the new Romanian alphabetical standard , a Romanization replacing Cyrillic spelling ( which had been officially discarded in 1862 ) . Largely based on Maiorescu 's principles , Metodă nouă ... became one the period 's most circulated textbooks . In addition to didactic texts , it also featured Creangă 's isolated debut in lyric poetry , with a naïve piece titled <unk> în <unk> <unk> ( " The Little Bird in <unk> " ) . The book was followed in 1871 by another such work , published as Învățătoriul copiilor ( " The Children 's Teacher " ) and co @-@ authored by V. Răceanu . It included several prose fables and a sketch story , " Human Stupidity " , to which later editions added <unk> ( " A Story " ) and <unk> ( a borrowing of the fictional folk character better known as <unk> ) . 
 In February 1866 , having briefly served at Iași 's Pantelimon Church , he was welcomed by hegumen Isaia <unk> <unk> into the service of Golia Monastery . Around 1867 , his wife Ileana left him . After that moment , Creangă began losing interest in performing his duties in the clergy , and , while doing his best to hide that he was no longer living with his wife , took a mistress . The marriage 's breakup was later attributed by Creangă himself to Ileana 's adulterous affair with a Golia monk , and rumors spread that Ileana 's lover was a high @-@ ranking official , the <unk> of Iași . Creangă 's accusations , Călinescu contends , are nevertheless dubious , because the deacon persisted in working for the same monastery after the alleged incident . 
 By the second half of the 1860s , the future writer was also pursuing an interest in politics , which eventually led him to rally with the more nationalist group within the Romanian liberal current , known as Fracțiunea liberă și independentă . An agitator for his party , Creangă became commonly known under the nickname Popa <unk> ( " Priest Sour Cream " ) . In April 1866 , shortly after Domnitor Cuza was toppled by a coup d 'état , and just before Carol I was selected to replace him , the Romanian Army intervened to quell a separatist riot in Iași , instigated by Moldavian Metropolitan <unk> Miclescu . It is likely that Creangă shared the outlook of his fellow Fracțiunea members , according to which secession was preferable to Carol 's rule , and was probably among the rioters . At around the same time , the priest also began circulating antisemitic tracts , and is said to have demanded that Christians boycott Jewish business . He is thought to have coined the expression <unk> un ac de la <unk> ( " Not even a needle from the <unk> " ) . He was eventually selected as one of the Fracțiunea candidates for an Iași seat in the Romanian Deputies ' Chamber , as documented by the memoirs of writer Iacob Negruzzi , who was his conservative adversary for the same seat . The episode is supposed to have taken place at the earliest during the 1871 suffrage . 
 By 1868 , Creangă 's rebellious stance was irritating his hierarchical superiors , and , according to Călinescu , his consecutive actions show that he was " going out of his way for scandal " . He was initially punished for attending a Iași Theater performance , as well as for defiantly claiming that there was " nothing scandalous or demoralizing " in what he had seen , and reportedly further antagonized the monks by firing a gun to scare off the rooks nesting on his church . The latter incident , which some commentators believe fabricated by Creangă 's detractors , was judged absurd by the ecclesiastical authorities , who had been further alarmed by negative reporting in the press . When told that no clergyman other than him had been seen using a gun , Creangă issued a reply deemed " <unk> " by George Călinescu , maintaining that , unlike others , he was not afraid of doing so . Confronted by Metropolitan <unk> himself , Creangă allegedly argued that he could think of no other way to eliminate rooks , being eventually pardoned by the prelate when it was ruled that he had not infringed on canon law . 
 = = = <unk> and the Bojdeuca years = = = 
 Creangă eventually moved out of the monastery , but refused to relinquish his key to the church basement , and , in what was probably a modernizing intent , chopped off his long hair , one of the traditional marks of an Orthodox priest . The latter gesture scandalized his superiors , particularly since Creangă explained himself using an ancient provision of canon law , which stipulated that priests were not supposed to grow their hair long . After some assessment , his superiors agreed not to regard this action as more than a minor disobedience . He was temporarily suspended in practice but , citing an ambiguity in the decision ( which could be read as a banishment in perpetuity ) , Creangă considered himself defrocked . He relinquished his clerical clothing altogether and began wearing lay clothes everywhere , a matter which caused public outrage . 
 By then a teacher at the 1st School for Boys , on Română Street , Creangă was ordered out of his secular assignment in July 1872 , when news of his status and attitude reached Education Minister Christian Tell . Upset by the circumstances , and objecting in writing on grounds that it did not refer to his teaching abilities , he fell back on income produced by a tobacconist 's shop he had established shortly before being dismissed . This stage marked a final development in Creangă 's conflict with the church hierarchy . Summoned to explain why he was living the life of a shopkeeper , he responded in writing by showing his unwillingness to apologize , and indicated that he would only agree to face secular courts . The virulent text notably accused the church officials of being his enemies on account of his " independence , sincerity , honesty " in supporting the cause of " human dignity " . After the gesture of defiance , the court recommended his defrocking , its decision being soon after confirmed by the synod . 
 In the meantime , Creangă moved into what he called Bojdeuca ( or <unk> , both being Moldavian regional speech for " tiny hut " ) , a small house located on the outskirts of Iași . Officially divorced in 1873 , he was living there with his lover Ecaterina " Tinca " Vartic . A former laundress who had earlier leased one of the Bojdeuca rooms , she shared Creangă 's peasant @-@ like existence . This lifestyle implied a number of eccentricities , such as the former deacon 's practice of wearing loose shirts throughout summer and bathing in a natural pond . His voracious appetite , called " proverbial gluttony " by George Călinescu , was attested by contemporary accounts . These depict him consuming uninterrupted successions of whole meals on a daily basis . 
 In May 1874 , soon after taking over Minister of Education in the Conservative Party cabinet of Lascăr Catargiu , his friend Maiorescu granted Creangă the position of schoolteacher in the Iași area of <unk> . During the same period , Ion Creangă met and became best friends with Mihai Eminescu , posthumously celebrated as Romania 's national poet . This is said to have taken place in summer 1875 , when Eminescu was working as an inspector for Maiorescu 's Education Ministry , overseeing schools in Iași County : reportedly , Eminescu was fascinated with Creangă 's talents as a raconteur , while the latter admired Eminescu for his erudition . 
 = = = Junimea reception = = = 
 At around the same time , Creangă also began attending Junimea , an upper class literary club presided upon by Maiorescu , whose cultural and political prestige was increasing . This event , literary historian Z. Ornea argued , followed a time of indecision : as a former Fracțiunea affiliate , Creangă was a natural adversary of the mainstream Junimist " cosmopolitan orientation " , represented by both Maiorescu and Negruzzi , but was still fundamentally committed to Maiorescu 's agenda in the field of education . Literary historians Carmen @-@ Maria Mecu and Nicolae Mecu also argue that , after attending Junimea , the author was able to assimilate some of its innovative teachings into his own style of pedagogy , and thus helped diffuse its message outside the purely academic environment . 
 The exact date of his reception is a mystery . According to Maiorescu 's own recollections , written some decades after the event , Creangă was in attendance at a Junimea meeting of 1871 , during which Gheorghe <unk> proposed to transform the club into a political party . The information was considered dubious by Z. Ornea , who argued that the episode may have been entirely invented by the Junimist leader , and noted that it contradicted both Negruzzi 's accounts and minutes kept by A. D. Xenopol . According to Ornea 's assessment , with the exception of literary critic Vladimir Streinu , all of Creangă 's biographers have come to dismiss Maiorescu 's statement . Several sources mention that the future writer was introduced to the society by Eminescu , who was an active member around 1875 . This and other details lead Ornea to conclude that membership was granted to Creangă only after the summer break of 1875 . 
 Gradually or instantly , Creangă made a positive impression by confirming with the Junimist ideal of authenticity . He also became treasured for his talkative and jocular nature , self @-@ effacing references to himself as a " peasant " , and eventually his debut works , which became subjects of his own public readings . His storytelling soon earned him dedicated spectators , who deemed Creangă 's fictional universe a " sack of wonders " at a time when the author himself had started casually using the pseudonym Ioan <unk> @-@ <unk> ( " Ioan <unk> " ) . Although still in his forties , the newcomer was also becoming colloquially known to his colleagues as Moș Creangă ( " Old Man Creangă " or " Father Creangă " ) , which was a sign of respect and sympathy . Among Ion Creangă 's most dedicated promoters were Eminescu , his former political rival Iacob Negruzzi , Alexandru <unk> and Vasile <unk> , as well as the so @-@ called <unk> ( roughly , " small game " ) section , which comprised Junimists who rarely took the floor during public debates , and who were avid listeners of his literary productions ( it was to this latter gathering that Creangă later dedicated his erotic texts ) . In parallel to his diversified literary contribution , the former priest himself became a noted voice in Junimist politics , and , like his new friend Eminescu , voiced support for the group 's nationalist faction , in disagreement with the more cosmopolitan and aristocratic segment led by Maiorescu and Petre P. Carp . By that the late 1870s , he was secretly redirecting the political support of some former Fracțiunea colleagues toward his new colleagues , as confirmed by an encrypted letter he addressed to Negruzzi in March 1877 . 
 = = = Literary consecration = = = 
 Autumn 1875 is also often described as his actual debut in fiction prose , with " The Mother with Three Daughters @-@ in @-@ Law " , a short story first publish in October by the club 's magazine Convorbiri Literare . In all , Convorbiri Literare would publish 15 works of fiction and the four existing parts of his Childhood Memories before Creangă 's death . Reportedly , the decision to begin writing down his stories had been the direct result of Eminescu 's persuasion . His talent for storytelling and its transformation into writing fascinated his new colleagues . Several among them , including poet Grigore Alexandrescu , tasked experimental psychologist Eduard Gruber with closely studying Creangă 's methods , investigations which produced a report evidencing Creangă 's laborious and physical approach to the creative process . The latter also involved his frequent exchanges of ideas with Vartic , in whom he found his primary audience . In addition to his fiction writing , the emerging author followed Maiorescu 's suggestion and , in 1876 , published a work of educational methodology and the phonemic orthography favored by Junimea : <unk> la <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> ( " Guide to Reading by Writing in the Phonetic System " ) . It was supposed to become a standard textbook for the training of teachers , but was withdrawn from circulation soon afterward , when the Catargiu cabinet fell . 
 After losing his job as school inspector following the decisions of a hostile National Liberal executive , Mihai Eminescu spent much of his time in Bojdeuca , where he was looked after by the couple . For five months after quarreling with Samson <unk> , his fellow poet and previous landlord , Eminescu even moved inside the house , where he reputedly pursued his discreet love affair with woman writer Veronica <unk> , and completed as many as 22 of his poems . Creangă introduced his younger friend to a circle of companions which included <unk> Creangă , who was by then a cantor , as well as Răceanu , priest Gheorghe <unk> , and clerk <unk> ( all of whom , Călinescu notes , had come to share the raconteur 's lifestyle choices and his nationalist opinions ) . Eminescu was especially attracted by their variant of simple life , the rudimentary setting of Creangă 's house and the group 's bohemian escapades . Circumstances drew the two friends apart : by 1877 , Eminescu had relocated in Bucharest , the capital city , regularly receiving letters in which Creangă was asking him to return . He was however against Eminescu 's plan to marry Veronica <unk> , and made his objection known to the poet . In 1879 , as a sign that he was formalizing his own affair with Tinca Vartic , Creangă purchased the Bojdeuca in her name , paying his former landlord 40 Austrian gulden in exchange . That same year , he , Răceanu and <unk> published the textbook <unk> <unk> Iași ( " The Geography of Iași County " ) , followed soon after by a map of the same region , researched by Creangă and Răceanu . A final work in the area of education followed in 1880 , as a schoolteacher 's version of Maiorescu 's study of Romanian grammar , <unk> <unk> române ( " Rules of the Romanian Language " ) . 
 = = = Illness and death = = = 
 By the 1880s , Creangă had become afflicted with epilepsy , suffering accelerated and debilitating episodes . He was also severely overweight , weighing some 120 kilograms ( over 250 pounds ) , with a height of 1 @.@ 85 meters ( 6 feet ) , and being teasingly nicknamed <unk> ( " Tubby " ) by his friends ( although , according to testimonies by his son and daughter @-@ in @-@ law , he did not actually look his size ) . 
 Despite his activity being much reduced , he still kept himself informed about the polemics agitating Romania 's cultural and political scene . He was also occasionally hosting Eminescu , witnessing his friend 's struggle with mental disorder . The two failed to reconnect , and their relationship ended . After one of the meetings , he recorded that the delusional poet was carrying around a revolver with which to fend off unknown attackers — among the first in a series of episodes which ended with Eminescu 's psychiatric confinement and death during June 1889 . Around that time , Creangă , like other Junimists , was involved in a clash of ideas with the emerging Romanian socialist and atheistic group , rallied around <unk> magazine . This occurred after <unk> founder Ioan <unk> publicly ridiculed Învățătoriul copiilor over its take on creationism , quoting its claim that " the invisible hand of God " was what made seeds grow into plants . Creangă replied with a measure of irony , stating that " had God not pierced the skin over our eyes , we would be unable to see each other 's mistakes " . Nevertheless , Călinescu argued , <unk> 's comments had shaken his adversary 's religious sentiment , leading Creangă to question the immortality of the soul in a letter he addressed to one of his relatives in the clergy . According to other assessments , he was himself an atheist , albeit intimately so . 
 In 1887 , the National Liberal Ministry of Dimitrie Sturdza removed Creangă from his schoolteacher 's post , and he subsequently left for Bucharest in order to petition for his pension rights . Having hoped to be granted assistance by Maiorescu , he was disappointed when the Junimea leader would not respond to his request , and , during his final years , switched allegiance to the literary circle founded by Nicolae <unk> ( where he was introduced by Gruber ) . Among Creangă 's last works was a fourth and final part of his Memories , most likely written during 1888 . The book remained unfinished , as did the story Făt @-@ <unk> , <unk> <unk> ( " Făt @-@ Frumos , Son of the Mare " ) . He died after an epileptic crisis , on the last day of 1889 , his body being buried in Iași 's <unk> Cemetery . His funeral ceremony was attended by several of Iași 's intellectuals ( Vasile <unk> , A. C. Cuza , Dumitru <unk> , Nicolae Iorga and Artur <unk> among them ) . 
 = = Work = = 
 = = = Cultural context = = = 
 The impact of Ion Creangă 's work within its cultural context was originally secured by Junimea . Seeking to revitalize Romanian literature by recovering authenticity , and reacting against those cultural imports it deemed excessive , the group notably encouraged individual creativity among peasants . Reflecting back on Maiorescu 's role in the process , George Călinescu wrote : " A literary salon where the personal merit would take the forefront did not exist [ before Junimea ] and , had Creangă been born two decades earlier , he would not have been able to present ' his peasant material ' to anyone . Summoning the creativity of the peasant class and placing it in direct contact with the aristocrats is the work of Junimea . " His <unk> and fellow literary historian Tudor Vianu issued a similar verdict , commenting : " Junimea is itself ... an aristocratic society . Nevertheless , it is through Junimea that surfaced the first gesture of transmitting a literary direction to some writers of rural extraction : a phenomenon of great importance , the neglect of which would render unexplainable the entire subsequent development of our literature . " Also referring to cultural positioning within and outside the group , Carmen @-@ Maria Mecu and Nicolae Mecu took the acceptance of " literate peasants " such as Creangă as exemplary proof of Junimist " diversity " and " tolerance " . 
 Maiorescu is known to have had much appreciation for Creangă and other writers of peasant origin , such as Ion <unk> @-@ <unk> and Ioan Slavici . Late in life , he used this connection to challenge accusations of Junimist elitism in the face of criticism from more populist traditionalists . Nonetheless , Junimea members in general found Creangă more of an entertainer rather than a serious writer , and treasured him only to the measure where he illustrated their theories about the validity of rural literature as a source of inspiration for cultured authors . Therefore , Iacob Negruzzi sympathetically but controversially referred to his friend as " a primitive and uncouth talent " . Maiorescu 's critical texts also provide little individual coverage of Creangă 's contributions , probably because these failed to comply exactly with his stratification of literary works into <unk> ( " popular " , that is anonymous or collective ) and otherwise . Tudor Vianu 's theory defines Creangă as a prime representative of the " popular realism " guidelines ( as sporadically recommended by the Junimist doyen himself ) , cautioning however that Creangă 's example was never mentioned in such a context by Maiorescu personally . 
 Although he occasionally downplayed his own contribution to literature , Creangă himself was aware that his texts went beyond records of popular tradition , and made significant efforts to be recognized as an original author ( by corresponding with fellow writers and willingly submitting his books to critical scrutiny ) . Vianu commented at length on the exact relationship between the narrative borrowed from oral tradition and Creangă 's " somewhat surreptitious " method of blending his own style into the folkloric standard , likening it to the historical process whereby local painters improvised over the strict canons of Byzantine art . Creangă 's complex take on individuality and the art of writing was attested by the his own foreword to an edition of his collected stories , in which he addressed the reader directly : " You may have read many stupid things since you were put on this Earth . Please read these as well , and where it should be that they don 't agree with you , take hold of a pen and come up with something better , for this is all I could see myself doing and did . " 
 An exception among Junimea promoters was Eminescu , himself noted for expressing a dissenting social perspective which only partly mirrored Maiorescu 's take on conservatism . According to historian Lucian Boia , the " authentic Moldavian peasant " that was Creangă also complemented Eminescu 's own " more metaphysical " <unk> . Similarly , Z. Ornea notes that the poet used Creangă 's positions to illustrate his own ethnonationalist take on Romanian culture , and in particular his claim that rural authenticity lay hidden by a " superimposed stratum " of urbanized ethnic minorities . 20th century critics have described Creangă as one of his generation 's most accomplished figures , and a leading exponent of Junimist literature . This verdict is found in several of Vianu 's texts , which uphold Creangă as a great exponent of his generation 's literature , comparable to fellow Junimea members Eminescu , Slavici and Ion Luca Caragiale . This view complements George Călinescu 's definition , placing the Moldavian author in the company of Slavici and Caragiale as one of the " great prose writers " of the 1880s . Lucian Boia , who noted that " the triad of Romanian classics " includes Creangă alongside Eminescu and Caragiale , also cautioned that , compared to the other two ( with whom " the Romanians have said almost all there is to say about themselves " ) , Creangă has " a rather more limited register " . 
 The frequent comparison between Creangă and Caragiale in particular is seen by Vianu as stemming from both their common " wide @-@ ranging stylistic means " and their complementary positions in relations to two superimposed phenomenons , with Caragiale 's depiction of the petite bourgeoisie as the rough equivalent of Creangă 's interest in the peasantry . The same parallelism is explained by Ornea as a consequence of the two authors ' social outlook : " [ Their works ] have cemented aesthetically the portrayal of two worlds . Creangă 's is the peasant world , Caragiale 's the suburban and urban one . Two worlds which represent , in fact , two characteristic steps and two sociopolitical models in the evolution of Romanian structures which ... were confronting themselves in a process that would later prove decisive . " According to the same commentator , the two plus Eminescu are their generation 's great writers , with Slavici as one " in their immediate succession . " While listing what he believes are elements bridging the works of Creangă and Caragiale , other critics have described as strange the fact that the two never appear to have mentioned each other , and stressed that , although not unlikely , a direct encounter between them was never recorded in sources . 
 = = = Narrative style and language = = = 
 Highlighting Ion Creangă 's recourse to the particularities of Moldavian regionalisms and archaisms , their accumulation making Creangă 's work very difficult to translate , George Călinescu reacted against claims that the narratives reflected <unk> patterns . He concluded that , in effect , Creangă 's written language was the equivalent of a " <unk> museum " , and even contrasted by the writer 's more modern everyday parlance . Also discussing the impression that Creangă 's work should be read with a Moldavian accent , noted for its " softness of sound " in relation to standard Romanian phonology , Călinescu cautioned against interpretative exaggerations , maintaining that the actual texts only offer faint suggestions of regional pronunciation . Contrasting Creangă with the traditions of literature produced by Wallachians in what became the standard literary language , Călinescu also argued in favor of a difference in mentality : the " balance " evidenced by Moldavian speech and illustrated in Ion Creangă 's writings is contrasted by the " discoloration and roughness " of " <unk> " . He also criticized those views according to which Creangă 's variant of the literary language was " beautiful " , since it failed to " please everyone on account of some acoustical beauty " , and since readers from outside the writer 's native area could confront it " with some irritation . " For Călinescu , the result nevertheless displays " an enormous capacity of authentic speech " , also found in the works of Caragiale and , in the 20th century , Mihail Sadoveanu . According to the same commentator , the dialectical interventions formed a background to a lively vocabulary , a " hermetic " type of " argot " , which contained " hilarious double entendres and indecent onomatopoeia " , passing from " erudite beauty " to " obscene laughter " . Some of the expressions characteristic of Creangă 's style are obscure in meaning , and some other , such as " drought made the snake scream inside the frog 's mouth " , appear to be spontaneous and nonsensical . Another specific trait of this language , commented upon by Vianu 's and compared by him to the aesthetics of Classicism , sees much of Creangă 's prose being set to a discreet poetic meter . 
 The recourse to oral literature schemes made it into his writings , where it became a defining trait . As part of this process , Călinescu assessed , " Creangă acts as all his characters in turn , for his stories are almost entirely spoken . ... When Creangă recounts , the composition is not extraordinary , but once his heroes begin talking , their <unk> and wording reach a height in typical storytelling . " According to the critic , discovering this " fundamental " notion about Creangă 's work was the merit of literary historian and Viața Românească editor Garabet Ibrăileanu , who had mentioned it as a main proof of affiliation to realism . The distinctive manner of characterization through " realistic dialogues " is seen by Vianu as a highly personal intervention and indicator of the Moldavian writer 's originality . Both Vianu and Călinescu discussed this trait , together with the technique of imparting subjective narration in @-@ between characters ' replies , as creating other meeting points between Creangă and his counterpart Caragiale . Partly replicating in paper the essence of social gatherings , Ion Creangă often tried to transpose the particular effects of oral storytelling into writing . Among these characteristic touches were interrogations addressed to the readers as imaginary listeners , and pausing for effect with the visual aid of ellipsis . He also often interrupted his narratives with concise illustrations of his point , often in verse form , and usually introduced by <unk> <unk> ( an expression literally meaning " that word " , but covering the sense of " as word goes around " ) . One example of this connects the notions of abundance and personal satisfaction : 
 In other cases , the short riddles relate to larger themes , such as divine justification for one 's apparent fortune : 
 = = = Creangă 's specificity = = = 
 Despite assuming the external form of traditional literature , Ion Creangă 's interests and creative interventions , Călinescu noted , separated him from his roots : " peasants do not have [ his ] entirely cultured gifts . ... Too much ' atmosphere ' , too much <unk> ' humor ' , too much polychromy at the expense of linear epic movements . The peasant wants the bare epic and desires the unreal . " The commentator passed a similar judgment on the author 's use of ancient sayings , concluding that , instead of crystallizing and validating local folklore , the accounts appeal to cultured tastes , having as the generation of comedy and <unk> as their main purpose . According to Vianu 's assessment Creangă was " a supreme artist " whose use of " typical sayings " attests " a man of the people , but not an anonymous and impersonal sample . " These verdicts , directly contradicting Junimist theories , were mirrored by several other 20th century exegetes belonging to distinct schools of thought : Pompiliu Constantinescu , Benjamin Fondane and Ion <unk> . Writing during the second half of the century , critic Nicolae Manolescu passed a similar judgment , believing that Creangă was motivated by a " strictly intellectual sensuousness " and the notion that " pleasure arises from gratuitousness " , while Manolescu 's colleague Mircea Braga referred to " the great secret of the man who has managed to transfer unaltered the code of popular creativity into the immanence of the cultured one . " In Braga 's assessment , this synthesis managed " the impossible " , but the difficulty of repeating it with each story also resulted in mediocre writings : " from among his few texts , even fewer are located on the relatively highest level of the relative aesthetic hierarchy " . 
 Călinescu viewed such intellectual traits as shared by Creangă with his Wallachian counterpart Anton Pann , in turn linking both writers to the satirical component of Renaissance literature , and specifically to François Rabelais . Within local tradition , the literary historian saw a symbolic connection between Creangă and the early 18th century figure , Ion <unk> , one of Moldavia 's leading chroniclers . While he made his own comparison between Creangă and Pann , Tudor Vianu concluded that the Moldavian writer was in fact superior , as well as being more relevant to literature than Petre <unk> , the prime collector of tales in 19th @-@ century Wallachia . Also making use of the Rabelais analogy , literary chronicler Gabriela <unk> found another analogy in local letters : Ion Budai @-@ <unk> , an early 19th @-@ century representative of the Transylvanian School , whose style mixes erudite playfulness with popular tastes . These contextual traits , researchers assess , did not prevent Creangă 's overall work from acquiring a universal aspect , particularly since various of his writings use narrative sequences common throughout world literature . 
 George Călinescu also assessed that these literary connections served to highlight the elevated nature of Creangă 's style , his " erudite device " , concluding : " Writers such as Creangă can only show up in places where the word is ancient and equivocal , and where experience has been condensed into unchanging formulas . It would have been more natural for such a prose writer to have emerged a few centuries later , into an era of Romanian humanism . Born much earlier , Creangă showed up where there exists an ancient tradition , and therefore a species of erudition , ... in a mountain village ... where the people is unmixed and keeping [ with tradition ] . " Outlining his own theory about the aspects of " national specificity " in Romanian letters , he expanded on these thoughts , listing Creangă and Eminescu as " core Romanians " who illustrated a " primordial note " , complemented by the " southern " and " Balkan " group of Caragiale and others . Claiming that the " core " presence had " not primitive , but ancient " origins , perpetuated by " stereotyped wisdom " and " energetic fatalism " , he asserted : " Creangă shows our civilization 's <unk> with the world 's oldest civilizations , our Asian age . " The alternating national and regional characteristics in Creangă 's writings are related by historian Neagu Djuvara with the writer 's place of birth , an affluent village in an isolated region , contrasting heavily with the 19th century Wallachian countryside : " if the mud hut villages of the Danube flood plain are to be taken into account , one finds himself in a different country . " Ornea , who noted that Eminescu effectively shared Creangă 's worldview , believed the latter to have been dominated by nostalgia for a world of independent landowning peasants , and argued that Creangă 's literary and political outlook were both essentially conservative . Ornea commented : " One could say that it was through [ this form of nostalgia ] that the writer debuted and that , within the space of his work it became , in its own right , an expression of the world that was about to vanish . " Commenting on Creangă 's " robust realism " and lack of " sentimentality " , Vianu contrarily asserted : " Creangă 's nostalgia ... has an individual , not social , sense . " 
 The witty and playful side of Creangă 's personality , which became notorious during his time at Junimea and constituted a significant part of his appeal , was reflected into a series of anecdotes . These accounts detail his playing the ignorant in front of fellow Junimists in order not to antagonize sides during literary debates ( notably , by declaring himself " for against " during a two @-@ option vote ) , his irony in reference to his own admirers ( such as when he asked two of them to treasure the photograph of himself in the middle and the two of them on either side , while comparing it to the crucifixion scene and implicitly assigning them the role of thieves ) , and his recourse to puns and proverbs which he usually claimed to be citing from oral tradition and the roots of Romanian humor . The latter habit was notably illustrated by his answer to people who would ask him for money : " not since I born was I as poor as I was poor yesterday and the day before yesterday and last week and last week and throughout life " . His joyfulness complemented his overall <unk> and his <unk> habits : his accounts are often marked by a special interest in describing acts related to food and drink . Overall , Eduard Gruber 's report contended , Creangă 's writing relied on him being " a strong sensual and auditive type " , and a " very emotional " person . 
 Ion Creangă 's sense of humor was instrumental in forging the unprecedented characteristics of his work . American critic Ruth S. Lamb , the writer 's style merges " the rich vocabulary of the Moldavian peasant " with " an original gaiety and gusto comparable to that of Rabelais . " According to George Călinescu : " [ Creangă ] got the idea that he was a clever man , like all men of the people , and therefore used irony to make himself seem stupid . " In Călinescu 's view , the author 's antics had earned him a status equivalent to that of his Wallachian Junimist counterpart Caragiale , with the exception that the latter found his inspiration in urban settings , matching " <unk> " with " <unk> " . Z. Ornea sees the main protagonists in Creangă 's comedic narratives as , in effect , " particularized incarnations of the same symbolic character " , while the use of humor itself reflects the traditional mindset , " a survival through intelligence , that of a people with an old history , whose life experience has for centuries been concentrated into gestures and words . " 
 = = = Most prominent tales = = = 
 Part of Ion Creangă 's contribution to the short story , fantasy and children 's literature genres involved collecting and transforming narratives circulating throughout his native region , which intertwine with his characteristic storytelling to the point where they become original contributions . According to Călinescu , the traditional praise for Ion Creangă as a creator of literary types is erroneous , since his characters primarily answered to ancient and linear narrative designs . The conclusion is partly shared by Braga , who links Creangă 's tales to ethnological and anthropological takes on the themes and purposes of fairy tales , postulating the prevalence of three ancient and related narrative pretexts throughout his contributions : the <unk> of a " perturbing situation " ( attributable to fatality ) , the plunging of the hero into a rite of passage @-@ type challenge , a happy ending which brings the triumph of good over evil ( often as a brutal and uncompromising act ) . Like their sources and predecessors in folklore , these accounts also carry transparent morals , ranging from the regulation of family life to meditations about destiny and lessons about tolerating the marginals . However , Swedish researcher Tom <unk> argues , they also illustrate the absurdist vein of some traditional narratives , by featuring " grotesqueries " and " illogical surprises " . 
 With " The Goat and Her Three Kids " , written mainly as a picturesque illustration of motherly love , Creangă produced a fable in prose , opposing the eponymous characters , caricatures of a garrulous but hard @-@ working woman and her restless sons , to the sharp @-@ toothed Big Bad Wolf , a satirical depiction of the cunning and immoral stranger . The plot shows the wolf making his way into the goat 's house , where he eats the two older and less obedient kids , while the youngest one manages to escape by hiding up the chimney — the symbolism of which was <unk> by Dan Grădinaru , who claims it constitutes an allusion to Creangă 's own childhood . The dénouement sees an inversion of the natural roles , an episode which , ethnologist Șerban Anghelescu notes , is dominated by " the culinary fire " : the goat exercises her brutal revenge by trapping and slowly cooking the predator . This approach partly resonates with that of " The Mother with Three Daughters @-@ in @-@ Law " , in which Creangă makes ample use of a traditional theme in Romanian humor , which portrays mothers @-@ in @-@ law as mean , stingy and oppressive characters . The embodiment of such offensive traits , she is also shown to be ingenious , pretending that she has a hidden third eye which always keeps things under watch . The narrator sides with the three young women in depicting their violent retribution , showing them capturing their oppressor , torturing her until she is left speech impaired , and leaving her on the brink of death . The mother @-@ in @-@ law 's end turns into a farce : the eldest and most intelligent of the killers manipulates her victim 's dying sounds into a testament partitioning her wealth , and a thin decorum is maintained at the funeral ceremony by the daughters ' hypocritical sobbing . 
 " The Story of the Pig " partly illustrates the notion that parental love subdues even physical repulsion , showing an elderly peasant couple cherishing their adopted porcine son , who , unbeknown to them , is enchanted . The creature instantly offsets his parents ' sadness and immobility by his witty intelligence . Having applied his perseverance and spells to erect a magical bridge , the piglet fulfills the requirement for marrying the emperor 's daughter , after which it is uncovered that he is a Făt @-@ Frumos or Prince Charming character who assumes his real identity only by night . Although the plot is supposed to deal with imperial magnificence in fairy tale fashion , the setting is still primarily rural , and the court itself is made to look like an elevated peasant community . According to researcher Marcu Beza , the text is , outside of its humorous context , a distant reworking of ancient legends such as Cupid and Psyche . The story introduces three additional characters , old women who assess and reward the efforts of the virtuous : Holy Wednesday , Holy Friday and Holy Sunday . They represent a mix of Christian and pagan traditions , by being both personifications of the liturgical calendar and fairy @-@ like patrons of the wilderness ( <unk> ) . 
 A similar perspective was favored by " The Old Man 's Daughter and the Old Woman 's Daughter " . Here , the theme echoes Cinderella , but , according to Călinescu , the rural setting provides a sharp contrast to the classical motif . Persecuted by her stepmother and stepsister , the kind and loving daughter of the old man is forced into a position of servitude reflecting the plight of many peasant women in Creangă 's lifetime . In this case , the old man is negatively depicted as cowardly and entirely dominated by his mean wife . The focal point of the narrative is the meeting between the good daughter and Holy Sunday . The latter notices and generously rewards the girl 's helpful nature and mastery of cooking ; in contrast , when her envious sister attempts the same and fails , she ends up being eaten by serpent @-@ like creatures ( <unk> ) . The happy ending sees the good girl marrying not Prince Charming , but a simple man described as " kind and industrious " — this outcome , Călinescu assessed , did not in effect spare the old man 's daughter from a life of intense labor . A story very similar to " The Old Man 's Daughter ... " is " The Purse a ' Tuppence " , which teaches that greed can shatter families , while offering symbolic retribution to men who are unhappy in marriage . The old man 's rooster , chased away by the old woman for being unproductive , ends up amassing a huge fortune , which he keeps inside his belly and regurgitates back into the courtyard ; the jealous old woman ends up killing her favorite hen , who has failed in replicating the rooster 's feat . 
 = = = Devil @-@ themed stories and " Harap Alb " = = = 
 Several of Creangă 's characteristic novellas are infused with themes from Christian mythology , fictionalizing God , Saint Peter and the army of devils , most often with the comedic intent of showing such personages behaving like regular people . A defining story in this series is " Dănilă Prepeleac " , whose eponymous peasant hero is characterized by what Șerban Anghelescu calls " idiocy serving to initiate " , or , according to Gabriela <unk> , " complete , and therefore sublime , stupidity . " The first part of the story shows Dănilă exchanging his oxen for an empty bag — a set of dialogues which , George Călinescu argued , is almost exactly like a comedy play . In what was described as a complete reversal in characterization , the hero uses intelligence and ruse to trick and frighten several devils . Contrarily , " Stan Pățitul " shows its hero fraternizing with a lesser demon . Following the opening episode , in which the latter accidentally eats a bit of <unk> dedicated by Stan to those who honor God , Satan himself condemns his subordinate to service the peasant . Călinescu highlights the naturalness of exchanges between the two protagonists , the latter of whom assumes the endearing form of a frail boy , <unk> , who ends up moving in with Stan and entering his service . The writing was also noted for other realistic elements alluding to everyday life , such as the overtly colloquial exchange between <unk> and Satan , or the episodes in which the young devil helps Stan woo a peasant woman . Although relatively young , Stan himself is referred to as <unk> ( " <unk> " or " lacking in freshness " ) , and the wording reflects rural attitudes about men who fail to marry during a certain age interval . Toward the end , the story focuses on a corrupt old woman who tries to trick Stan 's new wife into committing adultery , but fails and is banished to the remotest area of Hell . Viewed by Călinescu as Creangă 's " most original manner of dealing with the fabulous " , and paralleled by him with Caragiale 's Kir <unk> on account of its realist approach to the supernatural , " Stan Pățitul " is , according to Vianu , untraceable in its inspiration : " [ its ] folk origin could not be identified , but it is not <unk> " . 
 Another account in this series is " Ivan Turbincă " , whose protagonist , a Russian serviceman , is shown rebelling against Heaven and Hell , and ultimately accomplishing the human ideal of cheating Death . The plot retells a theme present in both Romanian tradition and Ukrainian folklore , while , according to researcher of children 's literature Muguraș Constantinescu , the main character is similar to German tradition 's Till Eulenspiegel . In the beginning of the account , God rewards the soldier 's exemplary charity by granting him a pouch ( <unk> ) , which can miraculously trap anything in existence . In order to circumvent the laws of nature , Ivan subsequently makes use of both his magical item and his innate shrewdness . In one such episode , pretending not to understand the proper position of bodies inside a coffin , he tricks impatient Death into taking his place , and traps her inside . Eventually , he is allowed to keep his life , but is promised an eternity of old age , which he ingeniously counterbalances by attending an endless succession of wedding parties , and therefore never having to feel sad . 
 " Harap Alb " , one of Ion Creangă 's most complex narratives , carries a moral defined by Călinescu as " the gifted man will earn a reputation under any guise . " The story opens with a coming of age quest , handed down by a king to his three sons : the most fit among them is supposed to reach the court of the Green Emperor , who is the king 's brother , and succeed him to the throne . According to Călinescu , the mission bases itself on travels undertaken by young men in Creangă 's native region , while the subsequent episodes in the narrative reinforce the impression of familiarity , from the " peasant speech " adopted by the villain known as the Bald Man , to the " crass vulgarity " evidenced by the antagonist Red Emperor . Forced to pass himself off as a foreign servant ( or " Moor " ) , the prince is three times tested and aided by Holy Sunday , who doubles as the queen of <unk> creatures . Călinescu described as " playful realism " the method through which Creangă outlined the mannerisms of several other characters , in particular the allegorical creatures who provide the youngest prince with additional and serendipitous assistance . In one noted instance , the characters <unk> ( " Drink @-@ All " ) and <unk> ( " Eat @-@ All " ) help the hero overcome seemingly impossible tasks set by the Red Emperor , by ingesting unnaturally huge amounts of food and drink . 
 The tale builds on intricate symbolism stemming from obscure sources . It features what Muguraș Constantinescu calls " the most complex representation of Holy Sunday " , with mention of her isolated and heavenly abode on " flower island " . A background antithesis opposes the two fictional monarchs , with the Red Emperor replicating an ancient tradition which attributes malignant characteristics to the color . By contrast , the Green Emperor probably illustrates the ideals of vitality and healthy lifestyle , as hinted by his culinary preference for " lettuce from the garden of the bear " . Historian Adrian <unk> , building on earlier observations made by linguist Lazăr Șăineanu , also connects the servant @-@ prince 's antagonists with various reflections of ethnic strife in Romanian folklore : the Red Emperor as standing for the medieval Khazars ( " Red Jews " ) , the Bald Man as a popular view of the Tatars . 
 = = = Childhood Memories = = = 
 Childhood Memories is , together with a short story about his teacher Isaia <unk> ( titled " Popa <unk> " ) , one of Creangă 's two memoirs . George Călinescu proposed that , like his fairy tales , the book illustrates popular narrative conventions , a matter accounting for their special place in literature : " The stories are true , but typical , without depth . Once retold with a different kind of <unk> , the subject would lose all of its lively atmosphere . " Also based on the techniques of traditional oral accounts , it features the topical interventions of a first @-@ person narrator in the form of soliloquies , and reflects in part the literary canon set by frame stories . The resulting effect , Călinescu argued , was not that of " a confession or a diary " , but that of a symbolic account depicting " the childhood of the universal child . " According to Vianu , the text is especially illustrative of its author 's " spontaneous passage " between the levels of " popular " and " cultured " literature : " The idea of fictionalizing oneself , of outlining one 's formative steps , the steady accumulation of impressions from life , and then the sentiment of time , of its irreversible flow , of regret for all things lost in its consumption , of the charm relived through one 's recollections are all thoughts , feelings and attitudes defining a modern man of culture . No popular model could have ever stood before Creangă when he was writing his Memories , but , surely , neither could the cultured prototypes of the genre , the first autobiographies and memoirs of the Renaissance " . Grădinaru and essayist Mircea <unk> analyzed the volume as a fundamentally sad text , in stated contrast with its common perception as a recollection of joyful moments : the former focused on moments which seem to depict Nică as a loner , the latter highlighted those sections which include Creangă 's bitter musings about destiny and the impregnability of changes . A distinct interpretation was provided by critic Luminița Marcu , who reacted against the tradition of viewing Creangă 's actual childhood as inseparable from his own subjective rendition . 
 Several of the book 's episodes have drawn attention for the insight they offer into the culture , structure and conflicts of traditional society before 1900 . Commenting on this characteristic , Djuvara asserted : " even if we take into account that the grown @-@ up will embellish , transfigure , ' enrich ' the memories of his childhood , how could we not recognize the sincerity in Creangă 's heart @-@ warming evocation of his childhood 's village ? " The book stays true to life in depicting ancient customs : discussing the impact of paganism on traditional Romanian customs , Marcu Beza communicated a detail of Creangă 's account , which shows how January 1 celebrations of Saint Basil opposed the loud <unk> players reenacting a fertility rite to people preferring a quieter celebration . The work also offers details on the traditional roles of a rural society such as that of Humulești , in the context of social change . Muguraș Constantinescu highlights the important roles of old men and women within Nică 's universe , and especially that of his grandfather and " clan leader " David Creangă . The latter , she notes , is an " enlightened man " displaying " the wisdom and balance of the ripe age " , a person able to insist on the importance of education , and a churchgoer who frowns on " his wife 's bigotry . " The seniors ' regulatory role within the village is evidenced throughout the book , notoriously so in the episode where the boy captures a hoopoe who bothers his morning sleep , only to be tricked into releasing it by old man , who understands the bird 's vital role as village alarm clock . 
 Another significant part of the account , detailing Creangă 's education , shows him frustrated by the old methods of teaching , insisting on the absurd image of children learning by heart and chanting elements of Romanian grammar and even whole texts . The narrator refers to this method as " a terrible way to <unk> the mind " . The negative portrayal of teaching priests was commented by writer and critic Horia Gârbea as proof of the author 's anticlericalism , in line with various satirical works targeting the Romanian clergy : " Creangă 's Memories of the catechism school would discourage any candidate . " 
 = = = Didactic writings = = = 
 Creangă 's contribution to literature also covers a series of didactic fables written as lively dialogues , among them " The Needle and the Sledge Hammer " , in which the objects of traditional metalworking scold the byproducts of their work for having forgotten their lowly origin . The inspiration behind this theme was identified by Călinescu as " The Story of a Gold Coin " , written earlier by Creangă 's Junimist colleague Vasile Alecsandri . A similar piece , " The Flax and the Shirt " , reveals the circuit of fibers from weed @-@ like plants into recycled cloth , leading to the conclusion that " all things are not what they seem ; they were something else once , they are something else now ; — and shall become something else . " The technique employed by Creangă has the flax plant teaching the less knowledgeable textile , a dialogue which Călinescu likened to that between old women in a traditional society . Included alongside the two stories were : <unk> , a writing which , Mircea Braga argued , is not as much didactic as it is a study in dialogue ; " The Bear Tricked by the Fox " , which uses legendary and humorous elements in an attempt to explain why bears are the tail @-@ less species among mammals ; and <unk> <unk> ( " Five <unk> of Bread " ) , which serves as a condemnation of greed . 
 With " Human Stupidity " , Creangă builds a fable about incompetence in its absolute forms . The story centers on a peasant 's quest to find people who are less rational than his wife , having been infuriated by her panic at the remote possibility that a ball of salt could fall from its place of storage and kill their baby . This , essayist and chronicler Simona <unk> argues , highlights " a family @-@ based division " of illogical behavior , in which women are depicted as the main propagators of both " astonishing nonsense " and " prudent stupidity " . Instead , literary critic Ion Pecie identified inside the narrative a meditation on " the link between spirit and nature " , with the unpredictable ball of salt representing the equivalent of a " sphinx " . His colleague Gheorghe Grigurcu argued that such conclusions " may seem excessive " , but that they were ultimately validated by the literary work being " a plurality of levels " . A similar piece is the prose fable " The Story of a Lazy Man " : fed up with the protagonist 's proverbial indolence , which has led him as far as to view chewing food as an effort , his fellow villagers organize a lynching . This upsets the sensibility of a noblewoman who happens to witness the incident . When she offers to take the lazy man into her care and feed him bread crumbs , he seals his own fate by asking : " But are your bread crumbs soft ? " The peculiar effect of this moral is underlined by Anghelescu : " The lazy man dies as a martyr of his own immobility . " Braga interpreted the story as evidence of " the primacy of ethics " over social aspects in the local tradition . Ion Pecie saw in the story proof of Creangă 's own support for capital punishment with a preventive or didactic purpose , even in cases were the fault was trivial or imagined , concluding : " Here , ... Creangă loses much of his depth . " Pecie 's conclusion was treated with reserve by Grigurcu , who believed that , instead , the narrator refrains from passing any judgment on " the community 's instinctual eugenic reaction " . 
 Partly didactic in scope , several of Creangă 's anecdotes involve Ion Roată , a representative to the ad hoc Divan which voted in favor of Moldo @-@ Wallachian union , and the newly elected Domnitor Alexandru Ioan Cuza . The texts convey a sense of tension between the traditional boyar aristocracy and the peasant category , closely reflecting , according to historian Philip Longworth , a conflict mounting during the second half of the 19th century . The same is argued by Ornea , who also proposes that the protagonist offers insight into Creangă 's own conservative reflexes and his complex views on the union , while outlining several connections which the brand of social criticism professed by Junimea . Although Roată , a real @-@ life person , was a representative of the pro @-@ union National Party , his main interest , according to the stories themselves , was in curbing the boyars ' infringement of peasant rights . The stories ' narrator directs his hostility not at boyars in general , but at the younger Romantic nationalist ones , whom he portrays as gambling on Moldavia 's future : " [ There was ] a clash of ideas opposing old boyars to the youth of Moldavia 's ad hoc Divan , even though both were in favor of ' Union ' . It 's only that the old ones wanted a negotiated ' Union ' , and the young ones a ' Union ' done without proper thinking , as it came to pass . " According to Muguraș Constantinescu : " [ Roată ] opposes the intelligence of common folk , their common sense , their humor and the pleasure of allegorical discourse to the pompous and hollow speeches of some politicians " . In this context , Cuza 's presence is depicted as both legitimate and serendipitous , as he takes a personal interest in curbing boyar abuse . 
 = = = Moș Nichifor Coțcariul and " corrosives " = = = 
 Seen by Romanian critic Radu Voinescu as an extended anecdote , the novella Moș Nichifor Coțcariul ( " Old Man Nichifor <unk> " ) establishes a connection with the language of fairy tales , being located in a legendary and non @-@ historical age . It details the elaborate seduction of a young Jewish bride by a worldly Moldavian wagoner , on the route between Târgu Neamț and <unk> . The episode , which the text itself indicates is just one in a series of Nichifor 's conquests among his female clients , highlights the seducer 's verbose monologue , which covers accounts of his unhappy marriage , allusions about the naturalness of physical love , and intimidating suggestions that wolves may be tempted to attack the wagon ( prompting the young woman to seek refuge in his arms ) . The seducer 's behavior , Constantinescu notes , presents an alternative to the theme of old age as a time of immobility : " the still @-@ green old man , the rake , the joker who enjoys his amorous escapades , while justifying them by the natural course of life " . Nichifor mostly expresses himself with the help of folk sayings , which he casually mixes in with personal observations about the situation . The background to the plot is a record of various superstitions , some anticlerical or antisemitic : Nichifor voices the belief that priests crossing one 's path will produce bad luck , as well as the claim that Jewish apothecaries sold " poisons " . 
 The reception of Moș Nichifor Coțcariul by Junimea illustrated its ambivalence toward Creangă . Maiorescu found the text " interesting in its way and decisively Romanian " , but asked Convorbiri Literare journal to either modify it or refrain from publishing it altogether . This was complemented by its author 's own self @-@ effacing assessment : calling the text " a childish thing " , he suggested to Maiorescu that revisions were needed , stating " I have written it long , because there was no time for me to write it short . " Contrarily , the writer 's posterity referred to it as one of the greatest Romanian contributions to the genre : according to George Călinescu , the insight into Nichifor 's musings resulted in transforming the writing as a whole into " the first great Romanian novella with a stereotypical hero " , while Voinescu described the entire story as " a true masterpiece . " 
 The narrative approaches of Moș Nichifor Coțcariul bordered on Creangă 's contributions to erotic literature , pieces collectively known as " corrosives " and which have for long treated with discretion by literary historians . In Călinescu 's view , this chapter in Creangă 's literature created another link between the Moldavian writer and the Renaissance tradition of Rabelais : " All <unk> have penetrated deeply into the realm of vulgarity . " The taste for titillating accounts was also cultivated by Junimea members , who discreetly signaled their wish to hear more explicit content by asking Creangă to recount stories from " the wide street " . A product of this context , Moș Nichifor Coțcariul itself is said to have had at least one sexually explicit variant , circulated orally . 
 Two stories with explicit pornographic content survive as samples of Creangă 's erotic authorship : " The Tale of <unk> the Fool " and " The Tale of All Tales " ( also known as Povestea <unk> , " Tale of the Dick " or " Tale of the Cock " ) . The former shows its cunning hero having intercourse with a priest 's daughter , moving between prose and verse to describe the act . " The Tale of All Tales " , which makes ample use of vulgar speech , recounts how a peasant disrespectful of divinity has his entire maize harvest transformed into male genitalia , but is able to turn out a profit by catering to the sexual appetites of women . The final section , seen by Gârbea as a sample of anticlerical jeers recorded by " the defrocked Creangă " , depicts the rape of a priest by one such sexual object . Although explicit , literary historian Alex . Ștefănescu argued , the text " is refined and full of charm " . While acknowledging both " corrosives " for their " popular charm " in the line of Rabelais and Geoffrey Chaucer , and noting that they still display the author 's place as a " great stylist " , Voinescu also signaled the texts ' " very obvious " debt to folkloric sources . In his definition , Ion Creangă is " possibly the only writer " to draw on the legacy of " luscious popular jests " found in local " erotic folklore " . Nevertheless , according to literary critic Mircea <unk> , " The Tale of All Tales " may in fact be based on <unk> , a pornographic leaflet circulating in Italian and French . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 = = = Estate , family and early cultural impact = = = 
 Soon after the Creangă 's death , efforts began to collect his manuscript writings and the updated versions of his printed works . This project involved his son Constantin , alongside A. D. Xenopol , Grigore Alexandrescu and Eduard Gruber , the latter of whom obtained the works from Tinca Vartic . The first edition was published as two volumes , in 1890 – 1892 , but the project came to an abrupt halt due to Gruber 's insanity and death . Creangă 's final known work , the fragment of Făt @-@ <unk> , <unk> <unk> , was published by Convorbiri Literare in 1898 . The Gruber copies were sold to a Dr. Mendel , and only a part of them was recovered by exegetes , alongside various fragments accidentally discovered at Iași market , where they were being used for wrapping paper . The collection , structured into a whole by folklorist Gheorghe T. Kirileanu , was published by Editura Minerva in 1902 and 1906 . In addition to being mentioned in the memoirs of several prominent Junimists , Creangă had his political career fictionalized and satirized by Iacob Negruzzi , who transformed him , as Popa <unk> , into a character of his satirical poems <unk> ( " <unk> " ) . The same author referred to his counterpart in one of his epigrams . 
 Shortly after her lover 's death , Tinca Vartic married a man who lived in the same part of Iași . The target of organized tourism from as early as 1890 , the Iași Bojdeuca nevertheless fell into disrepair . It was eventually purchased by a " Ion Creangă Committee " , whose members included Constantin Creangă , Kirileanu and the ultra @-@ nationalist politician A. C. Cuza . It was set up as the first of Romania 's " memorial houses " on April 15 , 1918 . Restored the same year and again in 1933 – 1934 , it houses an important part of Creangă 's personal items and the first known among Creangă 's portraits , painted by his contemporary V. <unk> . While Constantin Creangă had a successful career in the Romanian Army , one of the writer 's two grandsons , Horia Creangă , became one of the celebrated modern architect of the interwar period , earning his reputation by <unk> much of downtown Bucharest . 
 The popularity of Ion Creangă 's accounts outside his regional and dialectal context , together with his own contribution as an educator , played a part in the evolution of standard Romanian , at a new phase in which many dialectal variations were incorporated into the spoken language . His primers Metodă nouă ... and Învățătoriul copiilor went through many editions during the late 19th century . The impact of his works was also a contributing factor to preserving a noted interest in rural subjects , a subsequent defining trait in modern Romanian literature . Discussing " stylistic harmony " , which he believed to be bridging all of Romania 's social and literary environments , philosopher Mircea Eliade wrote : " Romanians consider Ion Creangă a classic writer belonging to the modern age . His work can be read and understood by the entire range of social classes , in all the provinces of our country . In spite of the abundant presence of Moldavian words in his writings , the work would not remain a stranger to its readers . What other European culture can take pride in having a classic writer read by all categories of readers ? " The " thematic grip of the village " was noted by American academic Harold Segel , who investigated its impact on " some of the most revered names in the history of Romanian literature " , from Creangă and Slavici to interwar novelist Liviu Rebreanu . 
 = = = Early 20th century and interwar echoes = = = 
 A more thorough evaluation of Creangă 's literature began after 1900 . At the time , it became a topic of interest to the emerging traditionalist and populist trend , illustrated by the two venues rivaling Junimea : the right @-@ wing Sămănătorul , led by Nicolae Iorga , and the left @-@ wing <unk> , among which was Garabet Ibrăileanu . The new editions of his works enlisted the collaboration of Sămănătorist intellectuals Ilarie Chendi and Ștefan Octavian Iosif . Tudor Vianu however noted that , unlike Eminescu 's outlook , Creangă 's " authentic <unk> " did not complement the " spiritual complications " , global social class perspective and intellectual background associated with these trends , making Creangă " the least Sămănătorist among our writers . " According to Ornea , Creangă has " nothing in common " with the Sămănătorul ideology in particular : while the group shared his nostalgic outlook on the rural past in stark contrast to the modernized world , the Moldavian author could " maintain , intelligently , the middle ground between <unk> " . Likewise , Mircea Braga reacted against the perception of Creangă as announcing a " series " of authors , noting that , for all imitation , he was " an exceptional and , as far as Romanian literary history goes , unique creator . " 
 Directly influenced by Creangă , several early 20th century and interwar authors within the new traditionalist trend explicitly stood for the legacy of folkloric , spontaneous and unskilled literature : the peasant writer I. Dragoslav , whose memoirs borrow stylistic elements from Creangă 's accounts ; Constantin Sandu @-@ Aldea , an agriculturalist by profession , who took inspiration from his techniques of rendering dialogue ; and Ion <unk> , whom the Sburătorul literary circle acclaimed as " a new Creangă " , and who made ample use of a modernized <unk> dialect . Similarly , the Aromanian activist and author Nicolae Constantin <unk> , who divided his career between Romania and the southern Balkans , combined Creangă 's storytelling techniques with the traditions of Turkish literature , while the reworking of regional folklore themes earned intellectual Constantin S. <unk> @-@ <unk> a reputation as " the Oltenian Creangă " . During the 1910s , folklorist Tudor <unk> published a specialized magazine named Ion Creangă in honor of the writer . Creangă 's various works also provided starting points for several other writers of diverse backgrounds . They included representatives of the Symbolist movement , such as Victor Eftimiu , who was inspired by Creangă 's narrative style in writing his fantasy and verse play <unk> 'te <unk> . Another such author was poetess Elena Farago , whose didactic children 's story <unk> @-@ un <unk> de <unk> ( " Inside a Swallow 's Nest " ) borrows from " The Flax and the Shirt " . 
 With the interwar period and the spread of modernist literature , a new generation of critics , most notably George Călinescu and Vladimir Streinu , dedicated important segments of their activity to the works of Ion Creangă . Other such figures were Șerban Cioculescu , whose contribution attempts to elucidate the more mysterious parts of the writer 's vocabulary , and educator Dumitru <unk> , whose biographical studies provided a main source for subsequent research . By then , interest in Creangă 's life and writings had diversified . This phenomenon first touched Romanian theater when I. I. <unk> dramatized a section of Creangă 's Memories as <unk> de la Humulești ( " The <unk> from Humulești " ) — a literary contribution judged " superfluous " by George Călinescu , who noted that the original was already " dramatic " in style . The writer 's stories also became an inspiration for Alfred Mendelsohn and Alexandru <unk> , two Romanian composers who worked in children 's musical theater , who adapted , respectively , " Harap Alb " and " The Goat and Her Three Kids " . Creangă was also a secondary presence in Mite and <unk> , two biographical novels centered on Eminescu 's amorous life , written by the prominent interwar critic Eugen Lovinescu , to whom Călinescu reproached having largely ignored Creangă in his nonfictional texts . Creangă 's writings also earned followers among the more radical wing of the modernist scene . The authenticity and originality of Creangă 's prose were highlighted and treasured by the influential modernist venue Contimporanul , in particular by its literary chroniclers Ion Vinea and Benjamin Fondane . Likewise , while formally affiliating with Surrealism , the avant @-@ garde author Ion Călugăru contributed various prose works which borrow some of Creangă 's storytelling techniques to depict the lives of Jewish Romanian communities from Moldavia . 
 In stages after World War I , the 19th century writer became better known to an international audience . This process produced translations into English , some of which , Călinescu argued , reached significant popularity among British readers of Romanian literature . In contrast , writer Paul Bailey assessed that the variants used antiquated words and " sounded terrible " in English . Among the series of early English @-@ language versions was a 1920 edition of Creangă 's Memories , translated by Lucy Byng and published by Marcu Beza . It was also during the interwar that Jean <unk> published the first @-@ ever French @-@ language monograph on the Romanian writer , originally as a Ph.D. thesis for the University of Paris . 
 While their author continued to receive praise for his main contributions , the erotic tales were most often kept hidden from the public eye . George Călinescu summarized this contrast by stating : " The ' corrosives ' left by Creangă are not known publicly . " An exception to this rule was Kirileanu 's Creangă reader of 1938 , published by Editura Fundațiilor Regale as the first critical edition of his entire literature . According to critic Adrian Solomon , the Romanian tradition of silencing obscene language and sexually explicit literature through censorship made " The Tale of All Tales " circulate " rather like a samizdat " , which left writers with " no solid tradition to draw on , and precious little chance to evade ... the vigilant morals of a straitlaced public . " The nationalist aspects of Ion Creangă 's public discourse were however approved of and recovered by the far right of the 1920s and ' 30s . High @-@ ranking Orthodox cleric Tit <unk> referred to Creangă as a predecessor when , in 1937 , he urged his congregation to refrain from purchasing merchandise sold by Jews ( a measure which he believed was a practical alternative to the Jews ' forced eviction ) . In 1939 , as part of a press campaign targeting Călinescu 's work , the fascist journal <unk> <unk> accused the literary historian of having exposed Creangă 's biography for the sake of compromising the " genial Moldavian " by turning him into " an <unk> epileptic and a drunk . " 
 Creangă inspired a 1920 painting by Octav <unk> , which shows Creangă listening to Eminescu reading his poems . Two busts of the author were erected in Iași , respectively at his grave site and , in 1932 , the gardens of <unk> neighborhood . After 1943 , another such piece was unveiled in Bucharest 's Cișmigiu Gardens , as part of Rotunda <unk> monument . 
 = = = Under communism = = = 
 During Romania 's restrictive communist period , which lasted between 1948 and 1989 , the critical evaluation of Ion Creangă 's work went through several periods , complementing political developments . Throughout the first part of this interval , when socialist realism was politically imposed on Romanian letters , Creangă was spared the posthumous censorship which affected several other classical writers ( see Censorship in Communist Romania ) . His work was officially praised for its aesthetic qualities , but its association with the condemned Junimea was omitted from critical commentary , and readers were instead referred to Creangă as a realist critical of bourgeois society . In 1948 , the new authorities granted him posthumous membership in the Romanian Academy . The following year , at the height of Soviet occupation , official critic Barbu <unk> controversially described Creangă as a writer indebted to Russian folklore . 
 By the second half of communist rule , several new approaches in the critical assessment of Creangă 's literature were emerging . His work became a main topic of critical interest and the sole subject of many works , to the point where Nicolae Manolescu assessed that " everything has been said about Creangă " . Within this <unk> phenomenon , an original interpretation of his stories from an esoteric perspective was written by philosopher Vasile Lovinescu as Creangă și <unk> de aur ( " Creangă and the Golden Bough " ) . During the final two decades of communism , under Nicolae Ceaușescu , the recovery of nationalist discourse into official dogma also encouraged the birth of <unk> . In one of its aspects , theorized by cultural historian Edgar Papu , this approach controversially reevaluated various Romanian writers , Creangă included , presenting them as figures who anticipated most developments on the world stage . Papu 's own conclusion about " Harap Alb " , outlined in a 1983 volume , depicted Creangă as a direct predecessor of Italian semiotician Umberto Eco and his celebrated volume The Open Work — a conclusion which literary historian Florin <unk> has seen as proof of Papu 's " <unk> obsession " , lacking in " sense of humor , not just sense of reality . " One of Papu 's disciples , national communist ideologue Dan <unk> , claimed that Creangă was equal to , or even more important than world classics Homer , William Shakespeare and Johann Wolfgang von Goethe , while asserting that the eponymous protagonist of " Ivan Turbincă " stands as " the character who dominates world history in our century " . Left outside the scope of this critical interest , the " corrosives " were left out of new Creangă readers ( such as Iorgu <unk> 's 1970 edition ) , being , according to a 1976 essay by scholar George <unk> , " still unpublishable " for lack of " a general level of aesthetic education " among Romanians . 
 A second museum entirely dedicated to the writer was opened at his Târgu Neamț home in 1951 , and donated to the state by his successors in 1965 . During the following decades , it reportedly became the most visited memorial house in Romania . The authorities also financed a new cultural center , raised in the immediate vicinity of Bojdeuca during 1984 – 1989 . In 1965 , the Ion Creangă Children 's Theater , a state @-@ run institution , was founded in Bucharest , and its subsequent activity included staging several of the writer 's fairy tales for a junior public . Among such contributions were two adaptation of " Harap Alb " , directed respectively by Ion Lucian and Zoe Anghel <unk> . In 1983 , Timișoara @-@ based author Șerban <unk> also completed work on a stage version of " Ivan Turbincă " . 
 A new publishing house , Editura Ion Creangă , was created as a main publisher of children 's literature , and its output included editions of Creangă 's own works . The new editions were illustrated by several visual artists of note , among them Corneliu Baba , Eugen Taru and Lívia <unk> , while " Harap Alb " became a project of comic book artist Sandu <unk> , earning him a <unk> prize . A major project of the time involved Creangă translations into other languages , including Hungarian ( a celebrated contribution by Hungarian @-@ Romanian author András <unk> ) . During the same epoch , Creangă and his stories first became sources of inspiration for the Romanian film industry . Among the first were two contributions of filmmaker Elisabeta <unk> , both released in the early 1960s and based on the Memories : <unk> din <unk> ( starring child actor Ion <unk> as the young Nică and Ștefan <unk> as the grown @-@ up narrator ) , and <unk> din <unk> ( focusing on the hoopoe story ) . In 1965 , celebrated Romanian director Ion Popescu @-@ <unk> released De @-@ <unk> fi Harap Alb , a loose adaptation of " Harap Alb " , starring Florin <unk> in the title role . Popescu @-@ <unk> also directed the 1985 film Povestea <unk> , which was based on " The Story of the Pig " . The series also includes Nicolae <unk> 's biographical film of 1989 , Un <unk> de <unk> , focuses on the friendship between Creangă ( played by <unk> <unk> ) and Eminescu ( Adrian <unk> ) . 
 The legacy of Ion Creangă was also tangible in the Soviet Union , and especially in the Moldavian SSR ( which , as the larger section of Bessarabia , had been part of interwar Greater Romania , and later became independent Moldova ) . Initially , his writings , titled Moldavian Stories , formed part of the Soviet curriculum in the Moldavian Autonomous Region ( Transnistria ) . Following the Soviet occupation of Bessarabia , Creangă was one of the Romanian @-@ language writers whose works were still allowed for publishing by the new authorities . This provided local contributors to Romanian literature contact with older cultural models , directly inspiring the experimental or Postmodern prose pieces by Vlad <unk> and Leo <unk> . The endorsement of Creangă 's public image within the Moldavian SSR was also reflected in art : in 1958 , the writer 's bust , the work of sculptor Lev <unk> , was assigned to the Alley of Classics in Chișinău . His works were illustrated by one of the Moldavian SSR 's leading visual artists , Igor Vieru , who also painted a portrait of the author . In 1967 , <unk> and filmmaker Gheorghe Vodă released Se <unk> un <unk> : an adaptation of " Ivan Turbincă " and one of the successful samples of early Moldovan cinema , it was also noted for the musical score , composed by Eugen Doga . Also during that period , " The Goat ... " and " The Purse a ' Tuppence " were made into animated shorts ( directed by Anton Mater and Constantin <unk> ) . In 1978 , an operatic version of " The Goat and Her Three Kids " was created by composer <unk> Tkach , based on a libretto by Grigore Vieru . 
 = = = After 1989 = = = 
 After the 1989 Revolution , which signaled the end of communism , Creangă 's work was subject to rediscovery and reevaluation . This implied the publishing of his " corrosives " , most notably in a 1998 edition titled Povestea poveștilor <unk> ' 80 ( " The Tale of the Tales of the 80s Generation " ) . Edited by Dan Petrescu and Luca <unk> , it featured a Postmodern reworking of Povestea poveștilor by Mircea Nedelciu , a leading theorist of the Optzeciști writers . A trilingual edition of Creangă 's original text was published in 2006 as a Humanitas project , with illustrations made for the occasion by graphic artist Ioan Iacob . The book included versions of the text in English ( the work of Alistair Ian Blyth ) and French ( translated by Marie @-@ France Ionesco , the daughter of playwright Eugène Ionesco ) , both of which were noted for resorting exclusively to antiquated slang . In 2004 , another one of Creangă 's stories was subjected to a Postmodern interpretation , with <unk> <unk> 's novel <unk> <unk> Harap Alb ( " A Report about Harap Alb " ) . In 2009 , <unk> followed up with a version of " The Old Man 's Daughter and the Old Woman 's Daughter " ; a year later , his colleague Horia Gârbea published a personal take on " The Story of a Lazy Man " . Ion Creangă 's own didactic tales have remained a presence in the Romanian curriculum after 2000 , particularly in areas of education targeting the youngest students . 
 New films based on Creangă 's writings include , among others , Mircea <unk> 's <unk> și <unk> of 1992 ( an adaptation of " The Old Man 's Daughter ... " ) and Tudor <unk> 's Moldovan @-@ Romanian co @-@ production Dănilă Prepeleac ( 1996 ) . There were also several post @-@ 1989 theatrical adaptations of Ion Creangă 's texts , contributed by various Romanian <unk> . Some of these are Cornel <unk> 's variant of " Harap Alb " ( with music by Nicu <unk> ) , Cristian <unk> 's take on " The Goat and Her Three Kids " , Mihai <unk> 's <unk> <unk> ( from " Human Stupidity " ) and Gheorghe <unk> 's Povestea poveștilor , a fringe theater show using both Creangă 's original and Nedelciu 's text . 
 In 1993 , answering a petition signed by a group of cultural personalities from Iași , Metropolitan Daniel ( the future Patriarch of All Romania ) signed a decision to posthumously revert the decision to exclude Ion Creangă from among the Moldavian clergy . The public polled during a 2006 program produced by the Romanian Television nominated Creangă 43rd among the 100 greatest Romanians . New monuments honoring the writer include a bust unveiled in Târgu Neamț , the work of sculptor Ovidiu <unk> . The patrimony associated with Creangă 's life has also sparked debates : local authorities in Târgu Neamț were criticized for not maintaining the site near his house in its best condition , while the Fălticeni where he once lived was controversially put up for sale by its private owners in 2009 , at a time when city hall could not exercise its pre @-@ emption right . 
 Creangă 's name was assigned to several education institutions , among them Bucharest 's Ion Creangă National College , and to an annual prize granted by the Romanian Academy . There is a Ion Creangă commune , in Neamț County , and streets or squares were also named in the writer 's honor in cities throughout Romania : Târgu Neamț , Iași , Fălticeni , Bucharest , Arad , Brăila , Brașov , Cluj @-@ Napoca , Craiova , Drobeta @-@ Turnu Severin , Oradea , Ploiești , Sibiu , Suceava , Târgu Mureș , <unk> , Timișoara , Tulcea , etc . A quarter in northern Bucharest , near <unk> , is also named Ion Creangă . Creangă 's name was assigned to several landmarks and institutions in post @-@ Soviet Moldova . Among them is the Ion Creangă Pedagogical State University , founded on the basis of Chișinău 's normal school . 
 = Dishaster = 
 Dishaster is an action game released for the Atari 2600 in 1983 by <unk> . Another version of the game was released by Bit Corporation under the name Dancing Plates which features oriental @-@ themed graphics and adds eight game variations . 
 Dishaster was inspired by the circus tradition of keeping spinning plates suspended on poles . The player controls a girl attempting to keep a group of several spinning plates balanced on poles from falling . The game received negative reviews ; criticism focused on the game 's repetition and monotony . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 The girl can stabilize wobbling dishes by pressing the button on the controller . If a plate falls , the player is able to capture it if the girl touches it before it hits the ground , and a new one appears at the top of the pole . The number of poles to spin varies between the selected skill level ; there are six on the easiest setting , and ten on the hardest . The player loses if they let four dishes hit the ground . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The game received negative reviews . Author Brett Weiss stated that Dishaster was " as bad as its unfunny title implies " and that it was " a hopelessly repetitive game " . While Weiss opined the graphics were " convincing " , he remarked that " the plate @-@ spinning action gets old in a hurry " . Al <unk> , a reviewer for the magazine Digital Press , wrote : 
 Dishaster gets to be so monotonous so quickly because if you play in a systematic manner it 's too easy : I move sequentially from left to right and repeat . Yep , really tough pattern . I was able to max out the easy version without dropping a plate after several hours . I was hoping something interesting would happen , but the score just resets to zero after passing 999 @,@ 999 . 
 Another Digital Press writer , Kevin <unk> , also disliked Dishaster , including the game in his " The Worst of the Atari 2600 " list , writing : " The lack of sound effects , details or any background whatsoever while maneuvering around one unchanging screen would surely claim this as a <unk> " . <unk> reserved special criticism for the game 's music . The reviewer for TV Gamer magazine wrote " Dishaster may be enjoyed by very young gamers , but it is not sophisticated enough for any battle @-@ hardened arcade gamers . " 
 = IPhone 5S = 
 The iPhone 5S ( marketed with a stylized lowercase ' s ' as iPhone 5s ) is a smartphone designed and marketed by Apple Inc . Part of the iPhone series , the device was unveiled on September 10 , 2013 at Apple 's Cupertino headquarters . It was released on September 20 , 2013 along with its mid @-@ range counterpart , the iPhone 5C . 
 The iPhone 5S maintains almost the same design to its predecessor , the iPhone 5 . A redesigned home button with Touch ID , a fingerprint recognition system which can be used to unlock the phone and authenticate App Store and iTunes Store purchases , has been introduced . The camera has been updated with a larger aperture and a dual @-@ LED flash optimized for different color temperatures . It also introduced the A7 dual @-@ core processor , which the company proclaimed to be the first 64 @-@ bit processor to be used on a smartphone , accompanied by the M7 " motion co @-@ processor " . Unlike previous models , the iPhone 5S shipped in a white / gold color scheme in addition to white / silver and gray / black . 
 The iPhone 5S was the first Apple device to ship with iOS 7 , which introduced a revamped visual appearance and other new features . Designed by Jonathan Ive , iOS 7 departs from skeuomorphic elements used by previous versions of iOS in favor of a flat , colorful design . Among new software features introduced to the iPhone 5S include AirDrop , an ad @-@ hoc Wi @-@ Fi sharing platform , Control Center , a control panel containing a number of commonly used functions , and iTunes Radio , an internet radio service . Earphones known as EarPods are included with the iPhone 5S . Apple has released accessories including a case and a dock for the iPhone 5S . 
 Reception towards the device was generally positive , with some outlets considering it to be best smartphone available on the market due to its upgraded hardware , Touch ID , and other changes introduced by iOS 7 . However , others criticized the iPhone 5S for being too similar to its predecessors , while others expressed security concerns about the Touch ID system . Nine million units of the iPhone 5S and iPhone 5C were sold on their weekend of release , breaking Apple 's sales record for iPhones . The iPhone 5S was the best selling phone on all major U.S. carriers in September 2013 . 
 The iPhone 5S was succeeded as Apple 's flagship smartphone by the larger iPhone 6 . On March 21 , 2016 , the 5S received a direct replacement with the announcement of the iPhone SE , which incorporates internal hardware similar to the iPhone 6S , but retains the smaller form factor and design of the 5S . 
 = = History = = 
 Before its official unveiling , media speculation primarily centered on reports that the next iPhone would include a fingerprint scanner ; including Apple 's July 2012 acquisition of <unk> , a developer of mobile security products , references to a fingerprint sensor on the home button in the beta release of iOS 7 and leaked packaging for an iPhone 5S showing that the traditional home button now had a metallic " ring " around it . Similar ring @-@ based imagery was seen on the official invitation to Apple 's iPhone press event in September 2013 , where the new device was unveiled . Shortly before its official unveiling , The Wall Street Journal also reported the rumor . 
 Apple announced the iPhone 5C and the iPhone 5S during a media event at its Cupertino headquarters on September 10 , 2013 . While the iPhone 5C became available for preorder on September 13 , 2013 , the iPhone 5S was not available for preorder . Both devices were released on September 20 , 2013 . While most of the promotion focused on Touch ID , the 64 @-@ bit Apple A7 processor was also a highlight during the event . 
 This is the first @-@ ever 64 @-@ bit processor in a phone of any kind . I don ’ t think the other guys are even talking about it yet . Why go through all this ? The benefits are huge . The A7 is up to twice as fast as the previous @-@ generation system at CPU tasks , and up to twice as fast at graphics tasks , too . 
 Schiller then showed demos of Infinity Blade III to demonstrate the A7 's processing power and the device 's camera using untouched photographs . The release of iOS 7 on September 18 , 2013 was also announced during the keynote . 
 The iPhone 5S was released on September 20 , 2013 , in the United States , United Kingdom , Canada , China , France , Germany , Australia , Japan , Hong Kong , and Singapore . It was released in 25 additional countries on October 25 , 2013 , and in 12 countries on November 1 , 2013 . Indonesia was the last country to receive the iPhone 5S , on January 26 , 2014 . 
 On September 19 , 2014 , the iPhone 5S was succeeded as Apple 's flagship smartphone by the iPhone 6 and iPhone 6 Plus , but the older model remains available for purchase at a reduced price , while the <unk> version was discontinued . The gold edition of the iPhone 5S was discontinued on September 9 , 2015 , when Apple revealed the iPhone 6S and iPhone 6S Plus 
 The iPhone 5S was discontinued on March 21 , 2016 , and succeeded by the iPhone SE , which continues the same form factor but features vastly upgraded internals similar to the flagship iPhone 6S . This was a break with Apple 's product positioning trend ( in North America and Western Europe ) , starting with iPhone 4S released in September 2011 , which gave each newly released model one year as the flagship phone , then moving it to midrange for its second year of production , with the third and final year as the entry @-@ level offering before discontinuation . While iPhone 5S was expected to continue on sale until September 2016 , replacing it and its A7 processor early means that Apple " just reduced its long @-@ term chip support window by a year " for iOS . In addition , a new iPhone launch was meant to stimulate demand , as sales of iPhone 6S and 6S Plus had not met expectations since their September 2015 release and the iPhone family may suffer its first ever negative growth quarter in 2016 . 
 = = Specifications = = 
 = = = Design = = = 
 The iPhone 5S maintains a similar design to the iPhone 5 , with a 4 in ( 10 cm ) LCD multi @-@ touch Retina display and a screen resolution of 640 × 1136 at 326 ppi . Its home button has been updated with a new flat design using a laser @-@ cut sapphire cover surrounded by a metallic ring ; the button is no longer concave , nor does it contain the familiar <unk> icon seen on previous models . The phone itself is 0 @.@ 30 in ( 7 @.@ 6 mm ) thick and weighs 112 grams ( 4 @.@ 0 oz ) . The phone uses an aluminum composite frame . The device is available in three color finishes ; " space @-@ gray " ( replacing black with slate trim on the iPhone 5 ) , white with silver trim , and white with gold trim . The iPhone 5S was the first iPhone to be available in gold color ; this decision was influenced by the fact that gold is seen as a popular sign of a luxury product among Chinese customers . 
 = = = Hardware = = = 
 The iPhone 5S is powered by the Apple A7 system @-@ on @-@ chip , which the company proclaimed to be the first 64 @-@ bit processor ever used on a smartphone . The device 's operating system and pre @-@ loaded software were optimized to run in 64 @-@ bit mode , promising increased performance , although third @-@ party app developers would need to optimize their apps to take advantage of these enhanced capabilities . The A7 processor is designed by Apple and manufactured by Samsung . The A7 processor is accompanied by a new M7 " motion co @-@ processor " , a dedicated processor for processing motion data from the iPhone 's accelerometer and gyroscopes without requiring the attention of the main processor , which integrates with iOS 7 's new <unk> APIs . The same A7 SoC and M7 motion co @-@ processor are also found in the iPad Air and iPad Mini 2 which were released in the same quarter as the iPhone 5S . 
 The phone includes a 1560 mAh battery , which provides 10 hours of talk time and 250 hours of standby time . 
 While the camera is still 8 megapixels in resolution with the image capture size of <unk> × 2448 ( 4 : 3 ) , the lens has a larger aperture ( f / 2 @.@ 2 ) and larger sized pixels in its image sensor than previous iPhone models . The flashlight has dual " True Tone " flashes , consisting of an amber LED and a white LED , which are variably used based on the color temperature of the photo to improve color balancing . The camera also includes automatic image stabilization , dynamic tone mapping , 10 fps burst mode , " best shot " mode and slow motion video at 120 fps . 
 The home button on the iPhone 5S incorporates a fingerprint recognition system known as Touch ID , based on technology from <unk> , a company which Apple had acquired in 2012 . The sensor uses a capacitive CMOS @-@ based sensor which can detect the " sub @-@ epidermal layers " of fingers at 500 pixels per inch , and uses a 360 @-@ degree design that can read the print at any angle . The sensor itself is activated by a touch @-@ sensitive metallic ring surrounding the button . Touch ID can be used for various authentication activities within the operating system , such as unlocking the device or authenticating App Store and iTunes purchases instead of an Apple ID password . The sensor can be trained to recognize the fingerprints of multiple fingers and multiple users . <unk> data is stored in an encrypted format within a " secure enclave " of the A7 chip itself , and is not accessible to any other apps or servers ( including iCloud ) . 
 = = = Operating system and software = = = 
 The iPhone 5S is supplied with iOS 7 , released on September 20 , 2013 . Jonathan Ive , the designer of iOS 7 's new elements , described the update as " bringing order to complexity " , highlighting features such as refined typography , new icons , translucency , layering , physics , and gyroscope @-@ driven <unk> as some of the major changes to the design . The design of both iOS 7 and OS X Mavericks ( version 10 @.@ 9 ) noticeably depart from skeuomorphic elements such as green felt in Game Center , wood in Newsstand , and leather in Calendar , in favor of flat , colorful design . 
 iOS 7 adds AirDrop , an ad @-@ hoc Wi @-@ Fi sharing platform . Users can share files with the iPhone 5 onwards , the iPod Touch ( 5th generation ) , iPad ( 4th generation ) onwards , or iPad Mini ( 1st generation ) onwards . The operating system also adds Control Center , a control panel accessed by swiping up from the bottom of the screen . Control Center contains a number of commonly used functions , such as volume and brightness controls , along with toggles for enabling Wi @-@ Fi , Bluetooth , Airplane mode , and for using the rear camera 's flash LED as a flashlight . 
 iTunes Radio , an Internet radio service , is also included on the iPhone 5S . It is a free , ad @-@ supported service available to all iTunes users , featuring Siri integration on iOS . Users are able to skip tracks , customize stations , and purchase the station 's songs from iTunes Store . Users can also search through their history of previous songs . 
