 = = = Accessories = = = 
 Earphones known as Apple EarPods are included with the iPhone 5S . According to technology commentators , the design of the earphones is aimed to improve sound quality by allowing air to travel in and out more freely . Apple states that the design of their earphones allows it to " rival high @-@ end headphones that cost hundreds of dollars more " . Reviews by Gizmodo and TechRadar reported that although the earphones sounded better than its predecessor , reviewers felt that quality of sound produced is poor . TechRadar further opined that the EarPods are inferior to other earphones of a similar price . 
 = = Apple accessories = = 
 Apple announced during the keynote a case for the iPhone 5S that is made of soft microfiber on the inside and leather on the outside . This case was announced along with iPhone 5C 's case , both of which are the first cases Apple has announced since the iPhone 4 Bumpers . 
 Docks for both the iPhone 5S and 5C were found on the Apple Online Store after the announcement . Because of the casing difference between the iPhone 5S and 5C , they have separate docks , each made specifically for each respective phone . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 The iPhone 5S received a mostly positive reception from reviewers and commentators . Walt Mossberg of All Things Digital gave the phone a favorable review , saying that Touch ID " sounds like a gimmick , but it ’ s a real advance , the biggest step ever in biometric authentication for everyday devices , " and labeled it " the best smartphone on the market . " David Pogue of The New York Times praised Touch ID , but said that the innovation of the smartphone market has been saturated , and " maybe the age of annual mega @-@ leaps is over . " He focused much of his review on iOS 7 , which he believed was the biggest change of the device over previous generations , eulogizing new Siri features , Control Center , and AirDrop . In an editorial , Pogue stated that iOS 7 was the biggest change in the iPhone series , citing utilitarian interface changes as the main contributor to this . Scott Stein of CNET criticized the lack of design change over iPhone 5 and said that although the iPhone 5S " is not a required upgrade , but it 's easily the fastest and most advanced Apple smartphone to date . " Although praised the new iPhone for its camera , 64 @-@ bit A7 chip , M7 motion @-@ chip , and fingerprint scanning capabilities , some investors thought that the iPhone 5S , although a notable improvement over the iPhone 5 , was still relatively unchanged from its predecessor , and worried that the iPhone line had become a stagnant , dull product . Apple 's share price fell 5 @.@ 4 % after the launch to close at a month low of $ 467 @.@ 71 on the NASDAQ . 
 Darrell Etherington of TechCrunch who praised the iPhone 5S as the best smartphone available said " looks may not be different from the iPhone 5 , but the internal components have a dramatic impact on day @-@ to @-@ day activities normal for a smartphone user , " and went into detail explaining the impact of the improved camera and specifications on the phone . Etherington suggested that the 64 @-@ bit A7 processor will not reach its full potential until developers create applications supporting it . Myriam <unk> of Engadget found that the iPhone 5S could benefit significantly from the A7 if developers created applications optimized for the 64 @-@ bit processor . Anand Lal <unk> of AnandTech praised the phone 's A7 processor , describing it as " seriously impressive " , and stated that it was the most " <unk> of any iPhone ever launched . As much as it pains me to use the word <unk> , if you are one of those people who likes to hold onto their device for a while - the iPhone 5S is as good a starting point as any . " Scott Lowe of IGN also speaking highly of its 64 @-@ bit processor , " which has a substantial lead in processing power over the HTC One and Samsung Galaxy S4 , accounting for a graphics boost of up to 32 % and 38 % in CPU benchmarks . " The debut of Apple 's 64 @-@ bit A7 processor took rival Android smartphone makers by surprise , particularly Qualcomm whose own 64 @-@ bit system @-@ on @-@ chip was not released until 2015 . 
 Most reviewers recommended the iPhone 5S over the iPhone 5C which was released at the same time . The 5C retained almost the same hardware as the discontinued iPhone 5 , while the iPhone 5S featured substantially improved performance / features thanks to its new 64 @-@ bit A7 processor , as well as extra storage space , all for a relatively small additional upfront cost over the iPhone 5C ( US $ 650 versus US $ 550 in March 2014 ) . This was especially the case when iOS 8 was released and both iPhone 5S and iPhone 5C were move to the mid and low end of the iPhone range , respectively ; the iPhone 5S still had 16 or 32 GB storage available while the iPhone 5C had to make do with 8 GB storage with only <unk> available to the user after installing iOS 8 . Furthermore , the 5C 's polycarbonate exterior received a mixed reception and seen as a cost @-@ cutting downgrade compared to the iPhone 5 's aluminum / glass case ; the 5S retained the latter design and looked even more premium due its additional gold finish . 
 As of 2015 – 16 , there were still a significant number of customers who preferred the 4 @-@ inch screen size of iPhone 5S , which remained the second @-@ most popular iPhone after the iPhone 6 and ahead of the iPhone 6S . Apple stated in their event that they sold 30 million 4 @-@ inch iPhones in 2015 , even as that form factor was succeeded as the flagship iPhone by the redesigned larger display 4 @.@ 7 / 5 @.@ 5 @-@ inch iPhone 6 and 6 Plus back in September 2014 . Furthermore , the 5 and 5S design was regarded as " long been the golden child of Apple phone design and a benchmark for phones in general " ( with the 5S 's gold finish adding a premium touch to the 5 's already well @-@ regarded look ) , while the succeeding 6 and 6S design was less critically acclaimed as it " felt a little bit wrong , as though you were holding a slick $ 650 bar of soap " . The iPhone 5 was described as " elegance rooted in the way the aluminum and glass work together . It felt streamlined , yet substantial , which is different from iPhone 6 , which feels substantial in size alone . Plus , unlike the ubiquitous rounded corners of the 6 , iPhone 5 didn ’ t really look like anything else on the market at the time " . However , the iPhone 5 / 5S design was not suited to scaling up , in contrast to the iPhone 6 / 6S which could better accommodate the growing consumer trend towards larger screen sizes and indeed spawned the 6 / 6S Plus phablet models . When Apple discontinued the iPhone 5S , it was replaced by the iPhone SE which outwardly appears almost identical to the 5S even as the SE 's internal hardware has been upgraded significantly . 
 = = = Commercial reception = = = 
 The iPhone 5S and 5C sold over nine million units in the first three days , which sets a record for first weekend smartphone sales , with the 5S selling three times more units than iPhone 5C . After the first day of release , 1 % of all iPhones in the US were iPhone <unk> , while 0 @.@ 3 % were iPhone <unk> . Gene Munster of Piper Jaffray reported that the line at the Fifth Avenue Apple Store contained 1 @,@ 417 people on release day , compared to 1 @,@ 300 for the iPhone 4 in 2010 , and 549 for the iPhone 3G in 2008 on their respective release days . This was the first time that Apple launched two models simultaneously . The first @-@ day release in China also contributed to the record sales result . 
 On launch day , major stock shortages were reported in most stores , across all countries where the iPhone 5S initially went on sale . A great many customers in line outside Apple Stores worldwide were left disappointed due to severe shortages across all 5S models , with the gold model in particular being in highly limited supply . While this situation eased in the US in the days following the launch , other countries have reported receiving very little <unk> . Some commentators have questioned how Apple have handled the initial release , as online pre @-@ orders were not offered for the iPhone 5S , meaning large numbers of people queuing outside physical stores , with most in line not receiving a unit . In the US , Apple has offered an online reservation system , so customers can keep checking units available at their local Apple Stores , and order for pickup . Online orders have also been in short supply on launch day , with the shipping date across all model sizes and colors , changing from " 7 @-@ 10 working days " to sometime " October " in all countries , within hours of online orders being taken . 
 The iPhone 5S was the best selling phone on AT & T , Sprint , Verizon , and T @-@ Mobile in September 2013 in the United States , outselling the iPhone 5C and Samsung Galaxy S4 . According to Consumer Intelligence Research Partners , the iPhone 5S outsold the 5C by a two @-@ to @-@ one margin during its September release , confirming Apple CEO Tim Cook 's view that the high @-@ end smartphone market was not reaching a point of market saturation . While commentators viewed iPhone 5C as a flop because of supply chain cuts signifying a decline in demand , the iPhone 5S was viewed as a massive success . Apple admitted that it had failed to anticipate the sales ratio between the iPhone 5C and the iPhone 5S , leading to an overstocking of the 5C and shortages of the 5S . 
 Six months after the release of the iPhone 5S , on March 25 , 2014 , Apple announced that sales of the iPhone brand has crossed 500 million units . By May 2014 , despite being on the market for 8 months , the iPhone 5S reportedly outsold the newly released Samsung Galaxy S5 by 40 % , with 7 million iPhone 5S units versus 5 million Galaxy S5 units . The Galaxy S5 's failure to oust the iPhone 5S from the top selling spot was major setback for Samsung Mobile , as the preceding Samsung Galaxy <unk> and Samsung Galaxy S4 , in the first quarter of their releases , had outsold the iPhone 4S and iPhone 5 , respectively . 
 = = = Impact of Touch ID = = = 
 A number of technology writers , including Adrian Kingsley @-@ Hughes and Kevin Roose of New York believed that the fingerprint scanning functionality of the iPhone 5S could help spur the adoption of the technology as an alternative to passwords by mainstream users ( especially in " bring your own device " scenarios ) , as fingerprint @-@ based authentication systems have only enjoyed wider usage in enterprise environments . However , citing research by biometrics engineer <unk> <unk> , Roose suggested that the CMOS @-@ based sensor could become inaccurate and wear out over time unless Apple had designed the sensor to prevent this from occurring . Brent Kennedy , a researcher of the United States Computer Emergency Readiness Team , recommended that users not immediately rely on the technology , citing the uncertainty over whether the system could properly reject a spoofed fingerprint . 
 Following the release of the iPhone 5S , the German Chaos Computer Club announced on September 21 , 2013 that they had bypassed Apple 's new Touch ID fingerprint sensor by using " easy everyday means " . The group explained that the security system had been defeated by photographing a fingerprint from a glass surface and using that captured image to make a latex model thumb which was then pressed against the sensor to gain access . The spokesman for the group stated , " We hope that this finally puts to rest the illusions people have about fingerprint biometrics . It is plain stupid to use something that you can 't change and that you leave everywhere every day as a security token . " However , in 2013 , 39 % of American smartphone users used no security measures at all to protect their smartphone . Others have also used Chaos Computer Club 's method , but concluded that it is not an easy process in either time or effort , given that the user has to use a high resolution photocopy of a complete fingerprint , special chemicals and expensive equipment , and because the spoofing process takes some time to achieve . 
 = = = Problems = = = 
 Several problems were experienced with the iPhone 5S 's hardware after its release . The most widely reported issue is that the angle reported by the phone 's level sensor had drifted by several degrees , which caused the gyroscope , compass , and accelerometer to become inaccurate . Reports suggested that this is a hardware @-@ induced problem . Some encountered other problems such as crashing with a blue screen and then restarting , the power button making a rattling noise when the phone was shaken , overheating , the microphone not working , and Touch ID not working for iTunes purchases . Some of these issues have been fixed by software updates . 
 = = Timeline of models = = 
 = Eagle Cash = 
 Eagle Cash ( stylized as EagleCash ) , and sister program EZpay , are cash management applications that use stored @-@ value card technology to process financial transactions in " closed @-@ loop " operating environments . The programs are sponsored by the United States Department of the Treasury for the U.S. Armed Forces . The programs are administered for the Treasury by the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston , and are in use at approved U.S. military facilities inside and outside the continental United States . The systems utilize a plastic payment card , similar to a credit or debit card , which has an embedded microchip which keeps track of the amount of money stored on the card and interfaces with encrypted card acceptance devices . This allows soldiers with the card to purchase goods and services at U.S. military posts and canteens , without carrying cash , or manage their personal bank accounts while on deployment or in training . The program reduces the amount of American currency required overseas , reduces theft , saves thousands of man @-@ hours in labor , helps reduce the risk of transporting cash in battlefield environments , and increases security and convenience for service members . It helped reduce or eliminate the need for cash and money orders . 
 = = Overview and history = = 
 Originally developed in 1997 , the EZpay system was born as a pilot project aimed at inductees going into basic training , to alleviate some of the stress and cost of managing money while away from home . Many U.S. military bases are structured like small towns , where goods and services are available for sale . However , transferring wages into cash , in order to purchase desired products has traditionally been a struggle . The system works through soldiers receiving an advance on their wages in the form of the <unk> card , which they can then use to purchase goods and services , such as haircuts , snacks , and recreational activities at on @-@ base shops and stores . At the end of basic training , the balance on the card would be reconverted into cash , and paid back to the soldiers . The project was a great success , since it eliminated the need for bases to keep money on hand , and saved soldiers approximately $ 125 @,@ 000 a year in banking fees . 
 Around the same time , the <unk> system was expanded for overseas use during the aftermath of the 1992 @-@ 1995 War in Bosnia and Herzegovina , where U.S. personnel were deployed on peace @-@ keeping missions . Named " EagleCash " , the overseas system functions similarly to the EZpay system , but with the added ability of soldiers to attach personal bank accounts to the card , allowing them to load , and reload , without having to access their financial institutions back home . As 386th Air Expeditionary Wing financial manager , Catherine Miles explained in a 2007 article , " It 's like a gift card . [ ... ] You can put as little or as much money as you want on it and it comes from your checking account . " Unlike regular debit cards , the Eagle Cash is managed on @-@ base , using batch processing which ensures that the cards remained useful even when connections to banks and credit unions State @-@ side are severed . The system was given widespread acceptance in 1999 , just before the War in Iraq ; it has since been expanded to many military bases such as Camp Anaconda on the front lines . 
 = = Benefits and savings = = 
 For soldiers , the benefits are straightforward , but for the officers in charge of the system the benefits are much more extensive . Transporting U.S. currency overseas costs the military hundreds of thousands of dollars annually — during the Iraq War , for every $ 1 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 sent to pay soldiers in Iraq , it cost $ 60 @,@ 000 in security , logistics , and support fees . It also eliminates the need for the World War II practice of producing the Military Payment Certificate . The use of a cashless economy at military stores reduces transaction times , freeing personnel from tasks like stamping money orders or counting coins — during 9 months of the Iraq War , this saved approximately 5000 hours of processing time for financial personnel . It also prevents counterfeiting . 
 Since the initial adoption of the EagleCash system , it has been augmented by ATM @-@ like kiosks which allow soldiers to add funds to the card without visiting the base 's finance office . Originally , this requirement caused long lines to refill cards , reducing the utility of the system . The conversion to the kiosk system , developed by NCR Corporation , remedied these problems and increased the ability of the system to provide easy cash for soldiers away from home — " something we often take for granted , but for soldiers deployed on foreign land , it has always been a challenge " . To date , 3 @.@ 2 million EagleCash and EZpay cards have been issued and used to process 16 @.@ 5 million electronic transactions valued at over $ 3 @.@ 6 billion . 
 = 2 / 33rd Battalion ( Australia ) = 
 The 2 / 33rd Battalion was an infantry battalion of the Australian Army during the Second World War . It was formed as part of the Second Australian Imperial Force in the United Kingdom in June 1940 as the " 72nd Battalion " to create the 25th Brigade , which eventually became part of the 7th Division . After the threat of invasion had passed , the battalion was transferred to the Middle East in early 1941 , and after a period of garrison duty in the Western Desert , the battalion fought against the Vichy French in the invasion of Syria and Lebanon . 
 Later , in early 1942 , in response to Japan 's entry to the war , the battalion was transferred back to Australia and after a period of re @-@ organisation and training it was sent to New Guinea where it took part in the Kokoda Track campaign . Arriving at the height of the fighting , after the Japanese advance stalled it took part in the pursuit of Japanese forces to the northern coast , fighting around the beachheads at Buna – Gona . In 1943 , after returning to Australia for six months to refit , the battalion was committed to the Salamaua – Lae campaign , and then the Ramu Valley – Finisterre Range campaign . Returning to Australia in early 1944 , a long period of inactivity followed before the 2 / 33rd undertook its last campaign in Borneo in the final months of the war . The battalion was disbanded in Brisbane in March 1946 . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Formation in the United Kingdom = = = 
 Raised on 27 June 1940 , as part of the 25th Brigade , the battalion was initially designated the 72nd Battalion , as a continuation of the numbers assigned to the infantry battalions of the Australian Imperial Force , which had been raised during the First World War . One of three Australian infantry battalions established in the United Kingdom during the early months of the war – the others being 2 / 31st and 2 / 32nd Battalions – it was formed from surplus Australian infantry reinforcements and support corps personnel – drawn from all Australian states , these personnel had originally been assigned to the 6th Division – who were sent to bolster the garrison following the Fall of France when the threat of invasion loomed . Understrength and lacking support personnel and large amounts of specialist equipment , the battalion initially consisted of only three rifle companies , each consisting of three platoons . The companies were designated ' A ' to ' C ' , while the platoons were numerically designated 1 through to 9 . This was one rifle company short of the standard establishment of the time , and at the time the battalion had a strength of just over 460 personnel , well below its authorised strength of around 900 . In addition , the battalion headquarters company , which consisted of six platoons – signals , anti @-@ aircraft , mortars , carrier , pioneer , and transport – was also understrength , and lacked a large amount of specialist equipment at the outset . 
 Commanded by Lieutenant Colonel Rudolph Bierwirth , in September , the battalion was issued with a circular brown over red Unit Colour Patch ( UCP ) , with a border of grey to denote that the battalion was a 2nd AIF unit . However , the circumstances of the battalion 's establishment overseas resulted in the situation of the battalion 's personnel being issued two different <unk> . Personnel who were in the United Kingdom at the end of 1940 were issued with the brown over red UCP . However , this UCP was issued without reference to Army Headquarters in Australia , who issued battalion reinforcements in Australia with a UCP consisting of a black over green oval in a circle of grey : this was intended to link the battalion to the 33rd Battalion , which had served during the First World War . Upon arrival in the Middle East , though , these patches were replaced with the brown and red patches . 
 In October , the unit moved from Tidworth to Colchester and around the same time it was redesignated as the 2 / 33rd Battalion , to bring it into line with the other battalions of the Second Australian Imperial Force . At Colchester , the Australians undertook a period of intensive training which was followed by defensive duties amidst the backdrop of the ongoing Battle of Britain , which took place in the skies overhead . During this time , the battalion was allocated the role of mobile reserve , assigned the task of counter @-@ attacking around Harwich in the event of a German invasion ; in this role they undertook further training operating with and against tanks , with British armoured vehicles and crews being assigned to the battalion during training exercises . 
 = = = Garrison duties in North Africa and fighting in Syria = = = 
 By the end of 1940 , the threat of invasion had dissipated and the Australian troops that had been sent to the United Kingdom were transferred to the Middle East . Travelling by train from Colchester to Glasgow in January 1941 , the main body of the battalion embarked upon the transport Nea Hellas and sailed via Freetown and Durban . They reached Egypt in early March 1941 where the 25th Brigade , was assigned to the 7th Division . Moving to a camp in Palestine , the battalion 's fourth rifle company – designated ' D ' Company – was taken on strength , having previously been formed at Beit Jirja in September 1940 from excess reinforcements from the 6th Division . At the time , the 7th Division was preparing to go to Greece , to follow in the wake of the 6th Division ; however , the entry of the Afrika Korps into the fighting in the Western Desert and early German successes prompted their movement to the fortress at Mersa <unk> , to guard against a possible German advance into Egypt from Libya . 
 The 2 / 33rd remained at Mersa <unk> , undertaking defensive duties , until May 1941 , but did not see combat . After this , the 7th Division began to prepare for an invasion of Vichy French @-@ held Syria and Lebanon . A short @-@ lived campaign , from early June until mid @-@ July , the 2 / 33rd took part in the fighting around Merdjayoun – attacking Fort <unk> in the early stages of the campaign – and Jezzine , fighting mainly in disparate company groups . Following the French capitulation , the battalion undertook garrison duties in Lebanon as part of the Allied occupation force established there to defend against a possible German invasion through Turkey ; in September the battalion occupied a position around the port of Tripoli . They remained there until early 1942 when the Australian government requested the return of the 7th Division to Australia , following Japan 's entry into the war . The battalion 's role , and indeed that of the whole 7th Division , in the fighting against the Vichy French was largely censored at the time due to concerns about negative public opinion in Australia and the battalion 's historian , William Crooks , notes that later this caused some friction between 7th Division personnel and those from the 6th and 9th Divisions , and a general lack of public awareness of what they had done . Casualties sustained by the battalion in Syria and Lebanon numbered 21 dead , 84 wounded and 26 captured . 
 = = = Fighting against the Japanese in New Guinea = = = 
 Embarking on the Mt Vernon in Port Tewfik , the battalion sailed from Egypt in early February and arrived in Adelaide , South Australia , in mid @-@ March . After this , the battalion camped at Woodside , in the Adelaide Hills , where a period of re @-@ conditioning and exercises followed until mid @-@ April when the majority of its personnel were sent on home leave . At the end of the month , those that remained undertook a five @-@ day train journey to Casino , New South Wales . Limited training was undertaken until mid @-@ May , around which time orders were received for another move , this time to Caboolture , Queensland . By the end of the month , the battalion returned to almost full strength when the final leave draft returned . At the time , the strategic situation in the Pacific was in the balance ; the Japanese were advancing south and due to concerns about a possible Japanese invasion , the 25th Brigade was tasked with defending the coastal area north of Brisbane . 
 In late August 1942 , the 2 / 33rd deployed to New Guinea , where the Kokoda Track campaign was reaching its climax as the Japanese advanced on Port Moresby . Embarking on the Katoomba in late August , they landed at Port Moresby on 9 September . Four days later the battalion was thrown into battle against the Japanese around Ioribaiwa , leading the 25th Brigade forward . As the Japanese advance continued , the Australians withdrew back to Imita Ridge . As the 25th Brigade withdrew , the 2 / 33rd formed a rearguard , covering the withdrawal . After completing the movement rearwards , the battalion subsequently assumed a position in depth on the right . The Japanese then began to withdraw , having reached the limits of their supply line , and the Australians pursued them back to the beachheads on the northern coast where the Japanese had originally landed in July . Throughout October and November , the battalion fought significant engagements at <unk> and Gorari , before being thrown into further fighting around Gona in late November and early December . Casualties were heavy , and by the time the Japanese beachhead had been destroyed , the battalion was withdrawn to Port Moresby , the battalion had been reduced to only two companies ; early in January 1943 , the main body of 2 / 33rd returned to Australia upon the transports Both and Duntroon . The rear detail followed in the middle of the month aboard the <unk> . Total casualties sustained by the 2 / 33rd during this period had included 46 dead and 121 wounded . 
 Concentrating at Ravenshoe , in Queensland , in the early months of 1943 the 2 / 33rd was reorganised as part of the 7th Division 's conversion to the jungle divisional establishment . As a part of this , the battalion 's establishment was dropped to just over 800 men and it lost its carrier platoon , receiving in its place a machine gun platoon equipped with four Vickers machine guns . In addition , the anti @-@ aircraft platoon was re @-@ roled as a tank @-@ attack platoon and the transport platoon was reduced to a third , with its complement of 74 vehicles and 14 motorcycles being replaced by 25 jeeps . Following this , an intense period of training was undertaken as the battalion received a batch of around 300 reinforcements to replace its losses in New Guinea ; by July it was ready to deploy once again and subsequently returned to New Guinea to join the Salamaua – Lae campaign . 
 Throughout the final weeks of July , the battalion was transported to Port Moresby aboard three transports : Canberra , Duntroon and Katoomba . Establishing a camp at " Pom @-@ Pom " east of Port Moresby , the battalion spent the following month preparing for an airlift into Nadzab , in support of US paratroopers . On 7 September 1943 , while the battalion 's personnel waited to fly out to Nadzab from Jackson 's Airfield , near Port Moresby , a heavily laden US B @-@ 24 Liberator bomber crashed into trucks carrying the battalion , killing 60 and injuring a further 92 ; this represented a third of the battalion 's casualties for the entire war . The following day , the 2 / 33rd was flown into Nadzab and they subsequently took part in the capture of Lae ; at the end of the month , they were transported by air to <unk> from where they were committed to the advance up the Ramu Valley into the <unk> Range during which they were involved mainly in small unit actions and patrols . The battalion 's casualties in New Guinea during the campaigns of 1943 – 44 numbered 84 dead and 70 wounded . 
 = = = Borneo : Final campaign and disbandment = = = 
 In early February 1944 , the battalion was withdrawn back to Australia , returning aboard the Kanimbla . A long period of training and rebuilding followed , as US forces assumed the primary responsibility for the fighting against the Japanese in the Pacific . Inter @-@ Allied politics , coupled with a rapidly evolving strategic situation resulted in a period of operational uncertainty for the Australian Army during which there was significant ambiguity about their future employment against the Japanese . As a result , it was not until close to the end of the war that the 2 / 33rd went into action again . In June 1945 , the battalion embarked for Morotai Island , from where they subsequently took part in the re @-@ capture of Balikpapan the following month . During the landing , the 2 / 33rd formed part of the floating reserve , but after the early stages of the assault it came ashore on the second day along with the 25th Brigade 's two other infantry battalions , and they assumed control of the central part of the Australian beachhead . The following day , the 25th Brigade began to advance inland up the main north @-@ eastern axis , which the Australians dubbed the " Milford Highway " . The 2 / 33rd took up position on the right hand side of the brigade 's front , coming up against stiff Japanese resistance as it advanced around Chilton Road , but this was overcome with machine gun and artillery support , after which the advance inland continued . 
 A series of minor actions followed as the Australians continued their advance up the Milford Highway . After a month of fighting , the island was largely secured and following the bombing of Hiroshima and Nagasaki in early August 1945 , the Japanese sued for peace and hostilities came to an end . During the fighting in Borneo the 2 / 33rd had lost 25 dead and 57 wounded . In the immediate aftermath of the war , the Australians remained on Borneo as an occupation force , while the Army was slowly demobilised . During this time the battalion was steadily reduced as personnel were repatriated to Australia for discharge , or were transferred to other units for further service , including providing personnel to the 34th Brigade , which was raised for occupation duties in Japan . 
 In February 1946 , the remaining cadre returned to Australia and the following month it was disbanded in Brisbane . During the war , 3 @,@ 065 men served in the battalion , while a further 588 were posted to it following the war ; of these , the 2 / 33rd lost 200 men killed and 363 wounded . Members of the battalion received the following decorations : two Distinguished Service Orders , seven Military Crosses , 11 Military Medals and 27 Mentions in Despatches . 
 = = Battle honours = = 
 For its service during the war , the 2 / 33rd was awarded the following battle and theatre honours : 
 North Africa ; Syria 1941 ; Syrian Frontier ; Merjayun ; South @-@ West Pacific 1942 – 1945 ; Kokoda Trail ; Ioribaiwa ; Eora Creek – Templeton 's Crossing II ; Oivi – Gorari ; Buna – Gona ; Gona ; Lae – Nadzab ; Lae Road ; Liberation of Australian New Guinea ; Ramu Valley ; Shaggy Ridge ; Borneo 1945 ; Balikpapan ; Milford Highway . 
 = = Commanding officers = = 
 The following officers commanded the 2 / 33rd throughout the war : 
 Lieutenant Colonel Rudolph Bierwirth ( 1940 – 41 ) ; 
 Lieutenant Colonel John Graham Monaghan ( 1941 ) ; 
 Lieutenant Colonel John Armstrong Corby ( 1941 – 42 ) 
 Lieutenant Colonel Alfred William <unk> ( 1942 – 43 ) 
 Lieutenant Colonel Thomas Richard Worgan Cotton ( 1943 – 45 ) 
 = Gareloi Volcano = 
 The Gareloi Volcano is a stratovolcano in the Aleutian Islands of Alaska , United States , about 1 @,@ 259 miles ( 2 @,@ 026 km ) from Anchorage . Gareloi is located on Gareloi Island , and comprises most of its land mass . The island also has two small glaciers which protrude to the northwest and southeast . 
 The volcano is 6 miles ( 10 km ) by 5 miles ( 8 km ) at its base , possessing two summits . The southern crater is far greater in size , 984 feet ( 300 m ) wide with fumaroles , which can be attributed to edifice failure in the southern wall , while Gareloi 's northern crater is enclosed . 
 = = Discovery and accessibility = = 
 Vitus Bering had been a prominent sailor in Russia . After successful expeditions in 1725 , 1728 , and 1730 , Bering was sent to explore what is now the Bering Sea area of the Pacific in 1740 . He soon settled on Kamchatka , where he started a settlement and built two additional vessels , dubbed St. Peter and St. Paul . In 1741 Bering and his company started towards North America , but were stalled by a storm and in being delayed were forced to take land . During the storm they could not make out the Alaskan coast . The storm proved too powerful so the ships turned around , along the way charting several of the Aleutians , including Gareloi . Since then , it has been barely studied , resulting in a fragmentary knowledge of its eruptions and possibly even unrecorded episodes . 
 Gareloi Island is uninhabited and is part of the Alaska Maritime National Wildlife Refuge managed by the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service . 
 = = Geography and geology = = 
 Gareloi is the northernmost volcano of the <unk> Group , a subgroup of the Aleutian Islands . It is composed of two craters , the older of which is covered by lava flows running to the northwest and southern coasts . The northern crater is small , with a feature suggesting dome collapse in its northwest flank . The southern flank , higher up and considerably larger , contains fumarolic activity . A fissure created by Gareloi 's 1929 eruption runs along the southern summit of the volcano . Steep sea cliffs on the southwest side of the island cut into the older caldera . Three masses offshore of the island were produced by debris flows from the volcano . 
 Gareloi is of lava flows and pyroclastic origin . Two main episodes contributed to its creation . Lava deposits on the mountain vary from 3 feet ( 1 m ) to 20 feet ( 6 m ) in thickness . Some of them extend from external vents on the volcano , suggesting that activity during the Pleistocene took place . 
 There are two large lava valleys on the island 's southwest side which are u @-@ shaped . The oldest of these flows are of Pleistocene age composed of basaltic trachyandesite and basaltic andesite , with smaller amounts of plagioclase , clinopyroxene , olivine , and hornblende . 
 = = = Rock = = = 
 The rock that makes up Gareloi Island and its volcano is estimated to be of Pleistocene age . Several factors contribute to this inference , mainly the presence of glaciers and edifice failure ( landslide ) debris . The rock , which comprises dissected lava flows and pyroclastic masses , has been shaped by glacial retreat that began around 10 @,@ 000 years past and fleshed out newly formed rocks . Other landslides have been generated on the north and east flanks of the volcano . 
 = = = Mapping = = = 
 The Alaska Volcano Observatory proceeded to map the volcano and its surrounding area in 2003 , in addition to implementing seismic monitors in June . 
 = = Eruptive history = = 
 Gareloi has an extensive eruptive history , dating back to at least 1760 . At least 12 eruptions have occurred at the summit , accompanied by lava and pyroclastic flows . Typically they have been characterized by a central vent eruption followed by an explosive eruption , and sometimes a phreatic explosion . All have been of Volcanic Explosivity Index ( VEI ) of 1 to 3 . Such eruptions have occurred in 1790 , 1791 , 1792 , 1873 , 1922 , April 1929 , 1950 , January 17 , 1952 , August 7 , 1980 , January 15 , 1982 , September 4 , 1987 , and August 17 , 1989 . Uncertain eruptions occurred in 1760 , 1828 , 1927 , and 1996 . 
 = = = 1929 = = = 
 In 1929 Gareloi Volcano underwent a major explosive eruption where it generated four lava flows , andesitic tuff , volcanic glass , and scoria of red tone . Thirteen craters , all located in the fissure , contributed to this episode . All are most likely phreatic . During the eruption , pyroclastic flows convened with tephra , as suggested by deposits . Lahar also streamed from the summit . 
 = = = 1980s – 1990s = = = 
 On August 8 , 1980 Gareloi erupted for the first time in records since 1929 , sending ash plumes over 35 @,@ 000 feet ( 10 @,@ 668 m ) into the atmosphere . Precursor earthquakes occurred on August 8 and 9 , both west of the Adak seismic network . A similar episode took place in 1982 when an ash cloud exceeding 23 @,@ 000 feet ( 7 @,@ 010 m ) appeared on satellite images on January 15 . 1987 marked a milestone in Gareloi 's eruptive history , when a flow , likely to be of volcanic origin , was observed by a commercial airplane pilot . The mass extended for 1 @,@ 312 feet ( 400 m ) down the volcano . Steam reportedly emanated from the volcano , but volcanologists were unable to verify an eruption . In 1989 an employee of the US Fish and Wildlife Service spotted another ash plume covering the caldera and climbing 2 @,@ 300 feet ( 701 m ) from the summit on August 17 . A minor eruption occurred on September 27 , 1996 was reported to the National Weather Service Aviation Weather Unit in nearby Anchorage . The plume , consisting of ash and steam , rose 5 @,@ 000 feet ( 1 @,@ 524 m ) from the volcano 's summit . 
 = = Threat = = 
 <unk> volcanic hazards pose a significant threat to human life near Gareloi . If Gareloi were to erupt unexpectedly , ash clouds , falling volcanic ash , pyroclastic flows , and debris avalanches ( such as lahars ) could easily span deadly hazards such as tsunamis . As volcanic ash can induce engine failure , it puts commercial airplanes in particular at high risk . Inhalation of volcanic ash , also known as tephra , creates respiratory complexities and irritation of the eye . 
 Pyroclastic flows from an eruption would destroy much wildlife about the volcano . Gareloi has historically produced several pyroclastic flows , which can travel extremely fast . Future flows at Gareloi Volcano could travel off the island into the Pacific Ocean and , if large enough , could fall into the ocean and generate tsunamis , though unlikely . 
 = Fabyan Windmill = 
 The Fabyan Windmill is an authentic , working Dutch windmill dating from the 1850s located in Geneva , Kane County , Illinois , just north of Batavia , Illinois , off Illinois Route 25 . The five @-@ story wooden smock mill with a stage , which stands 68 feet ( 21 m ) tall , sits upon the onetime estate of Colonel George Fabyan , but is now part of the Kane County Forest Preserve District . 
 In 1979 , the windmill was listed on the National Register of Historic Places as the Dutch Mill . The following year , the windmill was selected to be on a U.S. postage stamp , as part of a series of five windmills in a stamp booklet called " Windmills USA . " It originally operated as a custom grinding mill . 
 = = History = = 
 During the mid @-@ 19th century , the Fabyan Windmill was constructed by German craftsmen , Louis <unk> , and his brother @-@ in @-@ law <unk> Brockmann , on a site at Meyers Road near 16th Street in York Township between Elmhurst and Oak Brook , Illinois ( now Lombard , Illinois ) . 
 By the early 20th century , the windmill had fallen into a state of disrepair . In 1914 , George Fabyan purchased the disused windmill for approximately $ 8 @,@ 000 from Mrs. Fred Runge . He then had it moved to its present location in Geneva Township on the east side of the Fox River , close to Illinois Route 25 in July 1915 . Fabyan spent an estimated $ 75 @,@ 000 to have it moved , reconstructed , and restored . 
 The Edgar E. Belding Company of West Chicago was contracted by Fabyan to move the windmill from York Center . It was slowly dismantled piece by piece , with Roman numerals carved into the beams and braces to facilitate correct reconstruction . Some of the largest beams had to be hauled by a team of mules . 
 The windmill was reassembled on its present site by a Danish millwright named Rasmussen , with the assistance of John Johnson and six others from the Wilson Bros. Construction Co . After nineteen months , the relocation and reconstruction were completed . The mill was a wonder in its day , because it is thought to be the only fully automatic wind @-@ driven mill of its type . 
 George Fabyan died in 1936 , and his wife died two years later . The estate was then sold by the executors of the will to the Kane County Forest Preserve District for $ 70 @,@ 500 . 
 = = Structure = = 
 The giant cypress wood beams , trimmed with black walnut , are all hand joined and <unk> with wood dowels . In fact , there are no metal nails used inside the structure . Even the original gearing was handmade of hickory and maple , with all five floors containing different mechanisms . 
 The windmill was a functioning mill used by the <unk> for grinding several types of grain , including corn , wheat , rye , and oats . It also served as a grain mill for Fabyan 's herd of prized Jersey cattle . 
 At the mill 's top , or cap , is a huge cogged wheel called the brake wheel , which was turned by wind blowing against the sails . The sails are covered with canvas <unk> to help catch the wind . The sails had to be entirely reconstructed by Rasmussen and John Johnson , because they were missing when Fabyan bought the mill . The sails span 74 feet 4 inches . The brake wheel , located in the cap , rotates an upright shaft running the height of the mill . This shaft supplied power to all of the mill 's operations . 
 There is a set of belt @-@ driven elevators , remarkable for its time , that moved the grains from chutes to hoppers , and even from floor to floor , making the mill almost fully automatic . Most other mills required workers to hand shovel materials between operations . 
 During its reconstruction , the Colonel had a new foundation poured , which created a basement . In the basement , he had ovens installed whose vents and chimney extended underground beneath Route 25 to a structure that once stood on the other side . In addition to the ovens , marble slabs and cooling racks were also installed . It is thought that at one time , the windmill basement was an operating bakery . During the flour rationing of World War I , the bakery supposedly produced bread for the Fabyan family and even for their two bears , Tom and Jerry . However , the extent of use of the mill 's bakery is debatable due to an inadequate oven draft . 
 = = Significance = = 
 The wind @-@ powered mill is a type that was rarely built in the United States , where grist mills are usually powered by water . Its wooden gears and nail @-@ less construction techniques are of interest both technically and architecturally . The mill is also an example of an America folly , a structure built primarily to enhance the landscape or view . In this case , George Fabyan , a wealthy merchant , purchased and moved the by @-@ then inoperative mill to beautify his estate , but maintained it as a private mill with no commercial value . 
 = = Today = = 
 Kane County considered the windmill 's demolition as early as 1990 when it became structurally unsafe for public inspection . However , local citizens began fighting to keep the mill intact . In 1997 , the Forest Preserve District contracted third @-@ generation Dutch windmill maker Lucas <unk> to fully restore the windmill for a cost of over $ 900 @,@ 000 . It made its public debut in June 2005 . 
 The Fabyan Windmill is the best example of an authentic Dutch windmill in the United States , actually it 's a treasure and would be the most popular windmill in the Netherlands ( we currently have 1000 windmills ) . 
 The grinding mechanisms to make flour have been restored and are in use today by mill volunteers who do demonstrations to the public . 
 Even now , the varnish from 1915 is in near perfect condition because the climate inside the mill varies little from season to season due to its superior construction , and the Roman numeral markings carved into the beams used in original reconstruction are still visible . 
 = University of Wisconsin Experimental College = 
 The University of Wisconsin Experimental College was a two @-@ year college designed and led by Alexander Meiklejohn inside the University of Wisconsin – Madison with a great books , liberal arts curriculum . It was established in 1927 and closed in 1932 . Meiklejohn proposed the idea for an alternative college in a 1925 Century magazine article . The magazine 's editor @-@ in @-@ chief , Glenn Frank , became the University of Wisconsin 's president and invited Meiklejohn to begin the college within the university . Despite pushback from the faculty , the college opened in the fall of 1927 with a self @-@ governing community of 119 students and less than a dozen faculty . Students followed a uniform curriculum : Periclean Athens for freshmen and modern America for sophomores . The program sought to teach democracy and to foster an intrinsic love of learning within its students . 
 The college 's students became known as free spirited outsiders within the university for their different dress , apathetic demeanor , and greater interest in reading books . The college 's demographics were unlike the rest of the university , with students largely not from Wisconsin and disproportionately of Jewish and East Coast families . The college developed a reputation for radicalism and wanton anarchy , especially within Wisconsin . The students lived and worked with their teachers , called advisers , in Adams Hall , away from the heart of the university . They had no fixed schedule , no compulsory lessons , and no <unk> grades , though they read from a common syllabus . The advisers taught primarily through tutorial instead of lectures . Extracurricular groups , including philosophy , law , and theater clubs , were entirely student @-@ led . 
 The Great Depression and lack of outreach to <unk> and UW faculty led to the college 's slow decline . Enrollment decreased every year since the program began , which its statewide reputation exacerbated . After his son was expelled in 1931 by dean and Experimental College critic George Sellery , Meiklejohn recommended the college 's dissolution . Public criticism of the college included student radicalism , lack of discipline , administrative issues , and financial issues . Meiklejohn wrote a retrospective of the college , which philosopher John Dewey reviewed favorably and noted for its contribution to educational philosophy . University of Wisconsin faculty and regents voted to dissolve the college in May 1932 . Some advisers stayed to teach in the university , and Meiklejohn remained briefly before moving to Berkeley . The Experimental College influenced programs internal to the university , and was the precursor to its Integrated Liberal Studies undergraduate program . 
 = = Background = = 
 In June 1923 , Alexander Meiklejohn had been asked to step down as president of Amherst College . He was recruited specifically to revitalize the college a decade earlier with the views on education for which he was known . Meiklejohn announced curriculum reform with a singular focus on " understanding human life as to be ready and equipped for the practice of it " , and subsequently made the humanities coursework more interdisciplinary , added social sciences courses , and attracted new faculty members interested in the Socratic method . Meiklejohn had student support , but clashed with senior faculty and alumni , and was ultimately removed due to his administrative mismanagement and not his educational reforms . 
 Meiklejohn resolved to open a new , experimental liberal arts college in late 1924 , but struggled to find funding . Seeking $ 3 million for the venture , he was rejected by Bernard Baruch and Abraham Flexner but through support from The New Republic 's Herbert Croly was offered planning funds from the magazine 's main benefactor . The planning team included journalist Mark Sullivan , New School professor Alvin Johnson , and The Century Magazine editor @-@ in @-@ chief Glenn Frank . Frank had previously published Meiklejohn 's work and was sympathetic to his cause . 
 In January 1925 , Century published Meiklejohn 's plan for a new and " experimental " college , " A New College : Notes on a Next Step in Higher Education " . The proposed college would have a " unified " two @-@ year curriculum and closer ties between faculty and students , who were to be " coequal partners " . Meiklejohn called for a small school with a maximum of 35 professors and 300 students , with tutorial as the chief means of instruction . The planned program eschewed division by academic discipline and preferred holistic study of human civilization , particularly ancient Athens and the contemporary United States . The school sought to foster students who understood themselves in the context of their surrounding society as a " total human undertaking " . Meiklejohn wanted students who would independently volunteer to live in self @-@ governance . Meiklejohn biographer Adam Nelson wrote that for the 1920s , this idea of voluntary interest in study " seemed almost laughable " . The augmented liberal arts program was a departure from vocational education trends of the time , as was its emphasis on smaller classes in a time of large lectures for burgeoning college populations . 
 Frank stepped down from the magazine in May 1925 to become the incoming president of the University of Wisconsin ( UW ) . He invited Meiklejohn to open his school there and offered him a distinguished professorship . Meiklejohn planned the experimental college in secret and moved to Madison in January 1926 to teach in the philosophy department . Meiklejohn finished his experimental college proposal by April 1926 . It was similar in style to his Century article and became codified as the Experimental College based on its colloquial reference in correspondence between Meiklejohn and Frank . Meiklejohn presented his proposal to the All @-@ University Study Commission convened by Frank " to investigate the first two years of liberal college work " . The university faculty received the proposal apprehensively , and criticized its vagueness , lack of control group , costliness , and effect on their livelihoods . It was eventually approved on the condition that the faculty could review its details and regular progress . The Wisconsin legislature approved two years of funding , and the Experimental College was scheduled to open in fall 1927 . 
 Meiklejohn prioritized compatibility in his staff selection , and so hired ten of his friends who could work in " intimate fellowship " . The college received hundreds of faculty applications in the summer of 1926 , and the final makeup included six from Amherst , two from Brown , and one from Scotland , mostly in idealist philosophy and labor economics disciplines . The team met through the winter and into the 1927 spring to plan the program . They received 119 applications even though the program was unadvertised . Half of the applicant pool was interested in working with Meiklejohn specifically , and he was excited to work with " an entirely self @-@ selected and therefore truly democratic community of learning . " 
 = = Program = = 
 Meiklejohn 's Experimental College proposal called for two years of compulsory and interdisciplinary study of civilizations : ancient Athens for freshmen , and contemporary America for sophomores . The plan had students and teachers living and working together in the same residence hall with no fixed schedule , no compulsory lessons , and no semester grades , but a common syllabus . Their only grade was to be the single final exam . The college aimed " to inspire students to want to learn " and to teach democracy through " the intrinsic value of learning " over bribery , coercion , and physical violence . 
 The teachers , called advisers , would instruct via small , weekly tutorials and occasional schoolwide lectures on their personal research . Adviser appointments were split with two @-@ thirds in the Experimental College and one @-@ third in the rest of the university , a compromise between Meiklejohn and the College of Letters and Sciences . The program 's budget and appointments were negotiated directly with President Frank , bypassing the UW College of Letters and Science and its dean , George Sellery . 
 Meiklejohn saw books as the main instrument of a liberal education , and chose a great books curriculum so as to model the human intellect he wished to impart and to connect the timeless philosophical questions that occupy all such works . He wanted his college to read the same books and to debate the same questions simultaneously . Meiklejohn did not prefer one " great book " over another and saw them as interchangeable and in pursuit of the same essential questions about goodness , justice , and truth . Freshmen studied ancient Athens in the age of Pericles , reading authors such as Aeschylus , Herodotus , Homer , Plato , Thucydides , and Xenophon . Meiklejohn 's curriculum accentuated the author 's thoughts behind the work as related to general questions about society , and forewent emphasis on the texts themselves . 
 Plato 's The Republic was the freshman year capstone , as " the apex of literary and philosophical achievement in ancient Athenian thought " and the book that best embodied their civilization . Meiklejohn asked the students to synthesize how the contents of their first year were " interrelated in the experience of the individuals and of the community as a whole " . Over the summers , Meiklejohn assigned Middletown studies where students drew conclusions about American society based a view of their hometowns as typical of society . The returning sophomores were expected to exhibit self @-@ regulation as the primary regulator of their understanding , to educate themselves self @-@ sufficiently , and to wean themselves of the college institution . This freedom was taught so as to empower students towards independence while the advisers continued to hold pedagogical power . Henry Adams 's The Education of Henry Adams was the sophomore year capstone , chosen for its complexity , self @-@ criticism , and study of modern America 's development . Meiklejohn biographer Adam Nelson compared the Ex College curriculum and Adams 's autobiography as both lamenting " the tragedy of lost spiritual and intellectual unity " and enabling students to relate " their literary and lived experiences " . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 All extracurricular groups were student @-@ led . Clubs included the Philosophy Club ( held weekly at Meiklejohn 's house ) , the Law Group , the Forum , and the Experimental College Players ( a theater troupe ) . The Philosophy Club discussed topics such as the self and the relation between philosophy and science , for which Meiklejohn invited Clarence Ayres from Amherst to speak . The Law Group discussed liberty , state action , and laissez @-@ faire , while the Forum discussed current events like war , behaviorism , and imperialism . The Players performed classical plays including Antigone , The Clouds , Euripedes 's Electra , and Lysistrata , which caused a particular stir for its cross @-@ gender acting in erotic scenes . The English department chair and dean of women both castigated President Frank for letting the play run . Meiklejohn also invited several prominent speakers , including Bertrand Russell , Clarence Darrow , Frank Lloyd Wright , and Lewis Mumford . 
 = = = Facilities = = = 
 The College was based in Adams Hall , where students and their advisers lived and worked by the shore of Lake Mendota ( except for Meiklejohn , who lived in a large house several blocks away ) . Adams Hall was constructed in 1926 , with a Renaissance @-@ style quad and eight identical divisions , each with its own common room , den , and facilities for 30 students , two advisers , and a fellow . The surrounding facilities afforded abundant sporting opportunities , and the site offered distance from the city and university . The students shared part of Adams Hall with non @-@ Experimental College students , and the nearby common dining hall with the UW students in Tripp Hall . The other students were said to be bothered by the Experimental College 's disregard for property , rambunctiousness , noise , and dining hall biscuit fights . 
 = = Rise = = 
 The first class arrived in fall 1927 . The incoming Experimental College class was more diverse than the larger university 's population . One third of students hailed from Wisconsin ( as opposed to 90 percent in the university ) , most were from urban areas ( the East Coast had particularly strong representation ) , one third were second @-@ generation immigrants , and Meiklejohn estimated their Jewish population at 40 percent . The College was all @-@ male , due in part to space availability and the regents ' refusal of mixed @-@ sex living arrangements , in keeping with American college conventions . The students were largely well @-@ versed in current affairs , with higher scores on entrance exams and lower high school grades than their UW counterparts . Meiklejohn appreciated the challenges of reconciling this diversity and related this task to those facing the country 's democratic governance . 
 Meiklejohn recommended student government to the fall 1927 class , but they couldn 't decide on its form and ultimately voted against government . Put another way , they democratically voted against democratic governance in favor of anarchy . This disappointed Meiklejohn , but he thought they would eventually change their minds . 
 As freshmen struggled with the Athenian curriculum , he reverted to classification by academic discipline and offered companion texts in the field of the current work studied . In their dorms , the college students were known for their lack of respect for property , with three times the breakage in dorm assets than the rest of the university . Meiklejohn saw this as desirable and indicative of abetting nonconformity , and did not attempt to curb it . Meiklejohn had full reign over the college , so the university and its disciplinary proceedings could not intervene . Upon their exit two years later , students transferred to a number of Ivy League and prominent state universities . By this time , the college was known throughout the nation and Europe . 
 The college was reputed to be a radical institution . A judge presiding over a case involving three students in a socialist march declared the school " a hotbed of radical activity " . Meiklejohn bemoaned this characterization of his school and blamed the college 's media prominence for disproportionate coverage of an avant @-@ garde minority . Two such cases included a former student who announced his Communist Party gubernatorial bid from jail , and another who organized a labor march with the college 's students that ended in a face @-@ off described as " bearded ' <unk> ' " against varsity athletes " bent on ' smashing the heads of the Reds ' " . The Experimental College students acted differently from those of the rest of the university . They grew beards , wore their hair long , carried an air of apathy conspicuously , and did not tend as meticulously to their outward presentation . They developed a tradition of wearing dark blue blazers with pearl gray trim , emblazoned with the owl of Athena , worn in the " spirit of fellowship " and to set the college apart from the university . Many of the advisers ( including Meiklejohn ) were indeed progressive @-@ minded activists . 
 Despite their stereotypical " queerness " , The Daily Cardinal reported in 1930 that a majority of Experimental College students participated in sport , and that a number joined intramural teams , pledged for Greek life , and joined campus clubs . However , the students abnormally read an average of 16 non @-@ assigned books each semester and had an average of " only two dates a month " , which the paper considered abnormal amid hints of homosexuality . As these claims became widespread , Meiklejohn imported psychiatrist <unk> Williams from New York to study the students ' sexual habits . He found the students to be " warped and twisted " as " normal for ... their age " , praised the program for aiding their psychosexual growth where others inhibit , and concluded that the advisers made the students subservient to their demands even as they spoke in praise of student autonomy . 
 = = Decline = = 
 With the onset of the Great Depression in 1929 , the Experimental College began a slow decline . Many students couldn 't afford tuition , fewer had additional savings , and several dropped out . Along with books and campus salaries , the Experimental College became a budgetary luxury during a time of economic need for both students and the state , and its funding was in jeopardy . Meiklejohn started an Experimental College interest @-@ fee loan fund for unfunded students , and asked advisers and monied students to donate . During this period , some sophomores absconded the college for two weeks to live like the vagrant hobos who traveled the Midwest by rail looking for work . They returned to write papers about their experiences , which Meiklejohn is said to have appreciated for its syncretism of experience and the great questions grounded in their readings . 
 A 1930 faculty review of the curriculum questioned the program 's focus and choice of civilizations . The advisers entertained the Enlightenment , Middle Ages , and Renaissance as alternatives to their ancient Athens curriculum , but ultimately did not change course . By early 1930 , Meiklejohn began to show a loss of faith in the experiment and in education reform , chiefly in the ability to teach " rational self @-@ criticism " . Around the same time , Meiklejohn received letters from the Baraboo , Wisconsin , schools superintendent and a Baraboo judge noting the Experimental College 's sordid reputation in the state and its habit of repelling " ordinary " students whose parents were uninterested in the ramifications of such an education . Within the community , a January 1930 student committee reported a widespread lack of individual responsibility in their living arrangements . Parents began to complain about the college 's public esteem , the qualities forming in their sons , and the curriculum . The experiment was in ill repute . 
 Enrollment dropped every year since the program 's inception such that , when compounded by dropouts , the program was below half @-@ capacity three years later . UW President Glenn Frank had warned of decreased enrollment in August 1928 and of its consequences for the college . UW College of Letters and Science Dean George Sellery offered support conditional on codified discipline and uniform final exams , which Meiklejohn refused . Sellery later refused to allow transfer students into the college . Meiklejohn wrote letters to Wisconsin high schools in April 1929 that acknowledged the college 's stereotypes and welcomed demographic change , but the campaign backfired . He sent an adviser to tour the state and solve what he saw as a communication issue . The adviser found high school seniors largely interested in vocational training , and that the prospect of traditional college excited students to the point where they did not consider improvements upon that model . The adviser found students uninterested in the Experimental College 's prospects . 
 The locals saw Meiklejohn as an outsider . He was foreign to Madison in his politics , social life , and personality . Dean Sellery and President Frank 's professional relationship was untrusting and contemptuous , which extended to Meiklejohn due to his close association with Frank . Sellery had the support of the faculty , who were envious of the Experimental College advisers ' arrangements for higher salaries . In objection to the college 's reputation for radicalism , the son of the man who endowed Meiklejohn 's professorship revoked his funding . Frank needed the donor 's support , and so the incident marked Frank 's waning support for the college . Sellery spoke out against the Experimental College in the first quarter of 1929 , and Frank attempted to fire him in response . In 1931 , Sellery received letters from spies who found Meiklejohn 's son Donald , a philosophy doctoral student at the university and a part @-@ time Experimental College adviser , engaged in sex acts against university policy . Sellery pursued expulsion and denied Meiklejohn and his son 's separate requests for a lesser punishment . A week later , Meiklejohn asked the advisers to close the college . 
 Common public explanations for the college 's closure include student radicalism , lack of discipline , administrative issues , and financial issues . The Nation 's Eliseo Vivas blamed its lack of grades as detrimental to student incentive , and judged the effort to create self @-@ motivated students through freedom to be a failure . In School and Society , Professor Grant <unk> also credited the college 's freedoms and lack of compulsions with its demise . Proponents of the Experimental College painted it as the foil of a conservative , standard college , and blamed educational stagnation on the existing order . Meiklejohn believed in a liberal education 's power to change society through imagining alternatives to the status quo . He aimed to produce students who could counterbalance society with independence of thought , but admitted that he did not know how to facilitate this . 
 The University of Wisconsin faculty and regents voted to end the Experimental College in May 1932 . There was a farewell banquet for 250 guests in June 1932 . Meiklejohn did not judge the college 's success by its permanence , which he did not expect — he said he attempted the college as a test . Meiklejohn asked Sellery to give his graduate student advisers university assistantships , but was denied . Meiklejohn began to work on adult education in the University of Wisconsin Extension Division in July 1932 , where some of the Experimental College 's ideas took hold . He later moved to Berkeley . Advisers who stayed after the program 's end — such as classicist Walter Agard , philosopher Carl <unk> , and political scientist John Gaus — were known as popular and innovative , and Agard became the Classics department chair . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Meiklejohn wrote a retrospective of the Experimental College during the first half of 1932 . John Dewey reviewed the published book and declared it " a contribution to the philosophy of American education " . He saw the college to be a true expression of liberal education as it fostered rational faculties and self @-@ criticism , and noted the college 's place in fighting norms on a much larger timescale . For its ability to produce free @-@ thinkers in an age without similar values , Dewey found the college " a tragic success " . 
 Experimental College alumni celebrated reunions in 1942 at the University of Chicago , in 1957 at St. John 's College in Annapolis , Maryland , and in 1962 back in Madison . At St. John 's , Meiklejohn addressed the audience and read his favorite poets . Over a hundred alumni announced a fund for the Alexander Meiklejohn Award for Academic Freedom through the American Association of University Professors . At the Madison reunion , alumni announced the Alexander Meiklejohn Lectureship on the Meaning and Methods of Education for Freedom . Their reunions featured notably intellectual speakers , and would take on the air of their college discussions . Over the next two decades , Meiklejohn would return to speak in Madison at the behest of the Memorial Union Forum Committee and philosophy department . 
 In The University of Wisconsin : A Pictorial History , Arthur Hove states that the Experimental College " had little discernible influence beyond the university " , though it served as a prototype for the university 's Integrated Liberal Studies ( ILS ) program , spawned interest in learning , and showed the university 's role in making individuals as well as workers . Cronon and Jenkins ' The University of Wisconsin : A History , 1925 – 1945 notes the college 's recognition as the " best known example of [ Wisconsin ] curricular innovation " at the time , and blamed the college 's closure on the depression but more so " the hubris of its architects " for not evangelizing its value to <unk> and UW faculty . Cronon and Jenkins also saw the college 's influence in Charles Russell Bardeen 's fourth @-@ year medical school preceptor program , the academic recommendations from the 1930 Fish and 1940 Daniels Committees , and the inception of Integrated Liberal Studies . Similar to the Experimental College , the Integrated Liberal Studies started in the late 1940s was a great books , liberal arts , tutorial curriculum . It was developed in part by Agard , the Classics professor and former Experimental College adviser . An English professor described ILS 's ambience as that of a " small college " within a large university . Meiklejohn received an honorary Doctor of Letters degree from Madison in June 1964 , where he was escorted by the first ILS director , Robert Pooley . 
 A 1939 announcement described him as " one of the university 's greatest teachers " . Notable alumni include Victor Wolfson , a Broadway playwright and founder of the college 's theater group . 
 = U.S. Route 18 in Iowa = 
 U.S. Highway 18 ( US 18 ) is the northernmost east – west U.S. Highway in the state of Iowa . As with all state highways in Iowa , it is maintained by the Iowa Department of Transportation ( Iowa DOT ) . It enters the state by crossing the Big Sioux River between Inwood and Canton , South Dakota . It travels 311 miles ( 501 km ) and connects Spencer , Mason City and Charles City . The highway leaves the state via the Marquette – Joliet Bridge over the Mississippi River at Marquette . Prior to becoming a U.S. Highway , the route US 18 follows was known as Primary Road No. 19 and the National Parks Pike . 
 = = Route description = = 
 US 18 begins at the Big Sioux River approximately 2 miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) east of Canton , South Dakota . It runs easterly through rural Lyon County , in the northwestern corner of the state . At Inwood it meets Iowa 182 , which provides access to Sioux Falls , South Dakota , via Iowa 9 and South Dakota Highway 42 . US 18 turns south at Inwood and heads into Sioux County . The highway crosses the Rock River on its way towards Rock Valley and Hull . West of Hull , at Perkins , US 18 juts to the south along US 75 before turning east again closer to Hull . The highway continues east towards Sheldon . 
 As it crosses into O 'Brien County on the western edge of Sheldon , US 18 intersects the business loop of Iowa 60 . The two routes head east towards a diamond interchange with Iowa 60 on the eastern side of town where the business loop ends . The highway roughly parallels the Dakota , Minnesota and Eastern Railroad ( DM & E Railroad ) . In Sanborn , US 18 is briefly overlapped by US 59 , which joins from the north and leaves to the south . Continuing east , it passes through Hartley and then enters Clay County . North of Spencer , it intersects US 71 and the two routes head south together through town . On the south side of Spencer , the two routes come to a T intersection and each route heads in the opposite direction – US 18 to the east and US 71 to the west . 
 East of Spencer , US 18 passes through Ruthven in Palo Alto County . Between Ruthven and <unk> , it is joined by Iowa 4 from the north . The two routes split again in <unk> as Iowa 4 heads south . US 18 continues east , briefly heading south to enter Cylinder . The route curves back to the east at the DM & E Railroad line . An intersection with Iowa 15 near Whittemore marks the Palo Alto – Kossuth county line . Iowa 15 follows US 18 for 1 mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) before it splits away to the north . On the northern edge of Algona , the highway meets US 169 . At the eastern county line , shared with Hancock County , is an intersection with Iowa 17 , which marks that route 's northern end . 
 In Hancock County , the route passes through Britt before meeting US 69 1 mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) west of Garner ; the two highways split in Garner . East of Garner , the route takes a north @-@ northeasterly path as it goes through Ventura and skirts the northern shore of Clear Lake . Near the northeastern shore of the lake , it enters the city of Clear Lake , where it meets Interstate 35 ( I @-@ 35 ) . Iowa 122 and U.S. Route 18 Business ( US 18 Bus . ) head east from the interchange with the interstate . US 18 traffic follows southbound I @-@ 35 for 4 miles ( 6 @.@ 4 km ) . Iowa 27 , the Avenue of the Saints highway , which had hitherto followed I @-@ 35 southbound now follows US 18 eastbound . The two routes , now on a four @-@ lane , controlled @-@ access highway , follow a path which passes to the south of Mason City . They meet US 65 and US 18 Bus. at exit 186 . 
 At the Floyd county line , US and Iowa 27 become a limited @-@ access road and angle slightly to the northeast , passing Rudd . At Floyd , the two routes are joined by US 218 . The three routes head south along a bypass of Charles City . They intersect Iowa 14 on the western side of town and take a 90 @-@ degree curve to the east . At exit 218 of the expressway , US 18 leaves US 218 and Iowa 27 , which continue southeastward towards Cedar Falls – Waterloo . US 18 briefly heads north into Charles City with US 218 Bus .. The two routes meet the northern end of Iowa 14 , and US 18 splits away to the east to cross the Cedar River . 
 Heading east again , the route enters Chickasaw County and passes through Bassett on its way to New Hampton . It meets US 63 at a four @-@ lane bypass on the western side of town . The two routes head south for 8 miles ( 13 km ) , splitting at the mile 196 interchange which is also the eastern end of Iowa 346 . The route turns to travel due @-@ east through Fredericksburg . 
 Continuing due @-@ east , US 18 does not enter another community for 20 miles ( 32 km ) until it reaches West Union in Fayette County . In West Union , it intersects Iowa 150 . East of town , it crosses into the Driftless Area , an area that was untouched by glaciation during the last ice age . The route turns to the northeast to through Clermont and then to the north to meet US 52 at <unk> in southern <unk> County . The two routes head east through <unk> and turn south into Clayton County . Near Froelich , US 52 leaves to the south towards Dubuque . Heading to the northeast towards , McGregor and Marquette , its business loop goes through the towns while the mainline skirts around them . The business loop rejoins the mainline at the foot of the Marquette – Joliet Bridge , which spans the Mississippi River . US 18 continues east into Wisconsin with Wisconsin Highway 60 , which begins at the state line . 
 = = History = = 
 Before it and the rest of the U.S. Highway System were designated on November 11 , 1926 , US 18 was known by two names in the state . It was first known as Primary Road No. 19 , which was assigned to the route when the Iowa State Highway Commission published its first state highway map in 1919 . The route was also called the National Parks Pike , which began at Yellowstone National Park and ended in Madison , Wisconsin , encompassing all of Primary Road No. 19 in the state . The Pike was registered with the on April 29 , 1920 . The National Parks Pike name fell into disuse after the highway became US 18 . 
 By 1927 , a significant portion of the route was paved , while the remainder was gravelled . All of O 'Brien County and 80 miles ( 129 km ) between Algona and Charles City were paved . In seven years , the gap between O 'Brien County and Algona was finished which created 160 miles ( 257 km ) of continuous pavement . During those same seven years , the route from West Union to the Mississippi River and all of Primary Road No. 59 , which included the 7 @-@ mile @-@ long ( 11 km ) overlap of US 18 near New Hampton were paved . Primary Road No. 59 is now known as US 63 . By the start of World War II , the only remaining section of US 18 that wasn 't paved was an 11 @-@ mile ( 18 km ) section west of Rock Valley in Sioux County . That last section would not be completed for another ten years . 
 Prior to 1932 , the only way vehicles traveling US 18 could cross the Mississippi River was by ferry . That changed in when identical suspension bridges were built to cross the river between Marquette and Prairie du Chien , Wisconsin . Built in 1931 – 1932 , each bridge was 450 feet ( 140 m ) long and crossed a main channel of the river and were divided by a 2 @,@ 000 @-@ foot @-@ long ( 610 m ) island causeway . The first car to cross the bridges did so on March 7 , 1932 . Users of the bridge had to pay a toll until July 15 , 1954 . The bridges remained in use for another twenty years , when they were replaced by the Marquette – Joliet Bridge . In 1988 – 89 , a bypass was built around McGregor so US 18 could connect directly to the Marquette – Joliet Bridge . A short road had previously provided access to and from the bridge . The old alignment of the route became US 18 Bus . 
 Over the late @-@ 1990s , construction began on the Avenue of the Saints corridor near Mason City . A new controlled @-@ access facility was built south of the city east to Rudd . On December 5 , 1999 , this section of freeway opened and US 18 was realigned onto the new road . The old alignment became Iowa Highway 122 . By the end of the next year , the four @-@ lane expressway was extended to Charles City . By 2003 , an expressway carrying US 63 was built around New Hampton . US 18 was rerouted onto the expressway and the western end of Iowa 24 was moved to the US 63 / US 18 interchange . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 = Tropical Storm Doria ( 1971 ) = 
 Tropical Storm Doria was the costliest tropical cyclone in the 1971 Atlantic hurricane season . The fifth tropical storm of the season , Doria developed from a tropical wave on August 20 to the east of the Lesser Antilles , and after five days without development it attained tropical storm status to the east of Florida . Doria turned to the north , and reached peak winds of 65 mph ( 105 km / h ) as it was making landfall near Morehead City , North Carolina . It turned to the northeast , and moved through the Mid @-@ Atlantic and New England as a tropical storm before becoming an extratropical storm over Maine on August 29 . 
 In North Carolina , Doria produced moderate rainfall , resulting in localized flooding and damage . The storm spawned a tornado near Norfolk , Virginia , damaging twelve houses and downing hundreds of trees . Tropical Storm Doria dropped heavy precipitation in New Jersey , peaking at 10 @.@ 29 inches ( 261 mm ) in Little Falls . The rainfall led to record @-@ breaking river levels and flooding in several houses , resulting in damage to dozens of houses across the state . Moderate damage and rainfall continued along its path into New England and southeastern Canada . In all , Tropical Storm Doria caused seven deaths and $ 147 @.@ 6 million ( 1971 USD , $ 862 million 2016 USD ) . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 On August 15 , a tropical wave moved off the coast of Africa , and tracked westward while slowly organizing . On August 20 , subsequent to the development of a low @-@ level circulation , an area of convection along the wave developed into a tropical depression while located about 1 @,@ 000 miles ( 1 @,@ 600 km ) east @-@ northeast of Grenada . Initially failing to organize further , the depression moved to the west @-@ northwest , and on August 23 , it passed through the northern Lesser Antilles . The depression moved to the north of Puerto Rico , Hispaniola , and the Bahamas , and began to show further signs of organization on August 25 . After briefly weakening on August 26 , the depression re @-@ strengthened while turning to the north , and attained tropical storm status on August 27 while located 230 miles ( 370 km ) east of Daytona Beach , Florida . 
 After reaching tropical storm status , Doria quickly intensified as its wind field expanded while moving northward . The minimum central pressure quickly dropped , as well , and late on August 27 , Doria reached its peak intensity of 65 mph ( 105 km / h ) while making landfall on North Carolina near Morehead City . The storm maintained its peak winds as it moved north @-@ northeastward through North Carolina , and weakened slightly to a 60 mph ( 95 km / h ) tropical storm after entering Virginia on August 28 . Doria turned to the northeast , passing through the Chesapeake Bay and Delmarva Peninsula before entering southern New Jersey . It paralleled the state a short distance inland , and after moving through New York City Doria became extratropical over northwestern Maine on August 29 . The extratropical remnant continued northeastward until losing its identity near the border of New Brunswick and Quebec in Canada . 
 = = Impact = = 
 = = = Southeast United States and Virginia = = = 
 Doria passed near or through the northern Caribbean Islands and the Bahamas as a tropical depression , though effects , if any , are unknown . Tropical Storm Doria passed about 160 miles ( 260 km ) east of Charleston , South Carolina , though its large wind field produced 22 mph ( 35 km / h ) winds in the town . The storm also dropped light rainfall of up to 1 @.@ 75 inches ( 44 mm ) , and resulted in a storm tide of 5 @.@ 7 feet ( 1 @.@ 7 m ) above the mean low water level . 
 Upon making landfall in North Carolina , Doria produced a storm tide of 2 feet ( 0 @.@ 6 m ) above normal at Cape Fear . Sustained winds in the state peaked at 41 mph ( 66 km / h ) in Hatteras , while gusts reached 69 mph ( 111 km / h ) in Atlantic Beach . In most areas , wind damage was minimal . Tropical Storm Doria dropped moderate rainfall across the state , including a report of 4 @.@ 17 inches ( 106 mm ) in Cape Hatteras . Over 5 inches ( 125 mm ) of rain fell around the Albemarle Sound and near New Bern . The rainfall led to flooding and mudslides , which blocked roads and highways . In localized areas , the flooding caused severe damage to roads and houses . Flooding from Doria also damaged water and sewage systems . Rainfall in the state persisted for two weeks after the passage of Doria . 
 In Virginia , the storm produced a storm tide of 3 @.@ 6 feet ( 1 @.@ 1 m ) above normal in Norfolk . Sustained winds peaked at 60 mph ( 95 km / h ) in Langley Air Force Base , while gusts reached 71 mph ( 114 km / h ) in Norfolk . The bands of the storm spawned an F1 tornado near Portsmouth and Chesapeake , damaging twelve homes and downing hundreds of trees . Damage from the tornado amounted to $ 250 @,@ 000 ( 1971 USD , $ 1 @.@ 46 million 2016 USD ) . Rainfall from Doria was moderate , peaking at 6 @.@ 44 inches ( 164 mm ) at a location 2 miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) south @-@ southeast of Halifax . One person drowned in Alexandria when she fell into a draining ditch . The storm severely damaged a large warehouse in Norfolk , as well . Damage in Virginia totaled $ 375 @,@ 000 ( 1971 USD , $ 2 @.@ 19 million 2016 USD ) . Floodwaters from Doria clogged sewage systems near Norfolk , Virginia with sand and silt . This forced the sewage to be dumped into the Chesapeake Bay , resulting in the closure of several beaches for days . 
 = = = Mid @-@ Atlantic states = = = 
 Tropical Storm Doria dropped 3 @.@ 85 inches ( 98 mm ) of rain in Washington National Airport in Washington , D.C. In Maryland , the storm resulted in tides 2 @.@ 7 feet ( 0 @.@ 8 m ) above normal in Fort McHenry . Rainfall in the state peaked at 4 @.@ 39 inches ( 112 mm ) in Baltimore , while wind gusts reached a maximum of 63 mph ( 101 km / h ) at the United States Coast Guard station in Ocean City . The storm produced 5 @.@ 09 inches ( 129 mm ) of rain in Wilmington , Delaware and a storm tide of 3 @.@ 2 feet ( 1 m ) above normal in Lewes . In Pennsylvania , the passage of Tropical Storm Doria resulted in 6 @.@ 57 inches ( 167 mm ) of rain and peak wind gusts of 73 mph ( 117 km / h ) in Philadelphia . Moderate winds downed trees and power lines in Pennsylvania , and one person died in the state . Several rivers in the southeastern portion of the state experienced record @-@ breaking flooding . 
 In New Jersey , Doria produced wind gusts of up to 54 mph ( 87 km / h ) and storm tides 5 @.@ 3 feet ( 1 @.@ 6 m ) above normal in Atlantic City . The outer bands of the storm spawned an F2 tornado near Cape May . It moved quickly northward through Cape May County , and caused about $ 250 @,@ 000 in damage ( 1971 USD , $ 1 @.@ 46 million 2016 USD ) in damage along its 29 mile ( 47 km ) path . The storm dropped heavy rainfall , peaking at 10 @.@ 29 inches ( 261 mm ) in Little Falls . Record 24 @-@ hour rainfall totals occurred in Newark with 7 @.@ 84 inches ( 199 mm ) and Trenton with 7 @.@ 55 inches ( 192 mm ) . The rainfall led to record flooding on several small streams in the state . The <unk> Brook crested at over 5 feet ( 1 @.@ 5 m ) above normal , which destroyed a bridge near Princeton . The Raritan River at Manville crested at 9 @.@ 8 feet ( 3 m ) , a record that stood until the passage of Hurricane Floyd in 1999 . The heavy rainfall overtopped the levee system in <unk> , causing severe damage to the Alma White College and preventing it from opening in the fall of 1971 . The rainfall also flooded two fire houses in Somerville with several feet of water , and the water treatment plant in Bridgewater Township with 18 inches ( 457 mm ) of floodwaters in what was catalogued as a 50 @-@ year flood event . Following the flooding to the water treatment plant , officials raised the beams of the plant to withstand a 500 @-@ year flood event . Eleven houses experienced flooding damage in Montgomery Township . Doria killed three people and caused $ 138 million in damage ( 1971 USD ) in the state . 
 = = = Northeast United States and Canada = = = 
 Tropical Storm Doria produced moderate winds in New York City with gusts to 48 mph ( 77 km / h ) . The storm tide reached 3 @.@ 8 feet ( 1 @.@ 2 m ) above normal at Battery Park , and rainfall peaked at 5 @.@ 96 inches ( 151 mm ) . LaGuardia Airport recorded 2 @.@ 29 inches ( 58 mm ) of rain in a one @-@ hour period . The threat of the storm cancelled a baseball game between the Los Angeles Dodgers and the New York Mets . Heavy rainfall flooded streets and subways in New York . In Connecticut , Doria produced up to 3 @.@ 12 inches ( 79 mm ) of rain and wind gusts peaking at 48 mph ( 77 km / h ) in Hartford . Doria dropped light rain in Rhode Island , including a report of 0 @.@ 97 inches ( 25 mm ) in Providence . The storm also produced wind gusts of up to 61 mph ( 98 km / h ) and a storm tide of 5 @.@ 9 feet ( 1 @.@ 8 m ) above mean water level . In Boston , rainfall totaled to 0 @.@ 83 inches ( 21 mm ) , while wind gusts peaked at 80 mph ( 130 km / h ) at the Blue Hill Meteorological Observatory . Two people drowned in Marblehead when they were swept away by surf from the storm . 
 The storm dropped moderate rainfall in Vermont , including a total of 5 @.@ 73 inches ( 141 mm ) in Mays Mill . The rainfall caused road washouts , landslides , and damage to bridges in the southeast portion of the state . The center of Tropical Storm Doria passed over south @-@ central New Hampshire , resulting in heavy rains and damaging winds . Sustained winds in Maine were generally around 30 mph ( 48 km / h ) , while gusts peaked at 61 mph ( 98 km / h ) in Lewiston . The strong winds resulted in downed trees and widespread outages to power and telephone service . The winds also damaged a mobile home in <unk> and a steel shed in Lewiston . Doria produced moderate rainfall , including a total of 1 @.@ 75 inches ( 44 mm ) in Lewiston , though little flooding occurred . 
 Moisture from Tropical Storm Doria entered southeastern Canada , peaking at over 3 inches ( 75 mm ) in the <unk> region of Quebec . The rainfall led to severe flooding in Victoriaville , causing damage to roads , bridges , and crops . Damage totalled to about $ 250 @,@ 000 ( 1971 CND , $ 245 @,@ 000 1971 USD ) . 
 Throughout its path , Tropical Storm Doria caused seven deaths and $ 147 @.@ 6 million in damage ( 1971 USD ) . 
 In early September 1971 , President Richard Nixon declared counties in New Jersey , New York , and Pennsylvania as disaster areas due to heavy rains and flooding . This allowed citizens in disaster areas to apply for federal assistance . 
 = Atomic Energy Act of 1946 = 
 The Atomic Energy Act of 1946 ( McMahon Act ) determined how the United States would control and manage the nuclear technology it had jointly developed with its World War II allies , the United Kingdom and Canada . Most significantly , the Act ruled that nuclear weapon development and nuclear power management would be under civilian , rather than military control , and established the United States Atomic Energy Commission for this purpose . 
 It was sponsored by Senator Brien McMahon , a Democrat from Connecticut , who chaired the United States Senate Special Committee on Atomic Energy , and whose hearings in late 1945 and early 1946 led to the fine tuning and passing of the Act . The Senate passed the Act unanimously through voice vote , and it passed the House of Representatives 265 – 79 . Signed into law by President Harry S. Truman on August 1 , 1946 , it went into effect on January 1 , 1947 , and the Atomic Energy Commission assumed responsibility for nuclear energy from the wartime Manhattan Project . 
 The Act was subsequently amended to promote private development of nuclear energy under the Eisenhower administration 's Atoms for Peace program in 1954 . In restricting the access to nuclear information to other countries , it created a rift between the United States and its allies , particularly Britain and Canada , which had participated in the Manhattan Project . This resulted in cumbersome command and control arrangements , and in Britain developing its own nuclear weapons . The Act was amended in 1958 to allow the United States to share information with its close allies . 
 = = Origins = = 
 Nuclear weapons were developed during World War II by the wartime Manhattan Project . Key scientists working on the project anticipated that their development would have wide @-@ ranging implications . However the project director , Major General Leslie R. Groves , Jr . , was reluctant to spend project funds on activities beyond those required to win the war . Nonetheless , Arthur Compton of the Metallurgical Project in Chicago commissioned a report on post @-@ war nuclear energy , and the Military Policy Committee , the Manhattan Project 's governing body , commissioned a similar study by Richard Tolman . Both reports called for a comprehensive , government @-@ supported nuclear energy program , with military , scientific , and industrial aspects . 
 In July 1944 , Vannevar Bush , James B. Conant and Irvin Stewart produced a proposal for domestic legislation to control nuclear energy . Conant submitted this to the Secretary of War Henry L. Stimson in September 1944 , and then to the Interim Committee , a body created by President Harry S. Truman in May 1945 to supervise , regulate and control nuclear energy until such a time as Congress created a permanent body to do so . In June 1945 , the Interim Committee asked George L. Harrison , an assistant to Stimson and a member of the committee , to prepare legislation . 
 = = Creation of the Act = = 
 = = = May – Johnson Bill = = = 
 Harrison brought in two experienced Harvard Law School @-@ educated War Department lawyers , Brigadier General Kenneth Royall and William L. Marbury to take up the job of drafting the legislation . The legislation was based on Bush and Conant 's proposal , and the organization that it proposed was based on the existing structure of the Manhattan Project . Their draft bill would have created a nine @-@ man commission consisting of five civilian and four military members . It granted the commission broad powers to acquire property , operate facilities , conduct research , regulate all forms of nuclear energy and administer its own security , administrative and audit regimes . 
 Royall and Marbury envisaged nuclear energy being controlled by experts , with a minimum of political interference . The commissioners would be appointed for indefinite terms , and the President 's power to remove them would be limited . They would be supported by four advisory boards , for military applications , industrial uses , research and medicine , the membership of which would be restricted to those with technical qualifications . Day @-@ to @-@ day running of the organization would be in the hands of an administrator and his deputy . The Royall – Marbury Bill was reviewed by the Interim Committee at its July 19 meeting and revised in line with their suggestions . After the atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki lifted the veil of secrecy surrounding the Manhattan Project , Royall and Marbury were able to consult with the Attorney General , the Judge Advocate General and the Office of Scientific Research and Development . The draft was sent to the President in August for circulation among , and comment from , affected government agencies . Only the State Department had objections , on the basis that it was still involved in trying to hammer out an international agreement on nuclear energy . 
 On October 3 , 1945 , the bill was introduced in the House of Representatives by Congressman Andrew J. May from Kentucky , the chairman of the House Military Affairs Committee , and in the Senate by Senator Edwin C. Johnson from Colorado , the ranking member of the Senate Military Affairs Committee . The bill was known as the May @-@ Johnson Bill for its sponsors . May immediately had the bill referred to the Military Affairs Committee , which held hearings on October 9 . Bush , Conant and Groves all testified before the committee . But in the Senate Military Affairs Committee , the bill was held up by Senator Arthur H. Vandenberg . 
 There was a storm of criticism from scientists , particularly those at the Metallurgical Laboratory in Chicago . Leó Szilárd and Harold Urey were particularly notable critics . The bill created a powerful administrator and deputy administrator , and specifically stated that they might be members of the armed forces . It was feared that they would dominate the part @-@ time commissioners . The fact that the bill emphasized that the administrator had to keep the deputy fully informed further aroused suspicion that the administrator would be an Army officer and the deputy a Navy officer . The secrecy provisions also frightened many scientists ; it contained severe penalties of up to ten years imprisonment and $ 10 @,@ 000 in fines for security breaches . The Chicago Sun headline accused the War Department of attempting to railroad the legislation through Congress . 
 Legislators found themselves in an unusual and uncomfortable situation . Nuclear weapons were terrifying , and the nature of nuclear energy was not widely understood . Because it was so new , there were no policies or precedents to guide legislators , and traditional party alignments were absent . The scientists who had developed the new technology had never been vocal before , but suddenly were now . The victorious conclusion of World War II gave the armed forces enormous prestige , but there still remained the long @-@ standing American distrust of standing armies , and the tradition of civilian control of the military . 
 = = = McMahon Bill = = = 
 On December 20 , 1945 , Senator Brien McMahon introduced an alternative bill on atomic energy , drafted by the Senate Military affairs Committee , which quickly became known as the McMahon Bill . This was initially a very liberal bill regarding the control of scientific research , and was broadly supported by scientists . McMahon framed the controversy as a question of military versus civilian control of atomic energy , although the May @-@ Johnson Bill also provided for civilian control . The McMahon Bill attempted to address the controversial aspects of the May @-@ Johnson Bill . The number of commissioners was reduced to five , and they would serve full @-@ time . No exemption was provided for serving military officers . An amendment specified that they have staggered terms of five years . 
 While the bill was being debated , the news broke on February 16 , 1946 , of the defection of Igor Gouzenko in Canada , and the subsequent arrest of 22 people . The members of Congress debating the bill feared that " atomic secrets " were being systematically stolen by Soviet atomic spies . McMahon convened an executive session at which Federal Bureau of Investigation Director J. Edgar Hoover , Secretary of State James F. Byrnes and Groves were called to appear . Groves revealed that the British physicist Alan Nunn May had passed information about the Manhattan Project to Soviet agents . 
 The more conservative elements in Congress now moved to toughen the act . Section 10 , which was formerly titled " Dissemination of Information " , now became " Control of Information " . This new section contained the novel doctrine later described as " born secret " or " classified at birth " . All information concerning the design , development and manufacture of nuclear weapons was " restricted data " , and regardless of how it was derived or obtained , was considered classified unless it was specifically declassified . This restriction on free speech , covering an entire subject matter , is still enforced . The " wall of secrecy " set up by the Act meant that atomic energy research and development had to be conducted under the supervision of the Atomic Energy Commission . 
 Representative Helen Gahagan Douglas , who sponsored the McMahon Bill in the House , vigorously defended the dissemination provisions of Section 10 against counterarguments . She dismissed objections that it would " give away the secret of the bomb " , asserting that America 's advantage in nuclear weapons could only be temporary , whereas the bill could perpetuate its lead in scientific research . An important addition , known as the Vandenberg Amendment , created a Military Liaison Committee to advise the commission on defense matters . Section 2 of the Act also created a General Advisory Committee , and a new Joint Committee on Atomic Energy to oversee the new organization . 
 The Senate passed the Act unanimously through voice vote on June 1 , 1946 . Considerable political maneuvering was required before it was passed by the House 265 – 79 on July 20 . A compromise bill was then agreed to by both houses on July 26 . Truman signed the compromise bill into law as the Atomic Energy Act of 1946 on August 1 , 1946 . When it went into effect at midnight on January 1 , 1947 , the newly created Atomic Energy Commission assumed responsibility for nuclear energy from the wartime Manhattan Project . 
 = = Amendment = = 
 = = = Private production of nuclear energy = = = 
 An important omission from the Atomic Energy of 1946 was any mention of non @-@ governmental use of nuclear energy , since military applications overshadowed all others at the time . The restrictions of the act related to secrecy , the control of fissile materials , the ownership of patents and the operation of production facilities placed a number of legal roadblocks in the way of private nuclear power stations . 
 This was at odds with the Eisenhower administration 's Atoms for Peace program , and resulted in pressure on federal officials to develop a civilian nuclear power industry that could help justify the government 's considerable expenditures on the nuclear weapons program . In 1953 the Atomic Energy Commission presented a set of draft amendments to the Joint Committee on Atomic Energy for consideration . After some debate , this resulted in the Atomic Energy Act of 1954 . 
 The Atomic Energy Act of 1954 proved insufficient in its objective of encouraging privately built and run nuclear reactors . A series of accidents with research reactors , including partial core meltdowns , made private companies cautious , and reluctant to become involved with nuclear energy without protection from liability . This led to the Price – Anderson Nuclear Industries Indemnity Act of 1957 , which capped private liability for nuclear accidents , while providing for adequate compensations for accident victims . 
 = = = International relations = = = 
 Implementing the McMahon Act created a substantial rift between United States and Britain . The new control of " restricted data " prevented the United States ' allies from receiving any information , despite the fact that the British and Canadian governments , before contributing technology and manpower to the Manhattan Project , had made agreements with the United States about the post @-@ war sharing of nuclear technology . Those agreements had been formalized in the 1943 Quebec Agreement . In the case of the United Kingdom , these were developed further in the 1944 Hyde Park Agreement , which was signed by Winston Churchill and Franklin Roosevelt . 
 The Hyde Park Agreement was lost in Roosevelt 's papers after his death , and until the American copy of the document was found American officials were puzzled when the British mentioned it . The Quebec Agreement was an executive agreement that only applied to the Roosevelt administration , and the Senate had not seen the document . McMahon told Churchill in 1952 that " If we had seen this Agreement , there would have been no McMahon Act . " The McMahon Act fueled resentment from British scientists and Churchill , and led to Britain developing its own nuclear weapons . 
 Lewis Strauss , the Chairman of the Atomic Energy Commission , proposed in January 1958 that the President should be able to share nuclear information with allies that were making " substantial and material contributions to the national defense and security " . In addition to its own nuclear weapons , Britain had hosted American Strategic Air Command nuclear bombers since 1948 . Congress modified the Atomic Energy Act of 1954 in June 1958 , and America and Britain again began sharing nuclear research under the 1958 US – UK Mutual Defence Agreement . 
 The stipulations contained in the Act caused significant controversy during debates over NATO 's military command structure . Both Striking Fleet Atlantic and the United States Sixth Fleet have never been allowed to be placed anywhere but directly under American commanding officers — the Supreme Allied Commander Atlantic and Commander @-@ in @-@ Chief , Allied Forces Southern Europe — because the dominant legal interpretation of the McMahon Act has been that nuclear striking forces cannot be controlled by non @-@ US commanders . This was the reason for the formation of Striking Fleet Atlantic as an independent entity , instead of being operationally subordinated to the UK Admiral serving as Commander @-@ in @-@ Chief , Eastern Atlantic , in October – November 1952 . This was also the reason why the Sixth Fleet , in its NATO guise as Naval Striking and Support Force , South , was placed under American control rather than Allied Forces Mediterranean when the European commands were agreed at the same time . 
 = = Case law = = 
 A 2012 court decision concerning a state law attempting to shut down the Vermont Yankee Nuclear Power Plant affirmed that the Act gives the federal government exclusive authority over safety at nuclear power plants . This allowed Vermont Yankee to continue operating until it was voluntarily shut down by the owner for economic reasons . 
 = Kilogram = 
 The kilogram or kilogramme ( SI unit symbol : kg ) , is the base unit of mass in the International System of Units ( SI ) ( the Metric system ) and is defined as being equal to the mass of the International Prototype of the Kilogram ( IPK , also known as " La Grande K " or " Big K " ) . 
 The gram , 1 / 1000 of a kilogram , was provisionally defined in 1795 as the mass of one cubic centimeter of water at the melting point of ice . The final kilogram , manufactured as a prototype in 1799 and from which the IPK was derived in 1875 , had a mass equal to the mass of 1 dm3 of water at its maximum density , approximately 4 ° C. 
 The kilogram is the only SI base unit with an SI prefix ( " kilo " , symbol " k " ) as part of its name . It is also the only SI unit that is still directly defined by an artifact rather than a fundamental physical property that can be reproduced in different laboratories . Three other base units ( cd , A , mol ) and 17 derived units ( N , Pa , J , W , C , V , F , Ω , S , <unk> , T , H , kat , Gy , Sv , lm , lx ) in the SI system are defined relative to the kilogram , so its stability is important . Only 8 other units do not require the kilogram in their definition : temperature ( K , ° C ) , time and frequency ( s , Hz , Bq ) , length ( m ) , and angle ( rad , sr ) . 
 The International Prototype Kilogram was commissioned by the General Conference on Weights and Measures ( CGPM ) under the authority of the Metre Convention ( 1875 ) , and in the custody of the International Bureau of Weights and Measures ( BIPM ) who hold it on behalf of the CGPM . After the International Prototype Kilogram had been found to vary in mass over time relative to its reproductions , the International Committee for Weights and Measures ( CIPM ) recommended in 2005 that the kilogram be redefined in terms of a fundamental constant of nature . At its 2011 meeting , the CGPM agreed in principle that the kilogram should be redefined in terms of the Planck constant . The decision was originally deferred until 2014 ; in 2014 it was deferred again until the next meeting . There are currently several different proposals for the redefinition ( some of which have been abandoned ) ; these are described in the Proposed Future Definitions section below . 
 The International Prototype Kilogram ( IPK ) is rarely used or handled . Copies of the IPK kept by national metrology laboratories around the world were compared with the IPK in 1889 , 1948 , and 1989 to provide traceability of measurements of mass anywhere in the world back to the IPK . 
 The avoirdupois ( or international ) pound , used in both the imperial and US customary systems , is defined as exactly 0 @.@ <unk> kg , making one kilogram approximately equal to 2 @.@ 2046 avoirdupois pounds . Other traditional units of weight and mass around the world are also defined in terms of the kilogram , making the IPK the primary standard for virtually all units of mass on Earth . 
 = = Name and terminology = = 
 The word kilogramme or kilogram is derived from the French kilogramme , which itself was a learned coinage , prefixing the Greek stem of <unk> <unk> " a thousand " to <unk> , a Late Latin term for " a small weight " , itself from Greek <unk> . The word kilogramme was written into French law in 1795 , in the Decree of 18 Germinal , which revised the older system of units introduced by the French National Convention in 1793 , where the gravet had been defined as weight ( poids ) of a cubic centimetre of water , equal to 1 / 1000 of a grave . In the decree of 1795 , the term gramme thus replaced gravet , and kilogramme replaced grave . 
 The French spelling was adopted in the United Kingdom when the word was used for the first time in English in 1797 , with the spelling kilogram being adopted in the United States . In the United Kingdom both spellings are used , with " kilogram " having become by far the more common . UK law regulating the units to be used when trading by weight or measure does not prevent the use of either spelling . 
 In the 19th century the French word kilo , a shortening of kilogramme , was imported into the English language where it has been used to mean both kilogram and kilometer . While kilo is acceptable in many generalist texts , for example The Economist , its use is typically considered inappropriate in certain applications including scientific , technical and legal writing , where authors should adhere strictly to SI nomenclature . When the United States Congress gave the metric system legal status in 1866 , it permitted the use of the word kilo as an alternative to the word kilogram , but in 1990 revoked the status of the word kilo . 
 During the 19th century , the standard system of metric units was the centimetre – gram – second system of units , treating the gram as the fundamental unit of mass and the kilogram simply as a derived unit . In 1901 , however , following the discoveries by James Clerk Maxwell to the effect that electric measurements could not be explained in terms of the three fundamental units of length , mass and time , Giovanni Giorgi proposed a new standard system which would include a fourth fundamental unit to measure quantities in electromagnetism . In 1935 this was adopted by the IEC as the Giorgi system , now also known as MKS system , and in 1946 the CIPM approved a proposal to adopt the ampere as the electromagnetic unit of the " MKSA system " . In 1948 the CGPM commissioned the CIPM " to make recommendations for a single practical system of units of measurement , suitable for adoption by all countries adhering to the Metre Convention " . This led to the launch of SI in 1960 and the subsequent publication of the " SI Brochure " , which stated that " It is not permissible to use abbreviations for unit symbols or unit names ... " . The CGS and MKS systems co @-@ existed during much of the early @-@ to @-@ mid 20th century , but as a result of the decision to adopt the " Giorgi system " as the international system of units in 1960 , the kilogram is now the SI base unit for mass , while the definition of the gram is derived from that of the kilogram . 
 = = Nature of mass = = 
 The kilogram is a unit of mass , a property which corresponds to the common perception of how " heavy " an object is . Mass is an inertial property ; that is , it is related to the tendency of an object at rest to remain at rest , or if in motion to remain in motion at a constant velocity , unless acted upon by a force . According to " Newton 's laws of motion " and the equation F = ma , ( second law of motion ) when acted upon by a force F of one newton , an object with mass m of one kilogram will accelerate a at the rate of one meter per second per second ( 1 m / s2 ) — about one @-@ tenth the acceleration due to Earth 's gravity 
 While the weight of an object is dependent upon the strength of the local gravitational field , the mass of an object is independent of gravity , as mass is a measure of how much matter an object contains . Accordingly , for astronauts in microgravity , no effort is required to hold objects off the cabin floor ; they are " weightless " . However , since objects in microgravity still retain their mass and inertia , an astronaut must exert ten times as much force to accelerate a 10 ‑ kilogram object at the same rate as a 1 ‑ kilogram object . 
 Because at any given point on Earth the weight of an object is proportional to its mass , the mass of an object in kilograms is usually measured by comparing its weight to the weight of a standard mass , whose mass is known in kilograms , using a device called a weighing scale . The ratio of the force of gravity on the two objects , measured by the scale , is equal to the ratio of their masses . 
 = = Kilogramme des Archives = = 
 On April 7 , 1795 , the gram was decreed in France to be " the absolute weight of a volume of pure water equal to the cube of the hundredth part of the metre , and at the temperature of melting ice . " The concept of using a unit volume of water to define a unit measure of mass was proposed by the English philosopher John Wilkins in his 1668 essay as a means of linking mass and length . 
 Since trade and commerce typically involve items significantly more massive than one gram , and since a mass standard made of water would be inconvenient and unstable , the regulation of commerce necessitated the manufacture of a practical realization of the water @-@ based definition of mass . Accordingly , a provisional mass standard was made as a single @-@ piece , metallic artifact one thousand times as massive as the gram — the kilogram . 
 At the same time , work was commissioned to precisely determine the mass of a cubic decimeter ( one liter ) of water . Although the decreed definition of the kilogram specified water at 0 ° C — its highly stable temperature point — the French chemist Louis Lefèvre @-@ <unk> and the Italian naturalist Giovanni <unk> after several years of research chose to redefine the standard in 1799 to water 's most stable density point : the temperature at which water reaches maximum density , which was measured at the time as 4 ° C. They concluded that one cubic decimeter of water at its maximum density was equal to 99 @.@ <unk> % of the target mass of the provisional kilogram standard made four years earlier . That same year , 1799 , an all @-@ platinum kilogram prototype was fabricated with the objective that it would equal , as close as was scientifically feasible for the day , the mass of one cubic decimeter of water at 4 ° C. The prototype was presented to the Archives of the Republic in June and on December 10 , 1799 , the prototype was formally ratified as the kilogramme des Archives ( Kilogram of the Archives ) and the kilogram was defined as being equal to its mass . This standard stood for the next 90 years . 
 = = International prototype kilogram = = 
 Since 1889 the magnitude of the kilogram has been defined as the mass of an object called the international prototype kilogram , often referred to in the professional metrology world as the " IPK " . The IPK is made of a platinum alloy known as " Pt ‑ 10Ir " , which is 90 % platinum and 10 % iridium ( by mass ) and is machined into a right @-@ circular cylinder ( height = diameter ) of 39 @.@ 17 millimeters to minimize its surface area . The addition of 10 % iridium improved upon the all @-@ platinum Kilogram of the Archives by greatly increasing hardness while still retaining platinum 's many virtues : extreme resistance to oxidation , extremely high density ( almost twice as dense as lead and more than 21 times as dense as water ) , satisfactory electrical and thermal conductivities , and low magnetic susceptibility . The IPK and its six sister copies are stored at the International Bureau of Weights and Measures ( known by its French @-@ language initials BIPM ) in an environmentally monitored safe in the lower vault located in the basement of the BIPM 's Pavillon de Breteuil in Sèvres on the outskirts of Paris ( see External images , below , for photographs ) . Three independently controlled keys are required to open the vault . Official copies of the IPK were made available to other nations to serve as their national standards . These are compared to the IPK roughly every 40 years , thereby providing traceability of local measurements back to the IPK . 
 The Metre Convention was signed on May 20 , 1875 and further formalized the metric system ( a predecessor to the SI ) , quickly leading to the production of the IPK . The IPK is one of three cylinders made in 1879 by Johnson Matthey , which continues to manufacture nearly all of the national prototypes today . In 1883 , the mass of the IPK was found to be indistinguishable from that of the Kilogramme des Archives made eighty @-@ four years prior , and was formally ratified as the kilogram by the 1st CGPM in 1889 . 
 Modern measurements of Vienna Standard Mean Ocean Water , which is pure distilled water with an isotopic composition representative of the average of the world 's oceans , show it has a density of 0 @.@ <unk> ± 0 @.@ <unk> kg / L at its point of maximum density ( 3 @.@ 984 ° C ) under one standard atmosphere ( 101 325 Pa or 760 torr ) of pressure . Thus , a cubic decimeter of water at its point of maximum density is only 25 parts per million less massive than the IPK ; that is to say , the 25 milligram difference shows that the scientists over 217 years ago managed to make the mass of the Kilogram of the Archives equal that of a cubic decimeter of water at 4 ° C , with a margin of error at most within the mass of a single excess grain of rice . 
 = = = Copies of the international prototype kilogram = = = 
 The various copies of the international prototype kilogram are given the following designations in the literature : 
 The IPK itself . Located in Sèvres , France . 
 Six sister copies , numbered : K1 , 7 , 8 ( 41 ) , 32 , 43 and 47 . Located in Sèvres , France . 
 Three unofficial copies , numbered : 25 , 88 and 91 ( numbers 9 and 31 were used before 2004 but were replaced by 88 and 91 ) . Located in Sèvres , France . 
 National prototypes , stored in Australia ( 44 and 87 ) , Austria ( 49 ) , Belgium ( 28 and 37 ) , Brazil ( 66 ) , Canada ( 50 and 74 ) , China ( 60 and 64 ; 75 in Hong Kong ) , Czech Republic ( 67 ) , Denmark ( 48 ) , Egypt ( 58 ) , Finland ( 23 ) , France ( 35 ) , Germany ( 52 , 55 and 70 ) , Hungary ( 16 ) , India ( 57 ) , Indonesia ( 46 ) , Israel ( 71 ) , Italy ( 5 and 76 ) , Japan ( 6 and 94 ) , Kazakhstan , Kenya ( 95 ) , Mexico ( 21 , 90 and 96 ) , Netherlands ( 53 ) , North Korea ( 68 ) , Norway ( 36 ) , Pakistan ( 93 ) , Poland ( 51 ) , Portugal ( 69 ) , Romania ( 2 ) , Russia ( 12 and 26 ) , Serbia ( 11 and 29 ) , Singapore ( 83 ) , Slovakia ( 41 and 65 ) , South Africa ( 56 ) , South Korea ( 39 , 72 and 84 ) , Spain ( 24 and 3 ) , Sweden ( 86 ) , Switzerland ( 38 and 89 ) , Taiwan ( 78 ) , Thailand ( 80 ) , Turkey ( 54 ) , United Kingdom ( 18 , 81 and 82 ) and the United States ( 20 , 4 , 79 , 85 and 92 ) . 
 Some additional copies held by non @-@ national organizations , such as the French Academy of Sciences in Paris ( 34 ) and the Istituto di <unk> G. <unk> in Turin ( 62 ) . 
 = = = Stability of the international prototype kilogram = = = 
 By definition , the error in the measured value of the IPK 's mass is exactly zero ; the IPK is the kilogram . However , any changes in the IPK 's mass over time can be deduced by comparing its mass to that of its official copies stored throughout the world , a rarely undertaken process called " periodic verification " . The only three verifications occurred in 1889 , 1948 , and 1989 . For instance , the US owns four 90 % platinum / 10 % iridium ( Pt ‑ 10Ir ) kilogram standards , two of which , K4 and K20 , are from the original batch of 40 replicas delivered in 1884 . The K20 prototype was designated as the primary national standard of mass for the US . Both of these , as well as those from other nations , are periodically returned to the BIPM for verification . 
 Note that none of the replicas has a mass precisely equal to that of the IPK ; their masses are calibrated and documented as offset values . For instance , K20 , the US 's primary standard , originally had an official mass of 1 kg − 39 micrograms ( μg ) in 1889 ; that is to say , K20 was 39 µg less than the IPK . A verification performed in 1948 showed a mass of 1 kg − 19 µg . The latest verification performed in 1989 shows a mass precisely identical to its original 1889 value . Quite unlike transient variations such as this , the US 's check standard , K4 , has persistently declined in mass relative to the IPK — and for an identifiable reason . Check standards are used much more often than primary standards and are prone to scratches and other wear . K4 was originally delivered with an official mass of 1 kg − 75 µg in 1889 , but as of 1989 was officially calibrated at 1 kg − 106 µg and ten years later was 1 kg − 116 µg . Over a period of 110 years , K4 lost 41 µg relative to the IPK . 
 Beyond the simple wear that check standards can experience , the mass of even the carefully stored national prototypes can drift relative to the IPK for a variety of reasons , some known and some unknown . Since the IPK and its replicas are stored in air ( albeit under two or more nested bell jars ) , they gain mass through adsorption of atmospheric contamination onto their surfaces . Accordingly , they are cleaned in a process the BIPM developed between 1939 and 1946 known as " the BIPM cleaning method " that comprises firmly rubbing with a chamois soaked in equal parts ether and ethanol , followed by steam cleaning with bi @-@ distilled water , and allowing the prototypes to settle for 7 – 10 days before verification . Cleaning the prototypes removes between 5 and 60 µg of contamination depending largely on the time elapsed since the last cleaning . Further , a second cleaning can remove up to 10 µg more . After cleaning — even when they are stored under their bell jars — the IPK and its replicas immediately begin gaining mass again . The BIPM even developed a model of this gain and concluded that it averaged 1 @.@ 11 µg per month for the first 3 months after cleaning and then decreased to an average of about 1 µg per year thereafter . Since check standards like K4 are not cleaned for routine calibrations of other mass standards — a precaution to minimize the potential for wear and handling damage — the BIPM 's model of time @-@ dependent mass gain has been used as an " after cleaning " correction factor . 
 Because the first forty official copies are made of the same alloy as the IPK and are stored under similar conditions , periodic verifications using a large number of replicas — especially the national primary standards , which are rarely used — can convincingly demonstrate the stability of the IPK . What has become clear after the third periodic verification performed between 1988 and 1992 is that masses of the entire worldwide ensemble of prototypes have been slowly but inexorably diverging from each other . It is also clear that the mass of the IPK lost perhaps 50 µg over the last century , and possibly significantly more , in comparison to its official copies . The reason for this drift has eluded physicists who have dedicated their careers to the SI unit of mass . No plausible mechanism has been proposed to explain either a steady decrease in the mass of the IPK , or an increase in that of its replicas dispersed throughout the world . This relative nature of the changes amongst the world 's kilogram prototypes is often misreported in the popular press , and even some notable scientific magazines , which often state that the IPK simply " lost 50 µg " and omit the very important caveat of " in comparison to its official copies " . Moreover , there are no technical means available to determine whether or not the entire worldwide ensemble of prototypes suffers from even greater long @-@ term trends upwards or downwards because their mass " relative to an invariant of nature is unknown at a level below 1000 µg over a period of 100 or even 50 years " . Given the lack of data identifying which of the world 's kilogram prototypes has been most stable in absolute terms , it is equally valid to state that the first batch of replicas has , as a group , gained an average of about 25 µg over one hundred years in comparison to the IPK . 
 What is known specifically about the IPK is that it exhibits a short @-@ term instability of about 30 µg over a period of about a month in its after @-@ cleaned mass . The precise reason for this short @-@ term instability is not understood but is thought to entail surface effects : microscopic differences between the prototypes ' polished surfaces , possibly aggravated by hydrogen absorption due to catalysis of the volatile organic compounds that slowly deposit onto the prototypes as well as the hydrocarbon @-@ based solvents used to clean them . 
 It has been possible to rule out many explanations of the observed divergences in the masses of the world 's prototypes proposed by scientists and the general public . The BIPM 's FAQ explains , for example , that the divergence is dependent on the amount of time elapsed between measurements and not dependent on the number of times the artifacts have been cleaned or possible changes in gravity or environment . Reports published in 2013 by Peter <unk> of Newcastle University based on the X @-@ ray <unk> spectroscopy of samples that were stored alongside various prototype kilograms suggested that one source of the divergence between the various prototypes could be traced to mercury that had been absorbed by the prototypes being in the proximity of mercury @-@ based instruments . The IPK has been stored within centimeters of a mercury thermometer since at least as far back as the late 1980s . In this Newcastle University work six platinum weights made in the nineteenth century were all found to have mercury at the surface , the most contaminated of which had the equivalent of 250 µg of mercury when scaled to the surface area of a kilogram prototype . 
 Scientists are seeing far greater variability in the prototypes than previously believed . The increasing divergence in the masses of the world 's prototypes and the short @-@ term instability in the IPK has prompted research into improved methods to obtain a smooth surface finish using diamond turning on newly manufactured replicas and has intensified the search for a new definition of the kilogram . See Proposed future definitions , below . 
 = = = Dependency of the SI on the IPK = = = 
 The stability of the IPK is crucial because the kilogram underpins much of the SI system of measurement as it is currently defined and structured . For instance , the newton is defined as the force necessary to accelerate one kilogram at one meter per second squared . If the mass of the IPK were to change slightly , so too must the newton by a proportional degree . In turn , the pascal , the SI unit of pressure , is defined in terms of the newton . This chain of dependency follows to many other SI units of measure . For instance , the joule , the SI unit of energy , is defined as that expended when a force of one newton acts through one meter . Next to be affected is the SI unit of power , the watt , which is one joule per second . The ampere too is defined relative to the newton , and ultimately , the kilogram . 
 With the magnitude of the primary units of electricity thus determined by the kilogram , so too follow many others , namely the coulomb , volt , tesla , and <unk> . Even units used in the measure of light would be affected ; the candela — following the change in the watt — would in turn affect the lumen and lux . 
 Because the magnitude of many of the units comprising the SI system of measurement is ultimately defined by the mass of a 137 @-@ year @-@ old , golf @-@ ball @-@ sized piece of metal , the quality of the IPK must be diligently protected to preserve the integrity of the SI system . Yet , despite the best stewardship , the average mass of the worldwide ensemble of prototypes and the mass of the IPK have likely diverged another 6 @.@ 4 µg since the third periodic verification 27 years ago . Further , the world 's national metrology laboratories must wait for the fourth periodic verification to confirm whether the historical trends persisted . 
 Fortunately , definitions of the SI units are quite different from their practical realizations . For instance , the meter is defined as the distance light travels in a vacuum during a time interval of 1 ⁄ 299 @,@ 792 @,@ 458 of a second . However , the meter 's practical realization typically takes the form of a helium – neon laser , and the meter 's length is delineated — not defined — as <unk> @.@ <unk> wavelengths of light from this laser . Now suppose that the official measurement of the second was found to have drifted by a few parts per billion ( it is actually extremely stable with a reproducibility of a few parts in 1015 ) . There would be no automatic effect on the meter because the second — and thus the meter 's length — is abstracted via the laser comprising the meter 's practical realization . Scientists performing meter calibrations would simply continue to measure out the same number of laser wavelengths until an agreement was reached to do otherwise . The same is true with regard to the real @-@ world dependency on the kilogram : if the mass of the IPK was found to have changed slightly , there would be no automatic effect upon the other units of measure because their practical realizations provide an insulating layer of abstraction . Any discrepancy would eventually have to be reconciled though , because the virtue of the SI system is its precise mathematical and logical harmony amongst its units . If the IPK 's value were definitively proven to have changed , one solution would be to simply redefine the kilogram as being equal to the mass of the IPK plus an offset value , similarly to what is currently done with its replicas ; e.g. , " the kilogram is equal to the mass of the IPK + 42 parts per billion " ( equivalent to 42 µg ) . 
 The long @-@ term solution to this problem , however , is to liberate the SI system 's dependency on the IPK by developing a practical realization of the kilogram that can be reproduced in different laboratories by following a written specification . The units of measure in such a practical realization would have their magnitudes precisely defined and expressed in terms of fundamental physical constants . While major portions of the SI system would still be based on the kilogram , the kilogram would in turn be based on invariant , universal constants of nature . Much work towards that end is ongoing , though no alternative has yet achieved the uncertainty of 20 parts per billion ( ~ 20 µg ) required to improve upon the IPK . However , as of April 2007 , the US 's National Institute of Standards and Technology ( NIST ) had an implementation of the watt balance that was approaching this goal , with a demonstrated uncertainty of 36 µg . See Watt balance below . 
 The avoirdupois pound , used in both the imperial and US customary systems , is defined as exactly 0 @.@ <unk> kg , making one kilogram approximately equal to 2 @.@ 2046 avoirdupois pounds . 
 = = Proposed future definitions = = 
 In the following sections , wherever numeric equalities are shown in ' concise form ' — such as 1 @.@ <unk> ( 14 ) × 1013 — the two digits between the parentheses denote the uncertainty at 1σ standard deviation ( 68 % confidence level ) in the two least significant digits of the significand . A final X in a proposed definition denotes digits yet to be agreed on . 
 As of 2014 the kilogram was the only SI unit still defined by an artifact . In 1960 the meter , having previously also been defined by reference to an artifact ( a single platinum @-@ iridium bar with two marks on it ) was redefined in terms of invariant , fundamental physical constants ( the wavelength of a particular emission of light emitted by krypton , and later the speed of light ) so that the standard can be reproduced in different laboratories by following a written specification . At the 94th Meeting of the International Committee for Weights and Measures ( CIPM ) ( 2005 ) it was recommended that the same be done with the kilogram . 
 In October 2010 , the CIPM voted to submit a resolution for consideration at the General Conference on Weights and Measures ( CGPM ) , to " take note of an intention " that the kilogram be defined in terms of the Planck constant , h ( which has dimensions of energy times time ) together with other fundamental units . This resolution was accepted by the 24th conference of the CGPM in October 2011 and in addition the date of the 25th conference was moved forward from 2014 to 2015 . Such a definition would theoretically permit any apparatus that was capable of delineating the kilogram in terms of the Planck constant to be used as long as it possessed sufficient precision , accuracy and stability . The watt balance ( discussed below ) may be able to do this . 
 In the project to replace the last artifact that underpins much of the International System of Units ( SI ) , a variety of other very different technologies and approaches were considered and explored over many years . They too are covered below . Some of these now @-@ abandoned approaches were based on equipment and procedures that would have enabled the reproducible production of new , kilogram @-@ mass prototypes on demand ( albeit with extraordinary effort ) using measurement techniques and material properties that are ultimately based on , or traceable to , fundamental constants . Others were based on devices that measured either the acceleration or weight of hand @-@ tuned kilogram test masses and which expressed their magnitudes in electrical terms via special components that permit traceability to fundamental constants . All approaches depend on converting a weight measurement to a mass , and therefore require the precise measurement of the strength of gravity in laboratories . All approaches would have precisely fixed one or more constants of nature at a defined value . 
 = = = Watt balance = = = 
 The watt balance is essentially a single @-@ pan weighing scale that measures the electric power necessary to oppose the weight of a kilogram test mass as it is pulled by Earth 's gravity . It is a variation of an ampere balance in that it employs an extra calibration step that nulls the effect of geometry . The electric potential in the watt balance is delineated by a Josephson voltage standard , which allows voltage to be linked to an invariant constant of nature with extremely high precision and stability . Its circuit resistance is calibrated against a quantum Hall resistance standard . 
 The watt balance requires exquisitely precise measurement of the local gravitational acceleration g in the laboratory , using a gravimeter . ( See " FG ‑ 5 absolute gravimeter " in External images , below ) . For instance , the NIST compensates for Earth 's gravity gradient of 309 <unk> per meter when the elevation of the center of the gravimeter differs from that of the nearby test mass in the watt balance ; a change in the weight of a one @-@ kilogram test mass that equates to about 316 µg / m . 
 In April 2007 , the NIST 's implementation of the watt balance demonstrated a combined relative standard uncertainty ( <unk> ) of 36 µg and a short @-@ term resolution of 10 − 15 µg . The UK 's National Physical Laboratory 's watt balance demonstrated a <unk> of 70 @.@ 3 µg in 2007 . That watt balance was disassembled and shipped in 2009 to Canada 's Institute for National Measurement Standards ( part of the National Research Council ) , where research and development with the device could continue . 
 If the CGPM adopts the new proposal and the new definition of the kilogram becomes part of the SI , the value in SI units of the Planck constant ( h ) , which is a measure that relates the energy of photons to their frequency , would be precisely fixed ( the currently accepted value of 6 @.@ <unk> ( 81 ) × 10 − 34 J s has an uncertainty of ± about 1 in 23 million ) . Once agreed upon internationally , the kilogram would no longer be defined as the mass of the IPK . All the remaining units in the International System of Units ( the SI ) that today have dependencies upon the kilogram and the joule would also fall in place , their magnitudes ultimately defined , in part , in terms of photon oscillations rather than the IPK . 
 Gravity and the nature of the watt balance , which oscillates test masses up and down against the local gravitational acceleration g , are exploited so that mechanical power is compared against electrical power , which is the square of voltage divided by electrical resistance . However , g varies significantly — by nearly 1 % — depending on where on the Earth 's surface the measurement is made ( see Earth 's gravity ) . There are also slight seasonal variations in g due to changes in underground water tables , and larger <unk> and diurnal changes due to tidal distortions in the Earth 's shape caused by the Moon . Although g would not be a term in the definition of the kilogram , it would be crucial in the delineation of the kilogram when relating energy to power . Accordingly , g must be measured with at least as much precision and accuracy as are the other terms , so measurements of g must also be traceable to fundamental constants of nature . For the most precise work in mass metrology , g is measured using dropping @-@ mass absolute gravimeters that contain an iodine @-@ stabilized helium – neon laser interferometer . The fringe @-@ signal , frequency @-@ sweep output from the interferometer is measured with a rubidium atomic clock . Since this type of dropping @-@ mass gravimeter derives its accuracy and stability from the constancy of the speed of light as well as the innate properties of helium , neon , and rubidium atoms , the ' gravity ' term in the delineation of an all @-@ electronic kilogram is also measured in terms of invariants of nature — and with very high precision . For instance , in the basement of the NIST 's Gaithersburg facility in 2009 , when measuring the gravity acting upon Pt ‑ 10Ir test masses ( which are denser , smaller , and have a slightly lower center of gravity inside the watt balance than stainless steel masses ) , the measured value was typically within 8 ppb of 9 @.@ <unk> m / s2 . 
 The virtue of electronic realizations like the watt balance is that the definition and dissemination of the kilogram would no longer be dependent upon the stability of kilogram prototypes , which must be very carefully handled and stored . It would free physicists from the need to rely on assumptions about the stability of those prototypes . Instead , hand @-@ tuned , close @-@ approximation mass standards would simply be weighed and documented as being equal to one kilogram plus an offset value . With the watt balance , while the kilogram would be delineated in electrical and gravity terms , all of which are traceable to invariants of nature ; it would be defined in a manner that is directly traceable to just three fundamental constants of nature . The Planck constant defines the kilogram in terms of the second and the meter . By fixing the Planck constant , the definition of the kilogram would depend only on the definitions of the second and the meter . The definition of the second depends on a single defined physical constant : the ground state hyperfine splitting frequency of the caesium 133 atom Δν ( 133Cs ) hfs . The meter depends on the second and on an additional defined physical constant : the speed of light c . If the kilogram is redefined in this manner , mass artifacts — physical objects calibrated in a watt balance , including the IPK — would no longer be part of the definition , but would instead become transfer standards . 
 Scales like the watt balance also permit more flexibility in choosing materials with especially desirable properties for mass standards . For instance , Pt ‑ 10Ir could continue to be used so that the specific gravity of newly produced mass standards would be the same as existing national primary and check standards ( ≈ 21 @.@ 55 g / ml ) . This would reduce the relative uncertainty when making mass comparisons in air . Alternatively , entirely different materials and constructions could be explored with the objective of producing mass standards with greater stability . For instance , osmium @-@ iridium alloys could be investigated if platinum 's propensity to absorb hydrogen ( due to catalysis of VOCs and hydrocarbon @-@ based cleaning solvents ) and atmospheric mercury proved to be sources of instability . Also , vapor @-@ deposited , protective ceramic coatings like nitrides could be investigated for their suitability to isolate these new alloys . 
 The challenge with watt balances is not only in reducing their uncertainty , but also in making them truly practical realizations of the kilogram . Nearly every aspect of watt balances and their support equipment requires such extraordinarily precise and accurate , state @-@ of @-@ the @-@ art technology that — unlike a device like an atomic clock — few countries would currently choose to fund their operation . For instance , the NIST 's watt balance used four resistance standards in 2007 , each of which was rotated through the watt balance every two to six weeks after being calibrated in a different part of NIST headquarters facility in Gaithersburg , Maryland . It was found that simply moving the resistance standards down the hall to the watt balance after calibration altered their values 10 ppb ( equivalent to 10 µg ) or more . Present @-@ day technology is insufficient to permit stable operation of watt balances between even biannual calibrations . If the kilogram is defined in terms of the Planck constant , it is likely there will only be a few — at most — watt balances initially operating in the world . 
 Alternative approaches to redefining the kilogram that were fundamentally different from the watt balance were explored to varying degrees with some abandoned , as follows : 
 = = = Atom @-@ counting approaches = = = 
 = = = = Carbon @-@ 12 = = = = 
 Though not offering a practical realization , this definition would precisely define the magnitude of the kilogram in terms of a certain number of carbon ‑ 12 atoms . Carbon ‑ 12 ( 12C ) is an isotope of carbon . The mole is currently defined as " the quantity of entities ( elementary particles like atoms or molecules ) equal to the number of atoms in 12 grams of carbon ‑ 12 " . Thus , the current definition of the mole requires that 1000 ⁄ 12 ( 83 ⅓ ) moles of 12C has a mass of precisely one kilogram . The number of atoms in a mole , a quantity known as the Avogadro constant , is experimentally determined , and the current best estimate of its value is 6 @.@ <unk> ( 74 ) × 1023 entities per mole . This new definition of the kilogram proposed to fix the Avogadro constant at precisely 6.02214X × 10 ^ 23 with the kilogram being defined as " the mass equal to that of 1000 ⁄ 12 · 6.02214X × 10 ^ 23 atoms of 12C " . 
 The accuracy of the measured value of the Avogadro constant is currently limited by the uncertainty in the value of the Planck constant — a measure relating the energy of photons to their frequency . That relative standard uncertainty has been 50 parts per billion ( ppb ) since 2006 . By fixing the Avogadro constant , the practical effect of this proposal would be that the uncertainty in the mass of a 12C atom — and the magnitude of the kilogram — could be no better than the current 50 ppb uncertainty in the Planck constant . Under this proposal , the magnitude of the kilogram would be subject to future refinement as improved measurements of the value of the Planck constant become available ; electronic realizations of the kilogram would be recalibrated as required . Conversely , an electronic definition of the kilogram ( see Electronic approaches , below ) , which would precisely fix the Planck constant , would continue to allow 83 ⅓ moles of 12C to have a mass of precisely one kilogram but the number of atoms comprising a mole ( the Avogadro constant ) would continue to be subject to future refinement . 
 A variation on a 12C @-@ based definition proposes to define the Avogadro constant as being precisely 84 @,@ 446 @,@ 8893 ( ≈ 6 @.@ <unk> × 1023 ) atoms . An imaginary realization of a 12 @-@ gram mass prototype would be a cube of 12C atoms measuring precisely 84 @,@ 446 @,@ 889 atoms across on a side . With this proposal , the kilogram would be defined as " the mass equal to 84 @,@ 446 @,@ 8893 × 83 ⅓ atoms of 12C . " 
 = = = = Avogadro project = = = = 
 Another Avogadro constant @-@ based approach , known as the International Avogadro Coordination 's Avogadro project , would define and delineate the kilogram as a softball @-@ size ( 93 @.@ 6 mm diameter ) sphere of silicon atoms . Silicon was chosen because a commercial infrastructure with mature processes for creating defect @-@ free , ultra @-@ pure <unk> silicon already exists to service the semiconductor industry . To make a practical realization of the kilogram , a silicon boule ( a rod @-@ like , single @-@ crystal ingot ) would be produced . Its isotopic composition would be measured with a mass spectrometer to determine its average relative atomic mass . The boule would be cut , ground , and polished into spheres . The size of a select sphere would be measured using optical interferometry to an uncertainty of about 0 @.@ 3 nm on the radius — roughly a single atomic layer . The precise lattice spacing between the atoms in its crystal structure ( ≈ 192 pm ) would be measured using a scanning X @-@ ray interferometer . This permits its atomic spacing to be determined with an uncertainty of only three parts per billion . With the size of the sphere , its average atomic mass , and its atomic spacing known , the required sphere diameter can be calculated with sufficient precision and low uncertainty to enable it to be finish @-@ polished to a target mass of one kilogram . 
 Experiments are being performed on the Avogadro Project 's silicon spheres to determine whether their masses are most stable when stored in a vacuum , a partial vacuum , or ambient pressure . However , no technical means currently exist to prove a long @-@ term stability any better than that of the IPK 's because the most sensitive and accurate measurements of mass are made with dual @-@ pan balances like the BIPM 's FB ‑ 2 flexure @-@ strip balance ( see External links , below ) . <unk> can only compare the mass of a silicon sphere to that of a reference mass . Given the latest understanding of the lack of long @-@ term mass stability with the IPK and its replicas , there is no known , perfectly stable mass artifact to compare against . Single @-@ pan scales , which measure weight relative to an invariant of nature , are not precise to the necessary long @-@ term uncertainty of 10 – 20 parts per billion . Another issue to be overcome is that silicon oxidizes and forms a thin layer ( equivalent to 5 – 20 silicon atoms ) of silicon dioxide ( quartz ) and silicon monoxide . This layer slightly increases the mass of the sphere , an effect which must be accounted for when polishing the sphere to its finished dimension . Oxidation is not an issue with platinum and iridium , both of which are noble metals that are roughly as cathodic as oxygen and therefore don 't oxidize unless coaxed to do so in the laboratory . The presence of the thin oxide layer on a silicon @-@ sphere mass prototype places additional restrictions on the procedures that might be suitable to clean it to avoid changing the layer 's thickness or oxide stoichiometry . 
 All silicon @-@ based approaches would fix the Avogadro constant but vary in the details of the definition of the kilogram . One approach would use silicon with all three of its natural isotopes present . About 7 @.@ 78 % of silicon comprises the two heavier isotopes : <unk> and <unk> . As described in Carbon ‑ 12 above , this method would define the magnitude of the kilogram in terms of a certain number of 12C atoms by fixing the Avogadro constant ; the silicon sphere would be the practical realization . This approach could accurately delineate the magnitude of the kilogram because the masses of the three silicon nuclides relative to 12C are known with great precision ( relative uncertainties of 1 ppb or better ) . An alternative method for creating a silicon sphere @-@ based kilogram proposes to use isotopic separation techniques to enrich the silicon until it is nearly pure 28Si , which has a relative atomic mass of 27 @.@ <unk> ( 19 ) . With this approach , the Avogadro constant would not only be fixed , but so too would the atomic mass of 28Si . As such , the definition of the kilogram would be decoupled from 12C and the kilogram would instead be defined as 1000 ⁄ 27 @.@ <unk> · 6 @.@ <unk> × 1023 atoms of 28Si ( ≈ 35 @.@ <unk> fixed moles of 28Si atoms ) . Physicists could elect to define the kilogram in terms of 28Si even when kilogram prototypes are made of natural silicon ( all three isotopes present ) . Even with a kilogram definition based on theoretically pure 28Si , a silicon @-@ sphere prototype made of only nearly pure 28Si would necessarily deviate slightly from the defined number of moles of silicon to compensate for various chemical and isotopic impurities as well as the effect of surface oxides . 
 = = = = Ion accumulation = = = = 
 Another Avogadro @-@ based approach , ion accumulation , since abandoned , would have defined and delineated the kilogram by precisely creating new metal prototypes on demand . It would have done so by accumulating gold or bismuth ions ( atoms stripped of an electron ) and counted them by measuring the electric current required to neutralize the ions . Gold ( 197Au ) and bismuth ( 209Bi ) were chosen because they can be safely handled and have the two highest atomic masses among the <unk> elements that is effectively non @-@ radioactive ( bismuth ) or is perfectly stable ( gold ) . See also Table of nuclides . 
 With a gold @-@ based definition of the kilogram for instance , the relative atomic mass of gold could have been fixed as precisely 196 @.@ 9665687 , from the current value of 196 @.@ 9665687 ( 6 ) . As with a definition based upon carbon ‑ 12 , the Avogadro constant would also have been fixed . The kilogram would then have been defined as " the mass equal to that of precisely 1000 ⁄ 196 @.@ 9665687 · 6 @.@ <unk> × 1023 atoms of gold " ( precisely 3 @,@ 057 @,@ 443 @,@ 620 @,@ 887 @,@ 933 @,@ 963 @,@ 384 @,@ 315 atoms of gold or about 5 @.@ <unk> fixed moles ) . 
 In 2003 , German experiments with gold at a current of only 10 <unk> demonstrated a relative uncertainty of 1 @.@ 5 % . Follow @-@ on experiments using bismuth ions and a current of 30 mA were expected to accumulate a mass of 30 g in six days and to have a relative uncertainty of better than 1 ppm . Ultimately , ion ‑ accumulation approaches proved to be unsuitable . Measurements required months and the data proved too erratic for the technique to be considered a viable future replacement to the IPK . 
 Among the many technical challenges of the ion @-@ deposition apparatus was obtaining a sufficiently high ion current ( mass deposition rate ) while simultaneously decelerating the ions so they could all deposit onto a target electrode embedded in a balance pan . Experiments with gold showed the ions had to be decelerated to very low energies to avoid sputtering effects — a phenomenon whereby ions that had already been counted ricochet off the target electrode or even dislodged atoms that had already been deposited . The deposited mass fraction in the 2003 German experiments only approached very close to 100 % at ion energies of less than around 1 eV ( < 1 km / s for gold ) . 
 If the kilogram had been defined as a precise quantity of gold or bismuth atoms deposited with an electric current , not only would the Avogadro constant and the atomic mass of gold or bismuth have to have been precisely fixed , but also the value of the elementary charge ( e ) , likely to 1.60217X × 10 ^ − 19 C ( from the currently recommended value of 1 @.@ <unk> ( 98 ) × 10 − 19 C ) . Doing so would have effectively defined the ampere as a flow of 1 ⁄ 1.60217X × 10 ^ − 19 electrons per second past a fixed point in an electric circuit . The SI unit of mass would have been fully defined by having precisely fixed the values of the Avogadro constant and elementary charge , and by exploiting the fact that the atomic masses of bismuth and gold atoms are invariant , universal constants of nature . 
 Beyond the slowness of making a new mass standard and the poor reproducibility , there were other intrinsic shortcomings to the ion ‑ accumulation approach that proved to be formidable obstacles to ion @-@ accumulation @-@ based techniques becoming a practical realization . The apparatus necessarily required that the deposition chamber have an integral balance system to enable the convenient calibration of a reasonable quantity of transfer standards relative to any single internal ion @-@ deposited prototype . Furthermore , the mass prototypes produced by ion deposition techniques would have been nothing like the freestanding platinum @-@ iridium prototypes currently in use ; they would have been deposited onto — and become part of — an electrode imbedded into one pan of a special balance integrated into the device . Moreover , the ion @-@ deposited mass wouldn 't have had a hard , highly polished surface that can be vigorously cleaned like those of current prototypes . Gold , while dense and a noble metal ( resistant to oxidation and the formation of other compounds ) , is extremely soft so an internal gold prototype would have to be kept well isolated and scrupulously clean to avoid contamination and the potential of wear from having to remove the contamination . Bismuth , which is an inexpensive metal used in low @-@ temperature solders , slowly oxidizes when exposed to room @-@ temperature air and forms other chemical compounds and so would not have produced stable reference masses unless it was continually maintained in a vacuum or inert atmosphere . 
 = = = Ampere @-@ based force = = = 
 This approach would define the kilogram as " the mass which would be accelerated at precisely 2 × 10 − 7 m / s2 when subjected to the per @-@ meter force between two straight parallel conductors of infinite length , of negligible circular cross section , placed one meter apart in vacuum , through which flow a constant current of 1 ⁄ 1.60217X × 10 ^ − 19 elementary charges per second " . 
 Effectively , this would define the kilogram as a derivative of the ampere rather than present relationship , which defines the ampere as a derivative of the kilogram . This redefinition of the kilogram would specify elementary charge ( e ) as precisely 1.60217X × 10 ^ − 19 coulomb rather than the current recommended value of 1 @.@ <unk> ( 98 ) × 10 − 19 C. It would necessarily follow that the ampere ( one coulomb per second ) would also become an electric current of this precise quantity of elementary charges per second passing a given point in an electric circuit . The virtue of a practical realization based upon this definition is that unlike the watt balance and other scale @-@ based methods , all of which require the careful characterization of gravity in the laboratory , this method delineates the magnitude of the kilogram directly in the very terms that define the nature of mass : acceleration due to an applied force . Unfortunately , it is extremely difficult to develop a practical realization based upon accelerating masses . Experiments over a period of years in Japan with a superconducting , 30 g mass supported by diamagnetic levitation never achieved an uncertainty better than ten parts per million . Magnetic hysteresis was one of the limiting issues . Other groups performed similar research that used different techniques to levitate the mass . 
 = = SI multiples = = 
 Because SI prefixes may not be concatenated ( serially linked ) within the name or symbol for a unit of measure , SI prefixes are used with the gram , not the kilogram , which already has a prefix as part of its name . For instance , one @-@ millionth of a kilogram is 1 mg ( one milligram ) , not 1 <unk> ( one <unk> ) . 
 The microgram is typically abbreviated " mcg " in pharmaceutical and nutritional supplement labelling , to avoid confusion , since the " µ " prefix is not always well recognized outside of technical disciplines . ( The expression " mcg " is also the symbol for an obsolete CGS unit of measure known as the " <unk> " , which is equal to 10 µg . ) 
 In the UK , because serious medication errors have been made from the confusion between milligrams and micrograms when micrograms has been abbreviated , the recommendation given in the Scottish Palliative Care Guidelines is that doses of less than one milligram must be expressed in micrograms and that the word microgram must be written in full , and that it is never acceptable to use " mcg " or " μg " . [ 2 ] 
 The <unk> ( dag in SI ) is in much of Europe often abbreviated " <unk> " ( from the local spelling " <unk> " ) and is used for typical retail quantities of food ( such as cheese and meat ) . 
 The unit name " <unk> " is rarely used , and even then typically only in technical fields in contexts where especially rigorous consistency with the SI standard is desired . For most purposes , the name " tonne " is instead used . The tonne and its symbol , " t " , were adopted by the CIPM in 1879 . It is a non @-@ SI unit accepted by the BIPM for use with the SI . According to the BIPM , " In English speaking countries this unit is usually called ' metric ton ' . " The unit name " <unk> " or " megaton " ( Mt ) is often used in general @-@ interest literature on greenhouse gas emissions , whereas the equivalent unit in scientific papers on the subject is often the " <unk> " ( Tg ) . 
 = = Glossary = = 
 <unk> : Isolated and its effect changed in form , often simplified or made more accessible in the process . 
 Artifact : A simple human @-@ made object used directly as a comparative standard in the measurement of a physical quantity . 
 Check standard : 
 A standard body 's backup replica of the international prototype kilogram ( IPK ) . 
 A secondary kilogram mass standard used as a stand @-@ in for the primary standard during routine calibrations . 
 Definition : A formal , specific , and exact specification . 
 <unk> : The physical means used to mark a boundary or express the magnitude of an entity . 
 <unk> : To widely distribute the magnitude of a unit of measure , typically via replicas and transfer standards . 
 IPK : <unk> of " international prototype kilogram " , the unique physical object , kept in France , which is internationally recognized as having the defining mass of precisely one kilogram . 
 Magnitude : The extent or numeric value of a property 
 National prototype : A replica of the IPK possessed by a nation . 
 Practical realization : A readily reproducible apparatus to conveniently delineate the magnitude of a unit of measure . 
 Primary national standard : 
 A replica of the IPK possessed by a nation 
 The least used replica of the IPK when a nation possesses more than one . 
 Prototype : 
 A human @-@ made object that serves as the defining comparative standard in the measurement of a physical quantity . 
 A human @-@ made object that serves as the comparative standard in the measurement of a physical quantity . 
 The IPK and any of its replicas 
 Replica : An official copy of the IPK . 
 Sister copy : One of six official copies of the IPK that are stored in the same safe as the IPK and are used as check standards by the BIPM . 
 Transfer standard : An artifact or apparatus that reproduces the magnitude of a unit of measure in a different , usually more practical , form . 
 = Pentachaeta bellidiflora = 
 Pentachaeta bellidiflora ( white @-@ rayed <unk> or <unk> <unk> ) is a Californian wildflower in the genus Pentachaeta of the ( Asteraceae ) family . It is included in both the state and federal lists of endangered species . 
 It is endemic to the San Francisco Bay Area of California , United States , and occurs only at altitudes less than 620 metres ( 2 @,@ 034 ft ) . P. bellidiflora is found chiefly on rocky , grassy areas . The conservation status of this species was , as of 1999 , characterized by a declining population , with a severely diminished and fragmented range . The specific bellidiflora refers to the similarity of the flowers with those of common daisies ( Bellis ) . 
 = = Description = = 
 Pentachaeta bellidiflora is a small annual wildflower growing from a slender taproot , which , although it appears smooth , is actually covered by fine hairs . The sparsely hairy stems may number between 6 – 17 cm ( 2 – 7 in ) in length and are typically simple , or branching in the lower half of plant . They are erect , generally flexible , and of green to reddish color . White @-@ rayed Pentachaeta leaves are normally narrowly linear , ciliate ( fringed with hair ) and green , measuring less than 4 @.@ 5 cm ( 1 @.@ 8 in ) long and one millimeter wide . Upper and lower leaf surfaces are smooth . 
 The terminal inflorescences number four or five solitary , roughly circular heads per plant . Peduncles are wispy , with bell @-@ shaped <unk> measuring 3 to 7 millimeters , and they range from glabrous to short @-@ haired . Like all of its genus , P. bellidiflora has green <unk> in two to three generally equal series , lanceolate to obovate , with margins widely scarious ( dry and membranous ) , and a naked receptacle . The yellow corollas are five @-@ lobed , and each of the 16 to 38 disk shaped florets ( per head ) has linear , acute style tips . They may be slightly red @-@ tinged underneath . Fruits are 1 @.@ 5 to 3 @.@ 0 millimeters in diameter and are generally compressed in an oblong to fusiform shape ; they are typically covered with small hairs . The plant presents fragile <unk> with five or fewer slender bristles , slightly expanded at the base . Flowering season ranges from late March until late June . From a chromosomal standpoint , the species is diploid , ( contains one set of chromosomes from each parent ) , and has 2n = 18 . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 White @-@ rayed <unk> is found in serpentine grassland as well as valley and foothill grassland . It is currently known only to survive in serpentine bunchgrass communities and native prairies in two small areas of San Mateo County , including populations in Edgewood County Park and on San Francisco Water District lands at serpentine outcrops on the eastern slopes of Crystal Springs Reservoir , in the vicinity of State Route 92 . It was formerly known to occur from Marin to Santa Cruz counties . One study declares only one population remains . Prior range is defined by the following USGS maps : Soquel ( <unk> ) * <unk> , Santa Cruz ( <unk> ) <unk> , Castle Rock Ridge ( 408A ) * <unk> , Big Basin ( <unk> ) * <unk> , Davenport ( <unk> ) * <unk> , Felton ( <unk> ) * <unk> , Woodside ( <unk> ) <unk> , San Francisco South ( <unk> ) * <unk> , <unk> Mountain ( <unk> ) * <unk> , San Mateo ( <unk> ) * <unk> , San Quentin ( <unk> ) * <unk> , San Rafael ( <unk> ) * <unk> , Point Bonita ( <unk> ) * . 
 = = Conservation = = 
 As of the declaration of Federal endangerment status , the finding of the United States Environmental Protection Agency was that the total species population was sufficiently small and fragmented that it was subject to stochastic extinction . Recent habitat destruction by urban development , off road vehicle use and actions of highway maintenance crews have been responsible for the severe reduction in range and viability of this species . 
 Population sizes vary from year to year depending on local rainfall and competition from invasive plants . In 1997 , P. bellidiflora was the subject of a recovery workshop conducted by the California Department of Fish and Game , where the need for permanently protecting and managing the existing populations , and reintroduction strategies for populations into suitable protected habitat were analyzed . Management and recovery actions for the species have been addressed in the United States Federal Recovery Plan for Serpentine Soil Species of the San Francisco Bay Area , finalized in 1998 . 
 = Noronha skink = 
 The Noronha skink ( Trachylepis atlantica ) is a species of skink from the island of Fernando de Noronha off northeastern Brazil . It is covered with dark and light spots on the upperparts and is usually about 7 to 10 cm ( 3 to 4 in ) in length . The tail is long and muscular , but breaks off easily . Very common throughout Fernando de Noronha , it is an opportunistic feeder , eating both insects and plant material , including nectar from the Erythrina velutina tree , as well as other material ranging from cookie crumbs to eggs of its own species . Introduced predators such as feral cats prey on it and several parasitic worms infect it . 
 Perhaps seen by Amerigo Vespucci in 1503 , it was first formally described in 1839 . Its subsequent taxonomic history has been complex , riddled with confusion with Trachylepis maculata and other species , homonyms , and other problems . The species is classified in the otherwise mostly African genus Trachylepis and is thought to have reached its island from Africa by rafting . The enigmatic Trachylepis tschudii , supposedly from Peru , may well be the same species . 
 = = Discovery and taxonomy = = 
 In an early account of what may be Fernando de Noronha , purportedly based on a voyage by Amerigo Vespucci in 1503 , the island was said to be inhabited by " lizards with two tails " , which is thought be a reference to the Noronha skink . The tail is long and fragile , and it breaks easily , like that of many skinks and other lizards , following which it may regenerate . However , when it does not completely break off , a new tail may nevertheless grow out of the broken part , so that the tail appears forked . 
 = = = 19th century = = = 
 The species was first formally described by John Edward Gray in 1839 , based on two specimens collected by HMS Chanticleer before 1838 . He introduced the names Tiliqua punctata , for the Noronha skink , and Tiliqua maculata , for a species from Guyana , among many others . Six years later , he transferred both to the genus Euprepis . In 1887 , George Boulenger placed both in the genus Mabuya ( misspelled " Mabuia " ) and considered them identical , using the name " Mabuia punctata " for the species , which was said to occur both on Fernando de Noronha and in Guyana . He also included Mabouya punctatissima O 'Shaughnessy , 1874 , purportedly from South Africa , as a synonym . 
 = = = 20th century = = = 
 In 1900 , L.G. Andersson claimed that Gray 's name punctata was preoccupied by Lacerta punctata Linnaeus , 1758 , which he identified as Mabuya homalocephala . He therefore replaced the name punctata with its junior synonym maculata , using the name Mabuya maculata for the skink of Fernando de Noronha . Linnaeus 's Lacerta punctata in fact refers to the Asian species <unk> punctatum , not to Mabuya homalocephala , but Gray 's name punctata remains invalid regardless . In 1931 , C.E. and M.D. Burt resurrected the name Mabuya punctata ( now spelled correctly ) for the Noronha skink , noting that it was " apparently a very distinct species " , but did not mention maculata , and in 1935 , E.R. Dunn disputed Boulenger 's conclusion as to the synonymy of punctata and maculata and , in apparent ignorance of Andersson 's work , restored the name Mabuya punctata for the Noronha skink . He wrote that the Noronha skink was very distinct from other American Mabuya and more similar in some respects to African species . 
 K.P. Schmidt , in 1945 , agreed with Dunn 's conclusion that maculata and punctata of Gray were not the same , but he noted Andersson 's point that punctata was preoccupied and therefore introduced the new name Mabuya atlantica to replace punctata . The next year , H. <unk> , disagreeing with Dunn and unaware of Andersson 's and Schmidt 's contributions , considered both of Gray 's names to be synonymous and restored the name Mabuya punctata for the Noronha skink . He also considered Mabouya punctatissima and Trachylepis ( Xystrolepis ) punctata Tschudi , 1845 , described from Peru , as synonyms of this species . In 1948 , he acknowledged the preoccupation of punctata noted by Andersson and accordingly retired Mabuya punctata in favor of Mabuya maculata , as Andersson had done . The name Mabuya maculata remained in general usage for the Noronha skink in subsequent decades , though some have used Mabuya punctata , " not ... aware of the last nomenclatural changes . " 
 = = = 21st century = = = 
 In 2002 , P. Mausfeld and D. Vrcibradic published a note on the nomenclature of the Noronha skink informed by a re @-@ examination of Gray 's original type specimens ; despite extensive attempts to correctly name the species , they were apparently the first to do so since Boulenger in 1887 . Based on differences in the number of scales , <unk> lamellae ( lamellae on the lower sides of the digits ) , and keels ( longitudinal ridges ) on the dorsal scales ( located on the upperparts ) , as well as the separation of the parietal scales ( on the head behind the eyes ) in maculata , they concluded that the two were not , after all , identical , and that Schmidt 's name Mabuya atlantica should therefore be used . Mausfeld and Vrcibradic considered Mabouya punctatissima to represent a different species on the basis of morphological differences , but were unable to resolve the status of Trachylepis ( Xystrolepis ) punctata . 
 In the same year , Mausfeld and others conducted a molecular phylogenetic study on the Noronha skink , using the mitochondrial 12S and 16S rRNA genes , and showed that the species is more closely related to African than to South American Mabuya species , as previously suggested on the basis of morphological similarities . They split the old genus Mabuya into four genera for geographically discrete clades , including Euprepis for the African – Noronha clade , thus renaming the Noronha species to Euprepis atlanticus . In 2003 , A.M. Bauer found that the name Euprepis had been incorrectly applied to this clade and that Trachylepis was correct instead , so that the Noronha skink is currently referred to as Trachylepis atlantica . Additional molecular phylogenetic studies published in 2003 and 2006 confirmed the relationship between the Noronha skink and African Trachylepis . 
 In 2009 , Miralles and others reviewed the taxon maculata and concluded that the animal now known as Trachylepis maculata also belongs in the African clade , but they were unable to determine whether or not it is indigenous to Guyana . They also reviewed Trachylepis ( Xystrolepis ) punctata and replaced it with Trachylepis tschudii because the older name was preoccupied by Linnaeus 's and Gray 's punctata . Although they were unable to resolve the identity of T. tschudii , which is still known from a single specimen , they believed that it is most likely the same species as the Noronha skink ; it may be either a representative of an undiscovered Amazonian population of the latter or simply a mislabeled animal from Fernando de Noronha . 
 = = Description = = 
 The Noronha skink is covered with light and dark spots above , but there is substantial variation in the precise colors . There are no longitudinal stripes . The scales on the underparts are yellowish or grayish . The eyelids are white to yellow . It has a small head with small nostrils , which are placed far to the front at the sides of the head . The mouth contains small and conical teeth and a thin but well @-@ developed tongue . The eyes are small and placed laterally and contain dark , rounded irises . There are three to five well @-@ developed auricular lobules ( small projections ) in front of the ears ; these lobules are absent in true Mabuya . The hindlimbs are longer and stronger than the forelimbs , which are small . The tail is longer than the body and is muscular but very brittle . It is nearly cylindrical in form and tapers towards the end . 
 In reptiles , features of the scales are important in distinguishing among species and groups of species . In the Noronha skink , the <unk> scales ( located above the nose ) are in contact , as are the prefrontal scales ( behind the nose ) in most individuals . The two frontoparietal scales ( above and slightly behind the eyes ) are not fused . Unlike in T. maculata , the parietal scales ( behind the <unk> ) are in contact with each other . There are four supraocular scales ( above the eyes ) in almost all specimens and five <unk> scales ( immediately above the eyes , below the supraoculars ) . The dorsal scales ( on the upperparts ) have three keels , two fewer than in T. maculata . There are 34 to 40 ( mode 38 ) midbody scales ( counted around the body midway between the fore- and hindlimbs ) , 58 to 69 ( mode 63 – 64 ) dorsal , and 66 to 78 ( mode 70 ) ventral scales ( on the underparts ) . Mabuya species and T. maculata generally have fewer midbody scales ( up to 34 ) . There are 21 to 29 <unk> lamellae under the fourth toe , more than in T. maculata , which has 18 . The Noronha skink has 26 presacral vertebrae ( located before the sacrum ) , similar to most Trachylepis , but unlike American Mabuya , which have at least 28 . 
 Although there is substantial variation in measurements within the species , no discrete groups can be detected and it is not possible to separate the sexes unambiguously using measurements alone . Among 15 male and 21 female T. atlantica collected in 2006 , snout to vent length was 80 @.@ 6 to 103 @.@ 1 mm ( 3 @.@ 17 to 4 @.@ 06 in ) , averaging 95 @.@ 3 mm ( 3 @.@ 75 in ) , in males and 65 @.@ 3 to 88 @.@ 1 mm ( 2 @.@ 57 to 3 @.@ 47 in ) , averaging 78 @.@ 3 mm ( 3 @.@ 08 in ) , in females and body mass was 10 @.@ 2 to 26 @.@ 0 g ( 0 @.@ 36 to 0 @.@ 92 oz ) , averaging 19 @.@ 0 g ( 0 @.@ 67 oz ) , in males and 6 @.@ 0 to 15 @.@ 0 g ( 0 @.@ 21 to 0 @.@ 53 oz ) , averaging 10 @.@ 0 g ( 0 @.@ 35 oz ) , in females . Males are significantly larger than females . In 100 specimens collected in 1876 , head length was 12 @.@ 0 to 18 @.@ 9 mm ( 0 @.@ 47 to 0 @.@ 74 in ) , averaging 14 @.@ 8 mm ( 0 @.@ 58 in ) ; head width was 7 to 14 @.@ 4 mm ( 0 @.@ 28 to 0 @.@ 57 in ) , averaging 9 mm ( 0 @.@ 35 in ) , and tail length was 93 to 170 mm ( 3 @.@ 7 to 6 @.@ 7 in ) , averaging 117 mm . 
 = = Ecology and behavior = = 
 The Noronha skink is very abundant throughout Fernando de Noronha , even occurring commonly in houses , and also occurs on the smaller islands that surround the main island of the archipelago . Its abundance may be a result of the absence of ecologically similar competitors . Apart from T. atlantica , the reptile fauna of Fernando de Noronha consists of the indigenous <unk> Amphisbaena <unk> and two introduced lizards , the gecko Hemidactylus <unk> and the <unk> Tupinambis merianae . 
 The species is found in several microhabitats , but most often on rocks . Although predominantly ground @-@ dwelling , it is a good climber . Nothing is known about its reproduction except that skinks studied in late October and early November , during the dry season , showed little evidence of reproductive activity . The Noronha skink is oviparous ( egg @-@ laying ) , like many Trachylepis , but unlike Mabuya , which are all viviparous ( giving live birth ) . 
 Trachylepis atlantica is active during the day . Its body temperature averages 32 ° C ( 90 ° F ) , a few degrees higher than the environment temperature . During the day , body temperature peaks at up to 38 ° C ( 100 ° F ) around midday and is lower earlier and later . In the early morning , the lizard may bask in the sun . During foraging , it spends about 28 @.@ 4 % of its time moving on average , a relatively high value for Trachylepis . 
 A geologist who visited the island in 1876 noted that the skink is curious and bold : 
 While seated upon the bare rocks I have often observed these little animals watching me , apparently with as much curiosity as I watched them , turning their heads from side to side as if in an effort to be wise . If I kept quiet for a few minutes they would creep up to me and finally upon me ; if I moved , they ran down the faces of the rocks , and turning , stuck their heads above the edges to watch me . 
 = = = Diet = = = 
 The Noronha skink is an opportunistic omnivore and " thrives on anything edible " . Analysis of stomach contents indicates that it mainly eats plant material , at least during the dry period , but it also feeds on insects , including larvae , termites ( Isoptera ) , ants ( Formicidae ) , and beetles ( Coleoptera ) . Its prey is mostly mobile , rather than sedentary , which is consistent with the relatively high proportion of time it spends moving . Related skink species eat mostly insects , but island populations may often be more herbivorous . Animal prey averages 6 @.@ 9 mm3 in volume , less than in most other Trachylepis . 
 When the <unk> tree Erythrina velutina blooms during the dry season , Noronha skinks climb up to 12 m ( 39 ft ) to reach the inflorescences of the tree and to eat the nectar by inserting their heads into the flowers . They probably use the nectar both for its sugar and water content . In this way , the skinks aid in pollinating the tree , as they acquire pollen on their scales and leave pollen on stigmas when visiting a flower . Pollination is rare behavior among lizards , but occurs most frequently in island species . Humans have introduced additional food sources to the island , including Acacia seeds , feces of the rock cavy ( <unk> rupestris ) , carrion flies , juvenile Hemidactylus <unk> , and even cookie crumbs given by tourists . The availability of these additional food sources may increase the abundance of the skink . In 1887 , H. N. Ridley observed Noronha skinks eating banana skins and yolk from doves ' eggs . Several cases of cannibalism have been reported , involving skinks eating eggs , juveniles , and the tail of an adult . 
 = = = Relationships with other species = = = 
 The Noronha skink probably lacked predators before Fernando de Noronha was discovered by humans , but several species that arrived since do prey on it , most commonly the cat ( Felis catus ) and cattle egret ( Bubulcus ibis ) . These may negatively affect skink abundance at some localities on the island . The Argentine black and white <unk> lizard , Tupinambis merianae , and three introduced rodents , the house mouse ( Mus musculus ) , brown rat ( Rattus norvegicus ) and black rat ( Rattus rattus ) , have also been observed to eat Noronha skinks , but the rodents , particularly the house mouse , may have been scavenging on already dead skinks . 
 According to a 2006 study , the Noronha skink is infected by several parasitic worms , most frequently by the nematode <unk> spinicauda . Another nematode , <unk> alvarengai , is much rarer . Other rare parasites include two trematodes — <unk> <unk> and an undetermined species of <unk> — and an undetermined species of <unk> , a cestode . S. spinicauda is usually only found in teiid lizards ; it may have entered the archipelago when Tupinambis merianae , a teiid , was introduced to the island in 1960 . Among nematodes , previous studies in 1956 and 1957 had only reported M. alvarengai and <unk> alvarengai from the skink ; the presence of S. spinicauda could explain the rarity of M. alvarengai and absence of T. alvarengai in Noronha skinks observed in 2006 . 
 = = Origin = = 
 Phylogenetic analyses using a variety of mitochondrial and nuclear genes places the Noronha skink among the tropical African species of Trachylepis , a position also supported by morphological similarities . It may have arrived on its island on rafting vegetation from southwestern Africa via the Benguela Current and the South Equatorial Current , which passes Fernando de Noronha . This possibility was first suggested by Alfred Russel Wallace before 1888 . Mausfeld and coworkers calculated that the journey from Africa to Fernando de Noronha would take 139 days . Because this period seemed too long for the skink to survive , they proposed that the Noronha skink instead arrived via Ascension Island , where a skink may have persisted into historical times . 
 The South American and Caribbean Mabuya skinks form a clade that appears to be derived from a separate colonization from Africa . Both transatlantic colonization events are believed to have occurred within the last 9 million years . 
 = Mega Man Battle Network ( video game ) = 
 Mega Man Battle Network , known as Battle Network Rockman EXE ( <unk> <unk> , <unk> <unk> Rokkuman <unk> ) in Japan , is a video game developed by Capcom for the Game Boy Advance ( GBA ) handheld console . It is the first title of the Mega Man Battle Network series of games . It was originally released in Japan as a GBA launch game on March 21 , 2001 and was released later that year in North America and Europe . It was also released via the Wii U Virtual Console in Japan on July 9 , 2014 , in Europe on July 24 , 2014 , and in North America on July 31 , 2014 . 
 Battle Network takes place during the 21st century in a world where society and everyday life is driven by the internet . Users are able to interact with and virtually explore nearly any electronic device using highly advanced , online avatars called " NetNavis " . The game follows a young boy named Lan Hikari and his NetNavi MegaMan.EXE as they solve a series of crimes instigated by the " WWW ( World Three ) " organization . Rather than share the platform gameplay of its predecessors , Battle Network is a tactical role @-@ playing game ( RPG ) in which the player respectively controls Lan in the game 's outside world and MegaMan.EXE in its virtual world . Battles take place in real @-@ time ; special abilities called " Battle Chips " can be accessed to fight off the numerous computer viruses present in the game 's cyberspace environments . 
 Battle Network was created amidst the success of Nintendo 's portable RPG franchise Pokémon . According to producer Keiji Inafune , the development team wanted Battle Network to identify specifically with younger gamers by creating a setting resembling the real world and a gameplay model that mixes traditional action and RPG elements . Battle Network received positive reviews from critics . Its unconventional combat system was given significant praise and its presentation was well @-@ regarded . However , its storyline was met with mixed opinions . The game was followed by a number of sequels and spin @-@ off titles , as well as other media . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Mega Man Battle Network is set in an ambiguous year in the 21st century ( " <unk> AD " ) in an alternate reality to the original Mega Man series . Within the world of Battle Network , the Net has become humanity 's primary means of communication , commerce , and even crime . Users are able to " jack in " to the Net and other computerized devices , and explore their various aspects using program avatars called " NetNavis ( Network Navigators ) " as if they were physical locations . The Net and the inner workings of computers are displayed as a virtual world with which computer programs of all varieties , as personified in a humanoid form , can interact . Users often do so by accessing their NetNavis via a " PET ( <unk> information Terminal ) " device . The plot of Mega Man Battle Network follows one such pair , Lan Hikari and his NetNavi MegaMan.EXE. Lan is a fifth grader in the town of ACDC . His father , Dr. Yuichiro Hikari , is one of the world 's top scientists and NetNavi researchers . Not long into the story , Lan and MegaMan.EXE take it upon themselves to solve various criminal cases around ACDC involving other Navis and their operators . Some of the confrontations with the various criminals involve desperate , life @-@ threatening situations including a bus rigged to explode , oxygen being cut off at a large party , the entire city 's clean water freezing , and school students being re @-@ educated as mindless slaves . The duo continuously crosses paths with Eugene Chaud , an official " <unk> " commissioned by the government to investigate crimes on the Net . Chaud and his NetNavi <unk> act as rivals to Lan and MegaMan.EXE. 
 The protagonists eventually learn that the criminals are all connected to an organization called the " WWW ( World Three ) " . The WWW intentionally infects computer networks with computer viruses so as to hinder their normal operations and hack vital information . The group is led by Dr. Wily , a former colleague of Lan 's grandfather . While working together , Wily had specialized in robotics while Lan 's grandfather specialized in networks , which eventually led to NetNavis . The government cut Wily 's funding , opting instead to pursue Hikari 's NetNavi project . Wily 's goal throughout the game is to collect four super programs with which the " LifeVirus " may be constructed . The LifeVirus is a nearly indestructible virus capable of wiping out the Net and all associated devices . The protagonists infiltrate the WWW , but MegaMan.EXE becomes disabled . Chaud arrives and gives Lan a batch file from Dr. Hikari to restore his Navi . After receiving the file " <unk> " , Lan questions his father about the name . It is revealed the MegaMan.EXE is actually a unique Navi made by Lan 's father . When Lan 's twin brother , Hub , died at a young age , Dr. Hikari transferred Hub 's consciousness into the NetNavi MegaMan.EXE. This created a special physical and virtual bond between the two brothers . In the end , Lan and MegaMan.EXE manage to defeat Wily , destroy the LifeVirus , and restore peace to ACDC . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Unlike the previous action @-@ platformer entries of the Mega Man franchise , Mega Man Battle Network is a real @-@ time tactical RPG . To progress through the game the player must alternately navigate the outside world as Lan Hikari and the Net as MegaMan.EXE , each containing certain tasks that must be completed to allow advancement in the other . Controlling Lan , the player may travel around the world map , interact with non @-@ player characters , check email , purchase items , initiate Net missions , or speak with MegaMan.EXE through his PET . In contrast with traditional Mega Man entries in which battle and movement through the levels happen in the same setting , Battle Network 's combat occurs only through by battling computer viruses within the Net . This cyber world is represented by a series of branching pathways and nodes , where MegaMan.EXE can travel to both new and previously visited locations , find and purchase items , and fight viruses . Battles do not generally appear on the field screen of the Net but are usually set as random encounters . The battlefield itself is made up of 18 tiles divided into two groups of nine , one group being space in which MegaMan.EXE may freely move and the other group being space inhabited by enemies . Akin to other Mega Man games , MegaMan.EXE possesses an arm cannon called the " Mega Buster " . The player can transition among the nine provided tiles and fire the Mega Buster at enemies from across the screen . The objective of each battle is to delete all the viruses by reducing their hit points ( HP ) to zero . If MegaMan.EXE 's own health depletes , a game over occurs . Certain power @-@ up programs can be found that upgrade MegaMan.EXE 's HP , defense , or Mega Buster power . 
 The Mega Buster is quite weak on its own , so in order to delete viruses more efficiently , the player must access special abilities called " Battle Chips " . These are minor programs that contain data that the Navi can utilize to perform more powerful attacks , summon other Navis for help , or execute supportive actions such as restoring HP or destroying tiles on the enemies ' side of the battlefield . Battle Chips are uploaded to MegaMan.EXE by Lan 's PET in a process called " Customization . " Each turn in battle presents the player with five random chips from which to choose , though the player is limited to chips of the same variety or chips with the same alphabetic code . Once the " Battle Gauge " ( or " Custom Gauge " ) at the top of the screen fills during battle , another random set of chips can be chosen from a general pool called the " folder " . At any given time , the player may only have exactly 30 chips in the folder from which the Customization process may draw . The player is only allowed to carry up to ten of the same kind of chip and up to five Navi @-@ summon chips in the folder . However , a player may possess any number of other chips in inactive reserve , called the " sack " , which may be moved to the active folder outside of battle . Every chip and enemy is aligned to one of five elements : Neutral , Fire , Water , Electric , and Wood . If MegaMan.EXE hits an enemy with an attack aligned to an element they are weak against , the attack will do double damage . 
 Battle Network features a very limited multiplayer option . Up to two players may connect with each other using a Game Link Cable and then give or trade Battle Chips . Players may also engage in battles with one another . The " test battle " mode has no stakes whereas the " real battle " mode allows the winning player to take a battle chip from the loser . 
 = = Development and release = = 
 Mega Man Battle Network was developed by Capcom Production Studio 2 amidst the success of Nintendo 's portable RPG franchise Pokémon . Rather than extend upon the traditional action @-@ platform formula for the Mega Man series as they had done with the 3D Mega Man Legends , Capcom followed Nintendo 's example on the latter 's then @-@ newest handheld console , the GBA . While creating Battle Network , director Masahiro Yasuma found difficulty in blending action attributes with " the kind of fun you get from a Pokémon game " in order to make it enjoyable , new , and fresh . Yasuma recalled that production was further challenged because no effective precursor of its type had been made before . Producer Keiji Inafune stated that the development team wanted to add a " real world " feel to the Mega Man series by placing the protagonist of Battle Network in a location where the internet is prevalent . With the release of the portable GBA , the team felt that they should target modern gamers , specifically children , as an audience for the new series . The developers thought such a theme would be both successful and relevant because these younger gamers grew up with and utilized such technology on a daily basis . To ensure the game 's popularity , Capcom marketed Battle Network alongside an afternoon anime adaptation , emphasized head @-@ to @-@ head matches between players , and provided fans with exclusive content via special events . 
 Inafune credited himself for redesigning the protagonist Mega Man as MegaMan.EXE for the Battle Network series , though he recounted the character designers were reluctant to hand over the responsibility to him and even altered his illustrations afterwards . The character 's initial concept art went through a large number of changes before it was finalized to a much simpler design , so that even very young fans could easily draw it . Yuji Ishihara acted as a primary character artist for the game . Each of the game 's boss characters was designed so that their bodies would exude a certain motif ; for example , <unk> was meant to look like a huge castle made from stone masonry . Some bosses resembled their original Mega Man series counterparts while others were a large departure from these more humanoid appearances . Ishihara explained that the artists chose size and shape variety among the characters to " provide a little bit of surprise and excitement " to fans familiar with their classic forms . The musical score for Battle Network was composed by Akari Kaida , who would later work on the fifth installment of the series . All 22 musical tracks for Mega Man Battle Network were included on the Rockman EXE 1 ~ 3 Game Music Collection , released in Japan by Suleputer on December 18 , 2002 . 
 The Japanese version of Battle Network was first announced in August 2000 as one of four games set to be released for the recently unveiled GBA . A demo of the game was promoted at Nintendo Space World that month , where it was displayed on only two out of the 140 playable consoles . The game was displayed on five kiosks at the Tokyo Game Show the following month . According to series planners Masakazu Eguchi and Masahiro Yasuma , this beta build of the game involved the player fighting a malevolent <unk> within the school 's electronic blackboard . Battle Network was officially released in Japan as a GBA launch title on March 21 , 2001 . A television advertisement of the game featured the song " Neo Venus " by Japanese rock band Janne Da Arc . The English localization of Battle Network was announced on May 17 , 2001 , just prior to the Electronic Entertainment Expo . The game was released in North America and Europe on October 31 and November 30 respectively . Ubisoft published Mega Man Battle Network in PAL regions as part of a seven @-@ GBA game licensing agreement with Capcom . < Its first sequel , Mega Man Battle Network 2 , was announced before the Japan World Hobby Fair in June 2001 . Attendees to the fair were able to download chip data for the character <unk> into their original Battle Network cartridges . 
 As stated , in an inside @-@ Games Interview , by the game developers , the game was initially conceptualized with the intention of being a horror game . 
 = = Reception and legacy = = 
 Mega Man Battle Network has been generally well @-@ received , holding aggregates score of 80 % on GameRankings and 79 out of 100 on Metacritic . The graphics of Battle Network were overall favored by reviewers . IGN 's Craig Harris , GameSpy contributor James Fudge , and Kristian Brogger of Game Informer were all impressed by the game 's crisp , colorful style and futuristic locales . As far as the sound was concerned , Justin Speer of GameSpot opined that the music appropriately matched the rich visuals . Brogger otherwise accepted the sound as " enough [ ... ] to get by " , but that nothing would be missed if it were turned off . Harris comparably stated that " the standard Japanese <unk> could have been given a bit more variety " . The reviewers gave mixed opinions of the game 's storyline . Though Brogger called it " engrossing " , Harris recognized the plot as the game 's one major fault , describing it as " kiddy " and disliking the consistent use of computer terminology for character names . Speer similarly summarized , " If there 's something that might hold you back from enjoying the game , it 's the lighthearted and somewhat goofy story . However , the game doesn 't take itself too seriously , so neither should you . " 
 The battle system of Battle Network was a positive stand @-@ out aspect for many critics . In his Battle Network series decade retrospective , 1UP.com 's Jeremy Parish felt the first game suffered from terrible plotting , unbalanced play design , and unattractive and annoying environment navigation . Still , Parish perceived the game 's combat mechanics to be its sole reason for success , marrying the original Mega Man action qualities with an RPG structure and requiring " a combination of sharp thinking and quick reflexes " on the player 's part . Speer found battle within the game to rightfully capture the spirit of Mega Man as its " most original and compelling feature " . Harris likewise regarded the battle interface to be well @-@ designed , a refreshing change from traditional Japanese RPGs , what gives the game its charm , and a very appreciative addition to the game 's limited multiplayer mode . Fudge summarized the combat as " very easy to learn , but difficult to master -- and yet very satisfying " . He admitted that the random encounters can occasionally be overwhelming . Brogger considered the gameplay both deep and simple to pick up on , but thought the menu system to be " clunky " at times and its battles to be repetitive . 
 Mega Man Battle Network entered Japanese sales charts at number 12 , selling approximately 43 @,@ 048 units during its first week . A total of 224 @,@ 837 units were sold in Japan during 2001 , with the game being listed by Dengeki Online as the 50th best @-@ selling video game in the region for that year . The success of Mega Man Battle Network led to several sequels and spin @-@ offs on other consoles , mobile phones , and arcade ; an anime series ; and numerous pieces of merchandise . A successor series called Mega Man Star Force began in 2006 after the Capcom decided to stop developing new Battle Network titles . Rockman EXE Operate Shooting Star , a remake of the first Battle Network game for the Nintendo DS , was released in 2009 and integrated elements from the Star Force series . 
 = Pokémon Black and White = 
 Pokémon Black Version and Pokémon White Version ( <unk> & <unk> , Poketto Monsutā Burakku & <unk> , " Pocket Monsters : Black & White " ) are role @-@ playing games developed by Game Freak and published by Nintendo for the Nintendo DS . They are the first installments in the fifth generation of the Pokémon series of role @-@ playing games . First released in Japan on September 18 , 2010 , they were later released in Europe on March 4 , 2011 , in North America on March 6 , 2011 , and Australia on March 10 , 2011 . 
 Similar to previous installments of the series , the two games follow the journey of a young Pokémon trainer through the region of Unova , as they train Pokémon used to compete against other trainers , while thwarting the schemes of the criminal organization Team Plasma . Black and White introduced 156 new Pokémon to the franchise , 5 more than the previous record holder Red and Blue , as well as many new features , including a seasonal cycle , rotation battles , fully animated Pokémon sprites and triple battles . Both titles are independent of each other , but feature largely the same plot , and while both can be played separately , trading Pokémon between both of the games is necessary in order to complete the games ' Pokédex . 
 Upon their release , Black and White received positive reviews ; critics praised the advancements in gameplay , as well as several of the new Pokémon introduced . Reviewers , however , were divided on some of the character designs , and some critics felt that the games did not innovate as much as expected . Nevertheless , the games were commercial successes ; prior to the games ' Japanese release , Black and White sold one million consumer pre @-@ orders and sold five million copies as of January 2011 , making it one of the best selling DS games to date . As of March 2015 , the games ' combined sales have reached 15 @.@ 60 million , putting the titles amongst the best selling games for the Nintendo DS , but still being outsold by their predecessors , Diamond and Pearl . Sequels to Pokémon Black and White , named Pokémon Black 2 and White 2 , were released in Japan for the Nintendo DS in June 2012 , with October releases in North America , Europe , and Australia . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Pokémon Black and White are role @-@ playing video games with adventure elements , presented in a third @-@ person , overhead perspective . There are three basic screens : an overworld , in which the player navigates the main character ; a battle screen ; and the menu , in which the player configures their party , items , or gameplay settings . The player controls a Pokémon Trainer who begins the game with a single Pokémon and is able to capture more using Poké Balls . Like all other Trainers , the player can carry up to six Pokémon at one time . However , the game also includes a network of PCs to store hundreds of Pokémon . PCs are found in certain buildings — namely , " Pokémon Centers " , where the player heals their Pokémon with low health . 
 Most Pokémon evolve into other forms when certain conditions are met , such as when they reach a certain level — levels range from 1 to 100 — or have a certain item used on them . They can learn up to four moves , including attacking moves , healing moves , and moves that inflict status conditions on the opponent . They have six stats that affect battle performance : maximum HP ( hit points ) , Attack , Defense , Special Attack , Special Defense , and Speed . Attack and Special Attack are distinguished from Defense and Special Defense by the types of moves being considered : generally , moves involving physical exertion are physical , while moves involving supernatural or elemental powers are special . Moves are classed as one of eighteen types , ( Normal , Water , Grass , Fire , Electric , Ghost , Bug , Fighting , Ice , Steel , Rock , Fairy , Poison , Psychic , Dark , Dragon , Ground , and Flying ) ; Pokémon can have one or two types . Generally , most of a Pokémon 's moves correspond to its typing . A Pokémon 's type makes it vulnerable or resistant to others ; for example , Fire @-@ type Pokémon are weak to Water @-@ type moves , while Grass @-@ type moves do little damage to them and Electric @-@ type moves do normal damage . 
 When the player encounters a wild Pokémon or is challenged by another Trainer to a battle , the screen switches to a turn @-@ based battle screen where the Pokémon fight . During battle , the player may fight , use an item , switch the active Pokémon , or flee . However , the player cannot flee a battle against another Trainer or against certain wild Pokémon that are stronger than the player 's . When a Pokémon 's HP is reduced to zero , it faints until it is revived . If an opposing Pokémon faints , all of the player 's Pokémon who participated in defeating it receive experience points . After accumulating enough experience points , a Pokémon may level up , increasing its stats . Many Pokémon evolve into other forms , usually by reaching certain levels . At the " Day Care " location , the player can breed two of their Pokémon — usually , a male and a female — to create Eggs that hatch into baby Pokémon at level 1 . 
 The world of Pokémon Black and White , known as Unova , consists of a number of cities and towns connected by " Routes " . Random encounters may take place in tall grass along routes or in bodies of water . The player occasionally battles Trainers in cities and towns , as well as along routes . In addition , eight of the game 's cities and towns are homes to " Gym Leaders " , powerful Trainers specializing in certain types of Pokémon ; beating a Gym Leader gives the player a " Badge " . All eight Badges are needed to unlock the Pokémon League , where the player faces off against the " Elite Four " and , finally , the Champion . Across Unova , items can be found on the ground or purchased from " Poké Marts " . For example , Hyper Potions restore HP , Antidotes cure poisoning , and <unk> revitalize fainted Pokémon . <unk> ( Technical Machines ) teach moves to Pokémon , and <unk> ( Hidden Machines ) are a special class of <unk> for important moves that allow the player to traverse the environment . The " Surf " HM move , as one example , is used to cross bodies of water . 
 = = = New features = = = 
 The graphics have been improved from Diamond and Pearl . The dialog boxes of previous games have been changed to speech balloons that appear over other characters ' heads , allowing more than one character to speak at once . Japanese players can have kanji appear on screen , rather than only hiragana and katakana . During battles , the sprites of the Pokémon are fully animated and the camera changes position to highlight specific parts of the battle . In addition to continuing the day and night cycle introduced in Gold and Silver , Black and White introduces a seasonal cycle , with the seasons advancing every month rather than being linked to the calendar . Outside areas appear differently depending on the season , such as changing of leaves in autumn or snow on the ground in winter . Certain areas are only accessible during certain seasons , and different Pokémon can be found in the wild in winter where others are encountered in the other seasons . The Pokémon <unk> and <unk> change their physical appearance to match the seasons . 
 There are two new battle mechanics : Triple Battles and Rotation Battles . In Triple Battles , both teams must send out three Pokémon in a row at once ; Pokémon on the left or right side can only attack the opponent 's Pokémon on the same side or in the center . Changing position takes up one turn . In Rotation Battles , each side sends out three Pokémon at once , but they are arranged in a circle that can be rotated at will . Black has more Rotation Battles than Triple Battles , and the opposite is true in White . Another introduction is Combination Moves : a starter Pokémon can be taught one of three moves , and using them together in Double or Triple battles produces more powerful attacks . In the wild , walking through different @-@ colored tall grass can trigger Double Battles against wild Pokémon rather than only Single Battles as usual . 
 Occasionally , the player can find rustling patches of grass and rippling water , where they can encounter either a rare Pokémon , a Pokémon more common in the opposite game version , or the highest evolutionary form of a Pokémon whose lower forms can normally be found in the area . This is the only way to capture Pokémon such as <unk> , <unk> , and <unk> . Also , dust clouds in caves and the shadows of flying Pokémon on certain bridges can be entered to either find a rare item or encounter <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , or <unk> , none of which can be found in the wild otherwise . Occasionally , when throwing a Poké Ball , the capture rate is highly increased , triggered by a random event . There are also new side @-@ games and sidequests : the player can compete in Pokémon Musicals , a side @-@ game similar to the Pokémon Contests of previous games ; the Battle Subway , similar to the Battle Towers and Battle Frontiers of previous games ; and on the Royal Unova , a cruise ship that the player can ride and fight Trainers aboard to win otherwise rare items . 
 = = = Connectivity to other devices = = = 
 The C @-@ Gear ( <unk> , Shī Gia ) replaces the <unk> from Diamond and Pearl on the Nintendo DS 's bottom screen . It controls the game 's wireless capabilities , including infrared ( IR ) communication for battling and trading , wireless communications in the <unk> video chat access to the <unk> to transfer content from the Pokémon Dream World , using the Wi @-@ Fi to sync with the Pokémon Global Link servers , and the new " Pass By mode " which allows the game to communicate with other copies through infrared while the DS is asleep . The Feeling Check ( <unk> , <unk> <unk> ) function tests the compatibility between two players and awards them items accordingly . In the " Pass By " feature , the player answers various survey questions and receives one of several items depending on how many other players they have connected with . In the " Random Matchup " feature , the player can battle others randomly . When playing against others online or in IR battles , a new mechanic called the Wonder Launcher allows healing items to be used in battle . 
 Two features were added to transfer Pokémon from older DS Pokémon games to Black and White . For normal transfer , the Poké Transfer feature is available after completion of the main storyline . Unlike the " Pal Park " feature from previous games , the Poké Transfer is a mini @-@ game in which after six Pokémon are transferred , the player uses the touch screen to launch Poké Balls at the transferred Pokémon to catch them within a time limit . Another feature called the <unk> is used to transfer the Pokémon given away in promotions for the film Pokémon : Zoroark : Master of Illusions so the player can obtain the rare Pokémon Zorua and Zoroark . Unlike the Poké Transfer , this is available before the main game is completed . 
 Unique to Black and White is the Pokémon Dream World , which is dependent on the official Pokémon Global Link website . Here , the player can befriend Pokémon that are not normally obtainable in @-@ game and that have unique abilities . This occurs after syncing the game back with the Dream World , similarly to the <unk> from HeartGold and SoulSilver . The player can maintain a house in the Dream World that other players can visit as well as grow berries . In addition to allowing access to Pokémon acquired in the Dream World , the <unk> also enables players to interact with each other and play side @-@ games . These side @-@ games award points that can be traded for temporary powers such as increasing experience , improving capture rate , or lowering prices of items in Poké Marts . 
 = = Plot = = 
 = = = Setting = = = 
 Black and White are set in the Unova region , a continental mass located far away from the previous regions , Kanto , Johto , Hoenn and Sinnoh . Unlike the previous regions which were based on real locations in Japan , Unova is modeled after New York City , an idea developed by game director Junichi Masuda when he visited the city for the launch of Diamond and Pearl . One particular example of this is Castelia City , which serves as the region 's central metropolis and had such inspirations as its " Brooklyn Bridge @-@ style suspension bridge " and its " huge skyscrapers " . Masuda also wanted to convey a " feeling of communities " in Castelia 's streets . Unova is host to large urban areas , a harbor , an airport , an amusement park , several bridges , and several mountain ranges . In addition to a diversity of new landscapes , the Unova region is also home to a diversity of people who vary in skin tone and occupation . The region 's Japanese name " Isshu " ( <unk> ) is derived from the Japanese words <unk> ( <unk> ? , meaning " many kinds " ) and isshu ( <unk> ? , meaning " one kind " ) ; the many kinds of people and Pokémon seen up close look like only one kind of life from afar . 
 = = = Story = = = 
 Like previous Pokémon games , Black and White both follow a linear storyline ; the main events occur in a fixed order . The protagonist of Pokémon Black and White is a teenager who sets out on a journey through Unova to become the Pokémon master . At the beginning of the games , the player chooses either <unk> , <unk> , or <unk> as their starter Pokémon as a gift from Professor Juniper . The protagonist 's friends , Cheren and Bianca , are also rival Pokémon Trainers who occasionally battle the player , Cheren will choose the Pokémon with a type advantage against yours , while Bianca will choose the Pokémon with a type disadvantage . The player 's primary goal is to obtain the eight Gym Badges of Unova and ultimately challenge the Elite Four of the Pokémon League , and its Champion , to win the game . 
 In addition to the standard gameplay , the player will also have to defeat the games ' main antagonist force , Team Plasma , a Knights Templar @-@ esque group who believe Pokémon are being enslaved by humans and work to " liberate " them . Team Plasma is led by " N " , a young man who was brought up alongside Pokémon and sees them as friends rather than tools for sport . Throughout the game , the player has some encounters with N , who claims that by capturing one of the legendary Dragon Pokémon of Unova and defeating the Pokémon Champion Alder , he will be recognized as Unova 's hero and will be able to convince the humans to part with their Pokémon . Depending on the game version , N will capture the Deep Black Pokémon Zekrom in Black or the Vast White Pokémon Reshiram in White . 
 After the player defeats the Elite Four and enters the Champion 's chamber , he or she finds that N has defeated Alder and has become the newest Pokémon Champion . Soon after , he summons a large castle that surrounds the Pokémon League , challenging the player to find him to take part in one final battle . When the player finally reaches him , Reshiram in Black or Zekrom in White appears before the player , and the player must capture the legendary Pokémon before challenging N. After his defeat , N laments the possibility that his ideals are mistaken , as Ghetsis intrudes and angrily reveals that his true intentions were to use N to ensure that he would be the only human left with control over Pokémon and use them to rule the world . In his rage , Ghetsis challenges the player to battle . After Ghetsis 's defeat , he is arrested , allowing Alder to resume his position as the Pokémon Champion of the Unova region . N then thanks the player for helping realize his mistake about the nature of the relationship between people and their Pokémon before leaving the castle on his captured Dragon Pokémon to a far @-@ off land . 
 After Team Plasma 's defeat , Looker arrives in Unova and tasks the player with finding the remaining Sages of Team Plasma , so they can be brought to justice . The player can also challenge the Elite Four once again , and challenge Alder , ultimately becoming the Unova region 's new Pokémon Champion . The player also gains access to the eastern portion of Unova , which contains Pokémon from the previous games in the series , as well as access to an area unique to each game version : the ultra @-@ metropolitan Black City , home to powerful Pokémon trainers ; and the White Forest , home to humans and Pokémon living in harmony . Cynthia , a former Champion of the Sinnoh region , is also found in this area of the game and can be challenged . A non @-@ player character named after Shigeki Morimoto , a Game Freak programmer , creature designer , and the director of the HeartGold and SoulSilver games , can also be found and battled in the game . 
 = = Development = = 
 On January 29 , 2010 , the Pokémon Company announced that a new game was in development for the Nintendo DS to be released later that year . Director Junichi Masuda stated that several aspects of the series were being revamped for the new generation . On April 9 , 2010 , the Japanese website updated with the titles of the versions as Pokémon Black and White , and announced a Q3 2010 release date . The games feature an improved visual style from other Pokémon games , with an increased use of 3D computer graphics than any other of the handheld series . It also has a special feature that allows the user to upload their saved game to the Internet , allowing them to do certain things on an official website . 
 On August 3 , 2010 , Masuda announced on his blog that the Black and White game versions will initially only contain brand @-@ new Pokémon to evoke a feeling of it being a brand @-@ new game , like when the original Pokémon games were first released . In all of the games following the first generation , there were a series of new Pokémon introduced interspersed with Pokémon from the previous generations . For example , Pikachu was introduced in Red and Green , and was obtainable in Blue , Yellow , and all subsequent main series games ; however , Pikachu will not be obtainable in Black and White from the start of the game . It was later confirmed that Black and White are region locked on the Nintendo DSi and 3DS . 
 Game director and composer Junichi Masuda stated that to keep the games fresh , he looks at every previous element to decide what to adapt to the new game , stating " people may not like what they like in the past , trend wise " . He explained the new battle styles , stating that while triple battles take more strategy , rotation battles take more luck to win . Masuda stated that their goal when making the games was to make it fun for new players , but they also wanted to get players who have not played the series in a while to come back . He said that it was hard to find that balance to satisfy both kinds of players . For the new players , there is good explanation in how to play , while for old players , they incorporated the C @-@ Gear , which makes the ability to trade and battle easier . When asked about the decision to introduce over 150 new species of Pokémon , Masuda stated that they did this so old players would not be able to know what is a good Pokémon to use , and it would level the playing ground for new players . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 Nintendo DS Pokémon Black · White Super Music Collection ( <unk> ポケットモンスター <unk> ・ <unk> <unk> , Nintendō Dī Esu Poketto Monsutā Burakku · <unk> Sūpā <unk> <unk> ) is a four @-@ disc soundtrack featuring the games ' music scored by Masuda , Go Ichinose , Shota Kageyama , Hitomi Sato , Morikazu Aoki , Minako Adachi , and Satoshi Nohara . The soundtrack was released on October 20 , 2010 , in Japan . Ichinose was in charge of directing all Pokémon voices for the game while Minako Adachi produced all sound effects . 
 = = Promotion and release = = 
 Pokémon Black and White were released in Japan on September 18 , 2010 , in Europe on March 4 , 2011 , and in North America on March 6 , 2011 . The Australian release was on March 10 , 2011 . 
 = = = Japanese release = = = 
 A silhouette of a new Pokémon was shown by Junichi Masuda on the February 7 , 2010 episode of Pokémon Sunday , stated to be in the film for the summer and to be identified in a future episode on February 21 . This new Pokémon would also be featured in the March 2010 issue of CoroCoro Comic available on February 15 , and is the start of the fifth generation of the Pokémon franchise . Since then , the Pokémon has been named " Zoroark " , and it evolves from a Pokémon named " Zorua " . Both were featured in the film Pocket Monsters Diamond & Pearl The Movie : Phantom Ruler : Zoroark . For pre @-@ order ticket holders , an alternate @-@ colored Raikou , Entei , or Suicune was available for transfer to their Diamond , Pearl , Platinum , HeartGold , or SoulSilver games . At the theater , players would be able to download a Celebi to the same games . Both of these Pokémon would activate special events in Black and White involving Zoroark and Zorua , respectively . 
 On April 18 , 2010 , the episode of Pokémon Sunday showed game footage of a player character walking around in a 3D environment and a single screenshot depicting a battle between the player 's Zoroark and an enemy Zorua . Host Shoko Nakagawa made note of how the player 's Zoroark 's sprite was a full body sprite as viewed from behind , when in the past all such sprites only showed a smaller portion of the player 's Pokémon 's body . On May 9 , 2010 , the episode of Pokémon Sunday revealed silhouettes of the three Pokémon available to choose from at the beginning of the games , which were later revealed to be the Grass Snake Pokémon <unk> , the Fire Pig Pokémon <unk> , and the Sea Otter Pokémon <unk> . Other information revealed is that the game takes place in the Isshu Region which includes the <unk> City metropolis . On May 16 , 2010 , the episode of Pokémon Sunday showed game battle footage , illustrating the new in @-@ battle animations and dynamic camera positioning ; also described were Zoroark 's Illusion ability and the special Zoroark acquired by the movie ticket pre @-@ order gift Pokémon . 
 On May 28 , 2010 , both the official Japanese and English Pokémon websites revealed names and designs of the two major Legendary Pokémon of these games , who also serve as the game version mascots : the White Yang Pokémon Reshiram for Pokémon Black and the Black Yin Pokémon Zekrom for Pokémon White . The July 2010 issue of CoroCoro Comic revealed the C @-@ Gear wireless interactivity features , the ability to upload game data to the internet and the player 's computer , several brand @-@ new Pokémon , new Pokémon moves , Reshiram and Zekrom 's Pokémon types , details on the Celebi / Zorua event , and a new character : Professor <unk> , the first female Pokémon professor to appear in the video games . The June 27 , 2010 , episode of Pokémon Sunday , made the announcement of the release date as September 18 , 2010 , and a yet @-@ to @-@ be named character . The June 28 episode of <unk> <unk> , showed a trailer , which included its release date , new gameplay footage , several new characters , more new Pokémon , and a three @-@ on @-@ three battle system . The August 2010 issue of CoroCoro Comic elaborated upon many new game mechanics : the three @-@ on @-@ three system , the online Global Link system , an online Dream World that can allow for access to other Pokémon , access to an area that uses the Wi @-@ Fi called the <unk> ( similar to the Underground ) , a special feature called the Live Caster for video chat on the Nintendo DSi and Nintendo 3DS , kanji support , aesthetic differences between the two versions of the game , areas exclusive to the game versions , new characters , new moves , new abilities , and new Pokémon . 
 The July 25 , 2010 , episode of Pokémon Sunday introduced the new phantom Pokémon Victini , which initially appeared in a trailer for the 2011 Pokémon film that was shown with screenings of Phantom Ruler : Zoroark . It is noted to be Pokémon No. 000 in Isshu 's regional Pokédex , and is only accessible by downloading a special item from Nintendo Wi @-@ Fi Connection , DS Stations , and Nintendo Zones ( such as those found in Japanese McDonald 's restaurants ) to a game save . This was initially available for a month following the games ' release date . Another promotional Pokémon given out after the games ' release is a <unk> , a Pokémon that is difficult to find in the games unless it is during the games ' winter season . 
 On the day of the Japanese release , Nintendo of America sent cease and desist letters to two English language Pokémon fansites , <unk> and <unk> , after they published screenshots and various other media from the newly released games . Nintendo claimed the posting of the media was infringing copyright and noted their intention to shut down the websites under the Digital Millennium Copyright Act unless the media was removed . The screenshots were subsequently taken down from both websites . Luke Plunkett of video game blog Kotaku initially speculated that Nintendo of America issued the cease and desist letters over the belief that the images were illegally obtained via a ROM image ; however , Jon <unk> of <unk> stated the images in question had been obtained from the Japanese forum 2channel . Charlie <unk> , Nintendo of America 's senior director of corporate communications , later stated that it was the choice of images that were of concern to the company . In a statement to Kotaku , he said , " Nintendo supports and appreciates the efforts that Pokémon fans go through to create fan sites . In most cases there is no issue with the content that is posted , but on this occasion we had to contact a select few websites to ask them to take down confidential images . " 
 = = = International release = = = 
 The foreign promotion for the games began on November 22 , 2010 , when the official website for the North American , European , and Australian markets was updated , including the localized names of the starter Pokémon ( <unk> , <unk> , and <unk> in English , Dutch , Italian , Brazilian Portuguese , and Spanish markets ) and the setting ( Unova Region ) . Floats of version mascots Reshiram and Zekrom accompanied the Pikachu balloon during the Macy 's Thanksgiving Day Parade on November 25 , 2010 , the following Thursday . 
 On December 27 , 2010 , the official websites for the international releases updated once more , revealing the English names for many of the first Pokémon revealed during the promotion for the Japanese release . In addition , the English names for the game location <unk> City and the character Professor <unk> were revealed to be Castelia City and Professor Juniper , respectively . 
 Starting on January 3 and lasting until January 9 , 2011 , in the United States , players of Diamond , Pearl , Platinum , HeartGold , and SoulSilver were able to visit GameStop stores to download the special shiny Raikou that was previously given out for Phantom Ruler : Zoroark pre @-@ order ticket holders in Japan . Similar downloads would be available for the shiny Entei ( January 17 to 23 ) and shiny Suicune ( January 31 to February 6 ) . All three of these Pokémon still enabled the event for Zoroark in the North American Black and White versions . These three Pokémon were later distributed via the Nintendo Wi @-@ Fi Connection for European , Australian , and North American markets ( for a second time ) starting February 7 to 13 with Raikou , again , with subsequent staggered releases for Entei and Suicune throughout February . 
 The Celebi event was run in North America and distributed through GameStop stores from February 21 to March 6 , 2011 , or it could be acquired from the tour promoting the Black and White games that began on February 5 , 2011 . In France and Spain , this same Celebi was available through various retailers from February 1 through March 3 , 2011 . Italian players could get this Celebi from specific video game retailers from January 21 through March 3 . 
 The event to distribute the item to allow players to capture Victini was also be run following the games ' release internationally . North American players were able to download the item from Nintendo WFC from March 6 to April 10 , 2011 . European players were able to get the item from March 4 to April 22 . Australian players were able to download it from March 10 to April 28 , 2011 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 Pokémon Black and White have received largely positive reviews by critics , having an aggregate score of 87 % on Metacritic , indicating generally favorable reviews . Japanese magazine Famitsu Weekly awarded the game a perfect 40 / 40 score , becoming the 15th game to receive such a distinction , as well as obtaining the highest score ever given to a Pokémon video game by the publication . Game Informer 's Annette Gonzalez remarked that " Pokémon Black and White do a great job building upon already solid features and taking them to the next level . " VideoGamer.com 's Jamin Smith criticized the games for not innovating as much as some people would have liked , but stated that " rest assured in the knowledge that Black and White are damn fine games ; the best the series has to offer . " Official Nintendo Magazine referred to them as " A beautiful refinement of a great series [ ... ] the best Pokémon ever . " Nintendo Power expressed that " the Pokémon series 's latest pair of adventures is as addictive as ever . " Edge acknowledged that " where next for Pokémon Black and White don 't suggest any answers , but they do remind us why we 'd care in the first place . " 
 IGN gave the games a 9 / 10 , a higher rating than any of the other Nintendo DS Pokémon games . The review praised the games for renewing interest in the series , though criticized some of the new Pokémon designs , explaining that " aside from a weaker lineup of monsters ( largely an aesthetic complaint ) , this is the best Pokémon has to offer on every level , renewing my waning interest in monster battling " . Jeremy Parish of Retronauts criticized Black and White , commenting that he grew tired of it shortly after starting and feeling like it was too similar to all previous Pokémon games . He further went on to say that EVs and IVs , invisible mechanics in the game , are not necessarily beneficial . By contrast , he noted that it would be great to new players . He also compared it to the Pokémon Mystery Dungeon games and Final Fantasy XIII , arguing that they all share the common element of being bad before they get good . Fellow Retronauts contributor Justin Haywald criticized the games ' release on the DS , which had received two main Pokémon series games published before them . GamesRadar editor Carolyn Gudmundson stated " It may not break the Pokemon mold , but Black / White offers enough new content coupled with the series ' classic , deep battle mechanics to make it endlessly playable . If you could only play one game for the rest of your life , this would be a wise choice . " 
 = = = Commercial performance = = = 
 In August 2010 , one month before the games ' release in Japan , Pokémon Black and White gained a total of 1 @.@ 08 million pre @-@ orders , becoming the fastest game on the Nintendo DS to break the one million mark . In the first two days on sale , it sold more than 2 @.@ 6 million copies , becoming the biggest launch in the series history in Japan . By November 3 , the games had sold over 4 @.@ 3 million copies in Japan . As of January 9 , 2011 , the games became the fastest DS titles to sell five million copies . 
 Upon release its in the UK , White and Black took the # 1 and # 2 spots respectively in the UK overall sales charts , with White becoming the second fastest @-@ selling DS game ever in the UK after Professor Layton and Pandora 's Box , selling 13 @,@ 000 more copies than Black . Combined , their sales became Nintendo 's third biggest ever launch in the UK , behind Wii Fit and Mario Kart Wii , and the biggest opening weekend ever for a pair of Pokémon titles . 
 In the US , Black and White sold more than 1 @.@ 08 million copies on day one , breaking the previous day @-@ one record held by predecessors Diamond and Pearl of 780 @,@ 000 copies . According to the NPD Group , Nintendo sold 1 @.@ 3 million units of White and 1 @.@ 1 million units of Black in March 2011 , making them the # 1 and # 2 top selling games in the US for the month . In April 2011 , Nintendo 's financial earnings report confirmed that Pokémon Black and White had sold 11 @.@ 5 million copies worldwide , making them the highest selling DS games for Nintendo in the 2010 @-@ 11 financial year , and third overall , behind only the Wii games , Wii Sports and Wii Sports Resort . As of March 2015 , the games ' combined sales have reached 15 @.@ 60 million . 
 = Infinity Blade = 
 Infinity Blade is a fighting game with role @-@ playing elements developed by Chair Entertainment and Epic Games and released through the Apple App Store on December 9 , 2010 . It is the first iOS video game to run on the Unreal Engine . In the game , the unnamed player character fights a series of one @-@ on @-@ one battles in a derelict castle to face the immortal God King . When in battle , players swipe the screen to attack and parry , and tap the screen to dodge and block enemy attacks . Upon victory or defeat , the player restarts the game as the character 's descendant with the same items and experience level . 
 The game was developed by a team of twelve people , who took two months to make a playable demo and three more to finish the game . Infinity Blade was intended to demonstrate the new iOS version of the Unreal Engine , and to combine the swordplay of Karateka and Prince of Persia with the loneliness of Shadow of the Colossus . The game received four free expansions that added new equipment , endings , and game modes . 
 Infinity Blade was the fastest @-@ grossing app in the history of iOS upon its release . It made US $ 1 @.@ 6 million in its first four days , and over US $ 23 million by the end of 2011 . It was well received by gaming critics . Reviews heavily praised the graphics and compared the mobile game favorably to console games . Critics also praised the swipe @-@ based combat system , but split opinions on the cyclical gameplay as either addictive or repetitive . Chair later released an arcade port and two iOS sequels : Infinity Blade II and Infinity Blade III . Author Brandon Sanderson also wrote two novellas set between the games : Infinity Blade : Awakening and Infinity Blade : Redemption . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 In the primary portion of Infinity Blade , the player @-@ character travels a largely linear path through a ruined castle and fights one @-@ on @-@ one battles with oversized enemies . The path through the castle is a series of discrete locations where the player can pan the camera around the stationary player @-@ character to view a fully three @-@ dimensional area . The player taps locations highlighted onscreen to trigger either a short cutscene as the player @-@ character moves to the next location , or a sword battle with an enemy . During combat , the player controls the character 's sword by swiping a finger across the screen . Players can touch icons at the bottom of the screen to dodge attacks by ducking right or left , or to block attacks with a shield , which has a limited number of uses during a single battle . Players may also parry incoming attacks with an intercepting sword move that , for example , parries an attack from the left with a swipe to the left . Each of these three counters can leave the enemy vulnerable to counterattack for a short period , but incorrect counters result in damage to the player @-@ character , as reflected in the health bar . When players fail in battle en route to the God King , the game resets to the location preceding the previous battle . Enemies can perform attacks that cannot be parried or blocked — such as a shield bash — that must be dodged . Players use two special abilities via icons atop the screen : the Super Attack temporarily stuns the opponent , and magic heals or attacks as indicated by drawing a given symbol . Both require time to recharge after use . When attacking , the player can swipe in any direction , and can do specific attack combinations to deal extra damage . 
 In addition to combat , there is also a mild role @-@ playing component . An experience point system levels up the player @-@ character and their equipment ( weapons , armor , shields , helms , and magic rings ) . Equipment pieces have special properties and a predetermined amount of experience points required to master them . Mastering a piece of equipment increases its sale value but decreases the player 's experience gain by 20 % . Upon leveling up or mastering a piece of equipment , players gain attribute points that can be allotted towards four character attributes : health , attack , shield power , or magic . Each point can only be allocated once and is a permanent upgrade to the character . Players can purchase new equipment using in @-@ game money from sacks and treasure chests found throughout the castle , defeated enemies , and sales of unused equipment . In @-@ game money can be purchased with real money within the game . 
 The game follows a cyclical narrative structure in which the player @-@ character and his descendants individually explore a castle in a quest to battle the primary antagonist , the immortal God King . In the game 's introduction , the player @-@ character has just finished this quest , but is slain by the God King . The player then assumes the role of the dead character 's descendant as he starts his own journey at the beginning of the castle . This cycle , called a bloodline , continues after the player finally faces the God King and either dies , wins , or chooses to join the God King instead of fighting . Enemy difficulty increases with each bloodline cycle . Another bloodline ending is unlocked after purchasing the Infinite Blade item : the sword is placed into a pedestal in the castle 's underground dungeons and three doors open . After then defeating each of the three " Deathless " — immortal beings like the God King — of increasing difficulty found within , a final fourth door opens and the player faces a mechanized warrior guarding the high @-@ tech chamber where the God King is reborn whenever he is killed . Upon defeating the mechanized warrior , the chamber is revealed to be controlled by an ancestor of the playable character , who chose to serve the God King . After fighting the ancestor , the player @-@ character is told that the Infinity Blade has the ability to prevent immortals like the God King from resurrecting after death . The player is then given the option of either starting the next bloodline as they do when defeated , or resetting the game and starting New Game + mode , which resets all gold and item progression but maintains the character 's experience level , letting the player remaster the items and level up even further . 
 = = = Expansions = = = 
 Chair Entertainment released four expansions as free updates to the game . The first , released December 20 , 2010 , added a new enemy , equipment , and microtransactions . It also removed an experience level cap . The second update , titled Infinity Blade : The Deathless Kings , was released on March 2 , 2011 and added the dungeons as a second branch to the game 's path . This expansion also added new equipment , enemies , and the second ending where the player @-@ character defeats his ancestor . The third update , Infinity Blade : Arena , was released on May 19 , 2011 . It added the player vs. player " Arena Mode " , a tiered combat game progression where one player fights as the hero and the other as an enemy from the game . The update also included new equipment and a single @-@ player version of Arena Mode called " Survival Mode " . On October 4 , 2011 , a fourth update added a new enemy and new equipment to coincide with the announcement of the forthcoming sequel Infinity Blade II . 
 = = Development = = 
 Infinity Blade was created by Chair Entertainment , a subsidiary company of Epic Games . In July 2010 , Chair had both recently finished the Xbox Live Arcade game Shadow Complex and been acquired by Epic . Chair was brainstorming Kinect and Wii games , including an idea similar to Infinity Blade , and Epic was nearing completion of an iOS version of the Unreal Engine 3 graphics engine and in need of a " killer game " to show it off . Epic had previously licensed the engine for use in numerous console and personal computer games . They asked Chair to develop a game for the engine in five months , with a playable demo for the Apple Special Event conference in two months . The team decided within a few days to work on the Infinity Blade concept , codenamed " Project Sword " . In lieu of the normal initial game development where working prototypes test gameplay ideas , Chair spent the first week of development refining the gameplay concept on paper before beginning to code . Many of the core gameplay ideas were developed in their first few hours . <unk> Mustard , Chair 's co @-@ founder and technical director , estimates that the team cut two @-@ third of that initial design due to lack of time . Refining the complex touch @-@ based interface was complicated due to the Unreal Engine 's incomplete status and the native iOS code library 's lack of support for fast touch @-@ based gameplay . The five @-@ month development was completed by a team of twelve people from Chair , with assistance from Epic . In addition to <unk> Mustard , the team was composed of Chair co @-@ founder and creative director Donald Mustard ; Simon Hurley as producer ; Joshua Andersen and Scott K. Bowen as programmers ; Adam Ford as art director ; Orlando <unk> , Bert Lewis , Mike Low , Scott Stoddard , and Nathan Trewartha as artists and animators ; and Brandon Raul Campos as lead tester . 
 The game 's swipe @-@ based swordplay was based on Donald Mustard 's desire for an uncommon gameplay based on nuanced sword fighting and parrying . He described the game 's influences as the combat of Karateka and Prince of Persia combined with the " lonely epicness " of Shadow of the Colossus . Chair sought to develop an experience that could be picked up and played for a minute ( a single battle ) or for half an hour ( a bloodline ) . They felt that many other developers accustomed to consoles were wrong to make iOS games that required long playing experiences to feel meaningful , and so Chair developed the bloodline concept as a natural <unk> . They also felt that mobile games like Infinity Blade with constant action elements went too long without giving the player time to relax and resulted in player exhaustion , and so Chair kept their individual battles short with brief cinematic pauses in longer battles . Chair showed their playable demo at the Apple conference on September 1 , 2010 , after weeks of rehearsal , and attracted a lot of attention to the game . It was released on December 9 , 2010 . While Chair itself spent little on marketing , Apple used the game extensively in advertisements for its devices . 
 The music for the game was composed by Josh Aker , who had written the music for previous Chair games . The soundtrack was intended by Aker to be " intense " during combat , but to vary between " serene " and " otherworldly " outside battle . It is a mixture of live and synthetic instrument performances . Cello and <unk> were the primary instruments used . Aker wanted to have " avant @-@ garde performances " for the recordings . The soundtrack was sold as a digital album , Infinity Blade : Original Soundtrack , through several online music retailers . Chair began to develop the game 's first update before the initial game was released . They intended only to add new monsters and features , but added the ability to purchase gold due to customer requests . Chair did not rebalance the game to incentivize in @-@ app purchases . Work on The Deathless Kings update began immediately afterwards . Chair felt that releasing several large , free updates to the game would increase their overall user base and result in more total sales due to word of mouth . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Infinity Blade was noted for its sales at launch , selling more than 270 @,@ 000 copies and making over US $ 1 @.@ 6 million in its first four days — the " fastest @-@ grossing app " ever released for iOS at the time . By the end of 2011 , it had made at least US $ 23 million in revenue . Around fourteen months after the initial release , Chair noted that half of the game 's sales were for the iPhone and half were for the iPad and iPod . After releasing the sequel , Epic Games noted in 2012 that the series was Epic 's most profitable by measure of revenue against person @-@ hours spent in development . 
 Infinity Blade was reviewed by several major gaming sites in addition to mobile game @-@ focused sites . Critics praised the game 's graphics heavily . IGN reviewer Hilary Goldstein said that it was " an absolute stunner for any handheld device and ushers in a new era of possibility for high @-@ end graphics . " GamePro 's Ryan Rigney called the game " downright gorgeous " and said that the graphics were almost at the level of a Xbox 360 game , which was echoed by John Meyer of Wired , who claimed that it had the best graphics of any iPad game . The reviewer for Edge further praised the art direction , especially with regards to the enemy and armor designs . 
 The gameplay was generally praised by reviewers , who typically found the combat engaging but were split on the repetitive aspects of the game . 1UP.com 's Matt Clark said that the sword gameplay " just feels right " , while Mark Brown of Eurogamer said that the combat had an excitement factor that pushed players to keep on going for one more battle . Tracy Erickson of Pocket Gamer described the swipe @-@ based combat system as " easy to understand , though tough to master " , and Nick Chester of Destructoid said that although the combat was not very complicated , it was fun to play . The role @-@ playing game elements were praised — Destructoid 's Chester called them " satisfying " and IGN 's Goldstein said that they added to the game 's difficulty . Brown 's review for Eurogamer , however , said that while good they were not as engaging as the combat , and the Edge review dismissed them as minimal . Reviewers had mixed opinions on the effectiveness of the bloodline system 's repetition : Destructoid 's Chester described it as addictive and IGN 's Goldstein agreed , but Erickson 's review for Pocket Gamer said that the game had problems with repetition and Wired 's Meyer dismissed it as " repetitive ... as the title suggests " . J. Nicholas Geist , writing for Kill Screen , focused his entire review on the cyclical nature of the game , treating its nature of repetition with small changes between each bloodline as a metaphor for life . Most reviewers found themselves between the two extremes , with Brown of Eurogamer simultaneously describing it as " alarmingly repetitious " but still addictive and 1UP.com 's Clark saying that enjoying the game required getting past the repetition , despite being " stellar " . 
 = = Sequels and spin @-@ offs = = 
 On October 28 , 2011 , Epic Games and Adrenaline Amusements released an arcade version of the game , Infinity Blade FX . The game is played on a 46 @-@ inch screen rigged with optical sensors so as to mimic a large iPhone or iPad screen . Each arcade stand contains up to three screens , and players can play against each other or in the single @-@ player game . A sequel to the iOS game , Infinity Blade II , was announced on October 4 , 2011 , during the Apple iPhone 4S keynote presentation . It was released on December 1 , 2011 , and features enhanced graphics , a new storyline , and new fighting styles . A spinoff game , Infinity Blade : Dungeons , was in development for iOS by Epic Games subsidiary Impossible Games , but was cancelled in February 2013 when Impossible Games was shut down . A final game in the trilogy , Infinity Blade III , was released on September 18 , 2013 . 
 A novella by author Brandon Sanderson was released prior to both Infinity Blade II and III to serve as a story bridge between the games . Infinity Blade : Awakening was released as an e @-@ book on October 4 , 2011 to correspond with the announcement of Infinity Blade II . The story gives the protagonist of the first game a name , Siris , introduces the idea that the God King was one of multiple Deathless in the world , as is Siris , and has Siris and the assassin Isa journey to find the Worker of Secrets in order to kill the resurrected God King and the other Deathless . The second e @-@ book novella , Infinity Blade : Redemption , was released on September 9 , 2013 just prior to the third game . In it , Siris and the God King escape from their imprisonment by the Worker of Secrets , while extensive flashbacks show the rise of the Deathless in a future @-@ Earth analogue . While Siris disrupts the Worker of Secret 's plans , the God King confronts and is killed by the Worker . 
 A Chinese version of the game for Xbox One and Android will be published by Tencent Games on November 28 , 2015 . 
 = Stronger ( What Doesn 't Kill You ) = 
 " Stronger ( What Doesn 't Kill You ) " is a song by American recording artist Kelly Clarkson and the titular song from her fifth studio album , Stronger ( 2011 ) . Originally titled as " What Doesn 't Kill You ( Stronger ) " , the song served as the album 's second single on January 17 , 2012 through RCA Records . Written by Jörgen Elofsson , Ali Tamposi , and David Gamson , with additional writing and production by Greg Kurstin , " Stronger " is an uptempo song which draws from the genres of pop rock , dance @-@ pop and electropop . Its lyrical content mainly explores themes of empowerment and recovery following a heartbreak , with the chorus inspired by a Friedrich Nietzsche quotation : " That which does not kill us makes us stronger . " 
 In the United States , " Stronger " became her third song to top the Billboard Hot 100 chart for three non @-@ consecutive weeks , surpassing " A Moment Like This " ( 2002 ) and " My Life Would Suck Without You " ( 2009 ) as her longest @-@ running number one single on the chart . It also topped fifteen other Billboard charts , including Adult Pop Songs , Adult Contemporary , Hot Dance Club Songs , and Pop Songs charts , more than any other song Clarkson has ever released . Internationally , " Stronger " topped the national charts of Poland and Slovakia and attained a top @-@ ten position in over fifteen countries around the world , eventually selling over five million copies worldwide , becoming one of the best @-@ selling singles of all time . Its success helped its parent album to sustain commercial longevity for over a year . " Stronger " merited consideration for several industry awards — including three Grammy Award nominations , and a World Music Award nomination . 
 The song 's accompanying music video was filmed by Shane Drake , which incorporates the theme of a global flash mob dance , featuring submitted videos of people dancing to the song . The music video garnered positive reception from critics who felt that its overall impact was exuberant . It earned Clarkson a nomination for a MuchMusic Video Award . With its continued success , she performed " Stronger " on several live award shows and television appearances around the world , debuting it during the first season of the The X Factor ( U.S. ) and performing it on the 37th season of Saturday Night Live , the 2012 MuchMusic Video Awards , and the 2012 American Music Awards . Clarkson also included the song in the set list of her Stronger Tour and on the encore set of her 2012 Summer Tour with The Fray . 
 = = Writing and production = = 
 Originally titled as " What Doesn 't Kill You " , " Stronger " was written by Jörgen Elofsson , Ali Tamposi , David Gamson , and Greg Kurstin in September 2010 . In an interview with American Songwriter , Tamposi revealed that the song was inspired by the Friedrich Nietzsche adage ( " That which does not kill us makes us stronger " ) that her mother told her as advice . Although Tamposi found the phrase as saccharine , she submitted it as an idea to Elofsson and Gamson during their writing sessions . Elofsson originally intended " Stronger " for Leona Lewis , who turned it down in the process . Tamposi 's manager , Tom Maffei , then had one of his producers , Matty Trump , to produce a demo track later to be pitched to RCA A & R executive Jeff Aldrich , who later gave the song to Clarkson . Tamposi revealed that Clarkson had also altered a lyric from the track . Aldrich had then commissioned Greg Kurstin , whom Clarkson wanted to collaborate with , to produce and add additional writing to the final version . Kurstin recalled , " I rethought the music part of it , I guess . It had a different tempo , beat , chords , and I kinda just came up with that guitar riff that goes into the verse , and that was the first thing that I kinda contributed just changed the feel of the song . " The song 's uplifting theme of empowerment led Clarkson to name her fifth studio album <unk> saying that it is one of her favorite songs in the album , she said , " Everybody loves the message ' What doesn 't kill you makes you stronger . ' It 's a perfect representation of my life . " 
 = = Composition = = 
 " Stronger " is a pop rock song with a length of three minutes and 41 seconds . According to the sheet music published by Hal Leonard Corporation , it is set in a common time and has a moderately fast tempo of 116 beats per minute . Written in the key of A minor , it follows the chord progression Am – F – C @-@ G / B. Clarkson 's vocals span two octaves , from G3 to G5 . The song begins with a " rumbling guitar " and a " shimmering synth " riff as Clarkson sings the opening line " You know the bed feels warmer / Sleeping here alone . " Jason Lipshutz of Billboard noted that the guitar riff in the verses is reminiscent of Clarkson 's " Since U Been Gone " which narrates an anthem of personal reinvention , and dancing . The bridges contain pulsating beats with synth and electric guitar that display some elements of electronic sound . During chorus , the song explodes into an upbeat dance @-@ pop number , complete with guitars and electronic drums as Clarkson sings " What doesn 't kill you makes you stronger / Stand a little taller / Doesn 't mean I 'm lonely when I 'm alone . " Jonathan Keefe of Slant felt nobody else could sell the song 's " ginormous chorus " better than Clarkson . Lyrically , " Stronger " explores the theme of moving on from an inimical relationship . In an interview , Clarkson remarked that the song doesn 't refer to a specific person , stating " I didn 't have a bad breakup or anything , I just think life is about relationships so I always write all about these different ones going on in my life . And I don 't have a filter , so it 's pretty verbatim . " Jason Scott of Blogcritics felt that out of all tracks in Stronger , Clarkson 's vocals are best and trendiest in " What Doesn 't Kill You ( Stronger ) " . 
 In an interview with MTV News prior to the song 's release , Clarkson compared " Stronger " as similar to " Since U Been Gone " ( 2004 ) . She commented , " We 've already rehearsed it , and it 's so much fun . It 's like this big dance anthem . That 'll be the one [ that 's ] kinda like " Since U Been Gone " , [ with ] people jumping up and down to [ it ] , and it 's just kind of really inspiring , so I can 't wait to perform that one . " 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 After returning from a vacation on Tahiti , Clarkson found out over 50 of her newly recorded demo material were leaked online , including " Stronger " . She commented that the leak felt worse than being physically robbed . In an attempt to counter @-@ attack the leakage , RCA finally debuted the song online on October 5 , 2011 , three weeks ahead of the album 's release . An acoustic version of the song appears in Clarkson 's second extended play , iTunes Session . " Stronger " was officially released as the album 's second single to mainstream radio on January 17 , 2012 . A dance remixes of the song were made available on February 3 , 2012 . On February 17 , 2012 , it was released as a CD single . 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 Jenna Hally Rubenstein of MTV Buzzworthy compared it to " Since U Been Gone , " which has " a super radio @-@ friendly hook . " Elizabeth Lancaster of MTV Newsroom listed it as one of five key tracks in Stronger , writing " Upbeat yet soulful , the chorus will drag you up and onto the floor to dance the heartache away alongside her . " Grady Smith of Entertainment Weekly thought that the song 's " <unk> pop / rock wheelhouse " should please fans of the sound . He later added that " Clarkson might have been better off releasing " What Doesn ’ t Kill You " as the first track from Stronger . " Another positive reception came from Glenn Gamboa of Newsday , who praised Clarkson for " infusing her tales of empowerment after a breakup with her unique combo of vulnerability and sass . " Jonathan Keefe of Slant thought that the song is " tailor @-@ made for radio play " and that " the chilly electro @-@ pop that Greg Kurstin brings to the verses , suggests a top forty version of Robyn 's " Call Your Girlfriend " ( 2010 ) . On March 5 , 2013 Billboard ranked the song number 2 in its list of " Top 100 American Idol Hits of All Time " . 
 Chris Willman of Reuters criticized the lyrics , commenting that " Never mind how tired that tune 's titular phrase is . For a laugh , look up the YouTube video in which some wag mashed together a medley of 30 different songs that already borrowed " That which does not kill me makes me stronger " as a lyrical hook . " Kevin Ritchie from Now Magazine emphasized that the lyrics are " about as clichéd as a mission statement can get , but it also makes for a solid pop song . " Robert Copsey of Digital Spy gave the song four stars out of five , writing " The message behind her song may already be a well @-@ worn , almost cliched lesson , but as she continues to prove , there 's little shame in coming out with the expected . " 
 = = = Commercial performance = = = 
 In the United States , " Stronger " topped sixteen Billboard charts , marking career highs for Clarkson . Boosted by digital sales following the release of Stronger , the song debuted on the Billboard Hot 100 chart as an album cut at number 64 on the week ending October 30 , 2011 . It dropped out following week before returning at number 99 on week ending November 20 , 2011 . Following its release as a single , " Stronger " re @-@ entered Billboard Hot 100 at number 58 after Clarkson performed it on Saturday Night Live on the week ending January 21 , 2012 . On the week ending January 28 , 2012 , the song climbed to number 21 , as well as debuting at number 38 on Adult Pop Songs . The following week , it became her tenth top ten song on the Hot 100 chart as it advanced to number 8 due to the strength of a number 11 to number 3 jump on Hot Digital Songs and vault on Hot 100 Airplay from number 71 to number 44 . With " Mr. Know It All " ( 2011 ) having peaked at number 10 on the Hot 100 , " Stronger " ' s ascent to number 8 marked the first time Clarkson has had a string of consecutive top ten hits since 2004 – 2005 , when she had four consecutive top @-@ ten hits from her second studio album , Breakaway ( 2004 ) . That same week , it debuted at number 30 on Pop Songs and at number 40 on Hot Dance Club Songs . On the week ending February 11 , " Stronger " bounded from number 8 to number 2 on the Hot 100 as it topped the Hot Digital Songs chart fueled by 225 @,@ 000 downloads , becoming her second song to top the Hot Digital Songs after " My Life Would Suck Without You " ( 2009 ) . The following week , it ascended to the top of the Hot 100 , becoming her third number 1 single in the country after " A Moment Like This " and " My Life Would Suck Without You " . It held the top spot for another week , before descending to number 4 on the week ending March 3 , 2012 . That same week , it became her first song to top the Hot Dance Club Songs , making Clarkson only first artist ever to have topped the Hot 100 and each of the Hot Dance Club Songs , Hot Country Songs , Adult Contemporary , and Adult Pop Songs charts . The week after , It returned to number 1 on the Hot 100 for the third time , thus becoming her longest @-@ reigning number 1 single in the United States . On the week ending March 24 , 2012 , " Stronger " became Clarkson 's fourth song to top the Pop Songs chart and her first in six years . It also became her first song to top the Hot 100 Airplay on the week ending April 7 , 2012 , her fourth song to top the Adult Pop Songs on the week ending March 10 , 2012 , and her second song to top the Adult Contemporary chart on the week ending June 16 , 2012 . In its 2012 Year @-@ End issue , Billboard ranked " Stronger " number 7 on the Year @-@ End Hot 100 , marking the first time Clarkson has had a Year @-@ End top ten single on the chart in seven years since " Since U Been Gone " and " Behind These Hazel Eyes " ( 2005 ) . Billboard also ranked it as number 1 on Year @-@ End Adult Contemporary , number 2 on the Year @-@ End Adult Pop Songs , number 11 on the Year @-@ End Pop Songs , and number 35 on the Year @-@ End Hot Dance Club Songs charts . 
 " Stronger " also outpaced its predecessor " Mr. Know It All " in the international charts except in Australia , Germany , Japan , Scotland , and South Korea . It topped the national charts of Poland and Slovakia and became her biggest hit in over 18 other countries , including Austria , Denmark , Hungary , Luxembourg , Portugal , New Zealand , Spain , Sweden , and the United Kingdom . " Stronger " is also her first single to enter the national charts of Finland , Brazil , Iceland , Lebanon , Mexico , Portugal , and Romania . In Canada , it debuted on the Canadian Hot 100 chart at number 64 on the week ending November 12 , 2011 , eventually peaking at number 3 . In the United Kingdom , debuted on the Official UK Charts at number 21 on the week ending January 14 , 2012 , eventually peaking at number 8 for three non @-@ consecutive weeks as her eighth career top ten single . The song performed better in Scotland , where it attained a peak of number 5 . In Ireland , the song debuted at 40 on January 19 , 2012 and ascended to number four . In Denmark , after debuting at number 11 on the Danish Singles Chart on the week ending January 20 , 2012 , it attained a top ten position at number 8 after two weeks . In France , the song debuted at number 187 and peaked at number 26 , becoming her first song to chart in six years since " Because of You " ( 2006 ) . In the Netherlands , the song debuted on the Single Top 100 at number 96 on the week ending January 7 , 2012 , and peaked at number 59 . In Austria , it entered the Ö3 Austria Top 40 at number 27 and peaked at number 6 . In Belgium , it attained a position on Ultratop 50 in Flanders at number 25 , but failed to enter the Ultratop 50 in Wallonia by reaching only the top of the Walloon Ultratip chart . Elsewhere in Europe , it attained a top ten position in Czech Republic , Hungary , Luxembourg , and Finland ; and a top forty position in Norway , Switzerland , Germany , and Sweden . In Australia , it peaked in the Australian Singles Chart at number 18 . In New Zealand , it peaked on the New Zealand Singles Chart at number 4 . 
 " Stronger " also marked career @-@ highs in Clarkson 's commercial performance . It became her first song to cross the 3 and 4 million marks in digital downloads , becoming her best @-@ selling single in the United States and the United Kingdom . As of March 3 , 2013 , " Stronger " had sold over 4 @,@ 533 @,@ 000 copies in the United States , . In the United Kingdom is sold over 546 @,@ 000 copies as of April 24 , 2016 . The song sold over 5 million copies worldwide , becoming one of the best @-@ selling singles of all time . 
 = = = Award nominations = = = 
 " Stronger " has been recognized with accolades from the music press . Entertainment Weekly ranked the song as the tenth best single of 2011 . In December 2012 , Popjustice ranked " Stronger " at number 1 on their " Top 45 Singles of 2012 " list , stating that " this song is timeless in its <unk> " and claiming that no one " but Kelly Clarkson who could have pulled off this tune . " The song 's music video was nominated for Best International Artist Video at the 2012 MuchMusic Video Awards . At the 2012 Teen Choice Awards , the song received two nominations , Choice Single by a Female Artist and Choice Break @-@ Up Song . " Stronger " received three Grammy Award nominations for Record of the Year , Song of the Year , and Best Pop Solo Performance at the 55th ceremony . 
 = = Music video = = 
 = = = Concept and synopsis = = = 
 On November 21 , 2011 , Clarkson announced on her website that she wanted to incorporate a global flash mob into the accompanying music video of " Stronger " . She posted , 
 I 'm shooting my video for " What Doesn 't Kill You " and I 'd like everyone to join me in my global flash mob ! Check out the routine in the video below . Learn it with me and get your cameras ready to record you and your friends rocking these moves in a unique location that shows where you are in the world . Submit your clip using the form below and maybe you 'll see it in my music video ! ! I can 't wait to see your submissions . Remember to be creative , but keep it safe and legal ! Thanks for participating ! 
 The music video premiered on VEVO on December 14 , 2011 . Directed by Shane Drake , the video begins with Clarkson in a video control room , watching select flash mob videos submitted by various participants in different monitors . Throughout the video , scenes of Clarkson performing the song in three different settings ( alone in a stage , with her band in a garden square , and in the control room ) alternate with various flash mob videos . Towards the end of the video , Clarkson , along with the people in the garden square , forms a flash mob featuring a same choreography . 
 = = = Reception = = = 
 Critical reception towards the accompanying music video was positive . Prior to its release , Jenna Halley Rubenstein of MTV Buzzworthy predicted that the video would depict women who triumphed over broken relationships as a homage to self @-@ sufficiency . However , she praised the different treatment of the video , complimenting the synchronized dancing and thought that Clarkson kept it classy . Leah Collins of The Vancouver Sun interpreted that the video depicts Clarkson developing a sense of strength and endurance as well as an ability to lead a large @-@ scale dance routine after surviving a trauma . Erin Strecker of Entertainment Weekly enjoyed Clarkson 's goofy expressions and perceived the video as " Since U Been Gone " round two . Rand Duren of The Dallas Morning News also reiterated that the music video is a reminiscent of " Since U Been Gone " and that it was great seeing more dancing and movement from Clarkson . Contessa Gayles of <unk> described the song as " powerful " and " uplifting " and she believed that the music video did the song justice . Trent Maynard of 4Music had a positive response towards the video and deemed Clarkson 's look as properly fit in the video . He concluded his review writing , " Nobody has a sense of humor quite like the original American Idol . Oh Kelly , you 're the best . " The same opinion was echoed by Robbie Daw of Idolator who thought the video was fun especially " when Kelly herself joins the giant mob at the very end . " He also stated that his personal favorite clip in the video was " the girls who do the moves underwater with fish swimming all around them . " The video placed fourth for VH1 's Top 20 Videos of the Year for 2012 . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 Clarkson first performed " Stronger " in live concerts , she first performed it in a Sony @-@ sponsored concert held at The Troubador in Los Angeles on October 19 , 2011 . On November 9 , 2011 , she performed the song at Z100 's annual Jingle Ball concert at Madison Square Garden . She also performed an acoustic version the song on the VH1 Unplugged : Kelly Clarkson special which premiered on VH1 on November 18 , 2011 . " Stronger " has been performed prominently in her fourth headlining tour , the Stronger Tour . 
 Clarkson also promoted " Stronger " in live television events , the first live televised performance of the song was on November 23 , 2011 , during The X Factor ( U.S. ) results show . On December 18 , 2011 , she performed the song on VH1 Divas Celebrates Soul television special . On January 7 , 2012 , she performed it along with " Mr. Know It All " on the 37th season of Saturday Night Live . On June 6 , 2012 , Clarkson performed it on the British television series This Morning . Clarkson also performed a medley of the " Stronger " with the succeeding single " Dark Side " on various television events , such as at the season finale of the fourteenth season of Dancing with the Stars on May 22 , 2012 , and at the 2012 MuchMusic Video Awards on June 17 , 2012 . 
 = = Cultural impact = = 
 = = = Usage in media = = = 
 " Stronger " was also used in various forms of media . It was used in a 2011 Toyota Camry advertisement which stars Clarkson singing the song with her co @-@ stars Chris Berman , Andrew Zimmern , and James Lipton . Amber Riley , Naya Rivera , and Heather Morris performed the song on the season three episode of Glee titled " On My Way " , which aired on February 21 , 2012 . Raymund Flandez of The Wall Street Journal described the trio 's performance as " fine , fierce and fabulous . " Their version of " Stronger " debuted on the Hot 100 at number 66 on the week ending March 3 , 2012 as " What Doesn 't Kill You ( Stronger ) " . The song was featured in Suburgatory and was used in advertisements promoting the second season of the USA Network series Fairly Legal . It was also featured in a playable piece in the Harmonix video game Rock Band Blitz , Rock Band 3 and Dance Central 3 . On May 6 , 2012 , a video of some of the patients and hospital staff of Seattle Children 's hematology oncology unit dancing to the song were uploaded in YouTube to represent their fight against cancer . The video became a viral hit and has been featured by Time and CBS News . On February 26 , 2012 , Chemmy Alcott and Sean Rice skated to the song on Dancing on Ice . [ 116 ] Maria Menounos and Derek Hough danced to the song in the fourteenth season of Dancing with the Stars . [ 117 ] . The instrumental version has been used as background music to the promotion and the opening theme to the 2013 MDA Show of Strength telethon . 
 = = = Cover versions = = = 
 " Stronger " has also been performed by contestants of various televised competition programs . On February 21 , 2012 , It was covered on Glee by Amber Riley and Naya Rivera for the Regionals episode titled " On My Way " . On March 22 , 2012 , it was first performed by Diandra Flores on the sixth season of the Finnish television series Idols . On April 11 , 2012 , it was covered by Hollie Cavanagh , Joshua <unk> and Jessica Sanchez in the eleventh season of American Idol . On May 12 , 2012 , it was performed by <unk> Moses after will.i.am 's recommendation on the first series of The Voice UK . 
 Clarkson also performed the song with Jordan Meredith on the television series Duets , where she is also a mentor . On March 16 , 2012 , the song was performed by various participants during the season finale of the fifth season of the Danish television series X Factor . On November 8 , 2012 , the song was performed by Team Adam and Team Blake on the third season of The Voice . On November 28 , 2012 , the girl @-@ group Fifth Harmony performed the song on the second season of The X Factor . On October 28 , 2013 , Tessanne Chin covered the song on Season 5 of NBC 's singing competition , The Voice for her performance in the Knockout round vs. Ashley DuBose ( who performed " Hey , Soul Sister " by Train ) . 
 = = = Involvement in Kanye West 's copyright lawsuit = = = 
 In 2010 , musician Vincent Peters filed a copyright infringement suit against recording artist Kanye West over the similarities between West 's song " Stronger " ( 2007 ) , Peter 's demo song " Stronger " ( 2006 ) which he sent to John Monopoly , West 's associate . The 7th Circuit Court of Appeals ruled the case in West 's favor , citing both the epigram by Nietzsche from his book Twilight of the Idols ( 1889 ) and Clarkson 's song " Stronger ( What Doesn 't Kill You ) " . 
 = = Formats and track listing = = 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Credits adapted from Stronger liner notes . 
 Recording 
 Recorded at Echo Recording Studio , Los Angeles , California 
 Personnel 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications and sales = = 
 = = Release and radio history = = 
 = Sable Island horse = 
 The Sable Island Horse , sometimes Sable Island Pony , is a type of small feral horse found on Sable Island , an island off the coast of Nova Scotia , Canada . It is a small type , often pony sized , but with a horse phenotype and horse ancestors , and usually dark in color . The first horses were released on the island in the late eighteenth century , and soon became feral . Additional horses were later transported to improve the herd 's breeding stock . They were rounded up for private use and sale for slaughter , which by the 1950s had placed them in danger of extinction . 
 In 1960 , the Canadian government protected the horses by law in their feral state . From the 1980s on , long @-@ term , noninvasive herd studies have been performed , and in 2007 a genetic analysis was conducted that concluded the herd was genetically unique enough to interest conservationists . In 2008 , the horses were declared the official horse of Nova Scotia , and in 2011 , the island was declared the Sable Island National Park Reserve . The herd is unmanaged , and legally protected from interference by humans . The horses live only at Sable Island and at the Shubenacadie Wildlife Park on the mainland of Nova Scotia , with the latter herd descended from horses removed from Sable Island in the 1950s . 
 = = Characteristics = = 
 The horses that remain on Sable Island are feral . They generally stand between 13 and 14 hands ( 52 and 56 inches , 132 and 142 cm ) . Males from the island average about 360 kilograms ( 790 lb ) and females about 300 kilograms ( 660 lb ) . The available food on the island limits their size , and the offspring of horses removed from the island and fed more nutritious diets are generally larger . Physically , the horses resemble Spanish horses , with arched necks and sloping croups . Overall , they are stocky and short , with short pasterns that allow them to move easily on sandy or rough ground . Sable Island horses have very shaggy coats , manes and tails , especially during the winter . The tail is full and low @-@ set . Their coats are mostly dark colours , but some do have white markings . About half are bays , with the rest distributed among chestnut , palomino and black . Many Sable Island Horses have a natural ambling gait . Prior to their protection , when they could be kept for the use of humans , the horses were known for their sure @-@ footedness and gaits . 
 The Sable Island horses are a feral horse population that is entirely unmanaged : they are not subject to any kind of interference . Observational research , which is considered noninvasive to the herd , is sometimes conducted . Herd numbers fluctuate between 160 and 360 animals , with numbers changing based on weather severity . The population is split into numerous smaller herds , ranging from 40 to 50 in number , each ranging over approximately 3 square kilometres ( 1 @.@ 2 sq mi ) . Due to the lack of predators , older horses often die of starvation after their teeth are worn down by a lifetime of exposure to sand and marram , a tough grass . A lack of nutritional food on the island limits the horses ' size , and the offspring of those removed from the island and raised on better diets are significantly larger . 
 = = History = = 
 Sable Island is a narrow , crescent @-@ shaped island located approximately 300 kilometres ( 190 mi ) southeast of Nova Scotia . It is 42 kilometres ( 26 mi ) long and covered in sand dunes and grasses . Over 350 bird species and 190 plant species are found on the island , in addition to the herd of feral horses , which are the most well @-@ known inhabitants . 
 Although popular legends claim that Sable Island horses swam ashore from the island 's many shipwrecks , or were introduced by 16th @-@ century Portuguese explorers , this is not supported by historical or genetic evidence . In reality , the horses were deliberately introduced to the island during the 18th century . The first recorded horses were brought by a Boston clergyman , the Reverend Andrew Le Mercier , in 1737 but most were stolen by passing mariners . The present @-@ day horses are thought by most historians and scientists to have descended mostly from horses seized by the British from the Acadians during the Expulsion of the Acadians . The Acadian horses were descendents of several shipments of French horses , including members of the Breton , Andalusian and Norman breeds , later crossed with horses from New England , including Spanish Barbs . The Boston merchant and shipowner Thomas Hancock purchased some Acadian horses and transported them to Sable Island in 1760 , where they grazed the island as pasture . Although often referred to as ponies due to their small size , they have a horse phenotype and an ancestry composed solely of horses . 
 After the government of Nova Scotia established a lifesaving station on Sable Island in 1801 , workers trained some of the horses to haul supplies and rescue equipment . Lifesaving staff recorded the importation of a stallion , Jolly , taken there in 1801 , who was probably similar in type to the original Acadian horses released on the island . Although Jolly was not the first horse on the island , he was the first to be identified by name in historic records , and is known to have survived on the island until at least 1812 . Other breeding stock , probably including horses of Thoroughbred , Morgan and Clydesdale breeding , were sent to the island during the first half of the 19th century , in the hopes of improving the type of horses found on the island and raising the price for which they could be sold on the mainland . 
 During the 19th and early 20th centuries , the horses on Sable Island were periodically rounded up and either kept by islanders or transported to the mainland , where they were sold , frequently for slaughter . The meat was primarily used for dog food by the late 1950s , and the island horses were in danger of extinction . A public campaign was begun by school children to save the horses . In 1960 , as part of the Canadian Shipping Act , the Canadian government declared the horses fully protected and no longer able to be rounded up and sold . The law requires that people receive written permission before " feeding , interfering with , or otherwise having anything to do with the horses on the island . " 
 = = = Study and preservation = = = 
 Beginning in the mid @-@ 1980s , long term studies were begun of the Sable Island herds , and by the mid @-@ 2000s , most horses living on the island had documented histories . In 2007 , a genetic analysis of the Sable Island herd was performed . It was concluded that these horses were genetically similar to multipurpose and light draft breeds found in eastern mainland Canada , with differences probably created by natural selection and genetic drift . However , the researchers also stated that Sable Island horses had genetically " diverged enough from other breeds to deserve special attention by conservation interest groups , " and that the loss of the Sable Island horses would be more damaging to the genetic diversity of the Canadian horse population than the loss of any other breed . Genetic erosion is a possibility within the Sable Island population , due to the small number of horses . In a study of mitochondrial DNA published in 2012 , the Sable Island horse was found to be the least genetically diverse of the 24 horse populations studied , which included horse and pony breeds as well as feral populations from North America and Europe . A 2014 study by Parks Canada stated that the horses were under threat from their low numbers , excessive inbreeding and extreme weather due to global warming . 
 In 2008 , the Nova Scotia Legislature declared the Sable Island Horse as one of the provincial symbols , making them the official horse of Nova Scotia . In 2011 , the Canadian government created the Sable Island National Park Reserve , which allows further protection of the island and horses . Aside from the island , Sable Island Horses live only at the Shubenacadie Wildlife Park in Shubenacadie , Nova Scotia . It maintains descendants of Sable Island Ponies removed from the island in the 1950s by the Canadian Department of Transport . 
 = Jacqui McQueen = 
 Jacqueline Bernadette " Jacqui " McQueen ( previously Malota and Ashworth ) is a fictional character from the British Channel 4 soap opera Hollyoaks , played by Claire Cooper . She debuted on @-@ screen during the episode airing on 26 September 2006 and was introduced by series producer Bryan Kirkwood as part of the McQueen family . Cooper has stated that whilst Lucy Allan produced the serial she was not used and Jacqui had " lost her identity " . In 2010 when Paul Marquess took over the role , he recognised she was an under used character split her apart from her on @-@ screen family , subsequently increasing her role within the show . Jacqui has been portrayed as a " tough ex @-@ con " and is extremely feisty , she often takes on the matriarch role within her family . She is also described as loyal and is one of a few characters to remain faithful within a relationship in the serial itself . 
 Many of Jacqui 's early storylines revolved around her life of crime , marrying illegal immigrant Aleksander Malota to pay off debts and her wayward relationship with Tony Hutchinson , which became popular with viewers . One of her most prominent early plots involved her desire to have her own child after a miscarriage left her unable to , this resulted in failed adoption , various surrogate mother stories involving her family and eventually led to the breakdown of her relationship with Tony . Jacqui 's later storylines involved her relationship with racist Des Townsend , covering up Calvin Valentine 's murder , being blackmailed and held at knife point for sex and a " surprise relationship " with Rhys Ashworth which also become very popular with audiences . In 2011 Jacqui made a rape accusation against Gilly Roach , whether Gilly is guilty or innocent was decided by a jury composed of viewers . The storyline subsequently resulted in Gilly being found not guilty . Various critics have praised the character because of her " feisty and tough persona " . Others have criticised her " chav " dress sense and accused her of being a " <unk> " . Cooper has received various award nominations for her portrayal . It was later announced that Cooper had quit Hollyoaks and Jacqui departed Hollyoaks on 26 April 2013 . 
 = = Casting = = 
 In May 2010 , Cooper felt that she had been sidelined by former producer Lucy Allan and that Jacqui had lost her identity . New executive producer Paul Marquess also felt that Cooper had been under used . He decided to split Jacqui away from the rest of the McQueens , his reason for which being that there was so much " talent " in terms of acting within the family , he felt Cooper or Jacqui didn 't need that " support system " . He increased her role in storylines . This made Cooper delighted , of the changes she stated : " he seemed to like what I did and he 's worked on it and developed it . Paul has really taken me under his wing , he 's worked me so hard and he 's given me opportunities that I could only have dreamt of . " Speaking of her approach to playing Jacqui , Cooper has said : " I try to tame Claire back because I 'm a really emotional , sensitive person and very different from Jacqui , so I do work hard and I feel very privileged . " 
 = = Character development = = 
 = = = Characterisation = = = 
 Jacqui has been described as a feisty character who is tough and hard . Holy Soap refer to her as a " tough ex @-@ con " . Jacqui often takes on the matriarch role . Jacqui deals with the sisters in a different way and can get different responses from the sisters . Cooper describes her as always being there to pick up the pieces for her family . She also states that Jacqui is very loyal and the most loyal character out of the McQueen family . Speaking of Jacqui 's time away from forefront plots Cooper has said : " I think that Jacqui 's one of those characters who , if she isn 't on screen for a while , it takes the audience time to warm to her again . But when they do , they find her funny , they find her interesting and I try to give them as much as I can . " 
 Jacqui has never had an affair in the serial , of her morality Cooper states : " It 's all about family for Jacqui and she 's never cheated on any of her sisters . She 's got morals and this isn 't good enough . " Cooper has also spoke of her confusion of the audiences perception that Jacqui is " a bitch " when she has strong morals . Cooper has said she is proud of Jacqui 's wardrobe because it is not glam . She brands her as the complete opposite of the " honey image " the serial sometimes becomes associated with . Describing how she plays Jacqui she states : " It 's great playing Jacqui because I can just be completely grotesque and over the top , snarling and grunting . " 
 BBC America describe Jacqui as being the toughest of the McQueen sisters and comment on her thieving ways stating : " She began the McQueens ' shoplifting tradition , teaching her younger siblings how to steal while their mother was at work and basically putting stolen goods in Michaela 's hands from birth . " 
 = = = Relationship with Tony Hutchinson = = = 
 Jacqui 's relationship with Tony Hutchinson ( Nick Pickard ) was often strained by her desire for children . Her sister Tina McQueen ( Leah Hackett ) agrees to be a surrogate mother for her child . The storyline was included to help house many lies and secrets that had previously been built up prior , including Tony 's affair with Mercedes McQueen ( Jennifer Metcalfe ) and Tina 's affair with Russ Owen ( Stuart Manning ) , of which Kirkwood stated there was " there 's so much ammunition in store " , which would eventually devastate Jacqui . Kirkwood also devised the plot to show of Coopers skills in playing tragedy , of this he commented : " It 'll also give Claire Cooper and Nick Pickard another opportunity to show off their acting talents . Tony and Jacqui are one of those couples that we can have fun with - but also will blow the audience away when dealing with tragedy . " 
 In a later storyline Tony announces his intentions to marry Cindy Hutchinson ( Stephanie Waring ) , prompting Jacqui to try to talk Tony out of it . Cooper has stated that she believes that her character is meant to be with Tony because " he is the love of Jacqui 's life " and that hearing their engagement makes Jacqui feel like she " has a knife in her back . " Cooper also hopes one day that the pair will reunite stating : " Jacqui needs to move on right now , but ultimately I 'd prefer the story to come full circle and lead back to Tony . " Cooper also revealed that at the time she was often approached by fans asking her when the couple would reconcile . Pickard has also stated he didn 't think Cindy was right for him and that he believed Jacqui to be the love of Tony 's life . 
 = = = Relationship with Rhys Ashworth = = = 
 In 2010 , Jacqui embarked on a " surprise " relationship with Rhys Ashworth ( Andrew Moss ) . Moss first hinted at their romance months prior stating : " I think Rhys is going to fall in love again . It 's a character already in the village . It 's quite surprising . It 's a character who 's been here for a while . " The relationship proved popular with viewers ; during an interview with Digital Spy , Cooper spoke of her original lack of optimism towards the pairing , stating : " When the relationship first started , we didn 't know how they were going to gel and how it was going to work , because people were such fans of Jacqui and Tony . Some people still ask me if those two are going to get back together , but people are really taken with Rhys and Jacqui . " Cooper believes it 's her own working relationship with Moss that helps make the pairing a success stating : " It 's a nice collaboration and we try to make it funny , emotional , hard @-@ hitting , three @-@ dimensional and as interesting for the audience as possible . " She also adopted a " couple name " for the pair titled " Ja @-@ Rhys " . 
 Jacqui and Rhys were given the biggest storyline on spring 2011 in the serial , of this Marquess stated : " They have got the biggest story for the first half of 2011 . I think it may be one of the biggest stories in Hollyoaks history . It 's very , very serious and I think it will really divide the audience . It will really test them and their relationship to the nth degree , and we 'll see whether they can recover from it . " 
 = = = King of Hearts = = = 
 In September 2010 , it was announced that actor Darren Day had been cast as new character Danny Houston , described as a gangster who would " spell trouble for Jacqui " . Danny takes a shine to Jacqui and they share a couple of dates ; during an interview Day brands Danny 's attraction to Danny being down to her feisty manner adding : " Jacqui stands up to him , and even though he 's not used to it , I think he likes it . He 's quite intrigued by the fact that she 's so feisty and he likes that edginess about her . " 
 It was later revealed that a special late night episode had been commissioned which would feature Jacqui . The storyline was described as " sinister " and would involve Danny and returnee Kathleen McQueen ( Alison Burrows ) , as they rig a game of poker with dramatic consequences . Of her involvement in the episode Cooper stated : " I was really chuffed and felt very flattered and privileged to be given the opportunity to do so much . " 
 On @-@ screen the storyline involves Kathleen blackmailing the McQueens for money , threatening to reveal their roles in Calvin 's murder . Kathleen is described as Jacqui 's " worst enemy " , of this Cooper stated : " She hates her with a passion - her worst enemy ever has been dragged back ! It 's funny and comedic at times , but then it can get deadly serious . " Although she knows the risks of crossing Danny , she tries to fix the poker game ; of this Cooper comments that " It 's pure desperation " on Jacqui 's behalf . When Danny exposes her , he threatens her with Rhys ' life , stating if she does not sleep with him , he will kill Rhys . In a turn of events Jacqui turns him down . Cooper defends Jacqui 's actions stating that she is a " bright girl " and adding " She doesn 't want to sleep with him and also she knows he 's not going to drop Rhys in front of so many people . So when he says it , she considers her options , weighs them up . " 
 Jacqui faces more horror from Danny when she is threatened at knife point to strip for him , scared for her life she complies . Speaking of Jacqui 's sudden change of heart , Cooper states : " He pulls out a knife . That changes the situation - the dynamic changes immediately . He could do something really horrible to her - it 's not necessarily about killing someone , he could slash her face or anything . In a situation like that , your mind plays tricks as you wonder what someone could do to you . " Cooper has spoken of her feelings of responsibility to portray it correctly and stated " I wanted to show how horrendous it was for Jacqui . She wonders whether she could die like this - all to protect her family … " 
 = = = Sexual assault = = = 
 In December 2010 , Channel 4 released a press statement which revealed Jacqui and Gilly Roach ( Anthony Quinlan ) would drunkenly cheat on Rhys together , after she finds out Rhys has slept with Cheryl Brady ( Bronagh Waugh ) and that the night 's events would " change their lives forever " . It was later announced that the storyline would see Jacqui accusing Gilly of raping her . The storyline received much coverage in various tabloid newspapers who also branded it as a " shock plot " for the serial . None of the cast members involved in the storyline knew if Jacqui had actually been raped , of this Cooper states : ' They 're telling the same story but are looking at it from different angles . Just who to believe is a very grey area . It will split the village and the viewers . We don 't know what happened that night , We 've just been told that our characters each think they 're telling the truth . [ Anthony ] and I have talked about it a lot . I even read his scripts to try to work it out . The outcome will be a surprise for both of us.' 
 The storyline began to play out on @-@ screen in February 2011 , describing how it starts to develop and the effects it has on Gilly a spokesperson for the serial told Inside Soap : " Jacqui loves Rhys , so she 's really hurt when she finds out about his infidelity . Then she runs into Gilly who 's also got relationship problems , . The drink starts to flow , and one thing leads to another ... Gilly consumed with guilt over sleeping with his best friend 's girlfriend , it doesn 't help that Jacqui leaves Gilly 's place while he 's asleep - and runs into Rhys . But after Gilly wakes up , he knows he has to tell his mate what he 's done . When Gilly confesses , Rhys is both furious and hurt , and lashes out violently . [ ... ] Once he 's confronted Gilly , he demands an explanation from Jacqui - and is stunned when she tells him she was actually raped , it 's absolutely devastating . " The storyline later takes another turn when Gilly confronts Jacqui in the village with everyone watching , leading everyone to doubt if he did commit the act or not . 
 It was later revealed that the details were left unclear because Lime Pictures had decided to leave the outcome of the rape trial into viewers . Viewers have been given the chance to apply for the fictional jury , consisting of a cross section of society , including non @-@ Hollyoaks viewers . They will be shown evidence from the case and then decide whether Gilly is guilty or innocent . Chief executive of Lime Pictures , Carolyn Reynolds stated : " We wanted to open up the thorny issue of how hard it is to be a juror and whether the court room the best place to resolve some of these questions about rape . " The storyline was developed with the " St Mary 's Sexual Assault Referral Centre " and other charities . DCI Ben <unk> , leader of Don 't Cross the Line campaign , explaining : " This storyline represents an issue that we see all too often , involving whether consent is clear on the part of both parties involved in sexual activity , and particularly when alcohol and drugs are involved . " Gilly was found not guilty , leaving Jacqui devastated . 
 Gilly later confessed to the rape , as he recalled that Jacqui had not only not consented , but had removed any perceived consent . Gilly left the village and did not go to the police . 
 = = = Departure = = = 
 On 21 February 2013 , it was revealed that Cooper had quit the show and her final scenes would air in April . Cooper said that she had the " most incredible and unforgettable " time and Jacqui had been a " fascinating part to play " . She also wanted to explore new roles and concluded that " it 's been one hell of a ride for Miss McQueen and an inspirational one for me . " A spokesperson added that Jacqui 's departure will occur after her involvement with Trudy Ryan ( Danniella Westbrook ) . Cooper filmed her final scenes on 26 February 2013 . 
 = = Storylines = = 
 Jacqui arrives home on a tag after being released from prison and hoards money for gangsta Davey but Carmel McQueen ( Gemma Merna ) steals the money to buy breast implants . Mercedes McQueen ( Jennifer Metcalfe ) finds the money to repay Davey but there is still not enough so Jacqui promises to do him a favour one day and he leaves , happy . 
 Jacqui meets divorcee Tony and an attraction igniting , they have sex . Tony goes away on holiday and starts a relationship with Jacqui on his return . Jacqui violates her prison tag after staying at Tony 's house overnight so she is sent back to prison . Sadly , Tony is forced to dump her because he cannot handle the pressure . Jacqui befriends Becca Dean ( Ali Bastian ) but Becca is killed by another prisoner and Jacqui is devastated . Jacqui decides to make something of herself , not wanting to waste her life and is reunited with Tony and Davey returns with the favour . He forces Jacqui to marry Aleksander Malota ( Jon <unk> ) . Jacqui and Aleksander manage to convince an immigration officer that their romance is genuine and they are married but Jacqui continues her affair with Tony secretly . The family uncover the truth about the marriage when Carmel and Alek 's affair is revealed . Jacqui admits she married Alek to pay off her debt to Davey and is seeing Tony . Myra McQueen ( Nicole Barber @-@ Lane ) is furious and orders Jacqui , Alek and Carmel to leave the house . Jacqui announces her pregnancy ; Tony initially doesn 't want the child , fearing that it may die like his previous child and their dreams are shattered when Jacqui miscarries and is left unable to have children of her own . Tony attacks Alek violently as he blames Alek as he cannot grieve for his baby publicly . Tony announces to the people in The Dog that the baby was his , not Alek 's and Jacqui asks Alek to return to Albania so she can live her life and he agrees . Carmel is shocked to discover Alek is leaving , leaving Carmel devastated . Depressed , Jacqui returns to her old habit of shop lifting , so Neville Ashworth ( Jim Millea ) gets her locked up for the night . 
 Jacqui accuses Myra of being a bad mother and suggests it would have been better if Myra had aborted her . Jacqui and Tony reconcile again . Jacqui plans to adopt because of her criminal record . Tony discovers he has a secret child called Harry . Jacqui forces Tony to make a choice : Harry or her . Tony chooses Harry and she ends their relationship and leaves . An intoxicated Tony and Mercedes betray Jacqui by sleeping together . Jacqui fails to resist Tony again and they restart their on @-@ off relationship . She then changes her surname back to McQueen from Malota and Mercedes reveals that she is pregnant and Jacqui asks Mercedes to let her and Tony raise the baby , unaware it 's Tony 's baby but Mercedes has an abortion , infuriating Jacqui so Myra offers to be her surrogate but she refuses . Tina sees how desperate her sister is for a child and offers to be the surrogate , leaving Jacqui and Tony ecstatic about having a future child . At Tina 's scan , Tina 's pregnancy paternity results uncover Russ Owen ( Stuart Manning ) is the baby 's father , not her boyfriend and Jacqui convinces her to keep quiet . Niall Rafferty ( Barry Sloane ) attacks Tina upon discovering she is considering adoption . Tina gives birth to a boy , Max McQueen ( Brayden Haynes @-@ Mawdsley ) naming him after Max Cunningham ( Matt Littler ) and then has to have an emergency hysterectomy . Tina then decides to keep Max . Niall holds all the McQueens ' hostage in a church and when Myra arrives , she soon learns that Niall is her son . Niall says Myra has to choose two children to die and Jacqui tells Mercedes that she cannot watch her die so Mercedes reveals her night of passion with Tony . Myra comes to a tough decision and chooses Jacqui and Carmel to die . Jacqui is devastated and Niall detonates the explosives and blows up the church and Tina dies . Jacqui confronts Mercedes and Tony , only to learn that the baby Mercedes aborted , was in fact Tony 's . This pushes her over the edge . She takes Max from Michaela and refuses to forgive Tony , Mercedes or Myra . Jacqui begins to spend Tony 's money and does anything to hurt him , even by sleeping with Mark Gascoyne ( Craig Russell ) . Jacqui and Tony separate and she realises she needs to forgive Myra . Jacqui 's cousin Theresa McQueen ( Jorgie Porter ) arrives and has sex with Tony . Jacqui attacks Tony and reports him to the police , but Theresa later retracts her statement . 
 Russ becomes angry with Jacqui for trying to stop him from seeing Max . Russ later runs off with Max abroad . Carmel confesses to Jacqui that she let Russ walk away with Max . Jacqui is angry and goes to see Tony , who agrees to pay for a private investigator to help find Max . Jacqui leaves for France in order to find Max , but is unsuccessful . She starts a relationship with Des Townsend ( Kris <unk> ) but confesses her love to Tony days before his wedding , Tony rejects her . A photographer publishes naked pictures of her after a drunken photoshoot . Jacqui and Des ' relationship is strained by Jacqui 's naked pictures leaking , her lies and stealing from the school canteen . 
 Mercedes tells Jacqui she is having an affair with Calvin . Jacqui confronts him and steals a gun from Lauren Valentine ( Dominique Jackson ) . Theresa finds the gun and shoots Calvin . Jacqui decides to cover for Theresa . Jacqui tries to frame Gaz Bennett ( Joel <unk> ) , but Kyle Ryder ( Neil Toon ) is later charged with the murder . Shortly after Des proposes to her , Jacqui discovers that he was a racist from Michaela 's boyfriend Zak Ramsey ( Kent Riley ) . Consequently , for Des , Jacqui declines his proposal and he leaves the village after being arrested alongside his sister Rose . 
 Jacqui , along with Rhys then gets a new job at Chez Chez , a new bar that is owned by Cheryl and her brother Brendan Brady ( Emmett J Scanlan ) . Jacqui and Rhys unknowingly meet on an internet dating website and fall for each other . Horrified when they find out , they kiss . Jacqui 's cousin Bart McQueen ( Jonny Clarke ) moves into the McQueen household and causes a rift when he steals money from her . This causes Jacqui to move in with Rhys . Jacqui meets gangster Danny and they begin dating despite her feelings for Rhys . She cheats on Danny with Rhys , leaving Danny furious . Jacqui tells Rhys they need to keep their affair secret . However she ends their relationship as Jacqui catches Cheryl Brady ( Bronagh Waugh ) and Rhys having sex . <unk> , Jacqui gets intoxicated and beds Gilly . She later tells Rhys that Gilly has sexually assaulted her , reports him to the police and he is charged . 
 Jacqui 's father William Alexander ( Richard Graham ) arrives in the village and asks for a kidney transplant . Jacqui refuses and before learning that Theresa is also her half sister . He leaves shamed when they discover the kidney is needed for his other daughter Emily Alexander ( Elizabeth Henstridge ) . William returns for the trial and she opens up to him . At the trial , Gilly and Jacqui remember the same events very differently . The jury find Gilly not guilty . Rhys tells Jacqui that he believes her and they agree to get married . However realising she is not over her ordeal Jacqui goes to stay with her dad in Spain . Upon her return she agrees to donate a kidney to Emily . When they are not a correct match , Emily tells her they were only interested in her kidney . Jacqui and Rhys marry but their relationship is problematic because Jacqui does not want to be intimate . Jacqui cannot readjust to life in the village . She gets a job working in The Dog . After more arguments Rhys suggests they spend time apart . Jacqui then goes missing , but is later found safe . She goes to see a counsellor and she and Rhys begin to rebuild their relationship . 
 Rhys and Jacqui find a dog which they keep and call Terry to help Jacqui get over her ordeal . Jacqui and Rhys finally consummate their marriage . Jacqui appears to be getting on with her life when Gilly returns to the village . When Rhys is continually aggressive towards Gilly , Jacqui moves back in with the McQueen 's . Jacqui moves back in with Rhys and they decide to move away from the village . Gilly admits that he raped Jacqui before he leaves the village . Jacqui and Rhys get a lodger Ally Gorman ( Daniel O 'Connor ) to help with the bills and she later clashes with Mercedes after she kisses Rhys . 
 Jacqui meets homeless teenager Phoebe Jackson ( Mandip Gill ) and invites her to move in to her flat . At Tony and Cindy Cunningham ( Stephanie Waring ) ' s wedding , a bus crashes in to the venue . Rhys becomes trapped under the debris and apologises to Jacqui as he dies in her arms . Jacqui returns home to discover Rhys had planned to leave her and had left a note , detailing his plans to leave her and his affair with a mystery woman . Jacqui becomes suspicious that Cindy was having an affair with Rhys . Jacqui confronts Cindy who is with Bart 's pregnant girlfriend Sinead O 'Connor . She accuses Cindy only for Sinead to confess to having sex with Rhys . Jacqui confronts Sinead and realises Rhys is the father of her baby . She allows Sinead to keep the baby 's paternity a secret when Bart proposes to her . On Christmas Day at the McQueens , which Tony and Cindy have both been invited to , Jacqui discovers items belonging to Rhys in the closet , including his mobile phone , which her family had been hiding from her . She recharges Rhys ' phone and discovers that it was Cindy he was having an affair with . A disgusted Jacqui attacks Cindy with a Santa statue , Cindy recovers in hospital and is persuaded by Tony to keep quiet about attack and say she slipped on the ice . Jacqui drags Cindy from Hospital to Rhys ' grave and warns her to stay away . 
 Jacqui and Tony get back together until Cindy tells Jacqui that Tony knew about her affair with Rhys leading to Jacqui breaking up with Tony again . Jacqui 's former cellmate Trudy Ryan ( Danniella Westbrook ) arrives and starts causing trouble for Jacqui . Jacqui and Theresa become cleaners for Trudy when they need money but Trudy starts framing Jacqui for theft , planting stolen phones in her bag and paying a security guard to ' rape ' Jacqui - With Trudy ' coming to her rescue ' Just in time and makes a remark about what would have happened if she had actually been raped , to which Jacqui replies " I have " . So Trudy then sits down with Jacqui and tells her she had also been raped by a friend . Both Trudy and Jacqui go back to Jacqui 's and have a heart to heart . Though when Trudy leaves the McQueens ' house after drinking with Jacqui , she smiles wickedly , implying that Trudy has lied . Phoebe also ends up being poisoned by dangerous Vodka of Trudy 's . Jacqui and Tony finally get back together at Chez Chez 's fancy dress party . 
 When Mercedes gets held to ransom by Clare Devine ( Gemma Bissix ) and wants £ 200 @,@ 000 Jacqui decides she must do whatever she can to help save her . She decides to sell a man , Trevor , an empty van supposing to have vodka in while she gets nana McQueen to sell the actual vodka for £ 50 @,@ 000 but this plan backfires when Phoebe decides to go with her – and find five illegal immigrants in the van . Jacqui lets them free but then has her life threatened by Trevor . Jacqui gets detained by police but it 's Trudy they 're after so Jacqui pretends to be her . But then Trudy gets arrested for human trafficking and leaves the village . With Trevor still after her , Jacqui realises she is no longer safe in Hollyoaks and must leave . But when she finds a stash of money in the loft at Trudy 's office and Trevor walks in , Jacqui is visibly scared . As he advances she manages to knock him to the floor but isn 't quick enough as he gets up and grabs her but Tony comes to the rescue by smashing a monitor over his head . As Jacqui and Tony escape with the money , She kicks an unconscious Trevor and legs it . As she says an emotional goodbye to Phoebe , she has a chat with John Paul and leaves the bag at the stairs for the family to find . As Tony finds Jacqui and tells her he has got Diane O 'Connor ( Alexandra Fletcher ) pregnant Jacqui gets upset and tells Tony It 's not going to be with her and makes him stick by Diane but Tony proposes to Jacqui who turns him down and gets in the taxi leaving Tony devastated . 
 On 26 April 2013 , Mercedes goes to find Jacqui in Alicante where the two had visited when they were younger . Mercedes finds Jacqui working as a barmaid . At first Jacqui is not happy to see her but the two sit down and have a conversation . Mercedes admits that at first the kidnapping was a scam to get back at Paul Browning ( Joe Thompson ) for supposedly cheating on her and apologizes to Jacqui . At first Jacqui is furious at Mercedes for this and yells at her causing them both to start crying . After insulting Mercedes Jacqui forgives her and tells her that she love her . Jacqui is last seen relaxing by the pool on a sun lounger drinking a cocktail with Mercedes whilst they talk and say their final goodbyes . 
 In November and December 2014 , Jacqui couldn 't attend Carmel 's funeral , and John @-@ Paul and Ste wedding along with Michaela . In July 2015 , Jacqui decides to not attend her adoptive daughter Phoebe 's funeral , because she is unable to get a flight from Spain and was too upset . However , Jacqui sends flowers . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Cooper was nominated for Best Actress at the 2007 Inside Soap Awards and the following year The McQueen 's won the " Best Family " award . She was then nominated for " Best Actress " at the 2010 ceremony . At the 2011 National Television Awards , she received a nomination for " Best Serial Drama Performance " and " Best Actress " at the 2011 British Soap Awards . She was again nominated in the category of " Serial Drama Performance " at the 2012 National Television Awards . On Digital Spy 's 2012 end of year reader poll , Cooper was nominated for " Best Female Soap Actor " and came third with 13 @.@ 7 % of the vote . Virgin Media criticised the character 's dress sense , stating that even though none of the family have style , that Jacqui has the most ' criminal wardrobe ' out of them due to her taste for thigh high boots , skin tight dresses and huge gold earrings . Co @-@ star Kieron Richardson branded Cooper the unsung hero of the cast claiming she deserves more recognition for her work and stated his favourite character is Jacqui . Soap opera reporting website Holy Soap describe Jacqui 's most memorable moment as : " Dealing with Tina 's decision not to give up baby Max , only for her to be killed by long @-@ lost brother Niall . " 
 Roz Laws of the Sunday Mercury responded negatively to Jacqui 's Promiscuity in 2010 by stating : " I DON 'T like to bandy names about but ... that Jacqui McQueen is a right <unk> . " Rhiannon Vivian of the Sunday Mirror describe Jacqui as a " hard @-@ bitten " character . Men 's lifestyle magazine FHM brand Jacqui a " notoriously sexy bad @-@ girl " . On a separate occasion Olly Richards of the magazine stated : " In the soap she always looks a bit hard and like she could definitely beat us up . " Josie <unk> of WalesOnline spoke about Cooper stating : " feisty jailbird character Jacqui has made her infamous on and off screen . " Colin Robertson of newspaper The Sun also agreed with the " feisty brunette " tag . Kris Green of Digital Spy branded Cooper as one of his favourite Hollyoaks actresses due to her portrayal of Jacqui . Dawn Collinson of the Liverpool Echo refers to Jacqui as a " brassy character " . Jaci Stephen of the Daily Mail said that Phoebe appeared to be melting Jacqui 's heart which was " something not normally possible without resorting to use of a blowtorch " . Cooper 's portrayal of Jacqui during the Enjoy The Ride storyline was well received by critics . Inside Soap journalist Sarah said Cooper was one of the " standout performances " and called Cooper one of her " all @-@ time favourite Hollyoaks stars " . All About Soap 's Kerry Barrett said Cooper is " fabulous as always " while her colleague Carena Crawford said " it was Jacqui who made our hearts break as she stayed by her beloved Rhys ’ s side as he died " explaining that Cooper was " absolutely fantastic " during the scenes . 
 = Jesus Freak ( song ) = 
 " Jesus Freak " is a song by the American contemporary Christian music group DC Talk . Released on August 1 , 1995 , it was the lead radio single from ( and lends its name to ) the group 's fourth album . The song was written and produced by Toby McKeehan and Mark <unk> . Lyrically , the song is about standing up for the belief in Jesus Christ in the midst of persecution . It received largely positive reviews from music critics , including some mainstream music reviewers , and was played on some non @-@ Christian stations . It earned DC Talk three GMA Dove Awards . 
 = = Origin and lyrics = = 
 After the success of DC Talk 's third album , Free at Last ( 1992 ) , which was based primarily on hip @-@ hop and pop oriented song writing , the trio decided to innovate their style . Michael Tait , one of the members of DC Talk , said , " I was totally into rock and roll at the time [ ... ] I really wanted to make a rock record . " The band decided to focus on more rock @-@ oriented music , with touches of rap and pop interwoven into the mix . Tait later explained , " We wanted to write songs that would hopefully touch a generation . " DC Talk member Toby McKeehan , writer of the song 's lyrics , wrote the song to be a bold declaration of love for Jesus Christ , even in the midst of persecution . In order to bring the hard @-@ hitting reality of their message to the mainstream , DC Talk combined the raw lyrics with guitar @-@ driven grunge @-@ rock . McKeehan took the song 's title from the derogatory 1970s term " Jesus freak " and turned it on its head ; he noted that when he was looking up the word " freak " in the dictionary , he saw an entry that said " ardent enthusiast " . Since the song and album 's release , many of the group 's fans have donned products with the term " Jesus Freak " . 
 The first time the band performed the song live , McKeehan only had about a verse written . He later recalled , " We had not yet recorded it for our album , but we had a demo with one verse written . We thought it would be safe to try it [ in South Africa ] . We could not believe the immediate response it got . " 
 = = Composition = = 
 " Jesus Freak " begins with acoustic strumming of the main riff written in the key of E minor , followed by guitar distortion as the vocals enter . During this transition , the song moves to the key of F minor . During the verses , which are sung by Michael Tait and Kevin Max respectively , a sparse electric guitar pattern , which outlines the chord progression , is played . During each pre @-@ chorus , McKeehan begins rapping about various people who have been retrospectively labeled as " Jesus Freaks " , such as John the Baptist . After the second chorus , a melodic breakdown is followed by a dissonant guitar solo . Following the repetition of the chorus , the feedback @-@ laden conclusion ends abruptly . 
 Musically , the song has been described as alternative rock and grunge , with many reviews noting a similarity with the sound of Nirvana . According to the Encyclopedia of American Gospel Music , " Jesus Freak " is believed to be one of the first songs to link alternative rock and rap rock in CCM . 
 = = Music video = = 
 The music video for " Jesus Freak " was directed by Simon Maxwell , who also worked on the music video for " Hurt " by Nine Inch Nails . Maxwell 's treatment of the video , reminiscent of his work with Nine Inch Nails , features footage of Christian imagery such as doves and crosses mixed with stock footage of riots , book burnings , hate crimes , a metallic hammer and sickle symbol of Communism , footage of one of Hitler 's speeches and an accompanying Nazi propaganda film projected onto a screen that includes Nazi burnings of " degenerate " materials . Interspersed between the stock footage is video of the band performing the song in a darkened room . 
 Although the song and video are , on the surface , about expressing one 's belief in Jesus Christ , the band later commented that the song could also be a metaphor for the " preservation of standing up for what you believe in – even in the midst of persecution . " 
 McKeehan later said that the point of the video was to " push the envelope " for the Christian rock community , and indeed , the song and video proved controversial . Although the song and video were an earnest attempt to " declare a single @-@ hearted faithfulness in Christ in an age when such devotion strikes many as the <unk> kind of fanaticism , " some of the more conservative Christian community members disapproved of the video . The song however , was highly successful on Z Music and managed to achieve air time on MTV . 
 = = Release and acclaim = = 
 The song was released as the lead @-@ off single for Jesus Freak in 1995 and received positive comments from music critics . The single was released to alternative and modern rock stations , the band 's first venture into these radio formats . Due to its dark , grunge sound – during an era when alternative rock was ruling the airwaves – the song was even played on some non @-@ Christian stations . As part of the promotion strategy for the song , <unk> , a Nashville @-@ based Christian music promotion company , sent out over 4 @,@ 000 copies of the CD single to youth pastors , along with Bible study material . Commercially the single was successful ; it initially charted on the Bubbling Under Hot 100 Singles at number 25 with little mainstream radio assistance . The song peaked at number 10 . 
 " Jesus Freak " received largely positive reviews from music critics . The song was even successful enough to garner praise from secular music reviews . Entertainment Weekly editor Laura Jamison , in a review for the Jesus Freak album , said that DC Talk , " successfully , if <unk> , combines textured vocals , aggressive guitar , and solid songwriting , especially on [ ... ] the raucous title track . " In a review of " Jesus Freak " , the Chicago Tribune said " In considering the group 's artistic merits , it 's time to bury the over @-@ burdened label ' Christian band ' [ ... ] DC Talk deserves to be judged by a different standard . " 
 In addition to " Colored People " and " Between You and Me " , " Jesus Freak " was considered instrumental in breaking DC Talk into the mainstream . " Jesus Freak " was extremely successful when it came to the GMA Dove Awards . In 1996 , the song won awards for Song of the Year and Rock Recorded Song of the Year . The music video for the song later won the award for Short Form Music Video of the Year in 1997 . 
 = = Other releases = = 
 Various version of " Jesus Freak " have appeared on several DC Talk official releases , including the band 's greatest hits album Intermission . A live version of " Jesus Freak " was included on the 1997 live release Welcome to the Freak Show ( 1997 ) . A short , comedic reprise , performed by Michael Tait , is included on the Jesus Freak album . In addition , a remix of the song , available on the " Jesus Freak " single , entitled " Jesus Freak ( <unk> Bros. Freaked Out Remix ) " features a more hip @-@ hop sound , reminiscent of the band 's third album , Free at Last . On August 3 , 2010 , the single was released as downloadable content for Rock Band . 
 = = = Cover versions = = = 
 The Newsboys have played this song ever since Tait joined in early 2009 . The band also released a new recording of the song with KJ @-@ 52 on their 2010 album Born Again . On the DC Talk tribute album , Freaked ! ( 2006 ) , both 4th Avenue Jones and Chasing Victory recorded covers of this particular song . " Jesus Freak " has also been covered by Larry Norman . McKeehan , under his stage name TobyMac , also recorded a cover version of the song for his album Alive and Transported . John <unk> covered the song on his album Lounge Freak . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Album credits = = 
 = = Accolades = = 
 = Give Me Love ( Give Me Peace on Earth ) = 
 " Give Me Love ( Give Me Peace on Earth ) " is a song by English musician George Harrison , released as the opening track of his 1973 album Living in the Material World . It was also issued as the album 's lead single , in May that year , and became Harrison 's second US number 1 , after " My Sweet Lord " . In doing so , the song demoted Paul McCartney and Wings ' " My Love " from the top of the Billboard Hot 100 , marking the only occasion that two former Beatles have held the top two chart positions in America . The single also reached the top ten in Britain , Canada , Australia and other countries around the world . 
 " Give Me Love ( Give Me Peace on Earth ) " is one of its author 's most popular songs , among fans and music critics , and features a series of much @-@ praised slide @-@ guitar solos from Harrison . The recording signalled a deliberate departure from his earlier post @-@ Beatles work , in the scaling down of the big sound synonymous with All Things Must Pass and his other co @-@ productions with Phil Spector over 1970 – 71 . Aside from Harrison , the musicians on the track are Nicky Hopkins , Jim Keltner , Klaus Voormann and Gary Wright . In his lyrics , Harrison sings of his desire to be free of karma and the constant cycle of rebirth ; he later described the song as " a prayer and personal statement between me , the Lord , and whoever likes it " . 
 Harrison performed " Give Me Love " at every concert during his rare tours as a solo artist , and a live version was included on his 1992 album Live in Japan . The original studio recording appears on the compilation albums The Best of George Harrison ( 1976 ) and Let It Roll : Songs by George Harrison ( 2009 ) . At the Concert for George tribute to Harrison , in November 2002 , Jeff Lynne performed " Give Me Love " with Andy Fairweather @-@ Low and Marc Mann playing the twin slide @-@ guitar parts . Marisa Monte , Dave Davies , Elliott Smith , Ron Sexsmith , Sting , James Taylor and Elton John are among the other artists who have covered the song . 
 = = Background and inspiration = = 
 As with most of the songs on his Living in the Material World album , George Harrison wrote " Give Me Love ( Give Me Peace on Earth ) " over 1971 – 72 . During this period , he dedicated himself to assisting refugees of the Bangladesh Liberation War , by staging two all @-@ star benefit concerts in New York and preparing a live album and concert film for release . In addition , much of his time was spent occupied with the business and legal problems afflicting the humanitarian aid project . Author Andrew Grant Jackson writes that Harrison 's frustration with this last issue resulted in a sombre quality pervading much of Material World , yet he " pushed his disillusionment aside for the lead single [ ' Give Me Love ' ] " . 
 The same period coincided with the height of Harrison 's devotion to Hindu spirituality . As with his religious @-@ themed 1970 – 71 hit , " My Sweet Lord " , and his subsequent singles " What Is Life " and " Bangla Desh " , Harrison wrote " Give Me Love " very quickly . Author Alan Clayson describes it as having " flowed from George with an ease as devoid of ante @-@ start agonies as a Yoko Ono ' think piece ' " . In his autobiography , I , Me , Mine , Harrison recalls of the writing process : 
 Sometimes you open your mouth and you don 't know what you are going to say , and whatever comes out is the starting point . If that happens and you are lucky , it can usually be turned into a song . This song is a prayer and personal statement between me , the Lord , and whoever likes it . 
 = = Composition = = 
 " Give Me Love ( Give Me Peace on Earth ) " continues the precedent that Harrison set on " My Sweet Lord " , through its fusion of the Hindu bhajan ( or devotional song ) with Western gospel tradition . Author Simon Leng comments that the song repeats another of its composer 's hit formulas , by using a three @-@ syllable lyrical hook as its title , like " My Sweet Lord " , " What Is Life " and " Bangla Desh " . 
 The song 's time signature is 4 / 4 throughout , and the musical key is F major . As on Harrison 's recording , this requires the placing of a capo on the guitar 's third fret , to transpose the chords from D up to the correct key . The intro features strummed acoustic guitar , similar in style to the opening of Bob Dylan 's " Mr. Tambourine Man " . The song builds gradually from its understated introduction , with the rhythm section only fully arriving after the first bridge segment . Harrison biographer Gary Tillery describes the musical mood as " bouncy yet soothing " . 
 In his lyrics , Harrison expresses his vision for life in the physical world . Following the opening instrumental passage , the song begins with a chorus in which he first pleads for a life devoid of the karmic burden of rebirth , or reincarnation : " Give me love , give me love , give me peace on earth / Give me light , give me life , keep me free from birth . " These lyrics bear a simple , universal message , one that , in the context of the time , related as much to the communal " peace and love " idealism of the 1960s as it did Harrison 's personal spiritual quest . 
 Harrison also asks for divine assistance to " cope with this heavy load " , while his stated attempt to " touch and reach you with heart and soul " recalls the same plea for a direct relationship with his deity that he expresses in " My Sweet Lord " . These two lines , which complete the chorus , imply a deficiency or <unk> on the singer 's part . According to author Ian Inglis , they serve as " an acknowledgment of the trials and tribulations he was facing in a more earthly setting " in the aftermath to the Concert for Bangladesh . 
 During the two bridge sections , Harrison incorporates the sacred term " Om " within his extended phrase " Oh ... my Lord " . Author Joshua Greene describes this as an example of a theme found in several songs on Material World , whereby Harrison " distilled " spiritual concepts into phrases " so elegant they resembled Vedic sutras : short codes that contain volumes of meaning " . The use of the word " Om " was a further comment from Harrison on the universality of faith , after his switching in " My Sweet Lord " from " hallelujah " refrains to the Hare Krishna mantra . Referring to the second half of the bridges in " Give Me Love " , Inglis views the drawn @-@ out " Please … " as " highly symbolic " , given the " unresolved conflict " that appears to be at the heart of the composition . 
 = = Recording = = 
 Harrison 's commitment to overseeing the release of the Concert for Bangladesh documentary film prevented him from being able to start on the follow @-@ up to his All Things Must Pass triple album until midway through 1972 . Another delay was caused by producer Phil Spector 's unreliability , as Harrison waited for him to turn up for the start of the sessions . Author Bruce Spizer writes that " the eccentric producer 's erratic attendance caused George to realize the project would never get done if he kept waiting for Spector " , and by October that year , Harrison had decided to produce the album alone . 
 As for the majority of Living in the Material World , Harrison recorded the basic track for " Give Me Love " in the autumn of 1972 with the assistance of former Beatles engineer Phil McDonald . The recording location was either FPSHOT , Harrison 's new home studio at Friar Park in Henley @-@ on @-@ Thames , or Apple Studio in London . In a departure from Harrison 's co @-@ productions with Spector , where a large line @-@ up of musicians had been standard , " Give Me Love " featured a pared @-@ down arrangement and more subtle instrumentation . Another contrast was Harrison 's adoption of a production style that partly recalls George Martin 's work with the Beatles . On " Give Me Love " , Inglis notes the same " supple and clear [ acoustic ] guitar @-@ playing that distinguished ' Here Comes the Sun ' " in 1969 , while the less grand production , relative to All Things Must Pass , allowed greater expression for Harrison as a slide guitarist . 
 Harrison carried out overdubs on the backing track , including twin slide @-@ guitar parts , during the first two months of 1973 . Aside from Harrison 's guitar work , the most prominent instrument on the recording is Nicky Hopkins ' piano , double @-@ tracked and played in his usual melodic style . The rhythm section consisted of bassist Klaus Voormann and drummer Jim Keltner . The organ player on the song was American musician Gary Wright , whose 1971 album Footprint was one of many musical projects in which Harrison was involved between All Things Must Pass and Material World . Peter Lavezzoli , author of The Dawn of Indian Music in the West , comments on how quickly Harrison 's " unique approach " to slide @-@ guitar playing had matured since 1970 , to incorporate sitar , veena and other Hindustani musical stylings , and rates the mid @-@ song solo on " Give Me Love " as " one of his most intricate and melodic " . 
 = = Release = = 
 " Give Me Love ( Give Me Peace on Earth ) " was Harrison 's first single in close to two years , after " Bangla Desh " in July 1971 . As with Living in the Material World , however , its release was delayed to allow for other items on Apple Records ' release schedule during the first half of 1973 : the Beatles ' compilations 1962 – 1966 and 1967 – 1970 , and Paul McCartney and Wings ' second album , Red Rose Speedway . In the years since All Things Must Pass , according to author Robert Rodriguez , the public bickering between John Lennon and McCartney and their " subpar " music had done much to diminish the " cachet of being an ex @-@ Beatle " . In his 1977 book The Beatles Forever , Nicholas Schaffner wrote that , because of the altruism inherent in the Bangladesh project compared to the twin " fiascos " of McCartney 's Wild Life album and the Lennon – Ono collaboration Some Time in New York City , " [ a ] receptive audience was guaranteed " for Harrison 's new songs . 
 Backed by " Miss O 'Dell " , " Give Me Love " was issued on 7 May 1973 in America ( as Apple R <unk> ) and 25 May in Britain ( Apple 1862 ) . Three weeks later , the song appeared as the opening track on Living in the Material World . As with all the songs on the album bar the 1971 @-@ copyright " Sue Me , Sue You Blues " and " Try Some , Buy Some " , Harrison assigned his publishing royalties for " Give Me Love " to his newly launched Material World Charitable Foundation . 
 Apple 's US distributor , Capitol Records , mastered the single to run at a faster speed than the album track , in order to make the song sound brighter on the radio . Unusually for an Apple release by a former Beatle , the single was packaged in a plain sleeve in the main markets of Britain and the United States . A variety of picture sleeves were available in European countries , including a design incorporating Harrison 's signature and a red Om symbol , both of which were aspects of Tom Wilkes 's artwork for the Material World album . 
 = = = US chart feat = = = 
 The single topped the Billboard Hot 100 at the end of June , for one week , and peaked at number 8 on the UK Singles Chart . Repeating the feat of January 1971 , when " My Sweet Lord " and All Things Must Pass sat atop the Billboard charts simultaneously , " Give Me Love " hit number 1 part @-@ way through Material World 's five @-@ week stay at the top of the albums listings . 
 " Give Me Love ( Give Me Peace on Earth ) " replaced Wings ' " My Love " at number 1 on the Hot 100 singles chart , and in turn was replaced by " Will It Go Round in Circles " , by Harrison 's former Apple Records protégé Billy Preston . For the week ending 30 June that year , the Harrison , McCartney and Preston songs were ranked numbers 1 , 2 and 3 , respectively , on the Billboard Hot 100 , marking the first time since 25 April 1964 that the Beatles occupied the top two positions on that chart . Schaffner described this period as " reminiscent of the golden age of Beatlemania " , due to the amount of Beatles @-@ related product dominating the charts in America . As of October 2013 , the week of 30 June 1973 remained the only time that two former members of the Beatles held the first and second positions on a US singles chart . 
 = = = Reissue = = = 
 " Give Me Love " later appeared on the 1976 compilation The Best of George Harrison , as one of just six selections from the artist 's solo career . The song was also included on 2009 's Let It Roll : Songs by George Harrison . 
 In Martin Scorsese 's 2011 documentary George Harrison : Living in the Material World , released ten years after Harrison 's death , the song plays over footage of the Friar Park grounds and of Harrison making music in the house with Keltner and Voormann . During the segment , Voormann discusses Harrison 's practice of preparing the studio with incense to create a suitable environment , adding : " He really made it into a real tranquil , nice surrounding – everybody felt just great . " 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Contemporary reviews = = = 
 " Give Me Love ( Give Me Peace on Earth ) " became one of Harrison 's most popular songs , both from his years with the Beatles and from his subsequent solo career . On release , McCartney described it as " very nice " , adding : " The guitar solo is ace and I like the time changes . " Billboard magazine 's reviewer wrote : " Harrison 's voice and sweet , country tinged guitar work within a rippling but controlled rhythm base , lends itself to this plea for human understanding . His sincere sound engulfs the listener and brings [ them ] into the story . " In Rolling Stone , Stephen Holden lauded the song for its " strong , short @-@ phrased melody whose lyrics are sheer exhortation " , and said that the single was " every bit as good as ' My Sweet Lord ' " . 
 In Britain , where the national economy was heading into recession after the boom years of the 1960s , lines such as " help me cope with this heavy load " " touched a raw nerve or two " , according to Alan Clayson . In the NME , Tony Tyler derided Harrison for " lay [ ing ] the entire Krishna @-@ the @-@ Goat trip on us " , while Michael Watts of Melody Maker suggested that " Living in the Material World " might have been a better choice for the album 's lead single . Writing in their 1975 book The Beatles : An Illustrated Record , Tyler and Roy Carr said that " Give Me Love " bore " more than a distant resemblance " to Dylan 's " I Want You " , but praised the track for its " excellent and highly idiosyncratic slide @-@ guitar playing " . 
 = = = Retrospective reviews and legacy = = = 
 Reviewing the song for AllMusic , Lindsay Planer highlights Harrison 's guitar contribution to this " serene rocker " and likewise acknowledges Hopkins ' " warm and soulful keyboard runs and fills " . Zeth Lundy of PopMatters describes " Give Me Love " as " effervescent " and " a # 1 single that remains one of Harrison 's most iconic and well @-@ loved " . In his liner notes to the Let It Roll compilation , music historian Warren <unk> views " Give Me Love " as " perhaps the best example " of how Harrison 's " post @-@ Beatles songwriting blurs the line between music and prayer without ever sacrificing the pure melodic force for which he was known " . 
 Mojo contributor John Harris cites " Give Me Love " as evidence of Material World 's standing as " something of a Hindu concept album … a pleasing fusion of Eastern religion , gospel , and the ghost of ' For You Blue ' " . Hugh Fielder of Classic Rock admires Harrison 's " painstaking craftsmanship " and " sublime playing " on this and other Material World tracks and describes it as " one of Harrison 's finest songs " . Writing for Uncut , David Cavanagh considers the album to be a " utopian follow @-@ up " to All Things Must Pass , on which " Give Me Love " " encapsulates the deal : simple message of hope , with gorgeous slide guitar … and fantastic rhythm section " . 
 Among Harrison and Beatles biographers , Robert Rodriguez recognises Harrison 's achievement in " cloak [ ing ] philosophical concerns in a thoroughly commercial package " , which included his " impossibly compelling slide work " . Simon Leng finds more superlatives for the song 's guitar lines , describing them as " almost too euphonious to be true " . Leng continues : " Living in the Material World could hardly have reveled in a stronger opening song ... A gorgeous ballad , awash with marvelously expressive guitar statements , ' Give Me Love ' retains the emotional power of All Things Must Pass in a compelling three minutes . " 
 Writing in Still the Greatest : The Essential Solo Beatles Songs , Andrew Grant Jackson considers that with " Give Me Love " , Harrison " captured the essence of what he had set out to do with the [ Bangladesh ] concerts – and what the Beatles had tried to do in their more idealistic moments " . Describing it as Harrison 's " finest plea to God " , with a vocal that " perfectly suits the yearning " implicit in the lyrics , Jackson adds : " ' Give Me Love ( Give Me Peace on Earth ) ' stands alongside ' All You Need Is Love , ' ' Let It Be , ' and ' Imagine ' as the purest expression of the Aquarian Age dream . " In his Harrison obituary for The Guardian in December 2001 , former Melody Maker critic Chris Welch concluded with a reference to the track , saying that the ex @-@ Beatle 's " feelings and needs were best expressed in one of his simplest songs – ' Give Me Love ( Give Me Peace On Earth ) ' " . 
 In the Concert for George documentary film ( 2003 ) , Eric Clapton names " Give Me Love " as one of his favourite Harrison compositions , along with " Isn 't It a Pity " . AOL Radio listeners voted the track fifth in a 2010 poll to find Harrison 's best post @-@ Beatles songs , while Michael Gallucci of Ultimate Classic Rock placed it fourth on a similar list that he compiled . Guitar World editor Damian Fanelli includes the track among his choice of Harrison 's ten best post @-@ Beatles " Guitar Moments " , praising the mid @-@ song solo as " simply one of the most intricate and melodic things the former Beatle ever played on slide " . David Fricke includes " Give Me Love " in his list of " 25 essential Harrison performances " for Rolling Stone magazine , and describes it as " a soft , intimate hymn , a small @-@ combo reaction to the Wagnerian spectacle of All Things Must Pass " . 
 = = Performance = = 
 Harrison performed " Give Me Love ( Give Me Peace on Earth ) " throughout both his 1974 North American tour with Ravi Shankar and his 1991 Japanese tour with Eric Clapton , and during his 1992 benefit show for the Natural Law Party . The latter took place at London 's Royal Albert Hall on 6 April that year and was Harrison 's only full concert as a solo artist in Britain . 
 In the 1974 shows , the song usually appeared midway through the set and featured Billy Preston 's synthesizer and a flute solo from Tom Scott instead of the familiar slide @-@ guitar breaks . Although widely bootlegged , no version of the song from this tour has been released officially . 
 = = = Live in Japan version = = = 
 The Japanese tour in December 1991 was Harrison 's only other tour as a solo artist . His 1992 album Live in Japan contains a version of " Give Me Love " from this tour , recorded at Tokyo Dome on 15 December 1991 . Harrison again delegated the solos to a fellow musician : in this case Andy Fairweather @-@ Low reproduced the slide @-@ guitar parts from the original studio recording . Ian Inglis notes the " impressive interplay " , particularly towards the end of the song , between Harrison and his backup singers , Tessa Niles and Katie <unk> . 
 This live version of " Give Me Love " , along with the accompanying concert footage , was subsequently included in the Living in the Material World reissue in September 2006 , as part of a deluxe CD / DVD package . The performance also appears on the DVD included in the eight @-@ disc Apple Years 1968 – 75 box set , released in September 2014 . 
