 = = Production = = 
 The Cincinnati Kid was filmed on location in New Orleans , Louisiana , a change from the original St. Louis , Missouri , setting of the novel . Spencer Tracy was originally cast as Lancey Howard , but ill health forced him to withdraw from the film . Sam Peckinpah was originally hired to direct ; producer Martin Ransohoff fired him shortly after filming began for " <unk> the picture . " Peckinpah 's version was to be shot in black @-@ and @-@ white to give the film a 1930s period feel . Jewison scrapped the black @-@ and @-@ white footage , feeling it was a mistake to shoot a film with the red and black of playing cards in greyscale . He did mute the colors throughout , both to evoke the period and to help pop the card colors when they appeared . Strother Martin claimed he was cast in the film but got fired after Jewison replaced Peckinpah . 
 The film features a theme song performed by Ray Charles and a brief appearance during the film by The Preservation Hall Jazz Band , with Emma Barrett as vocalist and pianist . 
 = = Soundtrack = = 
 = = Reception = = 
 Upon its 1965 release , The Cincinnati Kid was favorably reviewed by Variety which wrote " Martin Ransohoff has constructed a taut , well @-@ turned @-@ out production . In Steve McQueen he has the near @-@ perfect delineator of the title role . Edward G. Robinson is at his best in some years as the aging , ruthless Lancey Howard .... " Howard Thompson of The New York Times called the film a " respectably packaged drama " that is " strictly for those who relish — or at least play — stud poker " and notes that the " film pales beside The Hustler , to which it bears a striking similarity of theme and characterization . " Time magazine also noted the similarities to The Hustler , saying " nearly everything about Cincinnati Kid is reminiscent " of that film , but falls short in the comparison , in part because of the subject matter : 
 Director Jewison can put his cards on the table , let his camera cut <unk> to the players ' intent faces , but a pool shark sinking a tricky shot into a side pocket undoubtedly offers more range . Kid also has a less compelling subplot . Away from the table , McQueen gambles on a blonde ( Tuesday Weld ) and on the integrity of his dealer pal , Karl Malden . Pressure comes from a conventionally vicious Southern gentleman ( Rip Torn ) , whose pleasures include a Negro mistress , a pistol range adjacent to his parlor , and fixed card games . As Malden 's wife , Ann @-@ Margret spells trouble of another kind , though her naive impersonation of a wicked , wicked woman recalls the era when the femme fatale wore breastplates lashed together with spider web . By the time all the bets are in , Cincinnati Kid appears to hold a losing hand . 
 A retrospective review published by the New York State Writers Institute of the University at Albany also noted the similarities the film had to The Hustler , but in contrast said The Cincinnati Kid 's " stylized realism , dreamlike color , and detailed subplots give [ the film ] a dramatic complexity and self @-@ awareness that The Hustler lacks . 
 Blondell was singled out for her performance as Lady Fingers with an award from the National Board of Review of Motion Pictures and a Golden Globe nomination for Best Supporting Actress . Motion Picture Exhibitor magazine nominated Robinson for its Best Supporting Actor Laurel Award . 
 = = Home media = = 
 The Cincinnati Kid was released on Region 1 DVD on May 31 , 2005 . The DVD features a commentary track by director Norman Jewison , commentary on selected scenes from Celebrity Poker Showdown hosts Phil Gordon and Dave Foley and The Cincinnati Kid Plays According to Hoyle , a promotional short featuring magician Jay <unk> . A Blu @-@ Ray DVD was released on June 14 , 2011 . 
 With the release of the film on DVD , one modern reviewer said the film " is as hip now as when it was released in 1965 " and another cited McQueen as " effortlessly watchable as the Kid , providing a masterclass in the power of natural screen presence over dialogue " and Robinson " simply fantastic . " Poker author Michael <unk> calls The Cincinnati Kid " [ o ] ne of the greatest poker movies of all time . " 
 = Kashimashi : Girl Meets Girl = 
 Kashimashi : Girl Meets Girl ( <unk> ～ ガール ・ <unk> ・ ガール ～ , Kashimashi ~ Gāru <unk> Gāru ~ ) is a Japanese yuri manga series written by Satoru Akahori and illustrated by Yukimaru Katsura . The manga was originally serialized in Dengeki Daioh between the July 2004 and May 2007 issues , and later published in five bound volumes by MediaWorks from January 2005 to May 2007 . The story focuses on Hazumu <unk> , a normal , albeit effeminate high school boy who is killed when an alien spaceship crash lands on him , only to be restored to health as a girl . This results in a same @-@ sex love triangle that Hazumu finds herself in with two of her best female friends . 
 A single light novel written by Mako <unk> and illustrated by the manga 's artist was published by MediaWorks under their Dengeki Bunko imprint in January 2006 . The manga series was adapted into a twelve @-@ episode anime television series plus a single original video animation ( OVA ) sequel by Studio Hibari . The anime aired in Japan on TV Tokyo between January and March 2006 ; the OVA was released in October 2006 . A visual novel was created based on the series for the PlayStation 2 and was released in March 2006 . Seven Seas Entertainment licensed the manga series for English @-@ language publication in North America and released the five volumes between December 2006 and March 2008 . Media Blasters licensed the anime series , including the OVA , and released three DVD volumes between June and October 2007 with English @-@ subtitles . Media Blasters re @-@ released the anime with an English dub . 
 The manga has been given positive reviews by the popular anime and manga magazine Newtype USA , and at the online resources Anime News Network and IGN . The first manga volume was Newtype USA 's Book of the Month for December 2006 , and Newtype 's noted Seven Seas Entertainment 's " fan @-@ focused " translation without an effort to localize the humor for the mainstream American market . In July 2007 , Kashimashi was Seven Seas Entertainment 's best @-@ selling title . The anime has been likened to Rumiko Takahashi 's Ranma ½ , though only as far as the mutual transgender themes . Critics of the anime praised the down to earth characters , and the generally great animation quality with its soft and detailed art style . 
 = = Plot = = 
 At the start of Kashimashi , a young high school boy named Hazumu <unk> declares his love to classmate and close friend Yasuna <unk> , but she quickly rejects him . Dejected , Hazumu climbs Mt . Kashima and is killed when an alien spacecraft accidentally crash lands on him . To rectify this , the alien in the ship named Hitoshi Sora brings Hazumu back to life , but inadvertently regenerates him as a female right down to the DNA level . This change in Hazumu serves as the catalyst for the development of character interactions for the remainder of the series . 
 After Hazumu returns to school , Yasuna unexpectedly professes her love for Hazumu , but this serves only to confuse Hazumu as she adjusts to her new life as a girl . Yasuna , a rather feminine girl , has a unique affliction which makes her incapable of seeing males , and instead sees males as covered in a gray , hazy blur . Hazumu 's childhood friend Tomari Kurusu , an athletic girl and tomboy , finds Hazumu 's change difficult to cope with . Tomari starts to realize her own romantic feelings for Hazumu as Yasuna starts becoming closer to Hazumu , especially after Tomari witnesses Hazumu and Yasuna kissing one day after school . A conflict arises between Yasuna and Tomari who fight for Hazumu 's affection while she is unable to choose between them . This results in a love triangle emerging between the three female main characters . Hazumu 's best male friend Asuta <unk> also starts having romantic feelings for Hazumu , but tries his best to repress them . Tomari 's good friend Ayuki Mari , an intelligent girl interested in the sciences , continuously observes the ongoing development of the love triangle while keeping a stance of watching from afar . 
 The very stoic Hitoshi originally came to Earth in order to study human emotions , especially those related to love , in an attempt to save his species from extinction . His species has long @-@ since given up their emotions resulting in a loss of their sexual urges and thus a continuously dwindling population . Hitoshi moves into Hazumu 's home where he is warmly welcomed by Hazumu 's parents . He brings with him an artificially intelligent gynoid named Jan Pu which serves as the automatic pilot for his spaceship . Jan Pu 's body is modeled after Hazumu 's own female body , and possesses an energetic and childish personality . 
 While initially citing Hazumu 's change as an accident , Hitoshi later realizes this was an unexpected result of the regeneration process . By the time Hitoshi becomes aware of his mistake , he tells Hazumu and her friends she has only one month left to live . Hitoshi explains to Hazumu 's friends how someone very close to Hazumu has to donate " life grains " to Hazumu to sustain her life . While unaware her friends know about her impending death , Hazumu continues to live her life and comes to fully accept her fate . The day Hazumu is appointed to die , she falls off the school 's roof and Tomari jumps off the roof in an attempt to save her . While in mid @-@ air , Hitoshi interferes by transferring the necessary " life grains " to Hazumu , and both survive the fall . When they later wake up in the infirmary , Hazumu confesses her love to Tomari , effectively choosing her over Yasuna . 
 The anime ends differently , with no life @-@ threatening situation and Hazumu choosing Yasuna in order to help cure her worsening sight problem as it begins to degrade so she can no longer see girls as well . Afterwards however , Yasuna , who becomes able to see all people again , decides to break up with Hazumu , saying she can stand on her own , and in the follow @-@ up original video animation episode , Hazumu confesses her love to Tomari on Christmas and the two get married in a ceremony held by Hitoshi . 
 = = Production = = 
 When it was decided that Kashimashi : Girl Meets Girl would begin serialization in MediaWorks ' manga magazine Dengeki Daioh , Satoru Akahori wondered what kind of a message he could send to the readers , and eventually decided he wanted to write a steady message of " true love " . Akahori noted that up to the creation of Kashimashi , the works that he created were far apart from the concept of true love , and much of his previous work involved a lot of <unk> content which Akahori was attempting to avoid in Kashimashi . He wondered if the story would be interesting , and if he could surprise normal readers and fans of his previous works , if he wrote a true love story without much <unk> or fan service . 
 When thinking on how to write about true love , Akahori considered laughingly that in normal relationships between boys and girls , it eventually tends towards having sex . In order to avoid this , he chose to have a cast of female main characters , but he felt that audiences have experienced this before and that it thus would not be enough . This is when he thought up the idea of changing the main character from a boy to a girl . Akahori knew this would be a problem , since normally changing a person 's gender would cause complications , one of them being that the now @-@ female character would invariably want to return to being male . He knew that there were a few problems that could not be avoided , but he wanted to remove the desire to turn back into a male . For this reason , Akahori devised that the character would not want to turn back into a male if there was the impact of the entire world already having accepted the fact that his gender had changed . To do this , Akahori decided to have the alien who crashed into the character to not only revive the character as a female , but to broadcast this over the entire world , which is what happens at the beginning of Kashimashi . Afterwards , Akahori felt it necessary to expand on the alien 's role in the story . At this point in the development process , Akahori felt he could now begin writing the story . 
 The title Kashimashi loosely translates as " noisy , boisterous , or clamorous " and is derived from the Japanese phrase , " When three women gather , it is noisy " ( <unk> , Onna <unk> <unk> <unk> ) . The main title was originally romanized as Kasimasi in accordance with <unk> @-@ shiki romanization , but this was later changed in the English adaptations to Kashimashi in accordance with Hepburn romanization . 
 = = Media = = 
 = = = Manga = = = 
 The Kashimashi manga is written by Satoru Akahori and illustrated by Yukimaru Katsura . The original character designs were created by <unk> <unk> and the school uniform was designed by the company Cospa . It was serialized between the July 2004 and May 2007 issues of the monthly manga magazine Dengeki Daioh , sold between May 21 , 2004 and March 21 , 2007 , respectively . Five bound volumes were released in Japan between January 27 , 2005 and May 26 , 2007 published under MediaWorks ' Dengeki Comics imprint , concluding the series at thirty @-@ five chapters . 
 The manga was licensed for an English @-@ language release in North America by Seven Seas Entertainment using the revised Hepburn romanization of the title , Kashimashi , unlike the traditional name of Kasimasi . The first volume was released on December 25 , 2006 , with volumes released every three to four months until the fifth volume was published on March 18 , 2008 . Seven Seas re @-@ released the manga in a two @-@ volume omnibus collection of roughly 500 pages each ; volume one was published in June 2009 , followed by volume two in December 2009 . The series is also licensed in French by Ki @-@ oon and in Chinese in Taiwan by Kadokawa Media . 
 = = = Internet radio shows = = = 
 There have been two Internet radio shows for the Kashimashi series . The first show , entitled Kana , Yui , Yukari 's Kashima Radio ( <unk> ・ <unk> ・ <unk> , Kana , Yui , Yukari no Kashima Radio ) , was produced by Beat Net Radio beginning with a pre @-@ broadcast on September 30 , 2005 , and concluding on October 27 , 2006 with fifty @-@ six episodes . As implied in the title , the show was hosted by Kana Ueda , Yui Horie , and Yukari Tamura , who voiced Hazumu , Yasuna , and Tomari in the anime , respectively . Multiple guests appeared on the show such as Yūmao , who sung the anime 's ending theme " <unk> " , or other voice actors from the anime such as Ryōko Shintani , who voiced Jan Pu , and Daisuke Ono , who voiced Asuta . The radio show 's opening theme song was " Compass : Egao no Yukue " sung by Ueda , Horie , and Tamura . Listeners could submit contributions to the radio show via a form online . An audio CD containing the episodes between broadcast September 2005 and early 2006 went on sale on May 24 , 2006 . 
 The second Internet radio show , entitled Masumi Ryōko 's Kashima Radio PC ( <unk> ♥ <unk> , Masumi Ryōko no Kashima Radio PC ) , was also produced by Beat Net Radio , but was only available via podcasts on Bandai Visual Podcast . This show was one of only two radio programs ever distributed on Bandai Visual Podcast . The show was broadcast between December 22 , 2005 and April 27 , 2006 , concluding with ten episodes , and was hosted by Masumi Asano and Ryōko Shintani ; Asano voice Ayuki in the anime . 
 = = = Books = = = 
 A Kashimashi light novel , written by Mako <unk> and illustrated by Yukimaru Katsura , was published by MediaWorks under their Dengeki Bunko imprint on January 10 , 2006 . The novel is told from a first person perspective alternating between Hazumu , Yasuna , and Tomari between chapters . There is a prologue , four chapters , and an epilogue in the novel ; the prologue and the first chapter are told from Hazumu 's perspective , then Yasuna 's for chapter two , followed by Tomari 's for chapter three , and finally back to Hazumu for chapter four and the epilogue . The last three pages of the book contain an afterword written by the author . 
 A 112 @-@ page artbook entitled Kashimashi Official Fan Book ( <unk> , Kashimashi Kōshiki Fan Bukku ) was released by MediaWorks on March 27 , 2006 . The book , which is the same size as a manga bound volume , is printed in full @-@ color for the first forty @-@ eight pages which consists of a compilation of promotional art from the separate media types , character profiles with original sketches and comments on the characters , plus interviews from the voice actors of Hazumu , Yasuna , Tomari , Ayuki , and Jan Pu , and lastly original concept drawings of the school uniforms in the series . The middle of the book , which is printed in black @-@ and @-@ white , contains a brief overview of the first twenty @-@ one chapters of the manga , and interviews from the manga author and illustrator , anime director and scenario writer , and the light novel author . There is also a brief explanation of the PlayStation 2 visual novel , of two figurines of Hazumu , and of three audio CDs for the anime version . The last sixteen pages are again in full @-@ color and consist of the anime 's first episode in manga format . 
 = = = Anime = = = 
 The anime series of Kashimashi was produced by Studio Hibari and directed by Nobuaki Nakanishi . The series aired on TV Tokyo in Japan from January 11 to March 29 , 2006 , ending with twelve regular episodes . The episodes were released on seven DVD compilations released between April 26 and October 27 , 2006 , each containing two episodes . An original video animation ( OVA ) episode was released with the final DVD which changed the ending from the original television broadcast . There was a small additional portion during the bra shopping scene in episode two that was considered adult enough to be censored out of the television broadcast , but which was included in the DVD release . Bandai Visual released a DVD box set of Kashimashi in Japan on June 25 , 2010 . 
 The anime series was licensed by Media Blasters in November 2006 . The episodes were not dubbed into English , but still included subtitles in English . The first DVD went on sale on June 12 , 2007 and contained the first five episodes . Extras on the disc included two ten @-@ minute talks between the voice actresses for the three main female characters , a small collection of Japanese television advertisements , and textless opening videos . The second DVD went on sale on August 21 , 2007 , and the third and final DVD went on sale on October 23 , 2007 ; the last two DVDs contain four episodes each , including the OVA episode . A box @-@ set containing all three DVDs was released on October 14 , 2008 . The first episode of the series was included with the June 2007 issue of Newtype USA . A re @-@ release titled Kashimashi : Girl Meet Girl Vocal Collection was released on April 26 , 2011 with an English dub . 
 = = = Audio CDs = = = 
 The anime opening theme , " Koisuru Kokoro " by Eufonius , and main ending theme , " <unk> " by Yūmao , were both released on January 25 , 2006 in Japan by Lantis . The anime used four alternate versions of the ending theme sung by four of the voice actors . In episode eight , it was sung by Masumi Asano , in episode nine by Kana Ueda as Hazumu , in episode ten by Yui Horie as Yasuna , and in episode eleven by Yukari Tamura as Tomari . The opening theme " Koisuru Kokoro " was used as the ending theme for the first episode while the song " Kimi no Tame ni <unk> Koto " ( <unk> , lit . " Something I Can Do For You " ) by Yūmao was used as the ending theme in the twelfth episode . 
 Three insert songs sung by the voice actors were used in three of the episodes . In episode seven , the song " <unk> to <unk> " sung by Ueda was used , while in episode nine the song " Compass : Egao no Yukue " sung by Ueda , Horie , and Tamura was used ; these two songs were from the " Compass : Egao no Yukue " image song single released on December 21 , 2005 . The last insert song , " Hanbun " ( <unk> , lit . " Half " ) sung by Tamura , was used in episode twelve and was featured in the image song album Norte Amour released on April 5 , 2006 . The album also featured other songs by Ueda , Horie , Tamura , Asano , and Ryōko Shintani , who voiced Jan Pu . The Kashimashi Original Soundtrack for the anime version was released on April 26 , 2006 by Lantis . 
 Finally , a drama CD based on the anime version was released on May 18 , 2006 featuring ten voice actors from the anime . The plot for the drama CD takes place between final aired episode of the anime and the original video animation episode . 
 = = = Visual novel = = = 
 A visual novel video game based on the series named Kashimashi : Girl Meets Girl The First Summer Story ( <unk> ～ ガール ・ <unk> ・ ガール ～ <unk> , Kasimasi ~ Gāru <unk> Gāru ~ Hajimete no Natsu Monogatari ) was first released on the PlayStation 2 on March 30 , 2006 in Japan . The game was developed by Vridge , published by Marvelous Interactive , and released in two editions , limited and regular , on the same day . The limited edition came in a specially made box with an original drama CD called " Kashimashi Triangle Letter " , and a music CD featuring songs from the game in piano arrange versions . The game was later re @-@ released in a Best Collection edition on November 16 , 2006 , which sold at less than half the price of the original game . Kashimashi : Girl Meets Girl The First Summer Story received a total review score of 26 / 40 ( out of the four individual review scores of 7 , 6 , 7 , and 6 ) from the Japanese gaming magazine Famitsu . 
 The game 's story begins on the outset of summer vacation . Hazumu 's homeroom teacher <unk> Tsuki suggests Hazumu and her friends take a one @-@ week trip to a small mountain village with a hot spring resort . Hazumu 's grandparents reside in this town , and are two new characters introduced to the story . Three other female characters are introduced as possible love interests for Hazumu ; two are the same age as her , and the third is the older landlady of the resort . The goal of the game is to pair Hazumu up with one of the five female cast of characters . The gameplay 's main system comes from Hazumu 's indecisive personality . If the player shows more interest in a particular character , the other characters get annoyed that Hazumu is ignoring them , which is displayed in a tension meter . The more Hazumu ignores a particular character , the higher the tension between that character becomes . This ensures Hazumu stays good friends with the possible love interests . In order to view the ending of a particular character , a certain amount of tension will have to be between the other characters , but this cannot be too great or the ending will not show . 
 The gameplay requires little interaction from the player as most of the duration of the game is spent simply reading the text that appears on the game screen which represents either dialogue between the various characters or the inner thoughts of the protagonist . An important aspect of the game ( as in nearly every visual novel ) are the " decision points " which appear every so often which give the player the chance to choose from a limited number of options . The time between these decision points is variable and can occur anywhere from a minute to much longer . The game pauses at such moments and depending on which choice the player makes , the plot will progress in a specific direction . Each plot line can be achieved through multiple replays . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Manga = = = 
 In July 2007 , the English version of Kashimashi was Seven Seas Entertainment 's best @-@ selling title . The first volume of the manga was given positive reviews from such sources as Newtype USA , a popular anime and manga magazine . The first volume was named as Newtype USA 's Book of the Month for December 2006 , and the review noted Seven Seas Entertainment 's " fan @-@ focused " translation , which retained the honorifics and much of the Japanese wordplay without efforts to localize the humor for the mainstream American market . The review goes on to state that " for fans of more mainstream romantic productions , it 's a neat twist on the traditional love @-@ triangle formula , and a charming alternative to boys meeting girls . " In a review at Anime News Network ( ANN ) , Carlo Santos commented that " the fast @-@ moving events of this first volume combine to form a story of many moods : a gender @-@ bending comedy , but with sci @-@ fi touches , and most of all , a romance more touching than one might expect . The time has come to rethink the love triangle . " In a review at IGN , A. E. Sparrow stated " there 's plenty to enjoy in the first book , however . Hazumu attempting to buy his first bra is pretty humorous , as are the occasional visits from the aliens who put him in this situation in the first place . " 
 The second volume of the manga was positively reviewed at Anime News Network by Theron Martin , who wrote : " With its second volume the title pushes fully into the realm of romantic comedy , liberally sprinkling its story with humorous asides , pratfalls , and anecdotes while still dealing head @-@ on with the much more serious and involved love triangle springing up around Hazumu . For all its attempts to be funny , though , it is the story 's more dramatic side that will keep you coming back . " In ANN 's review of manga volume three , Theron Martin wrote , " The artistry of Yukimaru Katsura rarely devotes more effort to backgrounds than necessary , but its strength has always lain in the character designs and costuming . The array of the female cast provides a great contrast of looks [ but ] ... the male characters , though easily distinguishable , stand out less . " In ANN 's double review of manga volumes four and five , Martin commented , " these volumes offer a solid conclusion to this lovely little yuri series . It does handle things rather differently than in the anime version , and those irritated by the anime 's ending should find this one more to their liking . " 
 The first manga volume was generally panned by Deb Aoki at About.com where she felt the characters were " too flat and uninteresting " , and the story being " too far @-@ fetched " and " ridiculous " to make a good story . However , Aoki admitted the art is " quite nice , and there are some moments of genuine tenderness and humor . " In a review of the first manga volume by Matthew Alexander at Mania.com , he thought that while " stories with love triangles or gender @-@ switching protagonists have been done before ... Hazumu 's change into a girl explores romance between people of the same sex in an interesting and comedic way . " 
 = = = Anime = = = 
 The anime series has been compared with a similar series that involved gender swapping — Rumiko Takahashi 's Ranma ½ . In a review at T.H.E.M. Anime Reviews , the reviewer wrote , " [ the anime is ] rather aggravating to watch at times , but seems to have no problem raising smiles whenever it wants to , either . The characters , as they are , bring much of the believability of the show , despite the alien elements . It 's very much down to earth and pleasant to look at , if nothing else . The rather soft and detailed art style does help , of course , as does the generally great animation quality . " The conclusion of the anime was positively reviewed by Erica Friedman , who is the president of Yuricon , an anime convention geared towards fans of yuri anime and manga , and ALC Publishing , a publishing house dedicated to yuri . Friedman described the anime 's conclusion as " so normal - so much like a thing that might have actually happened in real life ... that it kind of just went under the radar . So - after all these years of watching crappy unresolved restart endings we FINALLY get a real ending and it 's a yuri ending where the girl remains a girl and get [ s ] the girl and ... thud . Nothing . " The anime was given an overall score of 7 / 10 by Friedman . 
 The three DVD volumes released by Media Blasters were reviewed by Anime News Network . In the review of the first DVD , the reviewer commented , " The series ' skillful juggling of different characters ' viewpoints puts the audience in a position to sympathize strongly with each one . Director Nobuaki Nakanishi guides the emotional content with a light , gentle touch — wisely forgoing extensive internal monologues , speeches , and emotional outbursts . Instead , he draws you in with soft , effortlessly evocative visuals and a simple , beautifully understated score , relying on subtly shifting facial expressions and meaning @-@ laden actions to communicate the quietly affecting emotional states of his characters . " For the second DVD volume , Theron Martin commented , " Every element of the production , from the style of the artistry to the palette of colors used to the soundtrack , contributes wonderfully to the look and feel of the original story , and the anime script not only exactly duplicates many scenes from the manga but also does everything in its power to stay true to the spirit of the original writing . " Finally , for the third volume , Carl Kimlinger wrote " ... the writers make an ill @-@ advised attempt to remove the " bitter " from " bittersweet " by tacking on some decidedly unconvincing plot developments [ in the OVA , although ] ... it isn 't as awful as it could have been . The third volume of Kashimashi ... creat [ es ] a deeply satisfying conclusion with all of the vicarious emotional thrills you could possibly want . " 
 The three DVD volumes released by Media Blasters were also reviewed by <unk> In the review of the first DVD , the reviewer Chris Beveridge described the anime as " something different from the norm " which " mixes romance and comedy quite well " . However , the pacing early on is felt as being " awkward " which " takes time to really find its rhythm " . For the second DVD volume , Beveridge commented that " the mixing of the relationships continues to be the most interesting part of the show . " Beveridge goes on to state " the mild moments of it are tacky and bad , " but " when it comes to the core cast of characters , it 's all solid material that is very enjoyable . " Finally , for the third volume , Beveridge wrote that " despite the issues with how the series turns in the bonus OVA episode , Kashimashi has proven to be quite a lot of fun for the situations it presented . " The series is seen to " close out rather well , " and " not only is it good fun but it 's also an enjoyable romantic show with lots of heart and emotion . " 
 = Priestfield Stadium = 
 Priestfield Stadium ( popularly known simply as Priestfield and officially known from 2007 to 2010 as KRBS Priestfield Stadium and from 2011 as MEMS Priestfield Stadium for sponsorship purposes ) is a football stadium in Gillingham , Kent . It has been the home of Gillingham Football Club since the club 's formation in 1893 , and was also the temporary home of Brighton & Hove Albion Football Club for two seasons during the 1990s . The stadium has also hosted women 's and youth international matches and from 2013 onwards will play host to London Broncos rugby league matches . 
 The stadium underwent extensive redevelopment during the late 1990s , which has brought its capacity down from nearly 20 @,@ 000 to a current figure of 11 @,@ 582 . It has four all @-@ seater stands , all constructed since 1997 , although one is only of a temporary nature . There are also conference and banqueting facilities and a nightspot named the Blues Rock Café . Despite having invested heavily in its current stadium , Gillingham F.C. has plans to relocate to a new stadium . 
 = = History = = 
 New Brompton Football Club , the forerunner of Gillingham Football Club , formed in June 1893 . At the same time an area of land in Gillingham was acquired by the club 's founders , the purchase being funded through an issue of 1 @,@ 500 £ 1 shares . Sources differ on whether the stadium was named after the road on which the land stood , Priestfield Road , or whether the road was named after the stadium , although until 1947 the stadium itself was officially named Priestfield Road . A pitch was laid and a pavilion erected , and the first matches at Priestfield were staged on 2 September 1893 . New Brompton 's reserve team played Grays , followed immediately by the first match for the club 's first team , against Woolwich Arsenal 's reserves . The admission charge for the two matches was 3d . A newspaper report on the matches noted that the club had recently purchased an additional acre and three @-@ quarters of ground and had accepted a contract for the construction of a stand containing 500 seats . Most spectators stood on terracing , banked earth , or simply along the perimeter of the pitch , as was the case at most football grounds at the time . In order to raise funds to assist with the running of the football club , New Brompton allowed the ground to be used for other events , such as smoking concerts , fêtes , athletics meetings and a ladies ' football match . Sheep were allowed to graze on the pitch during the week , a common practice at many grounds at that time . In 1899 , a second stand was added along part of the Gordon Road side of the ground , reportedly built by off @-@ duty dock workers in exchange for beer and cigarettes . 
 By 1908 , the total number of seats had been increased to 800 and terracing added at the Rainham end of the ground . In 1912 , the club 's first Supporters ' Association was formed , its initial project being to raise the necessary funds to construct terracing at the opposite end of the ground . Two years later the club , which had changed its name to Gillingham F.C. in 1913 , secured a bank loan of £ 1 @,@ 570 which was used to build a new grandstand , but just a month after it was completed the stand was severely damaged by high winds , which ripped off the roof and twisted most of the ironwork . The club sued the contractors , but it took a further three months for the damage to be repaired . 
 A new attendance record was set in 1924 when an FA Cup match against First Division leaders Cardiff City drew a crowd of 19 @,@ 472 . This record stood until 1948 , when 23 @,@ 002 fans watched Gillingham take on Queens Park Rangers in the FA Cup , with many more turned away . In the same year the club , which had lost its place in the Football League ten years earlier after failing to gain re @-@ election , produced a glossy brochure as part of its bid to be elected back into the league . The facilities at Priestfield were highlighted as one of the club 's strengths in the brochure , which listed the ground 's capacity as " between 25 @,@ 000 and 30 @,@ 000 " but stated that plans had been drawn up to increase the capacity to 50 @,@ 000 , with 5 @,@ 000 seats . 
 The ground underwent its most extensive redevelopment to date in 1955 , at a total cost of £ 28 @,@ 500 . The previously sloping pitch was levelled , the terracing that occupied part of the Gordon Road side of the ground replaced , and new covered accommodation , known as the Stanley Stand , erected between the Rainham End and Gordon Road Stand . The first floodlights were erected in 1963 , at a cost of over £ 14 @,@ 000 , but this was to be the last significant development work at Priestfield for over thirty years . By the early 1980s the capacity of the ground was listed as 22 @,@ 000 , although this was reduced to 19 @,@ 000 when the Gordon Road Stand was closed for safety reasons . In 1987 , a clock was erected at the corner of the Rainham End and the Stanley Stand , dubbed the Lord Sondes Clock in honour of Henry Milles @-@ Lade , 5th Earl Sondes , a member of the club 's board of directors . The clock was removed during later stadium redevelopment work and its current whereabouts are unknown . 
 New owner Paul Scally took over at the club in 1995 and soon instigated a programme of redevelopment which completely transformed the formerly run @-@ down ground . The closed stand was replaced with a new Gordon Road Stand in 1997 at a cost of more than £ 2 million . Two years later the Rainham End terracing was replaced with a new all @-@ seater stand , with the sports centre behind it demolished and replaced with a car park . 
 The main stand on the northern side of the pitch was demolished in 1999 , along with a section of away terracing , to be replaced with a new state @-@ of @-@ the @-@ art facility dubbed the Medway Stand , but the work was beset by problems . Due to serious delays with the building of the new stand , the club was forced to spend most of the subsequent season first with that side of the ground completely empty , then later with building work ongoing . Supporters were not able to sit in the new stand until the latter stages of the 1999 – 2000 season , and even then many of the facilities had not been finished . The stand also caused severe financial problems for the club , as its facilities eventually cost significantly more than the original estimate . 
 The fourth side of the ground was redeveloped in 2003 when the Town End terracing was removed and a temporary stand put in its place , named after the late football commentator and Gillingham supporter Brian Moore . It was hoped that work would begin on a permanent Brian Moore Stand in 2004 , but due to talk of relocating the club to a new ground and the club 's current financial problems , this has been put on hold . 
 On 1 June 2007 , the stadium was officially renamed KRBS Priestfield Stadium as part of a sponsorship deal that lasted three years with the Kent Reliance Building Society . In 2011 another such deal led to the rebranding of the stadium as MEMS Priestfield Stadium . 
 = = Structure and facilities = = 
 The pitch is surrounded by four all @-@ seater stands – the Medway Stand , the Rainham End , the Gordon Road Stand and the Brian Moore Stand . All are covered with the exception of the Brian Moore Stand . The Medway Stand , which replaced the old Main Stand and part of the terracing at each end , is the largest and northernmost of the four . It has two tiers with a row of twenty executive boxes between the top and bottom tier . The stand also contains the changing rooms , physiotherapy facilities , club offices and club shop . The Rainham End , located behind the goal at the eastern end of the pitch , opened in 1999 and houses 2 @,@ 400 fans . This stand , like the terrace it replaced , is known for housing the club 's most vocal supporters . The Gordon Road Stand , which seats 2 @,@ 600 , was opened in 1997 and is opposite the Medway Stand . Due to planning requirements , the stand had a height restriction placed upon it , making it significantly lower than the other three sides of the ground , and due to the road layout behind it is narrower at one end than the other . A gantry for television cameras is located on the roof of this stand . 
 Opposite the Rainham End is the Brian Moore Stand . This stand is a temporary one , and accommodates visiting supporters . It occupies the site of the former Town End terracing , which was unusual in that it had a pronounced slope , with one end of the terracing being higher up than the other . In 1955 the pitch , which previously sloped at that end of the stadium , was levelled out but the gradient of the Town End was left unchanged . 
 The state of the stadium 's pitch caused the club severe problems in 2003 . A number of fixtures had to be postponed due to the state of the pitch , which was described as resembling a ploughed field , and the surface had to be heavily sanded before an FA Cup match against Leeds United . At the end of the season , taking advantage of the demolition of the old Town End , which allowed better access to the pitch , the club had the drainage system replaced and a completely new pitch laid . 
 Added to the new stands were several new developments . The Conference and Banqueting Centre , which is located behind the Rainham End , comprises the Great Hall , which can accommodate up to 600 delegates for events , and twenty smaller delegate rooms . The Centre is connected to the Medway Stand , thus allowing views from the banqueting suite onto the pitch , and is also licensed for wedding ceremonies . The Blues Rock Café nightspot , located within the Medway Stand , is open between four and five nights a week and stages live music and screenings of major sporting events . The club purchased many of the fixtures and fittings for these new developments at discounted prices when the furnishings of the Millennium Dome were sold off upon its closure . 
 Despite the stadium 's new facilities , Priestfield is still viewed in a negative light in some circles . In 2004 , it was voted the worst football ground in England by a poll in the Observer newspaper , although most of the comments made in the poll concerned the town of Gillingham itself , rather than the actual stadium as a building . 
 = = Future = = 
 Gillingham chairman Paul Scally has made it clear that he intends to relocate the club away from its current stadium , announcing in September 2003 that " there is no future for the club at the Priestfield " . In 2004 , the club outlined plans for a new stadium at <unk> but abandoned them soon afterwards due to the cost of improving transport links to the site . At the time Scally stated that he anticipated the club moving within four years , but by 2007 the proposed date had been pushed back to 2010 . 
 Despite the proposed move , the club promoted its facilities , in conjunction with Medway Council , as a possible training base for athletes competing in the 2012 Summer Olympics , saying : 
 In December 2007 , Gillingham shareholders passed a resolution to sell the ground to Priestfield Developments Ltd , a company wholly owned by Paul Scally , for £ <unk> as part of a restructuring of the club 's debts . The deal was to allow three years use of the stadium at £ 1 p.a. , with the club meeting running costs , with tenure secured for a further seven years at a rent as yet unspecified . In 2011 , however , the club purchased the stadium back for around 10 % of the fee paid by Priestfield Developments . 
 = = Other uses = = 
 In April 2006 , the ground hosted the England women 's team 's World Cup Qualifier against Austria , achieving a gate of 8 @,@ 068 ( a higher attendance than Gillingham 's average home gate for the 2005 – 06 season ) . Priestfield has also been the venue for home matches for the England youth team , including a November 2007 match against their counterparts from Ghana . 
 The stadium has also occasionally been the " home " of clubs other than Gillingham . In 1895 , Woolwich Arsenal played a Second Division home game against Burton Swifts at Priestfield after their own Manor Ground had been closed by the Football League for five weeks after crowd trouble at a match there earlier that year . Over a century later , during the 1997 – 98 and 1998 – 99 seasons Brighton & Hove Albion played their home matches at Priestfield , as they had entered a ground @-@ share agreement with Gillingham as a result of the sale of their Goldstone Ground to property developers . The move , undertaken by the club after a plan to groundshare with nearby Portsmouth fell through , was a controversial one for Brighton 's fans , who faced a 150 @-@ mile ( 240 km ) round trip to each home game . The two clubs subsequently became embroiled in a dispute over the charges levied by Gillingham for the hire of the ground , which was eventually settled out of court in 2001 . In May 2012 the London Broncos hosted a rugby league match at the stadium , the first Super League match to be staged in Kent , and the club later announced the possibility of making Priestfield their permanent home venue with effect from 2013 , although this did not occur . 
 The social and catering facilities are used for a range of business and entertainment events , and the premises is licensed for marriages . The pitch area and the Gordon Road Stand were used for a Christian outreach festival in May 2000 . 
 = = Records = = 
 The highest attendance recorded at Priestfield was 23 @,@ 002 for a match against Queens Park Rangers in the FA Cup 3rd round on 10 January 1948 . The highest Football League attendance was 20 @,@ 128 against Millwall in the Third Division South on 2 September 1950 . The record modern ( all @-@ seated ) attendance is 11 @,@ 418 , set on 20 September 2003 against West Ham United in the First Division . 
 The highest seasonal average attendance for league matches at Priestfield since Gillingham returned to the Football League in 1950 was 12 @,@ 576 in the 1951 – 52 season . Gillingham 's lowest seasonal average was 2 @,@ 979 in the 1994 – 95 season , although Brighton recorded a lower figure of 2 @,@ 328 in the 1997 – 98 season . 
 = = Transport = = 
 The stadium is approximately 0 @.@ 5 miles ( 1 km ) from Gillingham railway station , which lies on Southeastern 's Chatham Main Line from London Victoria to Dover Priory and Ramsgate . The station is also the southern terminus of the North Kent Line , which connects to London Charing Cross . The stadium has no parking facilities for supporters , and the streets around the ground are subject to a residents @-@ only permit parking scheme on match days , which means that supporters have to park a considerable distance away from the ground . For the 2007 – 08 season the club introduced a park and ride scheme whereby supporters leave their cars in a car park approximately one mile from the ground and are transported to the stadium by taxi . Chairman Paul Scally has cited the lack of parking as one of the main reasons why a new stadium is essential . 
 = History of the Song dynasty = 
 The Song dynasty ( Chinese : 宋朝 ; pinyin : Sòng cháo ; 960 – 1279 ) of China was a ruling dynasty that controlled China proper and southern China from the middle of the 10th century into the last quarter of the 13th century . The Song is considered a high point of classical Chinese innovation in science and technology , an era that featured prominent intellectual figures such as Shen Kuo and Su Song and the revolutionary use of gunpowder weapons ( catapult @-@ projected bombs , fire lances , flamethrowers , and land mines ) . However , it was also a period of political and military turmoil , with opposing and often aggressive political factions formed at court , which impeded progress in many ways . The frontier management policies of the Chancellor Wang Anshi exacerbated hostile conditions along the Chinese @-@ Vietnamese border , sparking a border war with the Lý dynasty . Although this conflict was fought to a mutual draw , there was subsequently an enormous military defeat at the hands of invading Jurchens from the north in 1127 during the Jin – Song wars , forcing the remnants of the Song court to flee south from Kaifeng and establish a new capital at Hangzhou . It was there that new naval strength was developed to combat the Jurchen 's Jin dynasty formed in the north . Although the Song dynasty was able to defeat further Jurchen invasions , the Mongols led by Genghis Khan , Ögedei Khan , Möngke Khan , and finally Kublai Khan gradually conquered China , until the fall of the final Song Emperor in 1279 . 
 = = Founding of the Song = = 
 The Later Zhou was the last of the Five Dynasties that had controlled northern China after the fall of the Tang dynasty in 907 . Zhao Kuangyin , later known as Emperor Taizu ( r . 960 – 976 ) , usurped the throne from the Zhou with the support of military commanders in 960 , initiating the Song dynasty . Upon taking the throne , his first goal was the reunification of China after half a century of political division . This included the conquests of <unk> , Wu @-@ Yue , Southern Han , Later Shu , and Southern Tang in the south as well as the Northern Han and the Sixteen Prefectures in the north . With capable military officers such as Yang Ye ( d . 986 ) , Liu <unk> ( 929 – 987 ) , Cao Bin ( 931 – 999 ) and <unk> Zan ( d . 1000 ) , the early Song military became the dominant force in China . Innovative military tactics , such as defending supply lines across floating pontoon bridges led to success in battle such as the Song assault against the Southern Tang state while crossing the Yangzi River in 974 . Using a mass of arrow fire from crossbowmen , Song forces were able to defeat the renowned war elephant corps of the Southern Han on January 23 , 971 , thus forcing the submission of Southern Han and terminating the first and last elephant corps that would make up a regular division within a Chinese army . 
 Consolidation in the south was completed in 978 , with the conquest of Wu @-@ Yue . Song military forces then turned north against the Northern Han , which fell to Song forces in 979 . However , efforts to take the Sixteen Prefectures were unsuccessful and they were incorporated into the Liao state based in Manchuria to the immediate north instead . To the far northwest , the Tanguts had been in power over northern Shaanxi since 881 , after the earlier Tang court appointed a Tangut chief as a military governor ( jiedushi ) over the region , a seat that became hereditary ( forming the Xi @-@ Xia dynasty ) . Although the Song state was evenly matched against the Liao dynasty , the Song gained significant military victories against the Western Xia ( who would eventually fall to the Mongol conquest of Genghis Khan in 1227 ) . 
 After political consolidation through military conquest , Emperor Taizu held a famous banquet inviting many of the high @-@ ranking military officers that had served him in Song 's various conquests . As his military officers drank wine and feasted with Taizu , he spoke to them about the potential of a military coup against him like those of Five Dynasties era . His military officers protested against this notion , and insisted that none were as qualified as him to lead the country . The passage of this account in the Song Shi follows as such : 
 The emperor said , ' The life of man is short . Happiness is to have the wealth and means to enjoy life , and then to be able to leave the same prosperity to one 's descendents . If you , my officers , will renounce your military authority , retire to the provinces , and choose there the best lands and the most delightful dwelling @-@ places , there to pass the rest of your lives in pleasure and peace ... would this not be better than to live a life of peril and uncertainty ? So that no shadow of suspicion shall remain between prince and ministers , we will ally our families with marriages , and thus , ruler and subject linked in friendship and amity , we will enjoy tranquility ' ... The following day , the army commanders all offered their resignations , reporting ( imaginary ) maladies , and withdrew to the country districts , where the emperor , giving them splendid gifts , appointed them to high official positions . 
 Emperor Taizu developed an effective centralized bureaucracy staffed with civilian scholar @-@ officials and regional military governors and their supporters were replaced by centrally appointed officials . This system of civilian rule led to a greater concentration of power in the central government headed by the emperor than had been possible during the previous dynasties . In the early 11th century , there were some 30 @,@ 000 men who took the prefectural exams per year ( see imperial examination ) , which steadily increased to roughly 80 @,@ 000 by the end of the century , and to 400 @,@ 000 exam takers during the 13th century . Although new municipal governments were often established , the same number of prefectures and provinces were in existence as before the Song came to power . Thus although more people were taking exams , roughly the same number were being accepted into the government as in previous periods , making the civil service exams very competitive amongst aspiring students and scholars . 
 Emperor Taizu also found other ways to consolidate and strengthen his power , including updated map @-@ making ( cartography ) so that his central administration could easily discern how to handle affairs in the provinces . In 971 , he ordered Lu <unk> to update and ' re @-@ write all the Tu Jing [ maps ] in the world ' ; a daunting task for one individual . Nonetheless , he traveled throughout the provinces to collect illustrative gazetteers and as much data as possible . With the aid of Song <unk> , the massive work was completed in 1010 , with some 1566 chapters . The later Song Shi historical text stated ( Wade – Giles spelling ) : 
 Yuan Hsieh ( d . + 1220 ) was Director @-@ General of governmental grain stores . In pursuance of his schemes for the relief of famines he issued orders that each pao ( village ) should prepare a map which would show the fields and mountains , the rivers and the roads in fullest detail . The maps of all the pao were joined together to make a map of the tu ( larger district ) , and these in turn were joined with others to make a map of the <unk> and the hsien ( still larger districts ) . If there was any trouble about the collection of taxes or the distribution of grain , or if the question of chasing robbers and bandits arose , the provincial officials could readily carry out their duties by the aid of the maps . 
 Taizu also displayed a strong interest in science and technology . He employed the Imperial Workshop to support such projects as Zhang Sixun 's hydraulic @-@ powered armillary sphere ( for astronomical observation and time @-@ keeping ) that used liquid mercury instead of water ( because liquid mercury would not freeze during winter ) . Emperor Taizu was also quite open @-@ minded in his affairs , especially with those perceived as foreigners : he appointed the Arab Muslim Ma <unk> ( 910 – 1005 ) as the chief astronomer of the Song court . For receiving envoys from the Korean kingdom of Goryeo alone , the Song court had roughly 1 @,@ 500 volumes written about the nuanced rules , regulations , and guidelines for their reception . The Song also sent envoys abroad , such as Wang <unk> ( 939 – 1006 ) who was sent as an official envoy to the Uyghur @-@ Turkic city of Gaochang in 981 , then under Kara @-@ Khanid control . 
 = = Relations with Liao and Western Xia = = 
 = = = The Great Ditch and Treaty of Shanyuan = = = 
 Relations between the Song and Liao ( led by the Khitans ) were relatively peaceful in the first two decades after Song was founded , the disputed territories of the Northern Han and the Sixteen Prefectures notwithstanding . In 974 , the two began exchanging embassies on New Years Day . However , in 979 the Song moved against the Northern Han , long under the protection of the Liao dynasty . The Song emperor succeeded in forcing the Northern Han to surrender , but when marching on the Liao Southern Capital ( present @-@ day Beijing ) in the Sixteen Prefectures , Song forces were defeated at the Battle of <unk> River . This defeat was politically damaging to the prestige of Emperor Taizong of Song ( r . 976 – 997 ) , so much so that his top military commanders orchestrated an aborted coup to replace him with his nephew Zhao <unk> . 
 Relations between the Song and Liao remained tense and hostile : in 986 the Song sent three armies against the Liao in an effort to take advantage of an infant emperor and recapture the Sixteen Prefectures , but the Liao successfully repulsed all three armies . Following this , diplomatic relations were resumed . Relations between Song and Liao worsened in the 990s . From 993 to 1004 , the Liao observed the Song as the latter built a ' Great Ditch ' in northern Hebei province from the Taihang Mountains in the west all the way to the Bohai Sea in the east . This was essentially a series of canals meant to block the advance of Liao cavalry far from the northern border line , although the Liao perceived this engineering project as a means for the Song to dispatch offensive forces more efficiently via new waterways . In 999 the Liao began annual attacks on Song positions , though with no breakthrough victories . The Liao were interested in capturing the <unk> region of northern Hebei , both because the Song general Zhou Shizong had taken it from them and because it contained strategic passes . 
 In 1004 , Liao forces managed to march deep into Song territory , camping out in Shanyuan , about 100 kilometers ( 62 mi ) north of the Song capital of Kaifeng . However , their forces were greatly overextended and any possible escape route was in danger of being blocked by Song forces . Eventually , the completion of the ' Great Ditch ' as an effective defensive blockade which slowed the advance of Liao cavalry forced the Liao to request a truce . Negotiations resulted in the Treaty of Shanyuan , signed in January 1005 ( some sources cite 1004 due to the Chinese Lunar Calendar ) , which fixed the borders of the Song and Liao as they were before the conflict . The Khitan rulers also wanted to intermarry with the Zhao family line of the Song , an offer that the Song refused in favor of a nominal and figurative imperial kinship . However , the treaty required the Song to make annual tribute payments to the Liao and recognize Liao equality with the Song . The tribute consisted of 283 kg ( 100 @,@ 000 oz ) of silver along with 200 @,@ 000 bolts of silk , increasing to 500 @,@ 000 units by 1042 . However , even with the increase in 1042 , the Song economy was not damaged by this enforced tribute . The bullion holding of the Liao dynasty did not increase with the tribute either , since the Song exported many goods annually to the Liao , dwarfing the amount of imported goods from Liao . Therefore , much of the silver sent to Liao as tribute was used to pay for Song Chinese goods , and the silver wound up back into the hands of Chinese merchants and the Song government . 
 Until the Song dynasty took advantage of a large rebellion within the Liao Kingdom in 1125 , the Song had to conduct cordial relations with the Liao . Skilled ambassadors were sent on missions to court the Liao and maintain peace , such as the renowned horologist , engineer , and state minister Su Song . The Song also prepared for armed conflict , increasing the overall size of the armed forces to a million soldiers by 1022 . By that time , however , the military was consuming three @-@ quarters of the tax revenues gathered by the state , compared to a mere 2 or 3 percent of state income that would be consumed by just providing the Liao with tribute . Due to these circumstances , intense political rivalries would later arise in the Song court over how to handle these issues . 
 = = = Conflict and diplomacy in the northwest = = = 
 The Song came into conflict with the Tanguts of the Western Xia dynasty as early as the 980s , when Song intended to retake the former Ordos prefectures of the late Tang dynasty , then held by the Tanguts . After the Tangut leader Li <unk> died in 1004 , the Tanguts under his successor Li Deming ( r . 1005 – 1032 ) had initially attacked the Song , but later sought peaceful relations which brought economic benefits until 1038 . 
 After non @-@ Chinese Song patrol leader Li <unk> ( aka Zhao <unk> ) raided Xia 's territory and destroyed some fortified settlements in 1034 , the Tanguts under Li Yuanhao ( 1003 – 1048 ) retaliated . On September 12 , 1034 the Tanguts raided Qingzhou in <unk> Circuit , but later Li Yuanhao released Song officers and soldiers he had captured ; by January 29 , 1035 relations were restored when Li Yuanhao sent tribute of fifty horses to the Song court and requested a copy of a Buddhist canon in return , which he received . Although he retained some unique Tangut customs and had a Tangut script created , Li 's administration followed the traditional Chinese model of bureaus . Li proclaimed himself the first imperial ruler of Western Xia , ruling as Emperor Jingzong ( r . 1038 – 1048 ) , and on November 10 , 1038 he sent an envoy to the Song capital in order to gain recognition for his new title as " Son of Blue Heaven " and to cease paying tribute to Song to affirm his new status . The Xia began attacks on Song 's borders which were repulsed by Song commander Lu <unk> ( fl . 1030 – 1050 ) , and on January 9 , 1039 the Song shut down its border markets and soon after a reward of 100 @,@ 000 strings of coin was offered to anyone who could capture Emperor Jingzong . Although he won impressive victories in the initial phase of the war , Jingzong gained no additional territory for Western Xia by war 's end in 1044 , while both sides had lost tens of thousands of troops . Emperor Jingzong also conceded to the Song demand that he refer to himself as an inferior subject when addressing the Song , and that he accept Song ritualists to perform official ceremonies at his court . Throughout the war , the Song had maintained a number of fortified military outposts stretching some 480 km ( 300 mi ) from the westernmost prefectures of Shaanxi to <unk> in what is now Shanxi . Since the Song could not rely on water obstacle defenses in this region — like the Great Ditch of Hebei used against Liao — they instead garrisoned the wide expanse with a recorded 200 imperial battalions and 900 provincial and militia battalions by 1043 . 
 Relations broke down once more in 1067 with the ascension of Emperor Shenzong of Song , and in the 1070s the Song had considerable success in capturing Tangut territory . A mood of frontier adventurism permeated Shenzong 's court , as well as a desire to reclaim territories he felt belonged to him as the rightful ruler of China ; when a Song general led an unprovoked attack on a Western Xia border town , Shenzong appeared at the border to commend the general himself . To punish the Western Xia and damage their economy , Emperor Shenzong also shut down all commercial border markets along the Song @-@ Western Xia border . The scientist and statesman Shen Kuo ( 1031 – 1095 ) was sent to Yanzhou ( now Yan 'an , Shaanxi province ) in 1080 to stave off Tangut military invasion . He successfully defended his fortified position , yet the new Grand Councillor Cai Que held him responsible for the death of a rival Song military officer and the decimation of that officer 's forces ; as a result , Shen Kuo was ousted from office and the state abandoned the projected land that Shen was able to defend . 
 When Empress Dowager Gao died in 1093 , Emperor Zhezong of Song asserted himself at court by ousting the political conservatives led by Sima Guang , reinstating Wang Anshi 's reforms , and halting all negotiations with the Tanguts of the Western Xia . This resulted in continued armed conflict between the Song dynasty and the Western Xia . In 1099 , the Northern Song launched a campaign into Xining and Haidong ( in modern Qinghai province ) , occupying territory that was controlled by the Tibetan <unk> regime since the 10th century . By 1116 , Song managed to acquire all of its territory and incorporated it into prefectures ; the area became the westernmost frontier against the Western Xia . 
 = = Relations with Lý of Vietnam and border conflict = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 For roughly a millennium a series of Chinese dynasties had controlled northern Vietnam , until the independence of the Ngô dynasty ( 939 – 967 ) . Early Song armies had fought and lost to the Early Lê dynasty ( 980 – 1009 ) of Vietnam at the Battle of Bạch <unk> in 981 . Subsequently the Zhuang rebel Nong <unk> ( Nùng Trí Cao ) ( 1025 – 1053 ) attempted to establish his own frontier kingdom in 1042 , 1048 , and 1052 , creating a disturbance on Song 's southern border that prompted an invasion against Nong <unk> / Nùng Trí Cao 's forces in the 1050s . This invasion resulted in the Song conquest of border regions inhabited by Tai peoples and a border confrontation with the Lý dynasty ( 1010 – 1225 ) that lasted from 1075 to 1077 . The Song court 's interest in maximizing the economic benefits of these frontier zones came into conflict with the Lý dynasty , whose goal was to consolidate their peripheral fiefdoms . In the aftermath , an agreement was negotiated by both sides that fixed the borders ; the resulting line of demarcation " would largely remain in place through to the present day " , according to James A. Anderson , Associate Professor in the History Department at the University of North Carolina . 
 = = = Border <unk> = = = 
 The Lý court had not intervened when the Song general Di Qing ( 1008 – 1061 ) crushed the border rebellion of Nùng Trí Cao in 1053 . During the two decades of relative regional peace that followed , the Lý observed the threat of Song expansion , as more Han Chinese settlers moved into areas which the Lý relied upon for the extraction of natural resources . Initially , a division of Di Qing 's soldiers ( originally from Shandong ) had settled the region , followed by a wave of Chinese settlers from north of the Yangzi River . 
 The Guangnan West Circuit Fiscal Commissioner , Wang Han ( fl . 1043 – 1063 ) , feared that Nùng Trí Cao 's kinsmen Nùng Tông Đán intended to plunder the region after he crossed the Song border in 1057 . Wang Han took a personal visit to Nùng Tông Đán 's camp and spoke with Nùng Trí Cao 's son , explaining that seeking " Interior Dependency " status would alienate them from the Lý court , but if they remained outside of China proper they could safely act as loyal frontier militia . Wang Han then sent a memorial to Emperor Renzong 's ( r . 1022 – 1063 ) court in 1060 , advocating the policy agreed with the Nùng . The Song government rejected his proposal and made the Nùng communities ( along with other ethnic groups ) official dependents of Song imperial authority , and Nùng Tông Đán 's request that the territories under his authority be incorporated into the Song Empire was granted in 1062 . In 1059 — six years before the Song court 's New Policies under Chancellor Wang Anshi ( 1021 – 1086 ) organized new self @-@ sufficient militia units throughout the empire and along the border with Đại Việt — the Lý dynasty ruler Lý Thánh Tông reorganized northern frontier administrative units and raised new militias . This bolstered his kingdom 's strength in a time of conflict with Champa ( located in southern Vietnam ) . 
 In the spring of 1060 , Giáp Đồng natives under the frontier prefectural leader Thàn Thiệu Thái — an imperial in @-@ law to the Lý court through marriage alliance — raided the Song frontier for cattle and militia recruits . He succeeded in taking the Song military leader Yang <unk> hostage , and in autumn of 1060 Song troops were sent into the frontier to rescue the general but he was not found . The Song court appointed Yu Jing ( <unk> ; 1000 – 1064 ) as a new military commissioner of the Guangnan region and charged him with the task of quelling the unrest caused by Thàn Thiệu Thái . Yu Jing also sent an agent to Champa to enlist Cham aid against the Song 's enemies in Guangnan . 
 = = = Tribute and intrigue = = = 
 The Lý court discovered the Song 's secret attempt to ally with Champa ; while Lý sent a delegation to Yongzhou to thank Song for putting down local rebellions and to negotiate terms of peace , they instructed their agents to gather intelligence on the alleged Champa alliance and the strength of Song 's military presence in the Guangnan Western Circuit . Two Vietnamese envoys were permitted to offer tribute to the court of Renzong in Kaifeng , arriving on February 8 , 1063 to deliver gifts , including nine tamed elephants . On March 30 , 1063 , Emperor Renzong died and was succeeded by Emperor Yingzong ( <unk> – 1067 ) ; Vietnamese envoys arrived in Kaifeng again to congratulate Yingzong on his ascension , and on April 7 , 1063 , Yingzong sent gifts such as calligraphy works by Renzong to Vietnamese King Lý Thánh Tông . On the day that the Vietnamese envoy Lý <unk> Tiên prepared to depart from Kaifeng back to Đại Việt , news arrived that Thàn Thiệu Thái had raided Song 's Guangnan West Circuit again . Although a plea from a Guangnan official urged Kaifeng to take action , Yingzong left defenses up to local Guangnan forces and labeled Thàn Thiệu Thái as " reckless and mad " in an effort to disassociate him from the Lý court . 
 The minor Song official Lu Shen , a prefect in Guizhou , sent a message to Kaifeng in 1065 which reported that Nùng Tông Đán had apparently switched allegiance from Song to Lý , as well as united with the Quảng Nguyên chieftain Lưu Ký . When the now " mentally weak and distracted ruler " Yingzong — as Anderson describes him — received the report , he took no other action but to reassign Nùng Tông Đán with new honorific titles . The court took no action to resolve the problem , and Nùng Tông Đán later played a key role in the Song @-@ Lý war of 1075 – 1077 . The Song also gave official titles to other Vietnamese leaders despite their involvement in Nùng Trí Cao 's rebellions and their pledged loyalty to Lưu Ký , the latter employed as a tribal official under King Lý Thánh Tông . 
 Yingzong died on January 8 , 1067 , and was replaced by Emperor Shenzong ( r . 1067 – 1085 ) , who like his father , heaped rewards on Vietnamese leaders but was more observant of the Vietnamese delegations . When Vietnamese envoys arrived in Kaifeng to congratulate Shenzong on his ascension , he sent lavish gifts to the Lý court , including a golden belt , silver ingots , 300 bolts of silk , two horses , a saddle inlaid with gold and silver plating , and on February 9 , 1067 bestowed the Vietnamese ruler Lý Thánh Tông with the official title " King of the Southern Pacified Region " ( Chinese : <unk> , pinyin : <unk> <unk> wáng , Vietnamese : Nam Bình Vương ) . Shenzong also countered Nùng Tông Đán 's defection by recognizing his kinsman Nùng Trí Hội as the Nùng clan leader in 1069 , giving him a title similar to Tông Đán 's and command over Guihua prefecture ( also known as <unk> grotto settlement ) . 
 = = = Frontier policy and war = = = 
 In his New Policies sponsored by Shenzong , Wang Anshi enhanced central authority over Song 's frontier administrations , increased militia activity , increased troop levels and war horses sent to the frontiers ( including the border areas with Đại Việt ) , and actively sought loyal supporters in border regions who could heighten the pace of extraction of local resources for the state 's disposal . Officials at court debated the merits or faults of Wang 's policies , yet criticism of his reforms even appeared in Đại Việt , where the high officer Lý Thường Kiệt ( 1019 – 1105 ) publicly announced that Wang 's policies were deliberate efforts to seize and control their border frontiers . Tensions between Song and Lý were critical , and in these conditions any sign of hostility had potential to ignite a war . 
 The Quảng Nguyên chieftain Lưu Ký launched an unexpected attack against Yongzhou in 1075 , which was repelled by the Song 's Vietnamese officer Nùng Trí Hội in charge of Guihua . Shenzong then sought to cement an alliance with the " Five Clans " of northern Guangnan by issuing an edict which would standardize their once irregular tribute missions to visit Kaifeng now every five years . Shenzong had officials sent from the capital to supervise militiamen in naval training exercises . Shenzong then ordered that all merchants were to cease trade with the subjects of Đại Việt , a further indication of heightened hostility that prompted the Lý court under Lý Nhân Tông ( r . 1072 – 1127 ) to prepare for war . 
 In the autumn of 1075 , Nùng Tông Đán advanced into Song territory in Guangxi while a naval fleet commanded by Lý Thường Kiệt captured <unk> and <unk> prefectures . Lý Thường Kiệt calmed the apprehensions of the local Chinese populace , claiming that he was simply apprehending a rebel who took refuge in China and that the local Song authorities had refused to cooperate in detaining him . In the early spring of 1076 , Thường Kiệt and Nùng Tông Đán defeated the Song militia of Yongzhou , and during a battle at Kunlun Pass , their forces beheaded the Governor @-@ General of Guangnan West Circuit , Zhang <unk> ( d . 1076 ) . After a forty @-@ two @-@ day siege , Yongzhou was breached and razed to the ground . When Song forces attempted to challenge Lý 's forces , the latter retreated , with their spoils of war and thousands of prisoners . 
 Lý Thường Kiệt had fought a war with the Cham in 1069 , and in 1076 Song called on the Khmer Empire and Champa to go to war again in 1076 . At the same time , the Song commander Guo Kui ( 1022 – 1088 ) led the combined Song force of approximately 100 @,@ 000 men against Lý . The Song quickly regained Quảng Nguyên prefecture and in the process captured the resistance leader Lưu Ký . By 1077 , the Song had destroyed two other Vietnamese armies and marched towards their capital at Thăng Long ( modern Hanoi ) . Song forces halted at the Nhu <unk> River ( in modern Bắc Ninh Province ) , where Lý Thường Kiệt had defensive ramparts built on the southern banks . However , Song forces broke through his defense line and their cavalry advanced to within several kilometers of the capital city . The Vietnamese counterattacked and pushed Song forces back across the river while their coastal defenses distracted the Song navy . Lý Thường Kiệt also launched an offensive , but lost two Lý princes in the fighting at <unk> Túc River . According to Chinese sources , " tropical climate and rampant disease " severely weakened Song 's military forces while the Lý court feared the result of a prolonged war so close to the capital . In 1078 China defeated Đại Việt and overran several districts that would later make up part of Cao Bằng Province . 
 As a result , Thường Kiệt made peace overtures to the Song ; the Song commander Guo Kui agreed to withdraw his troops , but kept five disputed regions of Quảng Nguyên ( renamed Shun <unk> or Thuận Châu ) , <unk> Lang Châu , Môn Châu , Tô Mậu Châu , and Quảng <unk> . These areas now comprise most of modern Vietnam 's Cao Bằng Province and <unk> Sơn Province . In 1082 , after a long period of mutual isolation , King Lý Nhân Tông of Đại Việt returned Yong , Qin , and Lian prefectures back to Song authorities , along with their prisoners of war , and in return Song relinquished its control of four prefectures and the county of Đại Việt , including the Nùng clan 's home of Quảng Nguyên . Further negotiations took place from July 6 to August 8 , 1084 and were held at Song 's <unk> garrison in southern Guangnan , where Lý 's Director of Military Personnel Lê Van <unk> ( fl . 1075 – 1096 ) convinced Song to fix the two countries ' borders between Quảng Nguyên and Guihua prefectures . 
 = = Partisans and factions , reformers and conservatives = = 
 After students passed the often difficult , bureaucratic , and heavily demanding Imperial Exams , as they became officials , they did not always see eye to eye with others that had passed the same examination . Even though they were fully @-@ fledged graduates ready for government service , there was always the factor of competition with other officials . Promotion to a higher post , higher salary , additional honors , and selection for choice assignment responsibilities were often uncertain , as young new officials often needed higher @-@ ranking officials to recommend them for service . Once an official would rise to the upper echelons of central administration based in the capital , they would often compete with others over influence of the emperor 's official adoption of state policies . Officials with different opinions on how to approach administrative affairs often sought out other officials for support , leading to pacts of rivaling officials lining up political allies at court to sway the emperor against the faction they disagreed with . 
 Factional strife at court first became apparent during the 1040s , with a new state reform initiated by Fan Zhongyan ( 989 – 1052 ) . Fan was a capable military leader ( with successful battles in his record against the Tanguts of Xi @-@ Xia ) but as a minister of state he was known as an idealist , once saying that a well @-@ minded official should be one that was " first in worrying about the world 's troubles and last in enjoying its pleasures " . When Fan rose to the seat of chancellor , there was a growing opposition to him within the older and more conservative crowd . They disliked his pushing for reforms for the recruitment system , higher pay for minor local officials to discourage against corruption , and wider sponsorship programs to ensure that officials were drafted more on the basis of their intellect and character . However , his Qingli Reforms were cancelled within a year 's time ( with Fan replaced as chancellor ) , since many older officials halfway through their careers were not keen on making changes that could affect their comfortably set positions . 
 After Fan Zhongyan , there was Chancellor Wang Anshi ( 1021 – 1086 ) . The new nineteen @-@ year @-@ old Emperor Shenzong ( r . 1067 – 1085 ) had an instant liking of Wang Anshi when he submitted a long memorial to the throne that criticized the practices of state schools and the examination system itself . With Wang as his new chancellor , he quickly implemented Wang 's New Policies , which evoked some heated reaction from the conservative base . Along with the <unk> system of a community @-@ based law enforcement , the New Policies included : 
 Low @-@ cost loans for farmers and replaced the labor service with a tax instead , hoping this would ultimately help the workings of the entire economy and state ( as he directly linked state income to the level of prosperity of rural peasants who owned farms , produced goods for the market , and paid the land tax ) . These government loans replaced the system of landlords offering their tenants private loans , which was prohibited under the new laws of Wang 's reforms . 
 Government monopolies on tea , salt , and wine in order to raise state revenues ( although this would now limit the merchant class ) . 
 Instituting a more up @-@ to @-@ date land survey system in order to properly assess the land tax . 
 Introduction of a local militia in order to lessen the budget of expenses paid for upholding the official standing army , which had grown dramatically to roughly 1 million soldiers by 1022 . 
 The creation of a new government bureau in 1073 called the Directorate of Weapons , which supervised the manufacture of armaments and ensured quality control . 
 Introduction of the Finance Planning Commission , created in mind to speed up the reform process so that dissident Conservatives would have less time to react and oppose reforms . 
 The poetry requirement of the civil service examination ( introduced during the earlier Tang dynasty ) was scrapped in order to seek out men with more practical experience and knowledge . 
 In addition , Wang Anshi had his own commentaries on Confucian classics made into a standard and required reading for students hoping to pass the state examinations . This and other reforms of Wang 's were too much for some officials to bear idly , as there were many administrative disagreements , along with many personal interests at stake . In any case , the rising conservative faction against the reformer Wang Anshi branded him as an inferior @-@ intellect who was not up to par with their principles of governance ( likewise , the reformers branded conservatives in the same labeled fashion ) . The conservatives criticized Wang 's reforms as a means of curbing the influence of landholding families by diminishing their private wealth in favor of self @-@ sufficient communal groups . The conservatives argued that the wealth of the landholding class should not be purposefully diminished by state programs , since the land holding class was the essential socio @-@ economic group that produced China 's scholar @-@ officials , managers , merchants , and landlords . 
 Reminded of the earlier Fan Zhongyan , Wang was not about to allow ministers who opposed his reforms to have sway at court , and with his prowess ( and perceived arrogance ) was known as ' the <unk> premier ' . He gathered to his side ministers who were loyal to his policies and cause , an elite social coalition known as the New Policies Group ( <unk> , Xin Fa ) . He had many able and powerful supporters , such as the scientist and statesman Shen Kuo . Ministers of state who were seen as obstructive to the implementation of Wang 's reforms were not all dismissed from the capital to other places ( since the emperor needed some critical feedback ) , but many were . A more extreme example would be " obstructionist " officials sent far to the south to administer regions that were largely tropical , keeping in mind that northern Chinese were often susceptible to malaria found in the deep south of China . Even the celebrated poet and government official Su Shi was persecuted in 1079 when he was arrested and forced into five weeks of interrogation . Finally , he confessed under guarded watch that he had slandered the emperor in his poems . One of them read : 
 This poem can be interpreted as criticizing the failure of the salt monopoly established by Wang Anshi , embodied in the persona of a hard @-@ working old man who was cruelly denied his means to flavor his food , with the severity of the laws and the only salt available being charged at rates that were too expensive . After his confession , Su Shi was found guilty in court , and was summarily exiled to Hubei Province . More than thirty of his associates were also given minor punishments for not reporting his slanderous poems to authorities before they were widely circulated to the educated public . 
 Emperor Shenzong died in 1085 , an abrupt death since he was in his mid 30s . His successor Emperor Zhezong of Song was only ten years old when he ascended to the throne , so his powerful grandmother served as regent over him . She disliked Wang 's reforms from the beginning , and sought to appoint more Conservative officials at court who would agree to oppose the Reformists . Her greatest political ally was Sima Guang ( 1019 – 1086 ) , who was made the next Chancellor . Undoing what Wang had implemented , Sima dismissed the New Policies , and forced the same treatment upon Reformers that Wang had earlier meted out to his opponents : dismissal to lower or frontier posts of governance , or even exile . However , there was still mounted opposition to Sima Guang , as many had favored some of the New Policies , including the substitution of tax instead of forced labor service to the state . Sure enough , when Emperor Zhezong 's grandmother died in 1093 , Zhezong was quick to sponsor the Reformists like his predecessor Shenzong had done . The Conservatives once more were ousted from political dominance at court . When Zhezong suddenly died in his twenties , his younger brother Emperor Huizong of Song ( r . 1100 – 1125 ) succeeded him , and also supported the Reformers at court . Huizong banned the writing of Sima Guang and his lackeys while elevating Wang Anshi to near revered status , having a statue of Wang erected in a Confucian temple alongside a statue of Mencius . To further this image of Wang as a great and honorable statesman , printed and painted pictures of him were circulated throughout the country . Yet this cycle of revenge and partisanship continued after Zhezong and Huizong , as Reformers and Conservatives continued their infighting . Huizong 's successor , Emperor Gaozong of Song , abolished once more the New Policies , and favored ministers of the Conservative faction at court . 
 = = Jurchen invasions and the transition to Southern Song = = 
 = = = Jingkang Incident = = = 
 Before the arrival of the Jurchens the Song dynasty was for centuries engaged in a stand @-@ off against the Western Xia and the Khitan Liao dynasty . This balance was disrupted when the Song dynasty developed a military alliance with the Jurchens for the purpose of annihilating the Liao . This balance of power disrupted , the Jurchens then turned on the Song , resulting in the fall of the Northern Song and the subsequent establishment of the Southern Song . 
 During the reign of Huizong , the Jurchen tribe to the north ( once subordinates to the Liao ) , revolted against their Khitan masters . The Jurchen community already had a reputation of great economic clout in their own region of the Liao and <unk> rivers . They were positioned in an ideal location for horse raising , and were known to muster ten thousand horses a year to sell annually to the Khitans of the Liao dynasty . They even had a martial history of being pirates , in the 1019 Toi invasion of the Heian Japanese islands in modern @-@ day Iki Province , Tsushima Province , and Hakata Bay . From the Jurchen Wanyan clan , a prominent leader Wanyan Aguda ( 1068 – 1123 ) challenged Liao authority , establishing their own Jin ( or ' Golden ' ) dynasty in 1115 . The Song government took notice of the political dissidence of the Jurchens in Liao 's territory , as Council of State Tong Guan ( 1054 – 1126 ) persuaded the emperor to ally with the Jurchens against the Liao . The two nations secretly forged the Alliance on the Sea , so @-@ named because it was negotiated by envoys who crossed the Bohai Sea , and agreed to jointly invade the Liao , and if successful , divide up Liao territory with the Sixteen Prefectures given to the Song . 
 In 1121 @-@ 23 , Song forces fared badly against the Liao , but the Jin succeeded in driving the Liao to Central Asia . Through the campaign , the Jurchens discovered weaknesses about the Song military based in the north ( as the Chinese for so long had been sending tribute to the Liao instead of actually fighting them ) . Song forces had failed to make a joint attack in a siege with the Jurchens , who viewed the Song generals as incompetent . Banking on the possibility that the Song were weak enough to be destroyed , the Jurchens made a sudden and unprovoked attack against the Song in the north . Soon enough , even the capital at Kaifeng was under siege by Jin forces , only staved off when an enormous bribe was handed over to them . There was also an effective use of Song Chinese war machines in the defense of Kaifeng in 1126 , as it was recorded that 500 catapults hurling debris were used . During the siege of Taiyuan , the Jin employed 30 catapults and over fifty carts protected by <unk> and sheets of iron plating so that Jin troops could be ferried to the walls safely to fill in Taiyuan city 's defensive moat . The eunuch general Tong Guan , who had initially urged for an alliance with the Jurchens , was blamed for causing the war . He was eventually executed by Emperor Qinzong of Song ( r . 1126 – 1127 ) after Huizong abdicated the throne to him . 
 However , the Jin returned soon after with enough siege machinery to scale Kaifeng 's layer of walls defended by 48 @,@ 000 Song troops . The Jin used siege towers taller than Kaifeng 's walls in order to lob incendiary bombs into the city . The besieged city was captured by the Jurchens in less than two months . Three thousand members of the Emperor 's court were taken as captives , including Huizong and many of his relatives , craftsmen , engineers , goldsmiths , silversmiths , blacksmiths , weavers and tailors , Daoist priests , and female entertainers to label some . The mechanical clock tower designed by Su Song and erected in 1094 was also disassembled and its components carted back north , along with many clock @-@ making millwrights and maintenance engineers that would cause a setback in technical advances for the Song court . According to the contemporary Xia Shaozeng , other war booty included 20 @,@ 000 fire arrows that were handed over to the Jurchens upon taking the city . 
 After capturing Kaifeng , the Jurchens went on to conquer the rest of northern China , while the Song Chinese court fled south . They took up temporary residence at Nanjing , where a surviving prince was named Emperor Gaozong of Song in 1127 . Jin forces halted at the Yangzi River , but staged continual raids south of the river until a later boundary was fixed at the Huai River further north . With the border fixed at the Huai , the Song government would promote an immigration policy of repopulating and resettling territories north of the Yangzi River , since vast tracts of vacant land between the Yangzi and Huai were open for landless peasants found in Jiangsu , Zhejiang , Jiangxi , and Fujian provinces of the south . 
 = = = A new capital and peace treaty = = = 
 In 1129 , Emperor Gaozong designated the site at Hangzhou ( known then as Lin 'an ) to be the temporary settlement of the court , but it was not until 1132 that it was declared the new Song capital . Hangzhou and Nanjing were devastated by the Jin raids ; both cities were heavily repopulated with northern refugees who outnumbered the remaining original inhabitants . Hangzhou was chosen not only for its natural scenic beauty , but for the surrounding topographic barriers of lakes and muddy rice @-@ fields that gave it defensive potential against northern armies comprising mostly cavalry . Yet it was viewed by the court as only a temporary capital while the Song emperors planned to retake Kaifeng . However , the rapid growth of the city from the 12th century to the 13th necessitated long @-@ term goals of residency . In 1133 the modest palatial residence of the imperial family was improved upon from a simple provincial lodging to one that at least accommodated strolls with new covered alleyways to deflect the rain . In 1148 the walls of the small palace compound were finally extended to the southeast , yet this was another marginal improvement . 
 The new triangular arrangement between the Southern Song , Jin , and Western Xia continued the age of division and conflict in China . The region of Huainan ( between the Yangzi and Huai rivers ) became a new borderland and battleground between Song and Jin from 1128 to 1141 , displacing hundreds of thousands of families who had lived there for generations . The Southern Song deployed several military commanders , among them Yue Fei and Han Shizhong , to resist the Jin as well as recapture territory , which proved successful at times . Yue Fei in particular had been preparing to recapture Kaifeng ( or Bianjing as the city was known during the Song period ) , the former capital of the Song dynasty and the then southern capital of the Jin , after a streak of uninterrupted military victories . 
 However , the possible defeat of the Jurchens threatened the power of the new emperor of the Southern Song , Gaozong and his premier Qin Hui . The reason for this was that Qinzong , the last emperor of the Northern Song was living in Jin @-@ imposed exile in Manchuria and had a good chance of being recalled to the throne should the Jin dynasty be destroyed . Although Yue Fei had penetrated into enemy territory as far as Luoyang , he was ordered to head back to the capital and halt his campaign . Emperor Gaozong signed the Treaty of Shaoxing in 1141 that fixed the borders at the Huai River , as well as conceded territory regained through the efforts of Yue Fei , while Yue was killed during imprisonment . As part of the treaty , the Song were also forced to pay tribute to the Jin , much as it had to the Liao . With the treaty of Shaoxing , hostilities ceased between the Jin and Song dynasties for the next two decades . In the meantime , Emperor Gaozong negotiated with the Jin over his mother 's ransom while he commissioned a symbolic art project about her , the Eighteen Songs of a Nomad Flute , originally based upon the life of Cai Wenji ( b . 177 ) . Gaozong 's mother was eventually released and brought south , but Qinzong was never freed from his confinement in the north . 
 Decades after Yue 's death , the later Emperor Xiaozong of Song honored Yue Fei as a national hero in 1162 , providing him proper burial and memorial of a shrine . As a means to shame those who had pressed for his execution ( Qin Hui and his wife ) , iron statues of them were crafted to kneel before the tomb of Yue Fei , located at the West Lake in Hangzhou . 
 = = China 's first standing navy = = 
 As the once great Indian Ocean maritime power of the Chola dynasty in medieval India had waned and declined , Chinese sailors and seafarers began to increase their own maritime activity in South East Asia and into the Indian Ocean . Even during the earlier Northern Song period , when it was written in Tamil inscriptions under the reign of Rajendra Chola I that Srivijaya had been completely taken in 1025 by Chola 's naval strength , the succeeding king of Srivijaya managed to send tribute to the Chinese Northern Song court in 1028 . Much later , in 1077 , the Indian Chola ruler Kulothunga Chola I ( who the Chinese called Ti @-@ <unk> @-@ kia @-@ lo ) sent a trade embassy to the court of Emperor Shenzong of Song , and made lucrative profits in selling goods to China . There were other tributary payers from other regions of the world as well . The Fatimid @-@ era Egyptian sea captain <unk> traveled to a Buddhist site of pilgrimage in Shandong in 1008 , where he presented the Chinese Emperor Zhenzong of Song with gifts from his ruling Imam Al @-@ Hakim bi @-@ Amr Allah , establishing diplomatic relations between Egypt and China that had been lost during the collapse of the Tang dynasty in 907 ( while the Fatimid state was established three years later in 910 ) . During the Northern Song , Quanzhou was already a bustling port of call visited by a plethora of different foreigners , from Muslim Arabs , Persians , Egyptians , Hindu Indians , Middle @-@ Eastern Jews , Nestorian Christians from the Near East , etc . Muslims from foreign nations dominated the import and export industry ( see Islam during the Song dynasty ) . To regulate this enormous commercial center , in 1087 the Northern Song government established an office in Quanzhou for the sole purpose of handling maritime affairs and commercial transactions . In this multicultural environment there were many opportunities for subjects in the empire of foreign descent , such as the ( Arab or Persian ) Muslim Pu Shougeng , the Commissioner of Merchant Shipping for Quanzhou between 1250 and 1275 . Pu Shougeng had gained his reputable position by helping the Chinese destroy pirate forces that plagued the area , and so was lavished with gifts and appraisal from Chinese merchants and officials . Quanzhou soon rivaled Guangzhou ( the greatest maritime port of the earlier Tang dynasty ) as a major trading center during the late Northern Song . However , Guangzhou had not fully lost its importance . The medieval Arab maritime captain Abu Himyarite from Yemen toured Guangzhou in 993 , and was an avid visitor to China . There were other notable international seaports in China during the Song period as well , including Xiamen ( or Amoy ) . 
 When the Song capital was removed far south to Hangzhou , massive numbers of people came from the north . Unlike the flat plains of the north , the mountainous terrain riddled with lakes and rivers in southern China is largely a hindrance and inhospitable to widespread agriculture . Therefore , the Southern Song took on a unique maritime presence that was largely unseen in earlier dynasties , grown out of the need to secure importation of foreign resources . Commercial cities ( located along the coast and by internal rivers ) , backed by patronage of the state , dramatically increased shipbuilding activity ( funding harbor improvements , warehouse construction , and navigation beacons ) . Navigation at sea was made easier by the invention of the compass and Shen Kuo 's treatise of the 11th century on the concept of true north ( with magnetic declination towards the North Pole ) . With military defense and economic policy in mind , the Southern Song established China 's first standing navy . China had a long naval history before that point ( example , Battle of Chibi in 208 ) , and even during the Northern Song era there were concerns with naval matters , as seen in examples such as the Chinese official Huang Huaixin of the Xining Reign ( 1068 – 1077 ) outlining a plan of employing a drydock for repair of ' imperial dragon boats ' ( see Science and technology of the Song dynasty ) . Already during the Northern Song , the Chinese had established fortified trade bases in the Philippines , a noted interest of the court to expand China 's military power and economic influence abroad . Provincial armies in the Northern Song era also maintained naval river units . However , it was the Southern Song court that was the first to create a large , permanent standing naval institution for China in 1132 . The new headquarters of the Southern Song Chinese admiralty was based at Dinghai , the office labeled as the <unk> Zhizhi <unk> ( Imperial Commissariat for the Control and Organization of Coastal Areas ) . Even as far back as 1129 officials proposed ambitious plans to conquer Korea with a new navy and use Korea as a base for launching invasions into Jin territory , but this scheme was never achieved and was of secondary importance to maintaining defense along the fluctuating border with Jin . 
 Capturing the essence of the day , the Song era writer Zhang Yi once wrote in 1131 that China must regard the Sea and the River as her Great Wall , and substitute warships for watchtowers . Indeed , the court administration at Hangzhou lived up to this ideal , and were successful for a time in employing their navy to defend their interests against an often hostile neighbor to the north . In his Science and Civilization in China series , Joseph Needham writes : 
 From a total of 11 squadrons and 3 @,@ 000 men [ the Song navy ] rose in one century to 20 squadrons totalling 52 @,@ 000 men , with its main base near Shanghai . The regular striking force could be supported at need by substantial merchantmen ; thus in the campaign of 1161 some 340 ships of this kind participated in the battles on the Yangtze . The age was one of continual innovation ; in 1129 trebuchets throwing gunpowder bombs were decreed standard equipment on all warships , between 1132 and 1183 a great number of treadmill @-@ operated paddle @-@ wheel craft , large and small , were built , including stern @-@ wheelers and ships with as many as 11 paddle @-@ wheels a side ( the invention of the remarkable engineer Kao <unk> ) , and in 1203 some of these were armored with iron plates ( to the design of another outstanding shipwright <unk> Shih @-@ Fu ) ... In sum , the navy of the Southern Sung held off the [ Jurchen Jin ] and then the Mongols for nearly two centuries , gaining complete control of the East China Sea . 
 During the reign of Emperor Xiaozong of Song , the Chinese increased the number of trade missions that would dock at ports throughout the Indian Ocean , where Arab and Hindu influence was once predominant . The Chinese sailed regularly to Korea and Japan in the Far East , westwards towards India and Sri Lanka , and into the Persian Gulf , and the Red Sea . The Chinese were keen to import goods such as rare woods , precious metals , gems , spices , and ivory , while exporting goods such as silk , ceramics , lacquer @-@ ware , copper cash , dyes , and even books . In 1178 , the Guangzhou customs officer Zhou Qufei wrote of an island far west in the Indian Ocean ( possibly Madagascar ) , from where people with skin " as black as lacquer " and with frizzy hair were captured and purchased as slaves by Arab merchants . As an important maritime trader , China appeared also on geographical maps of the Islamic world . In 1154 the Moroccan geographer Al @-@ Idrisi published his Geography , where he described the Chinese seagoing vessels as having aboard goods such as iron , swords , leather , silk , velvet , along with textiles from Aden ( modern @-@ day Yemen ) , the Indus River region , and Euphrates River region ( modern @-@ day Iraq ) . He also commended the silk manufactured at Quanzhou as being unparalleled in the world for its quality , while the Chinese capital at Hangzhou was best known throughout the Islamic world for being a major producer of glass wares . By at least the 13th century , the Chinese were even familiar with the story of the ancient Lighthouse of Alexandria since it is described at length by Zhao <unk> , a Southern Song customs inspector of Quanzhou . 
 = = Defeat of Jin invasion , 1161 = = 
 In 1153 the Jin emperor Wanyan Liang moved the empire 's capital from Huining Prefecture in northern Manchuria ( south of present @-@ day Harbin ) to Zhongdu ( now Beijing ) . Four years later in 1157 he razed Beijing , including the nobles ’ residences , and moved the Jin 's southern capital from Beijing to Kaifeng . It was here at the former seat of the Song dynasty that he began a large project of reconstruction ( since the siege against it in 1127 ) . For much of his reign there was peace between Jin and Song , while both states upheld an uninterrupted flow of commercial trade between each other . While amassing tribute from the Southern Song , the Jin dynasty also imported large amounts of tea , rice , sugar , and books from the Southern Song . However , Wanyan Liang reopened the Jin dynasty 's armed conflict with the Song by the 1160s . 
 Wanyan Liang established a military campaign against the Southern Song in 1161 , with 70 @,@ 000 naval troops aboard 600 warships facing a smaller Song fleet of only 120 warships and 3 @,@ 000 men . At the Battle of Tangdao and the Battle of Caishi along the Yangtze River , Jin forces were defeated by the Southern Song navy . In these battles , the Jin navy was wiped out by the much smaller Song fleet because of their use of fast paddle @-@ wheel crafts and gunpowder bombs launched from trebuchet catapults ( since explosive grenades and bombs had been known in China since the 10th century ) . Meanwhile , two simultaneous rebellions of Jurchen nobles , led by soon @-@ to @-@ be crowned Jin emperor Wanyan Yong and Khitan tribesman , erupted in Manchuria . This forced the reluctant Jin court to withdraw its troops from southern China to quell these uprisings . In the end , Wanyan Liang failed in taking the Southern Song and was assassinated by his own generals in December 1161 . The Khitan uprising was not suppressed until 1164 , while the Treaty of <unk> ( <unk> ) was signed in 1165 between Song and Jin , reestablishing the 1142 border line and ushering in four decades of peace between the two . 
 = = Rise of the Mongols = = 
 In the years 1205 and 1209 the Jin state was under raid attacks by Mongols from the north , and in 1211 the major campaign led by Genghis Khan was launched . His army consisted of fifty thousand bowmen , while his three sons led armies of similar size . Patricia Ebrey writes that at this point the Mongol population could not have been greater than 1 @.@ 5 million , yet they boosted their numbers by employing Khitans and Han Chinese " who felt no great loyalty to their Jurchen lords . " After a Jurchen general murdered the Jin emperor Wanyan Yongji in 1213 and placed Emperor Xuanzong on the throne , a peace settlement was negotiated between Jin and the Mongol forces in 1214 , as Genghis made the Jin a vassal state of the Mongol Empire . However , when the Jin court moved from Beijing to Kaifeng , Genghis saw this move as a revolt , and moved upon the old Jin capital at Beijing in 1215 , sacking and burning it . Although the now small Jin state attempted to defend against the Mongols and even fought battles with the Song in 1216 and 1223 , the Jin were attacked by the Mongols again in 1229 with the ascension of Ögedei Khan . According to the account of 1232 , written by the Jin commander <unk> Hexi , the Jurchens led a valiant effort against the Mongols , whom they frightened and demoralized in the siege of the capital by the use of ' thunder @-@ crash @-@ bombs ' and fire lance flamethrowers . However , the capital at Kaifeng was captured by siege in 1233 , and by 1234 the Jin dynasty finally fell in defeat to the Mongols after the capture of Caizhou . 
 The Western Xia met a similar fate , becoming an unreliable vassal to the Mongols by seeking to secure alliances with Jin and Song . Genghis Khan had died in 1227 during the 5 @-@ month siege of their capital city , and being held somewhat responsible for this , the last Xia ruler was hacked to death when he was persuaded to exit the gates of his city with a small entourage . 
 = = Mongol invasion and end of the Song dynasty = = 
 Following the death of Gaozong and the emergence of the Mongols , the Song dynasty formed a military alliance with the Mongols in the hope of finally defeating the Jin dynasty . Several tens of thousands of carts full of grain were sent to the Mongol army during the siege . Following the destruction of the Jurchens in 1234 , the Southern Song generals broke the alliance , proceeding to recapture the three historical capitals of Kaifeng , Luoyang and Chang 'an . However , the cities , ravaged by years of warfare , lacked economic capacity and yielded little defensibility . This breaking of alliance meant open warfare between the Mongols and the Song Chinese . <unk> Khan 's forces conquered fifty @-@ four out of Sichuan 's fifty @-@ eight total districts by 1236 , while ordering the slaughter of over a million people that inhabited the city of Chengdu , which was taken by the Mongols with ease . 
 = = = Möngke 's campaign = = = 
 The Mongols eventually gained the upper hand under Möngke Khan , famed for his battles in Russia and Hungary in Eastern Europe , and ushered in the final destruction of the ruling Ch 'oe family of Korea in 1258 . In 1252 Möngke commissioned his younger brother Kublai to conquer the Kingdom of Dali in the southwest ( modern Yunnan province ) , which was a successful campaign from the summer of 1253 to early 1254 . Möngke also sent a military campaign into northern Vietnam ( which was a failure ) . Möngke sent his renowned general and brother Hulagu east to face Syria and Egypt , after he had sacked and razed medieval Baghdad to the ground in 1258 during the sack of Baghdad , bringing an end to the Abbasid Caliphate and the Islamic Golden Age . Meanwhile , Möngke infiltrated Song territory further , until he died while battling the Song Chinese at <unk> Fortress , Chongqing on August 11 , 1259 . There are several different claims as to how he died ; the causes of death include either an arrow wound from a Chinese archer during the siege , dysentery , or cholera epidemic . Whatever the cause , his death halted the invasion of the Southern Song , and sparked a succession crisis that would ultimately favor Kublai Khan as the new <unk> of the Mongols . Möngke 's death in battle also led to the recall of the main Mongol armies led by Hulagu campaigning in the Middle East . Hulagu had to travel back to Mongolia in order to partake in the traditional tribal meeting of the <unk> to appoint a new successor of the Mongol Khanate . In Hulagu 's absence , the emboldened Mamluks of Egypt were ready to face the Mongols . Mongol forces under Christian Kitbuqa 's command were defeated in a decisive blow at Ain Jalut . This marked the extent of Mongol conquests west , but in the east , the Song dynasty had to be dealt with . 
 = = = A fluctuating border = = = 
 Although Möngke 's forces stalled the war effort immediately after his death , his younger brother Kublai continued to fight the Southern Song along the Yangzi River for the next two months into the autumn of 1259 . Kublai made a daring advance across the river during a storm , and assaulted the Southern Song troops on the other side . Both sides suffered considerable casualties , but Kublai 's troops were victorious and gained a foothold south of the Yangzi . Kublai made preparations to take the heavily fortified city of Ezhou . Meanwhile , the Song chancellor Jia Sidao dispatched General Lü Wende to lead the reinforcements in the defense of Ezhou , and on October 5 Lü slipped past Kublai 's ill @-@ prepared forces and entered the city . Jia Sidao then sent his general and emissary Song Jing to negotiate a tributary settlement with Kublai . He offered Kublai annual tribute of silver like in the earlier treaty with the Khitans , in return for the territories south of the Yangzi that had been taken by the Mongols . Kublai rejected the proposal since he was already in a favorable strategic position on the other side of the Yangzi . However , Kublai had to suspend the war and travel north with the majority of his forces due to the Toluid Civil War . His rival brother Ariq Böke led a sudden movement of troops towards Kublai 's home base of Xanadu . 
 Kublai 's absence from the war front was seen by Chancellor Jia Sidao as an opportune moment , so he ordered to resume armed conflict . The Song army routed the small armed detachment that Kublai had stationed south of the Yangzi , and the Song regained its lost territory . With his ally Hulagu busy fighting the Golden Horde and his own forces needed in the north against the rival Khagan claimant Ariq Böke , Kublai was unable to focus on hostilities in the south . On May 21 , 1260 , Kublai sent his envoy Hao Jing and two other advisors to negotiate with the Southern Song . Upon their arrival and attempts to solve the conflict through diplomatic means , Jia Sidao ordered Kublai 's embassy to be detained . Although Kublai would not forget this slight of imprisoning his ambassadors , he nonetheless had to focus on more pressing affairs with the threat of his brother and rival Khan . From 1260 to 1262 the Song forces raided Kublai 's southern border which forced Kublai to retaliate with some minor incursions until 1264 , when his brother finally surrendered and ended the civil war . In 1265 the first major battle in five years erupted in Sichuan province , where Kublai gained a preliminary victory and considerable war booty of 146 Song naval ships . 
 = = = Growing discontent = = = 
 While Kublai attended to other matters in the north , the Song court was mobilizing its populace for war and all available resources that could be rendered and drained into the war effort . In the mid 13th century , the Song government led by Jia Sidao began confiscating portions of estates owned by the rich in order to raise revenues in a land nationalization scheme . This had the negative effect of alienating the wealthy landowners and hastening the collapse of the empire , as wealthy landlords and merchants favored what they deemed the inevitable Mongol conquest and rule than the other alternative of paying higher taxes for continual , exhaustive warfare . 
 There was also mounting political opposition against Chancellor Jia Sidao . Jia had purged several dissident officials who were opposed to his reforms aimed at limiting official corruption and personal profiteering . When he replaced some of these officials with his own cronies , however , political conditions were ripe for a schism at court and within the gentry class that would be favorable to a strong , unified force led by Kublai . Kublai used various ploys and gestures in order to entice defectors from the Southern Song to his side . Kublai Khan established Dadu ( Beijing ) as his new capital in 1264 , catering to the likes of the Chinese with his advisor Liu <unk> and the naming of his dynasty with the Chinese word for " primal " ( " Yuan " ) . He made it a policy to grant land , clothing , and oxen to Song Chinese who defected to his side . Kublai Khan chose the moral high ground of releasing Song captives and prisoners while Jia Sidao refused to release Kublai 's emissary Hao Jing . In 1261 Kublai personally released seventy @-@ five Song merchants captured at the border ; in 1263 he released fifty @-@ seven merchants ; in 1269 he released forty @-@ five merchants . In 1264 he publicly reprimanded his own officers for executing two Song generals without trial or investigation . With these acts his reputation and legitimacy in the eyes of the Chinese were greatly enhanced . 
 = = = Battle of Xiangyang = = = 
 The siege of the city Xiangyang was a long , drawn out conflict from 1268 to 1273 . Xiangyang and the adjacent town of <unk> were located on the opposite bank of the Han River and were the last fortified obstacles in Kublai 's way towards the rich Yangzi River basin . Kublai made an attempt to starve the city of its supply lines by gaining naval supremacy along the Han River in a gigantic blockade . It was the Song defector Liu Zheng who was the main proponent in advising Kublai Khan to expand the Yuan 's naval strength , which was a great factor in their success . An international force — composed of Chinese , Jurchens , Koreans , Mongols , Uyghur Turks , and Middle Eastern Muslims — contributed to Kublai 's siege effort in crafting ships and artillery . On several occasions — August 1269 , March 1270 , August 1271 , and September 1272 — the Southern Song attempted to break the Yuan blockade with its own navy , yet each attempt was a costly failure of thousands of men and hundreds of ships . After the siege , in the summer of 1273 , Kublai appointed the Chinese general Shi <unk> and Turkic general Bayan as the commander @-@ in @-@ chief of the armed forces . However , Shi <unk> died in 1275 ; Bayan was then granted a force of 200 @,@ 000 ( composed mostly of Han Chinese ) to assault Song . 
 = = = Final resistance = = = 
 In March 1275 the forces of Bayan faced the army of Chancellor Jia Sidao , which was 130 @,@ 000 strong ; the end result was a decisive victory for Bayan , and Jia was forced to retreat after many deserted him . This was the opportune moment for his political rivals to smite him . Jia was effectively stripped of rank , title , and office and banished to Fujian in exile from the court ; while en route to Fujian , he was killed by the same commander that was appointed to accompany him . After his death many of his supporters and opposing ministers submitted to Bayan . By 1276 the Yuan army had conquered nearly all of the Southern Song 's territory , including the capital at Hangzhou . 
 Meanwhile , the rebel remnants of the Song court fled to Fuzhou . Emperor Gong was left behind as the empress dowager submitted to Bayan , horrified by reports of the total slaughter of Changzhou . Before the capital was taken , Empress Dowager Xie ( 1208 – 1282 ) made attempts to negotiate with Bayan , promising annual tribute to the Yuan dynasty , but he rejected these proposals . After her attempts at diplomacy had failed , she handed over the Song dynasty 's imperial seal to Bayan , " an unambiguous symbol of capitulation . " With the submission of Emperor Gong , Bayan ordered that the Song imperial family should be respected , and forbade the pillaging of their imperial tombs or treasuries . Kublai granted the deposed emperor the title " Duke of Ying " , but he was eventually exiled to Tibet where he took up a monastic life in 1296 . 
 Any hope of resistance was centered on two young princes , Emperor Gong 's brothers . The older boy , Zhao Shi , who was nine years old , was declared emperor on June 14 , 1276 , in Fuzhou . The court sought refuge in Quanzhou , seeking an alliance with the Superintendent of Maritime Shipping , the Muslim Pu Shougeng . However , he secretly formed an alliance with Kublai , so the Song court was forced to flee in 1277 . The court then sought refuge in Silvermine Bay ( Mui Wo ) on Lantau Island . The older brother became ill and died on May 8 , 1278 at age ten , and was succeeded by his younger brother who became Emperor <unk> of Song , aged seven . The Sung Wong Toi monument in Kowloon commemorates his enthronement . On March 19 , 1279 the Song army was defeated in its last battle , the Battle of Yamen , fought against the Yuan army led by the Chinese general Zhang <unk> in the Pearl River Delta . Song Prime Minister Lu <unk> is said to have taken the boy emperor in his arms and jumped from his sinking ship into the sea , drowning both of them . 
 With the death of the last remaining emperor , Song China was eliminated , while Kublai Khan established the realm of the Yuan dynasty over China proper , Mongolia , Manchuria , Tibet , and Korea . For nearly a century to follow , the Chinese would live under a dynasty established by Mongols . However , a native Han Chinese dynasty would be established once more with the Ming dynasty in 1368 . 
 = = Historical literature = = 
 During the Song dynasty , the Zizhi Tongjian ( Chinese : <unk> / <unk> ; Wade – Giles : Tzu @-@ chih t 'ung @-@ chien ; literally " Comprehensive Mirror for / to Aid in Government " ) was an enormous work of Chinese historiography , a written approach to a universal history of China , compiled in the 11th century . The work was first ordered to be compiled by Emperor Yingzong of Song in 1065 , the team of scholars headed by Sima Guang , who presented the completed work to Emperor Shenzong of Song in 1084 . Its total length was 294 volumes containing roughly 3 million Chinese characters . The Zizhi Tongjian covers the people , places , and events of Chinese history from the beginning of the Warring States in 403 BC until the beginning of the Song dynasty in 959 . Its size , brevity , and scope has often been compared to the groundbreaking work of Chinese historiography compiled by the ancient historian Sima Qian ( 145 BC – 90 BC ) , known as the Shiji . This historical work was later compiled and condensed into fifty nine different books by the Neo @-@ Confucian philosopher Zhu Xi in 1189 , yet his pupils had to complete the work shortly after his death in 1200 . During the Manchu Qing dynasty , the book was reprinted in 1708 , while the European Jesuit Father Joseph Anne Maria de <unk> de <unk> ( 1679 – 1748 ) translated it shortly after in 1737 . It was later edited and published by the Jesuit Abbé , Jean Baptiste Gabriel Alexandre <unk> ( 1743 – 1823 ) , in part with Le Roux des <unk> , where a thirteenth volume and a title page were added . It was also translated and published by the Jesuit astronomer Antoine <unk> in 1759 , whose pupils founded a Russian school of <unk> . 
 Another historical source was the enormous encyclopedia Prime Tortoise of the Record Bureau published by 1013 , one of the Four Great Books of Song . Divided into 1000 volumes of 9 @.@ 4 million written Chinese characters , this book provided important information on political essays of the period , extensive autobiographies on rulers and various subjects , as well as a multitude of memorials and decrees brought forth to the imperial court . However , the official history of the Song dynasty was the Song Shi , compiled in 1345 during the Yuan dynasty . The recorded history of the Jurchen Jin dynasty , the Jin Shi , was compiled in the same year . This historical book is one of the classic Twenty @-@ Four Histories of China . 
 = Sørkjosen Airport = 
 Sørkjosen Airport ( Norwegian : Sørkjosen lufthavn ; IATA : <unk> , ICAO : <unk> ) is a regional airport located at Sørkjosen in Nordreisa , Norway , 4 @.@ 5 kilometres ( 2 @.@ 8 mi ) from the municipal center of <unk> . Owned and operated by the state @-@ owned Avinor , it handled 15 @,@ 198 passengers in 2014 . The airport has a 880 @-@ meter ( 2 @,@ 890 ft ) runway and is served by Widerøe , which operates regional routes using the Dash 8 @-@ 100 to Tromsø and communities in Finnmark on public service obligation contracts . The airport opened in 1974 and was originally served using de Havilland Canada Twin Otter aircraft . Dash 8s were introduced in 1995 and two years later ownership was transferred from Nordreisa Municipality to the state . 
 = = History = = 
 Sørkjosen was launched as part of a national network of regional short take @-@ off and landing airport which was proposed in the mid @-@ 1960s . The final decision to build the airport was taken by Parliament in 1972 . Both Widerøe and Norving applied to operate the subsidized regional routes in Finnmark , which included the route to Sørkjosen . Widerøe was awarded the contract in 1973 . Sørkjosen Airport opened on 1 August 1974 , the same day as four regional airports in Finnmark . 
 A new fire station , serving both the airport and the municipality , was completed in 1992 , costing 3 @.@ 2 million Norwegian krone . A five @-@ week strike by three employees took place in 1992 , where they demanded a collective agreement . The strike stopped all traffic at the airport , but the employees never received their demands . The Civil Aviation Administration ( later renamed Avinor ) recommended in 1994 that Sørkjosen and eight other airports be considered closed , as they had high costs and low patronage . Widerøe served the airport using Twin Otters until 1995 , when they were replaced by the Dash 8 . The airport received subsidies of 3 @.@ 9 million Norwegian krone ( NOK ) in 1996 , which allowed the airport to operate with a profit of NOK 1 @.@ 4 million . The state and the Civil Aviation Administration took over ownership and operations of the airport from 1 January 1997 , in exchange for NOK 3 @.@ 9 million being paid to Nordreisa Municipality . Ground handling remained a municipal responsibility . Flights to Sørkjosen have been subject to public service obligations since 1 April 1997 . 
 In the mid @-@ 1990s , Nordreisa Municipal Council attempted to change the airport 's name from Sørkjosen to Nordreisa . They argued that it was necessary to use the Nordreisa name to market the region as a tourist destination . The application was rejected by the Ministry of Transport and Communications , who stated that airports were required by regulation to be named after a settlement rather than a municipality . Airport security was introduced on 1 January 2005 . This required the terminal to be slightly rebuilt ; while it previously had a common departure and arrivals hall , it had to be separated into two areas . The municipality therefore decided to transfer the ownership of the ground handling service to the three employees . Avinor carried out a major upgrade to the runway safety area and landing lights in 2008 and 2009 . The investments cost NOK 40 million . The expansion of the safety area resulted in part of the lot of Birkelund Sawmill being expropriated . 
 = = Facilities = = 
 The airport has a 880 @-@ by @-@ 30 @-@ meter ( 2 @,@ 887 by 98 ft ) asphalt runway aligned 15 – 33 ( roughly north – south ) . The airport consists of a passenger terminal and an operations building . The terminal has a capacity of sixty passengers per hour and one airliner on the apron . Twenty people work at the airport , which is five minutes from <unk> . Free parking , taxis and car rental is available . 
 = = Airlines and destinations = = 
 Sørkjosen Airport is served by Widerøe with Dash 8 @-@ 100 aircraft connecting the community with Tromsø and airports in Finnmark . The routes are operated on public service obligation with the Ministry of Transport and Communications . The airport had 15 @,@ 198 passengers , 2 @,@ 343 aircraft movements and handled 0 tonnes of cargo in 2014 . Sørkjosen 's catchment area covers northern Troms and the airport is the only regional airport in the county . 
 = Tranmere Rovers F.C. = 
 Tranmere Rovers Football Club is a professional association football club founded in 1884 , and based in Birkenhead , Wirral , England . Originally known as Belmont Football Club , they adopted their current name in 1885 . They were a founder member of Division Three North in 1921 , and were a member of The Football League until 2015 , when they were relegated to the National League , the fifth tier of English football . 
 During the 1980s , they were beset by financial problems and , in 1987 , went into administration . However , this was a prelude to the most successful period in Tranmere 's history ; under manager John King , the team reached the play @-@ offs for promotion to the Premier League in three successive seasons . Under King 's successor , John Aldridge , Tranmere experienced a number of cup runs , most notably reaching the 2000 Football League Cup Final . Other cup runs include reaching FA Cup quarter @-@ finals in 2000 , 2001 and 2004 . 
 Tranmere 's regular kit is an all @-@ white strip with blue trim , their main colours since 1962 . The club moved to its current home , Prenton Park , in 1912 . In 1995 , the ground had a major redevelopment in response to the Taylor Report . It now seats 16 @,@ 567 in four stands : the Main Stand , the Kop , the Johnny King Stand and the Cowshed . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Formative years = = = 
 Tranmere Rovers were , initially , formed as Belmont Football Club when the football arms of two cricket clubs – Lyndhurst Wanderers and Belmont – came together in 1884 . On 15 November 1884 , they won their first game 4 – 0 against Brunswick Rovers . This was a friendly match , as there were no leagues until 1888 . Under the presidency of James <unk> , the team had a successful inaugural season , losing only one of their fifteen matches . An unrelated , disbanded side had played under the name " Tranmere Rovers Cricket Club ( Association football section ) " in 1881 – 82 . On 16 September 1885 , before their second season began , Belmont F.C. adopted this name Tranmere Rovers . 
 Tranmere played their first matches at Steeles Field in Birkenhead . In 1887 , they bought <unk> Field from Tranmere Rugby Club . In 1895 , their ground was renamed Prenton Park , although it was 25 years later that the team moved into the current stadium of the same name . Tranmere first wore a kit of blue shirts , white shorts and blue socks . In 1889 they adopted orange and maroon shirts , but in 1904 returned to wearing their original kit . 
 In 1886 , Tranmere entered their first competition : the Liverpool and District Challenge Cup ; in 1889 , they entered the West Lancashire League . They joined the Combination , a much stronger league , in 1897 , and won the championship in 1908 . In 1910 , continuing their movement through the leagues , they entered the Lancashire Combination and in 1912 they showed their ambition by moving to the present Prenton Park site , with an 800 @-@ seat stand . Tranmere won the Lancashire Combination Championship in 1914 and Stan Rowlands became the first Tranmere player to receive an international cap when he was selected to play for Wales . 
 Rovers continued to play throughout the First World War , although their players were criticised for avoiding military service , despite being employed in the local shipyards . 
 = = = Inter @-@ war years = = = 
 Following the expulsion of Leeds City Reserves in 1919 , Tranmere were able to enter the Central League . Their timing was excellent as the following season , four Central League clubs – including Tranmere – were invited to join the new Division Three North . On 27 August 1921 , as founder members of the division , they won their first Football League match 4 – 1 against Crewe Alexandra at Prenton Park . At this time the team were managed by Bert Cooke , who did so for 23 years in total , the club record for longest serving manager . 
 In 1924 , local youngster Dixie Dean made his debut aged 16 years 355 days . He played 30 games for Rovers , scoring 27 goals , before being transferred to Everton for £ 3 @,@ 000 . In the 1927 – 28 season , Dean scored a record 60 League goals for Everton . After Dean 's departure , a string of talented youngsters also left for Division One clubs , leading to Cooke 's reputation as a shrewd businessman . Among those sold was Pongo Waring who – having scored six goals in the 11 – 1 victory over Durham City – went to Aston Villa for £ 4 @,@ 700 . Waring retains the record of scoring most goals for Villa in a single season . 
 In 1934 , an FA Cup tie between Rovers and Liverpool was watched at Anfield by 61 @,@ 036 fans , then a record crowd for a game involving Rovers . One year later , Bunny Bell netted 57 goals during the 1933 – 34 season , and nine goals in the 13 – 4 Boxing Day 1935 victory over Oldham Athletic . As of 2011 , the aggregate of 17 goals in one game remains a league record . 
 During this same period , Tranmere made several appearances in the Welsh Cup , reaching the Final on two occasions . In 1934 , they lost 3 – 0 to Bristol City in a replay , after a 1 – 1 draw . The following season , they went one better by beating local rivals Chester 1 – 0 to win their first silverware since joining the Football League . 
 Rovers won their first championship in the Football League in 1938 with victory in Division Three North and , hence , promotion to Division Two for the first time . It is still Rovers ' only championship in the Football League . However , they were relegated the next season winning six matches – the record for the worst performance of any team in Division Two . 
 = = = Creation of the <unk> = = = 
 Prenton Park emerged from the Second World War largely unscathed . Tranmere rejoined the peacetime Football League in Division Three North and stayed there until the 1958 restructuring of the football league 's lower divisions . Manager Peter Farrell led Tranmere to finish 11th in the final season of the Northern Section , securing a place in the new national Division Three where they were , again , founder members . The final match against Wrexham , also fighting for a place in the higher league , attracted a crowd of 19 @,@ 615 , which remains the highest ever attendance at a Prenton Park league match . 
 In 1961 , Tranmere 's inspirational captain Harold Bell left the club . Bell had been picked in the first game after the Second World War in the 1946 season and did not miss a match until he was dropped on 30 August 1955 , a total of 459 consecutive appearances for a British team , a record which still holds in 2011 . Rovers certainly missed their captain , and were relegated to Division Four for the first time in 1961 . 
 The club brought in Dave Russell as manager who made some revolutionary changes . Tranmere had worn a kit of blue shirts , white shorts and blue socks since 1904 – the same colours as local rivals , Division One club Everton . Russell introduced an all @-@ white strip to set the teams apart ; these have been Tranmere 's usual colours since . Russell also developed a successful youth policy which included England international Roy McFarland among its graduates . Russell guided Rovers back to Division Three in 1967 , a year before a new 4 @,@ 000 @-@ seater main stand was opened , and Rovers reached the fifth round of the FA Cup for the first time . Three years later the club 's record attendance at Prenton Park was established as 24 @,@ 424 supporters witnessed Rovers draw 2 – 2 with Stoke City in the FA Cup . 
 In 1972 , Ron Yeats was installed as player / manager . He strengthened Tranmere 's connections with local rivals Liverpool by recruiting several former team @-@ mates such as Ian St John , and bringing in Bill Shankly in a consultancy role . This team saw one of the most memorable Rovers results of all time when , in a League Cup tie in 1973 , Tranmere beat First Division Arsenal 1 – 0 at their former Highbury home . However , Tranmere returned to the Fourth Division in 1975 . The following decade was among the bleakest times in the club 's history , with the team usually in the lower reaches of the Fourth Division , beset by financial problems , and attaining crowds of less than 2 @,@ 000 . 
 In 1979 , Steve <unk> joined Tranmere from Motherwell . He went on to make more than 500 league appearances for Rovers in a 17 @-@ year period . This spell saw Rovers rise up the league and make several appearances at Wembley . He remained with the club on the coaching staff before leaving in October 2000 to pursue business interests . 
 = = = 1980s = = = 
 Another relegation to Division Four in 1979 put the club in financial difficulties . Debts mounted throughout the 1980s , with insolvency forestalled through a series of friendly fixtures , contributions from fans and a £ 200 @,@ 000 loan from Wirral Council . This partnership proved an enduring one , as Wirral 's logo still appeared on the shirts until 2011 . Nonetheless , in 1987 the club went into administration , with local businessman Peter Johnson taking over control and ownership . This proved to be a turning point in Tranmere 's history , the club under his ownership enjoying by far the most successful period in its history , in which manager John King took the team from the bottom of Division Four to the brink of English football 's top league . King 's first task was to avoid the team finishing bottom of Division Four , which would have resulted in their relegation from the football league . Safety was guaranteed on the last game of the season with a 1 – 0 home win over Exeter City . 
 The first full season ( 1987 – 88 ) of King 's second managerial spell in charge saw Tranmere make their first appearance at Wembley stadium when a good mid @-@ season run of form saw them qualify for the Football League Centenary Tournament . Tranmere were the surprise stars of the event , beating Division One Wimbledon and Newcastle United before losing on penalties to eventual winners Nottingham Forest . The following season , King guided Tranmere to promotion as Division Four runners @-@ up . Their final game played to clinch promotion was against Crewe Alexandra , and was notable for the fact that both teams needed a point to gain promotion . The first half was contested as usual , but the second half , with the score at 1 – 1 , both teams failed to attack each other 's goals , leading to combined celebrations at the final whistle . 
 In the same season , they achieved a string of cup successes including beating Division One Middlesbrough . Promotion was almost achieved in their first season in Division Three , losing 2 – 0 in the Play @-@ off Final to Notts County . , a week after Tranmere 's 2 – 1 victory over Bristol Rovers at Wembley in the final of the Leyland DAF Trophy had clinched the club 's first trophy . A key element in Tranmere 's success during this period was the form of striker Ian Muir . He joined the club in 1985 and scored 180 goals in eleven seasons . He is the club 's record scorer , and the first inductee to their hall of fame . Fellow hall of fame member John Morrissey joined the club in 1986 . The winger spent 14 seasons at the club , making 585 appearances . 
 = = = Wembley years = = = 
 In the 1990 – 91 season , Tranmere won promotion to Division Two for the first time since the 1930s , with a 1 – 0 play @-@ off win over local rivals Bolton Wanderers . Once again , Rovers made an appearance in the Leyland DAF Trophy final , this time losing 3 – 2 to Birmingham City . This made the play @-@ off victory over Bolton Tranmere 's fourth appearance in a Wembley final in just over a year . 
 Former Liverpool player John Aldridge joined the club in summer of 1991 , signing from Spain 's Real Sociedad for £ 250 @,@ 000 ; he would remain on the club 's payroll for the next 10 years , scoring 170 times to put him behind only Ian Muir in the all @-@ time scoring charts . Aldridge also received 30 caps for the Republic of Ireland , and was the first Tranmere player to score at a World Cup . In 1993 , Scotland international Pat Nevin joined the team , forming a four @-@ man attack alongside Aldridge , Malkin and Morrissey . Tranmere reached the play @-@ offs in three successive seasons missing out on promotion to the newly formed Premier League through defeat to Swindon Town in 1993 , Leicester City in 1994 , and Reading in 1995 . 1994 also saw Tranmere progress to the League Cup semi @-@ final , where they faced Aston Villa over two legs . The home leg was won 3 – 1 by Tranmere , with Villa scoring their only goal in the 94th minute . The away leg was 2 – 1 to Villa until the 88th minute with Villa finally winning 3 – 1 , so the match went to extra time and penalties . Tranmere went 3 – 1 up in the shoot out , but eventually lost 4 – 3 . A reconstructed Prenton Park was opened in March 1995 , with the all seater stadium now holding just under 17 @,@ 000 supporters . One year later , John Aldridge was appointed player / manager and held that position for five years ; he retired from playing in 1999 . 
 = = = 2000 and beyond = = = 
 In the 1999 – 2000 season , despite severe financial constraints , victories over a succession of Premiership sides led not only to a place in the sixth round of the FA Cup but a place in the 2000 Football League Cup Final against Leicester City – the first time Rovers had ever reached a major final . Matt Elliott scored Leicester 's opening goal , before Tranmere 's Clint Hill was sent off for a second bookable offence . Despite being reduced to ten men , David Kelly equalised ; but Elliot soon netted Leicester 's second goal and Tranmere lost the match 2 – 1 . It was the last League Cup game to be played at the original Wembley stadium . 
 In 2000 , the all @-@ white kit was reintroduced and is still used in 2014 . That season they enjoyed yet another run in Cup competitions beating local Premier League rivals Everton 3 – 0 at Goodison Park , then Southampton 4 – 3 ( after being 0 – 3 down ) , before finally bowing out to Liverpool . They nevertheless struggled in League matches ; Aldridge quit before Tranmere 's relegation to Division Two ended a spell of ten years in Division One . 
 Brian Little was appointed as manager in 2003 . He took Rovers to a play @-@ off semi final in 2004 – 05 and a best ever 6th round replay in the 2004 FA Cup where they lost to eventual finalists , Millwall . At the end of the 2005 – 06 season , Little left the club and was replaced by former player Ronnie Moore . In Moore 's three seasons in charge , the club finished 9th , 11th and 7th , just missing out the play @-@ offs in the final season . Despite this , he was sacked in 2009 and replaced by former England winger John Barnes , whose only previous domestic managerial experience was with Celtic 10 years earlier . It was whilst Barnes was manager that long serving Kitman , Mark Trevor , ended his 12 @-@ year ' Labour of Love ' washing the kit of his local team . Having been at the club since 1997 , he washed his last kit in August 2009 ready for the home game with Charlton Athletic . Barnes ' reign lasted considerably less , it was a mere five months before long @-@ serving club physiotherapist Les Parry was given temporary charge . Rovers finished the season in 19th place in League One , avoiding relegation on the final day of the season with a 3 – 0 victory at Stockport County . In June 2010 , Parry was given the manager 's job on a permanent basis . He was sacked on 4 March 2012 , after a 1 – 0 defeat by Chesterfield left them only one point above the relegation zone , and replaced by Ronnie Moore for the remainder of the season . Moore won six of his thirteen games in charge at the end of the season , guiding Tranmere to a comfortable mid @-@ table position , as they finished the season in the top half for the first time in several years . Moore then signed a new one @-@ year deal with Tranmere , keeping him at the club until the end of the 2012 – 13 season . 
 Towards the end of the 2013 – 14 season , Moore admitted breaking the Football Association 's betting rules , and was sacked by Tranmere when the club were just outside the relegation zone . Assistant John McMahon took over as caretaker manager , but Tranmere were relegated to League Two on the final game of the season . Rob Edwards was subsequently appointed as new manager . 
 On 11 August 2014 , it was announced that former player and Football Association chief executive Mark Palios and his wife Nicola were taking a controlling interest in the club from outgoing chairman Peter Johnson . Mark Palios would become Executive Chairman of the club , with Johnson becoming Honorary President . 
 After a poor start to the season , the home loss to Plymouth Argyle on 11 October 2014 saw Tranmere in last place in the Football League for the first time since 27 August 1987 after they had lost their first two matches of that season . Edwards was sacked as manager on 13 October . Mickey Adams took over a week later , with the aim of saving the club from relegation to the Conference . However , on 25 April 2015 Tranmere were relegated from the Football League after another defeat to Plymouth Argyle in the reverse fixture , ending their 94 @-@ year stay in the leagues . Gary Brabin was appointed as manager on 5 May 2015 . 
 = = Colours and crest = = 
 Belmont F.C. , the forerunners of today 's Rovers , wore blue shirts and white shorts , as did the early Rovers , until a radical change in 1889 , when a combination of maroon and orange shirts and navy blue shorts was introduced to " dazzle " their opponents in the West Lancashire League . These were abandoned in 1904 in favour of the earlier blue and white colours which have , in some form or other , remained until the present day . In 1962 , Dave Russell introduced a white strip with blue trim , saying " Tranmere Rovers should have a specific identity of its own , so on Merseyside there 's now Liverpool 's Red , Everton 's blue and Tranmere 's white " . Since then , the team have worn varying combinations of blue and white , moving back towards a more predominantly white kit in 2000 . The team 's colours are reflected in their nickname of the " <unk> " . 
 Tranmere first introduced a badge on their shirt in 1962 , wearing the coat of arms of the borough of Birkenhead , along with adopting their motto " Ubi fides <unk> lux et robur " , meaning " Where there is faith there is light and strength " . The crest was replaced in 1972 by a monogram , and in 1981 by a simple blue and white shield . In 1987 , a complicated and confusing crest was introduced , adapting the Birkenhead crest through the inclusion of a football and a <unk> logo . Today 's simpler badge was adopted in 1997 , and modified slightly in 2009 to mark the club 's 125 @-@ year anniversary . 
 = = Stadium = = 
 Rovers played their first matches at Steeles Field in Birkenhead but , in 1887 , they bought a new site from Tranmere Rugby Club . The ground was variously referred to as the " Borough Road Enclosure " , " Ravenshaw 's Field " and " South Road " . The name " Prenton Park " was adopted in 1895 as a result of a suggestion in the letters page of the Football Echo . Because the land was required for housing and a school , Tranmere were forced to move and the name went with them . The present Prenton Park was opened on 9 March 1912 . There were stands ( also known as bleachers ) on both sides of the pitch , a paddock and three open terraces , the general format which remained until 1994 . 
 Many improvements to the ground were driven by changes in legislation . The biggest change of all took place during 1994 and 1995 . The Taylor Report suggested that all stadia in the top two divisions of English football should no longer permit standing . The club 's response was to redevelop three sides of the ground with entirely new all @-@ seater stands created – the Borough Road Stand ( now the Johnny King Stand ) , the Cowshed and the new Kop , in addition to the existing Main Stand . Capacity in the ground thus increased from 14 @,@ 200 to the 16 @,@ 567 of today . On 11 March 1995 , the new ground was officially opened at a cost of £ 3 @.@ 1 million . 
 Attendances at the ground have fluctuated over its hundred @-@ year history . Around 8 @,@ 000 visitors watched the first game at the stadium , as Tranmere beat Lancaster Town 8 – 0 . Prenton Park 's largest @-@ ever crowd was 24 @,@ 424 for a 1972 FA Cup match between Tranmere and Stoke City . In 2010 , an average of 5 @,@ 000 fans attended each home game . 
 = = Supporters and rivalries = = 
 Tranmere Rovers had an average home attendance of 5 @,@ 467 during the 2010 – 11 season , making them the twelfth best supported club in League One and 61st in The Football League as a whole . The club has a number of supporters ' groups , including the Tranmere Rovers Supporters Trust ; in 2010 , the trust raised £ 12 @,@ 500 for the club to sign Andy Robinson on loan . In 2011 , they raised £ 200 @,@ 000 and plan to purchase a controlling interest in Tranmere . TSB ( Tranmere Stanley Boys ) is the hooligan firm associated with the club . The club has been the subject of an independent supporters ' fanzine Give Us an R since the 1990s . 
 Despite being geographically closest to Everton and Liverpool , Tranmere 's time in the lower leagues has meant that they have formed rivalries with other clubs against whom they regularly compete . According to the Football Fans Census of 2003 , Tranmere fans listed Bolton Wanderers as their main rivals , followed by Chester City and Everton . In a more recent census , Oldham Athletic overtook Bolton as their main rivals , with Everton and Liverpool in joint third , although the census is debatable as it does not contain non @-@ league clubs , of whom Chester and Wrexham would likely feature . As of the end of the 2011 – 12 season , Tranmere had met the following teams most times in the Football League : 
 = = Tranmere Rovers Ladies = = 
 Tranmere Rovers Ladies Football Club were founded in 1990 . Based in the Wirral , they are affiliated with the men 's team , and play home games at Villa Park , the home of Ashville F.C. in Wallasey . Between 1996 and 2004 they competed in the FA Premier League National Division , then the top tier of the English women 's football pyramid . Since 2011 , they have played in the North West Regional League , Premier Division . As of the start of the 2011 – 12 season , they have won the Cheshire Cup a record 11 times . 
 = = Players = = 
 = = = First team squad = = = 
 Where a player has not declared an international allegiance , nation is determined by place of birth . Squad correct as of 6 May 2016 . 
 = = = Former players = = = 
 As part of the club 's 125 @-@ year anniversary celebrations in 2010 , a hall of fame was announced , initially honouring seven former players and managers : Ian Muir , John Aldridge , John King , Ray Mathias , Steve <unk> , John Morrissey and Pat Nevin . Harold Bell holds the record for the most consecutive league appearances for a British team . He was picked for the first game after the Second World War in the 1946 – 47 season and did not miss a match until 30 August 1955 , a total of 401 consecutive matches in the Third Division North . 
 = = Officials = = 
 = = = Current coaching staff = = = 
 = = = Managers = = = 
 As of the start of the 2011 – 12 season , the club has had 24 managers . The first man to hold this position was Bert Cooke , appointed in 1912 . He oversaw the club 's entry into the Football League and remained in charge for 23 years , the longest spell of any manager at the club . Major changes were not seen until businessman Dave Russell took over in 1961 . His introductions included the team 's current all @-@ white kit and regularly arranged floodlit home fixtures on Friday evenings rather than the usual Saturday afternoon . Rock band and Tranmere fans Half Man Half Biscuit described the practice in their song " Friday Night And The Gates Are Low " . 
 Tranmere 's most successful period came at the end of the twentieth century . John King returned for his third spell at the club in 1987 , having previously both played and managed the team . He led them to a victory in the League Trophy , and from the bottom of the Fourth Division to reach the play @-@ offs for promotion to the Premier League on three occasions . Success continued under King 's replacement , John Aldridge , including an appearance in the 2000 Football League Cup Final . From 2009 , they were managed by former club physiotherapist , Les Parry , until he was sacked on 4 March 2012 , and replaced by Ronnie Moore . In February 2014 it was reported that Moore was under investigation by The Football Association , for breaching its rules against betting on competitions in which his club were involved . Three days later , he was suspended , and after admitting the FA 's charges he was sacked on 9 April 2014 . 
 On 27 May 2014 , the club announced that Rob Edwards had been appointed as their new manager . He was sacked on 13 October 2014 . 
 Moving quickly to arrest the decline which had seen Tranmere slump to the bottom of League Two , former Port Vale manager Micky Adams ' appointment was announced on 16 October 2014 He left the club by mutual consent on 19 April 2015 , when the club were bottom of the league with two matches remaining . 
 Recent managers have had varied levels of success : 
 = = Honours = = 
 = = = League = = = 
 First Division ( tier 2 ) 
 4th in 1992 – 93 ( highest league position ) 
 Play @-@ offs : 1992 – 93 , 1993 – 94 , 1994 – 95 
 Third Division / Second Division / League One ( tier 3 ) 
 Promotion : 1990 – 91 
 Play @-@ offs : 1989 – 90 , 2004 – 05 
 Third Division North ( tier 3 ) 
 Winner : 1937 – 38 
 Fourth Division ( tier 4 ) 
 Promotion : 1966 – 67 , 1975 – 76 , 1988 – 89 
 Lancashire Combination 
 Winner : 1913 – 14 , 1918 – 19 
 The Combination 
 Winner : 1907 – 08 
 = = = Cup = = = 
 FA Cup 
 Quarter @-@ final : 1999 – 2000 , 2000 – 01 , 2003 – 04 
 Welsh Cup 
 Winner : 1934 – 35 
 Runner @-@ up : 1933 – 34 
 Football League Cup 
 Runner @-@ up : 1999 – 2000 
 Semi @-@ final : 1993 – 94 
 League Trophy 
 Winner : 1989 – 90 
 Runner @-@ up : 1990 – 91 
 = = Records = = 
 Scoreline : 13 – 4 , against Oldham Athletic , on 26 December 1935 . The aggregate of 17 goals in one game remains a league record . 
 Attendance : 74 @,@ 313 , against Leicester City on 27 February 2000 , in the League Cup final at Wembley Stadium . 
 Home attendance : 24 @,@ 424 , for an FA Cup tie against Stoke City on 5 February 1972 . 
 Goals ( total ) : 180 , by Ian Muir . 
 Goals ( season ) : 40 , by both Bunny Bell ( 1934 – 35 ) and John Aldridge ( 1991 – 92 ) . 
 Appearances : 637 , by Ray Mathias . 
 = Nels Nelsen Hill = 
 Nels Nelsen Hill , originally Big Hill , is an abandoned ski jumping hill located in Mount Revelstoke National Park near the town of Revelstoke , British Columbia , Canada . The original hill , Big Hill , was built in 1916 and was the first permanent ski jump in Canada . By 1933 , four world length records had been set on the Big Hill . It fell out of use in 1939 , with Revelstoke instead using the Big Bend Ski Jump . 
 Big Hill was rebuilt to a K @-@ 80 hill in 1948 and was named in honor of Nels Nelsen , a local ski jumper who had set two world records on the hill . Among the events hosted there were the annual Tournament of Champions and the 1949 edition of the Western Canada Ski Championships . In the vicinity was a K @-@ 60 hill and other smaller hills . The hill record of 94 @.@ 5 meters ( 310 ft ) was set by Kjell Sjöberg in 1967 . The last major tournament was held in 1974 . The venue has not been used since 1975 and has fallen into disrepair . 
 = = First hill = = 
 Skiing in Revelstoke started in 1890 with the influx of Norwegian immigrants who brought with them their tradition of home @-@ made skies . By the early 1910s , ski jumping was a major pastime during winter , with small ski jumps being built all around the town . Revelstoke Ski Club was founded in 1914 and reached 102 members within a year . Starting in 1915 , the club 's annual high point was the Winter Carnival Tournament . The first tournament was held in 1915 , and featured competitions in cross @-@ country skiing and ski jumping for boys under 16 , and awarded the title of Champion of British Columbia . The inaugurate tournament was won by Nels Nelson . 
 One of the jury members for the jumping competition , Ambassador Iverson of Norway , helped find a suitable location for a new , permanent ski jumping hill . The hill selected was located in Mount Revelstoke National Park near Revelstoke , British Columbia . It would allow for world @-@ record jumps , and the natural inclination of the hill allowed this to be done without an artificial tower . As the site was located within the national park , a lease was obtained , which was financed through a $ 1 @,@ 200 grant from the chamber of commerce and the municipality . Revelstoke was the largest town in the British Columbia Interior at the time , and easily accessible due to its location on the Canadian Pacific Railway mainline . 
 Big Hill was first used for the 1916 Winter Carnival , in which Nelsen set a hill record at 56 meters ( 183 ft ) . He beat his own record several times and kept the hill record until 1921 . The tournament was gradually expanded , and by 1921 it cost $ 5 @,@ 800 to arrange . That year , Henry Hall set a world length record in the hill , jumping 70 meters ( 229 ft ) . Three thousand spectators watched the games , in which many of the world 's elite skiers competed . To accommodate the extra spectators , Canadian Pacific Railway stationed sleeping cars at Revelstoke to supplement the hotels . In 1922 , Isabel <unk> debuted as Big Hill 's first women jumper . In 1923 , the tournament climaxed with 99 participating ski jumpers . In 1925 , while sick with the flu , Nelsen beat Hall 's world record by jumping 73 meters ( 240 ft ) . The record would remain until 1930 . 
 In 1928 , the hill was expanded to allow for jumps to 79 meters ( 260 ft ) . A car was offered to anyone able to beat Nelsen 's record jump at the Big Hill , provided that at least three outside jumpers participated in the competition . The prize was offered by local fur dealer J. H. Munro , who hoped to attract the world 's elite ski jumpers to Revelstoke . Many of the world 's best ski jumpers attended that year 's tournament , such as Henry Hall , Henry Lien , Ivan Knudsen and Alf Engen . Nelsen won the race , but failed to break his own record . The record was eventually broken by Adolph <unk> at Tremplin de <unk> in <unk> in 1930 , who jumped 75 meters ( 246 ft ) . However , Bob Lymburne was able to again claim the world record for the Big Hill , when he jumped 82 meters ( 269 ft ) in 1932 . He lost the record to Sigmund Ruud the following year , but by the end of the season , Lymburne reclaimed the title with a jump of 87 @.@ 5 meters ( 287 ft ) . Birger Ruud exceeded <unk> 's record in 1934 and no further world records were set in Revelstoke . Big Hill is the only ski jumping venue in Canada to have set world records . 
 = = Hill replaced = = 
 On 15 January 1939 , the Big Bend Ski Jump replaced Big Hill . It was located just north of town , allowing for a short walk to the venue and easier maintenance . It had been built to allow Revelstoke to host the Western Canada Ski Championships . It was a success for Revelstoke , with " ski trains " being set up from Vancouver to bring people in from the city to watch the events . The championships were broadcast on radio and received unprecedented newspaper attention for a Revelstoke skiing event . During the Second World War , only junior tournaments were contested . In 1946 , the Big Bend was renamed Hans <unk> Ski Jump in honor of local jumper Hans <unk> who had died in action . In 1947 , Revelstoke again hosted the Western Canadian Ski Championships . 
 = = Last hill = = 
 In April 1948 , the Big Hill was rebuilt and renamed Nels Nelsen Hill . With grants from the National Parks Department , Revelstoke Ski Club rebuilt the hill to meet the profile criteria set by the International Ski Federation , giving the hill a construction point of 80 meters ( 260 ft ) . The first tournament was the International Invitational Ski Jumping Tournament held in March 1949 , and attended by 2 @,@ 500 people . It was inaugurated by local ski jumper Art Johnson and the tournament was won by Petter <unk> of Norway , who jumped 75 meters ( 247 ft ) . In 1950 , the first Tournament of Champions was held to which seven Norwegian jumpers were invited . Art Johnson re @-@ mortgaged his home for $ 8000 to pay for the expenses of the Norwegians . The event was won by Arnfinn Bergmann . The tournament was held throughout the 1950s and started attracting jumpers from Sweden , Finland , Germany and Japan . The 1958 edition was the first to be televised , although this resulted in fewer spectators . That year 's event saw a new hill record of 82 meters ( 270 ft ) be set by Norway 's Odd Brevik . The following year , Finland 's Kalevi <unk> broke the record , reaching 85 meters ( 278 ft ) . 
 In 1961 , the wooden judge 's tower was replaced by a new one in steel . Tournaments were held every year except in 1963 , when it was canceled because of lack of snow . The 1960s also saw the construction of a smaller hill with a construction point of 60 meters ( 200 ft ) which was used for Olympic trials . The town even considered placing a bid for the 1968 Winter Olympics . However , throughout the 1960s , the interest in ski jumping was declining , resulting in lower attendance . The North American Nordic Championship was held in 1962 , and two years later Nels Nelsen Hill hosted the Canadian Nordic Championships , attracting crowds of up to 3 @,@ 000 spectators . In 1967 , Kjell Sjöberg set a Canadian jumping record of 94 @.@ 5 meters ( 310 ft ) . The Tournament of Champions , which had with a few interruptions been running since the inauguration , continued into the early 1970s . 
 The hill required a lot of volunteer work to maintain and run during the season and particularly for the tournament . It also lacked a ski lift . Combined , this made it increasingly difficult to recruit new ski jumpers during the 1960s , particularly after a lift was installed on Mount Revelstoke in 1961 . Skiing activities moved to Mount Mackenzie during the 1960s and in 1973 , the ski club also relocated to there . The Tournament of Champions during 1971 and 1972 incurred a heavy loss . The last major tournaments in Nels Nelson Hill were the Western Canadian Ski Jumping Tournament , the Canadian Junior and Senior Ski Jumping Championship and the International Cross Country Championship , held in February and March 1974 . The last tournament was a junior event held in 1975 . The venue has since fallen into disrepair . 
 = Rough Landing , Holly = 
 " Rough Landing , Holly " is a song by the American pop punk band Yellowcard . The song was written collaboratively by all the band members for their fifth album , Lights and Sounds ( 2006 ) . The track is built around an introductory guitar sound , followed by a soaring chorus , and heavy beating drums . " Rough Landing , Holly " is one of the songs from the album that is based on a character , Holly Wood , that Yellowcard had developed while working on Lights and Sounds . 
 The song was released on May 6 , 2006 , as the second single from Lights and Sounds and reached number 27 on Billboard 's Hot Modern Rock Tracks chart . Internationally , the track appeared for one week in the Australian and New Zealand charts at number 49 . " Rough Landing , Holly " was well received by music critics , who noted the track 's general sound . After its release , it was featured in the soundtrack of the 2006 video game , FlatOut 2 . 
 The music video was directed by Marc Webb , who had previously collaborated with the band on their previous music videos . In an interview , Webb revealed the video was the sequel to the band 's 2004 video " Ocean Avenue " . Webb also revealed that unlike " Ocean Avenue " , in which Key is running away from bad guys , this video shows Key running away from his " own personal demons " . 
 = = Background = = 
 While Yellowcard was working on their upcoming album , Lights and Sounds , they developed a character , Holly Wood , who served as a narrator and protagonist for the album 's storyline . The character also came about when the band began writing about their hatred for life in Los Angeles . Vocalist Ryan Key , in discussion of the character , said , " Holly became this person on the record who appears in a lot of the songs , and at times you love her and at times you hate her . At times she 's good to you and sometimes she 's bad . " Violinist Sean Mackin , also in discussion of the character , said : " ... Ryan didn ’ t have a romantic interest in his life and he didn ’ t want to write ' Only One ' again , and he wanted to create something new . A lot of songwriters narrate and create fictional characters ... and Holly was a character where sometimes you love her and sometimes you hate her , and she was someone he could get all his emotions out through . " Key revealed that the song " Rough Landing , Holly " , which features the Holly character , was his " favorite song " from Lights and Sounds . 
 Written in the key of E major , the beat is set in common time and moves at a moderate 175 beats per minute . The song 's musical structure features an introductory guitar sound , followed by a soaring chorus , and heavy beating drums . Sean Mackin plays the violin in " Rough Landing , Holly " . During discussion of the track listing in Lights and Sounds , Yellowcard revealed that " Rough Landing , Holly " spoke about the " difficulty of giving up its allure " . The band explained the lyrics , " And I still can 't get out / She 's all I think about / Can 't let her go / ... She moves fast , takes control / And like a heart attack I know I can 't turn back " , were written because of that particular reason . 
 = = Release and promotion = = 
 Yellowcard released " Rough Landing , Holly " in the United States on May 6 , 2006 , as the second single from Lights and Sounds . The song peaked at number 27 on Billboard 's Hot Modern Rock Tracks chart . Internationally , the track appeared on both the Australian Recording Industry Association ( ARIA ) and New Zealand charts at the number 49 position , and individually spent one week on the charts . " Rough Landing , Holly " was featured in the soundtrack of the 2006 video game , FlatOut 2 . 
 The song received positive reception from critics . Jenny Eliscu of Rolling Stone wrote that " Rough Landing , Holly " and " Lights and Sounds " , the latter being the title track , " boast seismic alt @-@ rock riffs and mosh @-@ worthy refrains . " Tom <unk> of Entertainment Weekly reported that the song was a " blustery tale of puppy love gone to the dogs that will surely make for a great ringtone . " Sputnikmusic wrote : " So how typical to have the next song , ' Rough Landing , Holly ' , slap you right on the mouth with a face @-@ melting violin solo . Yeah , a violin solo . And its pretty damn good . The beat follows right along with impossible @-@ sounding drum rolls while the guitar distortion is the backbone of the song . " In the Allmusic review , critic Heather Phares wrote , " ... Yellowcard expands on its expected sound . Songs like the title track , ' Rough Landing , Holly , ' and ' Down on My Head ' are tightly crafted , state @-@ of @-@ the @-@ art examples of shiny , earnest punk @-@ pop that sounds sunny even when it 's sad " . Tony Pascarella of AbsolutePunk.net noted that " we see flashes of the ' old ' band on ' Rough Landing , Holly ' , but it ’ s not nearly widespread enough for my liking ( although the song is possibly the best one on the new album ) . " Bart <unk> of The Clarion commented that the song " is probably one of the best songs " off Lights and Sounds and concluded that it was because of its " effective use of every instrument , a soulful blend of guitar , and excellent lyrics . " 
 = = Music video = = 
 The video for " Rough Landing , Holly " was shot in Los Angeles in February 2006 . The music video was directed by Marc Webb , who had previously worked with Yellowcard on their earlier videos , " Ocean Avenue " ( 2004 ) and " Lights and Sounds " ( 2005 ) . The video took three days to film in and around Los Angeles County . 
 In an interview with MTV News , Webb revealed that the video was a sequel of the music video " Ocean Avenue " ; " The ' Holly ' video expands on some of the elements of the ' Ocean Avenue ' clip . There are references to it , particularly some scenes involving a suitcase . It refers to that world , and I liked the idea of paralleling the band 's experiences over the past two years with some of the things [ frontman ] Ryan [ Key ] is going through in this video . " Webb went on to add that the reason Key is sprinting through Los Angeles , once again , is not bad guys that are after him , it is his " own personal demons " . Webb concluded that before filming began for the video , he had wanted to learn the experience that Key and bassist Peter Mosely were going through in New York , as they moved there to begin working on Lights and Sounds , and about the things they saw while they were there . 
 The video begins with Ryan Key lying on his bed in an apartment . Suddenly , he gets swallowed by the bedsheets ( this is where the track starts to play ) . The scene then shifts to Key in another dimension , ending up next to the wife of another man . The man notices Key , and he runs away from the man . Hiding in the bathroom , Key escapes through a window , where he ends up on a neighborhood street . Someone dressed in dark clothing gestures to offer him a drink , when Key notices he is in a bar filled with Asian people . During part of the video , it features the band performing in front of a crowd wearing suits . The chase continues through a hallway , underwater , to a hospital bed , and back . The video is based in a scene of the 1999 film Being John Malkovich , where Cameron Diaz chases Catherine Keener within the subconscious of Malkovich . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 AU Single : 
 " Rough Landing , Holly " – 3 : 33 
 " Holly Wood Died " ( live ) – 3 : 55 
 " Cigarette " ( live ) – 4 : 56 
 = = Chart positions = = 
 = Citizen 's Briefing Book = 
 Citizen 's Briefing Book is a compilation book of recommendations made to President Barack Obama by visitors to the Change.gov website , given to the President after his January 20 , 2009 inauguration . Internet users were able to post recommendations of changes they would like to see made in the United States , and they were also able to vote on other users ' recommendations , as well as participate in a comment process . 
 The Minnesota @-@ based company called <unk> helped develop the functionality , using technology from Salesforce.com. Co @-@ chair of the Obama @-@ Biden Transition Team , Valerie Jarrett , stated that the Citizen 's Briefing Book was a way for the Obama transition process to remain open and transparent . Popular recommendations included ending the prohibition on marijuana use in the United States and the legalization of online poker . Citizen 's Briefing Book received positive comments from writers for the Christian Science Monitor and Business Week , and criticism from writers for Chicago Tribune and Indianapolis Business Journal . 
 = = Comment process = = 
 Citizen 's Briefing Book is a work of suggestions by individuals compiled into a book format and submitted to President Barack Obama after his inauguration on January 20 , 2009 . Internet users originally posted their suggestions at Change.gov , with the plan that after Barack Obama was sworn in as President the website hosting the recommendations would direct users to <unk> The option to participate in the request for comment format was open until January 20 , 2009 , where users were able to post suggestions to the President , read others ' recommendations , and comment on each other 's ideas . Users voted on individual recommendations with an up or down vote for each suggestion . 
 The web function was developed for the Obama transition team by the Minnesota @-@ based company called <unk> , and utilizes technology from Salesforce.com. Co @-@ chair of the Obama @-@ Biden Transition Team , Valerie Jarret , stated : " The Citizen 's Briefing Book will come directly from the American people . It is yet another way that we will ensure that this transition is the most open and transparent one in history . " Members of Obama 's transition team interacted with users and responded to the voting . Beth Noveck , a law professor at NYU Law School and a member of the Obama Administration 's " Technology , Innovation and Government Reform Team " , stated that the book would help the government " get the best ideas for the beginning of the administration " . 
 = = Top recommendations = = 
 According to the Change.gov site the best @-@ rated ideas would " rise to the top " of the list , to later be given to the President . As of January 17 , 2009 the most popular suggestion , with 70 @,@ 520 points , advocated ending the prohibition on marijuana use in the United States . By January 19 , 2009 , over 500 @,@ 000 people had voted on thousands of suggestions posted by 70 @,@ 000 individuals . In total over 44 @,@ 000 suggestions were submitted , with over 1 @.@ 4 million votes cast for the various recommendations . 
 Other popular ideas included legalizing online poker in the United States , and focusing on green initiatives . One post suggested the administration investigate UFOs , and another suggested Obama hire entertainment personalities including Michael Moore , Jon Stewart , Bill Maher , and Stephen Colbert . After voting had closed , the most popular suggestion with 92 @,@ 000 votes was " Ending marijuana prohibition " , and the third most popular : " Stop using federal resources to undermine states ' medicinal marijuana laws . " A representative for President Obama , Jen <unk> , told Reuters : " President Obama does not support the legalization of marijuana . " 
 = = Release = = 
 The Obama Administration released the Citizen 's Briefing Book to the public on May 11 , 2009 , the same day that President Obama announced the renaming of the White House Office of Public Liaison to the Office of Public Engagement . " Many of the ideas you offer , from improving light rail transit to modernizing our energy grid to creating a new service corps , have been embraced by my administration , " said President Obama in a video released along with the briefing book . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Writing for the Christian Science Monitor , David Peck described the initiative as part of " a good foundation " of reaching out to individuals . Douglas MacMillan of Business Week noted that the Obama transition site Change.gov " won praise for its clean look and Citizen 's Briefing Book feature " . Joel Hood of the Chicago Tribune highlighted some of the more eccentric suggestions posted , commenting : " As if President Barack Obama doesn 't have enough on his plate , he 's about to hear the voice of the people , in all its eccentric glory . " 
 Morton Marcus commented in the Indianapolis Business Journal : " I see the virtue of being open to the public ’ s concern . I cannot imagine that the president will give attention to issues based on their popularity . " In noting that the first and third @-@ most popular items voted upon involved the legalization of marijuana , Andy Sullivan of Reuters commented on President Obama 's efforts to solicit opinions from citizens on legislation : " That approach can deliver unexpected results . " 
 = Duchess Violante Beatrice of Bavaria = 
 Violante Beatrice of Bavaria ( Violante Beatrix ; 23 January 1673 – 30 May 1731 ) was Grand Princess of Tuscany as the wife of Grand Prince Ferdinando of Tuscany and Governor of Siena from 1717 until her death . Born a Duchess of Bavaria , the youngest child of Elector Ferdinand Maria , she married the heir to the Tuscan throne , Ferdinando de ' Medici , in 1689 . Violante Beatrice loved him but Ferdinando did not return her affection , declaring her too ugly and too dull . Her brother @-@ in @-@ law , Prince Gian Gastone , befriended her out of sympathy , a friendship that lasted until Violante Beatrice 's demise . 
 Grand Prince Ferdinando expired from syphilis in 1713 , leaving his childless widow without purpose at the Tuscan court . Upon the return of the Electress Anna Maria Luisa de ' Medici , daughter of the then reigning , Cosimo III , thus Violante Beatrice 's sister @-@ in @-@ law , the Dowager Grand Princess contemplated retiring to her brother 's court at Munich ; however , Gian Gastone convinced her to stay , and Cosimo III appointed her Governor of Siena , where she then resided . As Governor , she formally defined the boundaries , names and number of Sienese <unk> — akin to administrative divisions — in 1729 . During Grand Duke Gian Gastone 's rule , the Governor was responsible for formal court audiences . Violante Beatrice , in collaboration with the Electress Anna Maria Luisa , attempted to withdraw Gian Gastone from the Ruspanti , his salacious entourage , by arranging banquets and public appearances . Gian Gastone , however , was immune to these approaches and spent the last eight years of his reign confined to bed , entertained by the myriad Ruspanti . 
 = = Childhood and marriage = = 
 Violante Beatrice , the youngest child of the Elector of Bavaria , Ferdinand Maria , and Henriette Adelaide of Savoy , was born on 23 January 1673 in Munich , the capital of Bavaria . Her siblings were Maria Anna Victoria , Dauphine of France , Elector Maximilian II and Joseph Clemens , Archbishop of Cologne . 
 Grand Duke Cosimo III of Tuscany in 1688 sought Violante Beatrice as a prestigious bride — Bavaria was one of the most powerful states of the Holy Roman Empire — for his elder son and heir , Ferdinando , Grand Prince of Tuscany . As Cosimo 's father , Ferdinando II , had embroiled Elector Ferdinand Maria in an abortive financial venture costing him 450 @,@ 000 <unk> worth of gold , relations between Munich and Florence were sour . 
 In order to acquire Violante Beatrice 's hand for the Grand Prince , Cosimo was obliged to reimburse Ferdinand Maria 's son Maximilian II . With this obstacle surmounted , the marriage contract was signed on 24 May 1688 , granting Violante Beatrice a dowry of 400 @,@ 000 thalers in cash and the same amount in jewellery . She married the Grand Prince by proxy in Munich on 21 November 1688 and was married in person on 9 January 1689 . The wedding reception was held at the Palazzo Medici Riccardi in Florence . The new Grand Princess was instantly enamoured with the bridegroom , in spite of the fact he loathed her . Cosimo III , however , could not find fault in his daughter @-@ in @-@ law , saying , " I have never known , nor do I think the world can produce , a disposition so perfect " . 
 = = Grand Princess = = 
 The grand princely couple 's lack of offspring after six years of marriage perturbed the Grand Duke . Consequently , much to the Grand Princess 's mortification , he commissioned three days ' religious observance to remedy their lack of children in April 1694 . Any hopes of an heir were dashed when Ferdinando contracted , in 1696 , syphilis during the Carnival of Venice , a disease to which he succumbed seventeen years later . The Grand Princess , meanwhile , fell victim to a state of melancholy , which did not escape the notice of her brother @-@ in @-@ law , Prince Gian Gastone , who befriended her as a result . Violante Beatrice rarely alluded to her emotional pain in conversation , but , on one documented occasion , in the presence of her ladies , branded Ferdinando 's lover <unk> de <unk> the focus of her woes . That Ferdinando often openly declared his wife " too dull and too ugly " only worsened matters . 
 The Grand Princess found herself , in 1702 , in the middle of a <unk> spat between Tuscany and Spain . The Grand Duke sent an agent to the court of Philip V of Spain with the objective of procuring a license for the Grand Prince and Princess — who , hypothetically , acquired royal dignity with Cosimo III on 5 February 1691 from the Holy Roman Emperor , Leopold I 's , diploma — to use the style Royal Highness in correspondence with Spain . Philip V initially deigned only to sanction his aunt Violante Beatrice 's use ; however , the agent , Pucci , eventually requisitioned full recognition . 
 King Philip V and Frederick IV of Denmark paid Violante Beatrice visits in 1703 and 1709 , respectively . The former chose to ignore the other members of the Tuscan Royal Family and reluctantly deigned only speak to her . The latter , on the other hand , was taken with Violante , going as far as to refuse to leave the room while she was changing clothes . 
 The Grand Prince , after much suffering , died from syphilis on 31 October 1713 , sparking a succession crisis and leaving his wife a childless and therefore purposeless widow . The Dowager was so distraught that she had to be bled by doctors in order to calm her down . Cosimo III gave her a set of blue sapphires as a token of mourning . Violante Beatrice considered returning to her homeland when she caught wind of the Electress Anna Maria Luisa de ' Medici 's , born a Tuscan princess , impending return ; the two did not get along . Violante Beatrice , additionally , would be usurped as first @-@ lady of Tuscany . To quell any future <unk> regarding precedence , Cosimo III appointed Violante Beatrice Governor of Siena , whose duties as such kept her away from the Tuscan court , and gave her possession of the Villa di <unk> , which became , in the words of historian Harold Acton , " a sort of literary academy " . Here , she feted poets Lucchesi , <unk> and Morandi . Although precedence was laid out <unk> of Violante Beatrice 's dignity , the Electress on several occasions disregarded it . Thus , Violante Beatrice refused to appear with her in public . 
 = = Governor of Siena = = 
 The Governor entered her domain in April 1717 , taking up residence in the city @-@ centre . Violante Beatrice 's most memorable act as Governor was the reorganisation of the Sienese <unk> — akin to administrative divisions — whose names , number and boundaries she formally defined which remain there to this day . The Grand Duke Cosimo III died on 31 October 1723 ; Gian Gastone ascended to the throne . He immediately recalled Violante Beatrice to Florence and banished his sister to the Villa La Quiete . Violante Beatrice dominated the royal court as Gian Gastone resigned his public duties to her , and literally chose to spend most of his time in bed . The " religious gloom " of Cosimo III gave way to a period of rejuvenation : Violante Beatrice instituted French fashions at court , compelled myriad Ecclesiastes to retire and patronised <unk> poets Perfetti and <unk> . Violante Beatrice brought Perfetti to Rome in 1725 and stayed at the Palazzo Madama . During her time in the Papal States , she met Pope Benedict XIII , who found her so agreeable that he bestowed upon her the golden rose , a great mark of Papal favour . 
 Upon her return from Rome , Violante Beatrice and the Electress Anna Maria Luisa decided to do something about Gian Gastone 's public image and the Ruspanti , his entourage . In order to distract him from the Ruspanti , Violante Beatrice threw banquets , to which she invited the foremost members of Tuscan society . The Grand Duke 's behaviour , vomiting , belching and cracking rude jokes , literally sent the guests scrambling to leave . The Electress was more fortunate for her part . She succeeded in making Gian Gastone appear on Saint John the Baptist 's day , 1729 . However , during the ceremony , the Grand Duke became so intoxicated that he had to be dragged back to his palace , the Pitti , on a litter . 
 Just five months before the arrival of troops on behalf of Gian Gastone 's Spanish heir , Violante Beatrice of Bavaria , Dowager Grand Princess of Tuscany , Governor of Siena , died . During the funeral procession , her hearse briefly paused before the Pitti , an action that incensed the Grand Duke , who ordered the hearse to move along in words a contemporary dubbed " unfit for the lowest of harlots , let alone for a gentle high @-@ born princess " . The bulk of Violante Beatrice 's remains were interred in the Convent of Saint Teresa , Florence ; her heart was placed in her husband 's coffin in the Medicean necropolis , San Lorenzo . When in 1857 her sarcophagus was re @-@ discovered , it bore the imperial stamp of Napoleon I of France , who had had it moved from the convent to San Lorenzo . On 26 February 1858 , she was restored to the convent , brought there in the royal hearse . 
 = = Ancestors = = 
 = = Titles , styles , honours and arms = = 
 = = = Titles and styles = = = 
 23 January 1673 – 9 January 1689 : Her Serene Highness Princess Violante Beatrice of Bavaria , Duchess of Bavaria 
 9 January 1689 – 5 February 1691 : Her Highness The Grand Princess of Tuscany 
 5 February 1691 – 31 October 1713 : Her Royal Highness The Grand Princess of Tuscany 
 31 October 1713 – 12 April 1717 : Her Royal Highness The Dowager Grand Princess of Tuscany 
 12 April 1717 – 30 May 1731 : Her Royal Highness The Governor of Siena 
 = = = Honours = = = 
 Dame of the Golden Rose ( 1725 ) 
 = Leslie Grinsell = 
 Leslie Valentine Grinsell ( 14 February 1907 – 28 February 1995 ) was an English archaeologist . He became noted within the discipline for his studies of the prehistoric barrows found across southern England , and published widely on archaeological subjects during his lifetime . 
 Born in London and raised largely in Brighton , Grinsell developed an early interest in archaeology through visits to Brighton Museum . Later working as a bank clerk in London , he embarked on archaeological research in an amateur capacity , visiting prehistoric barrows during his weekends and holidays in order to record their shape , dimensions , and location . On the basis of his research , he published a range of academic articles and books on the subject of barrows during the 1930s , gaining recognition as Britain 's foremost expert on the subject . In 1933 , he carried out his only archaeological excavation , at the Devil 's Humps in Sussex . 
 During the Second World War he joined the Royal Air Force and served in Egypt , where he acquainted himself with the archaeological remains of Ancient Egyptian society ; after the war he published a book on the Egyptian pyramids . On his return to Britain , Grinsell became the treasurer of the Prehistoric Society , a position that he held from 1947 till 1970 . Moving to Devizes , in 1949 he entered the archaeological profession as an assistant to Christopher Hawkes and Stuart Piggott at the Victoria County History project . From 1952 to 1972 , Grinsell worked as Keeper of Anthropology and Archaeology at Bristol City Museum , during which time he continued his examination of barrows , focusing on those in south @-@ west England . On retirement , he was appointed to the Order of the British Empire and a festschrift was published in his honour . 
 Over the course of his lifetime , Grinsell examined and catalogued around 10 @,@ 000 barrows and advanced the archaeological understanding of such monuments . His use of non @-@ <unk> fieldwork influenced much British archaeology in the latter part of his 20th century , while his willingness to pay attention to other sources of information , such as folklore and place @-@ names , has been deemed to be ahead of his time . 
 = = Biography = = 
 = = = Early Life : 1907 – 45 = = = 
 Grinsell was born in London on 14 February 1907 . With his family , he moved to Brighton shortly after the First World War . There , his interest in archaeology was encouraged by H. S. Toms , the curator of Brighton Museum who had formerly been an assistant to the archaeologist Augustus Pitt Rivers . Moving back to London , in 1925 Grinsell became a clerk for Barclays Bank . Although he had developed his interest in prehistory through an examination of stone tools , he came to <unk> his attention on barrows , recognising that these were among the least well understood prehistoric monuments in the British landscape and one of the few that could be studied from the position of an amateur . At the time , a number of antiquarians were still active in southern England , with Grinsell being encouraged in his interests by prominent figures in this milieu such as Eliot Curwen and Hadrian Allcroft . 
 Grinsell 's techniques of conducting archaeological fieldwork were entirely self @-@ taught , and from the start of his investigations he was very interested in understanding both the distribution and the chronology of the barrows . During the 1930s , Grinsell personally visited and catalogued all of the extant barrows in the counties of Surrey , Sussex , Berkshire , Hampshire , and the Isle of Wight , establishing himself as the " pre @-@ eminent " figure in the study of British barrows . The archaeologist Nicholas Thomas later noted that despite Grinsell 's status as an amateur , by 1932 he had established himself as being " without parallel " in British archaeology , with his accomplishments surpassing even the work of professionals like O. G. S. Crawford . Never having learned to drive , Grinsell conducted all his visits through the use of buses , trains , and on foot . 
 In 1932 Grinsell attended the First International Prehistoric Congress , held in London ; it was here that he was introduced to Crawford , with the two becoming close acquaintances , both sharing an interest in the use of maps as part of their archaeological fieldwork . It was also here that he met the Dutch archaeologist Albert <unk> van Giffen ; they discussed whether the bell barrows of Sussex were related to the palisade barrows of the Netherlands which van Giffen had been investigating . Seeking an answer to this question , Grinsell conducted his only excavation , an examination of one of several bell barrows – collectively known as the known as the Devil 's Humps – atop Bow Hill in Sussex . Conducted in April 1933 with the help of two members of the Brighton and Hove Archaeological Society , publication of the results was delayed until 1942 . In 1936 he published The Ancient Burial Mounds of England , and then followed this with The Bronze Age Round Barrows of Wessex in 1941 . 
 Around 1937 he met the painter and amateur archaeologist Heywood Sumner while conducting an exploration of the barrows of Hampshire , with his own hand @-@ drawn plans of barrows becoming influenced by Sumner 's illustrative style . With the archaeologist R. F. Jessup he began conducting a survey of the barrows in Kent , although their notes for this were later destroyed in an air raid during the Second World War before they could be published . With the archaeologist R. Rainbird Clarke he then conducted a survey of the barrows of Norfolk ; their findings were stored in an archive although never published . 
 After the outbreak of the Second World War , Grinsell became a Pilot Officer in the Air Photographic Branch of the Royal Air Force ( RAF ) in 1941 . During he conflict , he was stationed in Egypt , where he spent time studying the archaeological remains of Ancient Egypt and visiting al of the pyramids near to Cairo . Based on these experiences , at his own expense he published Egyptian Pyramids in 1947 . Designed as a guide to the sites , it was ( as Grinsell acknowledged ) heavily reliant on the earlier plans of Egyptologists but with additional aerial photographs that Grinsell had obtained through his involvement with the RAF . The book was largely ignored by Britain 's Egyptological establishment . 
 = = = Life as a Professional Archaeologist : 1945 – 95 = = = 
 On returning to Britain , Grinsell went back to his job at Barclays Bank . In 1947 he became the treasurer of the Prehistoric Society , a position that he retained until 1970 , during which he helped to secure the organisation 's post @-@ war reconstruction . In 1949 the archaeologist Christopher Hawkes invited Grinsell to join him and Stuart Piggott as a project assistant at Victoria County History in order to compile the Victoria County History of Wiltshire . Grinsell accepted , leaving his bank job and moving to the Wiltshire town of Devizes , thus becoming a professional archaeologist . Thomas later stated that the Victoria County History of Wiltshire " represents the high point in [ Grinsell 's ] combined powers of fieldwork , grasp of secondary sources and handling of a great deal of detailed information . " Grinsell later published the book The Archaeology of Wessex , which was based on his experience during this period . 
 Leaving Devizes , in 1952 Grinsell became Keeper of Anthropology and Archaeology at Bristol City Museum , remaining there until his retirement in 1972 . He also published a number of academic articles and book reviews . During his holidays he often visited the Mediterranean , where he examined various prehistoric tombs . He also continued pursuing his interest in barrows , and by the 1970s had also catalogued those examples in Dorset , Gloucestershire , Somerset , and Devon . 
 Bristol University awarded him an <unk> degree on the basis of his work , while he was appointed to the Order of the British Empire ( OBE ) in 1972 . That same year a festschrift was issued in his honour , edited by Nichols Fowler . In 1989 , Grinsell published an autobiography ; reviewing it for the Folklore journal , the historian Hilda Ellis Davidson praised it but noted that it does not " tell us very much about the inner life of the author " . According to the archaeologist Paul Ashbee , Grinsell 's " directness , whimsical humour and sound common sense were legendary , as were his walking , youth @-@ <unk> and penchant for traditional afternoon teas of the cream variety . " A bachelor , he never married . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Over the course of his career , Grinsell had examined and recorded around 10 @,@ 000 barrows . Thomas stated that Grinsell 's " astonishing volume of published fieldwork ... assured for him a place without equal in the history of British archaeological studies " . This recording was particularly valuable for archaeologists because it occurred before large numbers of British barrows were heavily damaged as a result of deep ploughing and land development . It also demonstrated the spread of barrows within particular regions and confirmed the older assumption that these barrows were heavily concentrated on areas of chalk geology . Many of the barrows that Grinsell discovered – such as Lambourn long barrow in Berkshire – were previously unrecorded , while he was also responsible for the discovery of rock art on the face of an Early Bronze Age grave slab at Pool Farm in West Harptree , Somerset . 
 According to Thomas , Grinsell 's career illustrated the validity of amateur archaeologists , the importance of publishing one 's research , and the significance of archaeological fieldwork other than excavation . The archaeologist Paul Ashbee expressed the view that " to a great extent [ he ] determined the direction of field archaeology in the second half " of the 20th century . 
 Interested in using sources other than archaeology , Grinsell made use of documents , place @-@ names , folklore , and the accounts of antiquarians as part of his research . According to later archaeologists Amy <unk> @-@ Schwartz and Cornelius <unk> , Grinsell was one of the few archaeologists of his generation who was interested in the relationship between folklore and archaeology , comparing him in this way to continental European scholars Paul <unk> , Horst <unk> , and Karel C. Peeters . 
 = Knitta Please = 
 Knitta Please , also known as simply Knitta , is the group of artists who began the " knit graffiti " movement in Houston , Texas in 2005 . They are known for wrapping public architecture — e.g. lampposts , parking meters , telephone poles , and signage — with knitted or crocheted material . It has been called " knit graffiti " , " yarn storming " and " <unk> " . The mission is to make street art " a little more warm and fuzzy . " 
 Knitta grew to eleven members by the end of 2007 , but eventually dwindled down to its founder , who continues to travel and knit graffiti . Internationally , as many as a dozen groups have followed Knitta 's lead . <unk> and the group have shown their art across the United States and around the world . 
 = = History = = 
 The group began with a self @-@ taught <unk> known as <unk> . She founded the group with anonymous member <unk> in October 2005 as a way to deal with frustration over their own unfinished knitting projects . It started with a doorknob cosy for the front door of <unk> 's Houston boutique . She loved it and , unexpectedly , so did the passersby . That inspired them to make more . " 
 The name of the group and the nicknames of the members were inspired by a desire to " resemble graffiti , but with knitted items " . The group mixed crafting terminology with a hip @-@ hop style , then changed the spelling " to represent traditional street art monikers " . <unk> and <unk> came up with their own names , then invented names for other members . Some former member names include <unk> <unk> , <unk> and P @-@ <unk> . 
 By 2007 , Knitta 's membership had grown twelve members and there were an estimated five to twelve copycat groups internationally . By 2009 , there was a groundswell , according to Sydney , Australia author and academic Emily Howes , who identified groups in Scandinavia , Japan , South Africa , and the United States . However , membership in Knitta eventually dwindled , leaving only the founder . 
 = = Art = = 
 Usually tagging on Friday nights and Sunday mornings , Knitta taggers would leave a paper tag on each work , bearing the slogan " <unk> please " or " <unk> <unk> ? " . They tagged trees , lamp posts , railings , fire hydrants , monuments and other urban targets , Another popular piece involved hanging knitted @-@ bagged sneakers over aerial telephone cable . The crew would mark holidays by doing themed work , using , for example , pink yarn for Valentine 's Day pieces and sparkly yarn for New Years . When Knitta was not working with a theme , they would work on projects , tagging specific targets or specific areas . The group and their followers consider their graffiti " a method of beautifying public space " . However , such work is considered vandalism in some U.S. States . 
 In 2006 the group decided to visit New York City , where they did their first large scale piece . Using more than 50 feet ( 15 m ) of knitted material donated by volunteers of the crew 's mailing list , they wrapped the top half of a monorail column . Knitta also called on others across the U.S. to get tagging and send in their images . 
 For another large project , the group tagged all 25 trees in the median of Allen Parkway in Houston for the annual Art Car parade in May 2006 , wrapping them in blankets measuring two feet tall by two @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half feet long . A year later , they were invited to the Standard Hotel in Los Angeles , which caters to an edgy clientele , to tag a glass box featuring <unk> ' designs and concepts . 
 To celebrate the 60th anniversary of Bergère de France , the first manufacturer of French yarn , the company invited Knitta to Paris to " revitalize urban landscapes with knitted pieces " . While there , they also tagged the Notre Dame de Paris . Knitta 's work has also been seen in London , Sydney , Rome , Milan , Prague , Sweden , Montreal , Mexico City , El Salvador , Netherlands , Germany , Luxembourg and atop the Great Wall of China . 
 = Loud ( Rihanna album ) = 
 Loud is the fifth studio album by Barbadian singer Rihanna . It was released on November 12 , 2010 , by Def Jam Recordings and SRP Records . It was recorded between February and August 2010 , during the singer 's Last Girl on Earth Tour and the filming of her first feature film Battleship . Rihanna was the executive producer of Loud and worked with various record producers , including StarGate , Sandy Vee , The Runners , Tricky Stewart and Alex da Kid . The record features several guest vocalists , including rappers Drake , Nicki Minaj and Eminem , who is featured on the sequel to " Love the Way You Lie " , titled " Love the Way You Lie ( Part II ) " . 
 The album differs from Rihanna 's 2009 album , Rated R , which incorporates a prominently foreboding and angry tone and dark themes . Loud features up @-@ tempo and pop genres , ranging from R & B and dance @-@ pop to electro music , and marks the return to dancehall ; a genre prominent on Rihanna 's first two albums Music of the Sun ( 2005 ) and A Girl like Me ( 2006 ) . It also incorporates rock in " California King Bed " and reggae in the Caribbean inspired " Man Down " . 
 Loud received generally positive reviews from music critics , who complimented its upbeat material and Rihanna 's vocal performances , while others stated that although the songs were solid , they were unfocused to each other . The album was a commercial success internationally ; it debuted at number three on the US Billboard 200 chart , with first week sales of 207 @,@ 000 copies , the highest first week sales of her career at the time . The album entered the Canadian , Swiss and UK album charts at number one . As of November 2011 , it had sold over 8 million copies worldwide . 
 The album produced seven singles , including the international hits " Only Girl ( In the World ) " , " What 's My Name ? " , and " S & M " . All three singles reached number one on the US Billboard Hot 100 . " S & M " was Rihanna 's tenth number one song in the US , making Rihanna the youngest recording artist to accumulate the plateau in the shortest time , surpassing Mariah Carey . " Only Girl ( In the World ) " won the Grammy Award for Best Dance Recording in February 2011 ; additionally , the album was nominated for three more Grammy Awards , including for Album of the Year . To support the album , Rihanna embarked on her third worldwide concert tour , entitled the Loud Tour . 
 = = Background = = 
 Following a domestic violence case between Rihanna and her boyfriend American entertainer Chris Brown , media speculated as to whether any song featured on her fourth studio album would be about him . The album was released in November 2009 , under the title Rated R. Primarily a pop and R & B album , it also incorporates musical elements of hip hop , rock , and dancehall . Rated R was commercially successful and spawned five singles , including the international hit , " Rude Boy " . Six months after releasing the record , Rihanna began planning a fifth studio album , promising that her new material would be " more energetic " than her previous works . 
 StarGate 's Tor Erik Hermansen , said " Rihanna came to us before we started recording " Only Girl ( In the World ) " and said ‘ I feel great about myself . I want to go back to having fun , I want to make happy and up @-@ tempo records ' . " Sean Garrett compared the sound of the new tracks with her previous hit singles " Umbrella " and " Rude Boy " . In an interview for MTV UK , the vice president of Def Jam Recordings compared the upcoming Rihanna album with Michael Jackson 's Thriller saying , " Rihanna is coming along incredibly . I ’ m trying to push her to where every song will be a hit from one to 12 . I ’ m talking about NO album fillers . Our bar for this album is Michael Jackson 's ‘ Thriller ’ . " 
 = = Recording and title = = 
 Rihanna and Antonio " L.A. " Reid assembled a group of songwriters and record producers at several recording studios in Los Angeles for two weeks to write songs for Rihanna ; they wrote approximately 200 songs , eleven of which were included on the album . Def Jam rented out nearly every recording studio in Los Angeles in order to create as many songs as possible . Ray Daniels , the manager of musical duo Rock City ( brothers Theron and Timothy Thomas ) , was present during the sessions , and stated that a writing camp typically involves the label hiring ten recording studios for two weeks at the cost of $ 25 @,@ 000 per day . Daniels revealed that it is where songwriters have lyrics but no music , and where producers have music but no lyrics . 
 Singer @-@ songwriters and producers Taio Cruz , Alex da Kid , Sean Garrett , Ne @-@ Yo , Rico Love , Timbaland , Shontelle , David Guetta , and Drake contributed to the album . " DJ Got Us Fallin ' in Love " was written for Rihanna , but the song was rejected and was subsequently sent to Usher . With regard to " What 's My Name ? " , Rihanna thought Drake could understand the melody of the song and invited him to work on the track when she played him the <unk> recording . The collaboration was originally planned to be a remix , but later it was decided that the version featuring Drake would be used as the original . 
 Loud was recorded in various recording studios worldwide including the Larrabee Sound Studios , The Village and Westlake Recording Studios in Los Angeles , Platinum Sound Recording Studios , and Roc the Mic Studios in New York City and The Bunker Studios in Paris . In September 2010 , during a webchat with her fansite <unk> , Rihanna announced that the album would be called Loud , saying " get Loud everybody , get crazy , get excited , because I 'm pumped . I 'm just gonna be me , because that 's what you guys love the most , and that 's what makes me feel best . Just being normal , normal for me is Loud ! Sassy , fun , flirty , energetic . " While Rihanna was filming Battleship , she explained in an interview with Entertainment Tonight , " Loud is , the word , the name of the album definitely reflects the attitude of it , it 's really sassy and flirty and it grabs your attention and that 's why I enjoy it . It takes you through a really really interesting ride . So colorful the album . " 
 = = Composition = = 
 = = = Influence and sound = = = 
 Loud is a departure from the personal , melodramatic themes of Rated R. Stylistically , it is a return to the Caribbean @-@ inspired dance @-@ pop of Rihanna 's earlier work . Ryan Burleson of Consequence of Sound described the album as " a dynamic R & B and dance @-@ pop record " . In an interview with MTV , Rihanna said " I wanted songs that were all Rihanna songs , that nobody else could do . I didn 't want the generic pop record that Ke $ ha or Lady Gaga or Katy Perry could just do and it 'll work . I wanted a song , or songs , that were Rihanna songs , that only I could do , had that little West Indian vibe to it , had that certain tone , a certain sass and a certain energy . " During the promotion of Loud , Rihanna said that much of the music was born out of frustration . She explained : " When you go to a club and have to listen to bad music you revert to the liquor , because you want to have a good time . I hate having to skip a track . I wanted to make an album you can just play . " 
 = = = Songs = = = 
 The opening track " S & M " is an up @-@ tempo eurodance song produced by Norwegian producers StarGate and Sandy Vee . The song is reminiscent of Depeche Mode 's 1984 song " Master and Servant " and contains lyrical thoughts of sadomasochism . Andy Kellman of Allmusic regarded " S & M " as a dance @-@ pop song which efficiently balanced " Rihanna 's playful and sinister sides " . " What 's My Name ? " was also produced by StarGate and features guest vocals from Canadian rapper Drake . It is a mid @-@ tempo , electro @-@ R & B song with a back track consisting of heavy reggae . The song also sees Rihanna 's return to the " Island @-@ pop " style of her early career " . " Cheers ( Drink to That ) " is a pop rock song produced by The Runners , and interpolates Avril Lavigne 's 2002 single " I 'm with You " . Mark Savage from BBC News described the song as a funky , loping guitar groove for a night out on the town . " Only Girl ( In the World ) " was the third song from the album produced by StarGate . It is an up @-@ tempo dance @-@ pop song that incorporates elements of eurodance in its production . Brad Wete , a reviewer of Entertainment Weekly , described Rihanna 's vocals as " seductive " and reminiscent of a " stronger , sexier version " of her 2007 single , " Don 't Stop the Music " . 
 " California King Bed " is a rock power ballad ; Ryan Dombell of Pitchfork Media compared it to the Aerosmith song , " I Don 't Want to Miss a Thing " . The Shama Joseph produced " Man Down " is a reggae song with an electro rhythm , in which Rihanna sings in a West Indian accent . " Raining Men " is a hip @-@ hop song , which features rap vocals from Trinidadian rapper Nicki Minaj . Rihanna described the song as a fun song that differs from the original , referring to the 1979 single by The Weather Girls with similar title " It 's Raining Men " . " Complicated " was produced by Tricky Stewart and Ester Dean . Leah Greenblatt from Entertainment Weekly said " Even while telling a recalcitrant man how hard he is to love , she [ Rihanna ] sounds almost buoyant , her newly expanded vocals eager to scale the song 's high @-@ altitude house beat " . The final track is the sequel to Rihanna 's duet with Eminem , " Love the Way You Lie " . " Love the Way You Lie ( Part II ) " , which was produced by Alex da Kid , features Rihanna as the protagonist and lead vocalist , viewing aspects of a relationship from a female perspective , unlike the original , which featured Eminem as lead vocalist and was from a male perspective . 
 = = Singles = = 
 " Only Girl ( In the World ) " was released as the album 's lead single on September 10 , 2010 . The song was sent to US mainstream and rhythmic radio on September 21 , 2010 . It received positive reviews from music critics , who praised its chorus and thunderous dance beats . The song reached number one on the US Billboard Hot 100 chart , in the UK , Canada , Australia , Austria , Belgium ( Wallonia ) , Ireland , Israel , Italy , New Zealand , Norway and Slovakia , becoming one of her best charting songs to date . At the 53rd Grammy Awards , held at the Staples Center in Los Angeles on February 13 , 2011 , " Only Girl ( In the World ) " won the award for Best Dance Recording . 
 " What 's My Name ? " , which features guest vocals by Canadian recording artist Drake , was released as the album 's second single ; it was sent to US mainstream and rhythmic radios on September 21 , 2010 . Music critics praised the song as some of Rihanna 's best vocal work to date , noting the romantic nature of the song and its sexual tones . The song peaked at number one on the US Billboard Hot 100 chart , giving Rihanna her eighth number @-@ one on the chart , while " Only Girl ( In the World ) " became her ninth number @-@ one song two weeks after " What 's My Name ? " . It reached number one in the United Kingdom and became Rihanna 's fifth UK number one single and Drake 's first . 
 The collaboration with Nicki Minaj , " Raining Men " , was sent to urban radio on December 7 , 2010 as an urban radio single and third track from Loud as a single in the US . It peaked at number 48 on the US Billboard R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs chart . " Raining Men " received mixed reviews from critics who praised the chemistry between Rihanna and Minaj but criticised the song for failing to create anything new or original . " S & M " , the album 's fourth US single and third international single , was solicited to US mainstream radio on January 25 , 2011 . Reception of " S & M " was mixed ; some reviewers criticized the overt use of sexual lyrics while others noted it as a stand @-@ out track from Loud . A remix of the song which features guest vocals by Britney Spears , was digitally released on April 11 , 2011 . " S & M " reached the top ten in twenty @-@ four countries and peaked at number one in Australia , Canada and the United States . 
 " Man Down " was released as the fifth international single in some European countries in July 2011 . It received positive reviews from critics , who called it a return to Rihanna 's Caribbean @-@ tinged rhythm . " Man Down " reached a peak of 59 on the US Billboard Hot 100 chart . In France , it peaked at number one for five consecutive weeks . " California King Bed " was released as the fourth international single on May 13 , 2011 , and as the sixth US single . It was sent to US Hot / Modern adult contemporary radio on May 16 , 2011 . The song peaked at number four in Australia and New Zealand and number eight on the UK Singles Chart . On July 24 , 2011 , Rihanna announced the release of " Cheers ( Drink to That ) " as the seventh single from the album . The single was released to US mainstream and rhythmic radio on August 2 , 2011 . The song peaked at number seven on the US Billboard Hot 100 , and number twelve on the US Pop Songs chart . 
 = = Release and promotion = = 
 Loud was released on November 12 , 2010 , in four separate editions : a standard edition ; a deluxe edition , packaged in a digipak exclusively for the US and Australia , that features a 30 @-@ minute documentary Making of Loud DVD ( Directed by Brian and Brad Palmer ) ; a Couture Edition containing the deluxe edition of Loud with a deluxe cover art lithograph , a box set with enhanced clear couture cover and a full @-@ size photo book . An Ultra Couture Edition was also produced , containing a copy of the Deluxe Edition of Loud signed by Rihanna , the MP3 download of Loud on street date and all the features of the Couture Edition . The Ultra Couture Edition sold out and is no longer available neither on Amazon or her online store . An explicit version of Loud was also released and features a Parental Advisory label due to some of the lyrical content . The Japanese edition of the album was released with two additional remixes of " Only Girl ( In the World ) " . The piano version of " Love the Way You Lie ( Part II ) " was only available with the iTunes edition of the album . However , the version which features Eminem was available for purchase . 
 = = = Live performances = = = 
 Rihanna embarked on a promotional tour across Europe and North America to promote the album 's release . The singer performed " Only Girl ( In the World ) " , the lead single , live for the first time in North America on Saturday Night Live on October 30 , 2010 , and debuted the second single , " What 's My Name ? " , later on in the show . The following day in the United Kingdom , Rihanna sang " Only Girl ( In the World ) " on series seven of The X Factor . Rihanna performed " Only Girl ( In the World ) " at the MTV Europe Music Awards 2010 in Madrid , Spain , on November 7 , 2010 , on The X Factor in Italy on November 9 , 2010 , and on Le Grand Journal in France on November 10 , 2010 . On November 11 , 2010 , Rihanna appeared on a pre @-@ recorded edition of The Graham Norton Show in the United Kingdom , where she gave an interview and sang " Only Girl ( In the World ) " . On November 15 , before the album 's US release , Rihanna reprised her performance of " What 's My Name ? " for MTV 's The Seven , live from Times Square , New York City . The next day , Rihanna performed " What 's My Name ? " on the Late Show with David Letterman . On November 17 , 2010 , Rihanna was interviewed and performed " Only Girl ( In the World ) " and " What 's My Name ? " on Good Morning America . Rihanna performed a medley of " Love the Way You Lie ( Part II ) " , " What 's My Name ? " and " Only Girl ( In the World ) " at the American Music Awards of 2010 on November 21 , 2010 , where she won the award for Favorite Soul / R & B Female Artist . Rihanna opened with an a cappella version of " Love The Way You Lie Part II " . 
 On December 11 , 2010 , Rihanna returned to series seven of the UK 's The X Factor , to perform " Unfaithful " with finalist Matt Cardle , as well as a solo of " What 's My Name ? " . The finale was watched by fifteen million viewers ; however , the episode generated thousands of complaints about Rihanna 's choice of outfit and sexual performance . Rihanna performed the song with Drake for the first time at the 53rd Grammy Awards on February 13 , 2011 . Rihanna also appeared at the 2011 BRIT Awards on February 15 , 2011 , where she performed " S & M " for the first time , as a medley with " Only Girl ( In the World ) " and " What 's My Name ? " . Rihanna was requested to " tone down " her performance of " S & M " by the show 's producers , and she performed only one verse and chorus in between " Only Girl ( In The World ) " and " What 's My Name ? " . The BRIT Awards corporation wanted to avoid receiving complaints similar to those received by the X @-@ Factor . Rihanna was a special guest at the NBA All Star Game on February 20 , 2011 , where she performed a medley of " Umbrella " , " Only Girl ( In the World ) " , " Rude Boy " , " What 's My Name ? " ( with Drake ) and " All of the Lights " ( with Kanye West ) . 
 Rihanna performed " California King Bed " in the style of a country music song for the first time with Sugarland front woman Jennifer Nettles , during the ACM Awards held by the Academy of Country Music on April 3 , 2011 . She was a guest on the tenth season of the US series American Idol on April 14 , 2011 , where she performed " California King Bed " . Rihanna promoted " California King Bed " with performances in Milan , Paris and Hamburg , because she was appointed ambassador for Nivea skincare . Rihanna opened the Billboard Music Awards on May 22 , 2011 , performing the remix of " S & M " with Britney Spears at the MGM Grand Garden Arena in Las Vegas . The performance attracted complaints about the overt sexual nature of the broadcast on a publicly owned television channel . Rihanna performed on NBC 's Today show on May 27 , 2011 as part of a Summer Concert Series . She performed " S & M " , " Only Girl ( In the World ) " , " What 's My Name ? " and " California King Bed " . 
 = = = Tour = = = 
 To further promote Loud , Rihanna embarked on her fourth concert tour , the Loud Tour , in June 2011 , having announced it on February 9 , 2011 . The tour comprised 101 show dates , 32 in North America , 1 in Central America , 4 in South America and 64 in Europe . Tickets sold well in the United Kingdom and some additional shows were added . She performed ten shows at London 's O2 Arena . Rihanna was interviewed by Ryan Seacrest on American Idol , and talked about the design of the stage , stating : " We 've just designed the stage and we have a section that we are building ... where the fans can actually be in the show and in the stage and be closer than they 've ever been . It 's real VIP . " The North American leg of the tour began on June 4 , 2011 in Baltimore , United States . Originally , J. Cole and Cee Lo Green were planned as supporting acts for the North American leg . However , Green left the tour , citing schedule conflicts . Rappers Drake , Kanye West and Jay @-@ Z made guest appearances on some dates to perform their collaborations " What 's My Name ? " , " Run This Town " , " All of the Lights " and " Umbrella " , respectively . The tour was received positively by critics , with some calling it " Rihanna 's best tour yet " . Jane Stevenson of the Toronto Sun commented that " the two @-@ hour , larger @-@ than @-@ life show lived up to the billing . " Jon Brean of the Minneapolis " Star Tribune " remarked , " The Barbadian singer is more visually and vocally dynamic than she has ever been before . " 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Loud received generally positive reviews from music critics . At Metacritic , which assigns a normalized rating out of 100 given to reviews from mainstream critics , the album received an average score of 67 , based on 22 reviews . Jon Pareles of The New York Times perceived a " hermetic , cool calculation " on the album , writing that it " works the pop gizmos as neatly as any album this year , maintaining the Rihanna brand " . Entertainment Weekly 's Leah Greenblatt commented that Loud shows Rihanna " undefeated by her worst circumstances — and finding redemption in exactly the kind of pop nirvana that made her famous in the first place " . James Reed of The Boston Globe called the album " an unabashed return to where Rihanna belongs : the dance floor " and stated : " As if liberating herself from the depths , she 's a force on these 11 songs " . Stacey Anderson of Spin commended Rihanna 's " full , healthy claim to her sexuality " and wrote that the album " offers a confident female ethos on par with the best of Shakira or Beyoncé " . 
 Genevieve Koski of The A.V. Club commended Rihanna for elevating the album 's generic sound , writing that she " does sound invigorated , delivering charismatic vocal performances of material that doesn ’ t always warrant them " . Emily Mackay of NME felt that its " experiments feel more organic , its tone better paced " than Rated R. Thomas Conner of the Chicago Sun @-@ Times wrote that " the celebratory atmosphere of Rihanna 's sassy new jams are seasoned with some of the darker flavors from ' Rated R ' " . Pitchfork Media 's Ryan Dombal complimented the album 's " effervescent pop " and stated : " Her laissez @-@ faire attitude toward hit @-@ making on Loud can result in too @-@ safe moves or semi @-@ experiments that come off surprisingly great " . Ed Power of Hot Press complimented its " unabashedly subtext @-@ free " songs and found its hooks " way beyond addictive . " 
 In a mixed review , Andy Kellman of Allmusic found the album 's material " slapdash " and " uneven " , and called it " more an unfocused assortment of poor @-@ to @-@ solid songs than a unified set " . Andy Gill of The Independent felt that " the more interesting tracks are those with less salacious demands on her vulnerability " . Slant Magazine 's Sal Cinquemani commended that " the subtle West Indian flavor with which Rihanna and company have smartly imbued " most of the album , although he noted some flaws in its production and wrote that " Rihanna has always had trouble fitting into one genre ... and for better or worse , Rihanna continues to stylistically branch out on Loud " . Hugh Montgomery of The Observer commented that " sonically , it 's fairly unremarkable ... but its strident buoyancy is difficult to resist " . 
 " Only Girl ( in the World ) " won the Grammy Award for Best Dance Recording at the 53rd Annual Grammy Awards and the album was nominated for three awards at the 54th Grammy Awards , including Album of the Year , Best Pop Vocal Album and Best Rap / Sung Collaboration for " What 's My Name ? " . 
 = = Commercial performance = = 
 Loud debuted at number three on the US Billboard 200 chart , with first @-@ week sales of 207 @,@ 000 copies in the United States , giving Rihanna her highest first @-@ week sales in the US at that time . It also debuted at number one on Billboard 's R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Albums chart . In its second week , the album dropped to number six on the Billboard 200 and sold 141 @,@ 000 copies . By its thirteenth week , the album returned to its peak at number three and sold 62 @,@ 000 copies . However , in its fourteenth week , the album dipped to number ten on the Billboard 200 with 45 @,@ 000 copies sold . In its fifteenth week , Loud rose to number eight , selling an additional 33 @,@ 000 copies in the US . By July 3 , 2011 , Loud was the eleventh @-@ best selling album of 2011 in the United States , selling 598 @,@ 000 copies between January 1 , 2011 and July 3 , 2011 . On January 25 , 2011 , Loud was certified platinum in the United States , denoting shipments of over one million . Loud ranked as Billboard magazine 's ninth @-@ most successful album of 2011 on their year @-@ end charts . As of June 2015 , the album has sold 1 @.@ 8 million copies in the United States . 
 Loud was also a commercial success outside of the United States . In Canada , it debuted at number one on the Canadian Albums Chart , selling 27 @,@ 000 copies in its first week . Loud sold more than 80 @,@ 000 units in Canada , achieving platinum status by the first week of December 2010 . By September 8 , 2011 , Loud had sold more than 240 @,@ 000 copies in Canada . In France , the album debuted at number three with first @-@ week sales of 17 @,@ 304 copies . By its sixth week on the French charts , Loud achieved platinum status , reaching the 100 @,@ 000 copies mark . In France , the album has sold 355 @,@ 000 copies as of April 2013 . In its second week on the Australian Albums Chart , Loud was certified platinum for shipments of over 70 @,@ 000 copies . In Italy , the album reached number eleven . It became Rihanna 's highest charting album there until her sixth studio album Talk That Talk ( 2011 ) surpassed the record . Loud was her third consecutive number @-@ one album in Switzerland . Loud debuted at number two on the German Albums Chart . 
 The album debuted at number two in the United Kingdom , with first week sales of 91 @,@ 000 units . In its fifth week , the album sold 306 @,@ 107 copies in the United Kingdom , giving the singer her first platinum @-@ selling week in her career . In its seventh week on the chart , Loud reached number one , giving Rihanna her second UK number @-@ one album . After seven weeks of sales , the album became the fourth best @-@ selling album of 2010 in the UK . The album had sold 1 @,@ 800 @,@ 000 copies in the United Kingdom by September 4 , 2011 . By December 16 , 2011 , Loud was certified six @-@ times platinum by the British Phonographic Industry ( BPI ) , marking shipments of 1 @.@ 8 million copies to retailers . It was the biggest selling R & B album of 2011 in the UK . As of August 2012 , Loud is the fifth biggest selling digital album of all time . As of March 2015 , Loud is the 45th best @-@ selling album of the millennium in the United Kingdom . As of November 2011 , the album has sold over 8 million copies worldwide . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 Notes 
 ^ a signifies a vocal producer 
 " Cheers ( Drink to That ) " contains samples from " I 'm with You " ( 2002 ) , as performed by Avril Lavigne and written by Lavigne , Scott Spock , Graham Edwards and Lauren Christy . 
 = = Release formats = = 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Credits for Loud adapted from Allmusic . 
 Musicians 
 Production 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Shackleton – Rowett Expedition = 
 The Shackleton – Rowett Expedition ( 1921 – 22 ) was Sir Ernest Shackleton 's last Antarctic project , and the final episode in the Heroic Age of Antarctic Exploration . The venture , financed by John Quiller Rowett , is sometimes referred to as the Quest Expedition after its ship Quest , a converted Norwegian sealer . Shackleton had originally intended to go to the Arctic and explore the Beaufort Sea , but this plan was abandoned when the Canadian government withheld financial support ; Shackleton thereupon switched his attention to the Antarctic . Quest , smaller than any recent Antarctic exploration vessel , soon proved inadequate for its task , and progress south was delayed by its poor sailing performance and by frequent engine problems . Before the expedition 's work could properly begin , Shackleton died on board the ship , just after its arrival at the sub @-@ Antarctic island of South Georgia . 
 The major part of the subsequent attenuated expedition was a three @-@ month cruise to the eastern Antarctic , under the leadership of the party 's second @-@ in @-@ command , Frank Wild . The shortcomings of Quest were soon in evidence : slow speed , heavy fuel consumption , a tendency to roll in heavy seas , and a steady leak . The ship was unable to proceed further than longitude 20 ° E , well short of its easterly target , and its engine 's low power was insufficient for it to penetrate southward through the pack ice . Following several fruitless attempts , Wild returned the ship to South Georgia , on the way visiting Elephant Island where he and 21 others had been stranded after the sinking of the ship Endurance , during Shackleton 's Imperial Trans @-@ Antarctic Expedition six years earlier . 
 Wild had thoughts of a second , more productive season in the ice , and took the ship to Cape Town for a refit . Here , in June 1922 , he received a message from Rowett ordering the ship home to England , so the expedition ended quietly . The Quest voyage is not greatly regarded in the histories of polar exploration , the event that defines it in public memory , overshadowing its other activities , being Shackleton 's untimely death . 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = Shackleton after the Endurance = = = 
 Shackleton returned to Britain from the Endurance expedition in late May 1917 , while World War I was raging . Too old to enlist , he nevertheless sought an active role in the war effort , and eventually departed for Murmansk with the temporary army rank of major , as part of a military mission to North Russia . Shackleton expressed his dissatisfaction with this role in letters home : " I feel I am no use to anyone unless I am <unk> the storm in wild lands . " He returned to England in February 1919 and began plans to set up a company that would , with the cooperation of the North Russian Government , develop the natural resources of the region . This scheme came to nothing , as the Red Army took control of that part of Russia during the Russian Civil War ; to provide himself with an income , Shackleton had to rely on the lecture circuit . During the winter of 1919 – 20 he lectured twice a day , six days a week , for five months . 
 = = = Canadian proposal = = = 
 Despite the large debts still outstanding from the Endurance expedition , Shackleton 's mind turned to his next exploration venture . He decided to turn away from the Antarctic , go northwards and , as he put it , " fill in this great blank now called the Beaufort Sea " . This area of the Arctic ocean , to the north of Alaska and west of the Canadian Arctic Archipelago , was largely unexplored ; Shackleton believed , on the basis of tidal records , that it contained large undiscovered land masses that " would be of the greatest scientific interest to the world , apart from the possible economic value " . He also hoped to reach the northern " pole of inaccessibility " , the most remote point in the Arctic regions . In March 1920 , his plans received the general approval of the Royal Geographical Society ( RGS ) and were supported by the Canadian government . On this basis Shackleton set about acquiring the necessary funding , which he estimated at £ 50 @,@ 000 ( about £ 1 @.@ 6 million , 2008 value ) . Later that year , Shackleton met by chance an old school @-@ friend , John Quiller Rowett , who agreed to put up a nucleus of cash to enable Shackleton to get started . With this money Shackleton was able , in January 1921 , to acquire the wooden Norwegian whaler <unk> I , and to proceed with the purchase of other equipment and the hiring of a crew . 
 In May 1921 the policy of the Canadian government towards the funding of expeditions changed with the advent of a new Prime Minister , Arthur Meighen , who withdrew support from Shackleton 's proposal . Shackleton was required to rethink his plans , and decided to sail for the Antarctic after all . A varied programme of exploration , coastal mapping , mineral prospecting and oceanographic research in southern waters would replace the <unk> Beaufort Sea venture . 
 = = Antarctic preparation = = 
 = = = Objectives = = = 
 Even before his problems with the Canadian government , Shackleton had been considering a southern expedition as a possible alternative to the Beaufort Sea . According to the RGS librarian Hugh Robert Mill , as early as March 1920 Shackleton had talked about two possible schemes — the Beaufort Sea exploration , and " an oceanographical expedition with the object of visiting all the little @-@ known islands of the South Atlantic and South Pacific " . By June 1921 , it had expanded to include a circumnavigation of the Antarctic continent and the mapping of around 2 @,@ 000 miles ( 3 @,@ 200 km ) of uncharted coastline . It would also encompass a search for " lost " or wrongly charted sub @-@ Antarctic islands ( including Dougherty Island , <unk> , and the Nimrod Islands ) , investigations of possible mineral resources to be exploited in these rediscovered lands , and an ambitious scientific research program . This was to include soundings around Gough Island to investigate an alleged " underwater continental connection between Africa and America . " Shackleton biographer Margery Fisher calls the plan " diffuse " , and " far too comprehensive for one small body of men to tackle within two years " . According to biographer Roland Huntford the expedition had no obvious goal and was " only too clearly a piece of improvisation , a pretext [ for Shackleton ] to get away " . 
 Fisher describes the expedition as representing " the dividing line between what has become known as the Heroic Age of Antarctic exploration and the Mechanical Age " . Shackleton called the voyage " pioneering " , referring specifically to the aeroplane that was taken ( but ultimately not used ) on the expedition . In fact this was only one of the technological " firsts " that marked the venture ; there were gadgets in profusion . The ship 's crow 's nest was electrically heated ; there were heated overalls for the lookouts , a wireless set , and a device called an <unk> which could trace and chart the ship 's route automatically . Photography was to figure prominently , and " a large and expensive outfit of cameras , <unk> machines and general photographic appliances [ was ] acquired " . Among the oceanographical research equipment was a Lucas deep @-@ sea sounding machine . 
 This ample provision arose from the sponsorship of Rowett , who had extended his original gift of seed money to an undertaking to cover the costs of the entire expedition . The extent of Rowett 's contribution is not recorded ; in an ( undated ) prospectus for the southern expedition Shackleton had estimated the total cost as " about £ 100 @,@ 000 " . Whatever the total , Rowett appears to have funded the lion 's share , enabling Frank Wild to record later that , unique among Antarctic expeditions of the era , this one returned home without any outstanding debt . According to Wild , without Rowett 's actions the expedition would have been impossible : " His generous attitude is the more remarkable in that he knew there was no prospect of financial return , and what he did was in the interest of scientific research and from friendship with Shackleton . " His only recognition was the attachment of his name to the title of the expedition . Rowett was , according to Huntford , " a stodgy , prosaic looking " businessman , who was , in 1920 , a co @-@ founder and principal contributor to an animal nutrition research institute in Aberdeen known as the Rowett Research Institute ( now part of the University of Aberdeen ) . He had also endowed dental research work at the Middlesex Hospital . 
 = = = Quest = = = 
 In March 1921 , Shackleton renamed his expedition vessel Quest . She was a small ship , 125 tons according to Huntford , with sail and auxiliary engine power purportedly capable of making eight knots , but in fact rarely making more than five @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half . Huntford describes her as " straight @-@ stemmed " , with an awkward square rig , and a tendency to wallow in heavy seas . Fisher reports that she was built in 1917 , weighed 204 tons , and had a large and spacious deck . Although she had some modern facilities , such as electric lights in the cabins , she was unsuited to long oceanic voyages ; Shackleton , on the first day out , observed that " in no way are we <unk> or fitted to ignore even the mildest storm " . Leif Mills , in his biography of Frank Wild , says that had the ship been taken to the Beaufort Sea in accordance with Shackleton 's original plans , she would probably have been crushed in the Arctic pack ice . On her voyage south she suffered frequent damage and breakdowns , requiring repairs at every port of call . 
 = = = Personnel = = = 
 The Times newspaper had reported that Shackleton planned to take a dozen men to the Arctic , " chiefly those who had accompanied him on earlier expeditions " . In actuality , Quest left London for the south with 20 men , of whom eight were old Endurance comrades ; another , James Dell , was a veteran from the Discovery , 20 years previously . Some of the Endurance hands had not been fully paid from the earlier expedition , but were prepared to join Shackleton again out of personal loyalty . 
 Frank Wild , on his fourth trip with Shackleton , filled the second @-@ in @-@ command post as he had on the Endurance expedition . Frank Worsley , Endurance 's former captain , became captain of Quest . Other old comrades included the two surgeons , Alexander Macklin and James McIlroy , the meteorologist Leonard Hussey , the engineer Alexander Kerr , seaman Tom McLeod and cook Charles Green . Shackleton had assumed that Tom Crean would sign up , and had assigned him duties " in charge of boats " , but Crean had retired from the navy to start a family back home in County Kerry , and declined Shackleton 's invitation . 
 Of the newcomers , Roderick Carr , a New Zealand @-@ born Royal Air Force pilot , was hired to fly the expedition 's aeroplane , an Avro " Antarctic " Baby : an Avro Baby modified as a seaplane with an 80 @-@ horsepower engine . He had met Shackleton in North Russia , and had recently been serving as Chief of Staff to the Lithuanian air force . In fact , the aeroplane was not used during the expedition due to some missing parts , and Carr therefore assisted with the scientific work . The scientific staff included Australian biologist Hubert Wilkins , who had Arctic experience , and the Canadian geologist Vibert Douglas , who had initially signed for the aborted Beaufort Sea expedition . The recruits who caught the most public attention were two members of the Boy Scout movement , Norman Mooney and James Marr . As the result of publicity organised by the Daily Mail newspaper , these two had been selected to join the expedition out of around 1 @,@ 700 Scouts who had applied to go . Mooney , who was from the Orkney Islands , soon dropped out , leaving the ship at Madeira after suffering chronic seasickness . Marr , an 18 @-@ year @-@ old from Aberdeen , remained with the expedition throughout , winning plaudits from Shackleton and Wild for his application to the tasks at hand . After being put to work in the ship 's coal bunkers , according to Wild , Marr " came out of the trial very well , showing an amount of hardihood and endurance that was remarkable " . 
 = = Expedition = = 
 = = = Voyage south = = = 
 Quest sailed from St Katharine Docks , London , on 17 September 1921 , after inspection by King George V. Large crowds gathered on the banks of the river and on the bridges , to witness the event . Marr wrote in his diary that it was as though " all London had conspired together to bid us a heartening farewell " . 
 Shackleton 's original intention was to sail down to Cape Town , visiting the main South Atlantic islands on the way . From Cape Town , Quest would head for the Enderby Land coast of Antarctica where , once in the ice , it would explore the coastline towards Coats Land in the Weddell Sea . At the end of the summer season the ship would visit South Georgia before returning to Cape Town for refitting and preparation for the second year 's work . However , the ship 's performance in the early stages of the voyage disrupted this schedule . Serious problems with the engine necessitated a week 's stay in Lisbon , and further stops in Madeira and the Cape Verde Islands . These delays and the slow speed of the ship led Shackleton to decide that it would be necessary to sacrifice entirely the visits to the South Atlantic islands , and instead he turned the ship towards Rio de Janeiro , where the engine could receive a thorough overhaul . Quest reached Rio on 22 November 1921 . 
 The engine overhaul , and the replacement of the damaged topmast , delayed the party in Rio for four weeks . This meant that it was no longer practical to proceed to Cape Town and then on to the ice . Shackleton decided to sail directly to Grytviken harbour in South Georgia . Equipment and stores that had been sent on to Cape Town would have to be sacrificed , but Shackleton hoped that this shortfall could be made up in South Georgia . He was vague about the direction the expedition should take after South Georgia ; Macklin wrote in his diary , " The Boss says ... quite frankly that he does not know what he will do . " 
 = = = Death of Shackleton = = = 
 On 17 December , the day before Quest was due to leave Rio , Shackleton fell ill . He may have suffered a heart attack ; Macklin was called , but Shackleton refused to be examined and declared himself " better " the next morning . On the ensuing voyage to South Georgia he was , from the accounts of his shipmates , unusually subdued and listless . He also began drinking champagne each morning , " to <unk> the pain " , contrary to his normal rule of not allowing liquor at sea . A severe storm ruined the expedition 's proposed Christmas celebrations , and a new problem with the engine 's steam furnace slowed progress and caused Shackleton further stress . By 1 January 1922 , the weather had abated : " Rest and calm after the storm – the year has begun kindly for us " , wrote Shackleton in his diary . On 4 January 1922 , South Georgia was sighted , and late that morning Quest anchored at Grytviken . 
 After visiting the whaling establishment ashore , Shackleton returned to the ship apparently refreshed . He told Frank Wild that they would celebrate their deferred Christmas the next day , and retired to his cabin to write his diary . " The old smell of dead whale permeates everything " , he wrote . " It is a strange and curious place .... A wonderful evening . In the darkening twilight I saw a lone star hover , gem like above the bay . " Later he slept , and was heard snoring by the surgeon McIlroy , who had just finished his watch @-@ keeping duty . Shortly after 2 a.m. on the morning of 5 January , Macklin , who had taken over the watch , was summoned to Shackleton 's cabin . He found Shackleton complaining of back pains and severe facial neuralgia , and asking for a painkilling drug . In a brief discussion , Macklin told his leader that he had been overdoing things , and needed to lead a more regular life . Macklin records Shackleton as saying : " You 're always wanting me to give up things , what is it I ought to give up ? " Macklin replied " Chiefly alcohol , Boss , I don 't think it agrees with you . " Immediately afterwards Shackleton " had a very severe paroxysm , during which he died " . 
 The death certificate , signed by Macklin , gave the cause as " <unk> of the <unk> arteries and Heart failure " — in modern terms , coronary thrombosis . Later that morning Wild , now in command , gave the news to the shocked crew , and told them that the expedition would carry on . The body was brought ashore for embalming before its return to England . On 19 January , Leonard Hussey accompanied the body on board a steamer bound for Montevideo , but on arrival there he found a message from Lady Shackleton , requesting that the body be returned to South Georgia for burial . Hussey brought the body back to Grytviken , where on 5 March Shackleton was buried in the Norwegian cemetery . Quest had meantime sailed , so only Hussey of Shackleton 's former comrades was present at the interment . A rough cross marked the grave , until it was replaced by a tall granite column six years later . 
 = = = Voyage to the ice = = = 
 As leader , Wild had to arrange where the expedition should now go . Kerr reported that the furnace problem was manageable , and after supplementing stores and equipment with what was available in South Georgia , Wild decided to proceed in general accordance with Shackleton 's original plans . He would take the ship eastward towards Bouvet Island and then beyond , before turning south to enter the ice as close as possible to Enderby Land , and begin coastal survey work there . The expedition would also investigate an " Appearance of Land " in the mouth of the Weddell Sea , reported by Sir James Clark Ross in 1842 , but not seen since . Ultimately , however , progress would depend on weather , ice conditions , and the capabilities of the ship . 
 Quest left South Georgia on 18 January , heading south @-@ east towards the South Sandwich Islands . There was a heavy swell , such that the overladen ship frequently dipped its gunwales below the waves , filling the waist with water . As they proceeded , Wild wrote that Quest rolled like a log , was leaking and required regular pumping , was heavy on coal consumption , and was slow . All these factors led him , at the end of January , to change his plan . Bouvet Island was abandoned in favour of a more southerly course that brought them to the edge of the pack ice on 4 February . 
 " Now the little Quest can really try her mettle " , wrote Wild , as the ship entered the loose pack . He noted that Quest was the smallest ship ever to attempt to penetrate the heavy Antarctic ice , and pondered on the fate of others . " Shall we escape , or will the Quest join the ships in Davy Jones 's Locker ? " During the days that followed , as they moved southward in falling temperatures , the ice thickened . On 12 February they reached the most southerly latitude they would attain , 69 ° 17'S , and their most easterly longitude , 17 ° <unk> , well short of Enderby Land . Noting the state of the sea ice and fearing being frozen in , Wild retreated to the north and west . He still hoped to tackle the heavy ice , and if possible to break through to the hidden land beyond . On 18 February he turned the ship south again for another try , but was no more successful than before . On 24 February , after a series of further efforts had failed , Wild set a course westward across the mouth of the Weddell Sea . The ship would try to visit Elephant Island in the South Shetlands , before returning to South Georgia on the onset of winter . 
 For the most part , the long passage across the Weddell Sea proceeded uneventfully . Wild and Worsley were at odds with each other , according to Macklin , and there was other discontent among the crew which Wild , in his own account , dealt with by the threat of " the most drastic treatment " . On 12 March they reached 64 ° 11'S , 46 ° <unk> , which was the area where Ross had recorded an " Appearance of Land " in 1842 , but there was no sign of it , and a depth sounding of over 2 @,@ 300 fathoms ( 13 @,@ 800 ft , 4 @,@ 200 m . ) indicated no likelihood of land nearby . Between 15 – 21 March Quest was frozen into the ice , and the shortage of coal became a major concern . When the ship broke free , Wild set a course directly for Elephant Island , where he hoped that the coal supply could be supplemented by blubber from the elephant seals there . On 25 March the island was sighted . Wild wanted if possible to revisit Cape Wild , the site of the old Endurance expedition camp , but bad weather prevented this . They viewed the site through binoculars , picking out the old landmarks , before landing on the western coast to hunt for elephant seals . They were able to obtain sufficient blubber to mix with the coal so that , aided by a favourable wind , they reached South Georgia on 6 April . 
 = = = Return = = = 
 Quest remained in South Georgia for a month , during which time Shackleton 's old comrades erected a memorial cairn to their former leader , on a headland overlooking the entrance to Grytviken harbour . Quest finally sailed for South Africa on 8 May . The first port of call , however , was Tristan da Cunha , a remote inhabited island to the west and south of Cape Town . After a rough crossing of the " Roaring Forties " , Quest arrived at there on 20 May . On the orders of the Chief Scout , Marr presented a flag to the local Scout Troop . 
 During the five @-@ day stay , with the help of some of the islanders , the expedition made brief landings on the small Inaccessible Island , 20 miles ( 32 km ) south @-@ west of Tristan , and visited the even smaller Nightingale Island , collecting specimens . Wild 's impressions of the stay at Tristan were not altogether favourable . He noted the appalling squalor and poverty , and said of the population : " They are ignorant , shut off almost completely from the world , horribly limited in outlook . " After the Scout parade and flag presentation , Quest sailed on to Gough Island , 200 miles ( 320 km ) to the east , where members of the expedition took geological and botanical samples . They arrived at Cape Town on 18 June , to be greeted by enthusiastic crowds . The South African Prime Minister , Jan Smuts , gave an official reception for them , and they were honoured at dinners and lunches by local organisations . 
 They were also met by Rowett 's agent , with the message that they should return to England . Wild wrote : " I should have liked one more season in the Enderby Quadrant ... much might be accomplished by making Cape Town our starting point and setting out early in the season . " However , on 19 July they left Cape Town and sailed northwards . Their final visits were to St Helena , Ascension Island and St Vincent . On 16 September , one year after departure , they arrived at Plymouth Harbour . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 = = = Assessment = = = 
 According to Wild , the expedition ended " quietly " , although his biographer Leif Mills writes of enthusiastic crowds in Plymouth Sound . At the end of his account , Wild expressed the hope that the information they had brought back might " prove of value in helping to solve the great natural problems that still beset us " . These results were summarised in five brief appendices to Wild 's book . The summaries reflected the efforts of the scientific staff to collect data and specimens at each port of call , and the geological and survey work carried out by Carr and Douglas on South Georgia , before the southern voyage . Eventually a few scientific papers and articles were developed from this material , but it was , in Leif Mills 's words , " little enough to show for a year 's work " . 
 The lack of a clear , defined expedition objective was aggravated by the failure to call at Cape Town on the way south , which meant that important equipment was not picked up . On South Georgia , Wild found little that could make up for this loss — there were no dogs on the island , so no sledging work could be carried out , which eliminated Wild 's preferred choice of a revised expedition goal , an exploration of Graham Land on the Antarctic Peninsula . The death of Shackleton before the beginning of serious work was a heavy blow , and questions were raised about the adequacy of Wild as his replacement . Some reports imply that Wild drank heavily — " practically an alcoholic " , according to Huntford . Mills suggests that even if Shackleton had lived to complete the expedition , it is arguable whether under the circumstances it could have achieved more than it did under Wild 's command . 
 The non @-@ use of the aeroplane was a disappointment ; Shackleton had hoped to pioneer the use of air transport in Antarctic waters , and had discussed this issue with the British Air Ministry . According to Fisher 's account , essential aeroplane parts had been sent on to Cape Town , but remained uncollected . The long @-@ range , 220 @-@ volt wireless equipment did not work properly , and was abandoned early on . The smaller , 110 @-@ volt equipment worked only within a range of 250 miles ( 400 km ) . During the Tristan visit , Wild attempted to install a new wireless apparatus with the help of a local missionary , but this was also unsuccessful . 
 = = = End of the Heroic Age = = = 
 An Antarctic hiatus followed the return of Quest , there being no significant expeditions to the region for seven years . The expeditions that then followed were of a different character from their predecessors , belonging to the " mechanical age " that succeeded the Heroic Age . 
 At the end of his narrative of the Quest expedition , Wild wrote of the Antarctic : " I think that my work there is done " ; he never returned , closing a career which , like Shackleton 's , had bracketed the entire Heroic Age . None of the other Endurance veterans returned to the Antarctic , although Worsley made one voyage to the Arctic in 1925 . Of the other crew and staff of Quest , the Australian naturalist Hubert Wilkins became a pioneer aviator in both the Arctic and Antarctic , in 1928 flying from Point Barrow , Alaska to Spitsbergen . He also made several unsuccessful attempts during the 1930s , in collaboration with the American adventurer Lincoln Ellsworth , to fly to the South Pole . James Marr , the Boy Scout , also became an Antarctic regular after qualifying as a marine biologist , joining several Australian expeditions in the late 1920s and 1930s . Roderick Carr , the frustrated pilot , became an Air Marshal in the Royal Air Force . 
 = Tropical Storm Thelma = 
 Tropical Storm Thelma , known in the Philippines as Tropical Storm Uring , was one of the deadliest tropical cyclones in Philippine history , killing at least 5 @,@ 081 people . Forming out of a tropical disturbance on November 1 , 1991 , several hundred kilometers north @-@ northeast of Palau , the depression that would become Thelma tracked generally westward . After turning southwestward in response to a cold front , the system intensified into a tropical storm on November 4 as it approached the Philippines . Hours before moving over the Visayas , Thelma attained its peak intensity with estimated ten @-@ minute sustained winds of 75 km / h ( 45 mph ) and a barometric pressure of 992 mbar ( hPa ; 29 @.@ 29 inHg ) . Despite moving over land , the system weakened only slightly , emerging over the South China Sea on November 6 while retaining gale @-@ force winds . Thelma ultimately succumbed to wind shear and degraded to a tropical depression . On November 8 , the depression made landfall in Southern Vietnam before dissipating hours later . 
 While passing over the Philippines , Thelma 's interaction with the high terrain of some of the islands resulted in torrential rainfall . Through a process known as orographic lift , much of the Visayas received 150 mm ( 6 in ) of rain ; however , on Leyte Island there was a localized downpour that brought totals to 580 @.@ 5 mm ( 22 @.@ 85 in ) . With the majority of this falling in a three @-@ hour span , an unprecedented flash flood took place on the island . Much of the land had been <unk> or poorly cultivated and was unable to absorb most of the rain , creating a large runoff . This water overwhelmed the Anilao – Malbasag watershed and rushed downstream . Ormoc City , located past where the Anilao and Malbasag rivers converge , suffered the brunt of the flood . In just three hours , the city was devastated with thousands of homes damaged or destroyed . A total of 4 @,@ 922 people were killed in the city alone , with 2 @,@ 300 perishing along the riverbank . 
 Outside of Ormoc City , 159 people were killed across Leyte and Negros Occidental . Throughout the country , at least 5 @,@ 081 people lost their lives while another 1 @,@ 941 – 3 @,@ 084 were missing and presumed dead . This made Thelma the deadliest tropical cyclone in Philippine history , surpassing a storm in 1867 that killed 1 @,@ 800 , until later surpassed by Typhoon Haiyan ( Yolanda ) in 2013 which killed at least 6 @,@ 300 people . A total of 4 @,@ 446 homes were destroyed while another 22 @,@ 229 were damaged . Total losses amounted to $ 27 @.@ 67 million . Initially , it took over 24 hours for word of the disaster to reach officials due to a crippled communication network around Ormoc City . Within a few days , emergency supply centers were established and aid from various agencies under the United Nations and several countries flowed into the country . A total of $ 5 @.@ 8 million worth of grants and materials was provided collectively in the international relief effort . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 In late October 1991 , a tropical disturbance developed near the Caroline Islands . Tracking generally west @-@ northwestward , the system gradually became more defined . On October 31 , convection associated with the system quickly increased , prompting the issuance of a Tropical Cyclone Formation Alert from the Joint Typhoon Warning Center ( JTWC ) . Early on November 1 , the Japan Meteorological Agency ( JMA ) began monitoring the system as a tropical depression , at which time the system was situated roughly 415 km ( 260 mi ) north @-@ northeast of Palau . Following a satellite @-@ derived surface wind estimate of 45 km / h ( 30 mph ) later that day , the JTWC also began monitoring the low as a tropical depression . Initially , forecast models showed the system continuing on an arcing path out to sea ; however , the system turned westward on November 2 and threatened the Philippines . Due to the cyclone 's proximity to the country , the Philippine Atmospheric , Geophysical and Astronomical Services Administration also monitored the storm and assigned it with the local name Uring . Late on November 3 , the depression turned west @-@ southwestward towards the Visayas in response to an approaching cold front , an event typical of late @-@ season cyclones in the basin . On November 4 , both the JTWC and JMA upgraded the system to a tropical storm , with the latter assigning it the name Thelma . 
 Hours before striking the Philippines on November 4 , both agencies reported Thelma to have reached its peak intensity . The JTWC estimated the storm to have attained one @-@ minute sustained winds of 85 km / h ( 50 mph ) while the JMA estimated ten @-@ minute sustained winds at 75 km / h ( 45 mph ) . Additionally , its barometric pressure reached 992 mbar ( hPa ; 29 @.@ 29 inHg ) . Thelma soon made landfall in Samar before weakening to a minimal tropical storm . Maintaining gale @-@ force winds , the system eventually passed over Palawan Island on November 6 before moving over the South China Sea . Despite being back over water , strong wind shear prevented re @-@ intensification and caused Thelma to weaken to a tropical depression by November 7 . Now moving westward , the depression eventually made its final landfall over the Mekong River Delta in Southern Vietnam on November 8 . Over the next couple of days the system weakened into an area of low pressure as it moved westwards , before it moved into the Andaman Sea during November 10 . Once in the Andaman Sea , the systems remnants contributed to the formation of the Karaikal tropical cyclone during the next day . 
 = = Impact = = 
 Tropical Storm Thelma struck the Philippines just five months after the Ultra @-@ Plinian eruption of Mount Pinatubo . The eruption resulted in the deaths of roughly 800 people and left nearly 1 million homeless . The country 's government was reportedly struggling to deal with the scope of the disaster and the addition of Thelma worsened the situation . 
 Striking the nation as a weak tropical storm , winds from Thelma gusted up to 95 km / h ( 60 mph ) in Tacloban ; these winds caused no known damage . The main destructive force associated with the cyclone was the tremendous rainfall it produced . More than 150 mm ( 6 in ) of rain across much of the Visayas , resulting in widespread flooding . In Tacloban , 140 @.@ 2 mm ( 5 @.@ 52 in ) fell over a 24 ‑ hour span . The heaviest rain occurred on Leyte Island due to orographic lift , which brought large quantities of moisture into the atmosphere over a relatively small area . Additionally , monsoonal winds to the southwest of Thelma converged over the island , further enhancing the precipitation . Near the city of Ormoc , a Philippine National Oil Company rain gauge measured 580 @.@ 5 mm ( 22 @.@ 85 in ) of precipitation , the highest in relation to the storm . Of this , approximately 500 mm ( 20 in ) fell during a three @-@ hour span around noon local time on November 5 . Initially , residents believed that waterspouts transported tremendous amounts of water to the island , triggering the floods . This notion was quickly dismissed as improbable , however . 
 The hardest hit region was Leyte , where more than 4 @,@ 000 people lost their lives . A total of 4 @,@ 446 homes were destroyed while another 22 @,@ 229 were damaged . The majority of casualties and damage took place in Ormoc when a flash flood devastated the city . At least 81 people were killed outside Ormoc and another 14 went missing ; 42 lost their lives in Burauen . The entire island of Leyte was left without power and many areas were isolated as roads were washed away . Another 78 people perished and 70 others were left missing in Negros Occidental . Losses from the storm amounted to $ 27 @.@ 67 million ; $ 18 @.@ 94 million in Leyte and $ 8 @.@ 73 million in Negros Occidental . A total of 598 @,@ 454 people were affected while an estimated 43 @,@ 000 people were left homeless by the storm across the Philippines . 
 = = = Ormoc City tragedy = = = 
 The greatest tragedy during Tropical Storm Thelma took place in the city of Ormoc after torrential rains overwhelmed the Anilao – Malbasag watershed , sending flood waters rushing down the deforested mountainside . This water flowed into the Anilao and Malbasag rivers , located north of Ormoc . The watershed , covering an area of 4 @,@ 567 hectares ( 11 @,@ 285 acres ) , is only 3 @.@ 3 percent forested , with the remainder being used for agricultural and private purposes . According to a study in 1990 , roughly 90 percent of the watershed had been converted into coconut and sugarcane plantations . The majority of this land was improperly cultivated since the 1970s , making conditions worse than they normally would have been . The natural structure of the mountains further contributed to the floods , with slopes as steep as 60 percent grade in some areas . In heavy rain events , this feature leaves the upper two @-@ thirds of the mountain range unstable . In the two hours prior to the heaviest rains , the soil in the watershed became saturated , greatly lessening its effectiveness at absorbing further rains . As a result , the tremendous rains that occurred just prior to the flood , during which rainfall rates reached 167 mm ( 6 @.@ 6 in ) per hour , the land was unable to absorb a majority of the rain . Many landslides ranging from 1 to 3 m ( 3 @.@ 3 to 9 @.@ 8 ft ) deep and 50 to 100 m ( 160 to 330 ft ) wide occurred across the region . Altogether , rains were twice as heavy as the land could handle and the many landslips doubled the volume of fluids . At various points along rivers , temporary dams created by debris , namely trees , allowed a build up of water upstream . In some instances , waters reached a depth of 10 m ( 33 ft ) before the dams collapsed . Normally , it takes water in the Anilao and Malbasag rivers roughly 3 @.@ 6 and 5 @.@ 6 days , respectively , to reach Ormoc City ; however , it only took one hour during the flood . 
 Ormoc City itself is located in a flood @-@ prone area , with the Anilao and Malbasag rivers converging just north of the city and taking a 90 degree turn towards the bay . In addition to the natural dangers of the river , poorly designed structures on the river made conditions worse . The majority of construction along the river did not take flooding threats into account , and actually increased the threat of these events . Concrete walls and levees were built into the river rather than on the banks , leading to faster debris damming . Lastly , just after the turn was the <unk> Bridge . This structure constricted the river by as much as 50 percent , enhancing the build up of water . The turn became the final trigger in the disaster as it created an " instantaneous backwater effect , " causing massive volumes of water to over @-@ top the riverbank . Around 11 : 00 a.m. local time on November 5 , approximately 22 @,@ 835 km3 ( 5 @,@ 480 <unk> ) of water inundated 25 km2 ( 15 @.@ 5 mi2 ) of the city . In just 15 minutes , the water rose by 2 @.@ 1 m ( 7 ft ) and further rose to 3 @.@ 7 m ( 12 ft ) within an hour . The flooding lasted for roughly three hours , leaving up to 0 @.@ 6 m ( 2 @.@ 0 ft ) of sediment behind . 
 The flood struck the city with little to no warning , catching all those in its path off @-@ guard . Numerous low @-@ income families lived along the banks of the river , despite being such a high @-@ risk area . Residential and commercial areas were also set up along reclaimed embankments that restricted river flow . Additionally , squatters were allowed to live along the banks of the Anilao river in an area called Isle Verde . Roughly 2 @,@ 500 people lived on this reclaimed land prior to the flood . The majority of fatalities took place along the banks of the river , with most drowning or being buried in mud or debris . A survivor described the initial event as a gigantic wave crashing over the banks and flooding the city . Isle Verde was virtually wiped out and out of the original 2 @,@ 500 people that lived there , only 200 survived . It became known as the " Isle of Death " to survivors . Residents reported hundreds of bodies floating down rivers in the area . The force of the water and mud was enough to crack the walls of city hall . Nearly 3 @,@ 000 homes were destroyed and more than 11 @,@ 000 others were damaged . In the city alone , officials confirmed that 4 @,@ 922 people were killed and another 1 @,@ 857 – 3 @,@ 000 were left missing . Additionally , 3 @,@ 020 people were injured . The majority of those missing were likely swept out to sea by the flood and presumed dead . Two days after the storm , several bodies of those swept out to sea washed back ashore . Officials stated that the death toll could have been in the tens of thousands had the flood occurred at night rather than in the middle of the day . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Initially , it took more than 24 hours for word of the level of devastation to reach officials in Manila as communications across Leyte were largely destroyed . By November 7 , search and rescue operations were underway across Leyte and Negros Occidental . The first shipment of relief supplies , consisting of food rations , rice , sardines , and used clothing , was to be shipped from Cebu later that day . On November 8 , Philippine President Corazon Aquino declared all of Leyte a disaster area . A Philippine Navy vessel set out with heavy earth @-@ moving machinery and the Philippine Air Force deployed aircraft to assist in rescue efforts . Relief efforts in Ormoc City were hampered by a lack of clear roads and fuel . Amateur radio reports stated that an AC @-@ 130 was able to land at a local airport but materials had to be moved by helicopter from there since roads were blocked . Relief efforts were also hampered by continuing rains and the rough terrain of the affected region . By November 11 , approximately 8 @,@ 300 families had been rescued and another 7 @,@ 521 were evacuated from affected regions . 
 Supply distribution centers were established in Ormoc , providing residents with food , water , and materials , by November 11 . People were given a can of sardines and 1 kg ( 2 @.@ 2 lb ) of rice at these centers . These centers were only able to operate in daylight though due to a lack of fuel and transportation . Water was supplied in limited quantities from Cebu . Medical and sanitation teams were deployed throughout the province , with many coming from surrounding areas . Residents searched through debris for lumber to construct makeshift coffins while others stacked bodies to be picked up by wheelbarrows or trucks . Officials had difficulty determining how to best deal with mass casualties as bodies lay across the Ormoc region . Many were found in the coastal barangays of <unk> , Camp Downes , and <unk> as well as the Ormoc pier . In order to prevent the spread of disease , mass graves were dug , with 700 bodies buried on November 8 . Dump trucks were used to transport the dead to these sites as quickly as possible . As decomposition set in , residents stated that " [ the ] putrid smell was unbearable . " Even months after the storm , bodies were occasionally discovered , some found in drainage systems . By November 10 , four navy vessels were searching debris in the waters near Ormoc for bodies ; 16 were recovered that day with more believed to be submerged in the bay . Roads surrounding the city were finally cleared by November 12 ; however , electricity remained out . With the deployment of medical teams from Japan , hospitals in the region returned to full capacity . By November 22 , electricity and water had been 70 percent and 60 percent restored , respectively . The emergency phase of assistance ended on November 29 and coordination of disaster relief was returned to the Philippines . By that time , national aid to Ormoc reached $ 1 @.@ 1 million , with more than half coming from a presidential grant . 
 On November 7 , despite no official appeal for international aid , the governments of France and the United States provided $ 34 @,@ 783 and $ 25 @,@ 000 in funds . The request for assistance came the following day , with the Philippines requesting food , water , medicine , emergency supplies , and heavy machinery . A team from the United Nations Disaster Relief Organization , specializing with relief coordination and flood management , was also sent . The Red Cross appealed for $ 418 @,@ 000 to support 15 @,@ 000 families for one month . A cash grant of $ 17 @,@ 300 from the United Kingdom was received on November 8 . Two United States Air Force AC @-@ 130s from Subic bay naval base flew to Cebu carrying ready @-@ to @-@ eat meals . International funding reached $ 2 @.@ 5 million on November 12 , with grants of $ 1 @.@ 05 million , $ 1 million , $ 188 @,@ 000 from the Netherlands , Japan , and Australia respectively . Additionally , the United States provided 55 @,@ 000 packages of food rations . This total nearly doubled two days later with grants from the United Nations Development Programme , World Food Programme , World Vision International , Médecins Sans Frontières , Caritas , various branches of the Red Cross , and the governments of Canada and New Zealand . Ultimately , approximately $ 5 @.@ 8 million was provided in international assistance from 13 nations , the United Nations , the Red Cross , and various non @-@ governmental organizations . 
 Isle Verde , where approximately 2 @,@ 300 people were killed , was declared uninhabitable by officials ; however , residents still returned to the area due to a need for land . Eventually , signs that used to warn people not to stay on the islet were eventually taken down and people were no longer warned not to live there . A resettlement community was constructed months later , with plans to house 912 of the 2 @,@ 668 families that needed to be moved from the area . Those that were not moved were left on Isle Verde despite orders not to stay there . Another resettlement project for 700 families was planned at the cost of $ 1 million . 
 The sheer magnitude of the flood event in the Anilao – Malbasag watershed made the region more vulnerable to future flood events . <unk> became more unstable and the rivers themselves were clogged with debris , raising their water levels and widening their banks . In a post @-@ disaster assessment in October 1992 , it was stated that swift cooperation of all agencies from local to governmental was necessary to prevent tragedies of similar caliber in the future . It was urged that residents still living along the river banks be relocated to safer areas ; however , by the time of the report , people had already begun repopulating the area . As a way of avoiding similar breaching of the riverbank , it was suggested that the two rivers be dredged and possibly re @-@ channeled . Several points were also brought up about rehabilitating the landscape of the watershed : reforestation , contoured farming , and redesigning of plantations to better retain rainwater . Long @-@ term rehabilitation of the watershed was deemed necessary in addition to repairing infrastructure in Ormoc . 
 In 1993 , following a request by the Philippine Government , the Japan International Cooperation Agency conducted as study on flood control for Ormoc and other cities across the country . In 1998 , a ₱ 800 million ( $ 20 @.@ 6 million USD ) construction project for flood mitigation was approved and later completed in 2001 . That year , Tropical Depression Auring caused flooding of similar magnitude to Thelma ; however , the waters were properly diverted to the sea . A sculpture and monument to the victims , designed by architect Maribeth <unk> and artist Florence Cinco respectively , called " Gift of Life " was constructed on a 1 @.@ 3 km2 ( 0 @.@ 8 mi2 ) plot of land . It was designed to also depict a need to respect nature and be a message of hope for residents in Ormoc . 
 Due to the catastrophic loss of life caused by the storm , the name Thelma was retired and replaced with Teresa . 
 = Ouvrage La Ferté = 
 Ouvrage La Ferté , also known as Ouvrage Villy @-@ La Ferté , is a petit ouvrage of the Maginot Line , located in the Fortified Sector of Montmédy , facing Belgium . The ouvrage lies between the towns of Villy and La Ferté @-@ sur @-@ Chiers . It possesses two combat blocks linked by an underground gallery . The westernmost position in its sector , it was a comparatively weakly armed fortification in an exposed position that left it vulnerable to isolation and attack . After a sustained attack during the Battle of France the position was overwhelmed by German forces and was destroyed with its entire garrison killed . The fighting at La Ferté was the heaviest of any position in the Maginot Line . It is preserved as a war memorial . 
 = = Design and construction = = 
 La Ferté is one of four positions in the so @-@ called Tête du Pont de Montmédy ( " Montmédy Bridgehead " ) , a salient in the French defensive lines along the Belgian border . The isolated area was one of the " New Fronts " to the west of the main Maginot Line , created to defend against the increased threat of a German advance through Belgium . The New Front positions suffered from restricted funding , as well as discontinuity in the fortification lines . Large distances between fortifications compared to earlier portions of the Line made mutual support between ouvrages difficult . 
 The site was approved in 1934 , under the supervision of <unk> ( Commission d 'Organisation des <unk> <unk> ) , the Maginot Line 's design and construction agency . Work by the contractor Chanel of Antibes began in 1935 at a cost of 14 @.@ 5 million francs . A second phase was planned to add an artillery block . This was scaled back to a pair of separate artillery casemates . A separate entrance block was proposed in April 1940 , linking to the casemates . As the initial confrontation with Germany was already underway , it was too late to be built , with a projected construction time of 18 months . 
 Compared to earlier Maginot positions , the La Ferté site suffered from a number of design and construction deficiencies . The site contours around Block 2 required a great deal of rubble fill to cover the sides of the block . This rubble had not yet stabilized by the spring of 1940 and could be dislodged by artillery fire . Block 2 suffered from restricted fields of fire to the west and southwest , which were covered only by an automatic rifle cloche . The nearby road ran in a cutting that could not be swept by direct fire . Since La Ferté lacked mortars , the road was dead ground . 
 The separate artillery casemates were not habitable for any extended period and lacked close @-@ in defenses . With unusually large gun embrasures measuring 1 @.@ 3 meters ( 4 @.@ 3 ft ) by 1 @.@ 7 meters ( 5 @.@ 6 ft ) , they afforded little protection to their crews against accurate fire , while coverage from the main ouvrage was poor . 
 = = Description = = 
 La Ferté is a petit ouvrage . It is located immediately to the west of the Chiers river , with two semi @-@ buried reinforced concrete combat blocks containing the position 's armament and observation posts , linked by a deep underground gallery . 
 Block 1 : infantry / entry block with one automatic rifle cloche ( GFM @-@ B ) , one observation cloche ( VDP ) , two mixed @-@ arms cloches ( AM ) , one twin machine gun embrasure and one machine gun / 47mm anti @-@ tank gun ( JM / <unk> ) embrasure . 
 Block 2 : infantry block with one retractable mixed @-@ arms turret , one AM cloche , one GFM @-@ B cloche and one GFM @-@ B observation cloche . Block 2 was the principal focus of the German assault . 
 A separate entry block was planned , adjacent to the Villy Est casemate . The underground gallery system at La Ferté is simple , limited to a gallery linking the two blocks , which were initially designed to function as separate units with separate generating plants and ventilation facilities in each block . The 275 @-@ meter ( 902 ft ) gallery contained some shared facilities , such as a kitchen , a laundry and an infirmary , at an average depth of 24 meters ( 79 ft ) below the surface . The gallery 's small size made it most useful as a link , rather than as the garrison , magazine , command post and long @-@ term shelter afforded by the gallery systems of most Maginot ouvrages . Unlike most ouvrages , La Ferté 's living spaces were near the surface in the two combat blocks . A more typical Maginot position would have such spaces under 30 meters ( 98 ft ) of earth or rock cover . Unlike many Maginot positions , the main drain at La Ferté was not configured as an emergency exit . The mixed @-@ arms turret used on Block 2 was known to be mechanically trouble @-@ prone , and La Ferté 's turret particularly so . 
 = = = Casemates = = = 
 A number of small blockhouses are associated with La Ferté , as well as unconnected casemates : 
 Casemate de <unk> : Double block with one JM / <unk> embrasure , one JM embrasure , two AM cloches and one GFM @-@ B cloche , about 2 kilometres ( 1 @.@ 2 mi ) to the east @-@ southeast on the far side of the Chiers . 
 Casemate de Villy Ouest : Artillery block with one 75mm gun . 
 Casemate de Villy Est : Artillery block with one 75mm gun . 
 The Villy gun casemates are close to Block 2 , directly adjacent to the 1940 road . They replaced the planned 75mm gun turret block . The casemates are not connected to each other or to the main ouvrage , a weakness that influenced the 1940 combat action . 
 = = = Villy = = = 
 The village of Villy lies about one kilometer to the northwest of ouvrage La Ferté . Villy itself was fortified with more than a dozen blockhouses , along with networks of barbed wire and tank obstacles . The blockhouses were primarily prepared , reinforced firing positions and did not necessarily possess fixed armament . 
 = = Manning = = 
 The 1940 manning of the ouvrage under the command of Lieutenant Bourguignon comprised 97 men and 3 officers of the 155th Fortress Infantry Regiment ( 155th RIF ) and the 169th Position Artillery Regiment ( 169th <unk> ) . The units were under the umbrella of the Second Army , Army Group 1 . The <unk> de Montmédy provided peacetime above @-@ ground barracks and support services to La Ferté and other fortifications in the area . 
 Lieutenant Bourguignon had exchanged commands with Lieutenant <unk> on 20 March 1940 , <unk> taking Bourguignon 's former position at the casemate of <unk> @-@ le @-@ <unk> . Bourguignon was assisted by Sub @-@ Lieutenant <unk> , who commanded Block 2 . <unk> , who had been previously posted to a machine gun battalion in the 149th and 132nd RIF , lacked specific training on Maginot systems . He replaced Captain André , a reservist and mayor of Villy , who had been promoted . Bourguignon was responsible for command of Block 1 , as well as for overall command . Compared to similar positions , La Ferté was understaffed with officers . 
 = = Strategic situation = = 
 The Second Army was commanded by General Charles Huntziger , who was responsible for the defense of the Ardennes region of the frontier , including the Fortified Sector of Montmédy . The sector was composed of two parts . The eastern portion was defended by the Maginot positions of La Ferté , Chesnois , <unk> and <unk> , widely spaced and small , compared to the massive fortifications of other sectors like Thionville . The western portion of the Montmédy sector was even more lightly defended , with several lines of fortifications ranging from fortified houses near the border to small blockhouses farther back . None of the western defenses were of a scale sufficient to support La Ferté or to act as a significant block to an invading force without the organized support of mobile army formations . The relatively weak La Ferté position effectively acted as the western end of fixed fortifications . 
 On 13 – 14 May , German forces crossed the Meuse near Sedan using integrated land and air tactics that broke the morale of the French 55th Infantry Division , driving them out of the blockhouse line and allowing the Germans to gain a strong position from which to exploit the breakthrough . A progressive collapse of the French Second and Ninth Armies from 14 May to 17 May allowed German forces to move to the west of La Ferté , cutting La Ferté off from much of its mobile support . 
 = = 1940 = = 
 See Fortified Sector of Montmédy for a broader discussion of the events of 1940 in the Montmédy sector of the Maginot Line . 
 On 13 May advance elements of the German 71st Infantry Division approached La Ferté ( which the Germans called <unk> 505 ) and occupied the surrounding area , out of range of fire from the ouvrage . The 71st ID had trained specifically for an assault on the Maginot Line , and were provided with shaped charge explosives of the type used in the assault on the Belgian Fort Eben @-@ Emael a few days before . The night of the 13th and 14th La Ferté installed a periscope in its machine gun turret , which had been just been delivered on the 11th . On 15 May the Villy Est casemate opened fire on German troops advancing on a nearby farm . On the 16th the Germans took nearby Hill 226 , which overlooked La Ferté from the west and attacked the higher Hill 311 ( overlooking La Ferté from the southwest ) despite fire from the Villy Ouest casemate . That evening , German reconnaissance around La Ferté and the <unk> and Sainte Marie casemates drew supporting fire from Ouvrage Chesnois 's 75mm guns . Chesnois fired 1200 rounds in seven hours . On 17 May , German forces made a series of determined attacks on Hill 311 , and German artillery began bombardment of La Ferté with 21 cm mortars and 88mm high @-@ velocity anti @-@ tank guns . About midday on the 17th , La Ferté 's telephone communications were cut , forcing the position to communicate by radio , which could be monitored by the Germans , and which required Bourguignon to transmit through Chesnois to reach headquarters . 
 The Germans eventually captured Hill 311 just before nightfall , driving off the first battalion of the 23rd Colonial Infantry Regiment with losses . During the afternoon of the 17th , the Villy artillery casemates were evacuated , while German bombardment continued amid French fire from Chesnois . At about this time , General Huntziger ordered that Villy and La Ferté be relieved to prevent their encirclement , emphasizing the importance of French possession of Hill 311 , and directing that the town of <unk> to the southwest be held at all costs . General <unk> , responsible for the area , decided to counterattack from the south through Hill 311 to La Ferté using the 3rd North African Infantry Division and the newly arrived 6th Infantry Division . Through the ensuing night La Ferté requested and received supporting fire from Chesnois to suppress German movements on top of the ouvrage . 
 Telephone service was restored the morning of the 18th , allowing better artillery coordination in support of La Ferté . By the afternoon of 18 May , the Germans had occupied the village of Villy , completing the encirclement of the ouvrage . Between 1400 and 1500 hours on the 18th , Block 2 's automatic rifle / observation ( GFM ) cloche was hit by German fire , killing three . At about the same time , the retractable mixed arms turret on Block 2 became stuck in the opened position , facing to the rear and unable to aim . As this comprised La Ferté 's heaviest armament , it significantly reduced the position 's defensive strength . At 1700 hours , Germans entered the vacant Villy Est casemate , occupying Villy Ouest an hour later . Both had been evacuated by the French amid concerns about the German presence on Hill 311 . From 1800 – 1830 three batteries of German <unk> howitzers fired on La Ferté with supporting fire on the fort 's surroundings from 155mm howitzers . At 1810 four German 88mm guns opened fire on the exposed portions of the main ouvrage . The combined artillery fire destroyed the barbed wire entanglements surrounding La Ferté and cratered the ground . Firing ceased after 20 minutes to allow German sappers to destroy the previously damaged GFM cloche . They then threw smoke bombs into the resulting hole and destroyed the stuck turret and two more cloches , leaving Block 2 incapable of further resistance . Supporting fire from Chesnois was hampered by smoke shells that obscured French observation posts ' view of La Ferté . 
 The French counterattack was ordered from French lines using ten Char B tanks supported by two battalions of the 119th Infantry Regiment of the 6th Infantry Division . The attack was launched at 1930 hours . With the infantry making a late start , the tanks halted at the saddle between Hill 311 and La Ferté to let them catch up . The infantry was met on the slopes of Hill 311 by two battalions of the German 119th Infantry Regiment , while three tanks were lost , two to enemy fire . The counterattack failed to reach La Ferté . In the meantime , Chesnois was ordered to cease supporting fire for fear of hitting the French rescue force , allowing the Germans to move freely about the surface . After dark on the 18th the Germans opened artillery fire on Block 1 , while at the same time blasting the Block 2 mixed arms turret into the air so that it landed askew in its opening . At 2300 a ground assault on Block 1 was launched . Two hours later all of Block 1 's cloches were out of action . Chesnois was directly ordered not to fire on La Ferté by the 6th ID artillery director , despite continuing assertions from observers that the Germans were on top of the position . Lieutenant <unk> repeatedly asked General Aymé , his commander at the 3rd Colonial Infantry Division for permission to abandon the position . Aymé refused Bourguignon permission to evacuate , saying " Your mission has not changed . " The commander of Chesnois , <unk> 's former commander who pleaded with the divisional staff to allow Bourguignon to evacuate , advised him that " A Maginot Line ouvrage is like a submarine . One doesn 't leave a submarine : one sinks with it . " Contact was lost with La Ferté overnight . 
 By the morning of the 19th , resistance ceased . There was no response to repeated telephone calls from the French headquarters . It became apparent that the interior of Block 2 was on fire . On the 20th , equipped with respirators , the Germans entered Block 2 , encountering no one . The next day they were able to enter Block 1 . Finding no resistance , the Germans moved on to other objectives . French patrols reached La Ferté on the 28th and 29th , reporting dense smoke within , but were unable to advance . On 2 June a German patrol made a full survey of the ouvrage , finding " the most difficult conditions imaginable , " and discovering the corpses of the garrison , apparently suffocated , most wearing gas masks . By 9 June the area was firmly under German control . The bodies of the garrison were recovered by a German disciplinary battalion and buried . Examination indicated that the garrison died of carbon monoxide poisoning . While the gas masks were effective against low concentrations of carbon monoxide , they could not cope with a concentration greater than 2 % . 
 The entire garrison was posthumously awarded the Ordre de l 'Armée and <unk> was made a chevalier of the Legion d 'Honneur . On the German side , Oberleutnant Alfred Germer , who led the assault on Block 2 , was awarded the Knight 's Cross . Belated Unteroffizier Walter Pape was also awarded the Knight 's Cross for conquering <unk> 505 and for his leading of a <unk> ( <unk> ) against Verdun in June 1940 . 
 = = Current condition = = 
 La Ferté is preserved as it was in 1940 , with the scars of shellfire visible on cloches and concrete . The site includes a military memorial facing the new road alignment . A small cemetery , established in 1960 opposite the memorial , is the burial site for the majority of the garrison . The ouvrage and surrounding casemates are recorded as French historic monuments . The interior is open to the public on stated days . 
 = Golf Ball = 
 Golf Ball ( sometimes <unk> ) is a 1962 painting by Roy Lichtenstein . It is considered to fall within the art movement known as Pop art . It depicts " a single sphere with patterned , variously directional semi @-@ circular grooves . " The work is commonly associated with black @-@ and @-@ white Piet Mondrian works . It is one of the works that was presented at Lichtenstein 's first solo exhibition and one that was critical to his early association with pop art . The work is commonly critiqued for its tension involving a three @-@ dimensional representation in two dimensions with much discussion revolving around the choice of a background nearly without any perspective . 
 = = History = = 
 When Lichtenstein had his first solo show at the Leo Castelli Gallery in February 1962 , it sold out before opening . Golf Ball was one of the works that Lichtenstein exhibited . Later , Lichtenstein included Golf Ball in Still Life with Goldfish Bowl , 1972 , and Go for Baroque , 1979 . The painting exemplifies the novel superimposition of abstraction and figuration . The work also represents abstraction as a result of elimination of three @-@ dimensionality , chiaroscuro and a landscape context . 
 The use of black and white is regarded as dramatic , and although it may have been influenced by 1940s and 1950s works of Willem de Kooning , Franz Kline and Robert Motherwell , it is more likely a commentary on Mondrian 's 1917 Composition in Black and White . Alternatively , it may have been a reference to another of Mondrian 's Pre @-@ World War I black and white oval paintings , such as Pier and ocean , 1915 . This complementary source art was common of Lichtenstein 's 1960s work on frequently advertised objects . Lichtenstein describes his sources as Mondrian Plus and Minus paintings . 
 = = Description = = 
 In 1962 , Lichtenstein produced several works in which he depicted " ... the repetitive regularity of their patterned surfaces ... " Golf Ball is a depiction of a golf ball using a <unk> set of black and white arcs to depict the three @-@ dimensionality of the subject . However , the neutral background manipulates the image and diminishes the volumetric characteristics by stripping the viewer of his perspective . It is described as a " pure graphic mark on a gray ground " as well as a " totality of abstract marks . " Lichtenstein described Golf Ball as " the antithesis of what was thought of as having ' art meaning ' " because of its lack of perspective . 
 Golf Ball is an example of the emerging " confident authority " of his single @-@ image paintings with its " Rock of Gibraltar @-@ like <unk> " . The " frontal and centralized presentation " ' s directness lacked the sophistication to market the images of household goods for advertising but was considered daring artistically . The black and white painting on a grey background challenges both the natural perception of realism and the boundaries of abstraction . The work " gives us both the impression of space and the fact of surface " . 
 Golf Ball was one of the bases by which " critics aligned him with other practitioners of Pop Art " , although much is made about the painting 's references to abstract painting , especially its likeness to Mondrian 's works . Furthermore , the painting leverages tensions regarding three @-@ dimensional representation in two dimensions resulting from spatial ambiguities caused by the lack of cues in the background . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Diane Waldman refers to the subject of Golf Ball as a freestanding form . This is one of the figures in which Lichtenstein demonstrates his draftsman experience . This work demonstrated his maturation as an artist with standardized contours that present uniformity and solidified inflections . This is a strong example of presenting the tension of volumetric potential balanced against two @-@ dimensional presentation . It also shows how placement against a neutral background diminishes three @-@ dimensionality . Despite Lichtenstein 's techniques to display / minimize dimensionality , the viewer imposes his or her own visualization experiences on the painting , which minimizes the effect of spatial illusion . 
 = Banded sugar ant = 
 The banded sugar ant ( Camponotus consobrinus ) , also known as the sugar ant , is a species of ant endemic to Australia . A member of the genus Camponotus in the subfamily Formicinae , it was described by German entomologist Wilhelm Ferdinand <unk> in 1842 . Its common name refers to the ant 's liking for sugar and sweet food , as well as the distinctive orange @-@ brown band that wraps around its gaster . 
 The ant is polymorphic and relatively large , with two different castes of workers : major workers ( also known as soldiers ) , and minor workers . These two group of workers measure around 5 to 15 millimetres ( 0 @.@ 2 to 0 @.@ 6 in ) in length , while the queen ants are even larger . Mainly nocturnal , banded sugar ants prefer a mesic habitat , and are commonly found in forests and woodlands . They also occur in urban areas , where they are considered a household pest . The ant 's diet includes sweet secretions that are retrieved from aphids and other insects that it tends . This species is a competitor of the meat ant ( Iridomyrmex purpureus ) , and food robbery and nest @-@ plugging is known to occur between these two ants . Workers prey on insects , killing them with a spray of formic acid . Banded sugar ants are preyed upon by other ants , echidnas , and birds . The eggs of this species were consumed by Indigenous Australians . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 The banded sugar ant was first described by German entomologist Wilhelm Ferdinand <unk> , who named it Formica consobrina in 1842 . The holotype specimen is a queen collected from Tasmania , which is now housed in the Museum für Naturkunde in Berlin . Formica consobrina was later moved to the genus Camponotus as Camponotus consobrinus , by entomologist Julius Roger in 1863 . In 1933 , American entomologist William Morton Wheeler described some subspecies and variants of the banded sugar ant . These subspecies were C. consobrinus lividipes and C. consobrinus nigriceps , while the variants were C. consobrinus var. <unk> and C. consobrinus var. <unk> . Some of these classifications were short @-@ lived ; C. consobrinus nigriceps was later revived as a full species in 1934 as C. nigriceps , while C. consobrinus lividipes was synonymised with C. consobrinus . C. consobrinus lividipes was treated as a subspecies for C. nigriceps in 1985 , now known as C. nigriceps lividipes . In 1996 C. consobrinus <unk> was synonymised with C. nigriceps , and C. consobrinus var. <unk> was synonymised with C. consobrinus . 
 The specific name is derived from the Latin word consobrina , meaning " cousin " . This is in reference to its similar appearance with the species C. herculeanus . 
 The ant is a member of the Camponotus nigriceps species group , which also includes C. <unk> , C. <unk> , C. <unk> , C. <unk> , C. <unk> , C. nigriceps , C. pallidiceps and C. <unk> . The species is commonly known as the banded sugar ant or sugar ant due to its attraction to sweet food and the orange @-@ brown band that is present on its gaster . 
 = = Description = = 
 Banded sugar ants appear in different forms , varying from 5 to 15 millimetres ( 0 @.@ 2 to 0 @.@ 6 in ) in length , making them a large species . Banded sugar ants are polymorphic , and colonies have two types of workers : minor workers and major workers that have different size ranges . The two castes can be identified easily , due to the workers being smaller and more slender , while the soldiers are larger and more robust . Both castes carry a set of powerful mandibles . Queen ants are the largest ants in the colony . Banded sugar ants come in a variety of colours , possibly due to ecological rather than genetic influences . For example , humidity , insolation and temperature may all affect the colour of an individual . 
 Female banded sugar ants are easily recognised by their black head , orange thorax and the orange @-@ brown band that wraps around their gaster . Males of the species are completely black . The dark sides of the thorax and legs are ferruginous ( rusty in colour ) . The scape ( the base of the antenna ) and mandibles are black , and the head is wider than the thorax . The thorax is longer than its total width and slightly compressed , and the gaster is covered with tiny black dots . Erect setae are golden in colour and absent under the head but present on the mesosoma . The setae on the tibia and scape are shorter than those on the mesosoma . The anterior of the gaster is lighter in colour compared to the posterior , and the dorsum of the mesosoma is outlined and curved . A worker 's metanotum is absent and the eyes are bulging , while a soldier 's metanotum is noticeable and the eyes are flat . The wings on the queen are dark , and the stigmata and nerves are yellow . While many ant species have a metapleural gland , the gland is not present in the banded sugar ant ; the number of malpighian tubules in workers is 21 . 
 The related black @-@ headed sugar ant ( Camponotus nigriceps ) has a similar appearance and may be mistaken for a banded sugar ant . Black @-@ headed sugar ants are lighter in colour than banded sugar ants and the orange @-@ brown band is absent from their gaster . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 The banded sugar ant is one of the most widely distributed ants in Australia , but is most commonly found in south @-@ east Australia . It occurs along the north @-@ east coast of Queensland , from Charters Towers in the north to Brisbane in the south . The ant is widespread in New South Wales , the Australian Capital Territory , Victoria and Tasmania . In South Australia , it is a common household pest in Adelaide , and populations are mostly found in the south @-@ east of the state while the species is absent in the north @-@ west . The banded sugar ant 's presence in Western Australia has yet to be verified . These ants are found in urban areas , eucalypt forests , dry sclerophyll woodland , grasslands and heaths , preferring a mesic habitat . In the drier regions of Australia , the banded sugar ant is absent and is usually replaced by Camponotus nigriceps . Banded sugar ants have been recorded from elevations ranging from 170 to 853 metres ( 558 to 2 @,@ 800 ft ) . 
 Nests are found in a variety of sites , including holes in wood , roots of plants , twigs of trees and shrubs , between rocks , in the soil , and under paving stones . Sometimes , banded sugar ant colonies form small mounds , which are less than 20 cm ( 8 in ) in diameter and usually funnel @-@ shaped and ephemeral . Mounds are not constructed in undisturbed regions where land degradation has not occurred . Instead , the entrance of a nest consists of a smooth @-@ walled vertical shaft that is 15 to 17 millimetres ( 0 @.@ 59 to 0 @.@ 67 in ) in diameter . Chambers in the nest have a similar appearance to the nest entrance ( shaft @-@ like walls ) , and the floors within the chambers are typically 20 to 30 millimetres ( 0 @.@ 8 to 1 @.@ 2 in ) in length with an arched roof that is 10 millimetres ( 0 @.@ 4 in ) in height . Excavated meat ant nests show that banded sugar ants will also inhabit them . 
 = = Behaviour and ecology = = 
 Banded sugar ants are the dominant group of nocturnal ants in their range . Workers are mostly encountered at dusk when they are foraging for food on marked trails or on Casuarina and Eucalyptus trees . These ants also forage during the day , but they are more frequently seen at night . They are also more active during the warmer seasons , especially summer . Banded sugar ants use multiple social techniques to make other ants follow them to a food source ; this includes a worker carrying another worker , tandem running , or simply leaving a pheromone trail to the source . Around 2 – 35 % of foraging workers engage in tandem running . 
 Banded sugar ants will often attack the nests of other ant species at random , while ignoring other ants nearby . They use their mandibles to hold opponents , and use formic acid to kill them . Foraging workers use visual cues to help them find their way around , or to let them determine that they are lost ; workers will identify landmarks they are familiar with to orientate themselves . When provoked , an individual banded sugar ant will lift up its abdomen and use its large mandibles to fend off an attacker . If further provoked , it can defend itself by spraying formic acid from its abdomen to deter predators . 
 Meat ants have been observed blocking banded sugar ant nesting holes with pebbles and soil to prevent them from leaving their nest during the early hours of the day . The ants counter this by preventing meat ants from leaving their nest by blocking their nesting holes with debris , a behaviour known as nest @-@ plugging . If meat ant nests are encroached by trees or other shade , banded sugar ants may invade and take over the nest , since the health of the colony may deteriorate from overshadowing . Members of an affected meat ant colony later move to a nearby satellite nest that is placed in a suitable area , while invading banded sugar ants fill nest galleries up with a black resinous material . In a 1999 study , <unk> myrmex leafhoppers were placed in a banded sugar ant colony to test the reaction of non @-@ host ants . These leafhoppers were attacked , suggesting no symbiotic relationship between the two . 
 Starlings have been observed to rub banded sugar ants on their feathers and skin , a behaviour known as anting . 
 = = = Diet and predators = = = 
 Banded sugar ants are omnivores and feed on sweet substances . They tend plant @-@ eating insects such as aphids , and feed on the fluids they secrete . Honeydew secretions are produced from the anus of the aphid , which is later provided to the ants . This behaviour is mutually beneficial to both organisms , as the ants protect the aphids from predation and the aphids provides a nutritious liquid to the ants . Banded sugar ants also tend the larvae of the southern purple azure butterfly ( Ogyris genoveva ) . They are visitors to flowers of Eucalyptus globulus trees , where they can act as pollinators . They may be seen at night foraging under lights in urban areas for arthropod prey , such as termites and the southern cattle tick ( Rhipicephalus <unk> ) . During the night , banded sugar ants are known to " rob " food sources excreted by Hemiptera insects that are fed on by meat ants during the day . Banded sugar ants and meat ants tend to nest near one another , and areas where the two ants forage have shorter foraging periods due to interference between the species . However , banded sugar ants are nocturnal while meat ants are not , so foraging periods are extended by one or two hours if no interference occurs . 
 Banded sugar ants have been found in the feces of the short @-@ beaked echidna ( Tachyglossus aculeatus ) , and non @-@ passerine birds are known to predate them . The blackish <unk> ( Ramphotyphlops nigrescens ) follows trails laid by banded sugar ants , possibly to locate them as potential prey . Blindsnakes are also known to consume the brood of this species . Nematodes are a parasite to banded sugar ant larvae , as several <unk> larvae were described . Infected individuals are recognisable by their swollen gasters ; for example , uninfected ants measuring 13 to 14 millimetres ( 0 @.@ 51 to 0 @.@ 55 in ) in length have a gaster length of 4 to 5 millimetres ( 0 @.@ 16 to 0 @.@ 20 in ) while the gaster of infected individuals who are similar in size is 6 to 7 millimetres ( 0 @.@ 24 to 0 @.@ 28 in ) . Some specimens collected had gasters so swollen that the <unk> @-@ membrane was exposed . 
 = = = Life cycle and reproduction = = = 
 Like all ants , banded sugar ants begin life as eggs . If the egg is fertilised , the ant becomes a female ; if not , it will become a male . They develop through complete metamorphosis , meaning that they pass through a larval and pupal stage before emerging as adults . 
 Although most banded sugar ant colonies are monogynous ( a nest that contains a single queen ) , some have been found to be polygynous , where a colony will have multiple queens ; this is the fourth Camponotus species that is recognized as exhibiting polygyny . In polygynous colonies , queens are not territorial and free @-@ mixing of offspring is observed . Despite the homogeneous environmental factors , however , different family lineages are strongly correlated with ant caste , suggesting caste is largely genetically determined . Nests containing a single queen are <unk> , where a queen will only mate once with a male . Not much is known about their nuptial flight , although virgin queens and males ( alates ) were observed mating in South Australia in January . This hints that banded sugar ants will mate during mid @-@ summer , and colony foundation occurs at this time . Ideal conditions for nuptial flight is on warm days during the afternoon at temperatures of 20 – 25 ° C ( 68 – 77 ° F ) , which is when the alates begin to swarm . A colony can be long @-@ lived , with queens living for seven years or more . The black carpenter ant ( Camponotus pennsylvanicus ) is known to adopt larvae and pupae from banded sugar ant colonies . 
 Workers that belong to different matrilines ( female ancestry ) appear significantly different from each other in size . <unk> are also said to influence caste determination within the species . 
 = = Interaction with humans = = 
 The banded sugar ant is considered a household pest and is occasionally seen in houses at night , capable of damaging furniture and fittings by chewing the wood ; carbon disulphide is used to treat and remove a banded sugar ant nest . These ants do not pose any threat to humans , as they are incapable of stinging and can only spray formic acid , however , the larger soldiers are capable of inflicting a painful bite with their powerful jaws , and the formic acid they spray is corrosive to human skin . The eggs of this species were consumed by the Australian Aborigines . 
 = Stephen Tomašević of Bosnia = 
 Stephen Tomašević ( Serbo @-@ Croatian : Stjepan / Stefan Tomašević , <unk> / <unk> <unk> ; died on 25 May 1463 ) was the last sovereign from the Bosnian Kotromanić dynasty . His father , King Stephen Thomas , arranged for him to marry Maria of Serbia and become Despot of Serbia in April 1459 . The marriage was meant to unite Bosnia and Serbia in their fight against the expanding Ottoman Empire , but failed in that regard . After ruling Serbia for merely two months , Stephen Tomašević surrendered it to the Ottomans and fled back to his father 's court . 
 Upon his father 's death in 1461 , Stephen Tomašević ascended as King of Bosnia , a kingdom whose existence was being increasingly threatened by the Ottomans . He desperately tried to secure help from Pope Pius II , King Matthias Corvinus of Hungary and monarchs of other neighbouring countries . Confident that they would come to his aid , Stephen Tomašević refused to deliver the customary tribute to Sultan Mehmed the Conqueror and thus provoked the invasion that cost him his life . In 1463 , Mehmed marched into Bosnia , meeting little effective resistance , and captured Stephen Tomašević , who was then beheaded . The execution marks the fall of the Kingdom of Bosnia to the Ottoman Empire . 
 = = Name = = 
 Like all Bosnian kings before him , Stephen Tomašević bore the name Stephen . His predecessors , with the exception of his uncle Stephen Ostojić , took the name Stephen upon accession as an honorific that signified their claim to the throne of Serbia , whose Nemanjić rulers had first adopted it . Stephen Tomašević , on the other hand , appears to have been baptized as Stephen ( <unk> ) , the last part of his name being a patronymic . On occasions when his predecessors referred to themselves by their Christian names only , omitting the honorific Stephen , Stephen Tomašević called himself simply <unk> – suggesting that the name was in his case more than an honorific . The same is true for his uncle , Stephen Ostojić . For this reason , Stephen Tomašević has been listed as Stephen II – his uncle being Stephen I – albeit very rarely . 
 = = Family = = 
 Stephen Tomašević was born into the House of Kotromanić , as one of the two known sons of Stephen Thomas and a commoner named Vojača . The other son died as an adolescent . Stephen Tomašević 's father was an adulterine son of King Stephen Ostoja and a younger brother of Radivoj , who contested the rule of their cousin King Stephen Tvrtko II . Stephen Thomas was politically inactive and did not take part in the struggle between his brother and cousin , enabling his family to lead a quiet life in a period when the Ottoman state tried to weaken Bosnia by encouraging internal divisions . This all changed when the ailing and childless King Stephen Tvrtko II decreed that Stephen Thomas should succeed him . The King died shortly after , in November 1443 , and Stephen Tomašević 's father ascended the throne . The legal status of his parents ' marriage is ambiguous ; his mother has been described as either his father 's concubine or common @-@ law wife . The marriage ended when Bosnian noblemen , unwilling to recognize a commoner as their queen , requested that Stephen Thomas take a wife of noble birth . The annulment was granted by Pope Eugene IV on 29 May 1445 . 
 Stephen Thomas , raised as a member of the Bosnian Church , converted to Roman Catholicism in c . 1445 ; Stephen Tomašević later stated that he had been baptized into the Roman Catholic Church as a child , and that he had been taught Latin letters . In 1446 , Stephen Thomas married Catherine of St Sava , by whom Stephen Tomašević had a half @-@ brother named Sigismund and a half @-@ sister named Catherine . 
 = = Marriage = = 
 In 1453 , the Ottomans conquered Constantinople and annexed the remnants of the Byzantine Empire . Without an adversary to their rear , the Ottomans were now able to freely campaign against European states , including the Kingdom of Bosnia and the neighbouring Despotate of Serbia . Stephen Thomas thereupon desperately tried to ensure Christendom 's help in case of Ottoman invasion , and entered into negotiations with Francesco Sforza , Duke of Milan , over Stephen Tomašević 's marriage to an illegitimate daughter of the Duke . 
 Serbia 's despot , Lazar Branković , died in 1458 , and a power vacuum ensued . Having left three daughters and no sons , he was nominally succeeded by his older brother Stephen , but Stephen 's authority was challenged as he was blind and thus considered unfit to rule . Stephen Thomas took advantage of Serbia 's weakness to recapture Eastern Bosnian towns he had lost to Lazar 's and Stephen 's father George . Shortly afterwards , he entered peace negotiations with Lazar 's widow , Helen Palaiologina . Abandoning the prospect of his son 's marriage to a daughter of the Duke of Milan , Stephen Thomas came to an agreement with Helen : Stephen Tomašević was to marry the eldest of the three daughters of her and Lazar , the 11 @-@ year @-@ old Helen , and assume the government of Serbia . The Hungarian king Matthias Corvinus agreed to the arrangement – it was in his interest to create a strong buffer zone between his realm and the Ottoman Empire by uniting the Kingdom of Bosnia and the Despotate of Serbia , which he considered Hungary 's vassal states , under Stephen Tomašević . The Diet of Hungary confirmed Stephen Tomašević 's right to Serbia in January 1459 . 
 Stephen Tomašević duly set out for Serbia but narrowly escaped imprisonment during an Ottoman raid on the royal residence of Bobovac . He arrived to Smederevo , capital of the Eastern Orthodox despotate , during the Holy Week of 1459 , and ascended the Serbian throne on 21 March . Michael Szilágyi , regent for the underage King Matthias , arrived at the head of an army to ensure that command over the town 's fortress would be assumed by Stephen Tomašević without any difficulties . 
 = = Despotism = = 
 Stephen Tomašević 's marriage to Helen took place on 1 April , the first Sunday following Easter . Following the presumably Catholic ceremony , the bride was known as Maria . He assumed the title of despot , despite the fact that the title was neither hereditary nor tied to a specific territory , but a grant from the Byzantine emperor . It is possible that his mother @-@ in @-@ law , a member of Byzantium 's last imperial family , believed that she had the right to grant the title in the absence of an emperor . Within a week of the wedding , Stephen Tomašević exiled his wife 's deposed uncle from Serbia . King Stephen Thomas retold these events in a letter sent to the Duke of Milan , claiming that the title of despot was granted to his son by the King of Hungary " with the agreement and will of all the <unk> " . It is more likely , however , that only Hungarians and the supporters of Stephen Tomašević 's mother @-@ in @-@ law were pleased with his accession to the Serbian throne . 
 It was clear from the onset that Stephen Tomašević 's reign in Serbia would be short @-@ lived . The Ottoman sultan Mehmed the Conqueror considered Stephen Tomašević 's enthronement an unwarranted violation of his own rights , for the Ottomans too considered Serbia their vassal state . Mehmed promptly launched an attack on Smederevo in June , and there was no serious consideration of trying to defend it . Aware that it could not withstand the attack , Stephen Tomašević surrendered the fortress on 20 June . The Ottoman proceeded to annex the rest of the Serbian state to their empire within a year . 
 Following the fall of the town which Pope Pius II lamentably termed " the gateway to Rascia " , Stephen Tomašević fled to Bosnia with his wife and in @-@ laws , seeking refuge at the court of his father . The King of Hungary accused Stephen Tomašević and the Bosnians of selling Smederevo Fortress to the Ottomans , and the Pope at first believed the Hungarians . Pius 's own investigation appears to have come to the conclusion that Stephen Tomašević did not sell the fortress , as the Pope did not repeat the claim . Ottoman , Bosnian and Serbian sources say nothing about the supposed betrayal , so the allegation is unlikely to be based on fact . The Serbian @-@ born <unk> Konstantin Mihailović and the Byzantine Greek scholar <unk> Chalkokondyles maintained Stephen Tomašević 's innocence and pointed out to the strength of the Ottoman army . Both agree that the Serbs within Smederevo were so unhappy with Bosnian rule and convinced that the Ottoman would prevail ( and grant them more religious tolerance than the Hungarians ) that they went out to meet Mehmed and presented him with keys to the city . 
 = = Kingship = = 
 = = = Accession and coronation = = = 
 Stephen Tomašević 's father died in the summer of 1461 . The 16th century Croatian chronicler Ivan <unk> wrote that the King died on 10 July – more precisely , that he was murdered on the order of his brother Radivoj and with the consent of his son Stephen Tomašević . No contemporary source records that the King was murdered , however , and historians have generally discarded the claim . Stephen Tomašević ascended the throne without difficulty , as he had been appointed his father 's heir @-@ designate already during his brief reign as Despot of Serbia . He ensured that his uncle would not contest the succession by generously endowing him with land . The new monarch assumed the pompous title inherited from Stephen Tvrtko I , the first Bosnian king , styling himself as , " by the Grace of God , King of Serbia , Bosnia , the Maritime Lands , Zachlumia , Dalmatia , Croatia , and the Western lands " – regardless of the fact that Serbia had by then become an Ottoman <unk> , that Croatia had been lost to Hungary in the 1390s , and that he had to beg the government of the Republic of Venice to allow him to take refuge in Dalmatia in case of an Ottoman attack . 
 Immediately upon his accession , Stephen Tomašević set out to resolve all disagreements within the royal family in order to strengthen his own position . His relations with his stepmother , the 37 @-@ year @-@ old Queen Catherine , had been strained during his father 's lifetime , but he now guaranteed that she would retain her title and privileges . Her father , Stjepan Vukčić Kosača , wrote to Venetian officials that the King had " taken her as his mother " , Vojača having already died by the time he ascended the throne . Kosača was the kingdom 's most powerful nobleman , and had been engaged in a never @-@ ending conflict with Stephen Tomašević 's father . It appears that he nevertheless refrained from claiming the Bosnian crown for his adolescent grandson Sigismund , Catherine 's son and Stephen Tomašević 's half @-@ brother , probably because he was aware that Bosnia needed a strong , mature monarch more than ever . Stephen Tomašević took the Venetians ' advice to make peace with his stepgrandfather , thus finally ensuring the nobility 's absolute support of their king . He then focused on improving Bosnia 's economy , which became stronger than ever during his reign , and ensuring that the state would collect more profit from the flourishing metalworking trade . 
 Pope Pius proclaimed Saint Gregory Thaumaturgus " Defender of Bosnia " on Stephen Tomašević 's request on 7 November , and sent a crown to be used for his coronation . On the feast of Saint Gregory ten days later , the newly appointed Bishop Nicholas of Modruš , Pope Pius 's legate , crowned Stephen Tomašević in the Church of Saint Mary in Jajce . The coronation marked the first and last time a Bosnian monarch received his crown from Rome . It exemplified how , with the religious persecution established by Stephen Thomas and Stephen Tomašević 's active correspondence with the papacy , the Kingdom of Bosnia acquired the character of a true Catholic state only at its very end . 
 = = = Ottoman invasion = = = 
 Conflict broke out in 1462 between Stephen Tomašević 's stepgrandfather and <unk> Vladislav Hercegović , and the latter sought Ottoman help in the revolt . The King and Stjepan Vukčić Kosača , along with the papal legate Luke de <unk> , prepared for an imminent Ottoman attack . The King could not count on Hungarian aid : Pope Pius 's recognition of Stephen Tomašević as a sovereign independent from Hungary gravely insulted King Matthias , who had not forgiven Stephen Tomašević for surrendering Smederevo in the first place . Stephen Tomašević seemingly appeased Matthias by paying him off with a considerable sum of money , ceding a few Bosnian castles , and promising to cancel the tribute due to the Ottomans . 
 Encouraged by Matthias 's commitment to help and possibly by the Bishop of Modruš , Stephen Tomašević made a tactless and fatal decision in June 1462 . Pope Pius wrote in his diary that , " relying on one knows what hope " , the King " refused the tributes which his ancestors had long been used to pay the Ottomans and had stormed the town which the enemy had built at the confluence of Sava and Bosna to put fear into the Hungarians and Slavs . " According to Chalkokondyles , Stephen Tomašević invited the Ottoman ambassador to his treasure house and showed him the money set aside as tribute , but informed him that he would rather use it to fight off an Ottoman attack or to live off it in exile . Mehmed the Conqueror was enraged by Stephen Tomašević 's <unk> and audacity . The Pope recounts how , hearing of Sultan Mehmed 's vow to conquer his kingdom and destroy him , Stephen Tomašević summoned the Bishop of Modruš and blamed him for infuriating the Sultan . He commanded Nicholas to go to Hungary and seek immediate action against the Ottomans , but no help ever arrived to Bosnia from Christendom ; Matthias of Hungary , <unk> of Albania and the Ragusans all failed to carry out their promises , while the Venetians flatly refused the King 's pleas . 
 In the spring of 1463 , Mehmed gathered an army of 150 @,@ 000 men in Adrianople and prepared to march towards Bosnia . In his despair , Stephen Tomašević turned to the Sultan himself and tried at the last moment to procure a 15 @-@ year @-@ long truce with him . <unk> claimed that he was present when the Ottomans duped the Bosnian envoys into thinking that the King 's request for truce was granted , and that he tried to warn them about the deceit . Mehmed 's army set out right after the envoys . Fortresses fell rapidly , and Stephen Tomašević fled with his family and possessions from Bobovac to Jajce . The Ottoman army under the leadership of Mahmud Pasha Angelović laid siege to Bobovac on 19 May , with the Sultan joining them the following day . Believing that Bobovac could withstand the siege for two years , Stephen Tomašević planned to assemble an army in Jajce , still counting on foreign aid . He sent his wife with their possessions to Dalmatia , while his stepmother took the rest to Ragusa . 
 = = = Capture and death = = = 
 Contrary to Stephen Tomašević 's expectations , Bobovac fell within days . The King had already realized that he had no choice but to take refuge in the neighbouring Croatia or Dalmatia . Angelović tirelessly pursued him , and caught up with him in Ključ . The Ottoman army was reportedly about to pass the city 's fortress , not suspecting that the King was hiding within its walls , when a local man revealed his whereabouts in return for money . A four @-@ day @-@ long siege of the fortress ensued . Eager to capture him , Angelović had his messengers solemnly promise the King that he would be done no harm if he surrendered , and sent him a document guaranteeing him freedom . With food supplies and ammunition running short , Stephen Tomašević decided to surrender himself and his garrison to Angelović . Angelović , in turn , brought him , his uncle Radivoj and 13 @-@ year @-@ old cousin Tvrtko before Mehmed in Jajce . 
 The captured King sought to ingratiate himself with the Sultan , and sent out orders to commanders and castellans to surrender , enabling Mehmed to take command of more than seventy towns in one week . Mehmed , however , had no intention of sparing Stephen Tomašević 's life and summoned him on 25 May . The King brought Angelović 's document , but Mehmed 's mullah , Ali al @-@ Bistami , issued a fatwah declaring that the Sultan was not bound to keep the promise made by his servant without his knowledge . As if to demonstrate the validity of his fatwah , the elderly mullah took out his sword and beheaded Stephen Tomašević in front of Mehmed . Benedetto Dei , on the other hand , recorded that Mehmed himself decapitated Stephen . The execution of the King , his uncle , cousin and two noblemen took place in a field next to Jajce , which has since been known as Carevo Polje ( " the Emperor 's Field " ) . 
 = = Assessment and legacy = = 
 Stephen Tomašević was buried on a hill near Jajce . Europe was stunned to see the Kingdom of Bosnia fall almost completely within weeks of his death . The country 's quick submission is said to be the consequence of a poor cooperation between Stephen Tomašević and his noblemen , but it is perhaps most accurate to attribute it to the people 's low morale and general belief that the conquest was inevitable . Additionally , the religiously diverse Bosnians were aware , much like the neighbouring Serbians , that the country would be overrun by Hungary if not by the Ottomans , and that they would enjoy far less freedom of religion and far higher taxes in that case . Therefore , resistance was not as strong as it could have been . Pope Pius 's claim that adherents of the Bosnian Church betrayed the kingdom is groundless . 
 Stephen Tomašević 's half @-@ siblings were taken to Constantinople and converted to Islam . Queen Catherine , his stepmother , left for the Papal States and unsuccessfully campaigned for the restoration of the kingdom ; Bosnia only ceased to be part of the Ottoman Empire in 1908 , 445 years after Stephen Tomašević 's death . His widow , Queen Maria , spent the rest of her life in the Empire . 
 In 1888 , the Croatian archeologist <unk> <unk> excavated bones in a settlement close to Jajce known as <unk> Grob ( King 's Tomb ) and found the skeleton of a decapitated adult male . Though there is no direct evidence that these are the remains of Stephen Tomašević , folk tradition and circumstantial evidence have led to the conclusion that they are . The bones were placed in a glass coffin , and have since been housed in the Franciscan monastery in Jajce . 
 = <unk> = 
 The gastrotrichs ( phylum Gastrotricha ) , commonly referred to as <unk> , are a group of microscopic ( 0 @.@ 06 @-@ 3 @.@ 0 mm ) , worm @-@ like , <unk> animals , and are widely distributed and abundant in freshwater and marine environments . They are mostly benthic and live within the periphyton , the layer of tiny organisms and detritus that is found on the seabed and the beds of other water bodies . The majority live on and between particles of sediment or on other submerged surfaces , but a few species are terrestrial and live on land in the film of water surrounding grains of soil . Gastrotrichs are divided into two orders , the Macrodasyida which are marine ( except for two species ) , and the Chaetonotida , some of which are marine and some freshwater . Nearly eight hundred species of gastrotrich have been described . 
 Gastrotrichs have a simple body plan with a head region , with a brain and sensory organs , and a trunk with a simple gut and the reproductive organs . They have adhesive glands with which they can anchor themselves to the substrate and cilia with which they move around . They feed on detritus , sucking up organic particles with their muscular pharynx . They are hermaphrodites , the marine species producing eggs which develop directly into miniature adults . The freshwater species are parthenogenetic , producing unfertilised eggs , and at least one species is viviparous . Gastrotrichs mature with great rapidity and have lifespans of only a few days . 
