 = = Career = = 
 = = = Early career = = = 
 After graduating from the Drama Centre in 1975 , Brosnan began working as an acting assistant stage manager at the York Theatre Royal , making his acting debut in Wait Until Dark . Within six months , he was selected by playwright Tennessee Williams to play the role of McCabe in the British première of The Red Devil Battery Sign . His performance caused a stir in London and Brosnan still has the telegram sent by Williams , stating only " Thank God for you , my dear boy " . In 1977 he was picked by Franco Zeffirelli to appear in the play <unk> by Eduardo De Filippo opposite Joan Plowright and Frank Finlay . 
 He continued his career making brief appearances in films such as The Long Good Friday ( 1980 ) and The Mirror Crack 'd ( 1980 ) , as well as early television performances in The Professionals , Murphy 's Stroke , and Play for Today . He became a television star in the United States with his leading role in the popular miniseries <unk> of America . He followed this with his 1982 Masterpiece Theatre documentary that chronicled the life of Lady Nancy Astor , the first woman to sit in British Parliament . His portrayal of Robert Gould Shaw II garnered him a 1985 Golden Globe Award nomination for Best Supporting Actor . 
 In 1982 , Brosnan moved to Southern California and rose to popularity in the United States playing the title role in the NBC romantic detective series Remington Steele . The Washington Post noted that same year that Brosnan " could make it as a young James Bond . " After Remington Steele ended in 1987 , Brosnan went on to appear in several films , including The Fourth Protocol ( 1987 ) , a Cold War thriller in which he starred alongside Michael Caine , The Deceivers and James Clavell 's Noble House both in ( 1988 ) , and The Lawnmower Man ( 1992 ) . In 1992 , he shot a pilot for NBC called Running Wilde , playing a reporter for Auto World magazine . Jennifer Love Hewitt played his daughter . The pilot never aired , however . In 1993 he played a supporting role in the comedy film Mrs. Doubtfire . He also appeared in several television films , including Victim of Love ( 1991 ) , Death Train ( 1993 ) and Night Watch ( 1995 ) , a spy thriller set in Hong Kong . 
 = = = James Bond ( 1994 – 2005 ) = = = 
 Brosnan first met James Bond films producer Albert R. Broccoli on the sets of For Your Eyes Only because his first wife , Cassandra Harris , starred as Countess Lisl von Schlaf , mistress to Milos Columbo . Broccoli said , " if he can act ... he 's my guy " to inherit the role of Bond from Roger Moore . It was reported by both Entertainment Tonight and the National Enquirer , that Brosnan was going to inherit another role of Moore 's , that of Simon Templar in The Saint . Brosnan denied the rumours in July 1993 but added , " it 's still languishing there on someone 's desk in Hollywood . " 
 In 1987 , NBC cancelled Remington Steele and Brosnan was offered the role as James Bond , but the publicity revived Remington Steele . His contract with the Remington Steele producers required him to resume his role and he regretfully declined the Bond role . The producers instead hired Timothy Dalton for The Living Daylights ( 1987 ) , and Licence to Kill ( 1989 ) . Legal squabbles between the Bond producers and the studio over distribution rights resulted in the cancellation of a proposed third Dalton film in 1991 and put the Bond series on a hiatus for several years . After the legal issues had been resolved , Dalton decided not to return for a third film . On 7 June 1994 , Brosnan was announced as the fifth actor to play Bond . 
 Brosnan was signed for a three @-@ film Bond deal with the option of a fourth . The first , 1995 's GoldenEye , grossed US $ 350 million worldwide , the fourth highest worldwide gross of any film in 1995 , making it the most successful Bond film since Moonraker , adjusted for inflation . It holds an 80 % Rotten tomato rating , while Metacritic holds it at 65 % . In the Chicago Sun @-@ Times , Roger Ebert gave the film 3 stars out of 4 , saying that Brosnan 's Bond was " somehow more sensitive , more vulnerable , more psychologically complete " than the previous ones , also commenting on Bond 's " loss of innocence " since previous films . James Berardinelli described Brosnan as " a decided improvement over his immediate predecessor " with a " flair for wit to go along with his natural charm " , but added that " fully one @-@ quarter of Goldeneye is momentum @-@ killing padding . " 
 In 1996 , Brosnan formed a film production company entitled " Irish DreamTime " along with producing partner and longtime friend Beau St. Clair . Brosnan and St. Clair released Irish DreamTime 's first production , The Nephew , in 1998 . One year later , the company 's second studio project , The Thomas Crown Affair , was released and met both critical and box office success . 
 Brosnan returned in 1997 's Tomorrow Never Dies and 1999 's The World Is Not Enough , which were also successful . In 2002 , Brosnan appeared for his fourth time as Bond in Die Another Day , receiving mixed reviews but was a success at the box office . Brosnan himself subsequently criticised many aspects of his fourth Bond movie . During the promotion , he mentioned that he would like to continue his role as James Bond : " I 'd like to do another , sure . Connery did six . Six would be a number , then never come back . " Brosnan asked Eon Productions , when accepting the role , to be allowed to work on other projects between Bond films . The request was granted , and for every Bond film , Brosnan appeared in at least two other mainstream films , including several he produced , playing a wide range of roles , ranging from a scientist in Tim Burton 's Mars Attacks ! , to the title role in Grey Owl which documents the life of Englishman Archibald Stansfeld <unk> , one of Canada 's first conservationists . 
 Shortly after the release of Die Another Day , the media began questioning whether or not Brosnan would reprise the role for a fifth time . At that time , Brosnan was approaching his 50th birthday . Brosnan kept in mind that both fans and critics were very unhappy with Roger Moore playing the role until he ( Moore ) was 58 , but he was receiving popular support from both critics and the franchise fanbase for a fifth instalment . For this reason , he remained enthusiastic about reprising his role . In October 2004 , Brosnan said he considered himself dismissed from the role . Although Brosnan had been rumoured frequently as still in the running to play 007 , he had denied it several times , and in February 2005 he posted on his website that he was finished with the role . Daniel Craig took over the role on 14 October 2005 . In an interview with The Globe and Mail , Brosnan was asked what he thought of Daniel Craig as the new James Bond . He replied , " I 'm looking forward to it like we 're all looking forward to it . Daniel Craig is a great actor and he 's going to do a fantastic job " . He reaffirmed this support in an interview to the International Herald Tribune , stating that " [ Craig 's ] on his way to becoming a memorable Bond . " 
 During his tenure on the James Bond films , Brosnan also took part in James Bond video games . In 2002 , Brosnan 's likeness was used as the face of Bond in the James Bond video game Nightfire ( voiced by Maxwell Caulfield ) . In 2004 , Brosnan starred in the Bond game Everything or Nothing , contracting for his likeness to be used as well as doing the voice @-@ work for the character . He also starred along with Jamie Lee Curtis and Geoffrey Rush in The Tailor of Panama in 2001 , and lent his voice to The Simpsons episode " Treehouse of Horror XII " , as a machine with Pierce Brosnan 's voice . 
 = = = Post @-@ James Bond = = = 
 Since 2004 , Brosnan has talked of backing a film about Caitlin Macnamara , wife of poet Dylan Thomas , the title role to be played by Miranda Richardson . Brosnan 's first post @-@ Bond role was that of Daniel Rafferty in 2004 's Laws of Attraction . Garreth Murphy , of entertainment.ie , described Brosnan 's performance as " surprisingly effective , gently riffing off his James Bond persona and supplementing it with a raffish energy " . In the same year , Brosnan starred in After the Sunset alongside Salma Hayek and Woody Harrelson . The film elicited generally negative reviews and a 17 % rating on Rotten Tomatoes . Brosnan 's next film was 2005 's The Matador . He starred as Julian Noble , a jaded , neurotic assassin who meets a travelling salesman ( Greg Kinnear ) in a Mexican bar . The film garnered generally positive reviews . Roger Ebert for the Chicago Sun @-@ Times called Brosnan 's performance the best of his career . Brosnan was nominated for a Golden Globe award for Best Actor in a Musical or Comedy , but lost to Joaquin Phoenix for Walk the Line . In December 2005 , Brosnan was reported to be starring in The November Man , an adaptation of Bill Granger 's novel , There Are No <unk> but the project was cancelled in 2007 . In 2006 , Brosnan narrated The Official Film of the 2006 FIFA World Cup , directed by Michael Apted . 
 In 2007 , Brosnan appeared in the film Seraphim Falls alongside fellow Irishman Liam Neeson . The film was released for limited screenings on 26 January 2007 to average reviews . Kevin Crust of the Los Angeles Times noted that Brosnan and Neeson made " fine adversaries ; " Michael Rechtshaffen of The Hollywood Reporter thought that they were " hard @-@ pressed to inject some much @-@ needed vitality into their sparse lines . " During the same year , Brosnan spoke of making a western with fellow Irishmen Gabriel Byrne and Colm Meaney . In that same year Brosnan starred as Tom Ryan in Butterfly on a Wheel . The film was released in the United States under the name of Shattered , and in Europe as Desperate Hours . 
 In 2008 , Brosnan joined Meryl Streep in the film adaption of the ABBA musical Mamma Mia ! . He played Sam Carmichael , one of three men rumoured to be the father of lead Amanda Seyfried , while Streep played her mother . Judy <unk> , producer to the film , said " Pierce brings a certain smooch factor , and we think he 'll have great chemistry with Meryl in a romantic comedy . " Brosnan 's preparation in singing for the role included walking up and down the coast and singing karaoke to his own voice for about six weeks , followed by rehearsals in New York in which he noted he " sounded dreadful . " Brosnan 's singing in the film was generally disparaged by critics , with his singing compared in separate reviews to the sound of a water buffalo , a donkey , and a wounded raccoon . In September 2008 , Brosnan provided the narration for the Thomas & Friends special The Great Discovery . He was originally set to narrate for both US and UK from Season 12 and onward , but withdraw from it for unknown reasons . 
 In 2009 , Brosnan starred in The Big <unk> , ( alternative title The Ace ) , an adaptation of the Leonard Wise novel , directed by Vondie Curtis @-@ Hall . Brosnan portrayed a card player who mentors a headstrong protégé . Also in 2009 , Brosnan finished the well @-@ received The Ghost Writer , playing a disgraced British Prime Minister , directed and produced by Roman Polanski . The film won a Silver Bear at the Berlin International Film Festival . He starred as Charles Hawkins in the film Remember Me and as Chiron in Percy Jackson & the Olympians : The Lightning Thief , both released in 2010 . 
 In 2012 , Brosnan played the role of Philip in the Danish romantic comedy Love Is All You Need . 
 His latest announced project is a role in the Danny DeVito @-@ helmed feature Charlotte Doyle , an adaptation of the novel The True Confessions of Charlotte Doyle , in which he will appear alongside Morgan Freeman . His production company Irish DreamTime is developing The Topkapi Affair , a follow @-@ up to The Thomas Crown Affair for MGM . In February 2013 Brosnan was awarded honorary patronage of the Dublin University Players society at Trinity College , Dublin . Brosnan is also said to be playing a " heroic government agent " in an action thriller called The Coup ( later renamed to No Escape ) alongside Owen Wilson . Brosnan will also be headlining Last Man Out , which is an adaptation of Stuart Neville 's crime novel titled The Twelve ( released as Ghosts of Belfast in the US ) , scripted by Craig Ferguson and Ted <unk> , with Terry Loan will be helming the project . 
 In 2013 , Brosnan appeared in television commercials as a tongue in cheek version of himself to promote the launch of Sky Broadband in Ireland . After its cancellation in 2007 , Brosnan 's production company , " Irish DreamTime " resurrected The November Man film project in 2012 with an announcement made on his part that he was jumping back to the spy arena . Filming took place in Serbia a year later , with Brosnan in action as a retired CIA operative called Devereaux , alongside co @-@ star Olga Kurylenko in a supporting role . The film received negative reception with a 34 % on Rotten Tomatoes and a 38 / 100 on Metacritic . In 2015 , he appeared alongside Milla Jovovich in suspense thriller movie written by Phil Shelby , called Survivor , which began filming in January 2014 , with Charles and Irwin Winkler producing , and James McTeigue directing . Brosnan later starred in a revenge thriller called I.T. , which is still yet to be released . 
 In January 2016 Pierce Brosnan was seen filming The Foreigner in London , co @-@ starring with Jackie Chan , taking on a role of a former IRA man turned government official Liam Hennessy . The film is directed by Martin Campbell , who previously worked with Brosnan on his debut James Bond film , GoldenEye . It was noted that Brosnan bore a strong resemblance to Sinn Féin leader Gerry Adams . An announcement was made that Brosnan and Campbell will team up once again in a film adaptation of an Ernest Hemingway novel , Across the River and into the Trees , in which Brosnan will play the role of the protagonist , Colonel Cantwell . 
 Brosnan replaced actor Sam Neill in the role of Eli McCullough in a television miniseries adaptation of Philipp Meyer 's novel The Son , with Kevin Murphy serving as both executive producer and showrunner of a ten @-@ episode miniseries , which begins production in June 2016 , aiming for a 2017 release . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Brosnan married twice , was widowed once and has five children and three grandchildren as of 2015 . 
 Brosnan met Australian actress Cassandra Harris through her stepson David Harris , one of Richard Harris ' nephews , in 1977 , shortly after he left drama school . On meeting her , he has described his feelings , saying , " What a beautiful looking woman . I never for an instant thought she was someone I 'd spend 17 years of my life with . I didn 't think of wooing her , or attempting to woo her ; I just wanted to enjoy her beauty and who she was . " They began dating , and eventually bought a house in Wimbledon . They married on 27 December 1980 and had one son together , Sean , who was born on 13 September 1983 . They lived with her children , Charlotte ( 1971 @-@ 2013 ) and Christopher , and after their father Dermot Harris died in 1986 , he adopted them and they took the surname Brosnan . 
 Brosnan supplemented his income by working in West End productions and in a television film about Irish horse racing . After Harris appeared in the James Bond film For Your Eyes Only in 1981 , they secured a bank loan and moved to southern California where Brosnan secured a role in the TV series Remington Steele , easing their financial worries . 
 An episode of Remington Steele that was filmed in Ireland generated significant publicity . One outcome was that Brosnan met his father , who had left when Brosnan was an infant , in a brief get @-@ together at his hotel . Brosnan said he expected to see a very tall man , but described his father as " a man of medium stature , pushed @-@ back silver hair , flinty eyes and a <unk> jaw . He had a very strong Kerry accent . " Brosnan was regretful that they met under such public circumstances . He said he would have preferred more private arrangements that would have given him the opportunity to speak privately with his father . 
 While filming The Deceivers in Rajasthan , India , in 1987 , Brosnan 's wife Harris became seriously ill . She was later diagnosed with ovarian cancer and died on 28 December 1991 at age 43 . Brosnan struggled to cope with her cancer and death . " When your partner gets cancer , then life changes . Your timetable and reference for your normal routines and the way you view life , all this changes . Because you 're dealing with death . You 're dealing with the possibility of death and dying . And it was that way through the chemotherapy , through the first @-@ look operation , the second look , the third look , the fourth look , the fifth look . Cassie was very positive about life . I mean , she had the most amazing energy and outlook on life . It was and is a terrible loss , and I see it reflected , from time to time , in my children . " Harris had always wanted Brosnan to play the role of James Bond , and in 1995 , four years after her death , Brosnan was given the role in GoldenEye . 
 In 1994 , Brosnan met American journalist Keely Shaye Smith in Mexico . They were married in 2001 at <unk> Abbey in County Mayo , Ireland . They have two sons together , Dylan Thomas Brosnan ( born 13 January 1997 ) and Paris Beckett Brosnan ( born 27 February 2001 ) . 
 In July 2003 , the Queen made Brosnan an honorary Officer of the Order of the British Empire for his " outstanding contribution to the British film industry " . As an Irish citizen , he is ineligible to receive the full OBE honour , which is awarded only to a citizen of the Commonwealth realms , but he is still allowed the letters " OBE " after his name . In 2002 , Brosnan was also awarded an honorary degree from the Dublin Institute of Technology and , a year later , the University College Cork . 
 On 23 September 2004 , Brosnan became a citizen of the United States , but retained his Irish citizenship . Brosnan said that " my Irishness is in everything I do . It 's the spirit of who I am , as a man , an actor , a father . It 's where I come from . " Brosnan was asked by a fan if it annoyed him when people get his nationality confused . He said : " It amuses me in some respects that they should confuse me with an Englishman when I 'm dyed @-@ in @-@ the @-@ wool , born and bred Irishman ... I don 't necessarily fly under any flag . But no , it doesn 't bother me . " 
 Brosnan has expressed contempt for his education by the Christian Brothers . However , in 2013 he commented , " It always helps to have a bit of prayer in your back pocket . At the end of the day , you have to have something and for me that is God , Jesus , my Catholic upbringing , my faith ... God has been good to me . My faith has been good to me in the moments of deepest suffering , doubt and fear . It is a constant , the language of prayer ... I might not have got my sums right from the Christian Brothers or might not have got the greatest learning of literature from them but I certainly got a strapping amount of faith . " Brosnan attends Mass , but adheres to other spiritual beliefs . In 2008 he said " I also love the teachings of Buddhist philosophy . It 's my own private faith . I don 't preach it , but it 's a faith that is a comfort to me when the night is long . " 
 Brosnan and wife Keely Shaye Smith were involved in a riparian water rights legal case ( 1999 – 2010 ) . The dispute centred on a parcel of land in Wainiha , Hawaii . 
 Brosnan 's daughter Charlotte died on 28 June 2013 of ovarian cancer , the same illness that claimed her mother 's life . 
 = = = Environmental and charitable work = = = 
 Pierce Brosnan has been an Ambassador for UNICEF Ireland since 2001 and recorded a special announcement to mark the launch of UNICEF 's " Unite for Children , Unite against AIDS " Campaign with Liam Neeson . Brosnan supported John Kerry in the 2004 presidential election and is a vocal supporter of same @-@ sex marriage . 
 Brosnan first became aware of nuclear disarmament at the age of nine when worldwide condemnation of the 1962 U.S. nuclear tests in Nevada headlined international news . During the 1990s , he participated in news conferences in Washington , D.C. to help Greenpeace draw attention to the issue . Brosnan boycotted the French GoldenEye premiere to support Greenpeace 's protest against the French nuclear testing program . From 1997 to 2000 , Brosnan and wife Smith worked with the Natural Resources Defense Council ( NRDC ) and International Fund for Animal Welfare ( <unk> ) to stop a proposed salt factory from being built at Laguna San Ignacio . The couple with Halle Berry , Cindy Crawford and Daryl Hannah successfully fought the Cabrillo Port Liquefied Natural Gas facility that was proposed off the coast of Malibu ; the State Lands Commission eventually denied the lease to build the terminal . In May 2007 , Governor Arnold Schwarzenegger vetoed the facility . Brosnan is also listed as a member of the Sea Shepherd Conservation Society 's Board of Advisors . Brosnan was named ' Best @-@ dressed Environmentalist ' by the Sustainable Style Foundation in 2004 . 
 Brosnan also raises money for charitable causes through sales of his paintings . He trained early on as an artist , but later shifted to theatre ; during his first wife 's terminal illness , he withdrew from acting to be with her and took up painting again for therapeutic reasons , producing colourful landscapes and family portraits . He has continued painting since then , using spare time on set and at home . Profits from sales of <unk> prints of his works are given to a trust to benefit " environmental , children 's and women 's health charities . " Since Harris ' death , Brosnan has been an advocate for cancer awareness and , in 2006 , he served as spokesperson for Lee National Denim Day , a breast cancer fundraiser which raises millions of dollars and raises more money in a single day than any other breast cancer fundraiser . 
 In May 2007 , Brosnan and Smith donated $ 100 @,@ 000 to help replace a playground on the Hawaiian island of Kauai , where they own a house . On 7 July 2007 , Brosnan presented a film at Live Earth in London . He also recorded a television advertisement for the cause . Brosnan lives with his family in Malibu , California and on the island of Kauai . 
 In April 2016 , a fire ripped through his $ 18 @.@ 5 million Malibu mansion causing $ 1 million in damages to the garage and a nearby guest bedroom . 
 = = Filmography = = 
 = = = Film = = = 
 = = = Television = = = 
 = = = Video games = = = 
 = Charles Kanaʻina = 
 Charles Kanaʻina , officially referred to as His Honour and his Highness , ( Kanaʻina II ) ( c . 1801 – March 13 , 1877 ) was an aliʻi ( hereditary noble ) of the Kingdom of Hawaii and father of William Charles Lunalilo , the 6th monarch of the Kingdom of Hawaii . Kanaʻina was a descendant of notable figures from ancient Hawaiian history , including Liloa , <unk> and Umi @-@ a @-@ Liloa of Hawaiʻi Island as well as <unk> of Maui . He served on both the Privy Counsel and in the House of Nobles . He was named after his uncle Kanaʻina , a name that means " The conquering " in the Hawaiian Language . This uncle greeted Captain James Cook in 1778 and confronted the navigator before he was killed . 
 His wife Miriam <unk> Kekāuluohi was a widow and niece of Kamehameha I. She was also Married to Kamehameha II before he converted to Christianity and gave up all but one wife . Kanaʻina and Kekāuluohi lived in a traditional aliʻi style home in a sacred neighborhood in Honolulu , Oahu , Hawaii called Pohukaina near Kekūanāoa , Kaʻahumanu and their offspring . The compound would eventually become the official Royal Residence of the Hawaiian Royal Family when Kekūanāoa would build Hale <unk> in the center of the families estates as a gift to his daughter Victoria Kamāmalu . The site would become the <unk> Palace and Palace Walk . Kanaʻina kept his property at the palace until his death and would be the only original owner to do so while the Palace was in use , living there from Kamehameha II up to Kalakaua . 
 Kanaʻina 's son , William Charles Lunalilo , was named by Kamehameha III as an heir to the throne of the kingdom and ascended in 1873 while his father still lived . Lunalilo died only a year later , three years before his father 's death . Kanaʻina died on March 13 , 1877 . He had not re @-@ written his will and when produced still left everything to his son Lunalilo . Having died intestate , probate hearings proceeded for 5 years . Final adjudication went to several of Kanaʻina 's cousins including Ruth <unk> and Bernice Pauahi Bishop . 
 = = Birth , early life and marriage = = 
 Charles Kanaʻina was born Charles Kanaʻina Eia , circa 1801 at <unk> , Hawaii to [ Eia ] Ka @-@ <unk> ( father ) and <unk> <unk> ( mother ) . His maternal great grandmother was High <unk> <unk> @-@ a @-@ Moana , the granddaughter of King <unk> and <unk> . His great grandfather , <unk> ( <unk> ) and <unk> @-@ a @-@ Moana were cousins , both being descendants of King <unk> of Maui . From <unk> , Kanaʻina is descended from Liloa through the ancient rulers son Umi @-@ a @-@ Liloa . He is also descended from Liloa 's son <unk> through his great , great , great grandmother <unk> . His paternal grandparents were <unk> and <unk> . 
 He was named Kanaʻina , after the nickname of his uncle <unk> , the chief who was drawn by artist John Webber and who later is reputed to have first struck Captain James Cook before he was killed at Kealakekua Bay . In the Hawaiian language , ka <unk> means " the conquering " . 
 Kanaʻina married Miriam <unk> Kekāuluohi in 1821 when Kamehameha II converted to Christianity and gave up all but one wife . Kekāuluohi was free to marry the monarch 's friend Kanaʻina on Kauaʻi . Kekāuluohi had been one of several wives of both Kamehameha I and Kamehameha II . However , under the influence of Christian missionaries , Kamehameha II renounced all his other wives except one . Kekāuluohi was then free to marry Kanaʻina after they both took Christian first names . 
 = = = Residence = = = 
 The couple lived near their family members . Kekūanāoa had his home just west of Kanaʻina 's called <unk> . Kekāuluohi and Kanaʻina had their home in the area called Pohukaina . This area was a sacred burial site for aliʻi nobles . The aliʻi style home was similar to that of the other estates in the neighborhood consisting of small buildings used for different purposes . The sitting and sleeping area had a folding door entrance of green painted wood under glass upper panels . The house had two rooms separated by a festooned tent door of chintz fabric and was carpeted with hand crafted <unk> mats . In the front was a lounge area opposite a sideboard and mirror . In the middle they placed a semi circle of armchairs with a center table where the couple would write . Four matching cabinet @-@ bookshelves with glass doors were set in each corner of the room with silk scarves hanging from each . In his book , A visit to the South Seas , in the U.S. Ship Vincennes : during the years 1829 and 1830 , Charles Samuel Stewart states : 
 They both write with great readiness ; and the husband with a freedom and command of hand that would class him among good <unk> anywhere . Both are among the most studious and improving of their <unk> . 
 Next to their home was an old estate that had been demolished called <unk> . This was the spot of an ancient <unk> called <unk> . In July 1844 Kekūanāoa began building a large home here as a gift to his daughter Victoria Kamāmalu . Instead , Kamehameha III would buy the estate and use as his Royal Residence after moving the capitol of the kingdom to Honolulu . It would become the <unk> Palace . As older aliʻi died , the lands were passed down and concentrated into fewer hands . Kekāuluohi 's lands were passed down to her from the Kamehameha family . When she died , she left her accumulated lands and wealth to her son , not her husband Kanaʻina . In 1865 Kamehameha V moved the bodies of the royal family to a new royal mausoleum however , he refused to allow the remains of Kekāuluohi to be moved with the rest of the <unk> . When Lunalilo made out his will he made provisions for a royal tomb to be built across the street from the palace at <unk> Church where he , his mother and Kanaʻina would be buried . 
 Kanaʻina served as a member of the House of Nobles of Kamehameha III from 1841 to 1876 , on the Privy Council from July 29 , 1845 , to 1855 , and on the Supreme Court from when it was first founded on May 10 , 1842 . In the tradition of European royalty , he was granted the style ( manner of address ) of " His Highness " . 
 = = Children = = 
 Kanaʻina and Kekāuluohi had two sons . Their first son Davida , died young . They had two hānai ( informal adoption to other family members ) children , Kalama , the wife of Kamehameha III and later Kalama 's second son <unk> II . Their surviving natural son , William Charles Lunalilo was born on January 31 , 1835 , at Pohukaina . He was considered the grandnephew of Kamehameha I , and second cousin to King Kamehameha V , King Kamehameha IV , and Princess Victoria Kamāmalu , through his mother , Kekāuluohi , who was the cousin of Elizabeth Kīnaʻu ( later called Kaʻahumanu II ) . He was declared eligible to succeed by the royal decree of King Kamehameha III and sent to the Chief 's Children 's School ( later called the Royal School ) when it was founded by missionaries Amos Starr Cooke and Juliette Montague Cooke . 
 = = = Lunalilo Trust = = = 
 Kanaʻina acted as trustee of the royal lands that had been inherited by his wife while his son was a minor , and after his son 's death . When Kanaʻina died , the court appointed nine trustees , six of which would take part in the militia that overthrew the monarchy and also take part in the new provisional government . Dole himself had been on the record as supporting the break up of crown lands to promote American style farming in his newspaper in 1872 . Various lawsuits ensued over the property including a suit questioning the validity of the will due to Lunalilo being under the guardianship of his father when he made it out . Lunalilo had requested in his will to use the estate to fund a charity . The trustees favored splitting up the estate by selling it off , while others claimed the value of land was underestimated , and an endowment to run the charity could have been funded by lease income . For example , Kanaʻina leased ( and later his heirs would sell ) thousands of acres of land on the island of Hawaii to businessman ( and son of missionaries ) William Herbert Shipman . 
 = = Death and legacy = = 
 Kanaʻina died on March 13 , 1877 , in Honolulu , Oahu , and was buried at <unk> Church in the Lunalilo Mausoleum , next to his son who had died before him . While Kanaʻina had made out a will , he had left everything to his son , and so had died intestate . Petitions to administer the estate began the following day . Probate proceedings were litigated for four years , between 1877 and 1881 , and re @-@ affirmed in 1886 . 
 Attorney General Alfred S. Hartwell applied for the appointment of trustees shortly after Kanaʻina 's death under the articles of Lunalilo 's will . Article three of that will bequeathed the entirety of his estate to three trustees appointed by the Justices of the Supreme Court of the Hawaiian Kingdom . The property was to be sold and invested until the sum of $ 25 @,@ 000 @.@ 00 was raised to fund a home for the poor and destitute . Chief Justice Charles Coffin Harris ordered a hearing for April 5 , 1877 , to hear the petition pertaining to the estate of the late Charles Kanaʻina and anyone who could show reason not to grant it . 
 = = = Estate probate = = = 
 A petition was filed by King David Kalakaua and his sisters and brother @-@ in @-@ law , Lydia K. <unk> , Miriam K. Cleghorn and Archibald Scott Cleghorn , with a hearing set by Justice Lawrence McCully . In July 1878 , Justices Harris , Judd and McCully heard Kalakaua 's appeal . While the Justices felt that the claim of Kalakaua and his sisters had not been proven , they were impressed with that of Kilinahe ( Kanaʻina 's first cousin ) and other claimants based on testimony and witnesses . The court decreed that the estate be split into four equal shares : one quarter to go to <unk> ( k ) , <unk> ( k ) and <unk> ( k ) ; one quarter each to <unk> ( w ) and <unk> ( k ) ; and one quarter to the widow and children of Kilinahe , who had died before the adjudication of his claim . 
 Claimants from the line of Moana Wahine made petitions to the court under the act of 1874 to quite land titles . The act was later deemed unconstitutional and a new decree of <unk> was made . By December 1879 disbursement of land in trust with William Cooper Parke , ( Marshal of Hawaii from 1853 to 1884 ) and owned by heirs , could not be agreed upon for settlement . Most supported the sale of the lands , so an order was made and all land sold at auction . 
 = = = Heirs and legacy = = = 
 Final adjudication of probate found a total of eight parties or groups of relatives , most of whom were descended from Moana and her four husbands , as heirs to the Kanaʻina estate splitting a total of 9 shares , with 2 shares going to one party . The probate records include a great deal of information from the four years of litigation . A great number of people petitioned the courts to claim title as heirs after the initial 1878 judgement . In the final adjudication , Bernice Pauahi Bishop received two of the nine shares . The remaining seven of the nine shares were divided equally in 1 / 9th and distributed to Ruth <unk> , <unk> and <unk> ( namesakes of the historic figures ) , Kilinahe ( Who 's grandmother was the older sister of Kanaʻina 's mother ) and 5 other parties . The first three trustees included John Mott @-@ Smith and Sanford B. Dole . 
 The Hawaii public archives building , built in 1906 on the ʻIolani Palace grounds , in a section that was formerly the Kanaʻina 's estate , was dedicated as the Kanaʻina building . It held state offices in the 1950s , added as a contributing property of the Hawaii Capital Historic District and then restored for the Friends of ʻIolani Palace in 1990 . 
 = = Family tree = = 
 = 2 / 3rd Battalion ( Australia ) = 
 The 2 / 3rd Battalion was an infantry battalion of the Australian Army . Raised for service during the Second World War as part of the Second Australian Imperial Force ( 2nd AIF ) , it was formed in October 1939 in Sydney and was attached to the 16th Brigade , 6th Division , the first formation raised as part of the 2nd AIF during the war . Deploying to the Middle East in early 1940 , it saw action in North Africa , Greece , Crete , and Syria in 1941 – 42 before returning to Australia following Japan 's entry into the war , and was one of only two Australian infantry battalions to fight against all the major Axis powers of the war : the Germans , Italians , Japanese and Vichy French . 
 In 1942 – 43 , the battalion took part in fighting along the Kokoda Track before returning to Australia where it spent over a year training and being rebuilt . In December 1944 , the 2 / 3rd returned to New Guinea to take part in the Aitape – Wewak campaign and remained there until the war ended . Following the end of hostilities , the battalion was disbanded on 8 February 1946 in Brisbane . The battalion 's battle honours are perpetuated by the Royal New South Wales Regiment . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Formation = = = 
 Upon the outbreak of the Second World War the Australian government decided to raise an all @-@ volunteer force for service overseas , due to the provisions of the Defence Act ( 1903 ) which restricted the deployment of the part @-@ time Militia to only those areas considered to be Australian territory . This force was known as the Second Australian Imperial Force ( 2nd AIF ) , and the 6th Division was the first to be raised . As a unit of this formation , the 2 / 3rd Battalion was formed at Victoria Barracks , Sydney , on 24 October 1939 . Along with the 2 / 1st , 2 / 2nd and 2 / 4th Battalions , the 2 / 3rd was assigned to the 16th Brigade . 
 Although initially the infantry battalions of the 6th Division adopted the Australian battalion structure of two rifle companies , a support company , a light machine gun platoon and an administrative headquarters , they soon switched to the British structure with four rifle companies – each consisting of three platoons with three sections – and a headquarters company consisting of signals , carrier , pioneer , anti @-@ aircraft , transport , administrative and mortar platoons . 
 The battalion 's first commanding officer was Lieutenant Colonel Vivian England , an officer who had fought in the First World War and had continued to serve in the Militia after the war , commanding the 55th Battalion . Personnel for the battalion were raised from an area around New South Wales that is known by the Aboriginal name of " The Werriwa " . This area is bounded by a line from Sydney to Bega in the south , and from Bega , west to the Snowy Mountains , Cooma , Canberra , Yass , then north to Sydney through the Goulburn and Liverpool areas . The men were enlisted from 20 October onwards , and by 3 November 1939 the battalion was formed . The colours chosen for the Unit Colour Patch ( UCP ) were the same as those of the 3rd Battalion , a unit which had served during the First World War before being raised as a Militia formation in 1921 . These colours were chocolate over green , in a horizontal rectangle , although a 3 mm border of gray was added to the UCP to distinguish the battalion from its Militia counterpart , which would also go on to serve with distinction during the war . 
 Following a brief period of training at Liverpool and Ingleburn , the battalion took part in a farewell march through Sydney . The Sydney Morning Herald of 4 January 1940 gave an account of their farewell march : " The long khaki columns thrilled the hearts of Sydney as it had not been so moved for a quarter of a century since that still , spring day in 1914 when the first A.I.F. marched through the same streets on its way to Anzac and imperishable glory ; the marching was magnificent . " Afterwards , the battalion sailed in the first troop convoy to leave Australia on 10 January 1940 , embarking upon the transport Orcades . They disembarked at El Kantara on the Suez Canal on 14 February 1940 , and from there they were trucked to their camp at Julis in Palestine , where they undertook further training . 
 = = = First actions : North Africa 1941 = = = 
 The first engagement that Australian troops were involved in during the Second World War came at Bardia , a major Italian military outpost in the north of Libya . The 16th Brigade broke through Bardia 's western defensive perimeter at dawn on 3 January 1941 , when the 2 / 1st Battalion breached the wire defences and swung left before advancing . The 2 / 2nd Battalion followed suit , swinging to the right , and the 2 / 3rd then moved straight through the breach . Meanwhile , the 17th Brigade led a diversion to the south . Although the 16th Brigade was able to capture Bardia in the late afternoon of 4 January , resistance continued , and fighting did not cease until the next morning . Over 40 @,@ 000 Italians were captured along with significant amounts of equipment and material – including food and ammunition – which was in short supply . A significant amount of alcohol was also captured by the Australians in Italian dugouts inside the 2 / 3rd 's position around Wadi @-@ el @-@ <unk> . During this period , the 2 / 3rd lost five officers and 56 men killed or wounded . 
 After this , the Allied forces advanced to the fortified naval outpost of Tobruk . The 6th Division attacked the perimeter defences early on 21 January , following a week of continuous bombardment from both land and sea . The 2 / 3rd Battalion was tasked with breaching the outer Italian defences for the 2 / 1st Battalion to pass through . Following the initial breakthrough , the 2 / 3rd then advanced west along the inner ring of defences , attacking a number of Italian posts as they went . Tobruk fell the next day , with the Italians surrendering to Brigadier Horace Robertson , the commander of the 19th Brigade . The Italian flag was taken down and in the absence of an Australian flag , a <unk> from the 2 / 4th Battalion tied his slouch hat to the flag staff and hauled it up to the top . The battalion 's losses during the fighting for Tobruk were seven officers and 50 men killed or wounded . 
 Following the capture of the town , the 2 / 3rd garrisoned Tobruk , although B Company was detached to the 19th Brigade for its assault on Derna , and remained there after its capture on 30 January . Prime Minister Robert Menzies interrupted his journey from Australia to England to address the troops after the capture of Tobruk . On 7 March 1941 , the battalion left Tobruk , along with the rest of the 6th Division , to bolster the Allied defences in Greece . 
 = = = <unk> in Greece and Crete 1941 = = = 
 On 18 March 1941 , the 2 / 3rd Battalion sailed from Alexandria aboard HMS Gloucester , arriving in Greece and landing in the port of Piraeus on the following day , after a 22 @-@ hour voyage during which their convoy had been attacked numerous times by Axis aircraft . After the invasion of the country on 6 April , they were moved north to attempt to turn back the German forces . The following day they occupied Veria , and on 12 April the 6th Division was grouped together with the 2nd New Zealand Division and a lone British brigade to form an Anzac Corps . This formation did not last long , however , as the Greek government requested Allied forces withdraw from Greece on 16 April before ceasing organised resistance on 18 April . Due to a series of withdrawals elsewhere , the battalion was forced to pull back from its positions at Veria and did not come into contact with the Germans until 18 April when they attempted to block passage of the Tempe Gorge . Fighting alongside the 2 / 2nd Battalion and New Zealanders , the rearguard action was successful and enabled the Allies to withdraw to the south . Brigadier Arthur Allen , commander of the 16th Brigade , later wrote of this encounter : " it was a fantastic battle . Everyone was on top , with no time to dig in , and all in the front line , including artillery , Bren carriers and infantry , as well as headquarters , with transport only yards in the rear . Some confusion could be expected in the circumstances , with every weapon firing and aircraft almost continually strafing from above . If you saw it in the cinema you would say the author had never seen battle . " 
 With the Germans enjoying numerical superiority on the ground , and with the Luftwaffe in total control of the skies , they then captured the township of Tempe . Although fierce rearguard fighting continued while the Australian and New Zealand forces withdrew to a new defensive line at Thermopylae , the situation deteriorated . An official evacuation plan was issued on 21 April , and on 25 April – Anzac Day – parties of evacuating Allied troops marched through Athens on their way to the coast . The 2 / 3rd Battalion embarked from Kalamata on 27 April . The 2 / 3rd 's casualties during the campaign amounted to 14 killed , 31 wounded and 62 captured . 
 While the majority of the 2 / 3rd Battalion was successfully evacuated to Egypt , a small force of 141 men were evacuated to the island of Crete instead , after the transport ship they were on was sunk . Having formed the rearguard during the withdrawal from Greece , they had embarked separately from the main body , being taken aboard the Costa Rica . During the voyage to Alexandria , the transport had been attacked by German aircraft , and as it sank , they were ordered to abandon ship . After being rescued by Royal Navy destroyers , the troops were transported to Crete , where they were formed into a composite battalion with men from other units of the 16th Brigade , and together the unit became known as the 16th Brigade Composite Battalion . 
 With only limited small arms and ammunition they moved to positions above <unk> on the shores of Suda Bay to undertake garrison duties in anticipation of a German attack on the island . Following the German invasion on 20 May 1941 , some of these troops saw direct action against German paratroopers . After the Allied evacuation from the island a week later , they undertook active patrols around the island before being evacuated on 31 May 1941 aboard HMS Phoebe . They arrived in Alexandria on 1 June 1941 . Two 2 / 3rd Battalion men were killed during the fighting on Crete , and one was wounded . Fifty became prisoners of war . Meanwhile , the rest of the battalion had concentrated in Palestine , where it was rebuilt in advance of its next campaign . 
 = = = Securing Syria and Lebanon , 1941 – 42 = = = 
 Australian troops from the 7th Division were already fighting in the Syria – Lebanon Campaign when the re @-@ formed 2 / 3rd Battalion , along with the 2 / 5th Battalion and the 6th Division Cavalry Regiment , were committed as reinforcements , to help bring the 7th Division up to strength . In a bitter campaign that lasted 28 days , Vichy French forces attempted to resist the Allied invasion , which had been launched in order to deny the Germans the use of Vichy territory to launch attacks against Egypt . Against a modest Allied force with only limited armour and artillery , the well @-@ equipped French force outnumbered the attackers and had the advantage of holding the mountainous terrain . Having contributed a company to garrison duties around Sidon in Lebanon , and provided 100 men to help re @-@ form the shattered 2 / 1st Battalion , the 2 / 3rd was understrength – consisting of only 21 officers and 385 other ranks – when it entrained at Majdal in Palestine on 18 June 1941 to join the campaign . 
 Initially , after arriving from Palestine , the battalion was committed to forming a block on the road between Damascus and Deraa ; they were later committed to an attack to sever the Beirut road around <unk> , as part of wider fighting around Damascus on 20 – 22 June . Operating with British and Indian forces on the right flank , they then launched an unsuccessful action at Jebel Mazar on 24 – 28 June , where they were tasked with capturing the high ground overlooking the main road , along which the Australians were advancing . The battalion came under command of the re @-@ formed 17th Brigade , which was reconstituted to bring the 7th Division up to full strength as it operated along the coast . Despite being well below strength – consisting of just two companies with a total of 300 men – it joined the fighting at Damour on 6 – 10 July , advancing along the <unk> River and leading the 17th Brigade 's advance . Despite heavy fighting the Allied forces slowly advanced simultaneously along the coast and inland , finally overcoming the Vichy French defences . Following the armistice on 14 July , the troops remained in Syria until January 1942 preparing defences and undertaking other garrison duties . The battalion 's casualties during the short campaign amounted to 16 killed and 77 wounded . 
 = = = Garrison duties in Ceylon 1942 = = = 
 Following Japan 's entry into the war in December 1941 the decision was made to bring the 6th Division back to bolster the Allied defences in the Pacific , and the 2 / 3rd Battalion left the Middle East on 10 March 1942 , aboard the steamer Orontes . The original intention was that they would be sent to reinforce Java ; however , while they were at sea concerns about a Japanese attack on Ceylon ( now Sri Lanka ) prompted the diversion of the 16th and 17th Brigades to Colombo , and they arrived there on 21 March . The freighter Ben <unk> , carrying the battalion 's vehicles , arrived shortly afterwards and the 2 / 3rd took up defensive positions in the southeast part of the island , which was considered to be the most likely location for a Japanese invasion force to land . 
 On 5 April , a Japanese naval force sortied from the recently captured Andaman Islands and launched a series of attacks by carrier @-@ based aircraft on Colombo and Trincomalee . Another attack occurred on 9 April . Little damage was done on land , but both the British and Australian navies suffered losses . Regardless , the Japanese failed to sustain their initial momentum and the expected invasion did not occur . Nevertheless , men from the 2 / 3rd Battalion were kept busy for the remainder of their time preparing defences , manning anti @-@ aircraft positions and undertaking jungle training , while receiving instruction in lessons learned from operations in Malaya and Singapore . The men were taught how to use the jungle according to author Paul Ham " ... to ' melt ' into the foliage ; to retrace their steps at night ; to use camouflage properly ; to detect human presence by crushed twigs and disturbed leaf mould ; to move silently over undergrowth . To build shelters ; and to discern human from animal sounds . " 
 In July , British forces were sent from India to relieve the Australian troops in Ceylon . Preparations were made for the 2 / 3rd Battalion to return to Australia , and after embarking upon the SS <unk> , they arrived in Melbourne on 8 August 1942 , having returned via the southern route away from the Japanese submarines patrolling the east coast . After this , the troops all received two weeks home leave , staggered from the time of their arrival . The final group had their leave cut short after only three days , however , when they were recalled by urgent telegram . The 16th Brigade was again on the move , this time to Port Moresby in New Guinea , where the fighting against the Japanese along the Kokoda Track was reaching a critical stage . After a short voyage , the brigade arrived at Port Moresby on 21 September 1942 . 
 = = = Fighting in New Guinea , 1942 – 43 = = = 
 Following their arrival at Port Moresby , the 16th Brigade along with the 25th Brigade , prepared to relieve the forces on the Kokoda Track . With the Australians having finally halted the Japanese advance , the fresh troops would be tasked with launching a counterattack to drive the Japanese back to Buna in the north . Consequently , throughout October , November and into December , the 2 / 3rd Battalion took part in three major actions : Eora Creek ( 22 – 28 October ) , Oivi ( 5 – 12 November ) , and an action on the Sanananda Track ( 21 November – 19 December ) . 
 On 3 October , General Douglas MacArthur spoke to the 16th Brigade 's commander , Brigadier John Lloyd , at Ower 's Corner , at the foot of the Kokoda Track : " Lloyd , by some act of God your Brigade has been chosen for this job . The eyes of the Western world are upon you . I have every confidence in you and your men . Good luck and don 't stop . " The 16th Brigade arrived at Templeton 's Crossing on 19 October , just three days behind the 2 / 25th and 2 / 33rd Battalions , whom they relieved . The following day the 16th Brigade continued the advance but found that the Japanese had withdrawn to Eora Creek , where they had established a strong defensive position . 
 Here the Japanese held the high ground in well @-@ concealed positions that had clear fields of fire into the narrow gorge below . With no other options , the 16th Brigade was forced to assault the Japanese defences frontally , advancing straight up the gorge . Amidst torrential rain and stiff defence , progress was slow as each defensive position had to be dealt with individually . As the water level in the creek rose steadily , the troops came under heavy mortar fire and were attacked with grenades lobbed from the heights above . The supply situation grew desperate too , but by 28 October the 2 / 3rd Battalion had managed to work its way around the Japanese right flank in preparation for an attack . In the afternoon , the battalion launched its attack , breaking through the Japanese outposts and into the main position . The defenders were overwhelmed and many of them abandoned their weapons as they fled . That night , the remaining Japanese withdrew from the position . The 16th Brigade lost 72 killed and 154 wounded in this action . 
 Despite the successful action , the superiors of the 7th Division 's commander , Major @-@ General Arthur Allen , were dissatisfied by the counter @-@ offensive 's rate of progress , and he was relieved of his command the day before the Australian forces won through at Eora Creek . Japanese resistance decreased after that battle , and by 31 September the 16th Brigade was advancing along the eastern fork of the Track through <unk> without opposition . On 2 November they passed through the recently abandoned village of Kokoda . Three days later , as the Australians advanced towards the Kumusi River , the 2 / 3rd Battalion went into battle at Oivi , after coming up against an entrenched force holding the high ground from Oivi to Gorari . The Japanese counter @-@ attacked the next day , and as fighting continued through to 6 November , Major General George Vasey , the new divisional commander , sent the 25th Brigade and the 2 / 1st Battalion on a successful attack against the Japanese rear at Gorari . The Japanese at Oivi , their supply and withdrawal route cut , were then forced to retreat . 
 The 2 / 3rd Battalion 's final involvement in the campaign came as the 16th Brigade advanced towards Sanananda in November . They left the Wairopi area on 16 November , with the battalion second in order of march . Tired and drained from the exertions of the last two months , the advance across the swamps of the coastal plain proved heavy work . On the first day they made 6 miles ( 9 @.@ 7 km ) , but after heavy rains the following day and failures in the resupply effort , a large number of men fell behind due to exhaustion . On 19 November , the 2 / 3rd spearheaded the brigade 's advance to the coast . Several Japanese stragglers were taken prisoner and a number of minor contacts followed , but the Japanese defenders withdrew before the Australians could shake out to conduct an assault . 
 The following morning , the brigade reached the junction of the <unk> and Cape Killerton trails , about 2 miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) from the coast . After the 2 / 1st Battalion was attacked , the 2 / 3rd Battalion took part in a brigade flanking attack around the Japanese position to the right , forcing the Japanese to fall back . The action , however , had severely depleted the brigade to the point where , with less than 1 @,@ 000 fit men , it was unable to continue offensive operations . Thereafter activity was limited to patrolling and maintaining a defensive perimeter . In early December the 16th Brigade was relieved by the 30th Brigade . The 2 / 3rd Battalion itself was relieved on 6 December , returning to <unk> with a strength of just six officers and 67 other ranks , before being evacuated back to Port Moresby by plane on 23 December 1942 . They were returned to Australia shortly afterwards for leave and to reorganise . During the fighting along the Kokoda Track and the advance north to the sea , the 2 / 3rd lost 69 men killed and 103 wounded . 
 = = = Final campaign : Aitape – Wewak 1944 – 45 = = = 
 After a short period of leave the 6th Division came together again in late January 1943 on the Atherton Tablelands to begin training , and to convert to the more austere jungle establishment . Under this structure , the size of the battalion was reduced by one officer and 106 other ranks , giving the 2 / 3rd Battalion a total of 803 men of all ranks . At this time , a camp was built from scratch at Wondecla , but it was 12 months before the battalion 's ranks were brought to full strength by the return of sick and wounded soldiers . As the battalion began to reform , some who had performed well in the preceding campaigns were recommended for commissioning and were sent to an Officer Training Unit at Woodside , in South Australia . Along with training there was time for recreation including swimming carnivals , boxing tournaments and a 6th Division rugby league championship in which the 2 / 3rd Battalion was victorious , beating the 2 / 3rd Machine Gun Battalion in the final . The team captain , Col Windon , later went on to play for and captain the Wallabies . 
 During this time the battalion received a number of reinforcements from its associated Militia unit , the 3rd Battalion ( The Werriwa Regiment ) . This unit had been fighting in New Guinea as part of the 30th Brigade , with whom it had served on the Kokoda Track alongside the 2 / 3rd as well as the 39th and 49th Battalions , before being returned to Australia , where it had been disbanded . Other reinforcements also arrived from the 16th Battalion . 
 Due to a combination of political and strategic decisions , it was almost two years before the battalion went into combat again . In late 1944 , in order to free up American troops for operations in the Philippines , Australian forces were directed to take over responsibility for operations around Aitape in New Guinea . The 6th Division returned to New Guinea in November 1944 , with the final brigade arriving on 31 December 1944 . Although basically cut off from resupply , there were around 35 @,@ 000 Japanese troops in the area , holding the coast past Wewak and into the interior . Supported by food supplies from native gardens in the Torricelli Mountains , the Japanese put up heavy resistance to the Australians ' primary tactic of aggressive patrolling . 
 Tasked with reducing the Japanese , while remaining available to support operations elsewhere , the 6th Division began a limited offensive in the Wewak area . The 16th Brigade was initially held in divisional reserve , occupying a defensive position west of the <unk> River , until in February 1945 it was tasked with securing a forward supply base near <unk> Bay and clearing up to the Anumb River , about 8 miles ( 13 km ) to the east of the river . They came up against only minor opposition and by 23 February they had crossed the Anumb ; less than a month later they had progressed 6 miles ( 9 @.@ 7 km ) east , occupying the coastal town of But and removing the Japanese from the Dagua area . 
 During this time , contact with the Japanese was limited to small @-@ scale actions rather than a large general action ; nevertheless , these actions caused heavy casualties as the Japanese defended stubbornly . Casualties amongst the Australians were , according to author Eustace Keogh , " heavy in relation to the size of ... the numerous small actions the Japanese forced them to fight " . In addition , the strenuous nature of the campaign reduced the troops ' resistance and ability to undertake proper medical precautions and as a result there were large numbers of sickness casualties . Malaria took a particularly heavy toll , with troops being affected by a particularly strong strain that proved resistant to the normal doses of <unk> . Accidents also resulted in losses . In one incident , seven men from the 2 / 3rd drowned when the <unk> River flooded amidst a torrential downpour . 
 Wewak was captured on 10 May 1945 , and the 16th Brigade began pursuing the Japanese defenders that had withdrawn inland . They continued until 11 August , when offensive operations ceased after word was received that the Japanese had entered into ceasefire talks . The battalion was in the Mount <unk> area on 15 August when news came that the Japanese had surrendered following the atomic bombing of Hiroshima and Nagasaki . The battalion 's losses during its final campaign were 51 killed and 76 wounded . 
 = = = Disbandment = = = 
 After the cessation of hostilities , the battalion remained in the Aitape – Wewak area undertaking occupation duties . Its strength was slowly reduced as personnel were repatriated to Australia for demobilisation or transferred to other units for further service . Eventually , the remaining cadre of personnel returned to Australia , and on 8 February 1946 the 2 / 3rd Battalion disbanded in Brisbane , as one of the most decorated battalions of the 2nd AIF . They had fought all the major Axis powers : the Italians , Germans , Vichy French and Japanese . Alongside the Australian 2 / 5th Battalion , they were the only Allied troops able to make this claim . During its service a total of 3 @,@ 303 men served with the 2 / 3rd Battalion of whom 203 were killed and 432 wounded . Members of the 2 / 3rd received four Distinguished Service Orders , 16 Military Crosses , 12 Distinguished Conduct Medals , 30 Military Medals , two British Empire Medals and 73 Mentions in Despatches . 
 In 1948 , the Militia units that had fought during the war were re @-@ raised as part of the Citizens Military Force ( CMF ) , and it was decided to entrust the battle honours of the 2nd AIF units to their associated CMF units . As a result , the 2 / 3rd Battalion 's battle honours were passed to the 3rd Battalion ( The Werriwa Regiment ) , which was reformed around Canberra . In 1960 , with the introduction of the Pentropic division into the Australian Army , the CMF was reorganised and the 3rd Battalion ( The Werriwa Regiment ) was reduced to company strength , forming ' C ' Company , 3rd Battalion , Royal New South Wales Regiment ( 3 RNSWR ) . In 1965 , following the abandonment of the Pentropic divisional structure , the 3rd Battalion was reformed in its own right as the individual companies were split up to form new battalions with the old regionally based numerical designations . In 1987 , however , following another reorganisation of the Army Reserve which saw a reduction in the number of the infantry battalions across Australia , 3 RNSWR was linked with 4 RNSWR to become 4th / 3rd Battalion , Royal New South Wales Regiment ( 4 / 3 RNSWR ) . 
 = = Battle honours = = 
 The 2 / 3rd Battalion received the following battle honours for its service during the war : 
 North Africa , Bardia 1941 , Capture of Tobruk , Syria 1941 , Damascus 1941 , Dimas , Damour , Greece 1941 , Mount Olympus , Tempe Gorge , South @-@ West Pacific 1942 – 1945 , Kokoda Trail , Eora Creek – Templeton 's Crossing II , Oivi – Gorari , Buna – Gona and Sanananda Road . 
 These battle honours are now carried by the Royal New South Wales Regiment . 
 = = Commanding officers = = 
 The following officers commanded the 2 / 3rd Battalion : 
 Lieutenant Colonel Vivian England ( 1939 – 41 ) ; 
 Lieutenant Colonel Donald Lamb ( 1941 ) ; 
 Lieutenant Colonel John Stevenson ( 1941 – 43 ) ; and 
 Lieutenant Colonel Ian Hutchison ( 1943 – 46 ) . 
 = Cyclone Mala = 
 Cyclone Mala was the strongest tropical cyclone of the 2006 North Indian Ocean cyclone season . In mid @-@ April , an area of disturbed weather formed over the southern Bay of Bengal and nearby Andaman Sea . Over a period of several days , the system became increasingly organized and was classified as a depression on April 24 . Situated within a region of weak steering currents , the storm slowly intensified as it drifted in a general northward direction . It attained gale @-@ force winds and was named Mala the next day . Conditions for strengthening improved markedly on April 27 and Mala subsequently underwent rapid intensification which culminated in the cyclone attaining its peak . Early on April 28 , the cyclone had estimated winds of 185 km / h ( 115 mph ) . The Joint Typhoon Warning Center considered Mala to have been slightly stronger , classifying it as a Category 4 @-@ equivalent cyclone . Steady weakening ensued thereafter and the storm made landfall in Myanmar 's Rakhine State on April 29 . Rapid dissipation took place once onshore and Mala was last noted early the next morning . 
 In contrast to Mala 's intensity , damage was relatively minimal across Myanmar due to adequate early warnings , while timely and effective evacuations minimized loss of life along the coast . The greatest damage resulted from a thunderstorm near Yangon on April 28 that spawned a possible tornado in an industrial zone . A total of 586 homes were damaged there . Just outside the city in the <unk> District , a flash flood killed at least 18 people . Overall , the storm claimed 37 lives in the country and left US $ 6 @.@ 7 million in damage . In the wake of Mala , the Red Cross distributed relief aid to affected residents while local officials set up shelters to house those left homeless . Government and social organizations donated 5 @.@ 4 million kyat ( US $ 4 @,@ 320 ) in cash to survivors in the Ayeyarwady Region . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 In mid- to late @-@ April , a pulse in the Madden – Julian oscillation , coupled with a Kelvin wave , ( which later contributed to the formation of Typhoon Chanchu in the western Pacific ) enhanced convective activity over the Bay of Bengal . By April 22 , a trough developed along an axis from the southern Bay of Bengal eastward to the Andaman Sea . The Joint Typhoon Warning Center ( JTWC ) began monitoring the system for potential tropical cyclogenesis the following day . By 0600 UTC on April 24 , an area of low pressure formed southeast of the Andaman Islands and the India Meteorological Department ( IMD ) began monitoring the disturbance . Quickly organizing , the low developed into a tropical depression later on April 24 and the JTWC began writing full advisories on the cyclone without issuing a Tropical Cyclone Formation Alert . Organization slowed thereafter due to moderate wind shear , but continued at a near @-@ climatological rate as upper @-@ level outflow allowed for continued convective development . Early on April 25 , the JTWC estimated the system to have attained gale @-@ force winds . The IMD followed suit later that day and subsequently assigned it the name Mala . Weak steering currents prompted slow and erratic movement with an overall northward trajectory . 
 Forecasters at this time anticipated little intensification as the system was expected to move into a region of higher shear . However , on April 27 , the system moved under a subtropical ridge and conditions quickly became favorable for intensification . The presence of the ridge greatly enhanced the outflow over the cyclone and an eye developed by 1200 UTC . By this time , both the JTWC and IMD estimated Mala to have attained hurricane @-@ force winds with the latter classifying it as a very severe cyclonic storm . The previously weak steering currents became more established as well , with the storm now tracking northeast toward Myanmar through a weakness in a ridge over Southeast Asia . Situated in an area with sea surface temperatures of 28 to 29 ° C ( 82 to 84 ° F ) , the cyclone was able to undergo rapid intensification as wind shear abruptly diminished . The IMD estimated Mala to have reached its peak intensity at 0900 UTC on April 28 with winds of 185 km / h ( 115 mph ) and a barometric pressure of 954 mbar ( hPa ; 28 @.@ 17 inHg ) . Using the Dvorak technique , a method of determining a tropical cyclone 's strength via satellite imagery , the agency gave Mala a rating of T # 5 @.@ 5 which yields an intensity of 189 km / h ( 117 mph ) . 
 The JTWC estimated Mala to have been a stronger system , with peak winds of 220 km / h ( 140 mph ) and a pressure of 922 mb ( hPa ; 27 @.@ 23 inHg ) — equivalent to a Category 4 hurricane on the Saffir – Simpson hurricane wind scale . Their Dvorak values peaked at T # 6 @.@ 5 or 235 km / h ( 146 mph ) . As the powerful storm approached Myanmar , the combined effects of increasing wind shear and land interaction soon took their toll on Mala . At 0700 UTC on April 29 , Mala made landfall just south of <unk> in Myanmar 's Rakhine State as a very severe cyclonic storm . The JTWC estimated winds at this time to have been 165 km / h ( 105 mph ) . Rapid weakening ensued once the cyclone moved onshore . Within 12 hours of landfall , Mala weakened to a deep depression and was last noted as a dissipating system earl on April 30 . 
 Sea surface temperatures in the wake of Cyclone Mala decreased up to 4 – 5 ° C ( 7 – 9 ° F ) due to upwelling . From April 28 – 29 , the low @-@ level inflow associated affected much of the northern Bay of Bengal and resulted in northwesterly winds as far away as Hyderabad , India . These winds brought dry , dust filled air over the bay with mean particulate @-@ matter doubling over the region . 
 = = Preparations = = 
 On April 26 , the local Department of Meteorology and Hydrology in Myanmar stated that the Ayeyarwady , Bago Region , and Yangon regions were likely to be affected within two days and Rakhine State within three days . Officials began broadcasting storm warning to the public over radio the following day . Evacuations of at @-@ risk coastal areas were conducted , though specifics are unknown . Once the storm moved inland , residents across the country were advised of the likelihood of widespread heavy rain from the remnant system . 
 Despite never being forecast to strike Bangladesh , officials there warned residents that the storm could strike the nation and cause loss of life . Cautionary signals were raised at ports in Chittagong , Cox 's Bazar , and Mongla , advising seafaring vessels to remain docked until the storm 's passage . Roughly 34 @,@ 000 members of the Bangladesh Red Crescent Society were placed on standby for possible relief efforts . 
 Flash flood warnings were issued across northern Thailand on April 29 under the threat of heavy rains from Mala 's remnants . 
 = = Impact = = 
 Throughout almost the entire existence of Mala , it produced rainfall in the Andaman and Nicobar islands . Daily totals peaked on April 27 at 100 mm ( 3 @.@ 9 in ) in Car Nicobar . 
 After moving through Myanmar , Mala brought heavy rains to northern Thailand . According to local meteorologists the storm also accelerated the onset of the seasonal monsoon which would contribute to a wetter @-@ than @-@ average year for the region . 
 = = = Myanmar = = = 
 Though Mala struck Myanmar as a powerful cyclone , early warnings and proper evacuations minimized loss of life along coastal areas . Additionally , no major storm surge was reported , limiting the potential for major damage . The most significant effects were caused inland from torrential rains rather than at the coast . Overall , the storm claimed 37 lives and left 1 @.@ 24 billion kyat ( US $ 6 @.@ 7 million ) in damage . Approximately 12 @,@ 000 families were significantly affected by the cyclone . 
 Rakhine State suffered a direct hit from the cyclone , with <unk> Township reporting the worst damage . There , 88 homes were destroyed and 1 @,@ 246 more were damaged . One person was killed and at least four others were injured in the township . Ra <unk> Ku Toe village suffered significant losses as well , with 132 homes destroyed and 531 more damaged . A storm surge of 4 @.@ 57 m ( 15 @.@ 0 ft ) struck the region , but did not impact populated areas . 
 Across the Irrawaddy Delta , hurricane @-@ force winds caused extensive damage to housing and infrastructure . <unk> Island was the first area struck by the storm . Several homes were destroyed and many more lost their roof there . Thunderstorms from the storm 's outer bands on April 28 damaged 586 homes in Hlaingthaya Township . Residents described what appeared to be a tornado as the cause of the damage . The Hlaingthaya industrial zone was hardest hit , with five factories destroyed and dozens of homes having their roof torn off . Locals , however , claimed that the damage was more severe than reported by the government . Cars were reportedly tossed into the air during the storm . Two people were killed and fourteen others were injured in Hlaingthaya . The winds also downed numerous power lines , leaving many without electricity . In <unk> Township , near the southern tip of the Delta , 88 homes were destroyed . In the <unk> District , torrential rains caused flash flooding that killed 18 people and left 14 others missing . 
 = = = = Aftermath = = = = 
 By May 1 , the local branch of the Red Cross distributed essential supplies to residents in <unk> Township . In coordination with the Disaster Assistance Response Team , the areas in greatest need for aid were identified and requests for tarpaulin were made . Members of the Cabinet of Burma donated 3 @.@ 7 million kyat ( US $ 2 @,@ 960 ) in cash and 140 bags of rice to victims in the Ayeyarwady Region . On May 3 , another 1 @.@ 7 million kyat ( US $ 1 @,@ 360 ) was donated by social organizations to residents in rural areas outside Yangon . Temporary shelters were set up across <unk> Township . Local donations provided residents in the town with 200 @,@ 000 kyat ( US $ 160 ) worth of blankets , clothes , and cash . A local newspaper , The New Light of Myanmar , claimed that government officials immediately provided assistance to affected residents across the country . Red Cross operations continued through November 30 , by which time 3 @,@ 485 families were provided with aid . Additionally , though the agency planned to assist 4 @,@ 000 families with rebuilding their homes , a lack of necessary funds prevented the operation . Instead , a cash donation was provided to the 1 @,@ 000 most affected families . 
 = George W. Johnson ( governor ) = 
 George Washington Johnson ( May 27 , 1811 – April 8 , 1862 ) was the first Confederate governor of Kentucky . A lawyer @-@ turned @-@ farmer from Scott County , Kentucky , Johnson favored secession as a means of preventing the Civil War , believing the Union and Confederacy would be forces of equal strength , each too wary to attack the other . As political sentiment in the Commonwealth took a decidedly Union turn following the elections of 1861 , Johnson was instrumental in organizing a sovereignty convention in Russellville , Kentucky with the intent of " severing forever our connection with the Federal Government . " The convention created a Confederate shadow government for the Commonwealth , and Johnson was elected its governor . 
 Despite his meager political experience — having previously served only three years in the Kentucky House of Representatives — Johnson labored vehemently to ensure the success of the shadow government . Kentucky was admitted to the Confederacy on December 10 , 1861 , but the shadow government 's influence in the Commonwealth extended only as far as the Confederate Army advanced . When Albert Sidney Johnston abandoned the Confederate capital of Bowling Green , Governor Johnson and the other government officials accompanied him . Despite his advanced age and a crippled arm , Johnson volunteered for military service in General Johnston 's army . Johnson was killed at the Battle of Shiloh , making him the only state governor , Union or Confederate , to fall in battle during the Civil War . He was succeeded by Richard Hawes , the second and last governor of Confederate Kentucky . 
 = = Early life and career = = 
 George Washington Johnson was born on May 27 , 1811 near Georgetown in Scott County , Kentucky , the son of major William and Betsy Payne Johnson . Major Johnson died soon after the close of the War of 1812 , in which he was a participant , and George Johnson was reared in the home of his stepfather , John Allen . Johnson received three degrees from Transylvania University : an A.B. in 1829 , an LL.B. in 1832 , and an M.A. in 1833 . On August 20 , 1833 , he married Ann Eliza <unk> , daughter of Captain Willa and Lydia Smith <unk> . The couple had ten children , seven of whom lived to adulthood . 
 Johnson briefly practiced law in Georgetown , but decided he preferred farming . He owned a 300 @-@ acre ( 1 @.@ 2 km2 ) farm near Georgetown , as well as a 1 @,@ 000 @-@ acre ( 4 @.@ 0 km2 ) plantation in Arkansas . In 1838 , Johnson was elected as a Democrat to the Kentucky House of Representatives . He was offered the nominations for lieutenant governor and U.S. Congressman , but declined them both . In August 1845 , Johnson headed the Committee of Sixty that seized abolitionist Cassius M. Clay 's printing press and shipped it to Cincinnati , Ohio . 
 = = Civil War = = 
 Although he supported John C. Breckinridge for president in 1860 , he did not feel that Abraham Lincoln 's election justified secession , since Republicans controlled neither Congress nor the Supreme Court . As the Confederate States of America were formed , however , Johnson began to lose hope for Kentucky as a part of the Union . Instead , he began to advocate that Kentucky join the Confederacy , believing that the Union and Confederate nations would be too evenly matched to consider war and would negotiate a free trade agreement that would benefit both . 
 In 1861 , Johnson traveled to Richmond , Virginia to ask Jefferson Davis to respect Kentucky 's neutrality in the Civil War . Following a near sweep of Kentucky 's state and federal elections by Union sympathizers , William " Bull " Nelson established Camp Dick Robinson , a Union recruiting camp , in Garrard County . Southern sympathizers saw this as a breach of the Commonwealth 's neutrality , and called a State Rights Convention on September 10 , 1861 . Johnson was among the delegates from seventy Kentucky counties who attended the convention . The delegates elected Richard Hawes as chair , called for a restoration of Kentucky 's neutrality in the war , and condemned the Federal government for its " invasion . " This last @-@ minute effort to prevent Kentucky from aiding the Union was unsuccessful , and Johnson , a known Southern sympathizer , fled to Virginia with Breckinridge and others to avoid potential arrest by Union forces . From Virginia , Johnson traveled through Tennessee to Bowling Green where , despite his age ( 49 ) and a crippled arm , he volunteered as an aid to General Simon B. Buckner . 
 = = = Russellville Convention = = = 
 On October 29 , 1861 , a group of Kentuckians — Johnson among them — met at Russellville , Kentucky to discuss the formation of a Confederate government for the Commonwealth , believing the Unionist government in Frankfort did not represent the will of the majority of Kentucky 's citizens . Johnson chaired the committee that authored the convention 's final report , and personally introduced some of its key resolutions . The report called for a sovereignty convention to sever ties with the Federal government . Johnson , Breckinridge , and Humphrey Marshall were among the notable members of the Committee of Ten that made arrangements for the convention . 
 On November 18 , 1861 , 116 delegates representing 68 Kentucky counties convened at the Clark House in Russellville . Over the next three days , a shadow government was established with Bowling Green as its temporary capital . Johnson was unanimously chosen as governor of the new Confederate state . 
 = = = Confederate governor = = = 
 On November 21 , 1861 , Johnson wrote Confederate president Jefferson Davis to request Kentucky 's admission to the Confederacy . Though Davis had some reservation about the circumvention of the elected General Assembly in forming the Confederate government , he concluded that Johnson 's request had merit . Kentucky was admitted to the Confederacy on December 10 , 1861 . 
 During the winter of 1861 , Johnson tried mightily to assert the legitimacy of the fledgling government , but to no avail . Its jurisdiction extended only as far as the area controlled by the Confederate Army . Johnson came woefully short of raising the 46 @,@ 000 troops requested by the Confederate Congress in Richmond . Efforts to levy taxes and to compel citizens to turn over their guns to the government were similarly unsuccessful . On January 3 , 1862 , Johnson requested a sum of $ 3 million from the Confederate Congress to meet the provisional government 's operating expenses . The Congress instead approved a sum of $ 2 million , the expenditure of which required approval of Secretary of War Judah P. Benjamin and President Davis . 
 During his labors to sustain the provisional government , Johnson 's lack of hearing from his family weighed heavily upon him . The only family member with whom he had contact was his son Madison ( " Matty " ) , who had joined John Hunt Morgan 's cavalry . Johnson admired and respected Morgan , and was pleased that his son had chosen to serve under him . In 1862 , he requested by letter that his wife send their fifteen @-@ year @-@ old son Junius to serve in the Confederate Army . Despite Johnson 's protestations that he would ensure his son 's safety , his wife refused this request . 
 It was Johnson 's practice to avoid interference with military decisions , however he supported Morgan 's request for two light artillery pieces that became hallmarks of his command . By contrast , he consistently opposed the command of General Lloyd Tilghman , trying repeatedly but unsuccessfully to have him removed . It is unclear how much military influence Johnson wielded in his position as governor , though he enjoyed a cordial relationship with most of the Confederate generals . 
 = = = Death at the Battle of Shiloh = = = 
 When General Albert Sydney Johnston was forced to withdraw his troops from Bowling Green in February 1862 , the Confederate state government moved with his army to Tennessee . On April 6 , 1862 , General Johnston attacked the Union army at Shiloh , Tennessee . During this battle , Governor Johnson served as a volunteer aide to General Breckinridge and Colonel Robert P. Trabue . After his horse was killed out from under him , Johnson fought on foot with Company E of the Fourth Kentucky Infantry Regiment , and insisted on being sworn in as a private . He declared " I will take a good night 's rest and be ready for the fight tomorrow . " 
 The next day , Governor Johnson was seriously wounded in the right thigh and abdomen . He lay wounded on the battlefield until the next morning , when he was recognized by Union General Alexander McDowell McCook . Johnson and McCook had both attended the 1860 Democratic National Convention and were both Freemasons . Johnson was taken aboard the Union hospital ship Hannibal , where despite the ministrations of several physicians , he died on April 8 . Friends in the Union army , including General John M. Harlan , packed Johnson 's body in salt and shipped it to Louisville , then on to Georgetown for burial . 
 = Edwin of Northumbria = 
 Edwin ( Old English : <unk> ; c . 586 – 12 October 632 / 633 ) , also known as Eadwine or <unk> , was the King of Deira and Bernicia – which later became known as Northumbria – from about 616 until his death . He converted to Christianity and was baptised in 627 ; after he fell at the Battle of Hatfield Chase , he was venerated as a saint . 
 Edwin was the son of Ælle king of Deira and seems to have had ( at least ) two siblings . His sister Acha was married to Æthelfrith , king of neighbouring Bernicia . An otherwise unknown sibling fathered <unk> , who in turn fathered Abbess Hilda of Whitby and Hereswith , wife to Æthelric , the brother of king Anna of East Anglia . 
 = = Early life and exile = = 
 The Anglo @-@ Saxon Chronicle reported that on Ælle 's death a certain " Æthelric " assumed power . The exact identity of Æthelric is uncertain . He may have been a brother of Ælle , an elder brother of Edwin , an otherwise unknown Deiran noble , or the father of Æthelfrith . Æthelfrith himself appears to have been king of " Northumbria " — both Deira and Bernicia — by no later than 604 . During the reign of Æthelfrith , Edwin was an exile . The location of his early exile as a child is not known , but late traditions , reported by Reginald of Durham and Geoffrey of Monmouth , place Edwin in the kingdom of Gwynedd , fostered by king Cadfan ap Iago , so allowing biblical parallels to be drawn from the struggle between Edwin and his supposed foster @-@ brother Cadwallon . By the <unk> he was certainly in Mercia under the protection of king Cearl , whose daughter <unk> he married . 
 By around 616 , Edwin was in East Anglia under the protection of king Raedwald . Bede reports that Æthelfrith tried to have Raedwald murder his unwanted rival , and that Raedwald intended to do so until his wife persuaded him otherwise with Divine prompting . Æthelfrith faced Raedwald in battle by the River Idle in 616 , and Æthelfrith was defeated ; Raedwald installed Edwin as king of Northumbria . Raedwald 's son <unk> may have been killed at this battle , but the exact date or manner of Raedwald 's death are not known . He likely died between the years 616 – 627 , and the efficacy of Edwin ’ s kingship ostensibly depended greatly on his fealty to Raedwald . 
 Edwin was installed as king of Northumbria , effectively confirming Raedwald as bretwalda : Æthelfrith 's sons went into exile in Irish Dál Riata and Pictland . That Edwin was able to take power not only in his native Deira but also in Bernicia may have been due to his support from Raedwald , to whom he may have remained subject during the early part of his reign . Edwin 's reign marks an interruption of the otherwise consistent domination of Northumbria by the Bernicians and has been seen as " contrary to the prevailing tendency " . 
 = = Edwin as king = = 
 With the death of Æthelfrith , and of the powerful Æthelberht of Kent the same year , Raedwald and his client Edwin were well placed to dominate England , and indeed Raedwald did so until his death a decade later . Edwin expelled Ceretic from the minor British kingdom of Elmet in either 616 or 626 . Elmet had probably been subject to Mercia and then to Edwin . The larger kingdom of Lindsey appears to have been taken over c . 625 , after the death of king Raedwald . 
 Edwin and Eadbald of Kent were allies at this time , and Edwin arranged to marry Eadbald 's sister Æthelburg . Bede notes that Eadbald would agree to marry his sister to Edwin only if he converted to Christianity . The marriage of Eadbald 's Merovingian mother Bertha had resulted in the conversion of Kent and Æthelburg 's would do the same in Northumbria . 
 Edwin 's expansion to the west may have begun early in his reign . There is firm evidence of a war waged in the early 620s between Edwin and Fiachnae mac Báetáin of the Dál nAraidi , king of the Ulaid in Ireland . A lost poem is known to have existed recounting Fiachnae 's campaigns against the Saxons , and the Irish annals report the siege , or the storming , of Bamburgh in Bernicia in 623 – 624 . This should presumably be placed in the context of Edwin 's designs on the Isle of Man , a target of Ulaid ambitions . Fiachnae 's death in 626 , at the hands of his namesake , Fiachnae mac <unk> of the Dál Fiatach , and the second Fiachnae 's death a year later in battle against the Dál Riata probably eased the way for Edwin 's conquests in the Irish sea province . 
 The routine of kingship in Edwin 's time involved regular , probably annual , wars with neighbours to obtain tribute , submission , and slaves . By Edwin 's death , it is likely that these annual wars , unreported in the main , had extended the Northumbrian kingdoms from the Humber and the Mersey north to the Southern Uplands and the <unk> . 
 The royal household moved regularly from one royal vill to the next , consuming the food renders given in tribute and the produce of the royal estates , dispensing justice , and ensuring that royal authority remained visible throughout the land . The royal sites in Edwin 's time included Yeavering in Bernicia , where traces of a timber amphitheatre have been found . This " Roman " feature makes Bede 's claim that Edwin was preceded by a standard @-@ bearer carrying a " tufa " ( OE <unk> , this may have been a winged globe ) appear to be more than antiquarian curiosity , although whether the model for this practice was Roman or Frankish is unknown . Other royal sites included <unk> in Elmet ( perhaps Barwick ) , Sancton in Deira , and <unk> , the site where the pagan high priest Coifi destroyed the idols according to Bede . Edwin 's realm included the former Roman cities of York and Carlisle , and both appear to have been of some importance in the 7th century , although it is not clear whether urban life continued in this period . 
 = = Edwin 's conversion to Christianity = = 
 The account of Edwin 's conversion offered by Bede turns on two events . The first , during Edwin 's exile , tells how Edwin 's life was saved by Paulinus of York . The second , following his marriage to Æthelburg , was the attempted assassination at York , at Easter 626 , by an agent of Cwichelm of Wessex . Edwin 's decision to allow the baptism of his daughter Eanfled and his subsequent promise to adopt Christianity if his campaign against Cwichelm proved successful . Apart from these events , the general character of Bede 's account is one of an indecisive king , unwilling to take risks , unable to decide whether to convert or not . 
 Along with these events , the influence of Edwin 's half @-@ Merovingian Queen cannot be ignored , and the letters which Bede reproduces , sent by Pope Boniface V to Edwin and <unk> , are unlikely to have been unique . Given that Kent was under Frankish influence , while Bede sees the mission as being " Roman " in origin , the Franks were equally interested in converting their fellow Germans and in extending their power and influence . Bede recounts Edwin 's baptism , and that of his chief men , on 12 April 627 . Edwin 's zeal , so Bede says , led to Raedwald 's son Eorpwald also converting . 
 Bede 's account of the conversion is oft @-@ cited . After Paulinus explains the tenets of Christianity , the king asks his counselors what they think of the new doctrine . Edwin 's priest Coifi responds that they may be worthwhile ; after all , he says , no one has been more respectful of and devoted to their gods than he , and he has seen no benefits from his dedication to them . Then , an unnamed counselor stands up and addresses the king , also seeing the benefit of the new faith . Coifi speaks again and announces that they should destroy the idols and temples they had hitherto worshiped . King Edwin agrees and embraces Christianity ; Coifi himself will set fire to the <unk> declaring " I will do this myself , for now that the true God has granted me knowledge , who more suitably than I can set a public example , and destroy the idols that I worshipped in ignorance ? ” Bede goes on to describe the scene as Cofi " formally renounces his superstitions , and asked the king to give him arms and a stallion . " Armed with both a sword and spear , Cofi rides Edwin ’ s horse towards the idols , all within view of the crowd gathered to witness Edwin ’ s conversion . Upon reaching the temple , Cofi " cast a spear into it and profaned it . " 
 In an article titled " How Cofi Pierced Christ ’ s Side " , Julia Barrow examines Bede ’ s Latinate text and pays particular attention to the passage concerning Cofi ’ s attack upon the temple . Barrow notes that Bede 's use of <unk> was " not the word medieval writers normally used for spear " , while “ hasta was the usual choice . " Barrow goes on to claim that <unk> was likely used by Bede as a reference to the details of the crucifixion of Christ provided in the <unk> book of John , thus Cofi ’ s desecration of the shrine is to be understood " as an inversion of the piercing of the temple of Christ ’ s body . " All of these details support an understanding that Bede had great " warmth and admiration " for Edwin . 
 The brief speech by the unnamed counselor , a nobleman , has attracted much attention ; suggesting the " wisdom and hopefulness of the Christian message " , it has inspired poets such as William Wordsworth and was called " the most poetic simile in Bede " : 
 The present life man , O king , seems to me , in comparison with that time which is unknown to us , like to the swift flight of a sparrow through the room wherein you sit at supper in winter amid your officers and ministers , with a good fire in the midst whilst the storms of rain and snow prevail abroad ; the sparrow , I say , flying in at one door and immediately out another , whilst he is within is safe from the wintry but after a short space of fair weather he immediately vanishes out of your sight into the dark winter from which he has emerged . So this life of man appears for a short space but of what went before or what is to follow we are ignorant . If , therefore , this new doctrine contains something more certain , it seems justly to deserve to be followed . 
 Noteworthy is Bede ’ s summation of the nature of Edwin ’ s reign as King of Northumbria : 
 “ It is told that at the time there was so much peace in Britannia , that whenever King Edwin ’ s power extended , as is said <unk> right up to today , even if a woman with a recently born child wanted to walk across the whole island , from sea to sea , she could do so without anyone harming her . ” 
 Kershaw indicates that “ Bede ’ s decision to couch Edwin ’ s peace in proverbial terms offers ... a chilling insight into the levels of lawlessness accepted in eighth @-@ century England ” . Furthermore , a definition of “ peace ” is to be understood as “ freedom from robbery , rape , or violence ; security to travel at will and to literally ‘ go in peace . ’ ” 
 Edwin 's conversion and Eorpwald 's were reversed by their successors , and in the case of Northumbria the Roman Paulinus appears to have had very little impact . Indeed , by expelling British clergy from Elmet and elsewhere in Edwin 's realm , Paulinus may have weakened the Church rather than strengthening it . Very few Roman clergy were present in Paulinus 's time , only James the Deacon being known , so that the " conversion " can have been only superficial , extending little beyond the royal court . Paulinus 's decision to flee Northumbria at Edwin 's death , unlike his acolyte James who remained in Northumbria for many years afterwards until his death , suggests that the conversion was not popular , and the senior Italian cleric unloved . 
 = = Edwin as overlord = = 
 The first challenge to Edwin came soon after his marriage @-@ alliance with Kent , concluded at Canterbury in the summer of 625 . By offering his protection to lesser kings , such as the king of Wight , Edwin thwarted the ambitions of Cwichelm of Wessex . Cwichelm 's response was to send an assassin , as noted already . Edwin did not immediately respond to this insult , suggesting either that he felt unable to do so , or that Bede 's portrayal of him as a rather indecisive ruler is accurate . Following the failed assassination , as noted , Edwin committed himself to Christianity provided only that he was victorious against Cwichelm . 
 From about 627 onwards , Edwin was the most powerful king among the Anglo @-@ Saxons , ruling Bernicia , Deira and much of eastern Mercia , the Isle of Man , and Anglesey . His alliance with Kent , the subjection of Wessex , and his recent successes added to his power and authority . The imperium , as Bede calls it , that Edwin possessed was later equated with the idea of a Bretwalda , a later concept invented by West Saxon kings in the 9th century . Put simply , success confirmed Edwin 's overlordship , and failure would diminish it . 
 Edwin 's supposed foster @-@ brother Cadwallon ap Cadfan enters the record circa 629 , but Cadwallon was defeated and either submitted to Edwin 's authority or went into exile . With the defeat of Cadwallon , Edwin 's authority appears to have been unchallenged for a number of years , until Penda of Mercia and Cadwallon rose against him in 632 – 633 . 
 Edwin faced Penda and Cadwallon at the Battle of Hatfield in the autumn of 632 or 633 and was defeated and killed . For a time his body was ( allegedly ) hidden in Sherwood Forest at a location that became the village of <unk> ( trans . Edwin 's resting place ) , his head being eventually buried at York and the rest of his body at Whitby . Of his two grown sons by <unk> of Mercia , <unk> died at Hatfield , and Eadfrith was captured by Penda and killed some time afterwards . 
 After his death , Edwin 's Queen Æthelburg , along with Paulinus , returned to Kent , taking her son <unk> , daughter Eanfled , and <unk> 's son <unk> into exile with her . <unk> and <unk> were sent to the court of Æthelburg 's kinsman Dagobert I , king of the Franks , but died soon afterwards . Eanfled , however , lived to marry her first cousin king Oswiu , son of Acha and Æthelfrith . 
 = = Death and legacy = = 
 Edwin 's realm was divided at his death . He was succeeded by Osric , son of Edwin 's paternal uncle Ælfric , in Deira , and by Eanfrith , son of Æthelfrith and Edwin 's sister Acha , in Bernicia . Both reverted to paganism , and both were killed by Cadwallon ; eventually Eanfrith 's brother Oswald defeated and killed Cadwallon and united Northumbria once more . Thereafter , with the exception of Oswine son of Osric , power in Northumbria was in the hands of the <unk> , the descendants of Ida of Bernicia , until the middle of the 8th century . 
 After his death , Edwin came to be venerated as a saint by some , although his cult was eventually overshadowed by the ultimately more successful cult of Oswald , who was killed in 642 . They met their deaths in battle against similar foes , the pagan Mercians and the British , thus allowing both of them to be perceived as martyrs ; however , Bede 's treatment of Oswald clearly demonstrates that he regarded him as an unambiguously saintly figure , a status that he did not accord to Edwin . 
 Edwin 's renown comes largely from his treatment at some length by Bede , writing from an uncompromisingly English and Christian perspective , and rests on his belated conversion to Christianity . His united kingdom in the north did not outlast him , and his conversion to Christianity was renounced by his successors . When his kingship is compared with his pagan brother @-@ in @-@ law Æthelfrith , or to Æthelfrith 's sons Oswald and Oswiu , or to the resolutely pagan Penda of Mercia , Edwin appears to be something less than a key figure in Britain during the first half of the 7th century . Perhaps the most significant legacies of Edwin 's reign lay in his failures : the rise of Penda and of Mercia , and the return from Irish exile of the sons of Æthelfrith , which tied the kingdom of Northumbria into the Irish sea world for generations . 
 = Oubliette ( The X @-@ Files ) = 
 " Oubliette " is the eighth episode of the third season of the American science fiction television series The X @-@ Files , and originally aired on the Fox network on November 17 , 1995 . Written by Charles Grant Craig and directed by Kim Manners , " Oubliette " is a " Monster @-@ of @-@ the @-@ Week " story , unconnected to the series ' wider mythology . It earned a Nielsen rating of 10 @.@ 5 and was watched by 15 @.@ 90 million people on its initial broadcast . The episode received positive reviews . Both the emotional nature of the story and David Duchovny 's performance received positive critical attention . 
 The show centers on FBI special agents Fox Mulder ( Duchovny ) and Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) who work on cases linked to the paranormal , called X @-@ Files . Mulder is a believer in the paranormal , while the skeptical Scully has been assigned to debunk his work . In the installment , a little girl named Amy is kidnapped and imprisoned by a mentally unstable photographer . Mulder discovers a psychic connection between the recently kidnapped victim and Lucy , another girl kidnapped by the same man years ago . He attempts to use the connection to help solve the investigation , but discovers that the event may be too traumatic for Lucy to handle . 
 " Oubliette " is the only X @-@ Files screenplay written by Craig , who exited the writing staff before the entry was produced . The extensive outdoor filming lead to several difficulties for the production crew . Amy was 12 years old in the original screenplay . The Fox network was concerned her situation was an uncomfortable parallel to the recent Polly Klaas case , resulting in her age being increased before filming could begin . Critics have complimented the thematic resonance of the kidnapping and its effect on Mulder . 
 = = Plot = = 
 In Seattle , photography assistant Carl Wade ( Michael <unk> ) photographs 15 @-@ year @-@ old Amy Jacobs ( Jewel Staite ) for school picture day . He becomes obsessed with her following the event , eventually kidnapping her . Her younger sister is the only witness to the incident , which takes place in their bedroom in the middle of the night . At exactly the same time , fast food worker Lucy <unk> ( Tracey Ellis ) collapses with a nosebleed . Agent Fox Mulder ( David Duchovny ) investigates Amy 's disappearance , drawn to the case because his younger sister was kidnapped in a similar situation . The investigation leads Mulder to Lucy , who was taken from her bedroom at age eight , twenty two years before , and held in a dark basement for five years before she escaped . 
 Mulder 's partner Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) suspects that Lucy may be connected to Amy 's disappearance , based on her long criminal record and the fact that her nosebleed contained not only her blood type , but Amy 's as well . In her room at a halfway house , scratches appear on Lucy 's face and she experiences temporary blindness — injuries identical to Amy 's , who is being tortured in the basement of Wade 's cabin . The two develop an unexplainable psychic connection ; everything that happens to Amy physically also happens to Lucy . Mulder tries to convince Lucy that she can help them find Amy , but she is too afraid to assist . Scully informs Mulder of their new lead in the case , the school photography assistant Wade , who was recently fired under strange circumstances . Mulder is adamant that Lucy , who admits that Wade was the man who abducted her , is not part of the kidnapping , and snaps at Scully when she suggests that Samantha 's disappearance is causing him to become too involved with the case . 
 The investigation team receives a tip from a tow truck driver concerning Wade 's location , which corresponds to the area where Lucy was found years ago . They find Wade 's cabin in the woods near Easton , Washington , discovering Lucy in the basement with no clear indication of how or why she came there . Lucy begins to feel cold and wet ; Mulder deduces that because of Lucy 's connection to Amy , she must be at the local river . Mulder and Scully rush there to find Wade attempting to drown Amy . Back with the police , Lucy begins to drown despite not even being near water . Mulder shoots Wade while Scully attempts to perform CPR on Amy , but because of the connection it resuscitates Lucy instead . Amy lies on the riverbank , dead . Mulder continues to attempt CPR , despite Scully 's protests . 
 Suddenly , the process is reversed ; Amy recovers and Lucy dies . Overwhelmed by Lucy 's sacrifice and his inability to save her , Mulder breaks down sobbing over her body . He later tells Scully he suspects that she died not only to save Amy , but to forget what Wade did to her all those years ago . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Writing = = = 
 The screenplay for " Oubliette " was authored by Charles Grant Craig , a writer who at the time had little background or experience within television . Before joining the writing staff of The X @-@ Files during the third season , his most significant writing credits included episodes for Renegade and Booker . His most notable television screenplay was The New Alfred Hitchcock Presents entry " Final Escape " . Though Craig left the staff shortly before " Oubliette " entered production for unknown reasons , he was credited as a supervising producer on several installments for the third season . The title was derived from the French word " oubliette " , which refers to a pit @-@ like dungeon consisting of " total darkness " with a hole that opens from the top . 
 The narrative centers on Mulder 's identification with Lucy which is based on the abduction of his sister , Samantha . It was decided that time would not be spent on Scully 's sympathy with the victim , despite her own abduction experience in the second season episode " Ascension " . Despite this , Scully is gentle towards Mulder and " wanted to believe " him until the evidence pointed overwhelmingly to Lucy . After that point , Scully takes on an antagonistic role , going against the wishes of her partner . Though not originally included the script , David Duchovny added the line about how his connection to the case was not just because of Samantha . 
 Series creator Chris Carter stated that in Craig 's original draft Lucy was more " hard @-@ boiled " , but actress Tracey Ellis played her as a more wounded person . Fox 's standards and practices department was uncomfortable with the screenplay , because it featured a 12 @-@ year @-@ old girl being kidnapped . The network requested that she be in her late teens and that the plot would not heavily feature Amy 's ordeal or suffering . Jewel Staite had just turned 13 when she was cast , but the producers felt she looked older and even applied make @-@ up to add to that effect . 
 The reason for the concern was because the original screenplay featured similarities to the Polly Klaas case , which had received large public attention around the time of production . Polly Klaas was a 12 @-@ year @-@ old girl who was kidnapped during a slumber party , and eventually strangled to death . The antagonist of the episode was compared to Richard Allen Davis , the culprit of the case , who was convicted and sentenced to death for his crimes . <unk> Genge in his novel The Unofficial X @-@ Files Companion commented that " tragically , unlike Amy , Klaas didn 't survive her abduction " . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 " Oubliette " was shot in Vancouver , British Columbia , as were the rest of the episodes of the third season . The location of the antagonist 's house was an important factor during production . Craig 's screenplay called for a remote house in the " middle of nowhere " , but the producers required a site closer to the studio . With a production crew consisting of 60 members , it was decided to use somewhere that could appear " rustic while being next to a parking lot . " A suitable area was found near the peak of Mount Seymour , a location that had previously been used in " Ascension " . The mountain featured both a parking lot and a log cabin that met the needs of the filming crew . An issue arose because the mountain had a ski lift , which needed to be avoided while composing shots . Over 1000 prop trees had to be brought to the filming site to camouflage surroundings , to give the atmosphere a " remote " feel . 
 The crew encountered a larger issue with the contract with the Provincial Park committee . The park required a seven @-@ day notice before filming of any kind was approved . The production manager had to contact the park Representative directly , who assured him that their needs would be met . For the final sequence , both the Capilano River and Lynn Headwaters were considered ; however , the Seymour River was ultimately chosen because it was the safest filming location . The filming of the episode was plagued by rain and heavy weather conditions . In one example , while directing the climax , the river had risen by four or five inches , causing the crew to move to another position to shoot at a week later . This cost the crew several days worth of production and a large sum of money . Shooting conditions were further complicated because shoots involving water are notably difficult , requiring a new set of costumes for each take . 
 Because of the extensive outdoor shooting , director Kim Manners hated directing the episode , commenting that " it couldn 't be fucking worse . " Despite a negative experience with shooting on the mountain , the episode " Gethsemane " from the fourth season was filmed there with similar issues . Gillian Anderson 's stand @-@ in Bonnie Hay , who appears in a cameo , previously played a doctor in both " Colony " and " End Game " and a nurse in " D.P.O. " . 
 = = Themes = = 
 The kidnapping of Amy shares several similarities with the abduction of Mulder 's sister . Mulder 's sister Samantha was abducted by aliens when Mulder was a child , before the timeline of The X @-@ Files . Both Amy and Lucy are kidnapped and victimized by the same pedophile , who represents the " logic of duplication " . Wade treats both girls in virtually identical ways , kidnapping them and photographing them obsessively in the same manner . David Lavery in Deny All Knowledge asserts that Mulder is capable of seeing beyond " simple equivalents " , caring about each individual girl separately . Lavery argues that this grants Mulder the ability to separate the case from his own personal experience with his sister . The scene that best exemplifies this trait is when Mulder attempts to comfort Amy 's mother following her daughter 's kidnapping . Mulder comments that he " knows how she feels " , not because of what happened to his sister , but because he can identify with her general sense of loss . Thematic elements concerning the concept of " remote viewing " — the paranormal ability to perceive feelings from a distance — are later explored in greater detail in the fifth season installment " Mind 's Eye " . 
 = = Broadcast and reception = = 
 " Oubliette " was first broadcast on the Fox network on November 17 , 1995 . It earned a Nielsen rating of 10 @.@ 2 , with a 17 share , meaning that roughly 10 @.@ 2 percent of all television @-@ equipped households , and 17 percent of households watching television , were tuned in to the episode . It was watched by a total of 15 @.@ 90 million viewers . In the UK it premiered the following year on BBC1 on October 17 , 1996 . 
 " Oubliette " received mostly positive reviews from critics . Todd VanDerWerff of The A.V. Club assessed it as a " B + " , commenting that it " belongs to a subcategory of X @-@ Files episodes that can often be more satisfying than the usual categories " due to the villain being a human being . He described it as " impressively dark and occasionally moving " , and praised the cinematography , editing , and storytelling . However , he was critical of Ellis 's performance as Lucy , finding that her characterization did not fit the character , and he noted that the installment fell into the trope of using women as victims . Paula Vitaris from Cinefantastique gave the program three and a half stars out of four . She felt that Mulder and Lucy 's relationship was " believable " and , in contrast to VanDerWerff , thought that Ellis 's performance was " perfect " . 
 Robert Shearman and Lars Pearson , in their book Wanting to Believe : A Critical Guide to The X @-@ Files , Millennium & The Lone Gunmen , rated " Oubliette " five stars out of five , noting that it was difficult and uncomfortable to watch with its parallels to the real world which made it " nevertheless one of the series ' boldest and greatest achievements " . The two praised the depth of Mulder 's characterization as well as Duchovny 's performance . Entertainment Weekly gave " Oubliette " a grade of " B- " , stating that the plot wasn 't as scary as it could have been considering the subject matter , positively critiquing that the episode was " worth it for Lucy 's channeling sequences " . The review also criticized Scully 's " aggressive I 'm @-@ not @-@ buying @-@ it mode " . 
 Writer Sarah Stegall awarded the entry five out of five , commenting that the subject matter made it hard for her to watch , as a mother herself . She praised the characterization of Mulder , and the performance by Duchovny , commenting that he brought warmth to the plot . Stegall positively described Mulder as " a truly gentle man who can show compassion without being maudlin about it " , but wrote negatively about Scully , who seemed " antagonistic " towards the well @-@ meaning Mulder , and the scene in which Scully " makes a half @-@ hearted attempt to resuscitate [ Amy ] before giving up " . Duchovny was particularly pleased with his work in the episode , feeling that it was amongst his best acting performance during the entire run of The X @-@ Files . He later cited the episode as one of his favorites . 
 = 2000 Spanish Grand Prix = 
 The 2000 Spanish Grand Prix ( formally the XLII Gran Premio Marlboro de España ) was a Formula One motor race held on 7 May 2000 at the Circuit de Catalunya , Montmeló , Barcelona , Catalonia , Spain . It was the fifth round of the 2000 Formula One season and the 42nd Spanish Grand Prix . The 65 @-@ lap race was won by McLaren driver Mika Häkkinen who started from the second position . His team @-@ mate David Coulthard finished second and Rubens Barrichello finished third in a Ferrari . 
 Michael Schumacher started from the pole position and held off a challenge from Häkkinen on the first lap . He maintained the lead until his first pit stop on lap 24 when a refuller was struck by his rear tyre , allowing Häkkinen to take over the lead until his pit stop two laps later . Michael Schumacher kept the lead for a further twenty @-@ one laps as he and Häkkinen made their second pit stops together , with Häkkinen emerging in front because Schumacher experienced a slow pit stop . Häkkinen kept the lead for the remaining twenty @-@ three laps to win the race . 
 The victory was Häkkinen 's first of the season , and put him into second place in the World Drivers ' Championship , fourteen points behind Michael Schumacher . Coulthard 's second @-@ place finish meant that he dropped to third , and Barrichello third place moved him ahead of Ralf Schumacher . In the World Constructors ' Championship , McLaren 's one @-@ two finish allowed them to move within seven points from leaders Ferrari . Williams remained in third on 15 points , with twelve races remaining in the season . 
 = = Report = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 The Grand Prix was contested by eleven teams with two drivers each . The teams ( also known as constructors ) were McLaren , Ferrari , Jordan , Jaguar , Williams , Benetton , Prost , Sauber , Arrows , Minardi and British American Racing ( BAR ) . Tyre supplier Bridgestone brought two different tyre types to the race ; two dry compounds ( soft and medium ) . 
 Before the race Ferrari driver Michael Schumacher led the Drivers ' Championship with 34 points , ahead of David Coulthard ( 14 points ) and Mika Häkkinen ( twelve ) . Rubens Barrichello and Ralf Schumacher were tied in fourth place with nine points each . In the Constructors ' Championship Ferrari led with 43 points , seventeen points ahead of rival McLaren in second . Williams were third with twelve points , while Benetton and Jordan with eight points each contended for fourth place . Ferrari had dominated the championship , winning three out of the previous four races , with Coulthard winning the British Grand Prix . Barrichello , Häkkinen and Giancarlo Fisichella had second @-@ place finishes , and Heinz @-@ Harald Frentzen had finished third . 
 After the British Grand Prix on 23 April , all teams conducted in @-@ season testing at the Circuit de Catalunya on April 25 – 28 to prepare for the upcoming Spanish Grand Prix . Jos Verstappen was fastest on the first day of testing despite spinning into the gravel early in the session , ahead of McLaren test driver Olivier Panis . Michael Schumacher was quickest on the second day . Michael Schumacher remained the fastest driver on the third day of testing . The session was disrupted because several drivers stopped on the circuit with problems with their cars . On the final day , ( which was held in wet weather conditions in the morning and during the end of the session ) Michael Schumacher stayed the quickest driver on the final day . 
 In the week leading up to the race , Coulthard was leasing the Learjet of friend David Murray when the aeroplane developed engine trouble en route to Côte d 'Azur International Airport in Nice , and crashed while attempting an emergency landing at Lyon @-@ <unk> Airport , France . Coulthard , his then @-@ girlfriend the American model Heidi <unk> and personal trainer / bodyguard Andy Matthews survived ; Murray 's personal pilot David Saunders and co @-@ pilot Dan Worley died . Coulthard suffered from bruises to his right rib cage and severe grazed elbows in the crash . FIA Formula One Safety and Medical Delegate Sid Watkins declared that Coulthard was passed fit to compete in the race . 
 BAR driver Jacques Villeneuve was passed fit in the days leading up to the race . At the Brazilian Grand Prix , Villeneuve suffered back injury after his seat became loose during the race and the effects became worse and it caused him to withdraw from testing in Barcelona . He was also required to undergo physiotherapy . BAR had their official test driver Darren Manning available to replace Villeneuve should the need arise . 
 Some teams made modifications to their cars in preparation for the event . Minardi débuted a new gearbox which was constructed out of titanium , the first for a Formula One team . Prost made modifications to their cars oil system to improve the reliability of their engines and made minor aerodynamic changes to the front wing and the floor . The team also used an updated version of their engine the Peugeot A20 <unk> during the Friday practice sessions and reverted to the <unk> for the remainder of the weekend . BAR fitted their cars with a revised aerodynamic package which included new bargeboards and rear wings . 
 = = = Practice and qualifying = = = 
 Four practice sessions were held before the Sunday race , two each on Friday and Saturday . The Friday morning and afternoon sessions each lasted an hour ; the third and fourth sessions , on Saturday morning , lasted 45 minutes each . Conditions were dry and overcast for the Friday practice sessions and was held on a dirty track which was caused by rainfall in the run up to the event . Michael Schumacher set the first session 's fastest time with an early lap of 1 : 21 @.@ 982 , half a second quicker than team @-@ mate Barrichello . Häkkinen had the third fastest time , ahead of Ralf Schumacher and Jean Alesi . The two Benetton drivers were sixth and eighth ( with Fisichella ahead of Alexander Wurz ) ; the two were separated by Johnny Herbert . Eddie Irvine and Verstappen completed the top ten . In the second practice session , Michael Schumacher was unable to improve his time but remained fastest ; Ralf Schumacher had the second fastest time after putting on a new set of tyres towards the end of the session . Barrichello was third @-@ fastest , ahead of Jarno Trulli , Coulthard and Jenson Button . Häkkinen , Pedro Diniz , Frentzen and Alesi followed in the top ten . 
 The weather remained dry for the Saturday morning practice sessions . Coulthard set the fastest lap of the third session at 1 : 21 @.@ 370 , ahead of team @-@ mate Häkkinen who was two @-@ tenths of a second slower . Ralf Schumacher ( with a time of 1 : 21 @.@ 604 ) was third quickest , ahead of Michael Schumacher and Villeneuve . Fisichella and Frentzen followed in sixth and seventh . The two Arrows drivers were eighth and ninth ( with Verstappen ahead of Pedro de la Rosa ) . Mika Salo rounded out the top ten . During the final practice session , Michael Schumacher used a new set of tyres and set the fastest time of 1 : 21 @.@ 088 ; Coulthard finished with the second quickest lap . Barrichello was third fastest , in front of Häkkinen who struggled with a lack of grip and a loose rear end . Ralf Schumacher recorded the fifth fastest time . The Jordan drivers were sixth and seventh ( with Trulli in front of Frentzen ) . de la Rosa , Villeneuve and Button completed the top ten ahead of qualifying . 
 Saturday afternoon 's qualifying session lasted for an hour . Each driver was limited to twelve laps , with the grid order decided by the drivers ' fastest laps . During this session the 107 % rule was in effect , requiring each driver to remain within 107 % of the fastest lap time to qualify for the race . The session was held in sunny and hot conditions , with the ambient temperature 21 ° C ( 70 ° F ) and the track temperature between 22 to 26 ° C ( 72 to 79 ° F ) . Michael Schumacher clinched the first pole position of the season and the 24th of his career , with a time of 1 : 20 @.@ 974 on his second run . He was joined on the front row of the grid by Häkkinen who set a lap 0 @.@ 076 seconds slower in the closing seconds of qualifying . Barrichello qualified third , and felt that his car did not feel good having not made any changes . Coulthard secured fourth position , despite losing time early in qualifying because of a fuel pressure problem . He decided against taking his team 's spare car set up for Häkkinen because he believed it would take up time and had to run more fuel throughout the remainder of the session . Ralf Schumacher qualified fifth and he was suffering from excessive oversteer which prevented him from setting a quicker lap time but was delighted with his starting position . Villeneuve secured sixth position and said he achieved the best from his car . Both Jordan drivers lined up the fourth row of the grid ( with Trulli ahead of Frentzen ) and believed they could have a better starting position because of windy <unk> de la Rosa and Irvine rounded out the top ten fastest drivers , with de la Rosa confident of finishing in a higher position in his home country . Later on Saturday afternoon , a fuel sample from de la Rosa 's car was analysed and declared illegal by the FIA and Arrows announced that it would appeal the decision , allowing de la Rosa to retain his starting position . Button , eleventh , reported his car felt unstable due to the windy conditions . He was ahead of Verstappen in the slower of the two Arrows , Salo in the faster Sauber , and Fisichella . Herbert , fifteenth , lost his front wing mounted camera after hitting a kerb in the early part of qualifying and made a minor mistake which prevented him from starting higher up the field . Diniz had excessive oversteer and managed sixteenth place . Ricardo Zonta managed seventeenth after he was unable to find a set @-@ up which suited him and his fastest time was nine @-@ tenths of a second slower than team @-@ mate Villeneuve . Alesi qualified eighteenth , ahead of Wurz in nineteenth . Heidfeld had engine problems and had to use the spare Prost monocoque and took 20th position . The two Minardi drivers Marc Gené and Gastón Mazzacane qualified at the rear of the field in positions 21 and 22 . 
 = = = Race = = = 
 The drivers took to the track at 09 : 30 CEST ( UTC + 2 ) for a 30 @-@ minute warm @-@ up in cool and dry weather . Michael Schumacher maintained his good performance , setting a time of 1 : 22 @.@ 855 despite going into the gravel after braking too deep and also drove the spare Ferrari . Häkkinen was the second @-@ fastest driver ; Barrichello was third and Coulthard rounded out the top four . After the session ended , Arrows withdrew their appeal after they accepted the FIA 's findings and de la Rosa was required to start at the back of the field . 
 The conditions on the grid were dry before the race ; the air temperature ranged between 21 to 30 ° C ( 70 to 86 ° F ) and the track temperature was between 22 to 23 ° C ( 72 to 73 ° F ) .The race started at 14 : 00 local time . A total of approximately 79 @,@ 000 people attended the race . Ralf Schumacher started the race in the spare Williams monocoque because his race car developed a sensor issue with his engine the previous day . When the race started , Häkkinen got a better start than Michael Schumacher but the Ferrari driver moved across the circuit to block Häkkinen . Ralf Schumacher also got a good start and passed Coulthard and Barrichello . At the exit of the first corner , Ralf Schumacher made contact with the rear of Häkkinen 's car , sending him slightly sideways and both drivers were able to continue . Button also made a good start , moving from eleventh to ninth by the end of the first lap , while Irvine dropped three places over the same distance . Diniz spun off into the gravel on the first lap and retired . At the end of the first lap , the top ten were Michael Schumacher , Häkkinen , Ralf Schumacher , Coulthard , Barrichello , Villeneuve , Frentzen , Trulli , Button and Salo . 
 Michael Schumacher began to pull away from <unk> de la Rosa ran into the rear of Alesi at <unk> corner on lap two causing Alesi to retire , with de la Rosa sustaining a broken front wing and retired after going off at <unk> corner . Further back , Irvine passed Verstappen for twelfth position . The positions at the front were the same for the next sixteen laps with the gap between Michael Schumacher and Häkkinen <unk> from 1 @.@ 6 seconds to 3 @.@ 4 seconds while Coulthard and Barrichello battled Ralf Schumacher for third position . Button became the first driver to make a pit stop on lap 18 and rejoined in front of Mazzacane . Villeneuve made his pit stop on the 21st lap , which promoted Frentzen into the points @-@ scoring positions . After rejoining the circuit , his car caught fire and he pulled off to the side of the track at the exit of Seat corner . Trulli 's pit stop , which dropped him to 17th , proved problematic : he stalled his engine which required his mechanics to restart it . Ralf Schumacher made a pit stop one lap later and re @-@ emerged in fifth . On lap 24 , Michael Schumacher made his pit stop . As he accelerated from his pit box , his rear wheel hit the Ferrari refuller Nigel Stepney who was dragged before being knocked over . Stepney was taken to the circuit 's medical center for observation and he was replaced by reserve refuller Andrea <unk> . Coulthard made a pit stop on the same lap and experienced problems with leaving his pit box because he selected second gear and re @-@ emerged behind Ralf Schumacher . 
 Häkkinen made his pit stop on the 26th lap and emerged behind Michael Schumacher , while Verstappen retired from the race with an mechanical problem . All of the leaders had taken their stops by the start of lap 28 , the top ten were Michael Schumacher , Häkkinen , Ralf Schumacher , Barrichello , Coulthard , Button , Frentzen , Salo , Zonta and Wurz . Häkkinen set the fastest lap of the race on the same lap , a 1 : 24 @.@ 470 as he started to close the gap to Michael Schumacher , as Ralf Schumacher again became under pressure by Coulthard in fourth . Eleven laps later , Coulthard entered the pit lane , triggering the second round of pit stops . Ralf Schumacher and Barrichello made a pit stop on the following lap and rejoined behind Coulthard . Michael Schumacher and Häkkinen both made their pit stops on the 41st lap , with Häkkinen emerging in front because Michael Schumacher 's pit stop was problematic . Michael Schumacher 's mechanics had started refulling after putting his tyres on causing him to be stationary for ten seconds longer than usual . Salo and Zonta went into the pit lane on lap 45 , allowing Button into sixth . 
 Coulthard had caught Michael Schumacher ( who had air leaking from his left rear tyre ) by lap 46 . Coulthard attempted to pass the Ferrari driver on the following lap around the outside going into the first corner , but Schumacher drove into Coulthard 's line as a blocking <unk> . Coulthard replicated his move on lap 48 and passed Michael Schumacher around the outside under braking going into turn one . Ralf Schumacher had caught up to Michael Schumacher on lap 50 . Ralf Schumacher tried to overtake Michael Schumacher on the same lap , but the Ferrari driver blocked him . Ralf Schumacher was forced wide and lost momentum , allowing Barrichello to pass both drivers . Ralf Schumacher attempted to reclaim the position and got alongside Barrichello with Michael Schumacher taking the inside line to emerge in front . Michael Schumacher entered the pit lane on the same lap for new tyres and rejoined in front of Button . He immediately set new personal fastest laps in an effort to catch Ralf Schumacher . However , the order was stable at the front of the field as Häkkinen had a comfortable lead over Coulthard , while Ralf Schumacher had dropped back from Barrichello . Button pulled over to the side of the track on lap 62 , with smoke billowing from his engine , and retired . Häkkinen continued to maintain his lead and crossed the finish line on lap 65 to secure his first victory of the season in a time of 1 : 33 @.@ 550 @.@ 390 at an average speed of 122 @.@ 040 miles per hour ( 196 @.@ 404 km / h ) . Coulthard finished second 16 seconds behind , ahead of Barrichello who clinched third , Ralf Schumacher in fourth , Michael Schumacher in fifth and Frentzen rounded out the points @-@ scoring positions in sixth . Salo , Zonta , Fisichella , Wurz and Irvine filled the next five finishers , while Trulli , Herbert , Gené , Mazzacane , Heidfeld and Button ( despite his retirement ) completed the final classified finishers . 
 = = = Post @-@ race = = = 
 The top three drivers appeared on the podium to collect their trophies and in a later press conference . Häkkinen said that he was " pleased " to win the race and admitted that he waited until the pit stop phase to have any chance of overtaking Michael Schumacher . The driver said that his team had more work to do on his car and was looking forward to the next race . Coulthard believed he made the right decision to compete in the Grand Prix despite his injuries and that the result was " the best thing that could have happened for the team and myself . " He also said he was looking forward to resting over the coming days to allow his injuries to heal . Barrichello admitted that the race had not been good for him until his overtake on Michael Schumacher and Ralf Schumacher and said the absence of Stepney caused his second pit stop to be slower than usual . 
 Attention focused on the battle between Ralf Schumacher and Michael Schumacher during the race . Michael Schumacher blamed his brother for instigating the move and did not understand why he was upset over the incident . Ralf Schumacher did not comment and stated that he would watch a video of the incident before he would say anything . Their father , Rolf talked to the pair in an effort to get them reconciled . One week after the race , Ralf Schumacher said that tensions between him and his brother had eased and that there were no hard feelings for each other , saying , " It 's a lot of fun when we are out there on the track duelling against each other . " There was similar ill @-@ feeling between de la Rosa and Alesi after their collision on lap <unk> de la Rosa accused Alesi of blocking him , and of causing the crash by not looking in his mirrors , while Alesi said de la Rosa attempted to overtake him in a corner where overtaking is difficult . 
 After the race , Häkkinen reduced the lead of Michael Schumacher in the Drivers ' Championship to be seven points behind . Coulthard fell to third , two points behind Michael Schumacher . Barrichello moved up into fourth place on 13 points , and Ralf Schumacher fell to fifth overall . In the Constructors ' Championship , Ferrari maintained their lead but McLaren 's one @-@ two finish moved to within seven points clear of the Italian team . Williams maintained third position with nine points . Frentzen 's sixth @-@ place finish allowed Jordan to move point clear of Benetton in the battle for fourth , with twelve races remaining in the season . 
 = = Classification = = 
 = = = Qualifying = = = 
 = = = Race = = = 
 = = Championship standings after the race = = 
 Note : Only the top five positions are included for both sets of standings . 
 = Liberty Arming the Patriot = 
 Liberty Arming the Patriot , sometimes called Freedom Arming the Patriot , is a bronze sculpture at Park Place in Pawtucket , Rhode Island , commemorating the participation of the city 's citizens in the American Civil War . It was designed by William Granville Hastings and cast by the Gorham Manufacturing Company in 1897 . Unlike many Civil War memorials , Liberty Arming the Patriot is a dynamic composition , depicting a young farmer setting his plow aside , and reaching to take a sword from a classical female figure clad in breastplate and wielding a pike . The statue is 11 feet ( 3 @.@ 4 m ) in height , and is mounted on a granite base 10 feet ( 3 @.@ 0 m ) high and 22 feet ( 6 @.@ 7 m ) wide . The sculpture was listed on the National Register of Historic Places in 2001 . 
 = = History and design = = 
 The sculpture was commissioned by the Ladies ' Soldiers ' Memorial Association of Pawtucket , Rhode Island to honor those who served in the American Civil War . The funding for the sculpture came as the result of an 11 @-@ year fundraising campaign that was provided for by donations and entertainment events . The cost of the monument was stated to be $ 13 @,@ 000 by The New York Times , but report stated it to be $ 12 @,@ 000 . William Granville Hastings was chosen as the sculptor to execute the construction of the monument after winning a competition . The sculpture was cast by the Gorham Manufacturing Company . 
 The central feature of the monument depicts the theme of a young man called from civil life to serve his nation in a time of need and it transforms the theme into a contemporary allegory . It captures the decisive moment as farmer is caught mid @-@ transition , with his left hand still on the plow handle , and taking the sword with his right hand from Liberty . The details of the farmer includes realistic work clothes , a yoked shirt with rolled sleeves and work trousers tucked into his boots . Liberty , identified by her Phrygian cap , stands just above the farmer in classical robes with a breastplate , sandals and cloak . Her face is impassive as she bestows the sword upon the farmer with her left hand while her right hand holds her pike . 
 Beneath the farmer and Liberty is a bronze plaque depicting a Union artillery battery under the command of General Ambrose Burnside capturing a bridge in the Battle of Antietam . Flanked on the sides are two smaller triangular plaques which depict the female figures of History and Eternity . The Scribe of History , alternatively known as Epic Poetry , is writing on a tablet and Eternity both contemplates and is identified by a fern . The monument was dedicated on May 31 , 1897 , in ceremony conducted by the Grand Army of the Republic and an oration given by the Governor of Rhode Island , Elisha Dyer , Jr .. The statue is 11 feet ( 3 @.@ 4 m ) in height , and is mounted on a granite base 10 feet ( 3 @.@ 0 m ) high and 22 feet ( 6 @.@ 7 m ) wide . 
 According to the National Register of Historic Places , Liberty Arming the Patriot is historically significant as a " good representative of the character of early twentieth century figurative sculpture " and the quality of its design . It is also historically significant for its association with the Gorham Manufacturing Company , a prominent Rhode Island producer of high quality silverware and bronze statuary . Though it is commemorative in intention , the statue is important " because it documents the principal effort of Pawtucket to honor those who served in the Civil War . " The sculpture was added to the National Register of Historic Places in 2001 . 
 = = Inscription = = 
 In Grateful Recognition 
 Of The Valiant And Self @-@ Sacrificing Service To Their Country 
 Of All Persons 
 Who Went From Pawtucket And It Vicinity To Join 
 The Forces Of The United States 
 During The Civil War . 
 And Especially To The Memory Of Those Who <unk> 
 And Died In That Service . 
 This Monument Is Erected By 
 The Ladies Soldiers Memorial Association 
 Of Pawtucket , Rhode Island 
 And By Then Is Consecrated As An Everlasting 
 Memorial 
 Anno Domini 1897 
 = Triaenops menamena = 
 Triaenops menamena is a bat in the genus Triaenops found on Madagascar , mainly in the drier regions . It was known as Triaenops rufus until 2009 , when it was discovered that that name had been incorrectly applied to the species . Triaenops rufus is a synonym of Triaenops persicus , a Middle Eastern species closely related to T. menamena — the Malagasy species had previously been placed as a subspecies of T. persicus by some authors . Triaenops menamena is mostly found in forests , but also occurs in other habitats . It often roosts in large colonies and eats insects such as butterflies and moths . Because of its wide range , common occurrence , and tolerance of habitat degradation , it is not considered to be threatened . 
 With a forearm length of 50 to 56 mm ( 2 @.@ 0 to 2 @.@ 2 in ) in males and 46 to 53 mm ( 1 @.@ 8 to 2 @.@ 1 in ) in females , this is a medium @-@ sized bat . Its fur color is variable , ranging from reddish @-@ brown to gray , but it is generally darker than the species in the closely related genus Paratriaenops which also occur on Madagascar . The skull contains a pronounced swelling around the nose and the second upper premolar is displaced outside the toothrow . The maximum frequency of the echolocation call averages 94 @.@ 2 kHz and the species can easily be recognized on the basis of its call . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 In 1881 , Alphonse Milne @-@ Edwards described two new species in the genus Triaenops on the basis of specimens supposedly collected by Léon Humblot on Madagascar : the reddish Triaenops rufus and the larger , gray T. humbloti . Jean Dorst , who reviewed Madagascan Triaenops in 1947 , retained both as separate species ; in another review , published in 1982 , John Edwards Hill considered the two to represent the same species . In 1994 , Karl Koopman considered rufus itself to be part of the Middle Eastern and mainland African species Triaenops persicus , a possibility Hill had discussed , but most authors regarded the two as distinct species . In 2006 , Julie Ranivo and Steven Goodman revised Madagascan Triaenops and found little variation among specimens of T. rufus from throughout the dry parts of the island . Three years later , they published another paper which showed that the original material of T. rufus and T. humbloti was distinct from Madagascan specimens identified as " Triaenops rufus " and more similar to T. persicus . On his journey to Madagascar , Humblot had stayed in Somalia and Yemen , and Goodman and Ranivo concluded that he had probably collected the Triaenops there , after which their provenance was incorrectly recorded . Thus , rufus and humbloti cannot be used for the Madagascan species , and Goodman and Ranivo proposed the new name Triaenops menamena for the species formerly known as T. rufus . The specific name menamena is Malagasy for " reddish " , referring to the animal 's coloration . " Rufous trident bat " has been used as a common name for Triaenops rufus . 
 Triaenops menamena is currently one of four living species in the genus Triaenops ; a 2009 revision by Petr Benda and Peter Vallo split off the African T. afer and the Yemeni T. parvus from T. persicus and removed three other species , including two from Madagascar , to the separate genus Paratriaenops . An extinct species , Triaenops goodmani , is known from northwestern Madagascar . In 2007 and 2008 , Amy Russell and colleagues used phylogenetic and <unk> methodologies to investigate the history of the Triaenops group . They found that T. menamena ( as T. rufus ) was closest to mainland African Triaenops ( but did not study Middle Eastern bats ) and concluded that T. menamena and the species of Paratriaenops ( then still placed in Triaenops ) independently reached Madagascar from Africa ; the colonization of the island by T. menamena was dated to about 660 @,@ 000 years ago . Benda and Vallo also studied phylogenetic relationships in Triaenops and included Middle Eastern T. persicus and T. parvus in their analysis . They found little resolution of relationships within Triaenops , but some evidence suggested that T. menamena is more closely related to the Middle Eastern species than to T. afer in mainland Africa ; therefore , T. menamena may have reached Madagascar from the Middle East or northeastern Africa . They also placed the split between T. menamena and the other species much further back , at around 4 million years ago . 
 = = Description = = 
 Triaenops menamena is a medium @-@ sized species with variable fur coloration , ranging from reddish @-@ brown to gray . It is larger and darker than Paratriaenops auritus and P. furculus . Among living Triaenops species , it is smaller than T. persicus and T. afer , but somewhat larger than T. parvus . The extinct Triaenops goodmani , which is known only from three mandibles ( lower jaws ) , is also larger . In the complexly shaped <unk> ( a group of fleshy structures around the nose and mouth ) , T. menamena has the trident structure characteristic of Triaenops and Paratriaenops : three adjacent lancets ( projecting structures ) on the posterior leaf . In T. menamena , the two outer lancets are shorter than the middle one and curved , whereas the three lancets are more equal in Paratriaenops . The anterior leaf contains a broad , flat , horizontal process and the intermediate leaf contains a pointed process . The ears are small and broad and contain notches on the inner side . The fur is silky and the hairs on the body are about 5 to 6 mm long . The wing membrane is dark and translucent and the end of the tail usually projects from the uropatagium ( tail membrane ) . Males average slightly larger than females . Wingspan is 270 to 305 mm ( 10 @.@ 6 to 12 @.@ 0 in ) . 
 The skull is similar to that of Madagascan Paratriaenops , but the premaxilla is longer . The rostrum ( front part of the skull ) is well @-@ developed and contains a pronounced nasal swelling , which is less pronounced than in Paratriaenops ; the depression behind the swelling is relatively shallow . Compared to other species of Triaenops , the rostrum is relatively narrow and short , similar to T. parvus ; T. afer and T. persicus have a broader rostrum . The front margin of the rostrum is cast back between the left and right corners . A transverse line passes over the roof of the rostrum . The infraorbital foramen , an opening in the skull , is oblong in shape . The zygomatic arches ( cheekbones ) are not broadened towards the sides , are connected to the maxillaries by broad bones , and contain clear crests on their upper sides . In T. menamena , these crests are rectangular in form and larger than in Paratriaenops . The braincase is lower than in other species of Triaenops . The sagittal crest , which is on the roof of the braincase , is poorly developed . In the mandible , the coronoid process is blunt and rounded , but the angular process ( both processes at the back of the bone ) is small . 
 The upper incisors have two cusps and the upper canine has three — a large central one , a small but well @-@ developed one at the back , and a small cuspule at the front . The front upper premolar is projected outside the toothrow , so that the canine before it and back premolar behind it touch . The first lower incisor has two cusps and the second has three . On the second lower molar , the protoconid cusp is notably taller than the hypoconid ; these cusps are about as high in T. goodmani . 
 The species can easily be identified from recordings of its echolocation call . The call consists of a component with constant frequency followed by a short one with changing frequency . The call takes 6 @.@ 5 to 13 @.@ 5 ms , averaging 10 @.@ 1 ms , and the period between two calls is 22 @.@ 7 to 86 @.@ 3 ms , averaging 42 @.@ 7 ms . The maximum frequency averages 94 @.@ 2 kHz , the minimum frequency averages 82 @.@ 0 kHz , and the call emits the most energy at a frequency of 93 @.@ 2 kHz . 
 = = Distribution and ecology = = 
 Triaenops menamena mainly occurs in the dry regions of western Madagascar , but has also been recorded in humid areas in the far southeast and northeast , and is found up to 1300 m ( 4300 ft ) above sea level . It mainly occurs in forests , but has also been recorded outside forest and is not dependent on it . An obligate cave dweller , it is known to roost in large colonies , with one cave colony estimated to contain over 40 @,@ 000 bats ; this cave also contained an estimated 10 @,@ 000 Paratriaenops furculus . The effective population size of the species is estimated to be about 121 @,@ 000 . Lepidoptera ( butterflies and moths ) form the main component of its diet , but it also eats Coleoptera ( beetles ) and Hemiptera ( bugs ) and fewer members of some other insect orders . It is unclear how the ecological niches of Triaenops and the less frequently captured Paratriaenops furculus are separated , as both eat lepidopterans and occur in the same regions . 
 = = Conservation status = = 
 Under Triaenops rufus , the IUCN Red List lists this species as being of " Least Concern " , citing its common occurrence over a wide distribution and tolerance of human modifications of its habitat , even though its forest habitat is being destroyed in places . It has been recorded in numerous protected areas . Bats , mainly the large Hipposideros commersoni , are sometimes hunted for food in southwestern Madagascar , and T. menamena is also taken incidentally . 
 = Henry le Despenser = 
 Henry le Despenser ( c . 1341 – 1406 ) was a 14th @-@ century English nobleman and Bishop of Norwich whose reputation as the ' Fighting Bishop ' was gained for his part in suppressing the Peasants ' Revolt in East Anglia and in defeating the peasants at the Battle of North Walsham in the summer of 1381 . 
 As a young man he studied at Oxford University and held numerous positions in the English Church . He fought in Italy before being consecrated as a bishop in 1370 . Parliament agreed to allow Despenser to lead a crusade to Flanders in 1383 , which was directed against Louis II of Flanders , a supporter of the antipope Clement VII . The crusade was in defence of English economic and political interests . Although well funded , the expedition was poorly equipped and lacked proper military leadership . After initial successes , a disastrous attempt to besiege the city of Ypres forced Despenser to return to England . Upon his return he was impeached in parliament . His temporalities were confiscated by Richard II of England , but were returned in 1385 , the year he accompanied the king northward to repel a potential French invasion of Scotland . 
 Despenser was an energetic and able administrator who staunchly defended his diocese against Lollardy . In 1399 , he was among those who stood by Richard , following the landing of Henry Bolingbroke in Yorkshire towards the end of June . He was arrested for refusing to come to terms with Bolingbroke . The following year , he was implicated in the Epiphany Rising , but was pardoned . 
 = = Birth and ancestry = = 
 Henry le Despenser was the youngest son of Edward le Despenser ( 1310 – 1342 ) , who married Anne ( died 1367 ) , daughter of Sir Ralph Ferrers of Groby . Henry was born around 1342 , the year that his father was killed at the siege of Vannes . He and his three brothers all grew up to become soldiers . His eldest brother Edward le Despencer , 1st Baron le Despencer ( around 1335 – 1375 ) was reputed to be one of the greatest knights of his age : he and Henry fought together for Pope Urban V in his war against Milan in 1369 . Comparatively little is known of his other siblings : Hugh le Despenser fought abroad and died in Padua in March 1374 , Thomas fought in France and died unmarried in 1381 and Gilbert le Despenser died in 1382 . Their sister Joan was a nun at Shaftesbury Abbey until her death in 1384 . 
 The le Despenser family originated from the lords of <unk> in north @-@ eastern France . Henry 's grandmother Eleanor de Clare was a granddaughter of Edward I of England . 
 Henry 's great @-@ grandfather Hugh le Despenser , 1st Earl of Winchester ( 1262 – 1326 ) and grandfather Hugh Despenser the Younger ( 1286 – 1326 ) , who was a favourite of Edward II , were both exiled and later executed after the rebellion of Queen Isabella and her lover Mortimer against Edward II of England . Hugh le Despenser had become Edward II 's adviser , holding power until the king 's defeat at the Battle of Bannockburn , but he was later restored to favour . His son was appointed the king 's chamberlain and enjoyed a still larger share of royal favour . The barons were hostile to the Despensers , due to their acquired wealth and perceived arrogance , and in 1321 they were banished . Their sentences were soon afterwards annulled and from 1322 they played an important role in the governing of the country , but in 1326 Isabella acted against them and both men were tried and executed . 
 In 1375 , Despenser 's nephew Thomas le Despenser , 1st Earl of Gloucester succeeded his father Edward . Thomas was captured and killed following the attempt to restore Richard II in the Epiphany Rising . 
 = = Early career = = 
 In 1353 ( as an eleven @-@ year @-@ old boy ) Henry ' de Exon ' became the canon of Llandaff and a year later he was secured a canonry of Salisbury Cathedral . By the age of nineteen he had become the rector of Bosworth and by February 1361 he was a master at Oxford University , studying civil law . He was ordained on 17 December 1362 . By 20 April 1364 he was archdeacon of Llandaff . Of his early life Capgrave tells us that he spent some time in Italy fighting for Pope Urban V in his war against Milan in 1369 : 
 <unk> this same tyme was Ser <unk> Spenser a <unk> <unk> in <unk> , or the tyme that he was <unk> 
 = = Bishop of Norwich = = 
 In 1370 Despenser , then the canon of Salisbury , was appointed as Bishop of Norwich by a papal bull dated 3 April 1370 . He was consecrated at Rome on 20 April and returned to England . He received the spiritualities of his see from the Archbishop of Canterbury on 12 July 1370 and the temporalities from the king on 14 August . 
 = = = Involvement in the suppression of the Peasants ' Revolt = = = 
 During the Peasants ' Revolt of 1381 , rebels from Kent and Essex marched to London and , once admitted to the city , managed to capture the Tower of London . King Richard , who had promised to agree to all the demands of the peasants , met the rebels outside the city , where the leader of the peasants Wat Tyler was killed and the rebellion was ended . The king 's promises were retracted . 
 The rebellion quickly spread to other parts of England , including the diocese of Norwich , where it lasted for less than a fortnight . On 14 June a group of rebels reached Thetford and from there the insurrection spread over south @-@ western Norfolk towards the Fens . At the same time the rebels , led by a local dyer , Geoffrey Litster , moved across the north @-@ eastern part of the county , urging insurrection throughout the local area . Over the next few days , the rebels converged on Norwich , Lynn and Swaffham . Norwich , then one of the largest and most important cities in the realm , was taken and occupied by Litster and his followers , who caused considerable damage to the property and possessions of their enemies once they managed to enter the city . The Norwich rebels then travelled to Yarmouth , destroying legal records and landowners ' possessions ; other insurgents moving across north @-@ east Norfolk destroyed court rolls and taxation documents ; there were numerous incidents of pillage and extortion across the whole county . 
 Despenser first heard news of the rising in his own diocese at a time when he was absent at his manor of Burley in Rutland , 100 miles ( 160 km ) west of Norwich . Armed , he hastened back to Norfolk via Peterborough , Cambridge and Newmarket , with a company of only eight lances and a small body of bowmen . His followers increased on the way , and by the time he reached North Walsham , near the Norfolk coast , he had a considerable force under his command . There he found the rebels entrenched and defended by makeshift fortifications . According to Thomas Walsingham , in the Battle of North Walsham the bishop himself led the assault and overpowered his enemies in hand @-@ to @-@ hand fighting . Many were slain or captured , including the rebels ' leader , who was hanged , drawn and quartered soon afterwards . Despenser personally superintended Litster 's execution . In the following months he proceeded to deal with other rebels in his diocese . But the rigour with which he put down the rebellion made him highly unpopular in Norfolk and in the following year a plot was organised to murder him . The scheme was betrayed in time by one of the conspirators , and the plotters were dealt with by the authorities . 
 = = = Norwich Crusade of 1383 = = = 
 Soon after Urban VI had been elected pope in 1378 , Robert of Geneva was elected as a rival pope , taking the name Pope Clement VII and removing himself to Avignon . The so @-@ called Western Schism subsequently caused a great crisis in the Church and created rivalry and conflict throughout Christian Europe . It was eventually resolved as a result of the Council of Constance ( 1414 – 1418 ) . 
 In the autumn and winter of 1382 , Flanders had been invaded by Charles VI of France . Philip Van <unk> had fallen at the Battle of <unk> and the country had been compelled to submit to the French king , who obliged all the conquered towns to recognise Clement VII . In response to events in Flanders , Pope Urban issued bulls for the proclamation of a crusade , choosing Bishop Despenser to lead a campaign against the followers of Clement VII in Flanders . He granted Despenser extraordinary powers for the fulfillment of his mission and plenary indulgence to those who should take part in or contribute support to it . 
 Both the commons and King Richard II were enthusiastic about the launch of a crusade to Flanders , for political and economic reasons : revenues from the English wool staple ( that had ceased following the advance of the French ) could be resumed ; sending the bishop and not the king or his uncles to Flanders would enable John of Gaunt 's unpopular plans for a royal crusade to Castille to be abandoned ; French forces would be drawn away from the Iberian peninsula ; and Anglo @-@ Flemish relations would be strengthened . Another advantage in approving a crusade was that its cost would be borne by the Church and not by means of government levies : ever since the Peasants ' Revolt , the government was fearful of the consequences of imposing a tax to pay for a new war against the French . 
 On 6 December 1382 , Richard ordered the crusade to be published throughout England . Later that month the bishop and his men took the cross at St. Paul 's Cathedral . In February 1383 Parliament , after hesitating in entrusting the mission to a churchman , ultimately assigned to him the subsidy which it had granted the king in the previous October for carrying on the war in Flanders . The king 's only stipulation was that the crusaders should await the arrival of William Beauchamp before launching offensive operations against the French and their allies . 
 The bishop issued mandates for the publication of the bulls and the archbishop did the same . The enterprise was ardently seconded by the friars and contributions of immense value were made from all quarters , but especially , according to Henry Knighton , from " the rich ladies of England " . The English landed at Calais in May 1383 and proceeded to attack Gravelines , which was in the hands of the French . Gravelines , Dunkirk and the neighbouring country ( including the towns of Bourbourg , Bergues , <unk> , and Nieuport ) soon fell . On 25 May the crusaders put to flight a Franco @-@ Flemish army , under the command of the Count of Flanders , in a pitched battle fought near Dunkirk . Despenser was then persuaded by his followers to attempt to besiege Ypres , which was to prove to be the turning point of the crusade . He was unwilling to attack the city but his <unk> allies and some of his officers insisted that Ypres should be taken . 
 The inhabitants of Ypres were well prepared for a siege by the time the English and their allies arrived and attacked the city on 8 June 1383 . Dwellings in the outlying suburbs had been abandoned ; the timber from them was used to strengthen the earth ramparts and the stone gates of the city . A mission had been dispatched to Paris to replace artillery powder stocks . The city was well organised under the command of the Castellan of Ypres , John d <unk> , and had been divided into different defensive sectors . Although the ramparts were low , they were well protected with a double wet ditch , a high thorny hedge reinforced with stakes and a wooden stockade and fire @-@ step . 
 The English attacked the Temple Gate on the first day but were beaten off . Over the next three days the city gates were attacked simultaneously , without success . Before the end of the first week of the siege , reinforcements arrived to completely encircle the city walls and the outer ditch was breached using soil . On the eighth day ( 15 June ) Despenser attacked the defences with artillery , firing on the Messines Gate and damaging it , but not enough to cause the city defences to be breached . Over the following days of the siege , sustained artillery attacks had little overall effect and the assaults of Despenser 's troops were all beaten off . An attempt to drain the ditches seriously threatened the <unk> , but the attempt was unsuccessful and the besieged managed to communicate with the Duke of Burgundy through Louis le <unk> , who was able to raise a large French army to come to the aid of the city . On 8 August , after eight weeks of effort , Despenser abruptly decided to abandon the siege , leaving his allies to continue on their own . 
 After the débâcle at Ypres , the bishop 's forces divided , some going back to England , some remaining with the bishop and others under Sir Thomas Trivet and Sir Hugh Calveley retiring to Bourbourg and Bergues . The bishop and Calveley had wished to advance into France , but Sir William Elmham , Trivet and some of the other commanders refused to go . The bishop , after entering Picardy for some distance , was obliged to fall back upon Gravelines . It turned out that the French had little stomach for a showdown with the English and their allies , preferring instead to negotiate : part of the French army was unwilling to fight when Despenser and Calveley encountered it when moving towards Picardy . It is possible that had King Richard crossed the Channel with a large English army , the campaign would have ended in a famous victory . However , for the demoralised and disease @-@ ridden English forces , the arrival of the French headed by the boy @-@ king Charles VI was decisive . Charles had taken the <unk> on 2 August and his army was mustered in Arras on 15 August . They advanced into Flanders , reaching Thérouanne by the end of August , <unk> on 5 September , Bergues on 7 September ( forcing Trivet 's and Elmham 's retreat to Bourbourg and Gravelines ) and Dunkirk on 9 September . Bourbourg was besieged on 12 September : two days later the Duke of Brittany persuaded the French to negotiate a surrender and the English garrison was given safe conduct from the town . The French army then proceeded along the coast and besieged Gravelines . There , without Despenser 's authority , the defenders accepted bribes and the bishop 's treasurer pocketed 5000 francs . Despenser at first refused the surrender terms , but a few days later Gravelines was evacuated and Despenser ordered it to be sacked . By the end of October the remaining crusaders had returned across the English Channel . 
 = = = Career after 1383 = = = 
 Soon after returning from Flanders , the bishop was impeached in parliament , on 26 October 1383 , in the presence of the king . The chancellor Michael de la Pole accused him of not mustering his troops at Calais , as had been agreed ; not recruiting a high enough number of armed men ; refusing to certify properly who his military leaders were ; deceiving the king by not allowing a secular lord to command the expedition to Flanders ; and disbanding his forces prematurely . Despenser denied all the charges , insisting that enough men had assembled at Ypres , that he had chosen his commanders well and that he had not refused to obey the king 's orders . After de la Pole declared the bishop 's replies to be insufficient , Despenser requested another hearing to defend himself still further , which was granted . In this hearing Despencer proceeded to blame his own commanders for forcing him to retreat from Ypres and then evacuate the garrisons . All his arguments were refuted and he was blamed for the failure of the expedition . His temporalities were confiscated and he was ordered to repay any costs taken from money gained from the French . 
 Despenser 's fall from grace did not last long . Following Scottish incursions into England , it was decided that the 18 @-@ year @-@ old King Richard should lead an army into Scotland , marking the start of his military career . In 1385 every magnate of consequence , including Despenser , joined the immense host that advanced north with the king , 
 " finding a country totally waste , where there was nothing to plunder , and little that could even be destroyed , excepting here and there a tower , whose massive walls defied all means of destruction then known , or a cluster of miserable huts .... " ' ( Sir Walter Scott , Scotland , vol . 1 ) . 
 The English army reached Edinburgh , which was sacked , but then retreated back to England , despite John of Gaunt 's wish to go on to Fife . The Scottish campaign was one of the last times that Despenser marched with an army . 
 Henry le Despenser continued to be controversial after his fighting career was over , mainly because of the vigorous methods he used to maintain control over the laity in his diocese and his own cathedral church . He defended the orthodoxy of the church against Lollardy as passionately as he defended his episcopal rights and privileges . 
 For over a decade Despenser was involved in disputes with the chapter of Norwich Cathedral and with other religious communities in his diocese , mainly concerning the bishop 's right to intervene in their internal affairs . In 1384 the monks appealed successfully to Pope Boniface IX against Despenser , but in 1385 matters were still not resolved , for that year the pope ordered William Courtenay the Archbishop of Canterbury to assist in mediating between the parties . On Richard II 's instruction , the bishop and the convent instead appeared before Archbishop Courtenay and a royal council , but Courtenay 's death in July 1386 prevented a resolution of the dispute from being finalised until 1398 , when a royal commission decided in favour of Despenser . Pope Boniface annulled the decisions of the commission in 1401 , after the convent appealed to him , but the papal sentences were ignored by Despenser . Eventually the monks came to terms with the bishop and accepted a loss of their autonomy . 
 = = = = Fighting Lollardy = = = = 
 Since 1381 , there had been a growing fear of Lollardy among the English political elite . The Lollards had first appeared in the 1370s and had briefly found favour with the upper classes , but in 1382 power was given for the authorities to detain heretics and examine them in a Church court . During the second half of his reign Richard II became steadily more determined to maintain religious orthodoxy and acted increasingly harshly to suppress the Lollards . His successor Henry IV went even further , introducing the death penalty for heresy and for possession of a bible . 
 Despenser took active steps to maintain orthodoxy in his own diocese . The chronicler Thomas Walsingham praised Henry 's actions against the Lollards and contrasted him with his fellow bishops : 
 " He swore , moreover , and did not repent of what he said , that if anyone belonging to that perverse sect should presume to preach in his diocese , they should be taken to the fire or beheaded . Consequently , having understood this , no one belonging to that tendency had any desire to embrace martyrdom , with the result that , up to now , the faith and true religion have remained unaffected within the bounds of his episcopal authority . " ( Walsingham , Historia Anglicana ) . 
 Henry however appears not to have dealt too savagely in dealing with heretics . On 1 May 1399 , William Sawtrey , a Norfolk curate and a Lollard , was examined before him . Sawtrey recanted his heresies in public and apparently received no serious punishment , but after moving to London , Sawtrey 's heretical preaching attracted the attention of Archbishop Thomas Arundel and he was summoned to appear before a convocation at St. Paul 's . Despenser did not attend but sent a written memorandum on 23 February . Following his trial Sawtrey was condemned as a relapsed heretic and was burned in chains at Smithfield in 1401 . 
 = = = = Final years = = = = 
 Upon the death of John of Gaunt on 3 February 1399 , his son Henry Bolingbroke became the Duke of Lancaster , but Richard II moved quickly to strip him of his patrimony . Bolingbroke resolved to return to England from Paris to claim the restoration of his family estates and in July 1399 he disembarked at Ravenspur . Henry le Despenser reacted to these events by standing loyally by Richard . On 2 July he commissioned three vicars @-@ general to deputise for him whilst he was absent from the diocese and by 10 July he had reached St. Albans with reinforcements for the Duke of York 's army . There he joined up with York and they travelled to join the king as he returned from Ireland , whilst Bolingbroke moved south towards Bristol to intercept Richard 's supporters . Despenser was with York at Berkeley Castle when he came to terms with Bolingbroke at the end of July , but the bishop refused to submit and was arrested and briefly imprisoned . On 30 September Bolingbroke was proclaimed king in London , an event that Despenser may have witnessed . The bishop attended the first parliament of the new reign on 6 October 1399 , in which it was agreed that King Richard should be imprisoned . After this time Despenser 's influence in his diocese seems to have diminished , power having shifted to Sir Thomas Erpingham . 
 Henry was implicated in the abortive ‘ Epiphany Rising ' of January 1400 , during which his nephew Thomas , Earl of Gloucester played a key part and was subsequently executed . Thomas had been created Earl of Gloucester by Richard II , but in 1399 was accused of being involved in the death of the son of the Duke of Gloucester and as a result lost his earldom . He joined in the conspiracy of the earls of Rutland , Kent and Huntingdon and was with their army at Cirencester , when they were attacked by the townsmen , who burnt Thomas le Despenser 's lodgings . Thomas fled , boarding a ship , but the captain forced him to Bristol , where on 13 January he was released to the mob and beheaded at the high cross . 
 In the aftermath of the rebellion Henry le Despenser appointed John <unk> , the archdeacon of Norwich , as his vicar @-@ general on 5 February 1400 and then submitted himself to the custody of Archbishop Arundel who accompanied him to Parliament on 20 January 1401 . There his enemy Sir Thomas Erpingham falsely accused him of being involved in the plot . He was finally reconciled to Henry IV when the king granted him a pardon in 1401 . 
 Despenser died on 23 August 1406 and was buried in Norwich Cathedral before the high altar . A brass inscription dedicated to him was placed there , but has since been destroyed . 
 = = Ancestry = = 
 = Pluteus nevadensis = 
 Pluteus nevadensis is a species of fungus in the agaric family Pluteaceae . Described as new to science in 2010 , the species is known only from subtropical and pine forests in Mexico , where it grows on rotting pine and oak wood . Fruit bodies ( mushrooms ) have red @-@ orange caps up to 3 @.@ 8 cm ( 1 @.@ 5 in ) in diameter with a shape ranging from conic , convex , or flattened , depending on their age . The silky yellow stems are up to 4 @.@ 5 cm ( 1 @.@ 8 in ) long . It is similar in appearance to Pluteus aurantiorugosus , with which it shares an <unk> or scarlet @-@ colored cap and a yellow stem . P. nevadensis can be distinguished from this and other superficially similar Pluteus species by differences in microscopic characteristics . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 The species was described by Olivia Rodríguez in 2010 in the journal Mycotaxon , based on collections made in 1991 . The holotype material was collected on the Colima volcano , in the Municipality of <unk> el Grande , at an elevation of 2 @,@ 100 m ( 6 @,@ 900 ft ) . The species was formerly referred to Pluteus aurantiorugosus , with which it bears a close resemblance . After close examination and comparison of the two species , the authors concluded that the differences in morphology and DNA sequence were sufficient to warrant describing a new species . 
 According to Rolf Singer 's infrageneric classification of the genus Pluteus , the fungus belongs in the section Celluloderma . Species in this section have pleurocystidia that are either absent or non @-@ <unk> . Furthermore , the majority have a cap cuticle comprising short club @-@ shaped or spheropedunculate ( somewhat spherical with a stem ) cells , that may or may not be mixed with elongated cystidia @-@ like cells . Other species in Celluloderma include P. <unk> , P. aurantiorugosus , P. <unk> , P. <unk> , and P. <unk> . Molecular analyses of internal transcribed spacer DNA sequences supports the placement of P. nevadensis in Celluloderma , and further suggest that it has a sister relationship with P. <unk> . The specific epithet nevadensis refers to the mountain , Nevado de Colima , where the type material was collected . 
 = = Description = = 
 The cap is 15 – 38 mm ( 0 @.@ 6 – 1 @.@ 5 in ) in diameter , conic when young , bell @-@ shaped to convex or plano @-@ convex when mature , and umbonate . The cap margin is curved downward , even or slightly eroded . The red @-@ orange cap surface is dry to moist , and wrinkled towards the margin but smooths out as it approaches the center . Sometimes there is white @-@ yellowish flesh underneath the cap cuticle . The gills are free from attachment to the stem , crowded closely together , broad to swollen in the middle , and white or whitish when young to salmon @-@ pinkish in age . The edge of the gill is floccose ( with wool @-@ like tufts ) or fringed , and whitish . The stem , which is centrally attached to the cap , measures 6 – 45 mm ( 0 @.@ 24 – 1 @.@ 77 in ) by 2 – 6 mm ( 0 @.@ 08 – 0 @.@ 24 in ) , and is roughly equal in width throughout . It is smooth to slightly fibrillose ( covered in small slender fibers or filaments ) , silky , and hollow . The color is yellow or yellowish near the top , and deep orange or with orange tinges towards the base . The base of the stem is covered with cottony whitish mycelia . The flesh of the cap is 1 mm thick or more at the center and whitish . The stem tissue is yellowish or yellow gold . Fruit bodies of Pluteus nevadensis have no distinctive taste or odor . 
 The color of the spore print is pinkish @-@ brown . The smooth spores measure 5 @.@ 5 – 7 by 4 @.@ 5 – 6 @.@ 5 µm , roughly spherical to broadly ellipsoid in shape . Their walls are thin to slightly thickened , and almost translucent . The basidia ( spore @-@ bearing cells in the hymenium ) are 22 – 29 by 6 @.@ 5 – 7 @.@ 5 µm ( including sterigmata ) , club @-@ shaped , and four @-@ spored . They have <unk> contents and are hyaline ( translucent ) . The pleurocystidia ( cystidia on the gill face ) are 41 @.@ 8 – 75 by 11 @.@ 8 – 24 µm , frequent , scattered , and flask @-@ shaped with short or elongated necks . Some pleurocystidia are somewhat fusiform ( tapered on each end ) or somewhat utriform ( shaped like a leather bottle or flask ) , thin @-@ walled , and hyaline . Cheilocystidia ( cystidia on the gill edge ) are 32 – 55 by 10 – 18 @.@ 5 µm , crowded , and club @-@ shaped . Some are utriform , roughly cylindrical or egg @-@ shaped , thin walled , and hyaline . The gill tissue is convergent , meaning that the hyphae appear to converge toward the center of the tissue . The cap cuticle comprises club @-@ shaped or <unk> cells that measure 25 @.@ 6 – 60 by 13 @.@ 6 – 31 @.@ 2 µm . These cells typically have a long pedicel ( stalk ) with a thin or slightly thickened wall , and are hyaline . The species lacks oleiferous hyphae ( filled with oil @-@ like contents ) and clamp connections . 
 = = = Similar species = = = 
 Pluteus aurantiorugosus is very similar to P. nevadensis in external appearance , and the two can only be reliably distinguished by microscopic characteristics or DNA sequence . In contrast to the latter species , the former has oblong spores , and cystidia that are shorter and less slender . P. aurantiorugosus is widely distributed in the Northern Hemisphere , but rare . 
 The species Pluteus <unk> shares with P. nevadensis a fragile fruit body , a red cap , and similar <unk> morphology . It differs in its orange @-@ red gill edges , red stem , and cap cuticle cells that contain pigment . Other species with a roughly similar appearance , including P. <unk> , P. <unk> , P. <unk> , P. <unk> , and P. laetus , can be distinguished by differences in microscopic characteristics . 
 = = Habitat and distribution = = 
 Pluteus nevadensis is known only from subtropical and pine forests in the states of Guerrero and Jalisco , Mexico , where it grows on the rotting wood of pine and oak . It is one of 34 Pluteus species known in Mexico . 
 = Madge Syers = 
 Florence Madeline " Madge " Syers ( née Cave , 16 September 1881 – 9 September 1917 ) was a British figure skater . She became the first woman to compete at the World Figure Skating Championships in 1902 by entering what was previously an all @-@ male event and won the silver medal , which prompted the International Skating Union ( ISU ) to create a separate ladies ' championship . Syers was the winner of the first two ladies ' events in 1906 and 1907 , and went on to become the Olympic champion at the 1908 Summer Olympics , the first Olympic Games to include figure skating . She also competed as a pairs skater with her husband Edgar Syers , winning the bronze medal at the 1908 Olympics . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Florence Madeline Cave was born on 16 September 1881 in Kensington , London , one of 15 children of Edward Jarvis Cave , a builder , and his wife Elizabeth Ann . She was a proficient figure skater , as well as a gifted swimmer and <unk> . Madge became a regular at the Prince 's Skating Club in Knightsbridge , which had been formed in 1896 and was popular with aristocratic society in London . 
 In 1899 Madge met her future husband Edgar Syers , a figure skater and coach who was 18 years her senior . Edgar was an exponent of the international skating style , which was freer and less rigid than the traditional English style , and encouraged Madge to adopt this style . Madge and Edgar completed together in pairs skating events , and in 1900 finished second in one of the first international pairs events , staged in Berlin . They married in June of that year . The Syers co @-@ authored The Book of Winter Sports in 1908 . 
 = = Career = = 
 = = = 1902 World championships = = = 
 The World Figure Skating Championships , first contested in 1896 , was regarded as an all @-@ male event since competitive skating was generally viewed as a male activity , but there was no regulation barring women , enabling Syers to enter and compete at the 1902 Championships in London . She won the silver medal behind Ulrich Salchow , who was reputedly so impressed with her challenge that he offered her his gold medal . T. D. Richardson later wrote : " Rumour , nay more than rumour – a good deal of expert opinion – thought she should have won . " 
 Syers ' entry into the World Championships prompted the ISU to discuss the subject of women competing against men at their next Congress in 1903 . The concerns raised were that " ( 1 ) the dress prevents the judges from seeing the feet ; ( 2 ) a judge might judge a girl to whom he was attached ; and ( 3 ) it is difficult to compare women with men . " The Congress voted six to three in favour of barring women from the championships . 
 = = = 1903 – 1907 = = = 
 Syers continued to compete elsewhere , and in 1903 won the inaugural British Figure Skating Championships , which began as a mixed competition . She won again the following year , beating her husband , who won the silver medal . She also entered the 1904 European Championships but withdrew due to injury after the first stage of the competition , the compulsory figures . 
 The 1905 ISU Congress established a separate ladies ' event , which was supported by strong lobbying from the National Ice Skating Association . The event was known at the time as the Ladies ' Championship of the ISU rather than a World Championship , and was staged at a different date and location from the men 's event . Syers won the inaugural event held in Davos , Switzerland in 1906 , finishing first in a field of five competitors . She won her second title in Vienna at the 1907 Championships . 
 = = = 1908 Olympics = = = 
 The 1908 Summer Olympics in London were the first Games to include figure skating events in the programme , which were staged in October at the Prince 's Club . Syers entered both the ladies ' event and the pairs with Edgar . In the ladies ' event , Syers comfortably won the compulsory figures section , with all five judges placing her first . The official report of the Games described her as " in a class by herself " and stated that " the wonderful accuracy of her figures , combined with perfect carriage and movement , was the chief feature of the morning 's skating . " In the free skating , the report described her as having " excelled in rhythm and time @-@ keeping , and her dance steps , pirouettes , & c . , were skated without a fault . " She was again placed first by all five judges and won the title . In the pairs event Syers and Edgar finished third ( of three couples ) and won the bronze medal . 
 = = Later life = = 
 Syers retired from competitive skating after the Olympics due to fading health . She and Edgar co @-@ authored a second book together , The Art of Skating ( International Style ) , published in 1913 . She died of heart failure caused by acute endocarditis on 9 September 1917 at her home in Weybridge , Surrey , aged 35 . 
 Syers was elected to the World Figure Skating Hall of Fame in 1981 . 
 = = Results = = 
 = Senate of the Roman Republic = 
 The Senate of the Roman Republic was a political institution in the ancient Roman Republic . It was not an elected body , but one whose members were appointed by the consuls , and later by the censors . After a Roman magistrate served his term in office , it usually was followed with automatic appointment to the Senate . According to the Greek historian Polybius , our principal source on the Constitution of the Roman Republic , the Roman Senate was the predominant branch of government . Polybius noted that it was the consuls ( the highest @-@ ranking of the regular magistrates ) who led the armies and the civil government in Rome , and it was the Roman assemblies which had the ultimate authority over elections , legislation , and criminal trials . However , since the Senate controlled money , administration , and the details of foreign policy , it had the most control over day @-@ to @-@ day life . The power and authority of the Senate derived from precedent , the high caliber and prestige of the senators , and the Senate 's unbroken lineage , which dated back to the founding of the Republic in 509 BC . 
 Originally the chief @-@ magistrates , the consuls , appointed all new senators . They also had the power to remove individuals from the Senate . Around the year 318 BC , the " Ovinian Plebiscite " ( <unk> Ovinium ) gave this power to another Roman magistrate , the censor , who retained this power until the end of the Roman Republic . This law also required the censors to appoint any newly elected magistrate to the Senate . Thus , after this point in time , election to magisterial office resulted in automatic Senate membership . The appointment was for life , although the censor could impeach any senator . 
 The Senate directed the magistrates , especially the consuls , in their prosecution of military conflicts . The Senate also had an enormous degree of power over the civil government in Rome . This was especially the case with regards to its management of state finances , as only it could authorize the disbursal of public monies from the treasury . In addition , the Senate passed decrees called senatus consultum , which was officially " advice " from the Senate to a magistrate . While technically these decrees did not have to be obeyed , in practice , they usually were . During an emergency , the Senate ( and only the Senate ) could authorize the appointment of a dictator . The last ordinary dictator , however , was appointed in 202 BC . After 202 BC , the Senate responded to emergencies by passing the senatus consultum ultimum ( " Ultimate Decree of the Senate " ) , which suspended civil government and declared something analogous to martial law . 
 = = Venue and ethical standards = = 
 The rules and procedures of the Roman Senate were both complex and ancient . Many of these rules and procedures originated in the early years of the Republic , and were upheld over the centuries under the principle of mos maiorum ( " customs of the ancestors " ) . While Senate meetings could take place either inside or outside of the formal boundary of the city ( the pomerium ) , no meeting could take place more than a mile outside of the pomerium . Senate meetings might take place outside of the formal boundary of the city for several reasons . For example , the Senate might wish to meet with an individual , such as a foreign ambassador , whom they did not wish to allow inside the city . 
 At the beginning of the year , the first Senate meeting always took place at the Temple of Jupiter <unk> . Other venues could include the Temple of <unk> or the Temple of Concord , or , if the meeting was outside of the formal boundary of the city , at the Temple of Apollo or ( if a war meeting ) at the Temple of Bellona . In addition , the Senate operated while under various religious restrictions . For example , before any meeting could begin , a sacrifice to the gods was made , and a search for divine omens ( the auspices ) was taken . The auspices were taken in order to determine whether that particular Senate meeting held favor with the gods . The Senate was only allowed to meet in a building of religious significance , such as the Curia <unk> . 
 The ethical requirements of senators were significant . Senators could not engage in banking or any form of public contract . They could not own a ship that was large enough to participate in foreign commerce , and they could not leave Italy without permission from the Senate . In addition , since they were not paid , individuals usually sought to become a senator only if they were independently wealthy . 
 The censors were the magistrates who enforced the ethical standards of the Senate . Whenever a censor punished a senator , they had to allege some specific failing . Possible reasons for punishing a member included corruption , abuse of capital punishment , or the disregard of a colleague 's veto , constitutional precedent , or the auspices . Senators who failed to obey various laws could also be punished . While punishment could include impeachment ( expulsion ) from the Senate , often a punishment was less severe than outright expulsion . While the standard was high for expelling a member from the Senate , it was easier to deny a citizen the right to join the Senate . Various moral failings could result in one not being allowed to join the Senate , including bankruptcy , prostitution , or a prior history of having been a gladiator . One law ( the Lex <unk> of 123 BC ) made it illegal for a citizen to become a senator if they had been convicted of a criminal offense . Many of these laws were enacted in the last century of the Republic , as public corruption began reaching unprecedented levels . 
 = = Debates = = 
 Meetings usually began at dawn , although occasionally certain events ( such as festivals ) might delay the beginning of a meeting . A magistrate who wished to summon the Senate had to issue a compulsory order ( a <unk> ) , and senators could be punished if they failed to appear without reasonable cause . In 44 BC for example , consul Mark Antony threatened to demolish the house of the former consul Cicero for this very reason . The Senate meetings were technically public because the doors were usually left open , which allowed people to look in , but only senators could speak . The Senate was directed by a presiding magistrate , who was usually either a consul ( the highest @-@ ranking magistrate ) or , if the consul was unavailable , a Praetor ( the second @-@ highest ranking magistrate ) . By the late Republic , another type of magistrate , a plebeian tribune , would sometimes preside . 
 While in session , the Senate had the power to act on its own , and even against the will of the presiding magistrate if it wished . The presiding magistrate began each meeting with a speech ( the verba fecit ) , which was usually brief , but was sometimes a lengthy oration . The presiding magistrate would then begin a discussion by referring an issue to the senators , who would discuss the issue , one at a time , by order of seniority , with the first to speak , the most senior senator , known as the princeps senatus ( leader of the Senate ) , who was then followed by ex @-@ consuls ( <unk> ) , and then the praetors and ex @-@ praetors ( <unk> ) . This continued , until the most junior senators had spoken . Senators who had held magisterial office always spoke before those who had not , and if a patrician was of equal seniority as a plebeian , the patrician would always speak first . 
 A senator could make a brief statement , discuss the matter in detail , or talk about an unrelated topic . All senators had to speak before a vote could be held , and since all meetings had to end by nightfall , a senator could talk a proposal to death ( a filibuster or diem <unk> ) if they could keep the debate going until nightfall . It is known , for example , that the senator Cato the Younger once filibustered in an attempt to prevent the Senate from granting Julius Caesar a law that would have given land to the veterans of Pompey . 
 = = Delaying and obstructive tactics = = 
 Senators had several ways in which they could influence ( or frustrate ) a presiding magistrate . When a presiding magistrate was proposing a motion , for example , the senators could call " consult " ( <unk> ) , which required the magistrate to ask for the opinions of the senators . Any senator could demand a quorum call ( with the cry of <unk> ) , which required a count of the senators present . Like modern quorum calls , this was usually a delaying tactic . Senators could also demand that a motion be divided into smaller motions . Acts such as applause , booing , or heckling often played a major role in a debate , and , in part because all senators had an absolute right to free speech , any senator could respond at any point if he was attacked personally . Once debates were underway , they were usually difficult for the presiding magistrate to control . The presiding magistrate typically only regained some control once the debating had ended , and a vote was about to be taken . 
 In the later years of the Republic , attempts were made by the aristocracy to limit the increasing level of chaos associated with the obstructive tendencies and democratic impulses of some of the senators . Laws were enacted to prevent the inclusion of extraneous material in bills before the Senate . Other laws were enacted to outlaw the so @-@ called omnibus bills , which are bills , usually enacted by a single vote , that contain a large volume of often unrelated material . 
 Laws were also enacted to strengthen the requirement that three days pass between the proposal of a bill , and the vote on that bill . During his term as dictator , Julius Caesar enacted laws that required the publication of Senate resolutions . This publication , called the acta <unk> , or " daily proceedings " , was meant to increase transparency and minimize the potential for abuse . This publication was posted in the Roman Forum , and then sent by messengers throughout the provinces . 
 = = Votes and the Tribune 's veto = = 
 When it was time to call a vote , the presiding magistrate could bring up whatever proposals ( in whatever order ) he wished , and every vote was between a proposal and its negative . <unk> were required for votes to be held , and it is known that in 67 BC the size of a quorum was set at 200 senators ( by the lex Cornelia de <unk> ) . At any point before a motion passed , the proposed motion could be vetoed . Usually , vetoes were handed down by plebeian tribunes . If the Senate proposed a bill that the plebeian tribune ( the magistrate who was the chief representative of the people ) did not agree with , he issued a veto , which was backed by the promise to literally " ' interpose the sacrosanctity of his person ' " ( or intercessio ) if the Senate did not comply . If the Senate did not comply , he could physically prevent the Senate from acting , and any resistance could be criminally prosecuted as constituting a violation of his sacrosanctity . If the vetoed motion was proposed the next day , and the plebeian tribune who had vetoed it the day before was not present to interpose himself , the motion could be passed . In general , the plebeian tribune had to physically be present at the Senate meeting , otherwise his physical threat of interposing his person had no meaning . Ultimately , the plebeian tribune 's veto was based in a promise of physical force . 
 Once a vote occurred , and a measure passed , he could do nothing , since his promise to physically interpose his person against the senators was now meaningless . In addition , during a couple of instances between the end of the Second Punic War in 201 BC and the beginning of the Social War in 91 BC , although they had no legal power to do so , several Consuls were known to have vetoed acts of the Senate . Ultimately , if there was no veto , and the matter was of minor importance , it could be voted on by a voice vote or by a show of hands . If there was no veto , and the matter was of a significant nature , there was usually a physical division of the house , where senators voted by taking a place on either side of the chamber . 
 Any motion that had the support of the Senate but was vetoed was recorded in the annals as a senatus auctoritas , while any motion that was passed and not vetoed was recorded as a senatus consultum . After the vote , each senatus consultum and each senatus auctoritas was transcribed into a final document by the presiding magistrate . This document included the name of the presiding magistrate , the place of the assembly , the dates involved , the number of senators who were present at time the motion was passed , the names of witnesses to the drafting of the motion , and the substance of the act . In addition , if the motion was a senatus consultum , a capital letter " C " was stamped on the document , to verify that the motion had been approved by the Senate . 
 The document was then deposited in the temple that housed the Treasury ( the aerarium ) . While a senatus auctoritas ( vetoed Senate motion ) had no legal value , it did serve to show the opinion of the Senate . If a senatus consultum conflicted with a law ( lex ) that was passed by a Roman Assembly , the law overrode the senatus consultum , because the senatus consultum had its authority based in precedent , and not in law . A senatus consultum , however , could serve to interpret a law . 
 = Spokane , Washington = 
 Spokane ( pronunciation : / <unk> / <unk> @-@ KAN ) is a city in the state of Washington , in the northwestern United States . Spokane is the seat of Spokane County . It is located on the Spokane River , west of the Rocky Mountain foothills in eastern Washington , 92 miles ( 148 km ) south of the Canadian border , approximately 20 miles ( 30 km ) from the Washington – Idaho border , and 280 miles ( 450 km ) east of Seattle along Interstate 90 . The city and wider Inland Northwest region is served by Spokane International Airport , 5 miles ( 8 km ) west of downtown Spokane . According to the 2010 Census , Spokane had a population of 208 @,@ 916 , making it the second largest city in Washington and the 102nd largest city in the United States . 
 The first humans to live in the area , the Spokane people ( their name meaning " children of the sun " in Salishan ) , arrived between 13 @,@ 000 and 8 @,@ 000 years ago , living off plentiful game . Known as the birthplace of Father 's Day , Spokane is officially nicknamed the " Lilac City " . David Thompson explored the area with the westward expansion and establishment of the North West Company 's Spokane House in 1810 . This trading post was the first long @-@ term European settlement in Washington . Completion of the Northern Pacific Railway in 1881 brought settlers to the Spokane area , and that same year it was officially incorporated as a city with the name " <unk> Falls " . The " e " was added to Spokane in 1883 , and " Falls " was dropped in 1891 . In the late 19th century , gold and silver were discovered in the Inland Northwest . The local economy depended on mining , timber , and agriculture until the 1980s . Spokane hosted the first environmentally themed World 's Fair at Expo ' 74 . 
 Many of the older Romanesque Revival @-@ style buildings in the downtown area were designed by architect Kirtland Kelsey Cutter after the Great Fire of 1889 . The city also features Riverfront and Manito parks , the Smithsonian @-@ affiliated Northwest Museum of Arts and Culture , the Davenport Hotel , and the Fox and Bing Crosby theaters . The Cathedral of Our Lady of Lourdes serves as the seat of the Roman Catholic Diocese of Spokane with Thomas Daly as the newly appointed Bishop as of 2015 . The Cathedral of St. John the Evangelist ( Spokane , Washington ) represents the Anglican community . The city is also the center of the Mormon Spokane Washington Temple District . Gonzaga University was established in 1887 by the Society of Jesus , and the private Presbyterian Whitworth University moved to north Spokane in 1914 from Tacoma , WA . In sports , the Gonzaga Bulldogs collegiate basketball team competes at the Division I level . Professional and semi @-@ professional sports teams include the Spokane Indians in Minor League Baseball , Spokane Empire in arena football , and Spokane Chiefs in junior ice hockey . As of 2010 , Spokane 's only major daily newspaper , The Spokesman @-@ Review , had a daily circulation of over 75 @,@ 000 . 
 = = History = = 
 The first humans to live in the Spokane area arrived between 13 @,@ 000 and 8 @,@ 000 years ago and were hunter @-@ gatherer societies that lived off plentiful game . The Spokane tribe , after which the city is named ( the name meaning " children of the sun " Salishan ) , [ a ] are believed to be either their direct descendants , or descendants of people from the Great Plains . When asked by early white explorers , the Spokanes said their ancestors came from " up North " . 
 Early in the 19th century , the Northwest Fur Company sent two white fur trappers west of the Rocky Mountains to search for fur . These were the first white men met by the Spokanes , who believed they were sacred , and set the trappers up in the Colville River valley for the winter . 
 = = = Trading post = = = 
 The explorer @-@ geographer David Thompson , working as head of the North West Company 's Columbia Department , became the first European to explore the Inland Empire ( now called the Inland Northwest ) . Crossing what is now the U.S. – Canadian border from British Columbia , Thompson wanted to expand the North West Company further south in search of furs . After establishing the <unk> House and <unk> House trading posts in what are now Idaho and Montana , Thompson then attempted to expand further west . He sent out two trappers , Jacques Raphael Finlay and Finan McDonald , to construct a fur trading post on the Spokane River in Washington and trade with the local Indians . This post was established in 1810 , at the confluence of the Little Spokane and Spokane rivers , becoming the first enduring European settlement of significance in Washington state . Known as the Spokane House , or simply " Spokane " , it was in operation from 1810 to 1826 . Operations were run by the British North West Company and later the Hudson 's Bay Company , and the post was the headquarters of the fur trade between the Rocky and Cascade mountains for 16 years . After the latter business absorbed the North West Company in 1821 , the major operations at the Spokane House were eventually shifted north to Fort Colville , reducing the post 's significance . 
 In 1836 , Reverend Samuel Parker visited the area and reported that around 800 Native Americans were living in Spokane Falls . A medical mission was established by Marcus and Narcissa Whitman to cater for Cayuse Indians and hikers of the Oregon Trail at Walla Walla in the south . After the Whitmans were killed by Indians in 1847 , Reverend Cushing Eells established Whitman College in the city of Walla Walla , WA in their memory . Rev. Eells built the first church in Spokane in 1881 Between 1881 and 1882 the first Baptist and Episcopal churches were started , and the first Presbyterian church in 1883 . 
 In 1853 , two years after the establishment of the Washington Territory , the first governor , Isaac Stevens , made an initial effort to make a treaty with Chief Garry and the Spokanes at Antoine Plantes ' Ferry , not far from Millwood . 
 After the last campaign of the Yakima Indian War , the Coeur d 'Alene War of 1858 was brought to a close by the actions of Col. George Wright , who won decisive victories against a confederation of tribes in engagements at the battles of Four Lakes and Spokane Plains . The cessation of hostilities opened the inter @-@ mountain valley of the Pacific Northwest to safe habitation by settlers . 
 = = = American settlement = = = 
 Joint American – British occupation of Oregon Country , in effect since the Treaty of 1818 , eventually led to the Oregon Boundary Dispute after a large influx of American settlers along the Oregon Trail . The first American settlers in what is now Spokane were J.J. Downing and S.R. Scranton , cattle ranchers who squatted and established a claim at Spokane Falls in 1871 . Together they built a small sawmill on a claim near the south bank of the falls . James N. Glover and Jasper Matheney , Oregonians passing through the region in 1873 , recognized the value of the Spokane River and its falls for the purpose of water power . They realized the investment potential and bought the claims of 160 acres ( 65 ha ) and the sawmill from Downing and Scranton for a total of $ 4 @,@ 000 . Glover and Matheney knew that the Northern Pacific Railroad Company had received a government charter to build a main line across this northern route . Amid many delays in construction and uncertainty over the completion of the railroad and its exact course , Matheney sold his interest in the claim to Glover . [ b ] Glover confidently held on to his claim and became a successful Spokane business owner and was the second mayor of Spokane in 1883 . He later came to be known as the " Father of Spokane " . When Spokane was officially incorporated in 1881 Robert W. Forrest was elected as the first mayor of the city , with a Council of seven @-@ S.G. <unk> , A.M. Cannon , Dr. <unk> , L.W. Rima , F.R. Moore , George A. Davis , and W.C. Gray . The Mayor and Councilmen served without pay . 
 In 1880 , Fort Spokane was established by U.S. Army troops under Lt. Col. Henry Clay Merriam 56 miles ( 90 km ) northwest of Spokane , at the junction of the Columbia and Spokane Rivers , to protect the construction of the Northern Pacific Railway and secure a place for U.S. settlement . By June 30 , 1881 , the railway reached the city , bringing major European settlement to the area . The city of <unk> Falls ( the " e " was added in 1883 and " Falls " dropped in 1891 ) was officially incorporated as a city of about 1 @,@ 000 residents on November 29 , 1881 . [ c ] The marketing campaigns of transportation companies with affordable fertile land to sell along their trade routes lured many settlers into the region they dubbed " Spokane Country " . 
 The 1883 discovery of gold , silver , and lead in the Coeur d 'Alene region of northern Idaho lured prospectors . The Inland Empire erupted with numerous mining rushes from 1883 to 1892 . Mining and smelting emerged as a major stimulus to Spokane . At the onset of the initial 1883 gold rush in the nearby Coeur d 'Alene mining district , Spokane became popular with prospectors , offering low prices on everything " from a horse to a frying pan " . It would keep this status for subsequent rushes in the region due to its trade center status and accessibility to railroad infrastructure . [ d ] 
 Spokane 's growth continued unabated until August 4 , 1889 , when a fire , now known as The Great Fire ( not to be confused with the Great Fire of 1910 , which happened nearby ) , began just after 6 : 00 p.m. and destroyed the city 's downtown commercial district . Due to technical problems with a pump station , there was no water pressure in the city when the fire started . In a desperate bid to starve the fire , firefighters began razing buildings with dynamite . Eventually the winds and the fire died down ; 32 blocks of Spokane 's downtown core had been destroyed and one person killed . 
 Despite this catastrophe , and in part because of it , Spokane experienced a building boom . [ e ] The downtown was rebuilt , and the city was reincorporated under the present name of " Spokane " in 1891 . According to historian David H. Stratton , " From the late 1890s to about 1912 , a great flurry of construction created a modern urban profile of office buildings , banks , department stores , hotels and other commercial institutions , " which stretched from the Spokane River to the site of the Northern Pacific railroad tracks below the South Hill . Yet the rebuilding and development of the city was far from smooth : between 1889 and 1896 alone , all six bridges over the Spokane River were destroyed by floods before their completion . In the 1890s the city was subject to intrastate migration by African @-@ Americans from Roslyn , looking for work after the closure of the area 's mines . Two African @-@ American churches , Calvary Baptist and Bethel African Methodist Episcopal , were founded in 1890 . Just three years after the fire , in 1892 , James J. Hill 's Great Northern Railway arrived in the chosen site for Hill 's rail yards , the newly created township of Hillyard ( annexed by Spokane in 1924 ) . Spokane became an important rail shipping and transportation hub for the Inland Empire , connecting mines in the Silver Valley with agricultural areas around the Palouse region . The city 's population ballooned to 19 @,@ 922 in 1890 , and to 36 @,@ 848 in 1900 with the arrival of additional railroads . By 1910 the population had hit 104 @,@ 000 , and Spokane eclipsed Walla Walla as the commercial center of the Inland Empire . In time the city came to be known as the " capital " of the Inland Empire and the heart of a vast tributary region . After the arrival of the Northern Pacific , Union Pacific , Great Northern , and Chicago , Milwaukee , St. Paul and Pacific railroads , Spokane became one of the most important rail centers in the western U.S. 
 = = = Early 20th century = = = 
 Expansion abruptly stopped in the 1910s and was followed by a period of population decline , due in large part to Spokane 's slowing economy . Control of regional mines and resources became increasingly dominated by national corporations rather than local people and organizations , diverting capital outside of Spokane and decreasing growth and investment opportunities in the city . During this time of stagnation , unrest was prevalent among the area 's unemployed , who became victimized by " job sharks " , who charged a fee for signing up workers in the logging camps . Job sharks and employment agencies were known to cheat itinerant workers , sometimes paying bribes to periodically fire entire work crews , thus generating repetitive fees for themselves . Crime spiked in the 1890s and 1900s , with eruptions of violent activity involving unions such as the Industrial Workers of the World ( IWW ) , or " Wobblies " as they were often known , whose free speech fights had begun to garner national attention . Now , with grievances concerning the unethical practices of the employment agencies , they initiated a free speech fight in September 1908 by purposely breaking a city ordinance on <unk> . With IWW encouragement , union members from many western states came to Spokane to take part in what had become a publicity stunt . Many Wobblies were incarcerated , including feminist labor leader Elizabeth Gurley Flynn , who published her account in the local Industrial Worker . 
 After mining declined at the turn of the 20th century , agriculture and logging became the primary influences in the Spokane economy . The population explosion and the building of homes , railroads , and mines in northern Idaho and southern British Columbia fueled the industry . Although overshadowed in importance by the vast timbered areas on the coastal regions west of the Cascades , and burdened with monopolistic rail freight rates and stiff competition , Spokane became a noted leader in the manufacture of doors , window sashes , blinds , and other planing mill products . Rail freight rates were much higher in Spokane than the rates in coastal seaport cities such as Seattle and Portland , so much so that Minneapolis merchants could ship goods first to Seattle and then back to Spokane for less than shipping directly to Spokane , even though the rail line ran through Spokane on the way to the coast . [ f ] Local morale was affected for years by the collapse of the Division Street Bridge early in the morning on December 15 , 1915 , which killed five people and injured over 20 , but a new bridge was built ( eventually replaced in 1994 ) . The 1920 census showed a net increase of just 35 individuals , which actually indicates that thousands left the city when considering the natural growth rate of a population . Growth in the 1920s and 1930s remained slow but less drastically so , forcing city boosters to market the city as a quiet , comfortable place suitable for raising a family rather than a dynamic community full of opportunity . The Inland Empire was heavily dependent on natural resources and extractive goods produced from mines , forests , and farms , which experienced a fall in demand . The situation improved slightly with the start of World War II as aluminum production commenced in Spokane due to the area 's cheap electricity ( produced from regional dams ) and the increased demand for airplanes . 
 = = = Second half of the 20th century = = = 
 After decades of stagnation and slow growth , Spokane businessmen formed Spokane Unlimited in the early 1960s , an organization that sought to revitalize downtown Spokane . A recreation park showcasing the Spokane Falls was the preferred option , and after successful negotiation to relocate the railroad facilities on <unk> Island , Spokane hosted the first environmentally themed World 's Fair in Expo ' 74 on May 4 , becoming the smallest city at the time to host a World 's Fair . This event transformed Spokane 's downtown , removing a century of railroad infrastructure and reinventing the urban core . After Expo ' 74 , the fairgrounds became the 100 @-@ acre ( 40 ha ) Riverfront Park . 
 The growth witnessed in the late 1970s and early 1980s was interrupted by another U.S. recession in 1981 , in which silver , timber , and farm prices dropped . The period of decline for the city lasted into the 1990s and was also marked by a loss of many steady family @-@ wage jobs in the manufacturing sector . Although this was a tough period , Spokane 's economy had started to benefit from some measure of economic diversification ; growing companies such as Key <unk> and other research , marketing , and assembly plants for technology companies helped lessen Spokane 's dependence on natural resources . 
 = = = 21st century = = = 
 As of 2014 , Spokane is still trying to make the transition to a more service @-@ oriented economy in the face of a less prominent manufacturing sector . Developing the city 's strength in the medical and health sciences fields has seen some success , resulting in the expansion of the University District with a medical school branch . The city faces challenges such as a scarcity of high @-@ paying jobs , pockets of poverty , and areas of high crime . 
 The opening of the River Park Square Mall in 1999 sparked a downtown rebirth that included the building of the Spokane Arena and expansion of the Spokane Convention Center . Other major projects include the building of the Big Easy concert house ( now the Knitting Factory ) and renovation of the historic Montvale Hotel , the Kirtland Cutter @-@ designed Davenport Hotel ( after being vacant for over 20 years ) , and the Fox Theater ( now home to the Spokane Symphony ) . The Kendall Yards development on the west side of downtown Spokane is one of the largest construction projects in the city 's history . Directly across the Spokane River from downtown , it will blend residential and retail space with plazas and walking trails . 
 In August 2015 , the city entered a legal battle with international agricultural giant Monsanto , alleging that the company has pumped harmful products into the Spokane River for decades , and insist the company be responsible for cleanup costs . The city also announced it will spend hundreds of millions of dollars to keep harmful products out of the river in the coming years . 
 = = Geography = = 
 = = = Topography = = = 
 Spokane is located on the Spokane River in eastern Washington at an elevation of 1 @,@ 843 feet ( 562 m ) above sea level , about 20 miles ( 32 km ) from Idaho , 110 miles ( 180 km ) south of the Canadian border , 232 miles ( 373 km ) east of Seattle , and 277 miles ( 446 km ) southwest of Calgary . The lowest elevation in the city of Spokane is the northernmost point of the Spokane River within city limits ( in Riverside State Park ) at 1 @,@ 608 feet ( 490 m ) ; the highest elevation is on the northeast side , near the community of Hillyard ( though closer to Beacon Hill and the North Hill Reservoir ) at 2 @,@ 591 feet ( 790 m ) . Spokane is part of the Inland Northwest region , consisting of eastern Washington , northern Idaho , northwestern Montana , and northeastern Oregon . According to the U.S. Census Bureau , the city has a total area of 60 @.@ 02 square miles ( 155 @.@ 45 km2 ) , of which 59 @.@ 25 square miles ( 153 @.@ 46 km2 ) is land and 0 @.@ 77 square miles ( 1 @.@ 99 km2 ) is water . 
 Spokane lies in the Columbia Plateau ecoregion on the eastern edge of the basaltic Channeled <unk> steppe , a plain that then eventually rises sharply to the east towards the rugged , timbered Rocky Mountain foothills , the Selkirk Mountains . It is in a transition area between the barren landscape of the Columbia Basin and the coniferous forests to the east ; to the south are the lush prairies and rolling hills of the Palouse . The highest peak in Spokane County is Mount Spokane , at an elevation of 5 @,@ 883 feet ( 1 @,@ 793 m ) , located on the eastern side of the Selkirk Mountains . The most prominent water feature in the area is the Spokane River , a 111 @-@ mile ( 179 km ) tributary of the Columbia River , originating from Lake Coeur d 'Alene in northern Idaho . The river flows west across the Washington state line through downtown Spokane , meeting Latah Creek , then turns to the northwest , where it is joined by the Little Spokane River on its way to the Columbia River , north of Davenport . The Channeled <unk> and many of the area 's numerous large lakes , such as Lake Coeur d 'Alene and Lake Pend Oreille , were formed by the Missoula Floods after the ice @-@ dammed Glacial Lake Missoula ruptured at the end of the last ice age . The Turnbull National Wildlife Refuge south of Cheney is the closest natural reserve , and the closest national park is Glacier National Park , approximately a four @-@ hour drive away from Spokane . 
 = = = Climate = = = 
 Spokane has a dry @-@ summer continental climate ( Dsb under the Köppen classification ) , a rare climate due to its elevation and significant winter precipitation ; Spokane , however , is adjacent to and sometimes even classified as a cool @-@ summer Mediterranean climate ( Csb ) because the average temperature for the coldest month is just over 27 ° F ( − 3 ° C ) . 
 The area typically has a hot , arid climate during the summer months , bracketed by short spring and fall seasons . On average , July and August are equally warm , and the coolest month is December ; July averages 69 @.@ 5 ° F ( 20 @.@ 8 ° C ) while December averages 27 @.@ 5 ° F ( − 2 @.@ 5 ° C ) . Daily temperature ranges are large during the summer , often exceeding 30 ° F ( 17 ° C ) , and small during the winter , with a range just above 10 ° F ( 5 @.@ 6 ° C ) . The reason is the very opposite weather existing between the extremely sunny summers and the extremely overcast winters . The record high and low are 108 ° F ( 42 ° C ) and − 30 ° F ( − 34 ° C ) , but temperatures of more than 100 ° F ( 38 ° C ) or less than − 10 ° F ( − 23 ° C ) are rare . Temperatures above 90 ° F ( 32 ° C ) occur an average of 19 days annually , Temperatures above 100 ° F ( 38 ° C ) occur an average of only 1 day annually , and those below 0 ° F ( − 18 ° C ) average 3 @.@ 5 days a year . 
 Spokane 's location , between the Cascades Range to the west and the Rocky Mountains to the east and north , protects it from weather patterns experienced in other parts of the Pacific Northwest . The Cascade Mountains form a barrier to the eastward flow of moist and relatively mild air from the Pacific Ocean in winter and cool air in summer . As a result of the rain shadow effect of the Cascades , the Spokane area has 16 @.@ 5 inches ( 420 mm ) average annual precipitation , less than half of Seattle 's 37 inches ( 940 mm ) . The most precipitation occurs in December , and summer is the driest time of the year . The Rockies shield Spokane from some of the winter season 's coldest air masses traveling southward across Canada . 
 = = Administration and politics = = 
 The City of Spokane operates under a mayor – council form of government , with executive and legislative branches . In 2011 , David Condon was elected mayor as a non @-@ partisan candidate , taking office on the last business day of the year . The previous mayor was Mary Verner , who succeeded the recalled James " Jim " West . Spokane voters have not reelected a mayor since 1973 , when incumbent David H. Rodgers was granted a second term . The city elected James Everett Chase as its first African @-@ American mayor in 1981 , and after his retirement , elected the city 's first woman mayor , Vicki McNeil . Spokane is the county seat of Spokane County , a position it wrested from Cheney in 1886 . 
 Democrat Jay Inslee was elected governor of Washington in 2012 . Federally , Spokane is part of Washington 's 5th congressional district , and has been represented by Republican Cathy McMorris Rodgers since 2004 . Washington State is represented nationally in the Senate by Democrat Patty Murray and Democrat Maria Cantwell . In the 2012 general election , Spokane County favored Mitt Romney for President over Barack Obama by 51 @.@ 5 to 45 @.@ 7 percent ; on the state ballot , the county supported the legalization of recreational marijuana ballot measure by 52 @.@ 2 to 47 @.@ 9 percent and opposed the legalization of same @-@ sex marriage by 44 @.@ 1 to 55 @.@ 9 percent . Spokane native Tom Foley was a Democratic Speaker of the House and served as a representative of Washington 's 5th district for 30 years , enjoying large support from Spokane , until his narrow defeat in the " Republican Revolution " of 1994 , the only time U.S. voters have turned out a sitting Speaker of the House since 1860 . Today , Spokane has a slight Democratic tilt , although the county and surrounding metropolitan area as a whole is staunchly conservative , and as a result , Spokane is governed by a strong amount of Republicans . 
 = = = Crime = = = 
 The crime rate per 1 @,@ 000 people in the Spokane metropolitan area ( Spokane County ) was 64 @.@ 8 in 2012 , higher than the Washington state average of 38 @.@ 3 ; the violent crime rate of 3 @.@ 8 and property crime rate of 61 also exceed the statewide averages of 2 @.@ 5 and 35 @.@ 8 , respectively . Spokane 's crime rate is also higher for both violent and property crime than in 98 % of communities in the U.S. 
 Data shows that most crimes reported in the city tend to be focused around the downtown city center and its environs . Half of all property crimes are localized in about 6 @.@ 5 percent of the city . An individual in Spokane has a 1 in 140 chance of becoming a victim of burglary , larceny , motor vehicle theft , or arson . Spokane had the fourth highest rate of auto theft in the U.S. in 2010 and 2011 according to the National Insurance Crime Bureau . Drive @-@ by shootings and drug use , particularly crack cocaine use , became worse in the early 1990s , and four drive @-@ by shootings were recorded in December 1993 alone . In the 1990s , a special gang unit within the Spokane Police Department was established , with an officer " collecting intelligence on gang activity and disseminating it to street officers " . The 1990s also saw Spokane 's most prolific serial killer , Robert Lee Yates , who killed thirteen prostitutes in Spokane 's East Sprague red light district and confessed to two others in Tacoma , Washington . The transition of the Spokane Police Department to a community @-@ policing precinct model has been successful in curbing crime rates since its introduction downtown , and has been expanded citywide . 
 Spokane and the Spokane Police Department ( SPD ) have received national publicity and scrutiny in the 2000s and 2010s due to many officer @-@ involved shootings and the use of excessive force . The most high @-@ profile of these incidents was the 2006 death of Otto <unk> , a mentally challenged man who was initially suspected of theft at a convenience store . <unk> was later found to have committed no crime , but was struck with batons by several officers and tasered . The increased pressure on the SPD prompted an independent review by a commission of the organization 's use @-@ of @-@ force policies , an internal culture audit , and the purchase of body cameras . 
 Spokane 's high crime rate is related to its being a major dumping ground for Washington state 's prison system . 
 = = = Utilities = = = 
 The City of Spokane provides municipal water , wastewater management , and solid waste management . Spokane operates Washington 's only waste @-@ to @-@ energy plant as well as two solid waste transfer stations as part of the Spokane Regional Solid Waste System , a collaboration between the City of Spokane and Spokane County . Electricity generated by the waste @-@ to @-@ energy plant is used to operate the facility , with excess energy being sold to Puget Sound Energy . Spokane draws its water from the Spokane Valley – Rathdrum Prairie Aquifer ; this 370 @-@ square @-@ mile ( 958 km2 ) " sole source aquifer " is the only water supply for Spokane County in Washington , and for Kootenai and Bonner counties in Idaho . 
 Natural gas and electricity are provided by the local utility , Avista Utilities , while CenturyLink and Comcast provide television , internet , and telephone service . Spokane hosts three hydroelectric generation facilities on the Spokane River : the Upriver Dam , the Upper Falls Dam , and the Monroe Street Dam . The Upriver Dam is owned and operated by the City of Spokane , and generates the electricity needed to operate the municipal water supply 's pressure pumps . The power generated in excess of that is sold to Avista Utilities . The Upper Falls and Monroe Street dams are owned and operated by Avista Utilities , and have respective generation capacities of 10 and 15 MW . 
 = = Demographics = = 
 According to the American Community Survey , the median income for a household in Spokane in 2012 was $ 42 @,@ 274 , and the median income for a family was $ 50 @,@ 268 . Males had a median income of $ 42 @,@ 693 and females had a median income of $ 34 @,@ 795 . The per capita income for the city was $ 24 @,@ 034 . About 13 @.@ 3 % of families and 18 @.@ 7 % of the population were below the poverty line , including 23 @.@ 8 % of those under the age of 18 and 10 @.@ 8 % of those aged 65 and older . 
 At the 2010 census , there were 208 @,@ 916 people , 87 @,@ 271 households , and 49 @,@ 204 families residing in the city . The population density was 3 @,@ 526 @.@ 0 inhabitants per square mile ( 1 @,@ 361 @.@ 4 / km2 ) . There were 94 @,@ 291 housing units at an average density of 1 @,@ 591 @.@ 4 per square mile ( 614 @.@ 4 / km2 ) . The racial makeup of the city was 86 @.@ 7 % White , 2 @.@ 29 % African American , 2 @.@ 0 % Native American , 2 @.@ 6 % Asian , and 0 @.@ 6 % Pacific Islander , along with 1 @.@ 3 % from other races and 4 @.@ 6 % from two or more races . Hispanics and Latinos of any race were 5 @.@ 0 % of the population . 
 There were 87 @,@ 271 households , of which 28 @.@ 9 % had children under the age of 18 living with them , 38 @.@ 5 % were married couples living together , 12 @.@ 9 % had a female householder with no husband present , 5 @.@ 0 % had a male householder with no wife present , and 43 @.@ 6 % were non @-@ families . In 2010 , 34 @.@ 2 % of all households were made up of individuals , and 11 % had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older . The average household size was 2 @.@ 31 and the average family size was 2 @.@ 97 . 
 The median age in the city was 35 years . In Spokane , 22 @.@ 4 % of residents were under the age of 18 , 12 @.@ 3 % were between the ages of 18 and 24 , 27 @.@ 6 % were from 25 to 44 , 25 @.@ 1 % were from 45 to 64 , and 12 @.@ 8 % were 65 years of age or older . The gender makeup of the city was 48 @.@ 8 % male and 51 @.@ 2 % female . 
 According to the Association of Religion Data Archives ' 2010 Metro Area Membership Report , the denominational affiliations of the Spokane MSA are 64 @,@ 277 Evangelical Protestant , 682 Black Protestant , 24 @,@ 826 Mainline Protestant , 754 Orthodox , 66 @,@ 202 Catholic , 31 @,@ 674 Other , and 339 @,@ 338 Unclaimed . As of 2014 , there are also at least three Jewish congregations . The Emanu @-@ El congregation erected the first synagogue in Spokane and the state of Washington on September 14 , 1892 . The city 's first mosque opened in 2009 as the Spokane Islamic Center . 
 Spokane , like Washington and the Pacific Northwest region as a whole , is part of the <unk> Belt , a region characterized by low church membership rates and religious participation . The city serves as the seat of the Roman Catholic Diocese of Spokane , which was established in 1913 , and the Mormon Spokane Washington Temple District . 
 Spokane has been criticized and sometimes derided for its lack of diversity and multicultural offerings , but the city has become more diverse in recent decades . People from countries in the former Soviet Union ( especially Russians and Ukrainians ) form a comparatively large demographic in Spokane and Spokane County , the result of a large influx of immigrants and their families after the collapse of the Soviet Union in 1991 . According to the 2000 Census , the number of people of Russian or Ukrainian ancestry in Spokane County was reported to be 7 @,@ 700 ( 4 @,@ 900 residing in the city of Spokane ) , amounting to two percent of the county . Among the fastest @-@ growing demographics in Spokane is the Pacific Islander ethnic group , which is estimated to be the third largest minority group in the county , after the Russian and Ukrainian community and Latinos . Spokane was once home to a sizable Asian community , mostly Japanese , centered in a district called Chinatown from the early days of the city until 1974 . As in many western railway towns , the Asian community started off as an encampment for migrant laborers working on the railroads . The Chinatown Asian community thrived until the 1940s , after which its population decreased and became integrated and dispersed , losing its Asian character ; urban blight and the preparations leading up to Expo ' 74 led to Chinatown 's eventual demolition . 
 = = = Metropolitan area = = = 
 The Spokane metropolitan area consists of Spokane , Stevens , and Pend Oreille counties . As of the 2013 census estimates , the Spokane metropolitan area had a population of 535 @,@ 724 . Directly east of Spokane County is the Coeur d 'Alene Metropolitan Statistical Area , which consists of Kootenai County , Idaho , anchored by the city of Coeur d 'Alene . The urban areas of the two MSAs largely follow the path of Interstate 90 between Spokane and Coeur d 'Alene . The Spokane area has suffered from suburbanization and urban sprawl in past decades , despite Washington 's use of urban growth boundaries ; the city ranks low among major Northwest cities in population density and smart growth . The Spokane and Coeur d 'Alene Metropolitan Statistical Areas ( MSA ) are now included in a single Combined Statistical Area ( CSA ) by the Office of Management and Budget . The Spokane – Coeur d 'Alene CSA had around 679 @,@ 989 residents in 2013 . 
 = = Economy = = 
 Spokane became an important rail and shipping center because of its location between mining and farming areas . In the early 1880s , gold and silver were discovered in the Inland Empire ; as a regional shipping center , the city furnished supplies to the miners who passed through on their way to the mineral @-@ rich Coeur d 'Alene , Colville and Kootenay districts . The mining districts are still considered among the most productive in North America . 
 Natural resources have historically been the foundation of Spokane 's economy , with the mining , logging , and agriculture industries providing much of the region 's economic activity . After mining declined at the turn of the 20th century , agriculture and logging replaced mining as the primary influences in the economy . Lumberjacks and <unk> working in the hundreds of mills along the railroads , rivers , and lakes of northern Washington and Idaho were provisioning themselves in Spokane . Agriculture has always been an important sector in the local economy ; the surrounding area , especially to the south , is the Palouse , a productive agricultural region that supports many vineyards and microbreweries as well . By the early 20th century Spokane was primarily a commercial center rather than an industrial center . 
 In Spokane , wood and food processing , printing and publishing , primary metal refining and fabrication , electrical and computer equipment , and transportation equipment are leaders in the manufacturing sector . Gold mining company Gold Reserve , and Fortune 1000 company Potlatch Corporation – a forest products company that operates as a real estate investment trust – are headquartered in the city proper . Mining , forestry , and agribusiness remain important to the local and regional economy , but Spokane 's economy has diversified to include other industries , including the high @-@ tech and biotech sectors . Spokane is becoming a more service @-@ oriented economy in the face of a less prominent manufacturing sector , particularly as a medical and biotechnology center ; Fortune 1000 technology company <unk> , for instance , is headquartered in the area . Avista Corporation , the holding company of Avista Utilities , is the only company in Spokane that has been listed in the Fortune 500 , ranked 299 on the list in 2002 . Other companies with head offices in the Spokane area include technology company Key <unk> , hotelier Red Lion Hotels Corporation , and <unk> maker Commuter Cars . 
 As of 2013 , the top five employers in Spokane are the State of Washington , Spokane Public Schools , Providence Sacred Heart Medical Center and Children 's Hospital , the 92d Air Refueling Wing , and Spokane County . The largest military facility and employer , the 92d Air Refueling Wing , is stationed at Fairchild Air Force Base near Airway Heights . The leading industries in Spokane for the employed population 16 years and older were educational services , health care , and social assistance ( 26 @.@ 5 percent ) , retail trade ( 12 @.@ 7 percent ) , and arts , entertainment , recreation , and accommodation food services ( 10 @.@ 4 percent ) . As the metropolitan center of the Inland Northwest , as well as parts of southern British Columbia and Alberta , Spokane serves as a commercial , manufacturing , transportation , medical , shopping , and entertainment hub . In 2010 , the Spokane – Spokane Valley MSA had a gross metropolitan product of $ 19 @.@ 48 billion . 
 As of 2014 , economic development in the Spokane area primarily focuses on promoting the following industries : manufacturing ( especially aerospace manufacturing ) , health sciences , professional services , information science and technology , finance and insurance as well as clean technology , and digital media . To aid economic development , the eastern branch of <unk> Washington , a state @-@ supported business incubator was placed in the city . 
 Despite diversification to new industries , Spokane 's economy has struggled in recent decades . Spokane was ranked the # 1 " Worst City For Jobs " in America in both 2012 and 2015 , while also ranking # 4 in 2014 . Additionally , Forbes named Spokane the " Scam Capital of America " in 2009 due to widespread business fraud . Trends of fraud were noted as far back as 1988 , again in 2002 , and continuing through 2011 . 
 = = Cityscape = = 
 = = = Neighborhoods = = = 
 Spokane 's neighborhoods range from the Victorian @-@ style South Hill and Browne 's Addition , to the Davenport District of Downtown , to the more contemporary neighborhoods of North Spokane . Spokane 's neighborhoods are gaining attention for their history , as illustrated by the city being home to 18 recognized National Register Historical Districts . 
 Some of Spokane 's most prominent neighborhoods are Riverside , Browne 's Addition , and Hillyard . The Riverside neighborhood consists primarily of downtown Spokane and is the central business district of Spokane . The neighborhoods south of downtown Spokane are generally known as the South Hill . Downtown Spokane contains many of the city 's public facilities , including City Hall , Riverfront Park ( site of Expo ' 74 ) , and the Spokane Convention Center and <unk> Performing Arts Center , as well as the Spokane Arena and Spokane County Courthouse across the river in the historic West Central neighborhood . The Monroe Street Bridge , a city icon , connects the two areas . To the east of downtown is East Central and the adjacent University District and International District . To the west of downtown is one of Spokane 's oldest and densest neighborhoods , Browne 's Addition . 
 A National Historic District west of Downtown , Browne 's Addition was Spokane 's first prestigious address , notable for its array of old mansions built by Spokane 's early elite in the Queen Anne and early American Craftsman styles . The area houses the Northwest Museum of Arts and Culture . In northeast Spokane , the Hillyard neighborhood began in 1892 as the chosen site for James J. Hill 's Great Northern Railway yard , placed outside Spokane city limits to avoid " burdensome taxes . " The downtown Hillyard Business District , located on Market Street , was the Spokane neighborhood listed in the National Register of Historic Places . Many of the former town 's houses were built to house railroad workers , mainly immigrant laborers working in the local yard , who gave Hillyard an independent , blue @-@ collar character . Hillyard has become a home for much of Spokane 's growing Russian , Ukrainian , and Southeast Asian communities . 
 = = = Architecture = = = 
 = = = = Commercial and public buildings = = = = 
 Spokane neighborhoods contain a patchwork of architectural styles that give them a distinct identity and illustrate the changes throughout the city 's history . Most of Spokane 's notable buildings and landmarks are in the Riverside neighborhood and the downtown commercial district , where many of the buildings were rebuilt following the Great Fire of 1889 in the Romanesque Revival style . Examples include the Great Northern clock tower , Review Building , Cathedral of Our Lady of Lourdes , First Congregational Church , Washington Water Power Post Street substation , Peyton Building , and The Carlyle . The principal architect of many buildings of this period was Kirtland Kelsey Cutter . Self @-@ taught , he came to Spokane in 1886 and began by designing " Chalet Hohenstein " for himself and other residences for his family while also working as a bank teller . Other structures designed by Cutter include the Spokane Club , Washington Water Power Substation , Monroe Street Bridge ( featured in the city seal ) , Central Steam Plant , and the Davenport Hotel . Built in renaissance and Spanish revival style , the Davenport Hotel cost two million dollars to complete , and included new technologies at the time of its opening in September 1914 , such as chilled water , elevators , and air cooling . 
 Other well @-@ represented architectural styles downtown include art deco ( Spokane City Hall , Paulsen Center , Fox Theater , City Ramp Garage ) , renaissance revival ( Steam Plant Square , Thomas S. Foley Courthouse , San Marco ) , neoclassical ( Masonic Center , Hutton Building , Bing Crosby Theater ) , and Chicago school ( U.S. Bank Building , Liberty Building ) . The tallest building in the city , at 288 feet ( 88 m ) , is the modernist Bank of America Financial Center . Also of note is the Spokane County Courthouse in West Central ( the building on the seal of Spokane County ) , the Cathedral of St. John the Evangelist in Rockwood , the <unk> Milk Bottles in Riverside and Garland , Mount Saint Michael in Hillyard , and the <unk> Dutch Shop Windmill in South Perry . 
 = = = = Residential = = = = 
 As an early affluent Spokane neighborhood , the Browne 's Addition neighborhood and residences contain the largest variety of residential architecture in the city . These residences are lavish and personalized , featuring many architecture styles that were popular and trendy in the Pacific Northwest from the late 19th century to 1930 , such as the Victorian and Queen Anne styles . In high demand following his firms ' design of the Idaho Building at the Chicago World 's Fair in 1893 , Cutter found work constructing many mansions for mining and railroad tycoons such as Patrick " Patsy " Clark and Daniel and Austin Corbin . 
 The older neighborhoods of the early 20th century , such as West Central , East Central , Logan , Hillyard , and much of the lower South Hill , feature a large concentration of American Craftsman style bungalows . In Hillyard , the most architecturally intact neighborhood in Spokane , 85 percent of these buildings are historic . As the city expanded mainly to the north in the middle of the 20th century , the bungalows in the " minimal traditional " style commonplace from the 1930s to the 1950s tend to predominate in the Northwest , North Hill , and <unk> neighborhoods . This architectural style occupies the neighborhoods where the integrity of Spokane 's street grid pattern is largely intact ( especially the areas north of downtown and south of Francis Ave . ) , and the houses have backyard alleys for <unk> , deliveries , and refuse collection . Contemporary suburbs and architecture are prevalent at the north and south edges of Spokane as well as in the new Kendall Yards neighborhood north of downtown . 
 = = = Parks and recreation = = = 
 In 1907 , Spokane 's board of park commissioners retained the services of the Olmsted Brothers to draw up a plan for Spokane 's parks . Much of Spokane 's park land was acquired by the city prior to World War I , establishing it early on as a leader among Western cities in the development of a city @-@ wide park system . Spokane has a system of over 87 parks totaling 4 @,@ 100 acres ( 17 km2 ) and includes six neighborhood aquatic centers . Some of the most notable parks in Spokane 's system are Riverfront Park , Manito Park and Botanical Gardens , Riverside State Park , Mount Spokane State Park , Saint Michael 's Mission State Park , John A. Finch Arboretum , and the <unk> Hills Conservation Area . 
 Riverfront Park , created after Expo ' 74 and occupying the same site , is 100 acres ( 40 ha ) in downtown Spokane and the site of some of Spokane 's largest events . The park has views of the Spokane Falls and holds a number of civic attractions , including a <unk> , a rebuilt gondola lift that carries visitors across the falls from high above the river gorge . The park also includes the historic hand @-@ carved Riverfront Park Looff carousel created in 1909 by Charles I. D. Looff . Manito Park and Botanical Gardens on Spokane 's South Hill features the Duncan Gardens , a classical European Renaissance @-@ style garden and the Nishinomiya Japanese Garden designed by Nagao Sakurai . Riverside State Park , close to downtown , is a site for outdoor activities such as hiking , mountain biking , and horseriding . 
 The Spokane area has many trails and rail trails , the most notable of which is the Spokane River Centennial Trail , which features over 37 @.@ 5 miles ( 60 @.@ 4 km ) of paved trails running along the Spokane River from Spokane to the Idaho border . This trail continues on towards Coeur d 'Alene for 24 miles ( 39 km ) as the North Idaho Centennial Trail and is often used for alternative transportation and recreational use . In the summer , it has long been popular to visit North Idaho 's " Lake Country " , such as Lake Coeur d 'Alene , Lake Pend Oreille , Priest Lake , or one of the other nearby bodies of water and beaches . In the winter , the public has access to five ski resorts within a couple hours of the city . The closest of these is the Mt . Spokane Ski and Snowboard Park , which has trails for cross @-@ country skiing , snowshoeing , snowmobiling , and dog sledding . 
 = = Culture = = 
 = = = Arts and theater = = = 
 Spokane 's main art districts are located in the Davenport Arts District , the Garland Business District , and East Sprague . The First Friday <unk> , which occurs the first Friday of every month , is dedicated to local vendors and performers displaying art around downtown . The two most important <unk> dates ( the first Friday of February and October ) attract large crowds to the art districts . The Davenport Arts District has the largest concentration of art galleries and is home to many of Spokane 's main performing arts venues , including the Knitting Factory , Fox Theater , and Bing Crosby Theater . The Knitting Factory is a concert house that serves as a setting for many mainstream touring musicians and acts . The Martin <unk> Theater at the Fox , restored to its original 1931 Art Deco state after years of being derelict , is home to the Spokane Symphony Orchestra . The Metropolitan Performing Arts Center was restored in 1988 and renamed the Bing Crosby Theater in 2006 to honor the former <unk> . Theater is provided by Spokane 's only resident professional company , The Modern Theater , though there are also the Spokane Civic Theatre and several other amateur community theaters and smaller groups . The <unk> Performing Arts Center is often host to large traveling exhibitions , shows , and tours . Spokane was awarded the All @-@ America City Award by the National Civic League in 1974 , 2004 and 2015 . 
 Spokane offers an array of musical performances catering to a variety of interests . Spokane 's local music scene , however , is considered somewhat lacking by the Spokane All @-@ Ages Music Initiative and other critics , who have identified a need for a legitimate all @-@ ages venue for music performances . The Spokane Symphony presents a full season of classical music , and the Spokane Jazz Orchestra , a full season of jazz music . The Spokane Jazz Orchestra , formed in 1962 , is a 70 @-@ piece orchestra and non @-@ profit organization . 
 = = = Museums = = = 
 There are several museums in the city , most notably the Northwest Museum of Arts and Culture , located a few blocks from the center of downtown in Browne 's Addition , amid the mansions of Spokane 's late 19th @-@ century " Age of Elegance " . A Smithsonian affiliate museum , it houses a large collection of Native American artifacts as well as regional and national traveling art exhibits . 
 The Mobius Science Center and the related Mobius Kid 's Museum in downtown Spokane seek to generate interest in science , technology , engineering , and math among the youth in a hands @-@ on experience . The <unk> Art Museum at Gonzaga University features 2 @,@ 800 square feet ( 260 m2 ) of exhibition space and contains sizable collections of prints from the <unk> , Baruch , Jacobs , and <unk> Kent collections . The museum houses glass art by Dale Chihuly , bronze sculptures by Auguste Rodin , tapestries , paintings , ceramics , photographs , and a wide range of gifts , including from the Iris and B. Gerald Cantor Foundation and Collections . On the campus of Gonzaga University , the Crosby House , Bing Crosby 's childhood home houses , the Bing Crosby Memorabilia Room , the world 's largest Crosby collection with around 200 pieces . 
 = = = Events and activities = = = 
 Spokane is known as the birthplace of the national movement started by Sonora Smart Dodd that led to the proposal and eventual establishment of Father 's Day as a national holiday in the U.S. The first observation of Father 's Day in Spokane was on June 19 , 1910 . Sonora conceived the idea in Spokane 's Central Methodist Episcopal Church while listening to a Mother 's Day sermon . 
 The Lilac Bloomsday Run , held in summer on the first Sunday of May , is a 7 @.@ 46 @-@ mile ( 12 @.@ 01 km ) race for competitive runners as well as walkers that attracts international competition . Also in May is the Lilac Festival , which honors the military , celebrates youth , and showcases the region . Spokane 's nickname , the " Lilac City " , refers to a flowering shrub that has flourished since its introduction to the area in the early 20th century . In June the city hosts Spokane <unk> , a 3 @-@ on @-@ 3 basketball tournament , among the largest of its kind . One of Spokane 's most popular local events is Pig Out in the Park , an annual six @-@ day food and entertainment festival where attendees may eat a variety of foods and listen to free live music concerts featuring local , regional , and national recording artists in Riverfront Park . 
 Other notable events in Spokane include the Spokane Interstate Fair , Spokane Comic @-@ Con , and Japan Week . The Spokane Interstate Fair is held annually in September at the Spokane Fair and Expo Center . Japan Week is held in April and celebrates the sister @-@ city relationship with Nishinomiya , Hyogo , demonstrating the many commonalities shared between the two cities . Students from the Spokane campus of Mukogawa Fort Wright Institute , Gonzaga , Whitworth , and other area schools organize an array of Japanese cultural events . The gay and lesbian Spokane Pride Parade is held each June . 
 = = Education = = 
 Serving the general educational needs of the local population are two public library districts , the Spokane Public Library ( within city limits ) and the Spokane County Library District . Founded in 1904 with funding from philanthropist Andrew Carnegie , the Spokane Public Library system comprises a downtown library overlooking the Spokane Falls and five branch libraries . Special collections focus on Inland Pacific Northwest history and include reference books , periodicals , maps , photographs , and other archival materials and government documents . 
 Spokane Public Schools ( District 81 ) is the largest public school system in Spokane and the second largest in the state as of 2014 , serving roughly 30 @,@ 000 students in six high schools , six middle schools , and thirty @-@ four elementary schools . Other public school districts in the Spokane area include the Mead School District in north Spokane County , outside city limits . A variety of state @-@ approved , independent charter schools and private and parochial elementary and secondary schools augment the public school system . The Roman Catholic Diocese of Spokane manages 11 such schools in Spokane . 
 Spokane is home to many higher education institutions . They include the private universities Gonzaga and Whitworth University , and the public Community Colleges of Spokane system ( Spokane Community College and Spokane Falls Community College ) as well as a variety of technical institutes . Gonzaga University and Law School were founded by the Italian @-@ born priest Joseph Cataldo and the Jesuits in 1887 . Whitworth , founded in 1890 , is affiliated with the Presbyterian Church , and had 2 @,@ 500 students studying in 53 different undergraduate and degree programs as of 2011 . While Spokane is one of the larger cities in the U.S. to lack a main campus of a state @-@ supported university within its city limits , Eastern Washington University ( <unk> ) and Washington State University ( WSU ) have operations at the <unk> Campus in the University District , just adjacent to downtown and across the Spokane River from the Gonzaga campus . Washington State University Spokane is WSU 's health sciences campus and houses the school 's College of Medical Sciences , College of Nursing , and College of Pharmacy . The main <unk> campus is located 15 miles ( 24 km ) southwest of Spokane in nearby Cheney , and WSU is located 65 miles ( 105 km ) to the south in Pullman . In addition to WSU 's health science presence in Spokane , there is also a four @-@ year medical school branch affiliated with the University of Washington 's <unk> program . An international branch campus of the Mukogawa Women 's University , the Mukogawa Fort Wright Institute , is located in Spokane . 
 = = Sports = = 
 Spokane is close to dozens of lakes and rivers . People use these for swimming , boating , rafting , and fishing . Nearby mountains provide skiing , hiking , biking and sightseeing . Spokane 's professional and semi @-@ professional sports teams include the Spokane Indians in Minor League Baseball , Spokane Empire in indoor football , the Spokane Chiefs in junior ice hockey and Spokane Anarchy Wrestling . Collegiate sports in Spokane focus on the local teams such as the Gonzaga Bulldogs that compete in the NCAA 's Division I West Coast Conference and the Whitworth Pirates playing in the Division III Northwest Conference as well as other regional teams , including the Washington State Cougars , Eastern Washington Eagles , and the Idaho Vandals . 
 The Spokane Indians are a Class @-@ A @-@ Short @-@ Season baseball team in the Northwest League ( NWL ) and have been a farm team of the Texas Rangers since 2003 . The Indians play their home games at the 6 @,@ 803 @-@ seat Avista Stadium and have won seven NWL titles since their Short @-@ Season @-@ A debut in 1982 . Prior to 1982 , the Indians played at the Triple @-@ A level . The team achieved considerable success in the early 1970s , winning the Pacific Coast League championship in 1970 , and having a 94 – 52 record . In the 1920s and 1930s the Spokane City League , a semiprofessional baseball league of teams of the Inland Empire , reached its peak . 
 The Spokane Shock was an indoor football franchise awarded to the city in August 2005 in the AF2 league . The team was quickly placed into the Arena Football League ( AFL ) after winning championships in two of their four seasons in the <unk> league , all while setting league records for attendance . The Shock were crowned AFL champions in their inaugural season after defeating the Tampa Bay Storm 69 – 57 in <unk> XXIII . After the 2015 season , the owner of the Shock , Nader Naini , decided to have the team leave the AFL to join the Indoor Football League in order to have a geographic rival in the Tri @-@ Cities Fever . The AFL decided to retain the rights the Shock 's franchise , so Naini was forced to rename the team and it became the Spokane Empire beginning with the 2016 season . 
 The Spokane Chiefs are a major junior ice hockey team that play in the Canadian Hockey League 's Western Hockey League . They play their home games in the Spokane Arena and have a regional rivalry with the Tri @-@ City Americans . They have won the CHL 's top prize , the Memorial Cup , two times in club history , first in 1991 and again in 2008 . 
 The Spokane Veterans Memorial Arena is the city 's premier sports venue . In the years since the Spokane Arena opened , it has played host to several major sporting events . The first major event was the 1998 Memorial Cup , the championship game of the Canadian Hockey League . Four years later in 2002 , the city hosted the 2002 Skate America figure skating competition and then the 2007 U.S. Figure Skating Championships in the Spokane Arena . The latter event set an attendance record , selling nearly 155 @,@ 000 tickets . Spokane later hosted the 2010 U.S. Figure Skating Championships – ending eighteen days before the start of the 2010 Winter Olympics in Vancouver , British Columbia . 
 = = Transportation = = 
 = = = City streets = = = 
 Spokane 's streets use a street grid that is oriented to the four cardinal directions ; generally , the east – west roads are designated as avenues , and the north – south roads are referred to as streets . Major east – west thoroughfares in the city include Francis , Wellesley , Mission , Sprague , and 29th Avenues . Major north – south thoroughfares include Maple – Ash , Monroe , Division , Hamilton , Greene – Market ( north of I @-@ 90 ) , and Ray – Freya ( south of I @-@ 90 ) Streets . Division Street divides the city into East and West , while Sprague Avenue splits the city into North and South . Division Street is Spokane 's major retail corridor ; Sprague Avenue serves the same purpose in Spokane Valley . With over 40 @,@ 000 vehicles per day in average daily traffic from Interstate 90 north to the US 2 – US 395 junction , North Division is Spokane 's busiest corridor . 
 = = = Walkability = = = 
 Spokane has an average Walk Score of 45 , indicating most errands require a car , and an average Transit Score of 36 . The extensive skywalk system covers thirteen blocks in the downtown area and is among the largest in the United States ; it is used for pedestrian travel in cold and inclement weather and retail space as well . 
 = = = Freeways and highways = = = 
 Spokane is primarily served by interstate freeway I @-@ 90 and highways US 195 , US 395 , and US 2 . 
 Interstate 90 runs east – west from Seattle , through Spokane and suburban areas to the east , onward to Coeur d 'Alene , Idaho and Montana . 
 US 195 , also known as the Inland Empire Highway , connects Spokane with the Palouse region to the south and intersects Interstate 90 just west of Spokane near Latah Creek 
 US 395 enters Spokane from the west concurrently with I @-@ 90 , splitting off at Division St. , and continues northward to Deer Park , Colville and Canada . Its route designation will move from Division St. to the limited @-@ access North Spokane Corridor upon completion of that project . 
 US 2 , also enters Spokane from the west and runs concurrently US 395 until they reach " The Y " in north Spokane , where US 2 branches off to the northeast , continuing to Mead , Newport , and Sandpoint . 
 The Washington State Department of Transportation ( WSDOT ) is tasked with improving local highways to keep up with the region 's growth and to try to prevent congestion problems that plague many larger cities . The WSDOT is constructing the North Spokane Corridor . When completed , the corridor will be a 10 @.@ 5 @-@ mile @-@ long ( 16 @.@ 9 km ) limited @-@ access highway that will run from I @-@ 90 , in the vicinity of the Thor / Freya interchange , northward through Spokane , meeting the existing US 395 just south of the <unk> Golf Course . 
 = = = Mass transportation = = = 
 Before the influx of automobiles , Spokane 's electric streetcar and interurban lines played a dominant role in moving people and goods around Spokane . Streetcars were installed as early as 1888 , when they were pulled by horses . Many older side streets in Spokane still have visible streetcar rails embedded in them . Streetcar service was reduced due to declining ridership beginning in 1922 , and by August 1936 , all lines had been abandoned or converted to motor buses . Mass transportation throughout the Spokane area is provided by the Spokane Transit Authority ( STA ) , which operates a fleet of 156 buses . Its service area covers roughly 248 square miles ( 640 km2 ) and reaches 85 percent of the county 's population . A large percentage of STA bus routes originate from the central hub , the STA Plaza in downtown Spokane . Spokane has rail and bus service provided by Amtrak and Greyhound via the Spokane Intermodal Center . The city is a stop for Amtrak 's Empire Builder on its way to and from Chicago 's Union Station en route to Seattle and Portland . Amtrak 's through service to Seattle and Portland is a legacy of BNSF Railway 's old Spokane , Portland and Seattle Railway trackage . Spokane is a major railway junction for the BNSF Railway and the Union Pacific Railroad and is the western terminus for the Montana Rail Link . 
 = = = Airports = = = 
 Spokane International Airport ( IATA : <unk> , ICAO : <unk> ) serves as the primary commercial airport for Spokane , Eastern Washington , and Northern Idaho . It is the second largest airport in the state of Washington and is recognized by the Federal Aviation Administration as a small hub , with service from six airlines and two air cargo carriers . The 4 @,@ 800 @-@ acre ( 19 @.@ 42 km2 ) airport is located 5 miles ( 8 @.@ 0 km ) west of downtown Spokane and is approximately a 10 @-@ minute drive away . The international airport 's three @-@ letter designation is " <unk> " , a result and legacy of the Geiger Field days prior to 1960 , when the airport was named after Army aviator Major Harold Geiger in 1941 . 
 Felts Field is a general aviation airport serving the Spokane area and is located in east Spokane along the south bank of the Spokane River . Aviation at Felts Field dates back to 1913 and the strip served as Spokane 's primary airport until commercial air traffic was redirected to Geiger Field after World War II . In 1927 , the strip was one of the first in the western U.S. to receive official recognition as an airport by the U.S. Department of Commerce and is now named in honor of James Buell Felts , a Washington Air National Guard pilot . 
 = = Healthcare = = 
 The Spokane area has six major hospitals , four of which are full @-@ service facilities . The healthcare industry is a large and increasingly important industry in Spokane ; the city provides specialized care to many patients from the surrounding Inland Northwest and as far north as the Canadian border . The city 's healthcare needs are served primarily by non @-@ profit Seattle @-@ based Providence Health & Services and for @-@ profit Tennessee @-@ based Community Health Systems , which run the two biggest hospitals , Sacred Heart Medical Center , and Deaconess Medical Center , respectively . These two hospitals , along with most of Spokane 's major health care facilities , are located on Spokane 's Lower @-@ South Hill , just south of downtown , in what is known as the " Medical District " of Spokane . The Sacred Heart Hospital , opened originally , with just 31 beds , on Spokane Falls Boulevard on January 27 , 1887 , but later moved to its present location at 101 West Eighth Avenue . As of 2014 it had 642 beds , with 28 @,@ 319 admissions , 71 @,@ 543 emergency room visits , and 2 @,@ 982 births annually , and a full @-@ time staff of 29 doctors and dentists and 583 registered nurses . Deaconess Medical Center , the smaller of the two main hospitals , had 388 beds as of 2014 . Other hospitals in the area include the Spokane Veterans Affairs Medical Center in the northwest part of town , Holy Family Hospital on the north side , and Valley Hospital and Medical Center in the Spokane Valley . One of 20 specialty orthopedic Shriners Hospitals in the U.S. is also located in Spokane . One of Washington 's two state psychiatric hospitals , Eastern State Hospital , is located 15 miles ( 24 km ) away in Medical Lake . 
 = = Media = = 
 Newspaper service in Spokane is provided by its only major daily newspaper , The Spokesman @-@ Review , which has a daily circulation of 76 @,@ 291 and Sunday circulation of 95 @,@ 939 . The Spokesman @-@ Review was formed from the merger of the Spokane Falls Review ( 1883 – 1894 ) and the Spokesman ( 1890 – 1893 ) in 1893 and was first published under the present name on June 29 , 1894 . It later absorbed the competing afternoon paper The Spokane Daily Chronicle , a significant newspaper historically that existed from 1890 until the merger in 1982 . More specialized publications include the weekly alternative newspaper The Pacific Northwest <unk> , the bi @-@ weekly business journal The Spokane Journal of Business , the student @-@ run The Gonzaga Bulletin , the monthly GLBT newsmagazine Q View Northwest , and a monthly newspaper for parents , Kids newspaper . The city also has several community magazines , such as the monthly paper covering the Garland neighborhood , The Garland Times , and Spokane Coeur d 'Alene Living , a monthly home and lifestyle magazine . 
 According to Arbitron , Spokane is the 94th largest radio market in the U.S. , with 532 @,@ 100 listeners aged 12 and over . There are 28 AM and FM radio stations broadcast in the city . The five most listened @-@ to stations are <unk> @-@ FM ( classic rock ) , <unk> @-@ AM ( news / talk ) , KXLY @-@ FM ( country ) , <unk> @-@ FM ( adult contemporary ) , and <unk> @-@ FM ( Hot AC ) . Spokane 's primary sources of non @-@ commercial and community radio include Spokane 's NPR @-@ affiliate station <unk> @-@ FM and <unk> , a full @-@ power community radio station . 
 Spokane is the 73rd largest television market in the U.S. , accounting for 0 @.@ 366 % of the total TV households in the U.S. The city has six television stations , representing the major commercial networks and public television . Spokane is the television broadcast center for much of eastern Washington ( except the Yakima and Tri @-@ Cities area ) , northern Idaho , northwestern Montana , northeastern Oregon , and parts of southern Canada ( by cable television ) . Spokane receives broadcasts in the Pacific Time Zone , with weekday prime time beginning at 8 pm . Montana and Alberta , Canada are in the Mountain Time Zone and receive Spokane broadcasts one hour later by their local time . The major network television affiliates include <unk> ( TV ) 2 ( CBS ) , KXLY @-@ TV 4 ( ABC ) , <unk> @-@ TV 6 ( NBC ; Spokane 's first television station , on air on December 20 , 1952 ) , <unk> 28 ( FOX ) , <unk> 22 ( The CW ) , <unk> @-@ TV 7 ( PBS ) and <unk> @-@ TV 26 ( PBS ; operating out of Coeur d 'Alene , Idaho ) . 
 = = Notable people = = 
 = = Sister cities = = 
 Spokane has five current sister cities , as designated by Sister Cities International : 
 Nishinomiya , Hyōgo Prefecture , Japan – since September 1961 ( Spokane 's first sister city ) 
 <unk> , South Korea 
 Jilin City , China 
 Limerick , Ireland 
 = Fortifications of Xi 'an = 
 The fortifications of Xi 'an ( Chinese : <unk> ) , also known as Xi 'an City Wall , in Xi 'an , an ancient capital of China , represent one of the oldest , largest and best preserved Chinese city walls . It was built under the rule of the Hongwu Emperor Zhu Yuanzhang as a military defense system . It exhibits the " complete features of the rampart architecture of feudal society " . It has been refurbished many times since it was built in the 14th century , thrice at intervals of about 200 years in the later half of 1500s and 1700s , and in recent years in 1983 . The wall encloses an area of about 36 square kilometres ( 14 sq mi ) 
 The Xi 'an City Wall is on the tentative list of UNESCO 's World Heritage Site under the title " City Walls of the Ming and Qing Dynasties " . Since 2008 , it is also on the list of the State Administration of Cultural Heritage of the People 's Republic of China . Since March 1961 , the Xi 'an City Wall is a heritage National Historical and Cultural Town . 
 = = Location = = 
 Xi 'an City Wall is located in the urban district of Xi 'an City , which at one time was an imperial city during the periods of the Sui and Tang dynasties . It is situated at the end of the ancient Silk Road . 
 = = History = = 
 Zhu Yuanzhang , the first Emperor of the Ming dynasty ( 1368 – 1644 ) , was advised by Zhu Sheng , a sage , to build a fortified high wall around the city , create storage facilities for food and then establish his empire by unifying all the other states . Following the hermit 's advice , Zhu established the Ming dynasty , and then built a highly fortified wall over a previously existing wall of the Tang dynasty ( 618 <unk> ) . He started building the Xian City Wall , as the capital of northwestern Shaanxi Province in 1370 . He incorporated the ancient fortified embankments built by the Sui and Tang Dynasties by including them in the wall 's western and southern parts , enlarging the eastern and northern parts . The edifice was built over an eight @-@ year period and was well maintained during both the Ming Dynasty , and the Qing Dynasty , which followed . 
 The wall was initially built solely from tamped earth . During the <unk> Emperor 's period ( 1568 ) the wall was strengthened by laying blue bricks on the top and exterior faces of the earthen walls . During the reign of Qianlong of the Qing Dynasty ( 1781 ) , the wall was enlarged ; drainage features , crenels and other modifications were made ; and the structure as it is now seen came into existence . By the end of the Qing dynasty rule , the structure had begun to deteriorate . In a limited degree the Republican Authorities carried out maintenance of the wall , which was in a poor state . In the first decade of the 20th century , the wall 's defense system was considered to be of strategic importance , even though demolishing of similar walls in other regions of the country was undertaken following the 1911 Revolution . In 1926 , the wall was attacked with bombs by enemy forces resulting in serious structural damage , but the city within the wall was not affected . During the Second World War , when the Japanese carried out air bombings from 1937 to 1940 , the residents built around 1 @,@ 000 bunkers , as anti @-@ aircraft shelters within the wide base ( thickness of more than 15 metres ( 49 ft ) ) of the wall . A few escape openings were also made through the wall as passageways . Even later , new gates to allow traffic through the Xian Wall were constructed during the Republican rule . 
 According to the <unk> Atlas of 1933 , in the 1930s most people lived within the perimeter of the Xi 'an Wall but still there were a lot of unoccupied open areas . Among the visitors who came to see the Xian Wall were American captain ( later general ) Stilwell in 1922 and the Czech sinologist Jaroslav <unk> ( 1906 – 1980 ) in 1933 . In 1983 , the administration of the Xi 'an municipality carried out more renovations and additions to the wall . At that time , the <unk> tower , the <unk> sluice tower , the <unk> dipper tower , the <unk> corner tower and the <unk> defense tower were all refurbished ; the crumbling parts of the rampart were changed into gates ; and the moat was restored . In May 2005 , all of Xi 'an 's ramparts were inter @-@ connected . 
 The Xi 'an City Wall was proposed as a UNESCO World Heritage Site by the State Administration of Cultural Heritage of the People 's Republic of China in 2008 . UNESCO included the site in the tentative List of World Heritage Sites under the title " City Walls of the Ming and Qing Dynasties " as a cultural heritage designee under Criterion iii & iv . In March 1961 , the Xi 'an City Wall was fully approved as a heritage site as a National Historical and Cultural Town . 
 Michelle Obama , the first lady of the United States , visited the Xi 'an City Wall on 24 March 2014 , describing it as " a wall that has withstood war and famine and the rise and fall of dynasties " . 
 = = Features = = 
 The Xi 'an Wall is rectangular in shape and has a total length of 14 kilometres ( 8 @.@ 7 mi ) , with almost all stretches subjected to some kind of restoration or rebuilding . Along the top of the wall is a walkway , which would typically take four hours to cover . It is built in the Chinese architecture style . As a defense fortification , it was constructed with a moat , drawbridges , watch towers , corner towers , parapet walls and gate towers . The wall is 12 metres ( 39 ft ) in height with a width of 12 – 14 metres ( 39 – 46 ft ) at the top and base width of 15 – 18 metres ( 49 – 59 ft ) . Ramparts are built at intervals of 120 metres ( 390 ft ) , projecting from the main wall . There are parapets on the outer side of the wall , built with 5 @,@ 984 crenels , which form " altogether protruding ramparts " . There are four watch towers , located at the corners and the moat that surrounds the wall has a width of 18 metres ( 59 ft ) and depth of 6 metres ( 20 ft ) . The area within the wall is about 36 square kilometres ( 14 sq mi ) , enclosing the small area of 14 square kilometres ( 5 @.@ 4 sq mi ) occupied by the city . 
 The southern <unk> watchtower constructed in 1378 , was destroyed by fire in 1926 during the civil war of 1926 , and was restored in September 2014 . This was done after a careful historical review of documents related to the historical features that existed before it was damaged . The other three watchtowers forming the northern , eastern and western gates of the wall were also examined during the planning phase of the modifications done for the South Tower . They were modified , without affecting the integrity of the wall , by an encompassing hall offering protection to the structures by using steel , wood work and the ancient @-@ type tiles and bricks structure . Major gates have ramp access except the South Gate which has entry outside the walls . 
 There is an " Archery Tower " , which provides security to one of the four gates of the Xi 'an wall . Created as a large trap @-@ like chamber , capped by a tower filled with windows , it gave an advantageous position for archers to shoot arrows ( in the initial years of building the wall ) and later cannon balls at the opposing revolutionary forces . In the event that the enemy was able to breach the walls through the main gate they would become trapped in the small chamber that faced yet another gate and thus be easy targets for the defending troops . 
 = Radio ( LL Cool J album ) = 
 Radio is the debut studio album by American rapper LL Cool J , released November 18 , 1985 on Def Jam Recordings in the United States . It serves as the label 's first full @-@ length album release . Recording sessions for the album took place during 1984 to 1985 at Chung King House of Metal in New York City . The album was primarily produced by Rick Rubin , who provided a sparse and minimal production style . Radio also features a sound that is punctuated by DJ scratching , mostly brief samples , and emphasis of the downbeat . LL Cool J 's b @-@ boy lyricism conveys themes of inner city culture , teenage promiscuity , and braggadocio raps . 
 The album experienced a significant amount of commercial success and sales for a hip hop record at the time , earning U.S. Billboard chart success and selling over 500 @,@ 000 copies within its first five months of release . On April 19 , 1989 , Radio was certified platinum in sales by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) , following sales in excess of one million copies in the United States . Initial criticism of the album was generally positive , as LL Cool J 's lyricism and Rick Rubin 's production were praised by several music critics . It has since been recognized by critics as LL Cool J 's greatest work . 
 Reflecting the new school and <unk> subculture in the U.S. during the mid @-@ 1980s , Radio belongs to a pivotal moment in the history and culture of hip hop . Its success contributed to the displacement of the old school with the new school form and to the genre 's mainstream success during the period . Its success also served as a career breakthrough for LL Cool J and Rick Rubin . Radio has been recognized by music writers as one of the first cohesive and commercially successful hip hop albums . 
 = = Background = = 
 In March 1984 , when NYU student Rick Rubin and promoter @-@ manager Russell Simmons founded the then @-@ independent Def Jam label , 16 year – old St. Albans , Queens native James Todd Smith was creating demo tapes in his grandparents ' home . His grandfather , a jazz saxophonist , purchased him $ 2 @,@ 000 worth of stereo equipment , including two turntables , an audio mixer and an amplifier . Smith later discussed his childhood background and rapping , stating that " By the time I got that equipment , I was already a rapper . In this neighborhood , the kids grow up in rap . It 's like speaking Spanish if you grow up in an all @-@ Spanish house . I got into it when I was about 9 , and since then all I wanted was to make a record and hear it on the radio . " By using the mixing table he had received from his grandfather , Smith produced and mixed his own demos and sent them to various record companies throughout New York City , including Simmons ' and Rubin 's own Def Jam Recordings . 
 Under his new stage name , LL Cool J ( an acronym for Ladies Love Cool James ) , Smith was signed by Def Jam , which led to the release of his first official record , the 12 @-@ inch single " I Need a Beat " ( 1984 ) . The single was a hard @-@ hitting , streetwise b @-@ boy song with spare beats and ballistic rhymes . Smith later discussed his search for a label , stating " I sent my demo to many different companies , but it was Def Jam where I found my home . " That same year , Smith made his professional debut concert performance at Manhattan Center High School . In a later interview , LL Cool J recalled the experience , stating " They pushed the lunch room tables together and me and my DJ , Cut Creator , started playing . ... As soon as it was over there were girls screaming and asking for autographs . Right then and there I said ' This is what I want to do ' . " LL 's debut single sold over 100 @,@ 000 copies and helped establish both Def Jam as a label and Smith as a rapper . The commercial success of " I Need a Beat " , along with the Beastie Boys ' single " Rock Hard " ( 1984 ) , helped lead Def Jam to a distribution deal with Columbia Records the following year . 
 LL Cool J dropped out of Andrew Jackson High School in Queens to record his first studio album , also the first LP to be issued by Def Jam . Recording sessions for the album took place at Chung King Studios in Manhattan 's Chinatown under Rubin 's direction throughout 1984 and 1985 . Notable from the personnel line @-@ up was LL 's DJ Jay Philpot , better known as " Cut Creator " . A Queens native and former trombonist , Philpot met LL at a block party and they began performing together . The audio mastering was handled by engineer Herb Powers at 130 West 42nd Street in the Frankford Wayne Mastering Labs and the album was set for release as Radio in November 1985 , containing a dedication in the liner notes from LL Cool J to his mother and his grandparents . The album 's release had been anticipated by many rap fans following LL Cool J 's appearance in the hip hop movie Krush Groove , which was based on the beginnings of the Def Jam label and featured the single " I Can 't Live Without My Radio " from Radio . 
 = = Music and lyrics = = 
 The album 's production , handled entirely by Rick Rubin with a remix by DJ Jazzy Jay , has been noted by critics and music writers for Rubin 's minimalist style and stripped @-@ down aggressiveness . Steve Huey of AllMusic described the production for Radio as " bare @-@ bones " and " skeletal " , while calling the instrumentation " basically just a cranked @-@ up beatbox . " The sound of Radio is mostly punctuated by DJ scratching and features occasional brief samples , which emphasize a downbeat . In summing up the musical style of Radio , Huey stated " The result is rap at its most skeletal , with a hard @-@ hitting , street @-@ level aggression that perfectly matches LL 's cocksure teenage energy . " 
 The lyrical themes regarding the culture and the way of life of inner city youth that surface in Radio , including the growing and popular b @-@ boy attitude ( " I Can 't Live Without My Radio " , " Rock the Bells " ) and teenage promiscuity ( " Dear Yvette " ) , along with LL 's " teenage energy " , as described by writer Nelson George , helped appeal to a younger music audience and were essential in the album 's commercial success . LL Cool J 's lyricism on Radio is highlighted by clever disses , playful boasts and braggadocio raps . Columnist Stephen Holden of The New York Times described LL Cool J as " a brawny young giant with the animal magnetism and amiable self @-@ assurance of the young Muhammad Ali . " " I Want You " and " I Can Give You More " have been recognized by listeners of hip hop as the first hip @-@ hop ballads , and have been cited likewise by several music writers and critics . 
 Author of the 1985 book Fresh : Hip Hop Don 't Stop , writer Nelson George further elaborated on the appeal of Radio to listeners at the time , describing LL Cool J as a " minimalist homeboy who knows his beats " , and stating " You can call it rap , hip hop or street , but it really is a way of hearing music — and partying hard — that expresses the experiences and attitudes of a great many inner city kids . L.L. Cool J is one of the best young <unk> around , because he speaks directly to and about his generation over large beats that recall Run @-@ D.M.C. , Trouble Funk , James Brown , and funky little bits of AC / DC and Yes ... This teenage music is built around beats , but not just any old beats . It is all about a beat with style , with personality , and L.L. Cool J has plenty of both . " 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 Released November 18 , 1985 , on Def Jam Recordings in the United States , Radio earned a significant amount of commercial success and sales for a hip hop record at the time . Shortly after its release , the album sold over 500 @,@ 000 copies in its first five months , eventually selling over 1 million copies by 1988 , according to the Recording Industry Association of America . Radio peaked at number 6 on the Top R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Albums chart and at number 46 on the Billboard 200 albums chart . It entered the Top R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Albums chart on December 28 , 1985 , and remained there for forty @-@ seven weeks , while also entering the Pop Albums chart on January 11 , 1986 . Radio remained on the chart for thirty @-@ eight weeks . By 1989 , the album had earned platinum status from the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) , after earning a gold certification in the United States on April 14 , 1986 , with sales exceeding one million copies . 
 Radio received positive reviews from both " street and dance music " aficionados and mainstream music critics , including Robert Christgau from The Village Voice , who described it in a January 1986 article as " the most engaging and original rap album of the year " . LL Cool J 's aggressive rapping and Rick Rubin 's stripped @-@ down production were praised by critics who also agreed that LL 's lyrics set a new standard for MC 's at the time . The songs ' lyrics were favored by critics who described LL 's song @-@ writing as clever and fun . Connie Johnson of the Los Angeles Times said that he is an integral artist of hip hop 's " second generation " because of his " razor @-@ sharp wit " . Rolling Stone magazine 's Debby Bull was impressed by his songwriting and how its originality lies in the ballads , even though " it 's the sassier , dance @-@ worthy songs that make this record such an irresistible party . " The critical success of the album would later result in its comparison to other LL Cool J albums , which were not as critically successful as Radio . In his review for the Trouser Press , Ira Robbins called the album a " primary classic of hip @-@ hop 's original commercial surge " and went on to write : 
 Since its initial reception , Radio has been viewed by fans and critics as LL Cool J 's greatest work , as well as one of hip hop 's best albums . In retrospect , some critics and music writers have given more praise to producer Rick Rubin 's contributions to Radio , as well as note the importance of his production on the album . Yahoo ! Music 's Frank Meyer said that the album was " one of the earliest records , along with Run @-@ DMC , to combine the vocal approach of rap with the musical arrangements and riffing of rock ' n ' roll . ' I Can 't Live Without My Radio ' is a hip @-@ hop classic and this album set the standard for East Coast rap for a long time . " 
 Radio was later ranked at number 2 on ego trip magazine 's " Hip Hop 's 25 Greatest Albums ( 1980 @-@ 98 ) " , number 69 on Rolling Stone 's " 100 Best LPs of the 80s " , and number 71 on Blender 's " 100 Greatest American Albums of All Time " list . In 2003 , Rolling Stone ranked the album number 478 on its list of The 500 Greatest Albums of All Time ; it was ranked number 470 in a revised list in 2012 . The album was also included in Rolling Stone magazine 's 1997 issue of " The Essential 200 Rock Records " . In 1998 , Radio was selected as one of The Source magazine 's " 100 Best Rap Albums " . 
 = = Legacy and influence = = 
 With the breakthrough success of his hit single " I Need a Beat " and the Radio LP , LL Cool J became one of the first hip @-@ hop acts to achieve mainstream success along with Kurtis Blow and Run @-@ D.M.C. Gigs at larger venues were offered to LL as he would join the <unk> ' 87 Raising Hell tour , opening for Run @-@ D.M.C. and the Beastie Boys . Another milestone of LL 's popularity was his appearance on American Bandstand as the first hip hop act on the show . 
 The album 's success also helped in contributing to Rick Rubin 's credibility and repertoire as a record producer . Radio , along with Raising Hell ( 1986 ) and Licensed to Ill ( 1986 ) , would form a trilogy of New York City @-@ based , Rubin @-@ helmed albums that helped to diversify hip @-@ hop . Rubin 's production credit on the back cover reads " <unk> BY <unk> <unk> " , referring to his minimalist production style , which gave the album its stripped @-@ down and gritty sound . This style would serve as one of Rubin 's production trademarks and would have a great impact on future hip @-@ hop productions . Rubin 's early hip hop production work , before his exit from Def Jam to Los Angeles , helped solidify his legacy as a hip hop pioneer and establish his reputation in the music industry . 
 Radio 's release coincided with the growing new school scene and subculture , which also marked the beginning of hip @-@ hop 's " golden age " and the replacement of old school hip hop . This period of hip hop was marked by the end of the disco rap stylings of old school , which had flourished prior to the mid @-@ 80s , and the rise of a new style featuring " ghetto blasters " . Radio served as one of the earliest records , along with Run @-@ D.M.C. ' s debut album , to combine the vocal approach of hip hop and rapping with the musical arrangements and riffing sound of rock music , pioneering the rap rock hybrid sound . 
 The emerging new school scene was initially characterized by drum machine @-@ led minimalism , often tinged with elements of rock , as well as boasts about rapping delivered in an aggressive , self @-@ assertive style . In image as in song , the artists projected a tough , cool , street b @-@ boy attitude . These elements contrasted sharply with the 1970s P @-@ Funk and disco @-@ influenced outfits , live bands , synthesizers and party rhymes of acts prevalent in 1984 , rendering them old school . In contrast to the lengthy , jam @-@ like form predominant throughout early hip hop ( " King Tim III " , " Rapper 's Delight " , " The Breaks " ) , new school artists tended to compose shorter songs that would be more accessible and had potential for radio play , and conceive more cohesive LPs than their old school counterparts ; the style typified by LL Cool J 's Radio . A leading example of the new school sound is the song " I Can 't Live Without My Radio " , a loud , defiant declaration of public loyalty to his boom box , which The New York Times described as " quintessential rap in its directness , immediacy and assertion of self " . It was featured in the film Krush Groove ( 1985 ) , which was based on the rise of Def Jam and new school acts such as Run @-@ D.M.C. and the Fat Boys . 
 The energy and hardcore delivery and musical style of rapping featured on Radio , as well as other new school recordings by artists such as Run @-@ D.M.C. , Schooly D , T La Rock and Steady B , proved to be influential to hip hop acts of the " golden age " such as Boogie Down Productions and Public Enemy . The decline of the old school form of hip hop also led to the closing of Sugar Hill Records , one of the labels that helped contribute to early hip @-@ hop and that , <unk> , rejected LL 's demo tape . As the album served as an example of an expansion of hip hop music 's artistic possibilities , its commercial success and distinct sound soon led to an increase in multi @-@ racial audiences and listeners , adding to the legacy of the album and hip hop as well . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = = Personnel = = 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = Isaac Newton = 
 Sir Isaac Newton PRS ( / <unk> / ; 25 December 1642 – 20 March 1726 / 27 ) was an English physicist and mathematician ( described in his own day as a " natural philosopher " ) who is widely recognised as one of the most influential scientists of all time and a key figure in the scientific revolution . His book Philosophiæ Naturalis Principia Mathematica ( " Mathematical Principles of Natural Philosophy " ) , first published in 1687 , laid the foundations for classical mechanics . Newton made seminal contributions to optics , and he shares credit with Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz for the development of calculus . 
 Newton 's Principia formulated the laws of motion and universal gravitation , which dominated scientists ' view of the physical universe for the next three centuries . By deriving Kepler 's laws of planetary motion from his mathematical description of gravity , and then using the same principles to account for the trajectories of comets , the tides , the precession of the equinoxes , and other phenomena , Newton removed the last doubts about the validity of the heliocentric model of the Solar System . This work also demonstrated that the motion of objects on Earth and of celestial bodies could be described by the same principles . His prediction that Earth should be shaped as an oblate spheroid was later vindicated by the measurements of Maupertuis , La Condamine , and others , which helped convince most Continental European scientists of the superiority of Newtonian mechanics over the earlier system of Descartes . 
 Newton built the first practical reflecting telescope and developed a theory of colour based on the observation that a prism decomposes white light into the many colours of the visible spectrum . He formulated an empirical law of cooling , studied the speed of sound , and introduced the notion of a Newtonian fluid . In addition to his work on calculus , as a mathematician Newton contributed to the study of power series , generalised the binomial theorem to non @-@ integer exponents , developed a method for approximating the roots of a function , and classified most of the cubic plane curves . 
 Newton was a fellow of Trinity College and the second Lucasian Professor of Mathematics at the University of Cambridge . He was a devout but unorthodox Christian , and , unusually for a member of the Cambridge faculty of the day , he refused to take holy orders in the Church of England , perhaps because he privately rejected the doctrine of the Trinity . Beyond his work on the mathematical sciences , Newton dedicated much of his time to the study of biblical chronology and alchemy , but most of his work in those areas remained unpublished until long after his death . In his later life , Newton became president of the Royal Society . Newton served the British government as Warden and Master of the Royal Mint . 
 = = Life = = 
 = = = Early life = = = 
 Isaac Newton was born according to the Julian calendar ( in use in England at the time ) on Christmas Day , 25 December 1642 ( NS 4 January 1643 ) , at Woolsthorpe Manor in Woolsthorpe @-@ by @-@ <unk> , a hamlet in the county of Lincolnshire . His father , also named Isaac Newton , had died three months before . Born prematurely , he was a small child ; his mother Hannah Ayscough reportedly said that he could have fit inside a quart mug . When Newton was three , his mother remarried and went to live with her new husband , the Reverend Barnabas Smith , leaving her son in the care of his maternal grandmother , Margery Ayscough . The young Isaac disliked his stepfather and maintained some enmity towards his mother for marrying him , as revealed by this entry in a list of sins committed up to the age of 19 : " Threatening my father and mother Smith to burn them and the house over them . " Newton 's mother had three children from her second marriage . 
 From the age of about twelve until he was seventeen , Newton was educated at The King 's School , Grantham which taught Latin and Greek but no mathematics . He was removed from school , and by October 1659 , he was to be found at Woolsthorpe @-@ by @-@ <unk> , where his mother , widowed for a second time , attempted to make a farmer of him . Newton hated farming . Henry Stokes , master at the King 's School , persuaded his mother to send him back to school so that he might complete his education . Motivated partly by a desire for revenge against a schoolyard bully , he became the top @-@ ranked student , distinguishing himself mainly by building sundials and models of windmills . 
 In June 1661 , he was admitted to Trinity College , Cambridge , on the recommendation of his uncle Rev William Ayscough . He started as a <unk> — paying his way by performing valet 's duties — until he was awarded a scholarship in 1664 , which guaranteed him four more years until he would get his M.A. At that time , the college 's teachings were based on those of Aristotle , whom Newton supplemented with modern philosophers such as Descartes , and astronomers such as Galileo and Thomas Street , through whom he learned of Kepler 's work . He set down in his notebook a series of ' Quaestiones ' about mechanical philosophy as he found it . In 1665 , he discovered the generalised binomial theorem and began to develop a mathematical theory that later became calculus . Soon after Newton had obtained his B.A. degree in August 1665 , the university temporarily closed as a precaution against the Great Plague . Although he had been undistinguished as a Cambridge student , Newton 's private studies at his home in Woolsthorpe over the subsequent two years saw the development of his theories on calculus , optics , and the law of gravitation . 
 In April 1667 , he returned to Cambridge and in October was elected as a fellow of Trinity . Fellows were required to become ordained priests , although this was not enforced in the restoration years and an assertion of conformity to the Church of England was sufficient . However , by 1675 the issue could not be avoided and by then his unconventional views stood in the way . Nevertheless , Newton managed to avoid it by means of a special permission from Charles II ( see " Middle years " section below ) . 
 His studies had impressed the Lucasian professor , Isaac Barrow , who was more anxious to develop his own religious and administrative potential ( he became master of Trinity two years later ) , and in 1669 , Newton succeeded him , only one year after he received his M.A. He was elected a Fellow of the Royal Society ( FRS ) in 1672 . 
 = = = Middle years = = = 
 = = = = Mathematics = = = = 
 Newton 's work has been said " to distinctly advance every branch of mathematics then studied " . His work on the subject usually referred to as <unk> or calculus , seen in a manuscript of October 1666 , is now published among Newton 's mathematical papers . The author of the manuscript De <unk> per <unk> numero <unk> <unk> , sent by Isaac Barrow to John Collins in June 1669 , was identified by Barrow in a letter sent to Collins in August of that year as : 
 Mr Newton , a fellow of our College , and very young ... but of an extraordinary genius and proficiency in these things . 
 Newton later became involved in a dispute with Leibniz over priority in the development of calculus ( the Leibniz – Newton calculus controversy ) . Most modern historians believe that Newton and Leibniz developed calculus independently , although with very different notations . Occasionally it has been suggested that Newton published almost nothing about it until 1693 , and did not give a full account until 1704 , while Leibniz began publishing a full account of his methods in 1684 . ( Leibniz 's notation and " differential Method " , nowadays recognised as much more convenient notations , were adopted by continental European mathematicians , and after 1820 or so , also by British mathematicians . ) Such a suggestion , however , fails to notice the content of calculus which critics of Newton 's time and modern times have pointed out in Book 1 of Newton 's Principia itself ( published 1687 ) and in its forerunner manuscripts , such as De motu corporum in gyrum ( " On the motion of bodies in orbit " ) , of 1684 . The Principia is not written in the language of calculus either as we know it or as Newton 's ( later ) ' dot ' notation would write it . His work extensively uses calculus in geometric form based on limiting values of the ratios of vanishing small quantities : in the Principia itself , Newton gave demonstration of this under the name of ' the method of first and last ratios ' and explained why he put his expositions in this form , remarking also that ' hereby the same thing is performed as by the method of <unk> ' . 
 Because of this , the Principia has been called " a book dense with the theory and application of the infinitesimal calculus " in modern times and " <unk> est presque tout de ce <unk> " ( ' nearly all of it is of this calculus ' ) in Newton 's time . His use of methods involving " one or more orders of the infinitesimally small " is present in his De motu corporum in gyrum of 1684 and in his papers on motion " during the two decades preceding 1684 " . 
 Newton had been reluctant to publish his calculus because he feared controversy and criticism . He was close to the Swiss mathematician Nicolas Fatio de Duillier . In 1691 , Duillier started to write a new version of Newton 's Principia , and corresponded with Leibniz . In 1693 , the relationship between Duillier and Newton deteriorated and the book was never completed . 
 Starting in 1699 , other members of the Royal Society ( of which Newton was a member ) accused Leibniz of plagiarism . The dispute then broke out in full force in 1711 when the Royal Society proclaimed in a study that it was Newton who was the true discoverer and labelled Leibniz a fraud . This study was cast into doubt when it was later found that Newton himself wrote the study 's concluding remarks on Leibniz . Thus began the bitter controversy which marred the lives of both Newton and Leibniz until the latter 's death in 1716 . 
 Newton is generally credited with the generalised binomial theorem , valid for any exponent . He discovered Newton 's identities , Newton 's method , classified cubic plane curves ( polynomials of degree three in two variables ) , made substantial contributions to the theory of finite differences , and was the first to use fractional indices and to employ coordinate geometry to derive solutions to Diophantine equations . He approximated partial sums of the harmonic series by logarithms ( a precursor to Euler 's summation formula ) and was the first to use power series with confidence and to revert power series . Newton 's work on infinite series was inspired by Simon Stevin 's decimals . A very useful modern account of Newton 's mathematics was written by the foremost scholar on Newton 's mathematics , D.T. Whiteside or Tom Whiteside . Tom Whiteside translated and edited all of Newton 's mathematical writings and at the end of his life wrote a summing up of Newton 's work and its impact . This was published in 2013 as a chapter in a book edited by Bechler . 
 When Newton received his MA and became a Fellow of the " College of the Holy and Undivided Trinity " in 1667 , he made the commitment that " I will either set Theology as the object of my studies and will take holy orders when the time prescribed by these statutes [ 7 years ] arrives , or I will resign from the college . " Up till this point he had not thought much about religion and had twice signed his agreement to the thirty @-@ nine articles , the basis of Church of England doctrine . 
 He was appointed Lucasian Professor of Mathematics in 1669 on Barrow 's recommendation . During that time , any Fellow of a college at Cambridge or Oxford was required to take holy orders and become an ordained Anglican priest . However , the terms of the Lucasian professorship required that the holder not be active in the church ( presumably so as to have more time for science ) . Newton argued that this should exempt him from the ordination requirement , and Charles II , whose permission was needed , accepted this argument . Thus a conflict between Newton 's religious views and Anglican orthodoxy was averted . 
 = = = = Optics = = = = 
 In 1666 , Newton observed that the spectrum of colours exiting a prism in the position of minimum deviation is oblong , even when the light ray entering the prism is circular , which is to say , the prism refracts different colours by different angles . This led him to conclude that colour is a property intrinsic to light — a point which had been debated in prior years . 
 From 1670 to 1672 , Newton lectured on optics . During this period he investigated the refraction of light , demonstrating that the multicoloured spectrum produced by a prism could be recomposed into white light by a lens and a second prism . Modern scholarship has revealed that Newton 's analysis and resynthesis of white light owes a debt to corpuscular alchemy . 
 He also showed that coloured light does not change its properties by separating out a coloured beam and shining it on various objects . Newton noted that regardless of whether it was reflected , scattered , or transmitted , it remained the same colour . Thus , he observed that colour is the result of objects interacting with already @-@ coloured light rather than objects generating the colour themselves . This is known as Newton 's theory of colour . 
 From this work , he concluded that the lens of any refracting telescope would suffer from the dispersion of light into colours ( chromatic aberration ) . As a proof of the concept , he constructed a telescope using reflective mirrors instead of lenses as the objective to bypass that problem . Building the design , the first known functional reflecting telescope , today known as a Newtonian telescope , involved solving the problem of a suitable mirror material and shaping technique . Newton ground his own mirrors out of a custom composition of highly reflective speculum metal , using Newton 's rings to judge the quality of the optics for his telescopes . In late 1668 he was able to produce this first reflecting telescope . It was about eight inches long and it gave a clearer and larger image . In 1671 , the Royal Society asked for a demonstration of his reflecting telescope . Their interest encouraged him to publish his notes , Of Colours , which he later expanded into the work Opticks . When Robert Hooke criticised some of Newton 's ideas , Newton was so offended that he withdrew from public debate . Newton and Hooke had brief exchanges in 1679 – 80 , when Hooke , appointed to manage the Royal Society 's correspondence , opened up a correspondence intended to elicit contributions from Newton to Royal Society transactions , which had the effect of stimulating Newton to work out a proof that the elliptical form of planetary orbits would result from a centripetal force inversely proportional to the square of the radius vector ( see Newton 's law of universal gravitation – History and De motu corporum in gyrum ) . But the two men remained generally on poor terms until Hooke 's death . 
 Newton argued that light is composed of particles or corpuscles , which were refracted by accelerating into a denser medium . He verged on <unk> waves to explain the repeated pattern of reflection and transmission by thin films ( Opticks <unk> , Props . 12 ) , but still retained his theory of ' fits ' that disposed corpuscles to be reflected or transmitted ( <unk> ) . However , later physicists favoured a purely wavelike explanation of light to account for the interference patterns and the general phenomenon of diffraction . Today 's quantum mechanics , photons , and the idea of wave – particle duality bear only a minor resemblance to Newton 's understanding of light . 
 In his Hypothesis of Light of 1675 , Newton posited the existence of the ether to transmit forces between particles . The contact with the theosophist Henry More , revived his interest in alchemy . He replaced the ether with occult forces based on Hermetic ideas of attraction and repulsion between particles . John Maynard Keynes , who acquired many of Newton 's writings on alchemy , stated that " Newton was not the first of the age of reason : He was the last of the magicians . " Newton 's interest in alchemy cannot be isolated from his contributions to science . This was at a time when there was no clear distinction between alchemy and science . Had he not relied on the occult idea of action at a distance , across a vacuum , he might not have developed his theory of gravity . ( See also Isaac Newton 's occult studies . ) 
 In 1704 , Newton published Opticks , in which he expounded his corpuscular theory of light . He considered light to be made up of extremely subtle corpuscles , that ordinary matter was made of grosser corpuscles and speculated that through a kind of alchemical transmutation " Are not gross Bodies and Light convertible into one another , ... and may not Bodies receive much of their Activity from the Particles of Light which enter their Composition ? " Newton also constructed a primitive form of a frictional electrostatic generator , using a glass globe . 
 In an article entitled " Newton , prisms , and the ' <unk> ' of tunable lasers " it is indicated that Newton in his book Opticks was the first to show a diagram using a prism as a beam expander . In the same book he describes , via diagrams , the use of multiple @-@ prism arrays . Some 278 years after Newton 's discussion , multiple @-@ prism beam <unk> became central to the development of narrow @-@ <unk> tunable lasers . Also , the use of these prismatic beam <unk> led to the multiple @-@ prism dispersion theory . 
 Subsequent to Newton , much has been amended . Young and Fresnel combined Newton 's particle theory with Huygens ' wave theory to show that colour is the visible manifestation of light 's wavelength . Science also slowly came to realise the difference between perception of colour and <unk> optics . The German poet and scientist , Goethe , could not shake the Newtonian foundation but " one hole Goethe did find in Newton 's armour , ... Newton had committed himself to the doctrine that refraction without colour was impossible . He therefore thought that the object @-@ glasses of telescopes must for ever remain imperfect , <unk> and refraction being incompatible . This inference was proved by <unk> to be wrong . " 
 = = = = Mechanics and gravitation = = = = 
 In 1679 , Newton returned to his work on ( celestial ) mechanics by considering gravitation and its effect on the orbits of planets with reference to Kepler 's laws of planetary motion . This followed stimulation by a brief exchange of letters in 1679 – 80 with Hooke , who had been appointed to manage the Royal Society 's correspondence , and who opened a correspondence intended to elicit contributions from Newton to Royal Society transactions . Newton 's reawakening interest in astronomical matters received further stimulus by the appearance of a comet in the winter of 1680 – 1681 , on which he corresponded with John Flamsteed . After the exchanges with Hooke , Newton worked out proof that the elliptical form of planetary orbits would result from a centripetal force inversely proportional to the square of the radius vector ( see Newton 's law of universal gravitation – History and De motu corporum in gyrum ) . Newton communicated his results to Edmond Halley and to the Royal Society in De motu corporum in gyrum , a tract written on about nine sheets which was copied into the Royal Society 's Register Book in December 1684 . This tract contained the nucleus that Newton developed and expanded to form the Principia . 
 The Principia was published on 5 July 1687 with encouragement and financial help from Edmond Halley . In this work , Newton stated the three universal laws of motion . Together , these laws describe the relationship between any object , the forces acting upon it and the resulting motion , laying the foundation for classical mechanics . They contributed to many advances during the Industrial Revolution which soon followed and were not improved upon for more than 200 years . Many of these advancements continue to be the underpinnings of non @-@ relativistic technologies in the modern world . He used the Latin word gravitas ( weight ) for the effect that would become known as gravity , and defined the law of universal gravitation . 
 In the same work , Newton presented a calculus @-@ like method of geometrical analysis using ' first and last ratios ' , gave the first analytical determination ( based on Boyle 's law ) of the speed of sound in air , inferred the oblateness of Earth 's spheroidal figure , accounted for the precession of the equinoxes as a result of the Moon 's gravitational attraction on the Earth 's oblateness , initiated the gravitational study of the irregularities in the motion of the moon , provided a theory for the determination of the orbits of comets , and much more . 
 Newton made clear his heliocentric view of the Solar System — developed in a somewhat modern way , because already in the mid @-@ 1680s he recognised the " deviation of the Sun " from the centre of gravity of the Solar System . For Newton , it was not precisely the centre of the Sun or any other body that could be considered at rest , but rather " the common centre of gravity of the Earth , the Sun and all the Planets is to be esteem 'd the Centre of the World " , and this centre of gravity " either is at rest or moves uniformly forward in a right line " ( Newton adopted the " at rest " alternative in view of common consent that the centre , wherever it was , was at rest ) . 
 Newton 's postulate of an invisible force able to act over vast distances led to him being criticised for introducing " occult agencies " into science . Later , in the second edition of the Principia ( 1713 ) , Newton firmly rejected such criticisms in a concluding General Scholium , writing that it was enough that the phenomena implied a gravitational attraction , as they did ; but they did not so far indicate its cause , and it was both unnecessary and improper to frame hypotheses of things that were not implied by the phenomena . ( Here Newton used what became his famous expression " hypotheses non @-@ <unk> " ) . 
 With the Principia , Newton became internationally recognised . He acquired a circle of admirers , including the Swiss @-@ born mathematician Nicolas Fatio de Duillier . 
 = = = Classification of <unk> and beyond = = = 
 Descartes was the most important early influence on Newton the mathematician . Descartes freed plane curves from the Greek and Macedonian limitation to conic sections , and Newton followed his lead by classifying the cubic curves in the plane . He found 72 of the 78 species of <unk> . He also divided them into four types , satisfying different equations , and in 1717 Stirling , probably with Newton 's help , proved that every cubic was one of these four types . Newton also claimed that the four types could be obtained by plane projection from one of them , and this was proved in 1731 . 
 According to Tom Whiteside ( 1932 – 2008 ) , who published 8 volumes of Newton 's mathematical papers , it is no exaggeration to say that Newton mapped out the development of mathematics for the next 200 years , and that Euler and others largely carried out his plan . 
 = = = Later life = = = 
 In the 1690s , Newton wrote a number of religious tracts dealing with the literal and symbolic interpretation of the Bible . A manuscript Newton sent to John Locke in which he disputed the fidelity of 1 John 5 : 7 and its fidelity to the original manuscripts of the New Testament , remained unpublished until 1785 . 
 Even though a number of authors have claimed that the work might have been an indication that Newton disputed the belief in Trinity , others assure that Newton did question the passage but never denied Trinity as such . His biographer , scientist Sir David Brewster , who compiled his manuscripts for over 20 years , wrote about the controversy in well @-@ known book Memoirs of the Life , Writings , and Discoveries of Sir Isaac Newton , where he explains that Newton questioned the veracity of those passages , but he never denied the doctrine of Trinity as such . Brewster states that Newton was never known as an Arian during his lifetime , it was first William Whiston ( an Arian ) who argued that " Sir Isaac Newton was so hearty for the Baptists , as well as for the <unk> or Arians , that he sometimes suspected these two were the two witnesses in the Revelations , " while other like Hopton Haynes ( a Mint employee and Humanitarian ) , " mentioned to Richard Baron , that Newton held the same doctrine as himself " . 
 Later works — The Chronology of Ancient Kingdoms Amended ( 1728 ) and Observations Upon the Prophecies of Daniel and the Apocalypse of St. John ( 1733 ) — were published after his death . He also devoted a great deal of time to alchemy ( see above ) . 
 Newton was also a member of the Parliament of England for Cambridge University in 1689 – 90 and 1701 – 2 , but according to some accounts his only comments were to complain about a cold draught in the chamber and request that the window be closed . 
 Newton moved to London to take up the post of warden of the Royal Mint in 1696 , a position that he had obtained through the patronage of Charles Montagu , 1st Earl of Halifax , then Chancellor of the Exchequer . He took charge of England 's great <unk> , somewhat treading on the toes of Lord Lucas , Governor of the Tower ( and securing the job of deputy comptroller of the temporary Chester branch for Edmond Halley ) . Newton became perhaps the best @-@ known Master of the Mint upon the death of Thomas Neale in 1699 , a position Newton held for the last 30 years of his life . These appointments were intended as sinecures , but Newton took them seriously , retiring from his Cambridge duties in 1701 , and exercising his power to reform the currency and punish clippers and counterfeiters . 
 As Warden , and afterwards Master , of the Royal Mint , Newton estimated that 20 percent of the coins taken in during the Great <unk> of 1696 were counterfeit . Counterfeiting was high treason , punishable by the felon 's being hanged , drawn and quartered . Despite this , convicting even the most flagrant criminals could be extremely difficult . However , Newton proved equal to the task . 
 Disguised as a habitué of bars and taverns , he gathered much of that evidence himself . For all the barriers placed to prosecution , and separating the branches of government , English law still had ancient and formidable customs of authority . Newton had himself made a justice of the peace in all the home counties — there is a draft of a letter regarding this matter stuck into Newton 's personal first edition of his Philosophiæ Naturalis Principia Mathematica which he must have been amending at the time . Then he conducted more than 100 cross @-@ examinations of witnesses , informers , and suspects between June 1698 and Christmas 1699 . Newton successfully prosecuted 28 coiners . 
 As a result of a report written by Newton on 21 September 1717 to the Lords Commissioners of His Majesty 's Treasury the bimetallic relationship between gold coins and silver coins was changed by Royal proclamation on 22 December 1717 , forbidding the exchange of gold guineas for more than 21 silver shillings . This inadvertently resulted in a silver shortage as silver coins were used to pay for imports , while exports were paid for in gold , effectively moving Britain from the silver standard to its first gold standard . It is a matter of debate as whether he intended to do this or not . It has been argued that Newton conceived of his work at the Mint as a continuation of his alchemical work . 
 Newton was made President of the Royal Society in 1703 and an associate of the French Académie des Sciences . In his position at the Royal Society , Newton made an enemy of John Flamsteed , the Astronomer Royal , by prematurely publishing Flamsteed 's Historia Coelestis Britannica , which Newton had used in his studies . 
 In April 1705 , Queen Anne knighted Newton during a royal visit to Trinity College , Cambridge . The knighthood is likely to have been motivated by political considerations connected with the Parliamentary election in May 1705 , rather than any recognition of Newton 's scientific work or services as Master of the Mint . Newton was the second scientist to be knighted , after Sir Francis Bacon . 
 Newton was one of many people who lost heavily when the South Sea Company collapsed . Their most significant trade was slaves , and according to his niece , he lost around £ 20 @,@ 000 . 
 Towards the end of his life , Newton took up residence at Cranbury Park , near Winchester with his niece and her husband , until his death in 1727 . His half @-@ niece , Catherine Barton Conduitt , served as his hostess in social affairs at his house on Jermyn Street in London ; he was her " very loving Uncle , " according to his letter to her when she was recovering from smallpox . 
 Newton died in his sleep in London on 20 March 1727 ( OS 20 March 1726 ; NS 31 March 1727 ) and was buried in Westminster Abbey . Voltaire may have been present at his funeral . A bachelor , he had divested much of his estate to relatives during his last years , and died intestate . His papers went to John Conduitt and Catherine Barton . After his death , Newton 's hair was examined and found to contain mercury , probably resulting from his alchemical pursuits . Mercury poisoning could explain Newton 's eccentricity in late life . 
 = = = Personal relations = = = 
 Although it was claimed that he was once engaged , Newton never married . The French writer and philosopher Voltaire , who was in London at the time of Newton 's funeral , said that he " was never sensible to any passion , was not subject to the common frailties of mankind , nor had any commerce with women — a circumstance which was assured me by the physician and surgeon who attended him in his last moments " . The widespread belief that he died a virgin has been commented on by writers such as mathematician Charles Hutton , economist John Maynard Keynes , and physicist Carl Sagan . 
 Newton did have a close friendship with the Swiss mathematician Nicolas Fatio de Duillier , whom he met in London around 1690 . Their intense relationship came to an abrupt and unexplained end in 1693 , and at the same time Newton suffered a nervous breakdown . Some of their correspondence has survived . 
 In September of that year , Newton had a breakdown which included sending wild accusatory letters to his friends Samuel Pepys and John Locke . His note to the latter included the charge that Locke " endeavoured to embroil me with <unk> " . 
 = = After death = = 
 = = = Fame = = = 
 The mathematician Joseph @-@ Louis Lagrange often said that Newton was the greatest genius who ever lived , and once added that Newton was also " the most fortunate , for we cannot find more than once a system of the world to establish . " English poet Alexander Pope was moved by Newton 's accomplishments to write the famous epitaph : 
 Nature and nature 's laws lay hid in night ; 
 God said " Let Newton be " and all was light . 
 Newton himself had been rather more modest of his own achievements , famously writing in a letter to Robert Hooke in February 1676 : 
 If I have seen further it is by standing on the shoulders of giants . 
 Two writers think that the above quotation , written at a time when Newton and Hooke were in dispute over optical discoveries , was an oblique attack on Hooke ( said to have been short and hunchbacked ) , rather than — or in addition to — a statement of modesty . On the other hand , the widely known proverb about standing on the shoulders of giants , published among others by seventeenth @-@ century poet George Herbert ( a former orator of the University of Cambridge and fellow of Trinity College ) in his <unk> <unk> ( 1651 ) , had as its main point that " a dwarf on a giant 's shoulders sees farther of the two " , and so its effect as an analogy would place Newton himself rather than Hooke as the ' dwarf ' . 
 In a later memoir , Newton wrote : 
 I do not know what I may appear to the world , but to myself I seem to have been only like a boy playing on the sea @-@ shore , and diverting myself in now and then finding a smoother pebble or a prettier shell than ordinary , whilst the great ocean of truth lay all undiscovered before me . 
 In 1816 , a tooth said to have belonged to Newton was sold for £ 730 ( us $ 3 @,@ 633 ) in London to an aristocrat who had it set in a ring . The Guinness World Records 2002 classified it as the most valuable tooth , which would value approximately £ 25 @,@ 000 ( us $ 35 @,@ 700 ) in late 2001 . Who bought it and who currently has it has not been disclosed . 
 Albert Einstein kept a picture of Newton on his study wall alongside ones of Michael Faraday and James Clerk Maxwell . Newton remains influential to today 's scientists , as demonstrated by a 2005 survey of members of Britain 's Royal Society ( formerly headed by Newton ) asking who had the greater effect on the history of science , Newton or Einstein . Royal Society scientists deemed Newton to have made the greater overall contribution . In 1999 , an opinion poll of 100 of today 's leading physicists voted Einstein the " greatest physicist ever ; " with Newton the runner @-@ up , while a parallel survey of rank @-@ and @-@ file physicists by the site <unk> gave the top spot to Newton . 
 = = = Commemorations = = = 
 Newton 's monument ( 1731 ) can be seen in Westminster Abbey , at the north of the entrance to the choir against the choir screen , near his tomb . It was executed by the sculptor Michael Rysbrack ( 1694 – 1770 ) in white and grey marble with design by the architect William Kent . The monument features a figure of Newton reclining on top of a sarcophagus , his right elbow resting on several of his great books and his left hand pointing to a scroll with a mathematical design . Above him is a pyramid and a celestial globe showing the signs of the Zodiac and the path of the comet of 1680 . A relief panel depicts putti using instruments such as a telescope and prism . The Latin inscription on the base translates as : 
 Here is buried Isaac Newton , Knight , who by a strength of mind almost divine , and mathematical principles peculiarly his own , explored the course and figures of the planets , the paths of comets , the tides of the sea , the dissimilarities in rays of light , and , what no other scholar has previously imagined , the properties of the colours thus produced . Diligent , sagacious and faithful , in his expositions of nature , antiquity and the holy Scriptures , he vindicated by his philosophy the majesty of God mighty and good , and expressed the simplicity of the Gospel in his manners . Mortals rejoice that there has existed such and so great an ornament of the human race ! He was born on 25 December 1642 , and died on 20 March 1726 / 7 . — Translation from G.L. Smyth , The Monuments and Genii of St. Paul 's Cathedral , and of Westminster Abbey ( 1826 ) , ii , 703 – 4 . 
 From 1978 until 1988 , an image of Newton designed by Harry Ecclestone appeared on Series D £ 1 banknotes issued by the Bank of England ( the last £ 1 notes to be issued by the Bank of England ) . Newton was shown on the reverse of the notes holding a book and accompanied by a telescope , a prism and a map of the Solar System . 
 A statue of Isaac Newton , looking at an apple at his feet , can be seen at the Oxford University Museum of Natural History . A large bronze statue , Newton , after William Blake , by Eduardo Paolozzi , dated 1995 and inspired by Blake 's etching , dominates the piazza of the British Library in London . 
 = = Religious views = = 
 Although born into an Anglican family , by his thirties Newton held a Christian faith that , had it been made public , would not have been considered orthodox by mainstream Christianity ; in recent times he has been described as a heretic . 
 By 1672 he had started to record his theological researches in notebooks which he showed to no one and which have only recently been examined . They demonstrate an extensive knowledge of early church writings and show that in the conflict between Athanasius and Arius which defined the Creed , he took the side of Arius , the loser , who rejected the conventional view of the Trinity . Newton " recognized Christ as a divine mediator between God and man , who was subordinate to the Father who created him . " He was especially interested in prophecy , but for him , " the great apostasy was <unk> . " 
 Newton tried unsuccessfully to obtain one of the two fellowships that exempted the holder from the ordination requirement . At the last moment in 1675 he received a dispensation from the government that excused him and all future holders of the Lucasian chair . 
 In Newton 's eyes , worshipping Christ as God was idolatry , to him the fundamental sin . Historian Stephen D. <unk> says of Newton , " Isaac Newton was a heretic . But ... he never made a public declaration of his private faith — which the orthodox would have deemed extremely radical . He hid his faith so well that scholars are still unravelling his personal beliefs . " <unk> concludes that Newton was at least a Socinian sympathiser ( he owned and had thoroughly read at least eight Socinian books ) , possibly an Arian and almost certainly an anti @-@ trinitarian . 
 In a minority view , T.C. <unk> argues that Newton held the Eastern Orthodox view on the Trinity . However , this type of view ' has lost support of late with the availability of Newton 's theological papers ' , and now most scholars identify Newton as an <unk> monotheist . 
 Although the laws of motion and universal gravitation became Newton 's best @-@ known discoveries , he warned against using them to view the Universe as a mere machine , as if akin to a great clock . He said , " Gravity explains the motions of the planets , but it cannot explain who set the planets in motion . God governs all things and knows all that is or can be done . " 
