 = = Awards and honours = = 
 Iron Cross ( 1914 ) 
 2nd Class 
 1st Class ( 27 September 1919 ) 
 Friedrich August Cross , 2nd class 
 Ottoman War Medal ( Turkish : Harp <unk> ) , known as the " Gallipoli Star " or " Iron Crescent " 
 Honour Cross of the World War 1914 / 1918 ( 6 December 1934 ) 
 Service Award ( Dienstauszeichnung ) 2nd to 4th Class ( 2 October 1936 ) 
 Service Award ( Dienstauszeichnung ) 1st Class ( 16 March 1938 ) 
 Spanish Naval Merit Cross ( Cruz del <unk> Naval ) 3rd Class ( 6 June 1939 ) 
 Spanish Naval Merit Cross in White ( Cruz Naval con <unk> Blanco ) ( 21 August 1939 ) 
 Spanish Naval Merit Cross in Gold ( Cruz Naval con <unk> Amarillo ) 3rd Class ( 21 August 1939 ) 
 Swedish Royal Order of the Sword ( <unk> <unk> ) ( 11 January 1941 ) 
 War Merit Cross , 2nd Class with Swords ( 20 January 1941 ) 
 Clasp to the Iron Cross ( 1939 ) 
 2nd and 1st Class ( May 1941 ) 
 Knight 's Cross of the Iron Cross on 27 December 1941 ( posthumously ) as captain and commander of battleship Bismarck 
 Mentioned in the Wehrmachtbericht on Wednesday , 28 May 1941 
 High Seas Fleet Badge ( posthumously 1 April 1942 ) 
 = = = Wehrmachtbericht reference = = = 
 = = = Lindemann Battery = = = 
 To honour the late Captain Lindemann , the heavy naval battery at <unk> , between Calais and Boulogne was christened " Batterie Lindemann " ( the Lindemann Battery ) on 19 September 1942 by the admiral in command of the Channel Coast Friedrich <unk> . The battery consisted of three heavy 40 @.@ 6 cm ( 16 in ) SK C / 34 guns housed in casemates , originally intended for the early H @-@ class battleships . Prior to this , the guns had been referred to as " Batterie Schleswig @-@ Holstein " or " Batterie Groß @-@ Deutschland " and were located in the Hel Peninsula , Poland . The battery was destroyed by Canadian forces on the evening of 26 September 1944 . Today the structure is partly covered by excavated material from the Channel Tunnel , and only the command bunker with a number of smaller strong points are still visible . 
 = = In popular culture = = 
 Austrian actor Carl Möhner played Captain Ernst Lindemann in the 1960 black @-@ and @-@ white British war film Sink the Bismarck ! The film was based on the novel The Last Nine Days of the Bismarck by C. S. Forester . 
 = = Translation notes = = 
 = Kingdom Hearts 3D : Dream Drop Distance = 
 Kingdom Hearts 3D : Dream Drop Distance ( キングダム ハーツ 3D [ <unk> <unk> <unk> ] , Kingudamu Hātsu Surī Dī [ <unk> <unk> <unk> ] , stylized Kingdom Hearts 3D [ Dream Drop Distance ] ) is an action role @-@ playing game developed and published by Square Enix exclusively for the Nintendo 3DS , revealed at E3 2010 . The game is the seventh installment in the bestselling Kingdom Hearts series and was released in Japan on March 29 , 2012 . It was released outside Japan on July 20 , 2012 in Europe , July 26 , 2012 in Australia and July 31 , 2012 in North America . 
 Taking place after the events of Kingdom Hearts Re : coded , the game focuses on Sora and Riku 's Mark of Mastery exam in which they have to protect parallel worlds in preparation for the return of Master Xehanort . Besides controlling the two playable characters across a single scenario , the player is able to recruit creatures known as Dream Eaters that are able to assist in fights . 
 The Square Enix staff decided to develop Dream Drop Distance after being impressed by the quality of the Nintendo 3DS . Taking advantage of the console 's functions , they increased the action elements from the series based on the system previously seen in Kingdom Hearts Birth by Sleep . Additionally , both the gameplay and the plot are meant to give a glimpse about what the following title in the series , Kingdom Hearts III , will be like . The game has been well received in Japan and in the US , selling over 250 @,@ 000 and 180 @,@ 000 units on its debuts respectively . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 The game , which largely follows the action RPG gameplay of previous games in the series , sees players alternate between the roles of Sora and Riku . Alternating between characters is done via the ' Drop ' system . During gameplay , a Drop Gauge gradually depletes over time , though it can be replenished with items . When the gauge completely empties , control will switch to the other character , though players may also opt to drop manually at any time . Drop Points , which are earned by defeating enemies and completing optional objectives , can be spent on bonuses that can be used until the next time the character drops , such as a slower Drop Gauge or increased attack or defense . The game reuses the Command Deck system from Birth by Sleep , in which players can customize a deck filled with various actions , spells , and items that can be quickly selected . There are also several new elements added to the gameplay . <unk> allows players to move quickly about by performing actions such as bouncing off walls , grinding on rails and spinning around poles . Reality Shift is a system the player can use on certain objects or weakened opponents involving a touch @-@ screen activated minigame unique to each world . These include dragging the screen to fling a target like a catapult , touching hidden words to take control of enemies , and playing a small rhythm @-@ based game to cause fireworks to appear . 
 One of the key elements of Dream Drop Distance is the inclusion of the Dream Eaters . Whilst they generally serve as the main enemies of the game , up to three good Dream Eaters , known as Spirits , can be recruited per character to assist them in battle . Spirits can be created by combining Dream Fragments together with an item or spell , either via experimenting with combinations or using recipes found throughout the game . Characters can also link with Spirits to perform unique attacks . Along the way , the player can care for these Spirits by petting them , feeding them items , or playing mini @-@ games with them , which can unlock new abilities for the Spirits . 
 The game takes place across multiple worlds based on Pinocchio , The Hunchback of Notre Dame , Tron : Legacy , Fantasia and The Three Musketeers , each having two different plots from the perspectives of Sora and Riku . These worlds need to be completed by both Sora and Riku in order to unlock new worlds and progress through the game . Upon visiting each world for the first time , each character must go through a Dive section , in which characters freefall down a tube and must clear a certain objective , such as obtaining a certain amount of points , defeating a certain amount of enemies in a time limit , or defeating a boss character . In this mode , Sora and Riku can attack opponents , slow down their descent , or dodge attacks . They can also pick up magic spells which give them a limited supply of magical attacks to use against enemies . 
 Outside of the main game , players can play an additional mode called Flick Rush , which can be played alone or with another player via wireless multiplayer . In this mode , players battle with a team of three Spirits and pit them against each other . Players fight against their opponent by flicking up cards from the touchscreen . Each card has a number value determining its attack strength , with multiple cards combining to increase the overall value . The player whose attack value is greater than their opponent 's gets to attack with their Spirit . A slowly replenishing meter determines how many cards the player can send out at a time , and each Spirit has a limited amount of cards that can be replenished by swapping them out with another Spirit . The first player to eliminate all of their opponent 's Spirits wins the game . 
 = = Plot = = 
 = = = Setting = = = 
 Dream Drop Distance features a total of seven playable worlds , most of them set in a " world submerged in sleep " , with all the Disney @-@ based worlds introduced being entirely new , ( with the exception of Riku 's version of Pinocchio 's world , a.k.a Monstro ) including : La Cité des Cloches from The Hunchback of Notre Dame ; The Grid from Tron : Legacy ; Prankster 's Paradise from Pinocchio ; Country of the Musketeers from Mickey , Donald , Goofy : The Three Musketeers ; and Symphony of Sorcery from Fantasia . The other two playable worlds are Traverse Town and The World That Never Was , while the worlds Twilight Town , Radiant Garden , Disney Castle , Mysterious Tower , Destiny Islands , and Castle Oblivion appear in cutscenes . 
 = = = Characters = = = 
 The game features Sora and Riku as the two main characters of the game , taking part in a test to improve their skills with their weapon , the Keyblade . The two are depicted during gameplay as their younger selves shown in the original game while also being given new clothes ; their older selves from Kingdom Hearts II also appear during cutscenes , and Sora in this incarnation is briefly playable during the end credits . A younger incarnation of Xehanort , first introduced as the optional " Mysterious Figure " boss from the North American and European releases of Kingdom Hearts Birth by Sleep , returns and serves as the game 's primary antagonist together with his two revived alter @-@ egos , " Ansem " and Xemnas . Several former members of Xemnas ' Organization XIII , including Lea and some of Ansem the Wise 's apprentices , return after being restored to their human forms . 
 Like previous games , Dream Drop Distance features various Disney characters , including Mickey Mouse , who is seen in the game in three different incarnations — his original characterization in the Kingdom Hearts series as the king of Disney Castle ; a musketeer as featured in Mickey , Donald , Goofy : The Three Musketeers ; and the young apprentice of Yen Sid shown in Fantasia . Donald Duck and Goofy make similar appearances as well . Characters hailing from their respective worlds remain in their worlds and play a small role in the main story , while Maleficent and Pete reprise their roles as antagonists , and Yen Sid as a supporting character . Unlike the other major installments , which feature an extensive cast of Final Fantasy characters , only a single Moogle appears from the franchise . Dream Drop Distance features appearances of Neku Sakuraba , Joshua , Shiki , Beat and Rhyme from The World Ends with You , another game owned by Square Enix with characters designed by Tetsuya Nomura , marking the first time that non @-@ Disney , non @-@ Final Fantasy characters have appeared in the series . 
 The game introduces a new type of creature called Dream Eaters , which come in two varieties — " Nightmares " , which eat good dreams and create nightmares , and serve as enemies similar to the Heartless , Nobodies , and Unversed from previous games ; and " Spirits " , which eat nightmares and create good dreams , and also act as Sora and Riku 's party members . 
 = = = Story = = = 
 Anticipating Master Xehanort 's return following the defeat of his Heartless Ansem and Nobody Xemnas , Yen Sid puts Sora and Riku through a Mark of Mastery exam to deem them Keyblade Masters and counter Xehanort . For the exam , they are sent to worlds that were restored at the end of Kingdom Hearts , albeit in a " sleeping " state disconnecting them from other worlds . These worlds , La Cité des Cloches from The Hunchback of Notre Dame ; The Grid from Tron : Legacy ; Prankster 's Paradise from Pinocchio ; Country of the Musketeers from Mickey , Donald , Goofy : The Three Musketeers ; and Symphony of Sorcery from Fantasia , are inhabited by Dream Eaters , creatures born from darkness that seek out the Keyholes of Sleep found there . Sora and Riku 's task is to reawaken the sleeping worlds by unlocking the seven Keyholes of Sleep , and then return to the realm of light ; they are advised to create benevolent " Spirit " Dream Eaters to guide them and battle the malevolent " Nightmare " Dream Eaters . 
 Sora and Riku are separated at the start of the exam , and find themselves each in a separate version of the first sleeping world , Traverse Town , where they are able to influence one another 's journey , as evidenced by their interactions with Neku Sakuraba , Joshua , Shiki , Beat and Rhyme . Throughout the exam , Sora and Riku cross paths with a gray @-@ haired youth who is mysteriously accompanied by Xemnas and Ansem , respectively . The three issue warnings to Sora and Riku and play on their weaknesses , but the two ignore them and continue their test . 
 Upon completing the exam , Sora mysteriously arrives in the World That Never Was instead of the realm of light . Sora re @-@ encounters the youth , who is revealed to be a version of Xehanort from the past sent to gather different versions of himself throughout time to serve as vessels for fragments of Xehanort 's heart . Although Sora defeats Xemnas , his heart is swallowed by darkness and encased in Ventus ' armor . Elsewhere , Ansem reveals that Riku has been traveling through Sora 's dreams as a Dream Eater . Riku defeats Ansem and enters the Castle That Never Was , where he defeats the young Xehanort . Afterward , Master Xehanort appears alongside eleven other incarnations of himself in a new Organization XIII and attempts to turn Sora into his final vessel , intending to pit his thirteen " seekers of darkness " against seven " guardians of light " in order to recreate the χ @-@ blade . He is foiled by Lea , the revived human form of the original Organization member , Axel , as well as Mickey , Donald Duck and Goofy . Master Xehanort and his vessels return to their respective time periods , but assures that they will clash when the time comes . 
 Sora 's body is brought back to Yen Sid 's tower , where Riku enters Sora 's dreams and releases his heart from Ventus ' armor , which has been possessed by a Nightmare . Riku then arrives at a digital version of the Destiny Islands , where he meets a copy of Ansem the Wise . Ansem assures that Sora is now awake , and gives Riku his research data he had left in Sora 's heart to help Sora save those connected to his heart . Upon returning to the realm of light , Riku is declared a Keyblade Master by Yen Sid for braving the realm of sleep a second time to reawaken Sora . Lea then revealed that he 's now trained to be the Keyblade <unk> and suddenly wielded his own Keyblade , much to everyone 's surprise . Sora is undaunted by his failure , and returns to the sleeping worlds where he thanks his Spirit Dream Eater companions . Meanwhile , at Castle Oblivion , Ventus spreads a smile on his face in his comatose state , indicating Sora 's happiness . 
 In the game 's secret ending , Yen Sid and Mickey discuss Xehanort 's plan . Yen Sid reveals his intent to gather seven Keyblade wielders strong enough to combat the new Organization XIII in order to prevent Xehanort from using the Princesses of Heart to forge the χ @-@ blade . To this end , he has Riku bring Kairi to be trained as a Keyblade wielder . 
 = = Development = = 
 The game was created by the same development team that worked on Kingdom Hearts Birth by Sleep , then part of Square Enix 's 1st Production Department . Since it contained members who worked for The World Ends with You , the group decided to use characters from said game in replacement of Final Fantasy characters . The decision to make a Kingdom Hearts game for the Nintendo 3DS was due to the positive impression the Square Enix staff had when viewing the console 's quality . The console inspired Nomura to make the Dive Mode function where the character moves to different worlds without the use of a vehicle , while the <unk> was thought prior to deciding which console use . The game 's title was used to reference its various themes , with " Dream " referencing the storyline , " Drop " for the gameplay style , and " Distance " referring to the main characters ' interaction , and , while unintentionally , the system 's autostereoscopic 3D effect . Although Tetsuya Nomura admitted the English used was not grammatically correct , the team still decided to use it based on the way it sounded . Development was notably shorter than the ones from previous Kingdom Hearts games . However , co @-@ director Tai Yasue emphasized how the finished product resembled Kingdom Hearts II and Birth by Sleep but improved . 
 The team wished for the game to have more action than the previous games . Nomura noted the similarities with Final Fantasy Versus XIII as a result of their similar styles . The new maneuvers employed in Dream Drop Distance are also meant to give a glimpse about how the next game in the series , Kingdom Hearts III , would look like . New worlds were included in the game as a result of multiple requests by fans . The switches between player characters Sora and Riku across the game are meant to contrast the style from Kingdom Hearts Birth By Sleep , which allowed the player to use three characters in their own campaigns , as well as explain the word " Distance " in the title because the two characters never interact across their stories . The Free Flow system was made using data from Birth by Sleep , which took nearly two weeks to obtain a form similar to the one from the game . The game originally intended to use returning Heartless and Nobodies as generic enemies . However , the setting gave the staff the idea of introducing new creatures , Dream Eaters , who would also join the player in fights . They were also inspired in part by Nintendogs + Cats — Nomura wished that his virtual dog could battle with other pets met through Streetpass and created the Dream Eaters based on this concept . They are used in the mini @-@ game Flick Rush which originally intended to allow players to use a picture . Nomura did not approve of this idea . 
 With Kingdom Hearts Re : coded , the staff revealed that Dream Drop Distance would revolve around Sora 's and Riku 's " Mark of Mastery " exam , but were worried about how to set it . The idea of Sora going through a dream was inspired by the subtitle of Kingdom Hearts : Birth by Sleep and served as a basis for the game . Sora and Riku were chosen as the playable characters in anticipation for the franchise 's ending of the " Xehanort arc " as well as to represent the theme of " the light and the dark sides of hearts " which the two characters represent . The former 's inclusion was also done due to the character 's popularity in Japan . Nomura has stated that the themes of the game are trust and friendship , and that like Birth by Sleep , the story is on par with that of a numbered title . As a result of the game 's plot , both Sora and Riku appear in their younger forms from the first Kingdom Hearts game . However , to avoid misconceptions that Dream Drop Distance was a remake of the original game , Nomura decided to change Sora 's and Riku 's outfits for most of the game . Despite using two protagonists , the game primarily focuses on Riku 's growth across the series . When starting production , the staff had decided to make the story as complex as possible , leading to the inclusion of several cutscenes which can be viewed by the player anytime they want . In order to make it more accessible , scenario writer Masaru Oka was in charge of the Chronicles feature , which explains events from previous games . The game 's story is also meant to connect directly with Kingdom Hearts III , although its original ending was not approved by the staff and was scrapped . Like previous titles , Dream Drop Distance has a secret ending that connects to Kingdom Hearts III although the staff found it unconventional in comparison to previous ones . 
 = = = Promotion and release = = = 
 The game was announced at the Electronic Entertainment Expo 2010 as " Kingdom Hearts 3D Demo " for the Nintendo 3DS . It was formally unveiled though at the Square Enix 1st Production Department Premier event at the Toho Cinemas in Tokyo , Japan on January 18 , 2011 with its first trailer along with its official name . During the game 's development , Nomura emphasized the mystery element of the story and confirmed that the theme of the game is trust . In July 2011 , a Famitsu article included an interview with Nomura in which he revealed that the game would have an unlockable secret movie . A playable demo released the same month also first featured the Dream Eaters as the player characters ' partners and the game 's generic enemy . A Dengeki issue featured another interview with Nomura , where he confirmed that he would be considering what he called an " HD Technical Test " in order to commemorate the series ' tenth anniversary and to entice new players to the series . This occurred on March 3 , 2012 in the form of a premiere event where footage from the game , including its full CGI introduction sequence , was showcased to celebrate the game 's release . 
 The game was first released in Japan on March 29 , 2012 , and in North American and Europe on July 31 , 2012 and July 20 , 2012 , respectively . In Australia , it was released on July 26 , 2012 . A limited edition titled " Mark of Mastery " was also released in North America featuring twelve art cards , AR cards able to unlock new Dream Eaters , and a protector case for the 3DS console . While this has been noted to be the shortest gaps between the Japanese and English releases in the Kingdom Hearts , the latter version does not include new features not seen in the former . However , the Mark of Mastery limited edition was made so that English gamers would be able to obtain bonus material that can only be obtained in Japan . The game is also included within the " Kingdom Hearts 10th Anniversary Box " package made in commemoration of the franchise 's 10th anniversary . The box also includes the Nintendo DS games Kingdom Hearts 358 / 2 Days and Kingdom Hearts Re : coded . Unlike Kingdom Hearts , Kingdom Hearts II and Birth by Sleep , there will not be an updated version of the game according to Tetsuya Nomura . 
 A guidebook , Kingdom Hearts 3D : Dream Drop Distance Ultimania ( キングダム ハーツ 3D [ <unk> <unk> <unk> ] <unk> ) , was published in Japan on May 1 , 2012 . Square Enix also published a light novel by Tomoko Kanemaki based on the game on June 28 , 2012 under the title of " Side Sora " . The second volume , titled " Side Riku " , was released in Japan on September 27 , 2012 . 
 A HD remaster of the game for PlayStation 4 was announced in September 2015 at Tokyo Game Show to be part of the upcoming compilation Kingdom Hearts HD 2 @.@ 8 Final Chapter Prologue and will be renamed in the compilation as Kingdom Hearts Dream Drop Distance HD . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 Unlike the previous games , the music for Kingdom Hearts 3D : Dream Drop Distance was a collaboration by Yoko Shimomura , Takeharu Ishimoto , and Tsuyoshi Sekito , containing musical compositions from all three . Among the songs included are tracks from The World Ends with You , originally composed by Ishimoto , who remixed them for Dream Drop Distance . Orchestral arrangements were provided by Kaoru Wada . The Kingdom Hearts Dream Drop Distance Original Soundtrack was released in Japan on April 18 , 2012 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The Tokyo Game Show featured a playable demo which earned the game top honors as " Best 3DS RPG " in RPG Land 's Tokyo Game Show Awards , following a hands @-@ on report that praised the boss fights . RPG Site also praised the game upon its first impression , calling the demo " refreshing " . Reception to the game 's released trailers , demos and general information was generally positive , and the game ranked among Famitsu 's 25 " most wanted " list in October 2011 . The Official Nintendo Magazine listed it eighth in their " Games of 2012 " feature . In an IGN poll , it ranked as the most expected Nintendo 3DS game for 2012 's summer . It also won the " Most Valuable Game Award " from the Nintendo Power magazine . 
 In its first review , Famitsu gave Dream Drop Distance a rating of 10 / 9 / 10 / 9 , or a total of 38 / 40 , in their March 22 , 2012 issue , which made Dream Drop Distance the second highest rated game in the series for them , after Kingdom Hearts II . The game debuted at the top of Media Create 's sales charts , selling 213 @,@ 579 copies during its first week . The release was also noted to have helped boost the sales of the Nintendo 3DS console . Although the amount of pre @-@ orders surpassed that of Kingdom Hearts 358 / 2 Days for the Nintendo DS , the first week 's sales were lower . Nevertheless , Media Create noted that this was due to the comparison between the amount of units sold between the Nintendo DS and the Nintendo 3DS during the time the games were released , with the former having sold more copies than the latter . The game continued to appear in Media Create 's polls for the next several weeks , selling a total of 311 @,@ 688 units as of May 2012 . In North America , the game sold 200 @,@ 000 units during August 2012 , with 180 @,@ 000 regular editions and 20 @,@ 000 Mark of Mastery editions . 
 English publications have given Kingdom Hearts 3D moderately positive reviews , with lower scores than Japanese review outlets , generally praising the gameplay while criticizing the plot . It received an aggregated score of 78 @.@ 70 % on GameRankings and 75 / 100 on Metacritic . Game Informer writer Bryan Vore praised the new gameplay elements and , unlike other reviewers , how well the story handles the franchise 's plot , especially as it was set after that of Kingdom Hearts II , unlike many of the other newer titles in the series . Audrey Drake from IGN echoed similar comments about the gameplay , but felt that the story was sometimes not very interesting . Mark Walton from GameSpot praised the combat systems and environment design , though he wished that the game didn 't force the player through the levels linearly and dismissed the plot as " labyrinth @-@ like " with poor dialogue and confusing motivations . Bob Mackey of 1UP.com was harsher on the game than other reviewers ; while he too found the plot incomprehensible , he also felt that the numerous game mechanics combined together to form a confusing and frustrating system . The reviewer for GameTrailers had a different take , finding the combination of mechanics to form " the best battle system in the series to date " and was not a dismissive of the plot , though they did note that it required a lot of knowledge of previous games in the series to follow . Leah Jackson of G4 had one of the highest reviews for the game out of the major English review outlets ; though she had similar praises and criticisms as other reviewers , she felt that the gameplay and graphics more than made up for the sometimes confusing plot . 
 = = HD 2 @.@ 8 Final Chapter Prologue = = 
 In the credits of Kingdom Hearts HD 2 @.@ 5 Remix , clips of Dream Drop Distance were shown as well as the inclusion of a secret ending related to the game , hinting at a possible additional collection . In September 2015 , Square Enix announced Kingdom Hearts HD 2 @.@ 8 Final Chapter Prologue . The collection features an HD remaster of Dream Drop Distance as well as Kingdom Hearts χ Back Cover , set to tell the tale of the Foretellers and revealing new parts of the series ' history in HD cinematics , and Kingdom Hearts 0 @.@ 2 : Birth by Sleep – A Fragmentary Passage , a new part of the story taking place after the events of the original Birth by Sleep , told from the perspective of Aqua . It will be released worldwide in December 2016 . 
 = Frank Buckles = 
 Frank Woodruff Buckles ( born Wood Buckles , February 1 , 1901 – February 27 , 2011 ) was a United States Army soldier and the last surviving American veteran of World War I. He enlisted in the U.S. Army in 1917 at the age of 16 and served with a detachment from Fort Riley , driving ambulances and motorcycles near the front lines in Europe . 
 During World War II , he was captured by Japanese forces while working in the shipping business , and spent three years in the Philippines as a civilian prisoner . After the war , Buckles married in San Francisco and moved to Gap View Farm near Charles Town , West Virginia . A widower at age 98 , he worked on his farm until the age of 105 . 
 In his last years , he was Honorary Chairman of the World War I Memorial Foundation . As chairman , he advocated the establishment of a World War I memorial similar to other war memorials in Washington , D.C .. Toward this end , Buckles campaigned for the District of Columbia War Memorial to be renamed the National World War I Memorial . He testified before Congress in support of this cause , and met with President George W. Bush at the White House . 
 Buckles was awarded the World War I Victory Medal at the conclusion of that conflict , and the Army of Occupation of Germany Medal retroactively following the medal 's creation in 1941 , as well as the French Legion of Honor in 1999 . His funeral was on March 15 , 2011 , at Arlington National Cemetery , with President Barack Obama paying his respects prior to the ceremony with full military honors . 
 = = Early life and education = = 
 Buckles was born to James Clark Buckles , a farmer , and Theresa J. Buckles ( née Keown ) in Bethany , Missouri , on February 1 , 1901 . He had two older brothers , Ashman and Roy , and two older sisters , Grace and Gladys . Several family members lived long lives ; he remembered speaking with his grandmother who was born in 1817 , and his father lived to be 94 . His ancestry included soldiers of the Revolutionary and Civil Wars . 
 In 1903 , Frank — then known as Wood — and his brother Ashman contracted scarlet fever . Frank survived , but Ashman died from the disease at the age of four . Between 1911 and 1916 , Buckles attended school in Walker , Missouri . Later , he and his family moved to Oakwood , Oklahoma , where he continued his schooling and worked at a bank . He was an amateur wireless operator , and an avid reader of newspapers . 
 = = World War I and interwar years = = 
 Five months after the American entry into World War I , Buckles sought to enlist in the armed forces . He was turned down by the Marine Corps for being too small , and by the Navy , which claimed that he had flat feet . He fared better with the Army , which accepted that he was an adult even though he looked no older than his 16 years . A sergeant advised that a middle initial would be helpful , so he adopted his uncle 's name , " Frank Woodruff Buckles " . Another sergeant suggested that the quickest way to the front lines would be to seek a position driving ambulances . 
 Buckles enlisted on August 14 , 1917 , and went through basic training at Fort Riley in Kansas . Later that year , he embarked for Europe aboard the RMS Carpathia , which was being used as a troop ship . During the war , Buckles drove ambulances and motorcycles for the Army 's 1st Fort Riley Casual Detachment , first in England and then France . He later recalled his service as a doughboy : 
 " There was never a shortage of blown @-@ up bodies that needed to be rushed to the nearest medical care . The British and French troops were in bad shape – even guys about my age looked old and tired . After three years of living and dying inside a dirt trench , you know the Brits and French were happy to see us " doughboys . " Every last one of us Yanks believed we ’ d wrap this thing up in a month or two and head back home before harvest . In other words , we were the typical , cocky Americans no one wants around , until they need help winning a war . " 
 Buckles saw the war 's impact on malnourished children in France , and more than 80 years later he could remember helping to feed them . After the Armistice in 1918 , Buckles escorted prisoners of war back to Germany . One German prisoner gave him a belt buckle inscribed " Gott mit uns " ( English : God with us ) , which he kept for the rest of his life . Buckles was promoted to corporal on September 22 , 1919 . Following an honorable discharge in November 1919 , he returned to the United States aboard USS Pocahontas . 
 Early in the interwar period , he attended the dedication of the Liberty Memorial in Kansas City , Missouri , in honor of the Americans who died in World War I , and met General of the Armies John Pershing , who commanded the American Expeditionary Forces in Europe during the war . Buckles then attended business school in Oklahoma City , and found work at a shipping company in Toronto , Canada . From 1922 to 1923 , he served with the Seventh Regiment of the New York National Guard in New York City where he also worked in financial services . 
 Next came a career as chief purser on cargo and passenger ships travelling to South America , Europe , and Asia . In the 1930s , German and British passengers expressed fears about the Nazis , and military officers told him that Germany was equipping for war . Buckles witnessed antisemitism and its effects firsthand while ashore in Germany , and he warned acquaintances in Germany that their country would be brought down by Adolf Hitler , whom he encountered at a German hotel . Employed at sea during the Great Depression , he forwarded an $ 800 Army bonus to his father who was struggling as a farmer in the Oklahoma Dust Bowl ( Buckles provided these details many decades later ) . 
 = = During and after World War II = = 
 As of 1940 , Buckles had been employed by the White Star , American President , and W.R. Grace shipping companies , and in that year shipping business took him to Manila in the Philippines . After the outbreak of the Pacific War and the invasion of the Philippines , he reportedly remained in Manila to help resupply U.S. troops . He was captured in January 1942 by Japanese forces , and spent the next three years and two months as a civilian internee in the Santo Tomas and Los Baños prison camps . 
 As a prisoner , he battled starvation , receiving only a small meal of mush served in a tin cup — a utensil he kept for the rest of his life . With a weight below 100 pounds ( 45 kg ) , Buckles developed beriberi , and led fellow captives in calisthenics to counter the effects of imprisonment . Their captors showed little mercy , but Buckles was allowed to grow a small garden , which he often used to help feed children who were imprisoned there . 
 All of the captives were freed following a raid by Allied forces on February 23 , 1945 . Before the war he had become fluent in German , Spanish , Portuguese , and French , and by its end had learned some Japanese . 
 After World War II , Buckles moved to San Francisco , and married Audrey Mayo in 1946 . Eight years later , the couple bought the 330 @-@ acre ( 1 @.@ 3 km2 ) Gap View Farm in West Virginia where they raised cattle . Ancestors named Buckles had settled near Gap View Farm centuries earlier . 
 In 1955 , their only child , Susannah , was born . By then , the world traveller had settled down to a life of farm activities , social events , and serving as an officer ( eventually president ) of the county historical society . Audrey Buckles died in 1999 , and their daughter moved back to the farm to care for him . 
 = = Active centenarian = = 
 After the start of the 21st century , Buckles continued living near Charles Town , West Virginia , and was still driving a tractor on his farm at age 103 . He stated in an interview with The Washington Post on Veterans ' Day 2007 that he believed the United States should not go to war " unless it 's an emergency " . He has also stated that , " If your country needs you , you should be right there , that is the way I felt when I was young , and that 's the way I feel today . " 
 When asked the secret of long life , Buckles replied that being hopeful and not hurrying were key traits , adding : " When you start to die ... don 't " . In another interview , the centenarian talked about genetics , exercise , and a healthy diet , but put " the will to survive " above everything else . 
 Buckles joined actor Gary Sinise in 2007 to lead a Memorial Day parade , and that evening his life was featured on NBC Nightly News . With the death of 108 @-@ year @-@ old Harry Richard Landis in February 2008 , Buckles became the last surviving American veteran of World War I. The following month , he met with United States President George W. Bush at the White House . The same day , he attended the opening of a Pentagon exhibit featuring photos of nine centenarian World War I veterans , with Defense Secretary Robert Gates in attendance . That summer , he visited wounded soldiers at Walter Reed Army Medical Center . 
 Buckles was the Honorary Chairman of the World War I Memorial Foundation , which seeks refurbishment of the District of Columbia War Memorial and its establishment as the National World War I Memorial on the National Mall . He was named ABC 's World News Tonight 's " Person of the Week " on March 22 , 2009 , in recognition of his efforts to set up the memorial . Those efforts continued , as Buckles appeared before Congress on December 3 , 2009 , advocating on behalf of such legislation . He did so as the oldest person who ever testified before Congress . On Armistice Day ( i.e. Veterans Day ) of 2010 , he made a further appeal : 
 " We still do not have a national memorial in Washington , D.C. to honor the Americans who sacrificed with their lives during World War I. On this eve of Veterans Day , I call upon the American people and the world to help me in asking our elected officials to pass the law for a memorial to World War I in our nation 's capital . These are difficult times , and we are not asking for anything elaborate . What is fitting and right is a memorial that can take its place among those commemorating the other great conflicts of the past century . On this 92nd anniversary of the armistice , it is time to move forward with honor , gratitude , and resolve . " 
 Passage of the legislation remained in doubt , because opponents sought relocation of the proposed monument , or alternatively some benefit for the District of Columbia . As of July 2013 , U.S. Senator Pat Toomey was concerned that such a memorial would lead to the National Mall becoming " cluttered " . 
 A Freemason and longtime Shriner , Buckles was a member of the Osiris Shriners of Wheeling , West Virginia , and he became " the oldest Shriner in <unk> " . Other interests of his included genealogy ; he had been a member of the West Virginia Society of the Sons of the American Revolution since 1935 , and was active for many years in the Sons of Confederate Veterans . He was a Life Member of the National Rifle Association . 
 On February 1 , 2010 — Buckles ' 109th birthday — his official biographer , David DeJonge , announced a forthcoming documentary about him , entitled " Pershing 's Last Patriot " , described as a cumulative work of interviews and vignettes . DeJonge estimated a 2011 release for the documentary , and actor Richard Thomas is expected to narrate the film . 
 In late 2010 , Buckles was still giving media interviews and became a supercentenarian upon his 110th birthday , on February 1 , 2011 . 
 On February 27 , 2011 , Buckles died of natural causes at his home at the age of 110 years and 26 days . He was the second @-@ oldest living man in the United States at the time of his death ( Walter Breuning died 46 days later ) . 
 = = Commemoration and funeral = = 
 Buckles did not meet the criteria for burial at Arlington National Cemetery as he had never been in combat , but friends and family secured special permission from the federal government in 2008 . That was accomplished with the help of Ross Perot , who had met him at a history seminar in 2001 , and who intervened in 2008 with the White House regarding a final resting place . 
 Upon Buckles ' death on February 27 , 2011 , President Barack Obama ordered that the American flag be flown at half @-@ staff on all government buildings , including the White House and U.S. embassies , on the day in March when Buckles would be buried at Arlington . Leading up to the March 15 funeral , the governors of 16 states likewise called for lowering their states ' flags to half @-@ staff . 
 The United States Senate passed a resolution on March 3 , 2011 , honoring " the last veteran to represent the extraordinary legacy of the World War I veterans " . Concurrent resolutions were proposed in both the Senate and the House of Representatives for Buckles to lie in honor in the United States Capitol rotunda . However , that plan was blocked by Speaker of the House John Boehner and Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid . When asked for explanation , their spokesmen would not elaborate on reasons for the decision . Boehner and Reid instead advocated a ceremony in the Amphitheater of Arlington National Cemetery . Various people had supported a rotunda ceremony , including Buckles ' daughter , a great @-@ grandson of Sir Winston Churchill , and former Republican Party presidential nominee Bob Dole . 
 Faculty and students at Buckles ' high school in Missouri gathered to honor him on March 8 , 2011 . His home church in Charles Town held a memorial service , attended by the Episcopal bishop of West Virginia , members of Buckles ' family and others . On March 12 , 2011 , a ceremony was held at the Liberty Memorial in Kansas City , Missouri , to honor Buckles and the " passing of the Great War generation " . The keynote speaker was former Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff Richard Myers . 
 A ceremony at Arlington National Cemetery 's Memorial Amphitheater Chapel preceded the interment on March 15 . During the ceremony prior to burial , President Barack Obama and Vice President Joe Biden paid their respects and met with the family . 
 Buckles ' flag @-@ draped coffin was borne to the burial plot on a horse @-@ drawn caisson , and the folded flag was handed to his daughter by United States Army Vice Chief of Staff General Peter W. Chiarelli . Buckles was buried with full military honors in plot 34 , near General of the Armies John J. Pershing . Reporter Paul Duggan of The Washington Post summed up the occasion : 
 The hallowed ritual at grave No. 34 @-@ 581 was not a farewell to one man alone . A reverent crowd of the powerful and the ordinary — President Obama and Vice President Biden , laborers and store clerks , heads bowed — came to salute Buckles 's deceased generation , the vanished millions of soldiers and sailors he came to symbolize in the end . 
 In Martinsburg , West Virginia , on March 26 , 2011 , a candlelight vigil was held in memory of Buckles . Attendees made donations for a planned statue of him in Charles Town . 
 In addition to being the last U.S. veteran of World War I , Buckles was the oldest World War I veteran in the world at the time of his death , as well as the last field veteran of the war . Following his death and funeral , there were two surviving World War I veterans , Florence Green and Claude Choules , both of whom served in the British Armed Forces . Choules died on May 5 , 2011 ; Green died on February 4 , 2012 . 
 = = Honors and awards = = 
 For his service during World War I , Buckles received , from the United States government , the World War I Victory Medal and four Overseas Service Bars . He also qualified for the Army of Occupation of Germany Medal due to his postwar service in Europe during the year 1919 , and received that medal after it was created in 1941 . Buckles did not qualify for the Prisoner of War Medal , because he was a civilian at the time of his imprisonment by the Japanese . 
 As a resident of Jefferson County , West Virginia , he was involved for many years with the Jefferson County Historical Society ( including as President from 1960 to 1964 ) . In 1981 , the honor of Emeritus Officer was conferred upon him by that organization . 
 In 1999 , French president Jacques Chirac awarded him France 's Legion of Honour , for his service during World War I. 
 In 2007 , the United States Library of Congress included Buckles in its Veterans History Project ( VHP ) . Information about Buckles ' experiences in both world wars is available from the VHP , including a 148 @-@ minute video interview . 
 In 2008 , a section of West Virginia Route 9 , which passes by his Gap View Farm home , was named in his honor by West Virginia Governor Joe Manchin . The following month , Buckles received the Veterans of Foreign Wars ’ Gold Medal of Merit at the Liberty Memorial . Also in 2008 , he sat for a portrait to be displayed at the National World War I Museum . Buckles received the Scottish Rite of Freemasonry 's Knight Commander of the Court of Honour ( <unk> ) in September 2008 . 
 = Brander – Spencer model = 
 The Brander – Spencer model is an economic model in international trade originally developed by James Brander and Barbara Spencer in the early 1980s . The model illustrates a situation where , under certain assumptions , a government can subsidize domestic firms to help them in their competition against foreign producers and in doing so enhances national welfare . This conclusion stands in contrast to results from most international trade models , in which government non @-@ interference is socially optimal . 
 The basic model is a variation on the Stackelberg – Cournot " leader and follower " duopoly game . Alternatively , the model can be portrayed in game theoretic terms as initially a game with multiple Nash equilibria , with government having the capability of affecting the payoffs to switch to a game with just one equilibrium . Although it is possible for the national government to increase a country 's welfare in the model through export subsidies , the policy is of beggar thy neighbor type . This also means that if all governments simultaneously attempt to follow the policy prescription of the model , all countries would wind up worse off . 
 The model was part of the " New Trade Theory " that was developed in the late 1970s and early 1980s , which incorporated then recent developments from literature on industrial organization into theories of international trade . In particular , like in many other New Trade Theory models , economies of scale ( in this case , in the form of fixed entry costs ) play an important role in the Brander – Spencer model . 
 = = Entry game version = = 
 A simplified version of the model was popularized by Paul Krugman in the 1990s in his book <unk> Prosperity . In this set up there are two firms , one foreign and one domestic which are considering entering a new export market in a third country ( or possibly the whole world ) . The demand in the export market is such that if only one firm enters , it will make a profit , but if they both enter each will make a loss , perhaps because of initial set up , infrastructure , product development , marketing or other fixed costs of entry . The matrix below presents a stylized example of the game that the two firms are engaged in . 
 The available choices of the domestic firms are given on the left , while those of the foreign firm are on top . The first number in each cell denotes the payoff to the domestic firm while the second number is the payoff to the foreign firm . 
 The game with no government subsidy to the domestic firm is shown in Figure 1 on the left . If both firms enter , they each suffer a loss of 10 million dollars and if they both stay out of the market neither firm makes a profit or a loss . If only one firm enters however , that firm will realize a profit of 50 million dollars while the other firm will make nothing . The two Nash equilibria of this game ( marked in purple ) are the situations in which only one firm enters – but which firm , domestic or foreign , is indeterminate . In such a situation if the foreign firm has a slight initial advantage over the domestic firm ( perhaps because it began product development earlier ) the domestic firm will stay out and the foreign firm will enter . 
 The game changes however if the government credibly promises to subsidize the domestic firm if it enters the market , as illustrated in Figure 2 . Suppose the government promises a subsidy of twenty million , regardless of whether the foreign firm also enters or not . In that case , if the foreign firm enters the domestic firm will lose ten million from entry costs but will be more than compensated by the government subsidy , ending up with a net payoff of ten million . If the foreign firm does not enter of course , it is still profitable for the domestic firm to enter . As a result , regardless of the action of the foreign firm , the domestic firm 's incentive is to enter the market . Anticipating this , the foreign firm will stay out of the market itself , since otherwise it would incur a loss . 
 From the point of view of the domestic country , the subsidy is welfare improving . The 20 million subsidy is a transfer from the government to the firm hence it has no effect on national welfare ( ignoring costs of taxation ; as long as these are not too large the basic insight of the model goes through ) . Additionally the domestic firm gains 50 million which would have otherwise gone to the foreign firm . 
 = = Stackelberg – Cournot version = = 
 The original Brander and Spencer paper presented the game in the framework of a Cournot competition model . 
 Letting x denote the output of the domestic firm and y denote the output of the foreign firm , the inverse demand function ( price as a function of total quantity ) is given by <formula> . Hence the profit function for the domestic firm is <formula> where <formula> is total revenue , <formula> is total cost of producing x units , and s is per unit subsidy provided by the government . The profit function for the foreign firm is similar except that it does not include a subsidy , <formula> . 
 Each firm chooses the quantity to supply in order to maximize profits , taking the other 's choice as given . The ( first order ) conditions for profit maximization are <formula> for the domestic firm and <formula> for the foreign firm , where subscripted variables denote partial derivatives . Solving these for y implicitly defines a best response function for each firm ; <formula> and <formula> . These are illustrated in the figure below , with the domestic firm 's output on the x axis and foreign firm 's output on the y axis . 
 With no government subsidy ( s = 0 ) the resulting equilibrium will be the standard Cournot outcome , as shown in the graph by the intersection of the best response functions . A subsidy however has the effect of shifting the domestic firm 's best response function to the right . Because its output is subsidized , the domestic firm increases production . This in turn means that the foreign firm 's best response is to cut output , although not proportionally ( hence , the market price falls ) . In the new equilibrium domestic firm produces more and foreign firm produces less . 
 In the model , domestic social welfare can be defined as the home firm 's profit net of the subsidy ( the model can be extended so that social welfare includes the firm 's monopoly profit as well as the wages paid to the firm 's workers ; the results are qualitatively the same ) . It can be shown that the profit function evaluated at equilibrium quantity levels is concave in s and eventually negatively sloped . As a result , there is an " optimal subsidy " which maximizes the domestic firm 's profits and hence domestic social welfare . As it turns out , if the government sets the subsidy exactly at the optimal level , the resulting equilibrium is the same as that of the " leader and follower " Stackelberg model . In that case one of the firms ( in this case the domestic firm ) has the ability to choose its output first . This creates the ability to credibly commit to a particular action , resulting in " first mover advantage " . In the <unk> – Spencer model , the government 's subsidy creates this credible commitment even when the private firm does not have that ability . 
 = = Extensions = = 
 = = = Domestic consumption of export good = = = 
 In standard models of international trade a fall in the price of a country 's export good – a deterioration in its terms of trade – generally decreases the home country 's welfare . In the Brander – Spencer model however the opposite is true . This is because in this model the markets are not perfectly competitive and the revenue from the expanded quantity sold compensates the firm for the revenue lost from the lower export price . If the good produced by the firm is also consumed domestically however the result is a bit more complicated . In the case where the firm is able to separate the home and export market ( charge different prices in each with no possibility of third party arbitrage ) then the level of the optimal subsidies will depend on whether marginal costs of production are constant , increasing or decreasing . The optimal subsidy level is either the same , higher or lower , respectively , compared to the level with no domestic consumption . This underscores the need on the part of the government for very precise information on industry structure and firm 's cost functions . 
 In the more general case where the firm cannot price discriminate between domestic and foreign consumers the effects of a subsidy are less clear since both an expansion of exports and deterioration of terms of trade are present . However , <unk> and Spencer show that starting out from the position of no subsidy , introducing a small subsidy can improve a country 's welfare . 
 = = = Extended government game = = = 
 The basic model can be extended to incorporate a supra @-@ game played by the governments of the respective countries . In this case , each government chooses the level of subsidy it will provide to its firm , taking the other government 's action as given , and anticipating the reaction of the firms ( in terms of quantity produced ) to the subsidy . Brander and Spencer show that in the resulting Nash equilibrium the governments choose a level of subsidy that is too high and hence they do not manage to maximize social welfare . In fact , if the good produced is not consumed domestically , then the optimal level of subsidy is negative – an export tax . This is because the total quantity produced in the Cournot and the Stackelberg equilibrium is higher than the profit maximizing collusive monopoly level of output . Since both the home and foreign firm are producing for a third market , an export tax could reduce the total quantity produced down to the monopoly level , thus increasing both firms ' profits . In that way the governments can effect a collusive outcome between their firms , at the expanse of the third country which imports the good . 
 = = Policy applications and applied work = = 
 = = = General difficulties = = = 
 As pointed out by Paul Krugman , the Brander – Spencer model , due to the sensitivity of the results to its assumptions , does not establish a generally applicable policy prescription in favor of government subsidies . Rather , it provides an example for when such intervention may be justifiable and points to some conditions which may favor it . 
 A general difficulty with the application of the model , like many game theoretic models , is that it does not easily lend itself to econometric testing and parameter estimation . As a result , the two avenues of empirical research that have been pursued in subsequent literature have been estimates of a " conjectural variation " parameter for particular industries , and calibration of the models using behavioral parameters from other studies . The former approach assumes that firms have a " conjecture " as to how the other firms will react to their own choice of output and base their decision on this belief . However , the approach is problematic , both from an analytical ( it is not internally consistent ) and an empirical point of view ( there 's no guarantee that the parameter , even if it makes conceptual sense , remains stable when a new policy – the government 's subsidy – is introduced ) . <unk> of models of industry structure on the other hand have generally found that most industry are neither Cournot ( in which case the Brander – Spencer policy prescription would be an export subsidy ) nor Bertrand ( in which case the optimal policy is an export tax ) . As a result , it is hard to say in which industries exactly the Brander – Spencer policy prescription may apply . 
 = = = Agriculture = = = 
 Marie Thursby has used an extended version of the model to examine international trade in wheat , 60 % of which is produced by the United States and Canada . Thursby includes marketing boards , possibility of a monopsony , and a variety of government policies in the analysis . She finds that while there are significant economies of scale in the industry , the barriers to entry are not high and regardless of the extent of market power that US firms have in the industry , the optimal policy is actually an export tax , rather than a subsidy . 
 = = = Aircraft = = = 
 In his book which presented the model to the general public , Paul Krugman used the example of the aircraft industry , with the two players being Airbus and Boeing . In fact , Krugman and Baldwin examined the industry for wide bodied aircraft in the context of the model in a 1988 paper . The authors calibrate an extended version of the model in order to examine the effect of a subsidy to Airbus by European governments , and its presence in a market which can only support two firms at most , worldwide . They find that the subsidy had an unambiguously negative effect on welfare of the United States and a positive effect on rest of the world , which benefits from lower prices . The result for Europe hinges on price elasticity of demand ; for relatively inelastic demand the net effect of subsidy is positive with most of the benefits accruing to European consumers , but for elastic demand , social welfare in Europe goes down . Importantly , unlike in the baseline Brander and Spencer model , Krugman and Baldwin find that the changes to consumer surplus resulting from the subsidy and entry , dominate the effect of changes in firm profits in social welfare calculations . 
 <unk> Klepper , in an analysis similar to Krugman and Baldwin , has also used the Brander Spencer and other models to analyze the effects of entry into the transport aircraft industry . He included the effects of learning during the production process which depends on the scale of production . His calibrated model suggested that per unit production costs can fall by as much as 20 % if total production is doubled . In that case , the entry of another firm ( in this case , Airbus ) into the market would decrease per firm output and reduce the learning and scale effects . In his analysis , the entry of Airbus would cause an increase in consumer surplus , but this would be smaller than the resulting loss in producer surplus . 
 = = Criticism = = 
 In general , like with many of the New Trade Theory models , the results of the Brander Spencer model and the policy prescriptions it generates are very sensitive to the underlying assumptions on the nature of the industry in question , the information available to the national government , its ability to credibly commit to an action and the likely response of foreign governments . Some of these criticisms were already noted by Brander and Spencer in their paper , where they advised caution . 
 Further work on the model has shown that a slight difference in assumptions can produce completely different results . For example , Eaton and Grossmann showed that if the firms compete in prices rather in quantities ( Bertrand competition rather than Cournot ) then the optimal policy is an export tax rather a subsidy – a policy rarely used in practice , politically unpopular and contrary to protectionist sentiment which generally touted New Trade Theory models as an argument for their favored policies . 
 = = Influence = = 
 The 1985 paper " Export Subsidies and International Market Share Rivalry " , which presented the original version of the model , was the most cited paper in the Journal of International Economics since the inception of the journal in 1971 ( as of 2000 ) . 
 = Connecticut Wing Civil Air Patrol = 
 The Connecticut Wing Civil Air Patrol is the highest echelon of the Civil Air Patrol in the state of Connecticut . Headquartered in Beers Hall at the Connecticut Valley Hospital campus in Middletown , Connecticut , the Connecticut Wing ( CTWG ) has 14 primary subordinate units located throughout the state to help it carry out its missions . The missions include providing aerospace education and training for all of its members , teaching leadership skills to Connecticut youth , and performing various domestic emergency services for the United States of America in a noncombatant capacity . 
 Members were notably instrumental in major events during the Wing 's 66 @-@ year history , carrying out operations in World War II , 9 / 11 , and the Hurricane Katrina disaster . The Wing has received numerous awards and recognitions , including unit citations from the Northeast Region Headquarters and National Headquarters , as well as government recognition by local , state and federal officials . Several individual members , including most cadet officers , are recognized by the Connecticut General Assembly upon receiving their promotions . Governor M. Jodi Rell declared December 1 , 2007 , Civil Air Patrol Day in the State of Connecticut , in recognition of the continuing efforts of the Wing and held as an anniversary to the Wing 's creation on December 1 , 1941 . The Wing currently has more than 700 members . 
 = = History = = 
 During World War II , Connecticut Wing was heavily involved in coastal patrol and anti @-@ submarine missions along its section of the Atlantic coast . For this , it received two air medals from the U.S. government . Connecticut Wing also flew recovery operations to rescue American pilots who had lost their aircraft domestically . One of the Sikorsky S @-@ 39 Flying Boats used for recovery operations is now on display at the New England Air <unk> Bradley International Airport in Windsor Locks , Connecticut . 
 Among the other missions that Connecticut Wing currently performs is the Long Island Sound Patrol ( LISP ) program . LISP flies patrol missions across Long Island Sound during the summer months in coordination with the United States Coast Guard to provide more immediate assistance to vessels in distress . The Wing was credited with numerous finds and saves in the year following its inception in summer 2007 , and plans are in effect to continue the program . 
 = = Current command structure = = 
 As of December 2011 , the wing commander of the CTWG is Col Ken Chapman . The interim vice commander position is held by Lt Col Darren Cioffi . The chief of staff is Lt Col Jim Ridley . The vice commander is responsible for coordinating the wing echelon with the subordinate units , specifically the squadrons . The vice commander is also an assistant of the wing commander , serving as the coordinator of various special projects . The chief of staff is responsible for the staff members located at wing headquarters , who are independent of the individual squadrons . Finally , the wing commander is responsible for connecting the two groups and ensuring that the chief of staff uses the wing staff members to benefit the squadrons who receive these benefits through the vice commander . 
 Most of the wing @-@ level staff positions fit into various departments led by directors . For example , Emergency Services Officer ( DOS ) and Ground Training Officer ( GO ) fit into the Operations Department , led by the Director of Operations ( DO ) . Other positions are not in departments , such as the Finance Officer ( FM ) and Safety Officer ( SE ) . 
 Wing staff members meet at the headquarters building , Beers Hall , on the Connecticut Valley Hospital campus in Middletown , Connecticut . They also attend monthly " staff call " meetings to improve internal communication . 
 = = Squadrons = = 
 All 12 of Connecticut 's squadrons report directly to either the Western Connecticut Group or the Eastern Connecticut Group . The Groups report to Wing Headquarters . There are also three non @-@ standard squadrons ( 000 , 001 , and 999 ) under Wing HQ , and there are liaisons with units in other branches of the armed forces , including the <unk> at the University of Connecticut , which partners with Civil Air Patrol ( CAP ) . 
 = = Commanders = = 
 Col Peter Jensen began a history restoration project in 2007 in an effort to uncover as much about Connecticut Wing 's history as possible . Photographs were found of all of the previous Wing commanders , and were restored by Wing staff members . Notable commanders of the Connecticut Wing include Col Tier ( née Hopkins ) , who was the niece of Lady Astor and the Civil Air Patrol 's first female wing commander . Col Frost was slated to be the next Northeast Region commander after he relinquished command of the Wing , but he died before assuming command . Col Howard Palmer during his term as Wing commander established activities for the cadet membership , and the Col Howard E. Palmer Memorial Cadet Ball is conducted annually in his honor by the Connecticut Wing Cadet Advisory Council . 
 = = Icons and symbols = = 
 The most prominent icon representing the wing is the Connecticut Wing 's patch , with an ultramarine blue background and bearing the image of its mascot , Connie the Search and Rescue Dog . The wing patch was required to be worn on the left sleeve of the battle dress uniform until 2006 when National Headquarters made it optional . Each squadron also has a distinctive patch . A 2007 issue of the Civil Air Patrol Volunteer magazine featured an image of all of Connecticut Wing 's squadron patches surrounding the Wing patch . High @-@ resolution images of the patches are also being taken as part of the history project undertaken by Col Jensen . 
 Connecticut Wing is also symbolized by the name " Charter Oak " , which precedes all CTWG radio callsigns . Since Connecticut is in the Northeast region , it also uses callsigns that start with " CAP Stone " , the Northeast region prefix . 
 = = Cadet activities = = 
 The largest cadet activity held by the Wing is the annual Summer Encampment . The 2008 Encampment , which was held at the Norwich Academy in Vermont , is the first encampment not held in Niantic , Connecticut , for a decade , as reported in the CAP Encampment Reports . The Encampment is being held jointly with New Hampshire and Vermont Wings . There is also an Encampment , Non @-@ Commissioned Officer Academy , Leadership School and Honor Guard Academy , all of which are being held at Otis Air Force Base . The Connecticut Wing liaison for these multi @-@ Wing encampments is Lt Col <unk> . 
 Lt Col <unk> also runs the application process as per national regulations for the National Cadet Special Activities in the Civil Air Patrol . 
 Connecticut Wing was featured in the March 2007 edition of Civil Air Patrol Volunteer magazine for an event held at Hartford @-@ Brainard Airport in Hartford , Connecticut , in conjunction with the Connecticut State Police , which provided volunteers side @-@ by @-@ side training with search @-@ and @-@ rescue dogs . Connecticut Wing cadets are currently involved in a competition between squadrons in the field of model rocketry . The final competition is to be held in June 2008 in conjunction with <unk> Rocketry Club , the local chapter of the National Association of Rocketry . 
 The Wing 's Cadet Advisory Council also hosts the annual Col Howard E Palmer Cadet Ball in recognition of the longest @-@ serving Wing commander . The event is held during the fall season each year and is intended as an informal social gathering to promote inter @-@ squadron cooperation . Nearly one half of the Wing 's cadets attended the 2007 Cadet Ball , with an estimated 139 in attendance . 
 Additionally , the Connecticut Wing holds an annual conference during October . This time is used to allow the Wing commander to address the entire Wing , for guest speakers to give keynote speeches , and for the annual awards to be presented to their recipients . Several competitions for the cadets occur at each conference , including a military drill and ceremonies competition and a public speaking competition . Col Mary <unk> , after whom one of CAP 's cadet awards is named in honor of her work in women 's rights in aviation , was the keynote speaker at the 2007 conference . It is also common to have government representatives attend , including members of the state legislature . 
 = = Recognition and accomplishments = = 
 The CAP National History project and National Museum most recognize CTWG for their involvement in coastal patrol missions during World War II , shortly after the creation of CAP . Since CAP was created in a time of crisis , when Brigadier General Billy Mitchell was warning the country of impending attack and less than a week before the attack on Pearl Harbor , Hawaii , coastal patrol and submarine searching became the prime missions of CAP . 
 In the New England Air Museum , located at Bradley International Airport in Windsor Locks , Connecticut , a Sikorsky S @-@ 39 Flying Boat can be found that was used during World War II for rescuing pilots of subchasers that had gone down . A local artist painted an oil painting of the aircraft , now prominently displayed next to it in the exhibit . Photos of the exhibit , the unveiling ceremony , and the oil painting can be found at the Wing Headquarters building . 
 The first two Air Medals presented by the president of the United States to the Civil Air Patrol went to Hugh Sharp and Eddie Edwards , who conducted the rescue in the S @-@ 39 . This successful program , which spotted 173 German U @-@ Boats , dropped 57 depth charges , hit 10 of the U @-@ Boats , and sank two of them , was inevitably discontinued after the end of the second World War . Many of the planes used specifically for this program are now parts of exhibits , replaced by new aircraft that are more suited to teaching young students to fly and performing search and rescue , the current missions of the Civil Air Patrol . Currently , CTWG has two Cessna <unk> , two Cessna <unk> and one Cessna <unk> with Garmin <unk> Glass cockpit . Connecticut Wing has the highest number of hours flown per aircraft of any state in the North East Region , and ranks high on a national scale . 
 The membership of the CTWG grew from 500 to 600 total active members during the 2007 fiscal year , making the largest percent increase of any wing in CAP for that year , as was announced at the April 2007 Wing Conference in Cromwell , Connecticut . 
 = Wouldn 't Take Nothing for My Journey Now = 
 Wouldn 't Take Nothing for My Journey Now , published in 1993 , is African @-@ American writer and poet Maya Angelou 's first book of essays . It was published shortly after she recited her poem " On the Pulse of Morning " at President Bill Clinton 's 1993 inauguration . Journey consists of a series of short essays , often autobiographical , along with two poems , and has been called one of Angelou 's " wisdom books " . It is titled after a lyric in the song Keep Your Eyes on the Prize . At the time of its publication , Angelou was already well respected and popular as a writer and poet . Like her previous works , Journey received generally positive reviews . 
 = = Background = = 
 Wouldn 't Take Nothing for My Journey Now ( 1993 ) is Maya Angelou 's first book of essays , published shortly after she recited her poem " On the Pulse of Morning " at the inauguration of US President Bill Clinton , making her the first poet to make an inaugural recitation since Robert Frost at John F. Kennedy 's 1961 inauguration . Her recitation resulted in more recognition for her previous works and broadened her appeal " across racial , economic , and educational boundaries " . Journey is , together with the 1997 book Even the Stars Look Lonesome , one of the volumes that writer Hilton Als called Angelou 's " wisdom book , comprising " homilies strung together with autobiographical texts " . 
 Journey was published during the period between her fifth and sixth autobiographies , All God 's Children Need Traveling Shoes ( 1986 ) and A Song Flung Up to Heaven ( 2002 ) . Angelou 's second book of essays , Even the Stars Look Lonesome , was published in 1997 . She had earlier published several volumes of poetry , including the Pulitzer Prize @-@ nominated Just Give Me a Cool Drink of Water ' fore I Diiie ( 1971 ) . Angelou 's first personal essays were published in Essence in late 1992 . The positive response from her readers and the encouragement of her friend Oprah Winfrey inspired her to write Journey . She later admitted that the public 's response was " puzzling " to her . She also stated that she attempted to be " accessible " to her readers in the book . Journey appeared on The New York Times bestseller list and had an initial printing of 300 @,@ 000 copies . The Los Angeles Times , in a report about the 1993 financial struggles of Angelou 's publisher , Random House , speculated that the success of Journey partly compensated for the publisher 's other losses . 
 By 1993 , when Journey was published , Angelou had become recognized and highly respected as a spokesperson for Blacks and women . She was , as scholar Joanne Braxton stated , " without a doubt ... America 's most visible black woman autobiographer " . She had also become , as reviewer Richard Long stated , " a major autobiographical voice of the time " . Angelou was one of the first African @-@ American female writers to publicly discuss her personal life , and one of the first to use herself as a central character in her books . Writer Julian Mayfield , who called her first autobiography I Know Why the Caged Bird Sings " a work of art that eludes description " , stated that Angelou 's series set a precedent not only for other Black women writers , but for the genre of autobiography as a whole . 
 = = Overview = = 
 Wouldn 't Take Nothing for My Journey Now consists of 24 " journalistic homilies " or " meditations " , many of which are autobiographical , that range in number from 63 to a few hundred words . <unk> Carpenter of Religion News Service considered Journey as a part of the increase in popularity of motivational and inspirational books written by and for African Americans during the mid @-@ 1990s . The book 's topics include fashion , entertainment , sensuality and pregnancy , racism and death . Her character sketches are similar to the descriptions of people , including those of herself , that appear throughout her autobiographies . The book contains two poems , " Mrs. V.B. " about her mother Vivian Baxter , who was one of the first Black females to join the merchant marines , and an untitled poem about the similarities between all people , despite their racial and cultural differences . The book 's title , which Angelou called " a great song " , was taken from a gospel song first recorded by The Happy Goodman Family , which became their " signature song " , in the late 1950s : 
 = = Reviews = = 
 As with Angelou 's previous works , reviews of Wouldn 't Take Nothing for My Journey Now were generally positive . Mary Jane Lupton compared the essays in Journey to traditional Asian poetry and to the writings of Confucius . Many reviewers saw similarities between the essays in the book and Angelou 's autobiographical writing . Anne Patterson @-@ Rabon , who was emotionally impacted by Angelou 's essays , praised Angelou for her effective use of essays to tell her story and to illustrate her points . Lupton compared many of the events and character sketches in this book to descriptions in Angelou 's autobiographies . She compared two essays about Angelou 's grandmother to the descriptions in Angelou 's first autobiography I Know Why the Caged Bird Sings , and the essay " Extending the Boundaries " to her quarrel with her husband 's mistress in The Heart of a Woman . Marigold A. Clark of the Bowling Green , Kentucky Daily News called Journey " an autobiography like none other " . She praised Angelou for using " her experiences as examples " . 
 Genevieve <unk> of Publishers Weekly called the essays in Journey " quietly inspirational pieces " . Anne Whitehouse of The New York Times wrote that the book would " appeal to readers in search of clear messages with easily digested meanings " . Patterson @-@ Rabon stated that the book " sings " like the song from which it got its title . Journey made an emotional impact on Clark , who stated : " The reader can almost hear her voice through the written words . " Paul D. Colford of the Los Angeles Times said that the essays in the book " pass as easily as an evening breeze " . 
 = The Wolverine ( film ) = 
 The Wolverine is a 2013 superhero film featuring the Marvel Comics character Wolverine . The film , distributed by 20th Century Fox , is the sixth installment in the X @-@ Men film series . Hugh Jackman reprises his role from previous films as the title character , with James Mangold directing a screenplay written by Scott Frank and Mark Bomback , based on the 1982 limited series Wolverine by Chris Claremont and Frank Miller . In the film , which follows the events of X @-@ Men : The Last Stand , Logan travels to Japan , where he engages an old acquaintance in a struggle that has lasting consequences . Stripped of his healing factor , Wolverine must battle deadly samurai while struggling with guilt . 
 The film 's development began in 2009 after the release of X @-@ Men Origins : Wolverine . Christopher McQuarrie was hired to write a screenplay for The Wolverine in August 2009 . In October 2010 , Darren Aronofsky was hired to direct the film . The project was delayed following Aronofsky 's departure and the Tōhoku earthquake and tsunami in March 2011 . In June 2011 , Mangold was brought on board to replace Aronofsky . Bomback was then hired to rewrite the screenplay in September 2011 . The supporting characters were cast in July 2012 with principal photography beginning at the end of the month around New South Wales before moving to Tokyo in August 2012 and back to New South Wales in October 2012 . The film was converted to 3D in post @-@ production . 
 The Wolverine was released on July 24 , 2013 in various international markets ; and was released on July 25 , 2013 in Australia , and on July 26 , 2013 in the United States to generally positive reviews . The film earned US $ 414 @.@ 8 million worldwide , nearly 3 @.@ 5 times its production budget of $ 120 million and was the fifth highest @-@ grossing film in the series . The film was the first in the X @-@ Men film series not to feature the word " X @-@ Men " in the title . 
 = = Plot = = 
 In 1945 , Logan is held in a Japanese POW camp near Nagasaki . During the atomic bombing of Nagasaki , Logan rescues an officer named Ichirō Yashida and shields him from the blast . 
 In the present day , Logan lives as a hermit in Yukon , tormented by hallucinations of Jean Grey , whom he was forced to kill several years ago ( X @-@ Men : The Last Stand ) . He is located by Yukio , a mutant with the ability to foresee people 's deaths , on @-@ behalf of Yashida , now the CEO of a technology zaibatsu . Yashida , who is dying of cancer , wants Logan to accompany Yukio to Japan so that he may repay his life debt . In Tokyo , Logan meets Yashida 's son , Shingen , and granddaughter , Mariko . There , Yashida offers to transfer Logan 's healing abilities into his own body , thus saving Yashida 's life and alleviating Logan of his near @-@ immortality , which Logan views as a curse . Logan refuses and prepares to leave the following day . That night , Yashida 's physician Dr. Green ( also known as Viper ) introduces something into Logan 's body , but Logan dismisses it as a dream . 
 The next morning , Logan is informed that Yashida has died . At the funeral , Yakuza gangsters attempt to kidnap Mariko , but Logan and Mariko escape together into the urban sprawl of Tokyo . Logan is shot and his wounds do not heal as quickly as they should . After fighting off more Yakuza on a bullet train , Logan and Mariko hide in a local love hotel . Meanwhile , Yashida 's bodyguard Harada meets with Dr. Green who , after demonstrating her mutant powers on him , demands he find Logan and Mariko . Logan and Mariko travel to Yashida 's house in Nagasaki , and the two slowly fall in love . Meanwhile , Yukio has a vision of Logan dying , and goes to warn him . Before Yukio arrives , Mariko is captured by the Yakuza . After interrogating one of the kidnappers , Logan and Yukio confront Mariko 's fiancée , corrupt Minister of Justice Noburo Mori . Mori confesses that he conspired with Shingen to have Mariko killed because Yashida left control of the company to Mariko , and not Shingen . 
 Mariko is brought before Shingen at Yashida 's estate when ninjas led by Harada attack and whisk her away . Logan and Yukio arrive later and , using Yashida 's X @-@ ray machine , discover a robotic parasite attached to Logan 's heart , suppressing his healing ability . Logan cuts himself open and extracts the device . During the operation , Shingen attacks but Yukio holds Shingen off long enough for Logan to recover and kill Shingen . Logan follows Mariko 's trail to the village of Yashida 's birth , where he is captured by Harada 's ninjas . Logan is placed in a machine by Dr. Green , who reveals her plans to extract his healing factor and introduces him to the Silver Samurai , an electromechanical suit of Japanese armour with energized swords made of adamantium . Mariko escapes from Harada , who believes he is acting in Mariko 's interests , and manages to free Logan from the machine . Harada sees the error of his ways and is killed by the Silver Samurai while helping Logan escape . 
 Meanwhile , Yukio arrives and kills Dr. Green as Logan fights the Silver Samurai . The Silver Samurai severs Logan 's adamantium claws and begins to extract Logan 's healing abilities , revealing himself to be Yashida , who had faked his death . Yashida starts to regain his youth , but Mariko intervenes and stabs Yashida with Logan 's severed claws while Logan regenerates his bone claws and kills Yashida . Logan collapses and has one final hallucination of Jean , in which he decides to finally let go of her . Mariko becomes CEO of Yashida Industries and bids farewell to Logan as he prepares to leave Japan . Yukio vows to stay by Logan 's side as his bodyguard , and they depart to places unknown . 
 In a mid @-@ credits scene , Logan returns to the United States two years later and is approached at the airport by Erik Lehnsherr , who warns him of a grave new threat to the mutant race , and Charles Xavier , who Logan previously thought was dead . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Hugh Jackman as Logan / Wolverine : A mutant , whose prodigious healing abilities and adamantium infused skeleton combine to make him virtually immortal . Jackman also portrayed the character in the previous X @-@ Men films . In terms of his character Jackman views Wolverine as " the ultimate outsider " and that " the great battle , I always thought with Wolverine , is the battle within himself " . Regarding Logan 's struggle with extreme life longevity , Jackman said , " He realizes everyone he loves dies , and his whole life is full of pain . So it 's better that he just escapes . He can 't die really . He just wants to get away from everything . " Jackman stated that he ate six meals a day in preparation for the role . Jackman contacted Dwayne Johnson for some tips on bulking up for the film . Johnson suggested that for six months , he gain a pound a week , by eating 6 @,@ 000 calories a day which consisted of " an awful lot of chicken , steak and brown rice " . 
 Hiroyuki Sanada as Shingen Yashida : Yashida 's son as well as Mariko 's father and corporate rival , who is proficient in kendo . 
 Tao Okamoto as Mariko Yashida : Yashida 's granddaughter , whose life becomes threatened as a result of her grandfather 's will . About her character , Okamoto said that Mariko is no pushover and is proficient in karate and knife @-@ throwing . 
 Rila Fukushima as Yukio : A precognitive mutant and one of the deadliest assassins in Yashida ’ s clan . Fukushima said , " My character 's very physical . Yukio and Wolverine have a lot in common . She really takes care of him and he also cares about her . " Mangold described Yukio as a lethal fighter who is " both sexy and almost kind of sprung from the anime world . " 
 Famke Janssen as Jean Grey : A mutant and former member of the X @-@ Men , who Logan killed at the end of X @-@ Men : The Last Stand . Jackman said , " There ’ s no doubt that the most important relationship in his life is — we ’ ve seen through the movies — is his relationship with Jean Grey . Yes , we saw her die at the end of ‘ X @-@ Men : The Last Stand , ’ but in this movie , she has a presence , which I think is vital to the movie , particularly for him confronting the most difficult thing within himself . " 
 Will Yun Lee as <unk> Harada : A former lover of Mariko and head of the Black Ninja Clan , sworn to protect the Yashida family . Lee said that he underwent rigorous sword training for the film . 
 Svetlana Khodchenkova as Dr. Green / Viper : A mutant , who has an immunity to toxins . About her character , Khodchenkova said " Viper doesn 't really have many people that she cares about , most of them she just uses for her own purpose . " Mangold said , " as her name would imply , she 's kind of snakelike , " and that Viper views Logan " like a great hunter might view hunting a lion in his quarry . " 
 Haruhiko <unk> as Yashida : Shingen 's father , Mariko 's grandfather and the head of Yashida Industries , a powerful technology zaibatsu . Ken Yamamura portrays young Yashida . 
 Brian Tee as Noburo Mori : A corrupt minister of justice , who is engaged to Mariko . 
 Additionally , Patrick Stewart and Ian McKellen reprise their roles as Charles Xavier / Professor X and Erik Lehnsherr / Magneto in cameo appearances during the mid @-@ credits scene . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 In September 2007 , Gavin Hood , director of X @-@ Men Origins : Wolverine , speculated that there would be a sequel , which would be set in Japan . During one of the post credits scenes Logan is seen drinking at a bar in Japan . Such a location was the subject of Chris Claremont and Frank Miller 's 1982 limited series on the character , which was not in the first film as Jackman felt " what we need to do is establish who [ Logan ] is and find out how he became Wolverine " . Jackman stated the Claremont @-@ Miller series is his favorite Wolverine story . Of the Japanese arc , Jackman also stated , " I won ’ t lie to you , I have been talking to writers ... I ’ m a big fan of the Japanese saga in the comic book . " Before X @-@ Men Origins : Wolverine 's release , Lauren Shuler Donner approached Simon Beaufoy to write the script , but he did not feel confident enough to commit . By May 4 , 2009 , Jackman 's company Seed Productions was preparing several projects , including a sequel to X @-@ Men Origins : Wolverine to be set in Japan , but neither Jackman nor Seed has a production credit on the completed 2013 sequel . On May 5 , 2009 , just days after the opening weekend of X @-@ Men Origins : Wolverine , the sequel was officially confirmed . 
 Christopher McQuarrie , who went uncredited for his work on X @-@ Men , was hired to write the screenplay for the Wolverine sequel in August 2009 . According to Shuler @-@ Donner , the sequel would focus on the relationship between Wolverine and Mariko , the daughter of a Japanese crime lord , and what happens to him in Japan . Wolverine would have a different fighting style due to Mariko 's father having " this stick @-@ like weapon . There 'll be samurai , ninja , katana blades , different forms of martial arts - mano @-@ a @-@ mano , extreme fighting . " She continued : " We want to make it authentic so I think it 's very likely we 'll be shooting in Japan . I think it 's likely the characters will speak English rather than Japanese with subtitles . " In January 2010 , at the People 's Choice Awards , Jackman stated that the film would start shooting sometime in 2011 , and in March 2010 McQuarrie declared that the screenplay was finished for production to start in January the following year . Sources indicated Darren Aronofsky was in negotiations to direct the film after Bryan Singer turned down the offer . 
 = = = Pre @-@ production = = = 
 In October 2010 , Jackman confirmed that Aronofsky would direct the film . Jackman commented that with Aronofsky directing , Wolverine 2 will not be " usual " stating , " This is , hopefully for me , going to be out of the box . It 's going to be the best one , I hope ... Well , I would say that , but I really do feel that , and I feel this is going to be very different . This is Wolverine . This is not Popeye . He 's kind of dark ... But , you know , this is a change of pace . Chris McQuarrie , who wrote The Usual Suspects , has written the script , so that 'll give you a good clue . [ Aronofsky 's ] going to make it fantastic . There 's going to be some meat on the bones . There will be something to think about as you leave the theater , for sure " . The film was scheduled to begin principal photography in March 2011 in New York City before the production moves to Japan for the bulk of shooting . 
 While Jackman in 2008 characterized the film as " a sequel to Origins " , Aronofsky in November 2010 said the film , now titled The Wolverine , was a " one @-@ off " rather than a sequel . Also in November , Fox Filmed Entertainment sent out a press release stating that they have signed Aronofsky and his production company Protozoa Pictures to a new two @-@ year , overall deal . Under the deal , Protozoa would develop and produce films for both 20th Century Fox and Fox Searchlight Pictures . Aronofsky ’ s debut picture under the pact would have been The Wolverine . 
 In March 2011 , Aronofsky bowed out of directing the film , saying in a statement , " As I talked more about the film with my collaborators at Fox , it became clear that the production of The Wolverine would keep me out of the country for almost a year .... I was not comfortable being away from my family for that length of time . I am sad that I won 't be able to see the project through , as it is a terrific script and I was very much looking forward to working with my friend , Hugh Jackman , again " . Fox also decided to be " in no rush " to start the production due to the damage incurred in Japan by the 2011 Tōhoku earthquake and tsunami . Despite this , Jackman said the project was moving ahead . " It 's too early to call on Japan , I 'm not sure where they 're at . So now we 're finding another director , but Fox is very anxious to make the movie and we 're moving ahead full steam to find another director " . 
 In May 2011 , Fox had a list of eight candidates to replace Aronofsky , including directors José <unk> , Doug Liman , Antoine Fuqua , Mark Romanek , Justin Lin , Gavin O 'Connor , James Mangold and Gary Shore . In June 2011 , Fox entered negotiations with Mangold and intended to start principal photography in fall 2011 . In July 2011 , Jackman said he planned to begin filming in October 2011 and that he would fight the Silver Samurai . 
 In August 2011 , The Vancouver Sun reported that filming would take place from November 11 , 2011 to March 1 , 2012 at the Canadian Motion Picture Park in Burnaby , British Columbia . Almost immediately , filming was postponed to spring 2012 so Jackman could work on Les Misérables . In September , Mark Bomback was hired to rewrite McQuarrie 's script . At one point , Bomback tried to work Rogue into the script , but he rejected it for being " goofy " and " problematic " . In February 2012 , a July 26 , 2013 , release date was set , and in April , filming was set to begin in August 2012 in Australia , which would serve as the primary location due to financial and tax incentives . 
 In July 2012 , actors Hiroyuki Sanada , Hal <unk> , Tao Okamoto and Rila Fukushima had been cast as Shingen , Yashida , Mariko and Yukio , respectively . Additionally , Will Yun Lee was cast as Harada , and Brian Tee as Noburo Mori . By July 2012 , Deadline.com said Jessica Biel would play Viper . However , at the 2012 San Diego Comic @-@ Con International , Biel said her role in the film was " not a done deal " , explaining , " People keep talking about this . I don 't know anything about it . It 's a little bit too soon for that kind of an announcement " . A few days later , negotiations between Biel and 20th Century Fox had broken down . Later in July , Fox had begun talks with Svetlana Khodchenkova to take over the role . Somewhat unusually for action movies , The Wolverine features four female lead roles and " passes the Bechdel Test early and often " , according to Vulture . Mangold noted that he wrote his heroines so that " they all have missions . They all have jobs to do other than be the object of affection " , intent of avoiding the " worn out " trope of the woman in jeopardy . 
 In August 2012 , Guillermo del Toro revealed he had been interested in directing the film , as the Japanese arc was his favorite Wolverine story . After meeting with Jim Gianopulos and Jackman , del Toro passed , deciding he did not wish to spend two to three years of his life working on the movie . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 On a production budget of $ 120 million , principal photography began on July 30 , 2012 . Shuler Donner had to be absent through most of the production due to breast cancer , with her treatment ending just before post @-@ production begun . Some of the earliest scenes were shot at the <unk> Point Reserve in <unk> , New South Wales , which doubled as a Japanese prisoner @-@ of @-@ war camp . Filming there ended on August 2 , 2012 , with production scheduled to continue around Sydney followed by a few weeks in Japan before wrapping up in mid @-@ November . On August 3 , 2012 , production moved to Picton , which doubled as a town in Canada 's Yukon region . 
 On August 25 , 2012 , Mangold said that production moved to Tokyo and began shooting . On September 4 , 2012 , filming took place outside Fukuyama Station in Fukuyama , Hiroshima . Filming in <unk> , a port in the <unk> ward of Fukuyama , concluded on September 11 , 2012 . 
 On October 8 , 2012 , production returned to Sydney with filming on Erskine Street near Cockle Bay . The following week , the film shot in Parramatta , which doubled as a Japanese city . Also in October , Mangold revealed that the film follows the events of X @-@ Men : The Last Stand , saying , " Where this film sits in the universe of the films is after them all . Jean Grey is gone , most of the X @-@ Men are disbanded or gone , so there ’ s a tremendous sense of isolation for [ Wolverine ] . " Mangold later stated that in the fight scenes , " there 's an urgency and a kind of intensity and hand to hand physicality that I hope is a little different than everything else out there . " On October 25 , 2012 production relocated to Sydney Olympic Park in western Sydney . The set was made into a Japanese village draped in snow with filming beginning on November 1 , 2012 . On November 10 , 2012 , filming took place on a back street in Surry Hills . The set , constructed on Brisbane St. , was transformed to look like a Japanese street with Japanese signage and vehicles scattered throughout . Principal photography concluded on November 21 , 2012 . 
 Reshoots took place in Montreal , including the credits scene where Magneto and Professor X warn Wolverine of a new threat . Said scene was contributed by Bryan Singer and Simon Kinberg , writers of X @-@ Men : Days of Future Past , as a way to " reintroduce Patrick Stewart into the universe " and set up their film . Mangold stated that while production of The Wolverine started before Days of Future Past and thus the film was mostly focused on being a self @-@ contained story , he was able to collaborate with Singer to " make things groove together " . 
 = = = Post @-@ production = = = 
 In October 2012 , it was reported that The Wolverine would be converted to 3D , making it the first 3D release for one of 20th Century Fox 's Marvel films . Visual effects for the film were completed by Weta Digital , Rising Sun Pictures ( <unk> ) , <unk> , and Shade VFX . 
 In order to recreate the atomic bombing of Nagasaki , <unk> studied natural phenomena such as volcanoes , instead of relying on archived footage of atomic blasts , and recreated the effects digitally . They also replaced the Sydney cityscape on the horizon with views of Nagasaki . The walking bear featured in the Yukon scenes was created with computer graphics by Weta Digital , while Make @-@ Up Effects Group built a 12 foot tall animatronic bear , that was used for shots of the creature dying after it had been hit by poisoned arrows fired by hunters . 
 For a fight scene taking place on top of a speeding bullet train , the actors and stunt performers filmed on wires above a set piece surrounded by a greenscreen . The moving background , filmed on an elevated freeway in Tokyo , was added later . Weta Digital visual effects supervisor Martin Hill said the team adopted a " Google Street View method " , explaining " But instead of having a big panoramic cam on top of a van , we built a rig that had eight 45 degree angle Red Epic [ cameras ] that gave us massive resolution driving down all the massive lanes of the freeway . We let a bit of air out of the tires of the van and kept a constant 60 kilometers an hour . So if we shot at 48 fps we just needed to speed up the footage by 10 times to give us the 300 kilometers an hour required . " 
 The Silver Samurai , rendered by Weta Digital , was based on a model that had been 3D printed and chrome painted using electrolysis . Stunt performer Shane Rangi , wearing a motion capture suit , stood on stilts while filming as the Silver Samurai . Rangi 's performance was then used to animate the digital character . Hill said the main challenge was creating the Silver Samurai 's highly reflective surface , " He 's pretty much chrome . We were worried that he was going to look incredibly digital and that it was going to be very hard to make him look solid and real and not just like a mirrored surface . " 
 The original assembly cut of the film ran around two hours and 35 minutes . The mid @-@ credit scene was written by Simon Kinberg and shot by the X @-@ Men : Days of Future Past crew , though Mangold directed the scene . 
 = = Music = = 
 In September 2012 , Marco Beltrami , who previously scored James Mangold 's film 3 : 10 to Yuma ( 2007 ) , announced that he had signed on to score The Wolverine . Following Mangold 's noir and Spaghetti Western inspirations for the film , Beltrami explained , " I think I do every movie as a western whether it is or not , so there ’ s definitely some of the spaghetti western influence on my music throughout the score , and I guess throughout a lot of my work . I wouldn ’ t say there was a particular movie that influenced me more than something else . There was nothing that I was trying to mimic or anything . " On associating sounds with the film 's primary location , Beltrami said , " I think the last thing that Jim [ Mangold ] and I wanted to do was Japanese music associated with Japanese places . There 's a reference ; I do use Japanese instruments , [ but ] not really in a traditional way . " The score was performed by an 85 @-@ piece ensemble of the Hollywood Studio Symphony at the Newman Scoring Stage at 20th Century Fox . 
 Track listing 
 All music composed by Marco Beltrami . 
 iTunes bonus track 
 = = Release = = 
 The Wolverine was released in 2D and 3D theaters on July 24 , 2013 , in various international markets , on July 25 , 2013 in Australia , and on July 26 , 2013 in the United States . The film was titled Wolverine : Immortal in Brazil and Spanish @-@ language markets . The film premiered in Japan on September 13 , 2013 under the title Wolverine : Samurai ( <unk> : <unk> , <unk> Samurai ) . 
 = = = Marketing = = = 
 On October 29 , 2012 , director James Mangold and actor Jackman hosted a live chat from the set of the film . The chat took place on the official website and the official YouTube account of the film . 
 The first American trailer and international trailer of The Wolverine were released on March 27 , 2013 . Empire Magazine said " This is all very encouraging stuff from director James Mangold , a man who 's obviously not afraid of tweaking the original source material to serve his own ends . " The trailer was later attached to G.I. Joe : Retaliation . The second American trailer was then released on April 18 , 2013 and was screened at CinemaCon in Las Vegas , Nevada . 
 The third American trailer was released on May 21 , 2013 and then on June 13 , 2013 , the second international trailer was released . 
 On July 20 , 2013 , 20th Century Fox presented The Wolverine along with Dawn of the Planet of the Apes and X @-@ Men : Days of Future Past to the 2013 San Diego Comic @-@ Con with Jackman and Mangold in attendance to present new footage of the film . 
 20th Century Fox partnered with automotive company Audi to promote the film with their sports car Audi R8 and their motorcycle Ducati . Other partners included sugar @-@ free chewing gum brand 5 and casual dining restaurant company Red Robin . 
 = = = Home media = = = 
 The Wolverine was released on DVD , Blu @-@ ray , and Blu @-@ ray 3D on December 3 , 2013 . The Blu @-@ ray set features an exclusive unrated extended cut of the film referred to as the " Unleashed Extended Edition " . This version of the film was screened for the first time at 20th Century Fox Studios on November 19 , 2013 . It contains 12 extra minutes , primarily including an extended battle with Harada 's ninjas during the start of the film 's third act as well as additional footage during moments of character interaction . The BBFC gives its running time as <unk> 22s , only six minutes longer . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Box office = = = 
 Along with the improvements in critical reception , The Wolverine outgrossed Origins in total box office , though earned less domestically . The film closed in US theaters on December 5 , 2013 , grossing $ 132 @,@ 556 @,@ 852 in North America ( as opposed to $ 179 @,@ 883 @,@ 157 for the earlier film ) and $ 282 @,@ 271 @,@ 394 in other territories ( as opposed to the earlier film 's $ 193 @,@ 179 @,@ 707 ) , for a worldwide total of $ 414 @,@ 828 @,@ 246 . The film earned $ 139 @.@ 6 million on its worldwide opening weekend . When compared to the rest of the X @-@ Men film franchise , The Wolverine has garnered somewhat mixed results in terms of box office success . While its domestic gross is greater than the production budget , it is still lower than the other five films of the franchise , with its domestic box office total being roughly $ 45 @.@ 1 million less than the franchise 's average . However , its overseas total currently exceeds the franchise 's average by roughly $ 75 @.@ 7 million and is significantly more than any of the other X @-@ Men films . With a worldwide total of roughly $ 414 @.@ 8 million , The Wolverine was at that time the third highest grossing film . 
 = = = = North America = = = = 
 In North America , the film opened at the top of the box office on its opening day , with $ 20 @.@ 7 million , with $ 4 million coming from Thursday late night showings . It held onto to the number one spot through its first weekend , with $ 53 @,@ 113 @,@ 752 , which is the lowest opening of the series . 
 = = = = Other territories = = = = 
 The film topped the box office on its opening weekend with $ 86 @.@ 5 million from 100 countries . The film achieved the highest opening of the franchise , passing X @-@ Men : The Last Stand 's $ 76 @.@ 2 million opening . 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 The Wolverine received generally positive reviews among critics . The review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes reported a 70 % approval rating with an average rating of 6 @.@ 3 / 10 based on 232 reviews . The website 's consensus reads , " Although its final act succumbs to the usual cartoonish antics , The Wolverine is one superhero movie that manages to stay true to the comics while keeping casual viewers entertained . " On Metacritic , the film has a score of 60 out of 100 , out of 43 critics , indicating " mixed or average reviews " . CinemaScore polls reported that the average grade cinemagoers gave for the film was an " A- " . 
 Richard Roeper of the Chicago Sun @-@ Times gave it a grade of " B + " , praising Jackman 's performance as " strong , solid entertainment " and " a serious , sometimes dark and deliberately paced story . " Christy Lemire , writing for the website of Roger Ebert , said that the film " features some breathtakingly suspenseful action sequences , exquisite production and costume design and colorful characters , some of whom register more powerfully than others . " Variety film critic Peter Debruge called the film " an entertaining and surprisingly existential digression from his usual X @-@ Men exploits . Though <unk> comes across a bit world @-@ weary and battle @-@ worn by now , Jackman is in top form , taking the opportunity to test the character ’ s physical and emotional extremes . Fans might ’ ve preferred bigger action or more effects , but Mangold does them one better , recovering the soul of a character whose near @-@ immortality made him tiresome . " James Buchanan of TV Guide.com gave it 3 out of 4 stars , calling it " A rare comic @-@ to @-@ film adaptation that doesn 't sacrifice substance for the sake of thrilling action . " Scott Collura of IGN praised the film giving it an 8 @.@ 5 out of 10 and stated , " The Wolverine is a stand alone adventure for the classic character that reminds us that there 's more to this genre than universe @-@ building and crossovers . ... [ The ] story paints a deep and compelling portrait of Logan , a haunted character that Jackman still finds new ways to play all these years later . " Peter Travers of Rolling Stone felt that despite the film 's final act " sink [ ing ] into CGI shit " , Jackman 's performance " still has the juice " and Mangold 's directing " shows style and snap . " 
 Conversely , Henry Barnes of The Guardian derided the film , giving it 2 out of 5 stars and stating , " Hugh Jackman 's sixth time out in the claws and hair combo is looking increasingly wearied , as the backstory gets more complicated and the action gets duller and flatter . " Joe Neumaier of the New York Daily News offered a similar view , saying " Hugh Jackman has the role of the mutant superhero down pat , but the rest of the film is the same old slice and dice . " 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 = = Sequel = = 
 By October 2013 , 20th Century Fox had begun negotiations with both Jackman and Mangold to return for a third solo Wolverine film . Mangold was scheduled to write the treatment , with Lauren Shuler Donner returning to produce . On March 20 , 2014 , Fox announced that the sequel would be released March 3 , 2017 . David James Kelly was hired to write the script , and Jackman was set to reprise his role as Wolverine . By the following month , screenwriter Michael Green was attached to the film . Mangold tweeted that filming would start in early 2016 . Patrick Stewart said in August 2015 that he will reprise his role as Charles Xavier . Liev Schreiber , who portrayed <unk> in X @-@ Men Origins : Wolverine said in February 2016 that he was in talks to reprise his role in the sequel . By April 2016 , Boyd Holbrook had been cast as head of security for a global enterprise set against Wolverine , and Richard E. Grant as a " mad scientist type " . Simon Kinberg that month said the film will be set in the future . Toward the end of the month , Stephen Merchant was cast in an unspecified role . In May 2016 , Eriq La Salle and Elise Neal were cast in unspecified roles . In May , Kinberg said filming had started and that he planned it to be an R @-@ rated movie . 
 = The Great Lover ( novel ) = 
 The Great Lover is a 2009 biographical novel by Jill Dawson . The novel follows the fictional Nell Golightly as she encounters the eccentric poet Rupert Brooke in Grantchester , Cambridgeshire . Set from 1909 until 1914 , in the novel Dawson examines Brooke 's relationship with Nell , and his growth as a poet and individual . The novel is based on the biography of Brooke during that period , incorporating opinions , ideas , and excerpts from Brooke 's letters and other primary sources documenting his life . 
 Much of the novel emphasises Brooke 's sexuality and his understanding of love . Additionally , the novel contrasts the various elements of English upper- and lower @-@ class life during the Edwardian period . Other notable elements of the novel include the vivid descriptions of the life in Grantchester and the borrowing of themes from Brooke 's poetry such as beekeeping . 
 Generally , reviews of the novel are positive , noting the complexity of the characterisation of both main characters and the ease which the novel communicates Brooke 's life . Additionally , the novel was also featured in the 2009 Richard & Judy Summer Reads and The Daily Telegraph 's " Novels of the Year " for 2009 . 
 = = Background = = 
 Rupert Brooke had a successful tenure as a student at Cambridge as a member of various prominent societies , including the Fabian Society and the Marlowe Dramatic Society . When he graduated in 1909 , he moved to Grantchester where he studied Jacobean drama . He eventually received a fellowship at King 's College , and upon his father 's death became a schoolmaster . But during this period following 1909 , his personal life was very chaotic due to sexual confusion and several unsuccessful relationships with both men and women . To escape the chaos of his personal life , he toured the United States , Canada and the South Seas during 1913 . Upon his return a year later , Brooke still had difficulty with relationships , however the outbreak of World War I prevented any from coming to fruition . When the War started , Brooke got a commission in the Royal Navy and wrote several of his most famous poems , a series of war sonnets . Brooke died in 1915 , however , his poems were lauded by the British public , most notably Winston Churchill , and brought him to posthumous fame . 
 = = Development = = 
 Dawson did biographical research in order to develop the novel . Though she is interested in writing biography , she finds that novels are an easier genre to express her understanding of the historical individual . When writing her historical novels Dawson does not embark on a thorough bout of research beforehand , instead she researches as she writes . While researching the novel , Dawson read nine biographies of Brooke , finding different elements of his life in each one , and felt that she had an additional understanding of Brooke which need to be expressed . Dawson includes an extensive bibliography in the back of the novel showing where passages and ideas in the novel are from . She said that she included the bibliography in order to show readers where she found " [ her ] Rupert , a figure of [ her ] imagination " . Dawson spent so much time researching and thinking about Brooke , her husband once asked her " when is this obsession going to end ? " 
 Dawson 's initial inspiration came from a visit to The Orchard , an inn in <unk> , Cambridgeshire , where she encountered a photograph of maids who had been there while Brooke was in residence there from 1909 – 1914 . The Orchard became the primary setting of The Great Lover and the maids inspired the creation of the character Nell Golightly . Dawson choose to write about Brooke because she was intrigued by his personality and why women kept falling in love with him . To explore Brooke 's personality , she asked herself the question " What if Rupert Brooke put a note under one of these floorboards — a note , in a way , just for me ? " She also was particularly interested in capturing the essence of Grantchester , the primary setting for the novel . 
 Many elements of the novel are inspired by the works and writings of Brooke . The first and most obvious example of this is the title of the novel which is inspired by the poem of the same name . The text of the poem is included at the end of the novel . Dawson chose to include the poem at the end of the book so that the reader is forced to decide if Brooke was actually a great lover , wishing the reader to be uninfluenced by the poem while she is reading the novel . Nell 's interest and ability with bee keeping are also a theme borrowed from Brooke 's poem " The Old Vicarage , Grantchester " . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Note on names : Throughout the novel Rupert Brooke is referred to as Brooke and Nell Golightly is referred to as Nell . That convention is maintained here . 
 The prelude of the novel begins with a 1982 letter from the elderly daughter of Rupert Brooke by a Tahitian women to Nell Golightly , asking Nell to help the daughter better understand her father . Nell responds , including a narrative of the time spent by Brooke at The Orchard in Grantchester from 1909 until his retreat in Tahiti in 1914 , which becomes the rest of the novel . 
 Nell 's story alternates between the perspectives of Nell Golightly , a seventeen @-@ year @-@ old girl , and the poet Rupert Brooke . The novel begins as Nell 's father dies while tending to the family 's bee hives . Because she is the oldest child and her mother is long dead , Nell Golightly decides finds a job as a maid at The Orchard , a boarding house and tea room outside of Cambridge which caters to the students at the University there . There she , along with several other young women , serves guests and cleans the facilities . She also helps a local beekeeper tend his hives . 
 Soon after Nell begins working at The Orchard , Rupert Brooke becomes a resident . As he enjoys his summer working on papers for Cambridge societies and composing his poetry , Brooke leads a social life flirting with various women and enjoying the company of artists and other students . Brooke soon lusts for Nell , and his increased interest in her leads to unconventional encounters . They develop a friendship in which both Nell and Brooke hold secret admiration and love for the other , but are unable to express it because of social conventions . Brooke also desires to lose his virginity because he feels that being a virgin is disgraceful . Because he cannot convince Nell or any of several other women to succumb to his wooing , he loses it in a homosexual encounter with a boyhood friend , Denham Russell @-@ Smith . 
 After the encounter , Brooke returns home to comfort his mother at his father 's death bed . After his father 's death , though Brooke desires to return to the Orchard , Brooke is forced to stay at the school where his father worked as headmaster , retaining the post until the end of the school year . After a brief period , Brooke returns to The Orchard . Meanwhile , Nell 's sister Betty becomes a maid at The Orchard and another of Nell 's sisters has a still birth . Brooke continues to become closer to Nell , and they covertly go swimming together in Byron 's pond , a local swimming hole named after the poet Lord Byron . Afterwards , Brooke departs on a tour advocating for workers ' rights , which does not go very well . At the end of the tour , Brooke proposes to Noel Oliver , one of the wealthy girls whom Brooke had been courting during his stay at The Orchard . Upon his return to Grantchester , Brooke also finds himself expelled from The Orchard because of his wanton social life . Brooke then moves next door to another boarding house , the Old Vicarage . 
 Brooke does not marry Noel , but rather spends a brief period in Munich where he tries to become intimate with a Belgian girl in order to lose his heterosexual virginity . This relationship also fails , and he returns to England confused about his sexuality . He and Nell continue to remain close until he goes on a vacation with his friends , where he again proposes to another of his friends . Brooke is refused resulting in a psychological breakdown and an extended absence from Grantchester while he is treated by a London doctor . After a few more months , Brooke returns to the Old Vicarage briefly before departing on a trip to Tahiti via Canada and the United States . The night before he leaves , Nell realises that she still loves Brooke and goes to Brooke 's bed the night before he leaves . 
 While in Tahiti , Brooke suffers an injury to one of his feet , and is nursed by the beautiful Taatama , a local woman . Then Brook and Taatama romance each other , eventually having sex and impregnating Taatama . After several months of exploring the island , Brooke decides to return home . Before his departure Brooke leave writes Nell a letter which contains a black pearl . Nell , now married to a local carter , receives the pearl and letter soon after she gives birth to a child by Brooke . 
 = = Characters = = 
 The novel focuses mostly on the real Rupert Brooke and the fictional Nell Golightly , although other characters , fictional and real people from Brooke 's own life such as Virginia Woolf ( then Virginia Stephen ) , are presented . Brooke 's and Nell 's individual character development and their relationship maintains the focus of the novel . 
 At the inception of the novel in 1909 , Brooke is 22 years old . Throughout the novel , Brooke 's character goes through an intensive development of maturity as a poet and individual . At first , Brooke is both an individual obsessed with his virginity and extremely narcissistic in his poetry and the relationship with Nell and the loss of virginity act as catalysts for this change within Brooke . Additionally , Brooke is a very attractive man and this trait brings him to the centre of attention of the other individuals in the book . One reviewer noted that Brooke was depicted as so attractive that it seems that Dawson has " rather fallen for her subject " . However , despite his beauty and charm , the internal conflict in Brooke can be hard to sympathise with , Vanessa Curtis calling him " difficult for the reader to like " because he is " fey , brash , insecure and fickle " . 
 Nell on the other hand is a smart and responsible girl , age seventeen at the beginning of the novel . She too goes through character development . Initially , as one reviewer put it , Nell is filled with a " <unk> of angst " as she tries to figure out her relationship with Brooke and both " shocked and intrigued " by Brooke 's eccentric behaviour . Though she expresses herself as in the control of most situations , in fact she is not , especially when Brooke is involved . One reviewer noted that Nell 's voice in the novel is not altogether convincing , saying " the levels of diction and spelling here seem rather high to be coming up from the kitchen " . The centrality of Nell in the novel was inspired by a postcard that Dawson bought which showed the maids from The Orchard during Brooke 's stay . Though inspired by real individuals , Nell 's character primarily draws inspiration from many individuals in Dawson 's own life . The name Nell Golightly is a mix of two names : Izzie Golightly , a close friend of Dawson 's mother , and Nelly Boxall , Virginia Woolf 's servant . 
 = = Style = = 
 Dawson includes excerpts and quotes from Brooke 's letters within her fictional passages , integrating both elements to create a complete narrative . In fact many of the comments made by Nell observing Brooke are actually comments made by his contemporaries . This style of integrating fact and fiction is similar to Dawson 's previous novel Fred and Eddie . The integration of these facts is nearly seamless . However , in interpreting Edwardian language , Dawson misuses the term " pump ship " according to Frances Spalding in The Independent . Critic Simon Akam noted that sometimes the recreation of Brooke 's language affects Nell 's language , making her comments more poetic then her usual dialect . 
 Critic Lorna Bradbury noted how many of the scenes are " wonderful " , each evoking further understanding of Brooke as a character . Joanna Briscoe also noted that the novel had a wonderful " sense of time and place " because it treats many elements unique to the period in the Britain very well , including Fabianism and class politics . The Great Lover also maintains a very vivid imagery and sensory elements related to The Orchard ; as Vanessa Curtis of The Scotsman says , " the fragrance of honey , apples and flowers <unk> the novel " . 
 = = Themes = = 
 Sexuality is one of the primary themes of the novel . Letters by Brooke recently rediscovered by historians expressed much conflict within himself about his own sexuality . This same sexual conflict becomes a major element of Dawson 's novel . Nell is consistently shocked by Brooke 's sexual desires and encounters throughout the novel , while at the same time Brooke is confused by his lustful desires for Nell and his desire to court sexually constrained upper @-@ class women . Brooke has other causes of internal conflict . In his search for the right person to lose his virginity to , he has a homosexual encounter almost out of desperation . The continual conflict between a desire to be loved , and the inability to find a lover is ironic when compared to the title of the novel and poem which inspired the novel : Brooke is clearly not a " great lover " . 
 Brooke 's character is strongly driven by his desire to break from conventions . Brooke 's unconventional actions are common throughout the novel , the most prominent being nude bathing and odd remarks and humour . These actions create an externally carefree individual that is in strong contrast to the down @-@ to @-@ earth Nell . 
 Social disconnect between the Edwardian upper and lower classes is also a prominent element of The Great Lover . Nell 's character gives an opportunity to explore how the class structure and employment for young women of the lower classes consumed their time . Brooke also commits himself to unsuccessfully campaigning against the " Poor Law " . Despite the treatment of class difference , Dawson does not use diction and thoughts which are convincingly lower @-@ class in many of her lower @-@ class characters , such as Nell , instead giving them more refined dialects . 
 = = Criticism = = 
 Reviews of The Great Lover were generally positive , many of them noting the ability of Dawson to evoke the personality of Brooke and produce an accurate sense of his contemporaries and contemporary society . 
 Lorna Bradbury of The Daily Telegraph called the novel " a psychologically convincing picture of a man who , even in his many flirtatious moments , is teetering on the edge , and a brilliant account of the poet ’ s nervous breakdown . " Similarly , Joanna Briscoe of The Guardian said , " by the final quarter , Dawson knows what she is doing with a tricky subject , and the novel comes into its own with explosive force . It is a daring experiment , and one whose mood , setting and eccentricities linger in the mind . " Helen Dunmore of The Times called the narrative of the novel " strong , satisfying and memorable " . The Daily Mail called the novel " an exceptional book even from the prize @-@ winning Dawson ; clever , moving , sexy and with a mesmerising feel for that magical , optimistic , but doomed time just before the Great War . " Vanessa Curtis of The Scotsman admired the novel for its much more satisfying portrayal of Brooke than his biographies and called it " a seductive book , evocative and well paced , the tale split between Brooke and Nell , the two narrative voices strong , distinctive and consistent . " Alice Ryan called the novel " a gripping and beautifully written book which deals not only with the history of Brooke and his alleged love child , but also with the wider history of the Fens , its places , people and traditions " . The Oxford Times critic Phillipa Logan too gave praise to the novel , saying that Dawson " exploits [ the ] ambiguities [ in Brooke 's life ] to the full , creating a compelling , thoroughly plausible narrative that explores Brooke ’ s time as a student in Cambridge . " Simon Akam of The New Statesman liked the novel , noting that " in her novel Dawson has [ ... ] pulled off the risky gamble of reimagining history . " The New Zealand Listener said , " The Great Lover is proof that its author is one of the finest practitioners of the literary historical novel and that this is her best novel yet . " 
 Thomas Mallon of The Washington Post , unlike other reviewers , gave a much more lukewarm assessment of the novel . He wrote , " The Great Lover is conscientious and good @-@ hearted , but for all its class @-@ crossing improbability , still rather timid . " For Mallon , the novel does not treat Brooke during his most interesting part of his life : during the first World War , when he becomes a public figure . 
 = 1880 Democratic National Convention = 
 The 1880 Democratic National Convention was held June 22 to 24 , 1880 , at the Music Hall in Cincinnati , Ohio , and nominated Winfield S. Hancock of Pennsylvania for President and William H. English of Indiana for Vice President in the United States presidential election of 1880 . 
 Six men were officially candidates for nomination at the convention , and several more also received votes . Of these , the two leading candidates were Hancock and Thomas F. Bayard of Delaware . Not officially a candidate , but wielding a heavy influence over the convention , was the Democratic nominee from 1876 , Samuel J. Tilden of New York . Many Democrats believed Tilden to have been unjustly deprived of the presidency in 1876 and hoped to rally around him in the 1880 campaign . Tilden , however , was ambiguous about his willingness to participate in another campaign , leading some delegates to defect to other candidates , while others stayed loyal to their old standard @-@ bearer . 
 As the convention opened , some delegates favored Bayard , a conservative Senator , and some others supported Hancock , a career soldier and Civil War hero . Still others flocked to men they saw as surrogates for Tilden , including Henry B. Payne of Ohio , an attorney and former representative , and Samuel J. Randall of Pennsylvania , the Speaker of the United States House of Representatives . The first round of balloting was inconclusive . Before the second round , Tilden 's withdrawal from the campaign became known for certain and delegates flocked to Hancock , who was nominated . English , a conservative politician from a swing state , was nominated for Vice President . Hancock and English were narrowly defeated in the race against Republicans James A. Garfield and Chester A. Arthur that autumn . 
 = = Issues and candidates = = 
 In 1876 , Republican Rutherford B. Hayes of Ohio defeated Democrat Samuel J. Tilden of New York in the most hotly contested election to that time in the nation 's history . The results initially indicated a Democratic victory , but the electoral votes of several states were ardently disputed until mere days before the new president was to be inaugurated . Members of both parties in Congress agreed to convene a bi @-@ partisan Electoral Commission , which ultimately decided the race for Hayes . Most Democrats believed Tilden had been robbed of the presidency , and he became the leading candidate for nomination in 1880 . In the meantime , issues of tariff reform and the gold standard divided the country and the major parties . 
 The monetary issue played a large role in selecting the nominees in 1880 , but had little effect on the general election campaign . The debate concerned the basis for the United States dollar 's value . Nothing but gold and silver coin had ever been legal tender in the United States until the Civil War , when the mounting costs of the war forced Congress to issue " greenbacks " ( dollar bills backed by government bonds ) . They paid for the war , but resulted in the most severe inflation since the American Revolution . After the war , bondholders and other creditors ( especially in the North ) wanted to return to a gold standard . At the same time , debtors ( often in the South and West ) benefited by the way inflation reduced their debts , and workers and some businessmen liked the way inflation made for easy credit . The issue cut across parties , producing dissension among Republicans and Democrats alike and spawning a third party , the Greenback Party , in 1876 , when both major parties nominated hard money men . Monetary debate intensified as Congress effectively demonetized silver in 1873 and began redeeming greenbacks in gold by 1879 , while limiting their circulation . By the 1880 convention , the nation 's money was backed by gold alone , but the issue was far from settled . 
 Debate over tariffs would come to play a much larger role in the campaign . During the Civil War , Congress raised protective tariffs to new heights . This was done partly to pay for the war , but partly because high tariffs were popular in the North . A high tariff meant that foreign goods were more expensive , which made it easier for American businesses to sell goods domestically . Republicans supported high tariffs as a way to protect American jobs and increase prosperity . Democrats , generally , saw them as making goods unnecessarily expensive and adding to the growing federal revenues when , with the end of the Civil War , that much revenue was no longer needed . Many Northern Democrats supported high tariffs , however , for the same economic reasons that their Republican neighbors did , so while Democratic platforms called for a tariff " for revenue only , " their speakers avoided the question as much as possible . 
 = = = Tilden = = = 
 Samuel Jones Tilden began his political career in the " <unk> , " or Free Soil , faction of the New York Democratic Party . He was a successful lawyer and had accumulated a considerable fortune . A disciple of former president Martin Van Buren , Tilden was first elected to the New York State Assembly in 1846 . Tilden defected with Van Buren to the 1848 Free Soil Party convention before returning to the Democratic party after the election . Unlike many free @-@ soil Democrats , Tilden stayed with his party in the 1850s instead of transferring his allegiance to the newly formed Republican party . When the Civil War began , he remained loyal to the Union and considered himself a War Democrat . In 1866 , he became chairman of the New York State Democratic party , a post he held for eight years . Tilden initially cooperated with Tammany Hall , the New York City political machine of William " Boss " Tweed , but the two men soon became enemies . In the early 1870s , as reports of Tammany 's corruption spread , Tilden took up the cause of reform . He formed a rival faction that captured control of the party and led the effort to uncover proof of Tammany 's corruption and remove its men from office . Tweed was soon indicted and convicted ; Tammany was weakened and reformed , but not vanquished . 
 The triumph over Tammany paved the way for Tilden 's election to a two @-@ year term as governor in 1874 . As a popular , reformist governor of a large swing state , Tilden was a natural candidate for the presidency in 1876 , when one of the main issues was the corruption of the administration of President Ulysses S. Grant . He was nominated on the second ballot , and campaigned on a platform of reform and sound money ( i.e. the gold standard ) . His opponent was Governor Rutherford B. Hayes of Ohio , likewise noted for his honesty and hard @-@ money views . After the closely contested election , with the question still unresolved , Congress and President Grant agreed to submit the dispute to a bipartisan Electoral Commission , which would determine the fate of the disputed electoral votes . Tilden opposed the idea , but many Democrats supported it as the only way to avoid a second Civil War . The commission voted 8 – 7 to award Hayes the disputed votes . Congressional Democrats acquiesced in Hayes 's election , but at a price : the new Republican president withdrew federal troops from Southern capitals after his inauguration . Tilden was defeated — robbed , in his opinion and that of his supporters . 
 Tilden spent the next four years as the presumptive Democratic candidate in 1880 . In 1879 , he declined to run for another term as governor and focused instead on building support for the 1880 presidential nomination . He considered many of his former friends ( including Senator Thomas F. Bayard of Delaware ) enemies now for their support of the Electoral Commission , and sought to keep the " fraud of ' 76 " in the spotlight and burnish his own future candidacy by having his congressional allies investigate the events of the post @-@ election maneuvering . For ten months beginning in May 1878 , the Potter Committee , chaired by Democratic Congressman Clarkson Nott Potter of New York , investigated allegations of fraud and corruption in the states which had contested electoral votes in 1876 . Rather than produce conclusive evidence of Republican malfeasance , as Tilden 's supporters hoped , the committee exonerated Tilden of wrongdoing , but uncovered conflicting evidence that showed state election officials of both parties in an unfavorable light . This , and Tilden 's declining health , made many Democrats question his candidacy . Even so , Tilden 's presumed ability to carry New York , combined with his political organization and personal fortune , made him a serious contender . 
 The first of these qualifications was shattered with the Republican victory in the New York gubernatorial election in 1879 . In that election , a revitalized Tammany split from the regular Democratic party in a patronage dispute with Tilden 's faction ( now known as the " Irving Hall Democrats " ) . Tammany ran its new leader , " Honest " John Kelly , as an independent candidate for governor , allowing the Republicans to carry the state with a plurality of the vote . Tilden began to waver , issuing ambiguous statements about whether he would run again . Rumors circulated wildly in the months before the convention , with no definitive word from Tilden . As the New York delegation left for the national convention in Cincinnati , Tilden gave a secret letter to one of his chief supporters , Daniel Manning , suggesting that his health might force him to decline the nomination . The letter was vague and inconclusive , but it finally convinced the delegation to consider Tilden 's candidacy to be at an end , and to seek a new standard @-@ bearer . 
 = = = Bayard = = = 
 One beneficiary of Tilden 's departure from the scene was Senator Thomas F. Bayard of Delaware . Bayard was the scion of an old political family in Delaware and had represented his state in the United States Senate since 1869 . As one of a relative handful of conservative Democrats in the Senate at the time , Bayard began his career opposing vigorously , if ineffectively , the Republican majority 's plans for the Reconstruction of the Southern states after the Civil War . Like Tilden , Bayard supported the gold standard and had a reputation for honesty . At the 1876 convention , Bayard had placed a distant fifth in the balloting , but supported Tilden 's cause in the general election , speaking on his behalf around the country . The political friendship between the two quickly soured in the election 's aftermath as Bayard supported the Electoral Commission and Tilden opposed it . Bayard believed the commission was the only alternative to civil war , and served as one of the Democratic members ; Tilden took this as a personal betrayal . 
 In the four years that followed , Bayard sought to build support for another run at the nomination . He and Tilden competed for support among Eastern conservatives because of their support for the gold standard . The gold standard was less popular in the South , but there Bayard stacked his years @-@ long advocacy in the Senate for pro @-@ Southern conservative policies against Tilden 's political machine and wealth in the contest for Southern delegates . A blow to Bayard 's cause came in February 1880 when the New York Sun , a newspaper friendly to Tilden , published a transcript of a speech Bayard made in Dover , Delaware in 1861 . As the states of the Deep South were seceding from the Union , a young Bayard had proclaimed " with this secession , or revolution , or rebellion , or by whatever name it may be called , the State of Delaware has naught to do " , and urged that the South be permitted to withdraw from the Union in peace . To many in the South , this confirmed their view of Bayard as their champion , but paradoxically it weakened Bayard 's support with other Southerners , who feared that a former Peace Democrat would never be acceptable to Northerners . At the same time , Bayard 's uncompromising stance on the money question pushed some Democrats to support Major General Winfield Scott Hancock , who had not been identified with either extreme in the gold – silver debate and had a military record that appealed to Northerners . As the convention opened , Bayard was still among the leading candidates , but was far from certain of victory . 
 = = = Hancock = = = 
 Winfield Scott Hancock represented an unusual confluence in the post @-@ war nation : a man who believed in the Democratic Party 's principles of states ' rights and limited government , but whose anti @-@ secessionist sentiment was unimpeachable . A native of Pennsylvania , Hancock graduated from the United States Military Academy at West Point in 1844 and began a forty @-@ year career as a soldier . He served with distinction in the Mexican – American War and in the antebellum peacetime army . At the outbreak of the Civil War , Hancock remained loyal to the Union . He was promoted to brevet brigadier general in 1861 and placed in command of a brigade in the Army of the Potomac . In the Peninsula Campaign of 1862 , he led a critical counterattack and earned the nickname " Hancock the Superb " from his commander , Major General George B. McClellan . At Antietam , he led a division in the Union victory and was promoted to major general . Hancock 's shining moment came at the Battle of Gettysburg when he organized the scattered troops , rallied defenses , and was wounded on the third day as his troops turned back Pickett 's Charge . 
 Since 1864 , when he received a single unsolicited vote at the Democratic National Convention , Hancock had been a perennial candidate . As military governor of Louisiana and Texas in 1867 , Hancock had won the respect of the white conservative population by issuing his General Order Number 40 , in which he stated that if the residents of the district conducted themselves peacefully and the civilian officials performed their duties , then " the military power should cease to lead , and the civil administration resume its natural and rightful dominion . " He had a larger following at the 1868 convention , finishing as high as second place in some rounds of balloting . In 1876 , Hancock again drew a considerable following , but never finished higher than third place at that year 's convention . In 1880 , another Hancock boom began , this time centered mostly in the South . In March of that year , the New Orleans Picayune ran an editorial that called for the general 's nomination , partly for who he was — a war hero with conservative political principles — and partly for who he was not — a known partisan of either side of the monetary or tariff debates . As Tilden and Bayard rose and fell in the estimation of Democratic voters , Hancock 's bid for nomination gathered steam . Some were unsure whether , after eight years of Grant , himself a former general , the party would be wise to give the nomination to another " man on horseback " , but Hancock remained among the leading contenders as the convention began that June . 
 = = = Other contenders = = = 
 Several other candidates arrived in Cincinnati with delegates pledged to them . Former Representative Henry B. Payne , an Ohio millionaire , had gathered a number of former Tilden supporters to his cause . Payne was a corporate lawyer and hard money advocate , but also a relative unknown outside Ohio . In April 1880 , the New York Star published a tale that Tilden had bowed out of the race and instructed the Irving Hall faction to back Payne for the presidency . Tilden never confirmed the rumor , but after his letter of June 1880 to the New York delegation , many of his supporters did consider Payne among their likely choices . Payne , like Bayard , had served on the Electoral Commission of 1876 , but had nevertheless maintained Tilden 's friendship . He maintained his loyalty to Tilden until the convention , when his withdrawal was certain . Payne was hindered by a fellow Ohioan , Senator Allen G. Thurman , who controlled their home state 's delegation . Thurman looked like a natural successor to Tilden , as a popular conservative from a swing state with a background as an attorney , but he , like Bayard , had earned Tilden 's enmity by serving on the Electoral Commission . Thurman was also less wedded to the gold standard than some Northeastern delegates would tolerate . 
 Another would @-@ be heir to Tilden was Samuel J. Randall , since 1863 a congressman from Philadelphia . Like Tilden , Randall was conservative on the money question but , unusually for a Democrat , he supported high tariffs to protect American industry . He also advocated legislation to reduce the power of monopolies . Tilden had supported Randall in his quest to become Speaker of the House , and Randall returned the favor by remaining a loyal Tilden man up to the convention . He now hoped for the support of the former Tilden adherents in his quest for the presidency . Former Governor Thomas A. Hendricks of Indiana , Tilden 's 1876 running mate , also sought a claim on the previous nominee 's support . He came from a crucial swing state that the Democrats had narrowly carried in 1876 and had some support in the Midwestern states . His popularity with delegates from the Northeast was impaired by his views on the currency question ; he sided with those who wanted looser money . 
 Two candidates stood with rather less support . William Ralls Morrison of Illinois had served in Congress since 1873 and was best known for advocating tariff reductions despite hailing from a protectionist district . He commanded little support outside his home state , and was seen as only a favorite son . Justice Stephen Johnson Field of the United States Supreme Court was better known , but still an unlikely victor . The only candidate from the Far West , Field was respected as a scholar of the law , but had greatly diminished his chances with his home state of California by striking down anti @-@ Chinese legislation in that state in 1879 . Even so , some observers , including Edwards Pierrepont , considered Field a likely choice for the nomination . 
 = = Convention = = 
 = = = Preliminaries = = = 
 The delegates assembled on June 22 , 1880 at Cincinnati 's Music Hall . The venue was a large , red brick building in the High Victorian Gothic style , which had opened in 1878 . Intended , as the name suggests , for musical performances , the hall also functioned as Cincinnati 's convention center until a separate building was constructed in 1967 . William Henry Barnum of Connecticut , the chairman of the Democratic National Committee , called the convention to order at 12 : 38 p.m. After an opening prayer , George Hoadly , a Tilden associate and future governor of Ohio , was elected temporary chairman . Hoadly addressed the crowd , then adjourned the convention until 10 : 00 a.m. the next day , so that the Committee on Credentials could consider certain disputes among the delegates . 
 At the start of the second day , June 23 , the Committee on Permanent Organization announced the roster of officers , including the permanent president , John W. Stevenson of Kentucky . Before the delegates could formally elect Stevenson , they heard the report on the Committee on Credentials . Two rival factions of Massachusetts Democrats had agreed to compromise , both being admitted as a united delegation . A similar dispute in New York was not resolved so easily : Tammany Hall and Tilden 's Irving Hall had sent rival delegations as well , and neither was willing to compromise . The Committee had voted to consider the Irving Hall Democrats to have been regularly elected ; Tammany was consequently excluded . Debate followed , in which some delegates urged compromise , with the idea that a united delegation would help unite the party in New York in the coming general election . The argument was unpersuasive , as the delegates endorsed the Committee 's decision by a vote of 457 to 205 ½ ; Tammany was banished . Stevenson was then installed as permanent chairman and , as the Committee on Resolutions had not finished writing the platform , the delegates moved on to nominations . 
 = = = Nominations = = = 
 The clerk called the roll of states alphabetically . The first delegation to nominate a candidate was California . John Edgar McElrath , an Oakland attorney , rose to nominate Justice Stephen J. Field . <unk> Field 's virtues and learning , McElrath promised that , if nominated , " he will sweep California like the winds that blow through her Golden Gate . " George Gray , Delaware 's Attorney General and a future United States Senator , next nominated Thomas F. Bayard . Gray , in a speech that evinced his admiration for the Senator , said of Bayard : 
 Thomas Francis Bayard is a statesman who will need no introduction to the American people . His name and record are known wherever our flag floats , aye , wherever the English tongue is spoken . ... With his sympathies as broad as this great continent , a private character as spotless as the snow from heaven , a judgment as clear as the sunlight , an intellect as keen and bright as a flashing sabre , honest in thought and deed , the people all know him by heart . 
 Illinois was the next state to offer a name , as former Representative Samuel S. Marshall rose to submit that of his erstwhile colleague , William R. Morrison . Marshall immediately antagonized the South by comparing Morrison to Abraham Lincoln , and proclaimed that Morrison 's belief in tariff reduction would be a " tower of strength " in the election . 
 Next , Senator Daniel W. Voorhees of Indiana spoke on behalf of Thomas A. Hendricks , praising Hendricks as a candidate of national unity : " [ T ] o the South , who has been more faithful ? To the North , who has been truer ? To the East , who has been better , wiser , more conservative and more faithful ? And to the West I need not appeal , for he is our own son . " The next few states made no nominations . When the roll reached New York , there were cries from the crowd for Tilden , and some confusion when that state 's delegation made no nomination . 
 The next nomination came from Ohio , as John McSweeney made the case for Senator Allen G. Thurman . " Great in genius , correct in judgment , " as McSweeney described him in a lengthy speech , Thurman was " of unrivaled eloquence in defense of the right , with a spotless name , he stands forth as a born leader of the people . " Next came the Pennsylvania delegation , from which Daniel Dougherty rose . Dougherty , a Philadelphia lawyer , gave a short and effective speech in favor of Winfield Scott Hancock . 
 I present ... one who , on the field of battle , was styled " the Superb , " ... Whose nomination will thrill the land from end to end and crush the last embers of sectional strife , and be hailed as the dawning of the longed @-@ for day of perpetual brotherhood . ... With him as our chieftain , the bloody banner of the Republicans will fall from their palsied grasp . We can appeal to the supreme tribunal of the American people against the corruptions of the republican party and its untold violations of constitutional liberty . 
 As Dougherty finished his speech , delegates and spectators shouted loudly for Hancock . After five minutes , the cheers subsided . Senator Wade Hampton III of South Carolina , a former Confederate general , next spoke to praise Hancock , saying " we of the South would feel safe in his hands " , but said that Bayard was ultimately his choice " because we believe he is the strongest man " . Richard B. Hubbard , a former governor of Texas and Confederate soldier , spoke in favor Hancock as his state seconded the Pennsylvanian 's nomination . Hubbard praised Hancock 's conduct as military governor of Texas and Louisiana , saying , " in our hour of sorrow , when he held his power at the hands of the great dominant Republican party ... there stood a man with the constitution before him , reading it as the fathers read it ; that the war having ended we resumed the habiliments that as a right belong to us , not as a conquered province , but as a free people . " The last few states were called and the nominations ended . After a motion to adjourn failed , the delegates proceeded directly to the balloting . 
 = = = Balloting = = = 
 The clerk called the roll of the states again , and a band played " Yankee Doodle " and " Dixie " as the ballots were tallied . The results showed that the delegates had scattered their ballots to a variety of candidates , with no one close to the 492 necessary to nominate ( at that time , Democratic conventions required a two @-@ thirds majority for nomination ) . There was a clear delineation , however , as Hancock and Bayard , with 171 and 158 ½ respectively , were far ahead of the pack . The next closest , Payne , had less than half of Hancock 's number , with 81 . After one minor shift of ½ ballot , the totals were announced to the delegates . They voted to adjourn for the day , clearing the way for the off @-@ site negotiations that would influence the next day 's ballot . 
 The delegates assembled the next day , June 24 , to resume the balloting . Before that could begin , Rufus Wheeler Peckham of the New York delegation produced Tilden 's letter and read it to the crowd . The first mention of Tilden 's name provoked excitement , but the meaning of the message soon quieted the crowd . Peckham announced that , with Tilden 's withdrawal , New York now supported Samuel J. Randall . Moving then to the second ballot , more than one hundred delegates followed Peckham 's lead in voting for Randall , boosting his total to 128 ½ , just above Bayard 's 112 . But the shift to Hancock had been greater . Before the totals were announced to the crowd , Hancock had gathered 320 delegates to him ; as soon as the voting stopped , however , Wisconsin and New Jersey changed all of their votes to Hancock . Pennsylvania added those of their votes that were not already for Hancock . Then Smith M. Weed of New York , a Tilden confidante , announced that his state , too , would shift all of its 70 votes to Hancock . After that , according to the party records , " every delegate was on his feet and the roar of ten thousand voices completely drowned the full military band in the gallery . " 
 Nearly all of the remaining states now stampeded for Hancock . When the second vote was finally tallied , Hancock had 705 . Only Indiana refrained completely from joining in , casting its 30 votes for Hendricks ; two Bayard voters from Maryland and one Tilden man from Iowa were the remaining hold @-@ outs . After the second round was tallied , the nomination was made unanimous . Several delegates then spoke to praise Hancock and promise that he would triumph in the coming election . Even Tammany 's John Kelly was permitted to speak . Kelly pledged his faction 's loyalty to the party , saying , " Let us unite as a band of brothers and look upon each other kindly and favorably . " 
 * The candidate was not formally nominated . 
 = = = Platform and vice @-@ presidential nominee = = = 
 Turning to other matters , the delegates listened as Susan B. Anthony addressed them with a plea for women 's suffrage . The delegates took no action , and moved on to the platform , which Henry Watterson of Kentucky read aloud . The spirit of unanimity continued as the delegates approved it without dissent . The platform was , in the words of historian Herbert J. Clancy , " deliberately vague and general " on some points , designed to appeal to the largest number possible . In it , they pledged to work for " constitutional doctrines and traditions , " to oppose centralization , to favor " honest money consisting of gold and silver " , a " tariff for revenue only " , and to put an end to Chinese immigration . Most of this was uncontroversial , but the " tariff for revenue only " would become a major point of debate in the coming campaign . 
 Finally , the delegates turned to the vice presidency . Edmund Pettus , representing Alabama , moved the nomination of William Hayden English , a banker and former representative from Indiana . English , a member of the Indiana delegation , was fairly unknown to most delegates . He had been a Bayard enthusiast and was known as a successful businessman and hard money supporter ; more crucially , he hailed from an important swing state . While Hendricks was a better @-@ known representative of Indiana , Easterners in the party preferred English , who they saw as sounder on the money question . Several states seconded the nomination . John P. Irish of Iowa nominated former governor Richard M. Bishop of Ohio but , after all the other states expressed support for English , the Ohio delegation requested that Bishop 's name be withdrawn and English 's nomination made unanimous ; the motion carried . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Keeping with the custom at the time , Hancock did not campaign personally , but stayed at his post at Fort Columbus on Governors Island , in New York Harbor and met with visitors there ( as General Grant had in 1868 , Hancock remained on active duty throughout the campaign ) . Both parties ' campaigns began with a focus on the candidates rather than the issues . Democratic newspapers attacked the Republican nominee , James A. Garfield of Ohio , over rumors of corruption and self @-@ dealing in the Crédit Mobilier affair , among others . Republicans characterized Hancock as uninformed on the issues , and some of his former comrades @-@ in @-@ arms gave critical speeches regarding his character . Democrats never made clear what about their victory would improve the nation ; Hancock biographer David M. Jordan later characterized their message as simply " our man is better than your man " . 
 Both parties knew that , with the end of Reconstruction and the disenfranchisement of black Southerners , the South would be solid for Hancock , netting 137 electoral votes of the 185 needed for victory . To this , the Democrats needed only add a few of the closely balanced Northern states ; New York ( 35 electoral votes ) and Indiana ( 15 ) were two of their main targets , but New Jersey and the Midwestern states were also battlegrounds . Early in the campaign , Republicans used their standard tactic of " waving the bloody shirt " , that is , reminding Northern voters that the Democratic Party was responsible for secession and four years of civil war , and that if they held power they would reverse the gains of that war , dishonor Union veterans , and pay Confederate veterans pensions out of the federal treasury . With fifteen years having passed since the end of the war , and Union generals at the head of both tickets , the bloody shirt was of less effect than it had been in the past . 
 By October , Republicans shifted to a new issue : the tariff . Seizing on the Democratic platform 's call for a " tariff for revenue only " , Republicans told Northern workers that a Hancock presidency would weaken the tariff protection that kept them in good jobs . Hancock made the situation worse when , attempting to strike a moderate stance , he said " the tariff question is a local question " . The answer seemed only to reinforce the Republicans ' characterization of him as ignorant of the issues . In the end , fewer than two thousand votes separated the two candidates , but in the Electoral College , Garfield had an easy victory over Hancock , 214 to 155 . 
 = Variegated fairywren = 
 The variegated fairywren ( Malurus lamberti ) is a fairywren that lives in diverse habitats across most of Australia . Four subspecies are recognised . In a species that exhibits sexual dimorphism , the brightly coloured breeding male has chestnut shoulders and azure crown and ear coverts , while non @-@ breeding males , females and juveniles have predominantly grey @-@ brown plumage , although females of the subspecies rogersi and dulcis ( previously termed lavender @-@ flanked fairywren ) have mainly blue @-@ grey plumage . 
 Like other fairywrens , the variegated fairywren is a cooperative breeding species , with small groups of birds maintaining and defending small territories year @-@ round . Groups consist of a socially monogamous pair with several helper birds who assist in raising the young . Male wrens pluck yellow petals and display them to females as part of a courtship display . These birds are primarily insectivorous and forage and live in the shelter of scrubby vegetation across 90 % of continental Australia , which is a wider range than that of any other fairywren . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 The variegated fairywren was officially described by Nicholas Aylward Vigors and Thomas Horsfield in 1827 , and was at first considered a colour variant of the superb fairywren . The scientific name commemorates the British collector Aylmer Bourke Lambert . It is one of 12 species of the genus Malurus , commonly known as fairywrens , found in Australia and lowland New Guinea . Within the genus it belongs to a group of four very similar species known collectively as the chestnut @-@ shouldered fairywrens . The other three species are localised residents in restricted regions of Australia : the lovely fairywren ( M. amabilis ) of Cape York , the red @-@ winged fairywren ( M. elegans ) of the southwest corner of Western Australia , and the blue @-@ breasted fairywren ( M. pulcherrimus ) of southern Western Australia and the Eyre Peninsula . A 2011 analysis by Amy Driskell and colleagues of mitochondrial and nuclear DNA found that the lovely fairywren was nested within the variegated fairywren complex , and was the sister taxon of the purple @-@ backed subspecies assimilis . 
 Like other fairywrens , the variegated fairywren is unrelated to the true wrens . Initially fairywrens were thought to be a member of the Old World flycatcher family Muscicapidae or warbler family Sylviidae , before being placed in the newly recognised Maluridae in 1975 . More recently , DNA analysis has shown the family to be related to Meliphagidae ( honeyeaters ) and the Pardalotidae in a large superfamily Meliphagoidea . 
 = = = Subspecies = = = 
 Four subspecies are recognised ; there are zones with intermediate forms between the ranges of each subspecies , contrasting with the well @-@ defined borders between M. lamberti and the other chestnut @-@ shouldered wrens . However , molecular analysis may shed more light on relationships and the current taxonomic treatment may change . The purple @-@ <unk> and lavender @-@ flanked fairywrens were considered distinct species in the past . 
 M. l. lamberti is the nominate subspecies from coastal eastern Australia and the original form described by Vigors and Horsfield in 1827 . Unlike other subspecies , the head of a male in breeding plumage is a more uniform blue , with the crown azure and ear coverts lighter . It also has a blue rather than purple back . 
 M. l. assimilis , commonly known as purple @-@ backed fairywren , occurs across central Australia , from Queensland and western New South Wales to coastal Western Australia . It was initially described in 1901 by Australian ornithologist Alfred John North and called the purple @-@ backed superb warbler . Breeding males of this and the other two northern subspecies differ from subspecies lamberti in having a darker violet blue crown and a purple back . Females are identical , however . There is a broad area where intermediate forms between this and subspecies lamberti live that is bordered by <unk> , Wide Bay , Rockhampton and Emerald in southern Queensland . 
 M. l. dulcis , commonly known as lavender @-@ flanked fairywren , is found in Arnhem Land . It was described in 1908 by amateur ornithologist Gregory Mathews , though this and subspecies rogersi were long considered forms of the lovely fairywren ( M. amabilis ) until <unk> were noted over a wide area of northern Australia with subspecies assimilis . Like subspecies rogersi , females are predominantly blue @-@ grey rather than grey @-@ brown and have white lores and eye rings rather than the rufous coloration of the other subspecies . 
 M. l. rogersi occurs in the Kimberleys and was originally named by Mathews in 1912 . It was also known as the lavender @-@ flanked fairywren and considered as the same taxon . Though the males are similar to the widely occurring inland subspecies assimilis , the females are predominantly blue @-@ grey rather than grey @-@ brown . A broad hybrid zone with females of both subspecies has been recorded from northeastern Western Australia and the northwestern Northern Territory . 
 = = = Evolutionary history = = = 
 In his 1982 monograph , ornithologist Richard Schodde proposed a northern origin for the chestnut @-@ shouldered fairywren group due to the variety of forms in north and their absence in the southeast of the continent . Ancestral birds spread south and colonised the southwest during a warm wetter period around 2 million years ago at the end of the Pliocene or beginning of the Pleistocene . Subsequent cooler and drier conditions resulted in loss of habitat and fragmentation of populations . Southwestern birds gave rise to what is now the red @-@ winged fairywren , while those in the northwest of the continent became the variegated fairywren and yet another isolated in the northeast became the lovely fairywren . Further warmer , humid conditions again allowed birds to spread southwards , this group occupying central southern Australia east to the Eyre Peninsula became the blue @-@ breasted fairywren . Cooler climate after this resulted in this being isolated as well and evolving into a separate species . Finally , after the end of the last glacial period 12 @,@ 000 – 13 @,@ 000 years ago , the northern variegated forms have again spread southwards , resulting in the purple @-@ backed subspecies assimilis . This has resulted in the variegated fairywren 's range to overlap with all three other species . Schodde also proposed that the blue @-@ grey coloured females of the lavender @-@ flanked subspecies were ancestral , while the browner coloration of females of southern forms was an adaptation to dry climates . Further molecular studies may result in this hypothesis being modified . 
 = = Description = = 
 The variegated fairywren is 14 – 15 cm ( 5 @.@ 5 – 6 in ) long and weighs 6 – 11 g ( 0 @.@ 21 – 0 @.@ 39 oz ) . Like other fairywrens , it is notable for its marked sexual dimorphism , males adopting a highly visible breeding plumage of brilliant iridescent blue and chestnut contrasting with black and grey @-@ brown . The brightly coloured crown and ear tufts are prominently featured in breeding displays . The male in breeding plumage has striking bright blue ear coverts , with the crown often slightly darker , a black throat and nape , a royal blue upper back , chestnut shoulders and a bluish @-@ grey tail . The wings are grey @-@ brown and the belly creamy white . Non @-@ breeding males , females and juveniles are predominantly grey @-@ brown in colour ; all males have a black bill and lores ( eye @-@ ring and bare skin between eyes and bill ) , while females have a red @-@ brown bill and bright rufous lores . Immature males will develop black bills by six months of age and moult into breeding plumage the first breeding season after hatching , though this may be incomplete with residual brownish plumage and may take another year or two to perfect . Both sexes moult in autumn after breeding , with males assuming an eclipse non @-@ breeding plumage . They will moult again into nuptial plumage in winter or spring . The blue coloured plumage , particularly the ear @-@ coverts , of the breeding males is highly iridescent due to the flattened and twisted surface of the barbules . The blue plumage also reflects ultraviolet light strongly , and so may be even more prominent to other fairywrens , whose colour vision extends into that part of the spectrum . 
 Vocal communication among variegated fairywrens is used primarily for communication between birds in a social group and for advertising and defending a territory . The basic song type is a high @-@ pitched reel of a large number of short elements ( 10 – 20 per second ) ; this lasts 1 – 4 seconds . The reel of the variegated fairywren is the softest of all <unk> . Birds maintain contact with each other by <unk> or <unk> calls , while a short , sharp tsit serves as an alarm call . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 Distributed over 90 % of the Australian continent , the variegated fairywren is found in scrubland with plenty of vegetation providing dense cover . It prefers rocky outcrops and patches of Acacia , Eremophila or lignum ( <unk> <unk> ) in inland and northern Australia . They have been reported to shelter in mammal burrows to avoid extreme heat . In urban situations such as suburban Sydney , these wrens have been said prefer areas with more cover than the related superb fairywren , though a 2007 survey in Sydney 's northern suburbs has proposed that variegated fairywrens may prefer areas of higher plant diversity rather than denser cover as such . Forestry plantations of pine ( Pinus spp . ) and eucalypts are generally unsuitable as they lack undergrowth . 
 = = Behaviour = = 
 Like all fairywrens , the variegated fairywren is an active and restless feeder , particularly on open ground near shelter , but also through the lower foliage . Movement is a series of jaunty hops and bounces , its balance assisted by a relatively large tail , which is usually held upright , and rarely still . The short , rounded wings provide good initial lift and are useful for short flights , though not for extended jaunts . During spring and summer , birds are active in bursts through the day and accompany their foraging with song . Insects are numerous and easy to catch , which allows the birds to rest between forays . The group often shelters and rests together during the heat of the day . Food is harder to find during winter and they are required to spend the day foraging continuously . 
 Like other fairywrens , male variegated fairywrens have been observed carrying brightly coloured petals to display to females as part of a courtship ritual . In this species , the petals that have been recorded have been yellow . Petals are displayed and presented to a female in the male fairywren 's own or another territory . 
 The variegated fairywren is a cooperative breeding species , with pairs or small groups of birds maintaining and defending small territories year @-@ round . Though less studied than the <unk> and splendid fairywrens , it is presumably socially monogamous and sexually promiscuous , with each partner mating with other individuals . Females and males feed young equally , while helper birds assist in defending the territory and feeding and rearing the young . Birds in a group roost side @-@ by @-@ side in dense cover as well as engage in mutual preening . Occasionally larger groups of around 10 birds have been recorded , though it is unclear whether this was incidental or a defined flock . 
 Major nest predators include Australian magpies ( Gymnorhina tibicen ) , butcherbirds ( Cracticus spp . ) , laughing kookaburra ( Dacelo novaeguineae ) , currawongs ( Strepera spp . ) , crows and ravens ( Corvus spp . ) , and shrike @-@ thrushes ( Colluricincla spp . ) , as well as introduced mammals such as the red fox ( Vulpes vulpes ) , feral cats and black rat ( Rattus rattus ) . The variegated fairywren readily adopts a ' rodent @-@ run ' display to distract predators from nests with young birds . The head , neck and tail are lowered , the wings are held out and the feathers are fluffed as the bird runs rapidly and voices a continuous alarm call . 
 = = = Diet = = = 
 The variegated fairywren consumes a wide range of small creatures , mostly insects , including ants , grasshoppers , bugs , flies , weevils and various larvae . Unlike the more ground @-@ foraging superb fairywrens , they mostly forage deep inside shrubby vegetation , which is less than 2 m ( 6 @.@ 6 ft ) above the ground . 
 = = = Breeding = = = 
 Breeding occurs from spring through to late summer ; the nest is generally situated in thick vegetation and less than 1 m ( 3 @.@ 3 ft ) above the ground . It is a round or domed structure made of loosely woven grasses and spider webs , with an entrance in one side . Two or more broods may be laid in an extended breeding season . A clutch consists of three or four matte white eggs with reddish @-@ brown splotches and spots , measuring 12 mm × 16 mm ( 0 @.@ 47 in × 0 @.@ 63 in ) . The female incubates the eggs for 14 to 16 days , after which newly hatched nestlings are fed and their fecal sacs removed by all group members for 10 – 12 days , by which time they are fledged . Parents and helper birds will feed them for around one month . Young birds often remain in the family group as helpers for a year or more before moving to another group , though some move on and breed in the first year . Variegated fairywrens commonly play host to the brood parasite Horsfield 's bronze cuckoo ( Chrysococcyx basalis ) and , less commonly , the brush cuckoo ( Cacomantis variolosus ) and fan @-@ tailed cuckoo ( C. flabelliformis ) . 
 = = Cultural depictions = = 
 The variegated fairywren appeared on a 45c postage stamp in the Australia Post Nature of Australia – Desert issue released in June 2002 . 
 = Scott Feldman = 
 Scott Wynne Feldman ( born February 7 , 1983 ) is an American professional baseball starting pitcher for the Houston Astros of Major League Baseball ( MLB ) . 
 After going 25 – 2 in his first two years of college baseball , he was drafted in the 30th round by the Texas Rangers in 2003 . Feldman had Tommy John surgery later that year . He followed it up with a minor league career in which he had a 2 @.@ 70 ERA , and held batters to only 6 @.@ 6 hits per 9 innings , pitching almost exclusively in relief . 
 After pitching out of the bullpen while bouncing back and forth between Texas and its Triple @-@ A affiliate in 2005 – 07 , Feldman converted to a starter in 2008 . He established himself in 2009 with a breakout season for the Rangers . He was 17 – 8 , tied for 4th in the American League in wins , and tied the major league record with 12 victories on the road . 
 = = Early life = = 
 The 6 @-@ foot @-@ 5 @-@ inch ( 196 cm ) Feldman was big from an early age . " His second @-@ grade teacher made a comment to my wife that it was like ' Alice in Wonderland , ' because Scott was always too big for his seat " , his father recalls . 
 As for Feldman 's road to the major leagues , " The dream started off like any other kid " , Feldman said . " You ’ d think about it as you were watching games in front of the TV , and you ’ d think about it playing in the neighborhood park with your friends . You always hope , but you just don ’ t know if it 's ever going to happen . " 
 His father , Marshall , an FBI agent who grew up in a Pennsylvania coal mining town and played college baseball at Duquesne , coached Feldman in youth baseball in Northern California . He worked at Mollie Stones in Burlingame as a courtesy clerk . His store manager Mark Lucchesi taught him how to throw a change up . 
 He went to Lincoln Elementary , Burlingame Intermediate School and later , Feldman attended Burlingame High School in Burlingame , California , where he pitched a no @-@ hitter . Feldman led the Peninsula Athletic League in batting average in his junior year . He was overweight in high school ; at one point he was up to 265 pounds ( 120 kg ) . 
 = = College = = 
 Feldman lost 40 pounds ( 18 kg ) before the start of his freshman year at the College of San Mateo , and walked on to the team . In two seasons , he went 25 – 2 , with a 1 @.@ 30 ERA and a strikeout @-@ to @-@ walk ratio of 8 @-@ to @-@ 1 . " When Feldman pitched " , said Bulldogs coach Doug Williams , " the game was 95 % over . " He earned Coast Conference Pitcher of the Year honors both as a freshman in 2002 and as a sophomore in 2003 , and was also an All @-@ American both years . " He has a gift " , Williams said . 
 Picked in the 41st round ( the <unk> pick overall ) of the 2002 Major League Baseball Draft by the Houston Astros , he did not sign . He was then drafted again , in the 30th round ( <unk> overall ) of the 2003 Draft by the Texas Rangers , 13 rounds behind future teammate Ian Kinsler , and this time he signed with the Rangers after they offered him a lucrative contract . 
 = = Minor leagues = = 
 Feldman underwent reconstructive elbow surgery for a torn ulnar collateral ligament in October 2003 . In his four appearances in 2004 for the Arizona League Rangers in the Arizona League , he pitched seven scoreless innings . He began the 2005 season with the Single @-@ A Bakersfield Blaze , but after nine scoreless innings in relief was quickly promoted to the Double @-@ A Frisco RoughRiders . 
 On July 28 , 2005 , Feldman and two teammates threw a perfect game against the Corpus Christi Hooks . It was the first combined nine @-@ inning perfect game in Texas League history , and the third overall . Feldman was tasked with getting the last three outs , and with two outs in the ninth he let the count get to 3 – 1 . " I was just telling myself , ' Don 't walk him , ' " Feldman said . " Once it got to 3 – 1 , I threw it right down the middle . If they got a hit , they got a hit . But they 're not going to break up a perfect game on a walk . " The batter grounded out . On July 31 , the three pitchers shared the Texas League Pitcher of the Week Award . 
 With the RoughRiders , he held opposing batters to a .202 batting average in 46 relief appearances , led the team with 14 saves ( which tied for fifth @-@ most in the league ) , and had a 2 @.@ 36 ERA . For the 2005 season , between the two teams he had a 2 @.@ 06 ERA and 17 saves in 52 appearances , all in relief . Baseball America tabbed him as having the best control of all minor league pitchers in the Rangers ' organization . 
 Prior to the 2006 season , MLB.com beat reporter T. R. Sullivan opined that Feldman was the Rangers ' top minor league relief prospect . In 2006 , in 23 relief appearances for the Rangers ' Triple @-@ A affiliate , the Oklahoma RedHawks , he had a 1 @.@ 98 ERA , and in 2007 in 21 relief appearances for the team he had a 4 @.@ 50 ERA . Later in 2007 , he pitched in the Arizona Fall League , to work on a new three @-@ quarters delivery . 
 In 2008 , as the Rangers decided to convert Feldman to a starter , he started and won a game for Frisco , taking a perfect game into the fifth and a no @-@ hitter into the seventh ( " For my first start , it was a lot of fun " , Feldman said ) . He also started and won the two games that he pitched for Oklahoma . 
 Overall , through 2008 Feldman had a minor league career ERA of 2 @.@ 70 in 153 @.@ 1 innings in 105 games ( all but six as a reliever ) , and gave up on average only 6 @.@ 6 hits per every 9 innings . 
 = = Major leagues = = 
 = = = Texas Rangers ( 2005 – 12 ) = = = 
 = = = = 2005 : Breaking in = = = = 
 Feldman was a late @-@ season call @-@ up in 2005 . " The night before , I didn ’ t sleep a minute . I didn ’ t know what to expect , but when I walked in [ the locker room ] , I saw a lot of the guys I had seen on TV all these years , and was like , ' Holy cow , I ’ m in the big leagues ' " , he remembers . 
 He made his major league debut against the Chicago White Sox on August 31 , 2005 . In eight relief appearances with the Rangers , he compiled a record of 0 – 1 , with an ERA of 0 @.@ 91 in 9 @.@ 1 innings of work . 
 = = = = 2006 : Brawl = = = = 
 Towards the end of the spring training in 2006 , Feldman was feeling confident that he was going to make the parent club 's 25 @-@ man roster . A week before Opening Day he was called into Manager Buck Showalter 's office . But instead of telling Feldman he had made the team , for the first 10 minutes Showalter and the team 's pitching coach Mark Connor spoke on and on about how Feldman had had a solid spring training — but needed to work on some things . Feldman couldn 't believe it but eventually thought , " Holy smoke , I ’ m going down [ to the minors ] . " Suddenly , unable to continue the prank any longer , Showalter burst out laughing : " Pack your bags , rookie , you ’ re coming with us ! " 
 During the regular season , Feldman bounced back and forth between the Rangers and Oklahoma . 
 The national spotlight shone briefly on Feldman on August 16 , 2006 , when he sparked a violent bench @-@ clearing brawl in the ninth inning of a game between the Rangers and the Los Angeles Angels of Anaheim . Tensions between the two division rivals were already high after two Ranger starting pitchers — Adam Eaton and Vicente Padilla — had been ejected in previous games that month for throwing at Angel hitters , along with Texas manager Buck Showalter . Before Feldman took the mound in relief , on a night with a game @-@ time temperature of 101 degrees , two Angel pitchers ( Kevin Gregg and Brendan Donnelly ) had already been thrown out of the game for hitting Ranger batters , and Angel manager Mike Scioscia and acting manager / bench coach Ron <unk> had been ejected as well . 
 Feldman hit Angel second baseman Adam Kennedy in the buttocks with a fastball with two outs and the Rangers up 9 – 3 . Kennedy charged the mound as the 6 ' 5 " Feldman stood atop it and threw down his glove . When Kennedy reached him , triggering a fight between Feldman and the light @-@ hitting 6 ' 1 " Kennedy , Feldman punched him in the armpit . An announcer describing the fight said , " [ Feldman ] even punches like he throws — sidearm and underhand . " " I didn 't charge him " , Feldman said in his defense . " I couldn 't just stand there . " Feldman was suspended for six games . As to others ' reactions , Feldman said : " Everybody is telling me to take boxing lessons . " 
 In 36 relief appearances in 2006 , he had an ERA of 3 @.@ 92 . In games that were late and close , Feldman held the sixteen batters he faced hitless . 
 = = = = 2007 : First win = = = = 
 Feldman was in the Rangers ' 2007 spring training camp , and won the final spot in the Texas bullpen . He picked up his first Major League victory on April 11 in his 47th big @-@ league appearance . " I 'll always remember it , no doubt about it " , Feldman said . 
 He was sent down , however , on May 1 . That began a trend , as he was called up and send down five more times during the season . 
 He made some changes in his delivery in September . Instead of throwing sidearm , he raised his arm angle and threw from a three @-@ quarters delivery , which pitching coach Mark Connor observed gave him more sink on his fastball and downward movement on his breaking ball . " This has a chance to be pretty good " , Connor said . " He was busting his fastball 94 – 95 , the ball was sinking , and his four @-@ seamer was cutting . " 
 He was 1 – 2 for the season , with a 5 @.@ 77 ERA in 29 games . He held the first batter he faced in each game to a .160 batting average , and his " ground ball : fly ball ratio " of 1 @.@ 39 was the highest on the team . 
 = = = = 2008 : Conversion to starter = = = = 
 In spring training in 2008 , Feldman changed his release point , and used the three @-@ quarter delivery that he had begun to use late in 2007 . Manager Ron Washington noted : " It makes his ball heavier , and his movement a little more pronounced . " 
 In late March , he was one of three pitchers vying for one long relief spot on the team , though the Rangers also began experimenting with converting him to be a starter . General Manager Jon Daniels observed : " Toward the end of spring training something clicked with his new [ three @-@ quarter ] arm slot . " On March 22 , despite Feldman 's success with his new , higher arm angle , the Rangers optioned him to Oklahoma , where he was a starter . In April he bounced back and forth between Texas and Frisco . 
 In his first Major League start , on April 13 , he allowed three runs in six innings and did not receive a decision . " Feldman was outstanding " , manager Washington said . " He hung in there and battled . " Feldman recorded his first major league hit on June 13 against Óliver Pérez of the New York Mets . 
 On August 13 , against the Boston Red Sox , he allowed 10 runs in the first inning ( a team record ) . This was the first time a major league pitcher gave up at least 12 runs without taking a loss since Gene Packard of the St. Louis Cardinals did it on August 3 , 1918 ) . 
 T. R. Sullivan of MLB.com wrote towards the end of the season : " He 's going to win the bronze medal for innings pitched on the Rangers this season . ... He has exceeded all expectations , and his lack of history as a starter makes it difficult to figure where this great experiment is headed . " General Manager Daniels noted : " Feldman has really saved our pen this year , and he wasn 't a guy we were counting on in the beginning of the season . " The Rangers wanted to limit his use towards the end of the <unk> , but had to keep him in the rotation because of injuries to the other pitchers . 
 For the season , he was 6 – 8 in 25 starts and three relief appearances , over 151 @.@ 1 innings — just two innings fewer than he had pitched in his entire minor league career . He also led the Rangers ' pitching staff in quality starts ( 13 ) , quality start percentage ( 52 % ) , strikes looking ( 29 % ) , " grounded into double plays " ( 24 ) , and " grounded into double play rate " ( 21 % ) . His 13 unearned runs tied for the third @-@ highest total in the AL . 
 During the off @-@ season , club president Nolan Ryan emphasized conditioning for the Rangers pitchers . Feldman and nine other of the team 's top young pitchers were brought to Arlington in November for a week @-@ long conditioning camp . " It 's different " , Feldman said . " In the past , it was a little more of ' this is what you need to do , now go out and do it . ' Most guys would do it , but this is their way of overseeing it and making sure everybody is ready . " 
 = = = = 2009 : Breakout season = = = = 
 The Rangers decided that Feldman would begin 2009 as a middle reliever , and Kris Benson would be a starter . " Feldman makes us a better team in the bullpen " , explained Washington . " He goes down there with better stuff than he had before . " Feldman was disappointed at the change . 
 Within a month Benson was injured , however , and Feldman took his place in the rotation on April 25 . " I 'm excited " , said Feldman . " I love starting . " At the suggestion of pitching coach Mike Maddux , he changed his windup to a full windmill . He remained in the rotation thereafter . In early May , Washington noted : " He has real life on his fastball , his slider is harder than it has been , his breaking ball is much crisper , and he 's getting a good feel for his changeup . He 's got four pitches he can throw over the plate . " 
 Feldman began the 2009 season 5 – 0 . He sported better mechanics and a different repertoire ( a new and improved cut fastball ) , threw 1 – 2 mph harder , and kept the ball down — forcing more ground balls . " Scott Feldman has been great since we put him in the starting rotation " , said Manager Washington . " He always does what you need him to do , keep you in the ballgame . " 
 At the All Star break , despite not having moved into the starting rotation until nearly a month into the season , Feldman was 8 – 2 , led the AL in won @-@ lost percentage ( .800 ) , and was 9th in hits per nine innings ( 7 @.@ 75 ) and walks + hits per inning pitched ( 1 @.@ 18 ) . " He 's going to get better " , said Nolan Ryan on July 20 , noting Feldman 's youth and his recent change in pitching style . 
 On July 25 , Feldman <unk> Kansas City All @-@ Star and AL ERA leader Zack Greinke with eight innings of four @-@ hit , shutout ball , leading the Rangers to a 2 – 0 victory . " Feldman matched the best pitcher in baseball " , Washington said . " I ’ m so happy for him . Two pitchers went at it pretty good , and our 's won the battle . " The eight innings were Feldman 's major @-@ league high , as he mixed in a changeup , curveball , and slider with his fastball . 
 As of the end of July , opposing batters were hitting .228 against Feldman ( and only .217 in his starts ) , the fourth @-@ lowest batting average in the league . In his starts through the end of July he had a 3 @.@ 04 ERA , and 12 of his 17 starts were quality starts . 
 After he beat the Mariners on short ( three days ' ) rest at the beginning of August for the team lead in wins , Seattle manager Don Wakamatsu said : " I thought Feldman was awfully tough . I have seen this kid , and he gets better every year . I think you have to tip your hat . " 
 As of mid @-@ August , Feldman 's cut fastball was the most effective in the major leagues . And it was the third @-@ most @-@ effective pitch overall , behind only Tim Lincecum 's change @-@ up and Clayton Kershaw 's fastball . While in 2008 he used his cutter 13 @.@ 4 % of the time , in 2009 he was throwing it 30 @.@ 4 % of the time . The only starting pitchers who were throwing cutters more often were Brian Bannister , Doug Davis , and Halladay . 
 The press began to take notice . On August 14 Matthew Berry of ESPN noted that : " since April 25 , when Scott Feldman ... rejoined the Rangers ' rotation , only Justin Verlander has more wins than Feldman 's 12 . " And two days later , Phil Rogers wrote for The Chicago Tribune : " Scott Feldman is creeping into consideration for the bottom of Cy Young ballots . " 
 On August 23 , Feldman threw seven scoreless innings while allowing only four hits in a win over the Tampa Bay Rays . It was his 13th win of the season ( tied for third in the AL ) and put his season record at 13 – 4 . It was Feldman 's ninth road win of the season ( bringing him to 9 – 1 on the road ) , tying him with Sabathia for best in the AL . The win put the Rangers two games ahead of the Rays in the AL wild card standings , and one game behind the Red Sox . His career @-@ high 11 strikeouts were the most by a Ranger since Matt <unk> struck out 12 in 1999 ( see video of parts of Feldman 's 11 strikeouts ) . Commenting on Feldman 's last strikeout , Carlos Peña said : " I was on second base , and I saw a pitch that he made to B. J. [ Upton ] , and I was like , ' Wow . ' I thought to myself , ' That 's unhittable right there . ' " Rays manager Joe Maddon called Feldman 's performance " the best @-@ pitched game against us all year " , in spite of Mark Buehrle 's perfect game against them earlier in the season . 
 On August 29 , he again held the opposition scoreless , this time the Twins for 5 @.@ 2 innings in a 3 – 0 victory . " His ball was definitely moving all over the place , with a great breaking ball " , Twins manager Ron Gardenhire said . " He throws a nasty cutter , and the ball sinks . He was tough on us . " It was good for his 14th win of the season ( tied for second in the AL behind Sabathia ) , raising his record to 14 – 4 . His cutter was more dominant than any other thrown over a single season since Baseball Info Solutions first began collecting cutter data in 2004 . 
 On September 4 , he extended his scoreless streak to 18 @.@ 1 innings before giving up a run to the Baltimore Orioles in the sixth inning at Camden Yards ; that was the only run he gave up over 6 @.@ 2 innings in a 5 – 1 win , to bring his record to 15 – 4 . It was also his 11th road victory ( matching the club record held by Rick Helling ( 1998 ) and Padilla ( 2008 ) ) , and he matched the club record set by Bobby Witt ( 1990 ) with his 7th consecutive road win of the season . Evan Grant , writing for D Magazine , asked rhetorically : " At some point , RHP Scott Feldman is going to have to enter the Cy Young Award conversation , isn 't he ? " 
 On September 9 , Feldman threw seven innings of shutout ball against the Cleveland Indians , leading Texas to a 10 – 0 win . He struck out five , while giving up five singles , raising his record to 16 – 4 , and tying Sabathia and Verlander for the AL lead in victories . He became the first Rangers pitcher to win 16 games since Kevin Millwood in 2006 . It was his seventh win in a row , eighth straight road victory ( a new Texas record ) , and 12th road win overall in 2009 ( another new club record , and tops in the AL ) . " I 'm not doing anything different on the road than I am at home " , said Feldman , who had allowed only one run in the last 26 @.@ 1 innings . " The preparation is the same . I think it 's a pretty humbling game , so you can 't get too high or too low . " He became the first Rangers right @-@ hander to allow just one run over four consecutive starts . Outfielder Marlon Byrd said : " When you have your ace on the mound , you expect to win . You get a couple of runs early , and you feel you have a ' W ' in hand . He has been unbelievable this year when he steps on the mound . ... He just keeps getting better . " 
 The Boston Herald reported : " Scott Feldman started the season in the bullpen . He 'll end it as a Cy Young Award candidate . " Phil Rogers of the Chicago Tribune referred to him as " an under @-@ the @-@ radar Cy Young candidate . " And Jennifer Floyd Engel of The Fort Worth Star @-@ Telegram wrote : " Is there a more likable " stud player " on any of the locals than Scott Feldman ? Dude is amazing , wins freakishly a lot on the road , is Boy Scout @-@ <unk> dependable , has been an ace on what is really a pretty good staff , and is humble as hell . He 's certainly deserving to be in Cy Young conversations . " Manny Navarro of The Miami Herald also referred to him as a Cy Young Award candidate . 
 Through September 10 , he was leading the AL in won @-@ lost percentage ( .800 ) , tied with Sabathia and Verlander for the league lead in wins ( 16 ) , had the 3rd @-@ lowest " slugging percentage against " ( .359 ; behind Félix Hernández and Greinke ) , was tied for 4th in double plays induced ( 20 ) , and had the 7th @-@ lowest " OPS @-@ against " ( <unk> ) . Feldman was holding lefties to a .220 batting average , and as a starter he had kept batters to the 2nd @-@ lowest batting @-@ average @-@ against on balls that they had put in play ( .261 ) among AL starters ( behind only Washburn ) , had the 4th @-@ best ERA in the league ( 3 @.@ 10 ; behind Greinke , Hernández , and Halladay ) , was tied for the 4th @-@ lowest batting @-@ average @-@ against ( .236 ) , had stranded the 5th @-@ highest percentage of runners ( 78 @.@ 3 % ) , and had the 5th @-@ highest ground ball / fly ball ratio ( 1 @.@ 48 ) . He had the most effective cutter of all major league starters , and had thrown it 33 % of the time ( behind only Brian Bannister ( 52 % ) and Halladay ( 42 % ) among AL starters ) . Feldman had also pitched at least five innings in all but one of his 26 starts in 2009 . As of mid @-@ September , Feldman 's cutter was still the third @-@ most @-@ effective pitch in the major leagues , behind only Tim Lincecum 's changeup and Randy Wolf 's fastball . 
 For the season , Feldman was 17 – 8 with a 4 @.@ 08 ERA in 34 games , 31 of them starts . Despite not having become a starter until the end of April , he tied for 4th in the American League in wins , and only four pitchers in the majors had more victories . His club @-@ record 12 victories on the road tied the major league record . Feldman became the third player in Rangers history to win at least 17 games in 31 starts or fewer , joining Kenny Rogers ( 17 wins in 31 starts in 1995 ) and Ferguson Jenkins ( 18 wins in 30 starts in 1978 ) . 
 He was named the Texas Rangers ' Pitcher of the Year for 2009 by the Dallas @-@ Fort Worth Chapter of the Baseball Writers ' Association of America . 
 = = = = 2010 ; Opening Day starter = = = = 
 The Rangers and Feldman agreed to a $ 2 @,@ 425 @,@ 000 one @-@ year contract in January 2010 , thereby avoiding arbitration . 
 On March 27 , manager Ron Washington announced that Feldman would be the opening day starter for the Rangers . On April 2 , the Rangers signed Feldman to a two @-@ year , $ 11 @.@ 5 million extension through the 2012 season , with a $ 9 @.@ 25 million option for 2013 . 
 Feldman was 7 – 11 for the season , as he started 22 games and pitched seven games out of the bullpen . 
 = = = = 2011 ; Injuries , and scoreless postseason = = = = 
 Feldman , had microfracture surgery performed on his right knee during the off @-@ season . To rehab , he made two appearances for the Double @-@ A Frisco Roughriders and eight appearances for the Triple @-@ A Round Rock Express . On July 8 , he was transferred from the 15 @-@ day disabled list to the 60 @-@ day disabled list . He was outrighted to the minors on July 13 . However , on July 14 , after he cleared waivers , Feldman rejected the assignment giving the Rangers the option of activating him from the disabled list or releasing him . They opted to activate him off the disabled list , which re @-@ added him to the 40 @-@ man roster . 
 In 2011 , Feldman was 2 – 1 with a 3 @.@ 94 ERA for Texas in 11 games , two of which were starts . In 32 innings he gave up 25 hits , while walking 10 and striking out 22 . He limited left @-@ handed hitters to a .155 batting average . 
 Brought in during the first game of the playoffs against the Tampa Bay Rays , he pitched three scoreless innings , allowing two hits while striking out four . In Game 2 of the ALCS he pitched 4 1 / 3 scoreless innings in relief , allowing the Detroit Tigers only one hit and no walks . He became the third pitcher in 20 years to throw at least four scoreless innings of relief in a postseason game . He pitched another scoreless inning in Game 4 , and through the first two rounds of the postseason his playoff record was 8 @.@ 2 innings pitched with nine strikeouts , three hits , and no walks . 
 In the first game of the World Series , he pitched another 1 @.@ 2 innings of scoreless baseball to extend his postseason record to 10 @.@ 1 scoreless innings pitched . Only eight relief pitchers had pitched more scoreless innings in a postseason , with Goose Gossage holding the record ( 14 @.@ 1 in 1981 ) . His postseason record in 2011 was 10 @.@ 1 innings pitched with 10 strikeouts , 4 hits , and 0 walks . 
 = = = = 2012 = = = = 
 In 2012 , Feldman was 6 – 11 , with a 5 @.@ 09 ERA in 123 @.@ 2 innings . He had a 96 / 32 K / BB ratio . He walked one @-@ or @-@ fewer batters in 10 @-@ straight starts ; the only Ranger with a longer single @-@ season streak was Ferguson Jenkins with 12 @-@ straight starts in 1974 . 
 He became a free agent on October 30 , 2012 , when the Rangers declined his $ 9 @.@ 25 million 2013 option . 
 = = = Chicago Cubs ( 2013 ) = = = 
 On November 27 , 2012 , Feldman signed a one @-@ year deal with the Chicago Cubs worth $ 6 million with a possible $ 1 million in additional incentives . General Manager Jed Hoyer indicated that the team planned to use him as a starter . On May 24 , 2013 , Feldman hit his first career home run off of Cincinnati Reds pitcher Bronson Arroyo . 
 = = = Baltimore Orioles ( 2013 ) = = = 
 On July 2 , 2013 , Feldman and Steve Clevenger were traded to the Baltimore Orioles for pitchers Jake Arrieta and Pedro <unk> . There , Feldman reunited with his first big league manager , Buck Showalter . His first start was on July 3 , 2013 , against the Chicago White Sox , a game the Orioles won 4 – 2 although Feldman did not get the decision . Feldman had his best start as an Oriole August 18 , and was borderline dominant the entire outing . Through his first six innings , Feldman had allowed just two hits , while not allowing a single run to score . The Orioles took the victory 7 – 2 against the Rockies . He improved upon that outing by tossing the first complete game shutout of his career on September 6 , holding the White Sox to 5 hits . 
 He finished the season with a combined 12 – 12 win @-@ loss record and 3 @.@ 86 ERA in 30 starts that included one shutout . He allowed only a .234 opponent 's batting average , tied for 10th @-@ best in the Major Leagues among <unk> pitchers , and a .207 average with two outs . After falling behind batters 2 – 0 , he held them to a <unk> average , the lowest in the Major Leagues . 
 = = = Houston Astros ( 2014 – present ) = = = 
 Feldman signed a three @-@ year contract worth $ 30 million with the Houston Astros after the 2013 season . 
 He was the Astros ' opening day starter , and beat the New York Yankees by blanking them into the seventh inning . On August 30 , 2014 , Feldman threw a 3 @-@ hit shutout against the Texas Rangers , giving up just 1 walk while striking 5 . Astros went on to win 2 – 0 , winning the Silver Boot for the club for the first time since 2006 . 
 For the season , he was 8 – 12 with a 3 @.@ 74 ERA ( the lowest over a full season in his career ) , in 29 starts ( tied for the club lead ) . He was tied for sixth in the AL in complete games ( 2 ) . He threw the highest percentage of curveballs among all Major League pitchers ( 28 @.@ 9 % ) , ahead of Sonny Gray . At 6 – 7 , Feldman is the third @-@ tallest pitcher in Astros history behind Randy Johnson ( 6 – 10 ) and J. R. Richard ( 6 – 8 ) . He received the Astros 2014 Darryl Kile Good Guy Award , voted by the Houston Chapter of the Baseball Writers ' Association of America . 
 = = Pitching = = 
 Feldman is a three @-@ quarters pitcher with a sinker , a low @-@ to @-@ mid @-@ 90s fastball , a hard dropping slider , a curve , a changeup , and a 90 @-@ mph cut fastball . 
 He changed the angle of his arm from sidearm to three @-@ quarters in September 2007 . In August 2009 a scout described him has having three " above @-@ average pitches " , and a " filthy " cutter . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Feldman is Jewish , as is his father , and the family belonged to Peninsula Temple Sholom in Burlingame for a period of time . 
 As of March 2007 , Feldman was one of 13 Jewish baseball players in the major leagues , along with teammate Ian Kinsler . He was featured in the edition of Jewish Major Leaguers Baseball Cards , licensed by Major League Baseball , commemorating the Jewish major leaguers from 1871 through 2008 . He joined , among others , Kinsler , Brad Ausmus , Kevin Youkilis , Ryan Braun , Gabe Kapler , Jason Marquis , John Grabow , Craig Breslow , Scott Schoeneweis and Jason Hirsh . In 2009 , Feldman was named the Jewish Major Leaguers Pitcher of the Year , in a year in which he had more wins than any other Jewish pitcher since Steve Stone in 1980 . Through 2014 , he was eighth of all Jewish major leaguers in career strikeouts , behind Barney <unk> , and tied for eighth in career wins , with Barry <unk> . 
 Feldman , in 2007 , was one of 32 players born in Hawaii to have made it to the majors . In 2014 , he and Jerome Williams joined Brian Fisher ( 1990 ) and Sid Fernandez ( 1997 ) as the only Hawaiian @-@ born players to ever pitch for the Astros . 
 = All Star Pro @-@ Wrestling = 
 All Star Pro @-@ Wrestling ( <unk> ・ <unk> ) is a Japan @-@ exclusive professional wrestling video game developed and published by Square on June 8 , 2000 for the PlayStation 2 . It was the first wrestling game published on this platform . 
 All Star Pro @-@ Wrestling was released in a period in which Square sought to diversify its catalog by producing various non @-@ role @-@ playing games for the PlayStation 2 . The game was notable for its control relying exclusively on the DualShock 2 's analog sticks , although a second mode using the normal buttons was also available . 
 While the quality of the game 's graphics was lauded and sales were good during its month of release , the control was received negatively by critics , who felt it was awkward and unintuitive . Nevertheless , the game spawned two sequels , released in 2001 and 2003 . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 All Star Pro @-@ Wrestling is based on Japanese wrestling rather than American . The game can be played in several modes selected in the " Match Make " menu ; these include exhibition matches , championships , tournaments , or leagues separated by weight . Depending on the mode chosen , different wrestling rings can be chosen to battle , as well as the referee and the time limit . 26 real @-@ life wrestlers are initially available , notably Jushin Thunder Liger , The Great Muta , Don Frye , Koji <unk> , Antonio Inoki , and Masahiro Chono . 
 Each battle begins with the wrestlers ' entrance sequence . Two types of controls can be chosen to fight . The default one uses the DualShock 2 's analog sticks exclusively ; the left one being pressed for movements and the right one for attacks . Pins are executed by tilting both sticks up ; and pressing both sticks grabs the opponent , who can then be attacked or thrown depending on the way the right stick is tilted . The second type of controls , called " Type B " , is closer to other fighting games and assigns pinning to the triangle button , grabbing to the square button , and punches and moves to the cross button . With Type B , the power of each move is determined by the level of pressure applied on the buttons . In both modes , the precise techniques available depend on the position and distance of the opponent , as well as a personal " tension meter " which builds up during battle . At any time , the D @-@ pad can be used to change the angle of the camera . 
 Wrestlers return to full health after each match , and the game keeps track of the time of victories and records with the PlayStation 2 internal clock . A memory card can be used to save progress , battle snapshots , and match videos ; the latter of which can either be ten @-@ second long instant replays or up to three entire " Best Bout " matches . Hidden features include collectible autograph pictures of the defeated wrestlers ; and a few unlockable characters , among whom are two female models in bikinis . 
 = = Development = = 
 All Star Pro @-@ Wrestling was announced in January 1999 as part of Square 's desire to expand into more diverse game genres on the PlayStation 2 than their usual role @-@ playing games . While <unk> developed most of Square 's previous fighting games ( namely Tobal No. 1 , Tobal 2 , and Ehrgeiz ) , Square decided to develop a wrestling game internally as Dream Factory was already working on The Bouncer , another Square title . The game was produced by Yusuke Hirata of Parasite Eve 2 fame , head of Square 's Osaka @-@ based fifth production team . The score , which was never released in album form , consists mostly of rock music and was composed by Tsuyoshi Sekito , Kenichiro Fukui , and Kumi Tanioka . 
 Square 's aim with the title was to create some of the most realistic wrestlers seen in video games , with accurate details such as a faithful replication of body @-@ muscle physics and facial expressions . Screenshots of the game were shown during the Square Millennium Event in Japan in 2000 ; and a battle was played in demonstration by Yusuke Hirata and a young Japanese idol later in the same year at the Tokyo Game Show . 
 = = Reception = = 
 All Star Pro @-@ Wrestling topped the Japanese sale charts in its week of release with 107 @,@ 331 copies sold , and continued to top the charts for the rest of the month of June . It was the 63rd best @-@ selling video game of 2000 in Japan , with 185 @,@ 616 copies . The game scored 31 out of 40 in the Japanese gaming magazine Famitsu , with the four reviewers highly praising the graphics but feeling that the controls , while not bad , could have been better implemented . 
 The American gaming website GameSpot rated the game 4 out of 10 , and criticized the battle system more severely along with IGN , which stated that the default analog controls are " mind @-@ boggling " ; with pins being very difficult to execute whereas some other maneuvers can be chained with single button presses . The second type of controls was judged easier to play with by IGN , although one reviewer felt that it wears out the thumb quickly . On the contrary , GameSpot felt that the second type is even more difficult to use than the default one . The amount of moves available has been described as low even compared to lackluster titles such as WWF Attitude . Regarding the game 's fluidity , GameSpot and one IGN critic compared it to the speed of an " underwater soccer match " , with smooth moves coexisting with simple , three @-@ second long movements . The second IGN critic noted that the game is more of a wrestling simulation than an arcade title focused on entertainment . 
 Still , both GameSpot and IGN lauded the realism of the wrestlers ' appearances , their faithfulness to those of their real @-@ life counterparts , and the efficient use of the PlayStation 2 Emotion Engine . The spectacular ring entrance scenes and the amount of blood visible during battles was also appreciated . One IGN critic noted that the referee is always present on @-@ screen , unlike many other wrestling games . However , the other one stated that the outdoor arenas " look like they were ripped out of a [ Sega ] Saturn game " . He also criticized the presence of only two facial expressions for each wrestler ; and both IGN reviewers criticized the inconsistent collision detection and the lack of diversity in the crowd , who sometimes " look like they were made out of Legos " . GameSpot added that the walking looks particularly unrealistic , in contrast with the other animations . 
 While both IGN reviewers noted the <unk> of the audio commentary and crowd shouting , one critic felt the sound was adequate albeit less impressive than the graphics . GameSpot called the sound decent and well executed . Finally , the omission of features such as weapons and modes such as " create @-@ a @-@ wrestler " , steel cage match , battle royal , and multiplayer tag team , was felt as a very noticeable weak point compared to American wrestling games present on the market . 
 = = Sequels = = 
 A sequel titled All Star Pro @-@ Wrestling II was released on November 22 , 2001 for the PlayStation 2 . It addressed the controls issue by replacing it with a new , more standard battle system , and included wrestlers from three real @-@ life Japanese wrestling federations : New Japan Pro Wrestling , Pro Wrestling Noah , and Pro Wrestling Zero @-@ One . The game also scored 31 out of 40 in Famitsu . A third installment , All Star Pro @-@ Wrestling III was released by Square Enix on August 7 , 2003 for the same platform . It included a create @-@ a @-@ wrestler feature . 
 Both sequels added multiplayer tag team and battle royal modes , playable using a multitap with up to 5 players at a time ( 4 wrestlers and the referee ) . Tsuyoshi Sekito returned to score the two soundtracks . The All Star Pro @-@ Wrestling II Original Soundtrack was published by DigiCube on January 23 , 2002 , while the third game 's soundtrack was not published in album form . 
 = Cyclone Nancy = 
 Cyclone Nancy ( RSMC Nadi designation : <unk> , JTWC designation : 18P ) was the second in a series of four severe tropical cyclones to impact the Cook Islands during February 2005 . Forming out of an area of low pressure on February 10 , Nancy quickly organized into a small , but intense , cyclone . By February 14 , the storm explosively intensified into a Category 4 severe tropical cyclone with winds peaking at 175 km / h ( 110 mph 10 @-@ minute winds ) and a minimum barometric pressure of 935 hPa ( mbar ) . Over the following day , increasing wind shear rapidly weakened the cyclone and by February 17 , it transitioned into an extratropical cyclone shortly before being absorbed by Cyclone Olaf . 
 Already impacted by Cyclone Meena in early February , the Cook Islands sustained significant damage from Cyclone Nancy . Several homes were damaged and destroyed throughout the islands . Downed trees and power lines blocked roads and cut power and minor flooding was reported along coastal areas . Following the impact of the storm , the World Meteorological Organization retired the name Nancy in May 2006 and replaced it with the name Nat . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 Cyclone Nancy originated out of a broad area of low pressure within a monsoonal trough northeast of Samoa on February 10 . Initially , the system was nearly stationary within an area of weak steering currents , low wind shear and high sea surface temperatures , exceeding 30 ° C ( 86 ° F ) . On February 11 , a trough briefly increased shear over the system and its nearby twin , the precursor to Cyclone Olaf . By 0600 UTC on February 12 , the system 's outflow improved and a small area of deep convection , known as the central dense overcast , developed over the center of circulation . Later that day , the Regional Specialized Meteorological Centre ( RSMC ) in Nadi , Fiji upgraded the system to a Category 1 cyclone and gave it the name Nancy while it was located about 485 km ( 300 mi ) east @-@ northeast of Pago Pago , American Samoa . By this time , the Joint Typhoon Warning Center ( JTWC ) had also begun issuing advisories on the storm , designating it as Tropical Cyclone 18P . 
 The storm had undertaken a slow northeast motion early on February 13 before turning southeast in response to a mid @-@ level ridge located northeast of the cyclone . Convective banding features developed close to the center of circulation as the storm began to undergo explosive intensification . Around 1200 UTC , the storm attained Severe Tropical Cyclone status as winds reached 120 km / h ( 75 mph 10 @-@ minute winds ) and a small , irregularly shaped , eye began to develop . The JTWC , however , assessed Nancy to have been substantially weaker until 0000 UTC on February 14 , at which time they reported a 95 km / h ( 60 mph ) increase in winds , attaining minimal Category 3 status on the Saffir – Simpson Hurricane Scale . 
 By 1200 UTC on February 14 , Nancy attained its peak intensity with winds of 175 km / h ( 110 mph 10 @-@ minute winds ) and a barometric pressure of 935 hPa ( mbar ) . Shortly after , the JTWC assessed Nancy to have peaked with winds of 230 km / h ( 145 mph 1 @-@ minute winds ) . Increasing forward motion to the southeast and increasing wind shear caused Nancy to weaken . Early on February 15 , the storm passed directly over Manuae . Continued weakening took place as a trough approached from the southwest . By February 16 , Nancy weakened below hurricane intensity and turned to the southwest as it began to undergo a Fujiwhara interaction with Cyclone Olaf to the north . 
 Strong shear associated with the outflow of Cyclone Olaf caused all convection associated with Nancy to be displaced to the southwest on February 16 . Early on February 17 , Nancy transitioned into an extratropical cyclone as it entered the area of responsibility of the Tropical cyclone warning centre ( TCWC ) in Wellington , New Zealand . Shortly after , the low was absorbed into the larger circulation of Olaf . However , TCWC Wellington continued to monitor Nancy as a separate system until 1200 UTC on February 18 . 
 = = = Differences among warning centers = = = 
 The Regional Specialized Meteorological Center in Nadi , Fiji uses 10 @-@ minute sustained winds for its tropical cyclone tracking information , while the Joint Typhoon Warning Center uses 1 @-@ minute sustained winds . The conversion factor between the two is 1 @.@ 14 . RSMC Nadi 's peak intensity for Nancy was 175 km / h ( 110 mph ) 10 @-@ minute sustained , or 205 km / h ( 125 mph ) 1 @-@ minute sustained . The JTWC 's peak intensity for Nancy was 230 km / h ( 145 mph ) 1 @-@ minute sustained , or 205 km / h ( 125 mph ) 10 @-@ minute sustained . 
 = = Preparations = = 
 Upon being named Nancy on February 13 , a gale warning was put in place for American Samoa . Later that day , four additional countries were placed under watches and warnings . A gale watch was declared for Samoa and strong wind warnings were raised in Tuvalu , Tokelau and the Cook Islands . On February 14 , a tropical cyclone alert was declared for the southern Cook Islands . Additionally , Niue was placed under a strong wind warning . Later that day , Wallis and Futuna were placed under a strong wind warning . On February 15 , a hurricane warning was issued for the southern Cook Islands as Nancy tracked through the archipelago . 
 Already impacted by Cyclone Meena just a week prior , residents in the Cook Islands heeded warnings and evacuated to emergency shelters . Coastal areas where seawalls had been damaged or destroyed by Meena were of particular interest to warning centers and urged all people in the vicinity of them to evacuate to a nearby shelter . On <unk> , all preparations were completed by February 15 . Tourists were relocated from hotels to one of six shelters set up throughout the island . An estimated 100 people reportedly evacuated to shelters out of the 2 @,@ 000 that live on the island . Radio broadcasts urging people to move to shelters were broadcast all day and the local cyclone center had all staff on standby . Eight shelters were opened on Rarotonga by this time . All residents were evacuated from low @-@ lying areas as large swells were anticipated to inundate those areas . Schools throughout the Cook Islands were closed prior to the cyclone and would remain closed for several more days . Many of the south Pacific islands were in a " critically dangerous situation " due to the quick succession of cyclones . 
 = = Impact and aftermath = = 
 Cyclone Nancy caused substantial damage throughout the Cook Islands . On Atiu , all communication to the island was cut as power lines were downed throughout the island . Winds on the island gusted up to 241 km / h ( 150 mph ) . Four homes were destroyed on the island and at least 80 trees were downed , blocking all roads . Several homes had their roofs blown off , coconut trees were downed , road were covered in debris and heavy rains fell throughout all the islands . Numerous trees were downed across Manuae and Mauke by the storm 's high winds . Four homes were destroyed on Mauke . Three homes were destroyed on Mitiaro and trees blocked all roads on the island . 
 On Rarotonga , several bridges were damaged by high waves produced by the cyclone . Schools , churches , and restaurants were damaged by wind gusts up to 150 km / h ( 93 mph ) throughout the island . Fifteen temporarily shelters constructed after Cyclone Meena were also destroyed . Damages caused by the storm to the Avana Marina Condominiums forced the owners to close them until mid @-@ April to allow for reconstruction and renovation . The highest winds were recorded in the southern portions of the island chain , with a wind gust of 259 km / h ( 161 mph ) being recorded on Mangaia . Up to 100 % of the seasonal crop harvest was lost due to Cyclone Nancy . 
 In the wake of all four cyclones , the Cook Islands requested international assistance . Funding to repair damages from the storms reached $ 7 @.@ 87 million . The Red Cross provided relief items , such as blankets and lanterns worth $ 35 @,@ 200 ; the Pacific Forum provided food , fuel , and logistical support worth $ 32 @,@ 000 ; the Government of China donated $ 19 @,@ 200 in post @-@ disaster funds ; $ 32 @,@ 000 in funding was provided by the United Nations Development Programme ; contributions from the Australian Agency for International Development and the New Zealand Agency for International Development amounted to $ 862 @,@ 570 , consisting of fuel , shelter , relief items , and disaster funds ; the Government of Australia provided $ 128 @,@ 000 wort of fuel and equipment ; lastly , the Government of France deployed military teams with recovery supplies and tents . The European Union also supplied £ 200 @,@ 000 ( $ 280 @,@ 000 ) in relief funds . 
 Since Nancy caused substantial damage throughout the Cook Islands , the name was retired from " Naming List A " for the South Pacific basin and was replaced with Nat . The three other cyclones that impacted the region , Meena , Olaf and Percy , were also retired and replaced by Mal , Olof and Pita respectively . 
 = Italian battleship Roma ( 1940 ) = 
 Roma , named after two previous ships and the city of Rome , was the fourth Vittorio Veneto @-@ class battleship of Italy 's Regia Marina ( Royal Navy ) . The construction of both Roma and her sister ship Impero was planned due to rising tensions around the world and the navy 's fear that two Vittorio Venetos and the older pre @-@ First World War battleships were not enough to counter the British and French Mediterranean Fleets . As Roma was laid down almost four years after the first two ships of the class , some small improvements were made to the design , including additional freeboard added to the bow . 
 Roma was commissioned into the Regia Marina on 14 June 1942 , but a severe fuel shortage in Italy at that time prevented her from being deployed ; instead , along with her sister ships Vittorio Veneto and Littorio , she was used to bolster the anti @-@ aircraft defenses of various Italian cities . In this role , she was severely damaged twice in June 1943 from bomber raids on La Spezia . After repairs in Genoa through all of July and part of August , Roma was deployed as the flagship of Admiral Carlo Bergamini in a large battle group that eventually comprised the three Vittorio Venetos , eight cruisers and eight destroyers . Their stated intent was attacking the Allied ships approaching Salerno to invade Italy ( Operation " Avalanche " ) but , in reality , the Italian fleet was sailing to Malta to surrender following Italy 's 8 September 1943 armistice with the Allies . 
 While the force was in the Strait of Bonifacio , Dornier Do 217s of the German Luftwaffe 's specialist wing KG 100 — armed with Fritz X radio @-@ controlled bombs — sighted the force . The first attack failed , but the second dealt Italia ( ex @-@ Littorio ) and Roma much damage . The hit on Roma caused water to flood two boiler rooms and the after engine room , leaving the ship to limp along with two propellers , reduced power , and arc @-@ induced fires in the stern of the ship . Shortly thereafter , another bomb slammed into the ship which detonated within the forward engine room , causing catastrophic flooding and the explosion of the # 2 main turret 's magazines , throwing the turret itself into the sea . Sinking by the bow and listing to starboard , Roma capsized and broke in two , carrying 1 @,@ 253 or 1 @,@ 393 men — including Bergamini — down with her . 
 = = Background = = 
 For additional information , see Littorio @-@ class battleship 
 The Italian leader Benito Mussolini did not authorize any large naval rearmament until 1933 . Once he did , two old battleships of the Conte di Cavour class were sent to be modernized in the same year , and Vittorio Veneto and Littorio were laid down in 1934 . In May 1935 , the Italian Naval Ministry began preparing for a five @-@ year naval building program that would include four battleships , three aircraft carriers , four cruisers , fifty @-@ four submarines , and forty smaller ships . In December 1935 , Admiral Domenico Cavagnari proposed to Mussolini that , among other things , two more battleships of the Littorio class be built to attempt to counter a possible Franco @-@ British alliance — if the two countries combined forces , they would easily outnumber the Italian fleet . Mussolini postponed his decision , but later authorized planning for the two ships in January 1937 . In December , they were approved and money was appropriated for them ; they were named Roma and Impero ( " Empire " ) . 
 Laid down nearly four years after Vittorio Veneto and Littorio , Roma was able to incorporate a few design improvements . Her bow was noticeably redesigned to give Roma additional freeboard ; partway into construction , it was modified on the basis of experience with Vittorio Veneto so that it had had a finer end at the waterline . She was also equipped with thirty @-@ two rather than twenty @-@ four 20 mm ( 0 @.@ 79 in ) / 65 caliber Breda guns . 
 = = Description = = 
 Roma was 240 @.@ 68 meters ( 789 @.@ 6 ft ) long overall and had a beam of 32 @.@ 82 m ( 107 @.@ 7 ft ) and a draft of 9 @.@ 6 m ( 31 ft ) . She was designed with a standard displacement of 40 @,@ 992 long tons ( 41 @,@ 650 t ) , a violation of the 35 @,@ 000 @-@ long @-@ ton ( 36 @,@ 000 t ) restriction of the Washington Naval Treaty ; at full combat loading , she displaced 45 @,@ 485 long tons ( 46 @,@ 215 t ) . The ship was powered by four Belluzo geared steam turbines rated at 128 @,@ 000 shaft horsepower ( 95 @,@ 000 kW ) . Steam was provided by eight oil @-@ fired Yarrow boilers . The engines provided a top speed of 30 knots ( 56 km / h ; 35 mph ) and a range of 3 @,@ 920 mi ( 6 @,@ 310 km ; 3 @,@ 410 nmi ) at 20 knots ( 37 km / h ; 23 mph ) . Roma had a crew of 1 @,@ 830 to 1 @,@ 950 if she had been completed . 
 Roma 's main armament consisted of nine 381 @-@ millimeter ( 15 @.@ 0 in ) 50 @-@ caliber Model 1934 guns in three triple turrets ; two turrets were placed forward in a superfiring arrangement and the third was located aft . Her secondary anti @-@ surface armament consisted of twelve 152 mm ( 6 @.@ 0 in ) / 55 Model 1934 / 35 guns in four triple turrets amidships . These were supplemented by four 120 mm ( 4 @.@ 7 in ) / 40 Model 1891 / 92 guns in single mounts ; these guns were old weapons and were primarily intended to fire star shells . Roma was equipped with an anti @-@ aircraft battery that comprised twelve 90 mm ( 3 @.@ 5 in ) / 50 Model 1938 guns in single mounts , twenty 37 mm ( 1 @.@ 5 in ) / 54 guns in eight twin and four single mounts , and sixteen 20 mm ( 0 @.@ 79 in ) / 65 guns in eight twin mounts . 
 The ship was protected by a main armored belt that was 280 mm ( 11 in ) with a second layer of steel that was 70 mm ( 2 @.@ 8 in ) thick . The main deck was 162 mm ( 6 @.@ 4 in ) thick in the central area of the ship and reduced to 45 mm ( 1 @.@ 8 in ) in less critical areas . The main battery turrets were 350 mm ( 14 in ) thick and the lower turret structure was housed in barbettes that were also 350 mm thick . The secondary turrets had 280 mm thick faces and the conning tower had 260 mm ( 10 in ) thick sides . Roma was fitted with a catapult on her stern and equipped with three IMAM Ro.43 reconnaissance float planes or Reggiane Re.2000 fighters . 
 = = Service history = = 
 Roma 's keel was laid by the Italian shipbuilder Cantieri Riuniti dell 'Adriatico on 18 September 1938 and she was launched on 9 June 1940 . After just over two years of fitting @-@ out , the new battleship was commissioned into the Regia Marina on 14 June 1942 . She arrived in the major naval base of Taranto on 21 August of the same year and was assigned to the Ninth Naval Division . Although Roma took part in training exercises and was moved to various bases including Taranto , Naples and La Spezia , in the next year , she did not go on any combat missions as the Italian Navy was desperately short of fuel . In fact , by the end of 1942 , the only combat @-@ ready battleships in the navy were the three Vittorio Venetos because the fuel shortage had caused the four modernized battleships to be removed from service . When combined with a lack of capable vessels to escort the capital ships , the combat potential of the Italian Navy was virtually non @-@ existent . 
 Roma and her two sisters were moved from Taranto to Naples on 12 November in response to the Allied invasion of North Africa ; while en route , the three battleships were attacked by the British submarine HMS Umbra , though no hits were made . On 4 December , the United States launched a major air raid on Naples in an attempt to destroy the Italian fleet ; one cruiser was destroyed and two others were damaged in the attack , as were four destroyers . Two days later , Roma was transferred with Vittorio Veneto and Littorio to La Spezia , where she became the flagship of the Regia Marina . They remained here through the first half of 1943 without going on any operations . 
 During this time , La Spezia was attacked many times by Allied bomber groups . Attacks on 14 and 19 April 1943 did not hit Roma , but an American raid on 5 June severely damaged both Vittorio Veneto and Roma . B @-@ 17 aircraft carrying 908 kg ( 2 @,@ 002 lb ) armor @-@ piercing bombs damaged the stationary battleships with two bombs each . Roma suffered from two near hits on either side of her bow . The starboard @-@ side bomb hit the ship but passed through the side of the hull before exploding . The ship began taking on water through leaks from frames 221 to 226 — an area covering about 32 square feet ( 3 @.@ 0 m2 ) — and through flooding from the bow to frame 212 . The second bomb missed but exploded in the water near the hull . Leaks were discovered over a 30 sq ft ( 2 @.@ 8 m2 ) area ranging from frames 198 and 207 . Approximately 2 @,@ 350 long tons ( 2 @,@ 630 short tons ; 2 @,@ 390 t ) of water entered the ship . 
 Roma was damaged again by two bombs in another raid on 23 – 24 June . One hit the ship aft and to starboard of the rear main battery turret and obliterated several staterooms , which were promptly flooded from broken piping . The second landed atop the rear turret itself , but little damage was suffered due to the heavy armor in that location . This attack did not seriously damage Roma or cause any flooding , but she nevertheless sailed to Genoa for repairs . Roma reached the city on 1 July and returned to La Spezia on 13 August once repairs were complete . 
 = = = Loss = = = 
 Along with many of the principal units of the Italian fleet — including Vittorio Veneto and Italia ( the ex @-@ Littorio ) — the cruisers Eugenio di Savoia , Raimondo Montecuccoli , and Emanuele Filiberto Duca d 'Aosta , and eight destroyers — Roma sailed from La Spezia with Adone Del Cima as captain and also as the flagship of Admiral Carlo Bergamini on 9 September 1943 , a day after the proclamation of the 1943 Italian armistice . Joined by three additional cruisers from Genoa , Duca degli Abruzzi , Giuseppe Garibaldi , and Attilio <unk> , the fleet first sailed towards Salerno in a deliberate diversion to convince the Germans that they were going to attack the Allied ships sailing to invade Italy as part of Operation " Avalanche " . However , the Italian fleet was actually intending to break course and steam towards the British island of Malta to surrender . When Germany learned of the defection , the Luftwaffe sent Dornier Do 217s armed with Fritz X radio @-@ controlled bombs to attack the ships . These aircraft caught up with the force when it was in the Strait of Bonifacio . 
 The Do 217s trailed the fleet for some time , but the Italian fleet did not open fire upon sighting them ; they were trailing the fleet at such a distance that it was impossible to identify them as Allied or Axis , and Bergamini believed that they were the air cover promised to them by the Allies . However , an attack upon Italia and Roma at 1537 spurred the fleet into action , as the anti @-@ aircraft batteries onboard opened fire and all ships began evasive maneuvers . About fifteen minutes after this , Italia was hit on the starboard side underneath her fore main turrets , while Roma was hit on the same side somewhere between frames 100 and 108 . This bomb passed through the ship and exploded beneath the ships ' keel , damaging the hull girder and allowing water to flood the after engine room and two boiler rooms . The flooding caused the inboard propellers to stop for want of power and started a large amount of arcing , which itself caused many electrical fires in the aft half of the ship . 
 Losing power and speed , Roma began to fall out of the battle group . Around 16 : 02 , another Fritz X slammed into the starboard side of Roma 's deck , between frames 123 and 136 . It most likely detonated in the forward engine room , sparking flames , and causing heavy flooding in the magazines of main battery turret number two and the fore port side secondary battery turret , and putting even more pressure upon the previously stressed hull girder . Seconds after the initial blast , the number two 15 in turret was blown over the side by a massive explosion , this time from the detonation of that turret 's magazines . 
 This caused additional catastrophic flooding in the bow , and the battleship began to go down by the bow while listing more and more to starboard . The ship quickly capsized and broke in two . According to the official inquest conducted after the sinking , the ship had a crew of 1 @,@ 849 when she sailed ; 596 survived with 1 @,@ 253 men going down with Roma . According to naval historian Francesco <unk> , who cites the research of Pier Paolo Bergamini , the son of Admiral Bergamini , around two hundred men from Bergamini 's staff were aboard Roma , and were mistakenly not included in the official inquiry . These men increased the total number aboard to 2 @,@ 021 and the total fatalities to 1 @,@ 393 . In her 15 @-@ month service life , Roma made 20 sorties , mostly in transfers between bases ( none were to go into combat ) , covering 2 @,@ 492 mi ( 4 @,@ 010 km ) and using 3 @,@ 320 tonnes ( 3 @,@ 270 long tons ; 3 @,@ 660 short tons ) of fuel oil in 133 hours of sailing . 
 = = Wreck discovery = = 
 The sunken vessel was found in June 2012 by the underwater robot ' Pluto Palla ' , designed by Italian engineer Guido Gay . It was discovered about 30 km ( 19 mi ) off the northern coast of Sardinia at a depth of around 1 @,@ 000 m ( 3 @,@ 281 ft ) . On 10 September 2012 a memorial ceremony was held on an Italian frigate over the spot where Roma went down . Giampaolo Di Paola , himself a former naval officer and at the time defence minister , at the ceremony described the dead sailors as " unwitting heroes who found their place in history because they carried out their duty right until the end " . 
 = New York State Route 41 = 
 New York State Route 41 ( NY 41 ) is a north – south state highway in Central New York in the United States . The southern terminus of the route is at an interchange with NY 17 in the town of Sanford . Its northern terminus is at an intersection with U.S. Route 20 ( US 20 ) in the village of Skaneateles . The route is almost 100 miles ( 161 km ) long and passes through Broome , Chenango , Cortland , and Onondaga counties . NY 41 was assigned as part of the 1930 renumbering of state highways in New York , replacing New York State Route 70 from Homer to Skaneateles . The route initially extended as far north as Jordan ; however , NY 41 was cut back to its current northern terminus c . 1933 . 
 = = Route description = = 
 = = = Sanford to Greene = = = 
 NY 41 begins at NY 17 exit 82 in McClure , a hamlet within the town of Sanford . The route heads north , following Oquaga and Cornell Creeks through a series of valleys in the rural eastern portion of Broome County . It intersects only minor highways of local importance before crossing into Chenango County . Now in the town of Afton , NY 41 passes under Interstate 88 ( I @-@ 88 ) just south of an intersection with County Route 26 ( CR 26 ) . The highway turns northeast , paralleling I @-@ 88 into the village of Afton . 
 In Afton village , NY 41 connects to I @-@ 88 by way of an eastward extension of Maple Avenue . NY 41 turns northwest at this junction , following Maple Avenue across the Susquehanna River and into the center of the village . Here , NY 41 briefly overlaps with NY 7 before exiting the village and heading northwestward through two more river valleys to the town of Coventry , where it meets NY 206 in the hamlet of <unk> . 
 The two routes converge here and head west to the hamlet of Coventry , where they intersect the northern end of NY 235 . NY 41 and NY 206 continue on , following Wheeler Brook westward into the town of Greene and the village of Greene located within . In the eastern portion of the village , the highway intersects CR 32 , which joins the two state highways for two blocks before splitting off to the south at a junction on the eastern bank of the Chenango River . NY 41 and NY 206 continue west across the river into the village center , where the two routes meet NY 12 . Here , NY 41 leaves NY 206 and follows NY 12 northward through the western portion of the village . The concurrency lasts for just 0 @.@ 5 miles ( 0 @.@ 8 km ) before NY 41 splits from NY 12 and exits Greene village . 
 = = = Greene to Cortland = = = 
 The route continues north through the towns of Greene and Smithville to the hamlet of Smithville Flats , where it meets the western terminus of NY 220 . NY 41 heads northwest from this junction , passing by Long Pond and Cincinnatus Lake before crossing into Cortland County and the town of Willet . In the hamlet of the same name , NY 41 intersects NY 26 . It joins NY 41 here , and the two routes proceed northwest from the hamlet and across the <unk> River to a junction with the east end of NY 221 . Past this point , NY 26 and NY 41 head due north along the river 's west bank into the town of Cincinnatus . 
 The overlap comes to an end near the hamlet of Gee Brook , where NY 41 splits from NY 26 and veers northwestward into a rural valley surrounding a small stream that gives the hamlet of Gee Brook its name . NY 41 crosses through the northeastern corner of the town of Freetown and the southern portion of the town of Solon on its way to the town of Cortlandville , where it intersects I @-@ 81 and US 11 west of the village of McGraw . US 11 and NY 41 come together here and parallel I @-@ 81 westward toward the city of Cortland . Just east of the city line , I @-@ 81 veers north to avoid downtown Cortland while US 11 and NY 41 continue west across the Tioughnioga River and into the city . 
 US 11 and NY 41 follow Port Watson Street into downtown Cortland , where they meet NY 13 at Church Street . All three routes turn north here , following Church Street for three blocks to Groton Avenue . Here , NY 13 turns east to follow Groton Avenue ( which becomes Clinton Road ) out of the city while US 11 and NY 41 turns west onto Groton , joining NY 222 , which begins at the junction of Groton Avenue and Church Street . Here , maintenance of the route shifts from the New York State Department of Transportation ( NYSDOT ) to the city of Cortland . The overlap between NY 41 and NY 222 ends two blocks later when US 11 and NY 41 turn north onto Main Street . The two routes remain on Main Street up to Homer Avenue , at which point the two routes veer onto Homer Avenue and follow it out of the city , at which point maintenance of NY 41 becomes the responsibility of NYSDOT once more . 
 = = = Cortland to Skaneateles = = = 
 Now in the adjacent village of Homer , US 11 and NY 41 meet I @-@ 81 once more by way of a lengthy exit ramp internally designated as NY <unk> by NYSDOT . The two routes continue on into the village center , where they meet the southern terminus of NY 90 . The overlap between US 11 and NY 41 ends three blocks later when NY 41 leaves US 11 and follows Clinton Street to the northwest . NY 41 intersects with NY 281 before leaving Homer village . 
 Just over 2 miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) northwest of the Homer village limits in the town of Homer , NY 41 intersects with NY 41A , its only suffixed route . While NY 41A heads off to the west , NY 41 heads north through the town of Scott and into the Onondaga County town of Spafford , where it becomes East Lake Road and begins to parallel Skaneateles Lake . NY 41 heads northwest through Spafford , running atop a long , narrow hill bounded by Skaneateles Lake to the west and Otisco Lake to the east . At Borodino , a hamlet in northern Spafford , NY 41 meets the southern terminus of NY 174 . North of Borodino , NY 41 follows a more lakeside routing through the towns of Spafford and Skaneateles to the village of Skaneateles , where NY 41 ends at a junction with US 20 . 
 = = History = = 
 From the mid @-@ 1920s to 1930 , the road connecting the village of Skaneateles to the village of Homer via the east side of Skaneateles Lake was designated as NY 70 , a numbered state highway 26 miles ( 42 km ) long . Further south , the road leading southeast from the city of Cortland , through Greene at the Chenango River , to Afton at the Susquehanna River ( a distance of 54 miles or 87 kilometres ) was an unnumbered road . In the 1930 state highway renumbering , the entire length of old NY 70 was incorporated into the newly established NY 41 . This new route was , at the time , designated from McClure ( beginning at an intersection with NY 17 ) through Afton and Greene to Cortland , where it met US 11 . NY 41 overlapped US 11 through Cortland to Homer , from where NY 41 used old NY 70 to reach US 20 in Skaneateles . The new Route 41 continued further north to the village of Jordan ( at NY 31 ) . The portion of the Skaneateles – Jordan highway between Elbridge and Jordan was previously known as NY 31A prior to 1930 . When initially created in 1930 , NY 41 was 112 miles ( 180 km ) long . A pair of state routes in the vicinity of Jordan were renumbered as spur routes of NY 31 c . 1933 . One of these was the portion of NY 41 north of Elbridge , which became NY 31C . NY 41 was truncated on its northern end to Skaneateles as part of the change . The south end of NY 41 was shifted slightly with the opening of the Quickway c . 1960 . 
 = = NY 41A = = 
 NY 41A ( 25 @.@ 49 miles or 41 @.@ 02 kilometres ) is a western alternate route of NY 41 which runs from Homer to Skaneateles along the west shore of Skaneateles Lake . It was assigned as part of the 1930 renumbering of state highways in New York . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 = Hurricane Debby ( 1982 ) = 
 Hurricane Debby was the strongest tropical cyclone of the 1982 Atlantic hurricane season , with winds peaking at 130 mph ( 215 km / h ) . The fourth named storm , second hurricane , and the only major hurricane on the season , Debby developed near the north coast of Hispaniola from a westward moving tropical wave on September 13 . Forming as a tropical depression , it headed northwestward , and eventually strengthened into Tropical Storm Debby the following day . Thereafter , Debby rapidly intensified into a hurricane early on September 15 . The hurricane then curved northeastward and grazed Bermuda as a Category 2 hurricane on September 16 . It continued to strengthen , and by September 18 , Debby briefly peaked as a Category 4 hurricane on the Saffir – Simpson Hurricane Scale , with winds at 130 mph ( 215 km / h ) and a minimum pressure of 950 mbar ( hPa ; 28 @.@ 05 inHg ) . 
 After reaching peak intensity , Debby slowly weakened , and was between Category 2 and 1 when it passed south of Newfoundland early on September 19 . Thereafter , the storm accelerated and was moving at roughly 60 mph ( 95 km / h ) towards the east . Debby was rapidly approaching the British Isles on September 20 , shortly before it transitioned into an extratropical cyclone . Overall , impact was minor in the Lesser Antilles , with only light to moderate rainfall in Dominican Republic , Puerto Rico , and the United States Virgin Islands . On Bermuda , high winds caused some power outages and knocked over trees , though damage on the island was minimal . In addition , Debby dropped rainfall and produced moderately strong winds on Newfoundland . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 A weather system moved off the coast of Africa on September 3 . The disturbance was small and became unidentifiable within 24 hours of formation . Satellite imagery indicated that the disturbance may have acquired a circulation on September 7 , but the circulation was gone by the next day . The remaining tropical wave moved into the Lesser Antilles on September 11 and a reconnaissance aircraft was deployed . The aircraft found circulation ; however , by the next day , only a strong wave was detected . Atmospheric conditions became more favorable for development , yielding lower wind shear near Hispaniola for several days . The system moved into this area as the latest Reconnaissance aircraft was deployed , declaring it a tropical depression on September 13 near the Dominican Republic . 
 The next Reconnaissance aircraft that investigated the system discovered a minimal pressure of 1005 mbar ( 28 @.@ 67 inHg ) and winds of 45 mph ( 70 km / h ) in the depression 's center , prompting an upgrade to Tropical Storm Debby on the morning of September 14 . Uncertainty arose as to whether Debby would interact with an approaching trough or enter the influence of a ridge over the southeastern United States . The storm was later picked up by the trough , moving away from land and moved to the north . Debby strengthened further , becoming a minimal hurricane late on September 14 . The hurricane deepened further , reaching maximum winds of 110 mph ( 180 km / h ) , a Category 2 storm . Debby approached Bermuda in this time , and on September 16 , Debby passed 80 miles ( 130 km ) west of the island and continued north . 
 Debby began to slow down to 5 mph ( 10 km / h ) early on September 17 as another trough in the westerlies arrived and the system entered it . As the hurricane entered the trough , its forward speed picked up from 5 mph ( 10 km / h ) to 30 mph ( 50 km / h ) . During this time , Debby reached Category 4 strength , reaching a peak intensity of 130 mph ( 215 km / h ) and a minimal pressure of 950 mbar ( 28 @.@ 05 inHg ) . Early on September 19 , Debby passed just south of Cape Race , Newfoundland and started accelerating to the east at 60 mph ( 100 km / h ) on the following day . Debby remained a tropical cyclone while crossing the North Atlantic Ocean and weakened to a tropical storm at 0600 UTC September 20 . Debby was rapidly approaching the British Isles on September 20 shortly before it transitioned into an extratropical cyclone . 
 The remains of Debby maintained plenty of intensity over northern Europe , and on September 21 it struck northern parts of Finland ( where it was named storm <unk> ) as one of the most powerful windstorms in the country 's recorded history . Winds over 85 mph ( 137 km / h ) felled millions of cubic miles of forest , and a storm surge severely damaged the cities of Kemi and Tornio , claiming two lives . 
 Starting in the 1982 season ( with Debby ) , the Hurricane Hunter Aircraft ( also known as P @-@ 3s ) began running a new mission for NOAA 's Hurricane Research Division . The mission was to drop dropwindsondes that deployed very @-@ low Omega frequency signals . These signals were to estimate the <unk> 's motion compared to the aircraft in certain areas in a storm . 
 = = Preparations and impact = = 
 Rainfalls from Debby in Puerto Rico ranged between 3 inches ( 76 mm ) around the northern end of the island to 10 inches ( 250 mm ) in the southern ridge of the island . Rains on the island peaked at 12 @.@ 86 inches ( 326 mm ) in <unk> . The U.S. Virgin Islands reported rain of about 3 inches ( 76 mm ) , while about 5 inches ( 130 mm ) of precipitation fell in Dominican Republic . The United States Navy removed its 700 personnel on Bermuda 's Air Force Base , placing them in a gymnasium nearby . Thousands of tourists took last @-@ minute flights out of Bermuda on September 16 as Debby drew near . Some of the airlines had pulled back the number of flights going in and out of the island . Eastern Airlines dropped from five flights to two , with them going to only New York City , Newark , New Jersey and Boston , Massachusetts . 
 The storm had sustained winds of 110 mph ( 180 km / h ) winds , and forecasters were predicting that the hurricane 's eye would be over the island the next day . Airlines canceled flights , buildings boarded up , and cruise liners were hurried out of their harbors in the time before Debby arrived . Rescue teams evacuated workers from Mobil oil rigs in Debby 's path as it neared . Bermuda experienced heavy gusts of wind , which caused minor damage with no injuries or fatalities . Power outages were reported on the island , though electricity was quickly restored . Numerous trees were knocked down on the island due to high winds . As the storm was approaching Canada , some oil rigs offshore of Newfoundland were evacuated and a science expedition off Grand Banks was discontinued . Onshore , Debby produced light rainfall in the southeastern portions of Newfoundland , with precipitation peaking at approximately 3 @.@ 5 inches ( 89 mm ) . In addition , a few areas experienced tropical storm forces winds , though damage was minimal . 
 = Australian contribution to the Battle of Normandy = 
 The Australian contribution to the Battle of Normandy involved more than 3 @,@ 000 military personnel serving under British command . The majority of these personnel were members of the Royal Australian Air Force ( RAAF ) , though smaller numbers of Australians serving with the Royal Navy and British Army also participated in the fighting prior to and after the Allied landings on 6 June 1944 . While all the RAAF units based in the United Kingdom ( UK ) took part in the battle , Australians made up only a small portion of the Allied force . 
 The Australians who supported the D @-@ Day invasion included between 2 @,@ 000 and 2 @,@ 500 RAAF airmen in Australian squadrons and British Royal Air Force units , and approximately 500 members of the Royal Australian Navy serving on Royal Navy vessels , as well as a small number of Australian Army officers and merchant seamen . The army personnel and thousands of Australian airmen also took part in the subsequent Battle of Normandy between June and August 1944 , and an RAAF fighter squadron operated from airfields in Normandy . Throughout the campaign , Australian airmen provided direct support to the Allied ground forces by attacking German military units and their supply lines , as well as forming part of the force that defended the beachhead from air attack and manning transport aircraft . Australians also indirectly supported the campaign by attacking German submarines and ships that threatened the invasion force . The 13 Australian Army officers who took part in the campaign filled a variety of roles in British units in order to gain experience that they could take back to Australia . 
 Australian personnel also took part in the invasion of Southern France in August 1944 , and RAAF airmen continued to operate against German forces until the end of the war in May 1945 . However , the relatively low casualties suffered by the Allied air forces during the fighting in Normandy and subsequent campaigns resulted in an over @-@ supply of trained Australian aircrew in the UK , hundreds of whom were never assigned to a combat role . Australia 's contribution to the fighting in Normandy is commemorated in memorials and cemeteries in London and Normandy . 
 = = Background = = 
 In 1944 Australia 's war effort was focused on the Pacific War , and most elements of the country 's military were in Australia and the islands to its north . Nevertheless , substantial numbers of RAAF personnel , most of whom had been trained through the Empire Air Training Scheme ( EATS ) , were stationed in the United Kingdom ( UK ) and took part in operations against Germany . The Australian Government had very little influence over where Australian graduates of EATS were posted , and many were assigned directly to British units . As of 6 June 1944 , 1 @,@ 816 Australian airmen ( including 584 pilots ) were posted to RAF squadrons . Many of the thousands of Australian ground crew in the UK at this time were also serving with RAF units . In addition , ten RAAF flying squadrons were stationed in the UK . These included one regular RAAF unit , No. 10 Squadron , and nine temporary Article XV squadrons , which had been formed under the agreement that underpinned EATS . While the Article XV squadrons were nominally Australian , most included a substantial proportion of personnel from Britain and other Commonwealth countries ; as of 1 June 1944 they were manned by 796 Australian aircrew and 572 airmen from other countries . Owing to an over @-@ supply of aircrew trained through the Empire Air Training Scheme , there were also hundreds of RAAF airmen in the UK who were assigned to personnel depots while they waited to be posted to a combat unit ; prior to the invasion these unattached airmen were considered an asset by the Allied air forces as they could rapidly replace casualties . 
 The Australian air units were under the command of the RAF , which had 306 squadrons located in the UK at the time of the landings in Normandy . Two RAAF squadrons were assigned to the Second Tactical Air Force ( 2TAF ) , which was to provide direct support to the Allied armies during the campaign ; No. 453 Squadron operated Spitfire fighters as part of No. 125 Wing and No. 464 Squadron flew Mosquito light bombers as part of No. 140 Wing . Four Australian heavy bomber squadrons formed part of RAF Bomber Command ; No. 460 , No. 463 and No. 467 Squadrons were equipped with Lancasters and No. 466 Squadron flew Halifaxes . No. 456 Squadron , which was a specialist night fighter unit equipped with Mosquitos , formed part of Air Defence of Great Britain and was assigned to protect the invasion force . Three other RAAF squadrons in the UK would also support operations in Normandy as part of Coastal Command ; No. 10 and No. 461 Squadrons were equipped with Sunderland flying boats and flew patrols of the waters around the UK and France , while No. 455 Squadron operated against German surface shipping using Beaufighter strike aircraft . 
 In addition to the RAAF airmen operating as part of the RAF in the UK , hundreds of Royal Australian Navy ( RAN ) personnel were serving with the Royal Navy ( RN ) at the time of the Battle of Normandy . No Australian warships took part in the operation , however . Most of the Australian officers serving with the RN were members of the Royal Australian Naval Volunteer Reserve ( RANVR ) . Four RAN sub @-@ lieutenants who had been sent to the UK to undergo training were also assigned to RN landing craft units to help address a shortage of officers capable of coordinating operations by these vessels . 
 Thirteen Australian Army officers were attached to the British Army units that fought in Normandy . These officers had been posted to the UK to gain experience in planning and conducting large @-@ scale amphibious operations , which would improve the army 's procedures ahead of Australian landings in the Pacific . A single officer represented each of the Army 's corps , and the personnel sent to the UK included some of the most talented and experienced members of the service . 
 = = Pre @-@ invasion preparations = = 
 Few Australians were involved in planning the invasion . Some of those who had planning responsibilities included Lieutenant Colonel Ronald McNicoll , who served on the Operations Staff of the Supreme Headquarters Allied Expeditionary Force ; Air Commodore Frank Bladin , Senior Air Staff Officer for No. 38 Group RAF ; Lieutenant Commander Victor Smith , Flag Officer for British Assault Area 's air planning officer ; and Major Douglas Vincent , a signals officer attached to the headquarters of the British XXX Corps . Australian @-@ born Air Commodore Edgar McCloughry , who had served with the RAF since 1919 , headed the Allied Expeditionary Air Force Bombing Committee , which prepared air plans for the invasion . 
 During April and May the Allied air forces struck at German airfields as well as aircraft factories and repair facilities in France . No. 463 and No. 467 Squadrons participated in raids on airfields and factories near Toulouse on the nights of 5 / 6 April and 1 / 2 May , and bombed an airfield near <unk> on the night of 8 / 9 May . The first of these raids involved 148 aircraft and was led by No. 467 Squadron 's commanding officer , Wing Commander John Balmer . 2TAF also conducted 12 raids on German airfields during this period , of which eight involved individual Australians posted to RAF light bomber squadrons . Australians serving in the fighter squadrons of No. 10 Group RAF also occasionally took part in " ranger " operations over northern France in search of German aircraft . In addition , the 31 Australian pilots posted to RAF photo reconnaissance units frequently conducted sorties to monitor German dispositions along the coast of the English Channel . 
 The Allies also conducted a major air offensive against the French railway network and bridges over the river Seine from April to June . Bomber Command made 53 raids against these targets , of which 25 involved the four Australian heavy bomber squadrons . A total of 17 Australian bombers were lost during these operations , including six that German fighters shot down during an attack on the marshalling yards at Lille on the night of 10 / 11 May . In addition , Australians took part in 29 of the 46 raids conducted by 2TAF 's light bombers against French railway infrastructure . Australian fighter pilots , including all of No. 453 Squadron on occasion , escorted some of these raids and conducted ground attack sorties targeting railway rolling stock . 2TAF 's fighter @-@ bombers also attacked bridges over the river Seine from April as part of an effort to seal off the Normandy region , and Australian pilots posted to British squadrons were involved in a small number of these operations . No. 453 Squadron attacked bridges and viaducts near Normandy on 27 April and 2 May . 
 Australians participated in attacks on German defences in France in the weeks before D @-@ Day . No. 453 Squadron made four raids on radar stations in late May and early June , and RAAF pilots serving with British fighter and fighter @-@ bomber squadrons took part in other such attacks . The four Australian heavy bomber squadrons contributed aircraft to raids on radar stations and communications facilities in the week before the landing . These units also struck German coastal batteries along the channel coast on nine occasions between 8 and 29 May ; Australians serving with British light bomber units took part in a further 14 raids on German batteries . The RAAF heavy bomber squadrons and Australians in RAF light and heavy bomber units also participated in raids against German Army camps in France and Belgium during May . The Australian squadrons suffered heavy losses in several of these attacks , including seven aircraft lost during a raid on the 21st Panzer Division 's facilities at <unk> @-@ le @-@ Camp on the night of 3 / 4 May . In addition to these attacks on German positions , Bomber Command struck the seven largest German munitions factories and ammunition dumps in France during late April and early May ; the four Australian squadrons participated in five of these operations , and no Australian aircraft were lost . 
 Leading up to the invasion , the RAF intensified its operations against German submarines and ships operating near France . Coastal Command aircraft destroyed six submarines within eleven days during May ; Australian aircrew contributed to three of these sinkings . Bomber Command also expanded its program of laying naval mines from April , and No. 460 Squadron as well as Australians posted to RAF light and heavy bomber units took part in several minelaying operations in the Baltic Sea and Heligoland Bight . Coastal Command 's anti @-@ shipping force , which included the RAAF 's No. 455 Squadron , mainly undertook training exercises from April , but occasionally attacked German convoys in the English Channel . 
 Australian airmen were also involved in protecting southern England from German air attack in the lead @-@ up to the invasion . From late April to early June No. 456 Squadron was part of a force that defended port cities in southern England from a series of air raids . The Australian squadron accounted for eight of the 22 bombers shot down by Air Defence of Great Britain night fighters during this period . No. 464 Squadron also conducted " intruder " raids that tried to destroy German bombers as they returned to their bases in France . During this period , No. 453 Squadron and 36 Australians posted to eight RAF units took part in defensive patrols which sought to prevent German reconnaissance aircraft flying over southern England during daylight hours , but no German aircraft attempted this . 
 In addition to the air campaign , a small number of Australians took part in special operations ahead of the invasion . In January 1944 , RANVR officer Lieutenant Ken Hudspeth , who commanded the midget submarine HMS <unk> , transported a party of specialist personnel to inspect and collect soil samples from French beaches being considered for the invasion . This operation was successful , and earned Hudspeth his second Distinguished Service Cross ( DSC ) . Nancy Wake , an Australian serving with the British Special Operations Executive , was parachuted into France in April 1944 and subsequently helped to organise the French Resistance in the Auvergne region . 
 = = Australians at D @-@ Day = = 
 On the night of 5 / 6 June Bomber Command conducted precision attacks on ten German coastal artillery batteries near the beaches where Allied troops were to land . Each battery was targeted by approximately 100 heavy bombers , and all four Australian heavy bomber squadrons took part in the operation . No. 460 Squadron dispatched 26 aircraft , which were evenly split between attacking the batteries at Fontenay @-@ Crisbecq and St Martin de Varreville . No. 466 Squadron provided 13 aircraft to the raid on batteries at Merville @-@ Franceville Maisy , 14 aircraft from No. 463 Squadron struck Pointe du Hoe and No. 467 Squadron dispatched 14 against batteries at Ouistreham . The RAAF squadrons did not suffer any losses . Many Australian aircrew posted to British units also participated in this attack , and 14 @.@ 8 percent of the 1 @,@ 136 Bomber Command aircraft despatched were either part of RAAF squadrons or were flown by Australians . 
 Australians posted to RAF units also landed paratroopers in Normandy and took part in diversionary operations . On the night of 5 / 6 June several Australian airmen served in heavy bombers that dropped " window " chaff in patterns that , on German radar , simulated the appearance of convoys headed for the Pas de Calais region of France . Other Australians served in aircraft that dropped dummy paratroopers and jammed German radar . One Australian pilot posted to No. 139 Squadron RAF took part in " intruder " bombing raids against targets in western Germany and the Low Countries that sought to divert German aircraft away from Normandy . Australian aircrew also served aboard the transport aircraft of No. 38 Group RAF and No. 46 Group RAF , which flew the British 6th Airborne Division from the UK to Normandy on the night of 5 / 6 June . About 14 percent of the transport aircraft in No. 38 Group were piloted by Australians , though the proportion of Australians in No. 46 Group was much lower . There were no completely Australian aircrews in either group . 
 Australian aircrew supported the fighting on 6 June . No. 453 Squadron was one of 36 Allied squadrons that provided low @-@ altitude air defence for the invasion fleet and landing force . Many of the squadron 's pilots flew several sorties during the day , though they did not encounter any German aircraft . No. 456 Squadron also formed part of the force that provided air defence for the invasion area at night . In addition , about 200 Australian pilots were spread across the dozens of RAF fighter and fighter @-@ bomber units that supported the landings . A small number of Australian aircrew also served in RAF reconnaissance units and 2TAF 's light bomber squadrons , which also saw combat over France on D @-@ Day . The three Australian squadrons assigned to Coastal Command flew only a small number of sorties on 6 June as few German submarines or E @-@ boats put to sea . 
 About 500 RAN personnel served on board RN ships involved in the operation . While most formed part of the crew of RN warships , several Australian officers led flotillas of landing craft and others commanded individual craft . For instance , Sub @-@ Lieutenant Dean Murray commanded a force of six RN Landing Craft Assault that landed soldiers of the British 3rd Infantry Division at Sword Beach . Hudspeth also took <unk> across the channel to mark the edge of Juno Beach during the landings there ; he received his third DSC for completing this mission . Some of the warships with Australian crew members that supported the landings were HMS Ajax ( which had three RANVR officers on board ) , Ashanti , Enterprise , Eskimo , Glasgow , Mackay and Scylla . Australian members of the Merchant Navy also participated in the D @-@ Day landings , though the number of sailors involved is not known . 
 Few of the Australian Army officers attached to British units landed on D @-@ Day . Major Jo Gullett , who was the second in command of an infantry company in the 7th Battalion , Green Howards , came ashore on Gold Beach as part of the invasion force . In his memoirs , Gullett described the landing as " easily the most impressive occasion of my life " . He subsequently led a company of the Royal Scots until he was wounded by German machine gun fire on 17 July . Most of the other Australian officers served in staff positions ; for instance Lieutenant Colonel Bill Robertson was the chief of staff of the 51st ( Highland ) Infantry Division when that unit arrived in Normandy and was later posted to the 50th ( Northumbrian ) Infantry Division where he served in the same role . Vincent came ashore on 7 June and served with XXX Corps , 7th Armoured and 43rd ( Wessex ) Infantry Divisions during the campaign . 
 Due to the lack of a nominal roll or other records listing the Australians who took part in the D @-@ Day landings , it is not possible to determine the exact number involved . However , it has been estimated that about 3 @,@ 000 Australian military personnel and merchant seamen participated in the operation . The total number of Australians killed on 6 June was 14 , of whom 12 were RAAF airmen and two were members of the RAN . 
 = = Subsequent fighting = = 
 The fighting in Normandy continued until August 1944 , when the Allies broke out of the region and rapidly advanced to the German border . This campaign dominated the activities of eight of the ten Australian squadrons in the UK , as well as most of the airmen posted to RAF units . During July and August the RAAF units operated at or near their highest level of activity in the war to that point , but morale remained high as the airmen perceived that the contribution of air power to the campaign would be decisive . Large numbers of Australian airmen who were undergoing training or awaiting a posting on D @-@ Day were assigned to combat units during the fighting to replace casualties of the Normandy campaign . 
 In addition to the military personnel involved in the fighting , several Australian war correspondents reported on the Battle of Normandy . Chester Wilmot landed with the 6th Airborne Division on D @-@ Day , and his coverage of the fighting for the BBC soon made him one of the best @-@ known Allied war correspondents . Other Australian journalists in Normandy included John Hetherington , Geoff Hutton and Ronald Monson . 
 = = = June = = = 
 Australian airmen were involved in Allied efforts to delay German reinforcements from reaching Normandy throughout June . On the night of 6 / 7 June , 20 Mosquitos from No. 464 Squadron were dispatched to attack German road convoys and trains in northern France . The four Australian heavy bomber squadrons also participated in raids on French towns on this night . While No. 463 , No. 466 and No. 467 Squadrons mainly targeted railway facilities , No. 460 Squadron formed part of an attack on Vire , which sought to destroy the town to prevent the Germans from using the roads through it . Following these initial raids , Bomber Command continued to target railway infrastructure in France in an attempt to disrupt the movement of German reinforcements to Normandy . The command operated intensively during the week after the invasion , and some Australian aircrew flew raids on consecutive nights during this period . Overall , Bomber Command made 16 raids against railway facilities in France between 13 and 30 June , of which six included at least one of the RAAF squadrons . The RAAF heavy bomber squadrons and Australians in RAF units also took part in several attacks on German supply dumps and airfields during this period . Bomber Command made fewer raids on these targets than had been planned prior to the invasion , however , as its units were frequently assigned to strike facilities associated with the V @-@ 1 flying bombs the Germans were launching against the UK . No. 464 Squadron also operated against German vehicles travelling at night and bombed railway yards , and flew 75 sorties between the nights of 7 / 8 and 12 / 13 June . Overall , the squadron conducted attacks on 19 nights during June , during which five of its aircraft were destroyed . The Australians in 2TAF 's other light and medium bomber units also attacked the German lines of communication in France and occasionally provided direct support for the Allied ground forces throughout this period . 
 During June , Australians also contributed to the defence of the Allied beachhead against German air and naval attacks . No. 453 Squadron and the RAAF fighter pilots in RAF units continued to fly patrols over the beachhead in the week after D @-@ Day , but only rarely encountered German aircraft . From 11 June the Australian squadron 's aircraft frequently operated from airfields built at Normandy , and on the 25th of the month it and the other units of No. 125 Wing moved from the UK to Advanced Landing Ground B11 within the beachhead near Longues @-@ sur @-@ Mer . By late June , No. 453 Squadron and the other RAF Spitfire units were regularly attacking German positions in Normandy as well as providing air defence for the Allied forces in the area ; during the month the squadron flew more than 700 sorties . A small number of Australians posted to RAF squadrons equipped with Hawker Typhoon fighter @-@ bombers also attacked German vehicles and positions in direct support of the Allied ground troops throughout the month . No. 456 Squadron , which was one of four night fighter squadrons assigned to protect the beachhead , frequently met German aircraft and shot down twelve of them in the week after the landing . Australian fighter ace Flight Lieutenant Nicky Barr , who had escaped from German custody in Italy during 1943 , also briefly served in an air support control unit in Normandy . Barr landed at Omaha Beach on 9 June , but returned to the UK three days later as his commanding officer believed that German forces would execute Barr if they recaptured him . 
 German submarines and surface warships sortied to attack the Allied invasion fleet , and the Australian members of Coastal Command participated in attacks on these vessels . The two RAAF flying boat squadrons operated intensively throughout June , but did not sink any German ships or submarines . The aircrew of two of the British B @-@ 24 Liberators that sank German submarines during this period included Australian personnel , however , and Australians were on board several of the other RAF aircraft flying anti @-@ submarine and anti @-@ shipping patrols . In addition , No. 455 Squadron took part in several attacks on E @-@ boats operating near Normandy as well as German shipping travelling through the English Channel . No. 460 Squadron and Australians in other Bomber Command units also participated in raids on E @-@ Boat bases at Le Havre and Boulogne on the nights of 14 / 15 June and 15 / 16 June respectively . 
 = = = July and August = = = 
 By July the Allied armies were having difficulty advancing against the German forces in Normandy . In an attempt to create a breakthrough , the Allied air commanders decided to use heavy bombers to attack German positions . The first of these attacks was made on 7 July by 467 Bomber Command aircraft and targeted German forces near Caen , as well as the city itself . The Australian contribution to this raid included 20 Lancasters from No. 460 Squadron and 14 Halifaxes from No. 466 Squadron as well as aircrew in RAF units . One of No. 460 Squadron 's aircraft made a crash landing within the Allied beachhead after being damaged by German anti @-@ aircraft guns , but its crew survived and were evacuated to the UK . While the attack devastated Caen , the ground troops were only able to capture the northern half of the city when they advanced on 8 July . All four Australian heavy bomber squadrons participated in a series of attacks on German positions on 18 July as part of Operation Goodwood , but this offensive also failed to result in a breakthrough . On 30 July , No. 463 , No. 466 and No. 467 Squadrons contributed aircraft to another major bombardment of German positions near Caumont ahead of Operation Bluecoat ; 693 heavy bombers took part in this attack , of which 39 were from the Australian squadrons , but many did not drop their bombs as cloud obscured the aiming markers in the target area . All four Australian heavy bomber squadrons participated in the next major attack , which took place on the night of 7 / 8 August to support Operation Totalize , but cloud and smoke again prevented many of the bombers from attacking the target area . The four squadrons also attacked German Army positions on 14 August in support of Operation Tractable ; visibility was clear over most of the target area , and the raids were considered successful . By this time the Allied armies had successfully broken out of Normandy , and no further heavy bomber attacks were required . 
 Australians also continued to be involved in Allied air attacks aimed at disrupting movement of German troops and supplies to Normandy during July and August . As well as supporting the ground forces in Normandy and continuing to bomb V @-@ 1 flying bomb launch facilities in northern France , Bomber Command attacked railway facilities in France during July and August , and at least one of the Australian heavy bomber squadrons participated in 15 of the 25 raids conducted against these targets . No. 464 Squadron also flew more than 350 sorties during July and 400 in August against transport infrastructure in France and convoys of German vehicles . These operations , which were generally conducted at night , cost the unit three aircraft . The only interruption to No. 464 Squadron 's attacks on transportation came on the night of 14 / 15 July , when four aircraft piloted by highly experienced airmen conducted a successful precision strike on the Gestapo barracks at Bonneuil @-@ <unk> . Australian aircrew assigned to other 2TAF medium bomber and fighter @-@ bomber units also participated in attacks on bridges and railways throughout July . 
 No. 453 Squadron operated from Normandy during July and August , and mainly patrolled behind the German front line in search of motor transport to attack . It occasionally encountered German aircraft during this period and shot down several Me 109 and Fw 190 fighters . The squadron flew 727 sorties during July , but lost several of its Spitfires to German anti @-@ aircraft guns . No. 453 Squadron continued to operate against German transport during August , and moved to an airfield near Lingèvres on the 13th of the month . This airfield was attacked by a German aircraft the next day , resulting in the death of one Australian pilot and another three wounded . The squadron experienced considerable success during the Allied break @-@ out , and claimed to have destroyed a large number of German vehicles during August . Overall , No. 453 Squadron flew more than 1 @,@ 300 combat sorties during July and August . While No. 456 Squadron 's night fighters conducted patrols over Normandy in early July and shot down four German bombers on the 5th of the month , the unit — in common with almost all the Mosquito @-@ equipped night fighter squadrons stationed in the UK — was tasked with intercepting V @-@ 1 flying bombs from 6 July onwards . 
 The Australian flying boat squadrons assigned to Coastal Command also continued to support the invasion during July and August . On 8 July a No. 10 Squadron Sunderland sank the German submarine U @-@ 243 130 miles ( 210 km ) south @-@ west of Brest . Overall , No. 10 Squadron flew 56 patrols during July and No. 461 Squadron conducted 67 , most of which were made at night . One of No. 461 Squadron 's Sunderlands damaged the submarine U @-@ 385 150 miles ( 240 km ) south of Brest on 10 August , and it was sunk the next day by HMS Starling . On 13 August another No. 461 Squadron Sunderland attacked and sank U @-@ 270 . No. 10 Squadron flew almost as many patrols throughout August as it had during July , but did not encounter any submarines . No. 455 Squadron took part in attacks on German shipping travelling off the Netherlands and in the North Sea during July and August , but these operations were not directly related to supporting the invasion . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 RAAF personnel also participated in the Allied invasion of southern France ( Operation Dragoon ) during August 1944 . No. 458 Squadron , which was equipped with Wellington bombers , flew anti @-@ submarine patrols and attacked targets in northern Italy and southern France ahead of the landings , which took place on the 15th of the month . The squadron continued these duties until the end of August . The Spitfire @-@ equipped No. 451 Squadron escorted Allied invasion convoys on 14 August and patrolled over the Allied beachhead as troops came ashore the next day . From 25 August the squadron was based at an airfield near <unk> in France and provided air defence for the region until October . Few German aircraft were encountered throughout this period , however . 
 The low casualties the Commonwealth air forces incurred during the Battle of Normandy led to an over @-@ supply of trained aircrew . While the number of pilots and other airmen undergoing training through the EATS had begun to be reduced in early 1944 , by 30 June there were thousands of qualified airmen — including 3 @,@ 000 Australians — in the UK waiting for posts in operational units . This number greatly exceeded the requirements of the Allied air forces . Accordingly , the flow of airmen from EATS training facilities in Canada to the UK was greatly cut back , and Australia ceased sending airmen overseas for training under the scheme in August . While 1 @,@ 245 Australian airmen arrived in the UK during the last six months of 1944 ( a reduction from the 5 @,@ 181 who had arrived in the first six months of the year ) , only those who were qualified as air gunners were typically ever assigned to combat units . It was not possible to find flying positions for most of the remaining unattached airmen who arrived after June 1944 , and some were posted back to Australia ; the remainder spent the rest of the war in training courses and various non @-@ flying roles . 
 Australian military personnel in Europe remained in action until the end of the war . At the time of the German surrender in May 1945 , there were 15 @,@ 500 members of the RAAF in the UK and western Europe , of whom 12 @,@ 300 were qualified aircrew . Most members of the small party of Australian Army officers who had been posted to the UK ahead of D @-@ Day also remained in Europe until the end of the war . 
 = = Commemoration = = 
 Overall , 1 @,@ 177 Australian military personnel were killed in western Europe and Britain during the lead @-@ up to the invasion of France and the subsequent Normandy Campaign . These losses were higher than those suffered by Australian forces in the Pacific during this period . A total of 44 Australians are buried in Commonwealth War Graves Commission cemeteries in the Normandy region . These include men killed in the region prior to the invasion and those who died during the fighting in 1944 . Of the Australian graves , 17 are located at the Bayeux War Cemetery , six at Saint @-@ <unk> de Lisieux , five at <unk> @-@ la @-@ Campagne , four at the Bretteville @-@ sur @-@ Laize Canadian War Cemetery , three at both <unk> la <unk> and Hermanville @-@ sur @-@ Mer , two in Ranville and one each at Ryes @-@ <unk> , Saint @-@ Manvieu @-@ Norrey , Bolbec and Tilly @-@ sur @-@ Seulles . The Bayeux Memorial , which lists the names of Commonwealth personnel killed in Normandy with no known grave , does not include any Australians . The most recent burial of an Australian serviceman in Normandy took place in April 2011 when No. 453 Squadron pilot Flight Lieutenant Henry Lacy Smith was interred at Ranville War Cemetery . Smith drowned when his Spitfire crash @-@ landed in the River Orne on 11 June 1944 , but his body was not recovered until November 2010 . 
 Australia 's involvement in the Battle of Normandy has also been commemorated through memorials and official state visits . Many of the RAAF squadrons that fought in the campaign were awarded battle honours after the war in recognition of their contribution . " Normandy " is also one of the 47 battle sites recorded on the Australian War Memorial , London , which was dedicated in 2003 . In 2004 , Australian Prime Minister John Howard attended the ceremonies in France that marked the 60th anniversary of the Normandy invasion . The French Government also awarded the Legion of Honour to ten of the surviving Australian veterans of the landings to commemorate this anniversary . In 2014 , Prime Minister Tony Abbott and a party of seven Australian veterans of the campaign attended ceremonies held to commemorate the 70th anniversary of D @-@ Day . When the Mémorial de Caen opened in 1988 , the flagpoles outside the museum commemorating the countries that participated in the battle did not include an Australian flag . Former No. 453 Squadron fighter pilot Colin Leith campaigned to have an Australian flag added , and this was achieved on 1 May 1998 . Despite these commemorations , there is only limited awareness among modern Australians of their country 's role in the fighting in Normandy , and the campaigns fought in the Pacific have a much more prominent place in the public memory of World War II . 
 = Buncefield fire = 
 The Buncefield fire was a major conflagration caused by a series of explosions on 11 December 2005 at the Hertfordshire Oil Storage Terminal , an oil storage facility located near the M1 motorway by Hemel Hempstead in Hertfordshire , England . The terminal was the fifth largest oil @-@ products storage depot in the United Kingdom , with a capacity of about 60 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 gallons of fuel . The terminal is owned by TOTAL UK Limited ( 60 % ) and Texaco ( 40 % ) . 
 The first and largest explosion occurred at 06 : 01 UTC near tank 912 , which led to further explosions which eventually overwhelmed 20 large storage tanks . The emergency services announced a major emergency at 06 : 08 and a fire fighting effort began . The cause of the explosion seems to have been a fuel @-@ air explosion of unusually high strength . Latest evidence suggests this may have been caused by hedgerows of deciduous trees accelerating the flame front to such a degree its pressure wave caused remaining air fuel to detonate . The British Geological Survey monitored the event , which measured 2 @.@ 4 on the Richter scale . News reports described the incident as the biggest of its kind in peacetime Europe and certainly the biggest such explosion in the United Kingdom since the 1974 <unk> disaster . The flames had been extinguished by the afternoon of 13 December 2005 . However , one storage tank re @-@ ignited that evening , which the fire @-@ fighters left to burn rather than attempting to extinguish it again . 
 The Health Protection Agency and the Major Incident Investigation Board provided advice to prevent incidents such as these in the future . The primary need is for safety measures to be in place to prevent fuel escaping the tanks in which it is stored . Added safety measures are needed for when fuel does escape , mainly to prevent it forming a flammable vapour and stop pollutants from poisoning the environment . 
 = = Incident = = 
 = = = Explosion and fire = = = 
 The first and largest explosion occurred at 06 : 01 UTC on Sunday , 11 December 2005 near container 912 . Further explosions followed which eventually overwhelmed 20 large storage tanks . From all accounts , it seems to have been an unconfined vapour cloud explosion of unusually high strength — also known as a fuel @-@ air explosion . Because of an inversion layer , the explosions were heard up to 125 miles ( 200 km ) away ; there were reports that they were audible in Belgium , France , and the Netherlands . 
 The British Geological Survey monitored the event , which measured 2 @.@ 4 on the Richter scale . It was reported that people were woken in south London , and as far west as Wokingham ( about 28 miles ( 45 km ) ) , where in its southern suburb , <unk> , numerous people felt the shockwave after the initial explosion . Subsequent explosions occurred at 06 : 27 and 06 : 28 . 
 Witnesses many miles from the terminal observed flames hundreds of feet high ; the smoke cloud was visible from space , and from as far north as Lincolnshire ( about 70 miles ( 110 km ) ) away . Damage from the blasts included broken windows at various buildings including the Holy Trinity church and <unk> Green School , blown @-@ in or warped front doors , and an entire wall being removed from a warehouse more than half a mile ( 800 m ) from the site . Buildings in neighbouring St Albans also suffered ; Townsend School had serious blast damage , and a window was blown out of St Albans Abbey ( about 5 miles ( 8 km ) ) . 
 Several nearby office blocks were hit so badly that almost every window , front and back , was blown in as the explosion ripped through them . During the working day , these offices would have been full of people , and many deaths may have resulted . Reports also indicated that cars in nearby streets caught fire . The roof of at least one house was blown off . Buildings in the vicinity were evacuated by police , not only because of the smoke and possibility of more explosions , but because of the danger of structural damage making the buildings unstable . 
 There were 43 reported injuries ; two people were deemed to be seriously injured enough to be kept in hospital , one in Watford General Hospital , with breathing difficulties , and another in Hemel Hempstead Hospital , although they were not in a life @-@ threatening condition . Some early media reports spoke of eight fatalities , but these may have been persons missing . All members of staff from the terminal were accounted for . 
 Hertfordshire police & fire services and the member of parliament for the area , Mike Penning , said that there were seven fuel tanks on the site which , as of 14 : 00 on 12 December , had not been affected . These tanks were at risk of exploding if the fire were to spread . 
 = = = Tackling the blaze = = = 
 The emergency services announced a major emergency at 06 : 08 and a huge fire fighting effort began . At peak times this effort consisted of 25 fire engines , 20 support vehicles and 180 fire fighters . Around 150 firefighters were called immediately to the incident , and began tackling the blaze at 08 : 20 on the morning of 12 December , putting in containment measures before applying a large quantity of foam . The incident occurred close to junction 8 of the M1 motorway , which led to its closure and the setting up of a public exclusion area . It was estimated that this incident would be the largest " single @-@ seat " fire in the world ever to be fought by a fire brigade , and foam supplies from sites all over the UK were drawn upon . 
 Plans had been in place to start using foam at midnight on 11 December , but were delayed by last @-@ minute concerns over possible pollution of local rivers and underlying water sources . Six high volume pumps were used to extract 25 @,@ 000 litres ( 5 @,@ 499 imp gal ) of water per minute — 417 litres ( 92 imp gal ) per second — from a reservoir 1 @.@ 5 miles ( 2 km ) from the fire , with six more high volume pumps deployed at various locations to serve as boosters . Thirty @-@ two thousand litres ( 7 @,@ 039 imp gal ) of fire fighting foam per minute were directed against the fire for just over four hours , after which the pumping rate was reduced . Half of the 20 individual fires were reported extinguished by midday . 
 By 16 : 30 on Monday 12 December , it was reported that a further two tank fires had been extinguished , but that one of the tanks extinguished earlier had ruptured and re @-@ ignited , and was now threatening to cause the explosion of an adjacent tank . This led to the M1 motorway being closed again ; the public exclusion area was widened , and firefighters were temporarily withdrawn until the risk posed by the threatened tank could be assessed . 
 Firefighting operations were resumed at about 20 : 00 , and it was anticipated that all fires could be extinguished during the night . Further damage occurred to one of the storage tanks in the early hours of Tuesday morning , causing firefighters to be withdrawn once again , but operations resumed at 08 : 30 . By midday on 13 December , all but three fires had been extinguished , although the largest tank was still burning . Bronze command — operations on the ground — was visited by the Bishop of St Albans , the local vicar , and the industrial chaplain supporting the fire crews , to see how they were coping . 
 Firefighters were confident that the remaining fires could be extinguished during the day — Tuesday 13 December . The smoke plume had been considerably reduced and was more grey , indicating the amount of vapourised water now combining with the smoke . It was reported at 16 : 45 that all tank fires had been extinguished , although some smaller fires persisted . 75 % of firefighters for Hertfordshire were involved in fighting the fire , supported by 16 other brigades . The entire gold command operation , involving many agencies as well as all the emergency services , was run from Hertfordshire Constabulary 's headquarters in Welwyn Garden City , some distance from the fire . 
 A further fire broke out during the early morning of 14 December . Firefighters were of the view that extinguishing it would leave the risk of petroleum vapour re @-@ igniting or exploding , so it would be better to allow the fire , which was well contained , to burn itself out . Hertfordshire Fire Service 's deputy chief Mark Yates stated that escaping petroleum vapour was the most likely cause of the original explosion and fire . 
 = = = Smoke cloud = = = 
 The black smoke cloud , which was visible from satellite photographs , drifted at a high altitude , around 9 @,@ 000 feet ( 2 @,@ 700 m ) , towards Reading and Swindon , and could be seen across much of South East England . 
 The small particles in the smoke contained hydrocarbons , which can be an irritant but have a low toxicity and were not expected to cause any long @-@ term harm . The Met Office issued warnings that the smoke in the atmosphere could come down in rainfall during the night of 11 December . 
 The fire resulted in 244 people requiring medical aid — mainly on the first day of the fire . From those 117 had symptoms attributable to the incident , of whom 38 were members of the public . The majority of those visiting hospitals were from the rescue services and attended for precautionary check ups . Most of them had no symptoms , except for 63 emergency workers who suffered respiratory complaints , of which half were sore throats . 
 For the first two days of the fire , the high thermal energy made the plume highly buoyant ; this , together with settled weather conditions , allowed the plume to rise to a great height with little cross @-@ mixing . When the fire was reduced in intensity it was reported to be possible that the plume would be less buoyant and that ground @-@ level smoke concentrations could then rise significantly . By 12 December , it was reported that the smoke cloud had reached northern France ; it was expected to arrive in northern Spain by the weekend . 
 To investigate the smoke cloud the Facility for Airborne Atmospheric Measurements , a research aircraft operated jointly by <unk> and the Met Office , made two flights on 12 and 13 December . In the first flight the edge of the plume was followed along the south coast of England . Carbon monoxide , nitrogen oxides and ozone concentrations were found to be low with soot particles being the major component in the cloud . The second flight went into the centre of the plume to obtain data to help forecasting and emergency teams . 
 = = Reactions and response = = 
 = = = Evacuations and closures = = = 
 Hundreds of homes in the Hemel Hempstead area were evacuated , and about 2 @,@ 000 people had to find alternative accommodation ; emergency services asked residents of the smoke @-@ affected areas to close their windows and doors and to stay inside . 
 Hertfordshire Constabulary advised people who had houses with smashed windows to seek refuge with friends or family nearby if possible . Some people whose homes were damaged by the blast were placed in hotels , while others stayed in a nearby shopping centre . Total , the operator of the Buncefield depot , set up a helpline for people whose properties had been damaged by the explosion , and called in local authorities and the Salvation Army to provide accommodation or other help . 
 Concerns for public safety resulted in about 227 schools , libraries , and other public buildings across Hertfordshire and Buckinghamshire closing on 12 and 13 December . Police and local authorities advised residents to consult the Hertfordshire Direct website for up @-@ to @-@ date information . 
 Seventy @-@ eight schools in Luton borough were closed on 13 December , along with a limited number of schools in Bedfordshire , on the advice of Hertfordshire 's Health Protection Agency that all schools within a 10 @-@ mile ( 16 km ) radius of the incident site should be closed because of concerns surrounding the effect of the smoke plume on children 's health . Schools reopened as normal on 14 December . 
 = = = Transport disruption = = = 
 The incident occurred close to junction 8 of the M1 motorway . The motorway was shut between junctions 12 and 6a — about 18 miles ( 29 km ) — shortly after the incident . Other roads in the vicinity , including the short M10 motorway ( now part of the <unk> road ) , were also closed . 
 Some local petrol stations reported long queues as people started panic buying . A spokesman for the Department of Trade and Industry gave assurances that no petrol shortage was likely to result from the incident . 
 The oil terminal supplied 30 % of Heathrow Airport 's fuel , and because of the fire , the airport had to start rationing fuel . Some long @-@ haul flights to Australia , the Far East , and South Africa had to make an intermediate stop at Stansted Airport or other European airports to refuel , while short @-@ haul operators were asked to fuel their aircraft for the round trip before flying to Heathrow . Some aircraft were only allowed 40 % of the fuel they would normally take on board . Fuel shortages continued for months after the explosion . 
 = = = Business disruption = = = 
 In the Maylands industrial area the worst affected buildings were the Northgate Information Solutions headquarters and the Fujifilm building . These buildings were so badly damaged they were rendered completely unusable . Demolition of the Fujifilm building began soon afterwards , and by June 2006 it had been completely removed from the site . Although the Northgate and Fujifilm buildings were closest to the blast , the surrounding Catherine House ( to the north ) , Keystone Distribution building ( to the west ) , 3Com Corporation and RO buildings ( to the south ) , were also extensively damaged . In all , six buildings were designated for demolition and 30 more required major repairs before they could be reoccupied . 
 As a result of the destruction of the equipment in the Northgate building several websites hosted there were inaccessible — including that of the Labour Party . Addenbrooke 's Hospital in Cambridge was also affected ; its IT system dealing with admissions and discharges had to be replaced for several days by a manual system . 
 A number of companies were affected by inability to reach their premises even where the premises themselves were largely unaffected by the blast . Criticism was expressed by local citizens and the local MP that originally the depot had been constructed away from other buildings , but that developmental pressures had led to both houses and commercial premises being built near the depot . 
 = = = Groundwater pollution = = = 
 In May 2006 Three Valleys Water announced that it had detected the persistent , <unk> , and toxic <unk> <unk> sulfonate ( PFOS ) — which is used in fire fighting foam — in a ground water bore hole close to the Buncefield site . It stated that no water from this well entered the public water supply and that a nearby well and pumping station had been closed since the fire as a precaution . The chemical is a known health risk and the UK government had been about to ban its use . 
 However just before the announcement , the Drinking Water Inspectorate announced that it was increasing the safe level of the chemical in drinking water . Hemel Hempstead MP , Mike Penning accused the government of changing the rules to suit the situation in which PFOS levels in drinking water in the area may rise in the future . Most of the fuel burned out — rather than spilling into the soil , so the impact on surrounding land and the water table was limited . 
 = = Inquiry = = 
 A government inquiry held jointly by the Health and Safety Executive ( HSE ) and the Environment Agency was started , but calls for a full public inquiry were declined . The Board included Lord Newton of Braintree ; Prof Dougal Drysdale , an authority on fire safety ; and Dr Peter Baxter , a medical expert . Environment Agency and HSE staff were also on the board . Its aim was to identify the immediate causes of the explosion , rather than consider who was to blame for any deficiencies , so as not to prejudice further legal proceedings . 
 An initial progress report by the Major Incident Investigation Board on 21 February 2006 did not go into the causes of the explosion , but summed up the event and the immediate reaction from the emergency services . A second progress report , published on 11 April 2006 , looked at the environmental impact . 
 A further announcement was made on 9 May 2006 about the sequence of events which caused the explosion . Starting at 19 : 00 on the evening of 10 December 2005 , Tank 912 , towards the north west of the main depot , was filled with unleaded petrol — from the Coryton Refinery located in Essex , England . At midnight the terminal closed , and a check was made of the contents of tanks , which found everything normal . Normally the gauges monitor the level of the fuel in the tank as it fills from the particular pipeline . From about 03 : 00 the level gauge for Tank 912 began to indicate an unchanging level reading , despite it being filled at 550 cubic metres ( 19 @,@ 423 cu ft ) per hour . 
 Calculations show that the tank would have begun to overflow at about 05 : 20 . There is evidence suggesting that a high @-@ level switch , which should have detected that the tank was full and shut off the supply , failed to operate . The switch failure should have triggered an alarm , but it too appears to have failed . Forty @-@ one minutes later , an estimated 300 tonnes of petrol would have spilled down the side of the tank through the roof vents onto the ground inside a bund wall — a semi @-@ enclosed compound surrounding several tanks . 
 An overflow such as this results in the rapid formation of a rich fuel and air vapour . CCTV footage showed such a vapour flowing out the bund wall from around 05 : 38 . By 05 : 50 the vapour started flowing off the site , near the junction of Cherry Tree and Buncefield Lane . Around 05 : 50 the rate at which fuel was being pumped into the tank increased dramatically . Initially the fuel was pumped in at 550 cubic metres ( 19 @,@ 423 cu ft ) per hour , but it increased to about 890 cubic metres ( 31 @,@ 430 cu ft ) per hour . By 06 : 01 , when the first explosion occurred , the cloud which was initially about 1 metre ( 3 ft ) deep , thickened to 2 metres ( 7 ft ) and had spread beyond the boundaries of the site . 
 The extent of the damage meant it was not possible to determine the exact source of ignition , but possibilities include an emergency generator and the depot 's fire pump system . The investigators did not believe that it was caused either by the driver of a fuel tanker , as had been speculated , or by anyone using a mobile phone . It was felt unlikely that the explosion had a widespread effect on air quality at ground level . 
 = = Legal action = = 
 = = = Civil liability = = = 
 A total of 2 @,@ 700 claims were filed by residents , businesses and insurers . A group of 146 claimants were hoping to bring a class action against Hertfordshire Oil Storage Ltd . On 17 March 2006 a High Court official , Senior Master Turner , adjourned a hearing on whether to permit the class action until October 2006 . Claimants including insurance companies , small businesses and about 280 families whose properties were damaged or destroyed were claiming up to £ 1 billion in damages . 
 Several court cases resulted from the explosion , although the main trial to determine who was liable for the damage commenced at the High Court in October 2008 . An example of loss is Cheetah Couriers — which suffered a 20 % drop in turnover because of the explosions , resulting in losses of around £ 300 @,@ 000 to £ 400 @,@ 000 . The company was located in offices on an industrial estate 400 metres ( 1 @,@ 312 ft ) from the depot . 
 An initial trial concluded on 23 May 2008 when Mr Justice David Steel issued a summary judgment after hearing that both Total and Hertfordshire Oil Storage Ltd ( HOSL ) had agreed that negligence was the cause . In the main trial , Total UK claimed that the duty supervisor at the time was responsible for the explosion , but refused to admit either civil or criminal liability for the incident . Total UK argued that it should not be liable for damages because it could not reasonably have foreseen that it would cause the destruction it did . On 20 March 2009 the High Court found Total liable for the blast , saying that it was satisfied that Total had control of tank filling operations at the Buncefield depot . The judgement left the company facing damage claims of around £ 700 million . 
 Total appealed the judgement , but the appeal was dismissed in a hearing on 4 March 2010 . 
 = = = Criminal liability = = = 
 The site is covered by the <unk> regulations . The Control of Major Accidents and Hazards Regulations are jointly enforced by the " competent authority " which is formed of the Environment Agency and the Health and Safety Executive . They carried out an investigation during and following the fire . 
 In April 2010 the five companies accused of causing the explosion faced a criminal prosecution brought by the Health and Safety Executive and the Environment Agency . Two defendants , Total UK and British Pipeline Agency Limited , had already pleaded guilty to offences under the Health and Safety at Work Act . The remaining three , Hertfordshire Oil Storage Ltd , TAV Engineering Ltd , and Motherwell Control Systems were found guilty in June 2010 . TAV Engineering Ltd and Motherwell Control Systems were found guilty of failing to protect their employees . Hertfordshire Oil Storage Ltd was found guilty of failing to prevent major accidents and limit their effects and then pleaded guilty to causing pollution to enter controlled waters underlying the vicinity around the site , contrary to the Water Resources Act . 
