 Sentencing took place in July 2010 . Total UK was fined £ <unk> , plus £ 2.6m in costs . Hertfordshire Oil Storage Limited was fined £ <unk> and £ 1m in costs . The British Pipeline Agency was fined £ 300 @,@ 000 plus £ 480 @,@ 000 costs . Motherwell Control Systems and TAV Engineering were fined £ 1 @,@ 000 each . Local MP Mike Penning called the modest fines " insulting " . 
 = = The terminal = = 
 The Hertfordshire Oil Storage Terminal ( HOSL – Hertfordshire Oil Storage Ltd ) , generally known as the Buncefield complex , was the fifth largest oil @-@ products storage depot in the UK , with a capacity of about 60 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 imperial gallons ( 270 ML ) of fuel , although it was not always full . This was about 8 % of UK oil storage capacity . 
 The HOSL is a major hub on the UK 's oil pipeline network ( <unk> ) with pipelines to Humberside and Stanlow Refinery and is an important fuel source to the British aviation industry , providing aircraft fuel for local airports including London Gatwick , London Heathrow and Luton airports . About half of the complex is dedicated to the storage of aviation fuel . The remainder of the complex stores oil , kerosene , petrol and diesel fuel for petrol stations across much of the South @-@ East of England . The terminal is owned by TOTAL UK Limited ( 60 % ) and Texaco 40 % . 
 The seat of the fire , and the worst damaged section , was " HOSL West " , used by Total and Texaco to store a variety of fuels , and the neighbouring British Pipeline Agency area . 
 = = Causes = = 
 The final report of the Major Incident Investigation Board ( <unk> ) was written in 2008 and released in February 2011 . The investigation found that Tank 912 at the Buncefield oil storage depot was being filled with petrol . The tank had a level gauge that employees used to monitor the level manually , and an independent high @-@ level switch which would shut off inflow if the level got above a certain <unk> . On Tank 912 , the manual gauge was stuck and the independent shut @-@ off switch was inoperative , meaning that the tank was being " filled blind " with petrol ( i.e. , being filled without a clear indication of the level ) . Eventually Tank 912 filled up completely , the petrol overflowed through vents at the top , and formed a vapour cloud near ground level , which ignited and exploded . The fires from the explosion then lasted for five days . 
 The investigation found that the level gauge had stuck at random times after a tank service in August 2005 , but it did not concern maintenance contractors or site management . The independent shut @-@ off switch was not fitted with a critical padlock to allow its check lever to work . Secondary containment ( meant to trap the petrol in a retaining wall around the tank ) failed and allowed petrol to flow out . Tertiary containment ( drains and catchment areas to prevent release of spilled chemicals to the environment ) also failed , and fuel and firefighting foam entered groundwater supplies . The investigation found secondary and tertiary containment to be inadequately designed and poorly maintained . 
 Wider management failings were found by the investigation to have contributed to the explosion : management safety checks at the site were found to be deficient and not properly followed . Site staff did not have control over the flow rates and timing of two of the three inlet sources , meaning that they did not have enough information to properly manage the storage of incoming fuel . Further , overall throughput had increased , reducing wait times further and shifting the emphasis to process operations instead of process safety . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Soon after the incident the Health Protection Agency was stripped of its remit to provide air quality data and it was passed on to the Environment Agency which forms part of the Major Accident Investigation Board . 
 = = = Remembrance = = = 
 An anniversary service was held in Holy Trinity Church <unk> Green on Sunday , 10 December 2006 , at which the Bishop of St Albans spoke , calling again for a full public inquiry , for assurances that the local hospital would maintain its accident and emergency department , and for the community to continue to build on good relationships formed because of the blast . 
 = = = Reconstruction = = = 
 To rebuild the damaged parts of the site , the relevant approval from <unk> Borough Council would be needed . The BP section of the site is a good way from the explosion and survived with very little damage , but it was inoperative as of 2009 . BP is exploring plans for the future use of this part of the site , and has indicated a number of priorities , including the reopening of the fuel pipelines to Heathrow . It is considering using its section to store aviation fuel and as a distribution centre for motor fuel , but at a much @-@ reduced level . In late 2009 , Total UK submitted plans for the reconstruction of the oil depot . 
 = Either / Or = 
 Either / Or ( Danish : Enten – Eller ) is the first published work of the Danish philosopher Søren Kierkegaard . Appearing in two volumes in 1843 under the pseudonymous authorship of Victor Eremita ( Latin for " victorious hermit " ) it outlines a theory of human development in which consciousness progresses from an essentially hedonistic , aesthetic mode to one characterized by ethical imperatives arising from the maturing of human conscience . 
 Either / Or portrays two life views , one consciously hedonistic , the other based on ethical duty and responsibility . Each life view is written and represented by a fictional pseudonymous author , with the prose of the work reflecting and depending on the life view being discussed . For example , the aesthetic life view is written in short essay form , with poetic imagery and allusions , discussing aesthetic topics such as music , seduction , drama , and beauty . The ethical life view is written as two long letters , with a more argumentative and restrained prose , discussing moral responsibility , critical reflection , and marriage . The views of the book are not neatly summarized , but are expressed as lived experiences embodied by the pseudonymous authors . The book 's central concern is the primal question asked by Aristotle , " How should we live ? " His book was certainly informed by Epictetus ; " Consider first , man , what the matter is , and what your own nature is able to bear . If you would be a wrestler , consider your shoulders , your back , your thighs ; for different persons are made for different things . Do you think that you can act as you do and be a philosopher , that you can eat , drink , be angry , be discontented , as you are now ? You must watch , you must labor , you must get the better of certain appetites , must quit your acquaintances , be despised by your servant , be laughed at by those you meet ; come off worse than others in everything — in offices , in honors , before tribunals . When you have fully considered all these things , approach , if you please — that is , if , by parting with them , you have a mind to purchase serenity , freedom , and tranquillity . If not , do not come hither ; do not , like children , be now a philosopher , then a publican , then an orator , and then one of Caesar ’ s officers . These things are not consistent . You must be one man , either good or bad . You must cultivate either your own reason or else externals ; apply yourself either to things within or without you — that is , be either a philosopher or one of the mob . " His motto comes from Plutarch , " The deceived is wiser than one not deceived . ” 
 The aesthetic is the personal , subjective realm of existence , where an individual lives and extracts pleasure from life only for his or her own sake . In this realm , one has the possibility of the highest as well as the lowest . The ethical , on the other hand , is the civic realm of existence , where one 's value and identity are judged and at times superseded by the objective world . In simple terms , one can choose either to remain oblivious to all that goes on in the world , or to become involved . More specifically , the ethic realm starts with a conscious effort to choose one 's life , with a choice to choose . Either way , however , an individual can go too far in these realms and lose sight of his or her true self . Only faith can rescue the individual from these two opposing realms . Either / Or concludes with a brief sermon hinting at the nature of the religious sphere of existence , which Kierkegaard spent most of his publishing career expounding upon . Ultimately , Kierkegaard 's challenge is for the reader to " discover a second face hidden behind the one you see " in him / herself first , and then in others . Johann Goethe said the same . 
 The Middle Ages are altogether impregnated with the idea of representation , partly conscious , partly unconscious ; the total is represented by the single individual , yet in such a way that it is only a single aspect which is determined as totality , and which now appears in a single individual , who is because of this , both more and less than an individual . By the side of this individual there stands another individual , who , likewise , totally represents another aspect of life ’ s content , such as the knight and the scholastic , the ecclesiastic and the layman . Either / Or Part I p . 86 @-@ 87 Swenson 
 Goethe 's poem 
 Life I never can divide , ... Inner and outer together you see . ... Whole to all I must abide , ... Otherwise I cannot be . ... Always I have only writ ... What I feel and mean to say . ... Thus , my friends , although I split , ... Yet remain I one alway . 
 = = Historical context = = 
 After writing and defending his dissertation On the Concept of Irony with Continual Reference to Socrates ( 1841 ) , Kierkegaard left Copenhagen in October 1841 to spend the winter in Berlin . The main purpose of this visit was to attend the lectures by the German philosopher Friedrich Wilhelm Joseph Schelling , who was an eminent figure at the time . The lectures turned out to be a disappointment for many in Schelling 's audience , including Mikhail Bakunin and Friedrich Engels , and Kierkegaard described it as " unbearable nonsense " . During his stay , Kierkegaard worked on the manuscript for Either / Or , took daily lessons to perfect his German and attended operas and plays , particularly by Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart and Johann Wolfgang von Goethe . He returned to Copenhagen in March 1842 with a draft of the manuscript , which was completed near the end of 1842 and published in February 1843 . 
 According to a journal entry from 1846 , Either / Or " was written lock , stock , and barrel in eleven months " , although a page from the " <unk> " section in the ' A ' volume was written before that time . 
 The title Either / Or is an affirmation of Aristotelian logic , particularly as modified by Johann Gottlieb Fichte and Immanuel Kant . Is the question , " Who am I ? " a scientific question or one for the single individual to answer for him or her self ? 
 Fichte wrote in The Science of Knowledge “ The question has been asked , What was I before I became self @-@ conscious ? The answer is , I was not at all , for I was not I. The Ego is only in so far as it is conscious of itself . … . The proposition not A is not A will doubtless be recognized by every one as certain , and it is scarcely to be expected that any one will ask for its proof . If , however , such a proof were possible , it must in our system be deduced from the proposition A = A. But such a proof is impossible . ” 
 Law of identity ( A = A ; a thing is identical to itself ) 
 Law of excluded middle ( either A or not @-@ A ; a thing is either something or not that thing , no third option ) 
 Law of <unk> . ( not both A and not @-@ A ; a thing cannot be both true and not true in the same instant ) 
 In Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel 's work , The Science of Logic ( 1812 ) , Hegel had criticized Aristotle 's laws of classical logic for being static , rather than dynamic and becoming , and had replaced it with his own dialectical logic . Hegel formulated <unk> for Aristotle 's laws : 
 Law of identity is inaccurate because a thing is always more than itself 
 Law of excluded middle is inaccurate because a thing can be both itself and many others 
 Law of non @-@ contradiction is inaccurate because everything in existence is both itself and not itself 
 Kierkegaard spoke of Hegel 's Logic metaphorically in 1844 : 
 Thus when an author entitles the last section of the Logic “ Actuality , ” he thereby gains the advantage of making it appear that in logic the highest has already been achieved , or if one prefers , the lowest . In the meantime , the loss is obvious , for neither logic nor actuality is served by placing actuality in the Logic . Actuality is not served thereby , for contingency , which is an essential part of the actual , cannot be admitted within the realm of logic . ... If anyone would take the trouble to collect and put together all the strange pixies and goblins who like busy clerks bring about movement in Hegelian logic a later age would perhaps be surprised to see that what are regarded as discarded witticisms once played an important role in logic , not as incidental explanations and ingenious remarks but as masters of movement , which made Hegel ’ s logic something of a miracle and gave logical thought feet to move on , without anyone ’ s being able to observe them . Concept of Anxiety , Søren Kierkegaard , Nichol translation , p . 9 @-@ 10 , note 12 
 Kierkegaard argues that Hegel 's philosophy dehumanized life by denying personal freedom and choice through the neutralization of the ' either / or ' . The dialectic structure of becoming renders existence far too easy , in Hegel 's theory , because conflicts are eventually mediated and disappear automatically through a natural process that requires no individual choice other than a submission to the will of the Idea or Geist . Kierkegaard saw this as a denial of true selfhood and instead advocated the importance of personal responsibility and choice @-@ making . 
 = = Structure = = 
 The book is the first of Kierkegaard 's works written pseudonymously , a practice he employed during the first half of his career . In this case , four pseudonyms are used : 
 " Victor Eremita " - the fictional compiler and editor of the texts , which he claims to have found in an antique <unk> . 
 " A " - the moniker given to the fictional author of the first text ( " Either " ) by Victor Eremita , whose real name he claims not to have known . 
 " Judge Vilhelm " - the fictional author of the second text ( " Or " ) . 
 " Johannes " - the fictional author of a section of ' Either ' titled " The Diary of a Seducer " and Cordelia his lover . 
 I have half a mind to write a counter @-@ piece to “ The Seducer ’ s Diary . ” It would be a feminine figure : “ The Courtesan ’ s Diary . ” It would be worth the trouble to depict such a character . Journals and Papers of Kierkegaard , 4A 128 
 Kierkegaard published the second edition of Either / Or on May 14 , 1849 , the very same day he published The Lily of the Field and the Bird of the Air . Three devotional Discourses . He published three books on the same day October 16 , 1843 . 
 = = Either = = 
 The first volume , the " Either " , describes the " aesthetic " phase of existence . It contains a collection of papers , found by ' Victor Eremita ' and written by ' A ' , the " aesthete . " 
 The aesthete , according to Kierkegaard 's model , will eventually find himself in " despair " , a psychological state ( explored further in Kierkegaard 's The Concept of Anxiety and The Sickness Unto Death ) that results from a recognition of the limits of the aesthetic approach to life . Kierkegaard 's " despair " is a somewhat analogous precursor of existential angst . The natural reaction is to make an eventual " leap " to the second phase , the " ethical , " which is characterized as a phase in which rational choice and commitment replace the capricious and inconsistent longings of the aesthetic mode . Ultimately , for Kierkegaard , the aesthetic and the ethical are both superseded by a final phase which he terms the " religious " mode . This is introduced later in Fear and Trembling . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 The first section of Either is a collection of many tangential aphorisms , epigrams , anecdotes and musings on the aesthetic mode of life . The word ' <unk> ' is related to ' psalms ' , and means " refrains " . It contains some of Kierkegaard 's most famous and poetic lines , such as " What is a poet ? " , " Freedom of Speech " vs. " Freedom of Thought " , the " <unk> chess piece " , the tragic clown , and the laughter of the gods . 
 If one were to read these as written they would show a constant movement from the outer poetic experience to the inner experience of humor . The movement from the outer to the inner is a theme in Kierkegaard 's works . 
 = = = The Immediate Stages of the Erotic , or Musical Erotic = = = 
 An essay discussing the idea that music expresses the spirit of sensuality . ' A ' evaluates Mozart 's The Marriage of Figaro , The Magic Flute and Don Giovanni , as well as Goethe 's Faust . ' A ' has taken upon himself the task of proving , through the works of Mozart , that " music is a higher , or more spiritual art , than language " . During this process he develops the three stages of the musical @-@ erotic . 
 Here he makes the distinction between a seducer like Don Juan , who falls under aesthetic categories , and Faust , who falls under ethical categories . " The musical Don Juan enjoys the satisfaction of desire ; the reflective Don Juan enjoys the deception , enjoys the cunning . " Don Juan is split between the esthetic and the ethical . He 's lost in the multiplicity of the " 1 @,@ 003 women he has to seduce " . Faust seduces just one woman . Kierkegaard is writing deep theology here . He 's asking if God seduces 1 @,@ 003 people at one time or if he seduces one single individual at a time in order to make a believer . He also wrote about <unk> in this way : 
 Achim v. Arnim tells somewhere of a seducer of a very different style , a seducer who falls under ethical categories . About him he uses an expression which in truth , boldness , and conciseness is almost equal to Mozart ’ s stroke of the bow . He says he could so talk with a woman that , if the devil caught him , he could <unk> himself out of it if he had a chance to talk with the devil ’ s grandmother . This is the real seducer ; the aesthetic interest here is also different , namely : how , the method . There is evidently something very profound here , which has perhaps escaped the attention of most people , in that Faust , who reproduces Don Juan , seduces only one girl , while Don Juan seduced hundreds ; but this one girl is also , in an intensive sense , seduced and crushed quite differently from all those Don Juan has deceived , simply because Faust , as reproduction , falls under the category of the intellectual . The power of such a seducer is speech , i.e. , the lie . 
 A few days ago I heard one soldier talking to another about a third who had betrayed a girl ; he did not give a long @-@ winded description , and yet his expression was very pithy : “ He gets away with things like that by lies and things like that . ” Such a seducer is of quite a different sort from Don Juan , is essentially different from him , as one can see from the fact that he and his activities are extremely unmusical , and from the aesthetic standpoint come within the category of the interesting . The object of his desire is accordingly , when one rightly considers him aesthetically , something more than the mere sensuous . But what is this force , then by which Don Juan seduces ? It is desire , the energy of sensuous desire . He desires in every woman , the whole of womanhood , and therein lies the sensuously idealizing power with which he at once embellishes and overcomes his prey . The reaction <unk> and develops the one desired , who flushes in enhanced beauty by its reflection . As the enthusiast ’ s fire with seductive splendor illumines even those who stand in a casual relation to him , so Don Juan transfigures in a far deeper sense every girl , since his relation to her is an essential one . Therefore all finite differences fade away before him in comparison with the main thing : being a woman . He <unk> the older woman into the beautiful middle age of womanhood ; he matures the child almost instantly ; everything which is woman is his prey ( pur <unk> <unk> la <unk> , voi <unk> quel <unk> fa ) . 
 Either / Or Part 1 , Søren Kierkegaard , 1843 , Swenson , 1970 [ 1944 ] , p . 98 @-@ 99 
 Kierkegaard believed the spiritual element was missing in Don Juan 's and in Faust 's view of life . He wrote the following in 1845 . 
 Assume that a woman as beautiful as the concubine of a god and as clever as the Queen of Sheba were willing to squander the summa <unk> [ sum of sums ] of her hidden and manifest charms on my unworthy cleverness ; assume that on the same evening one of my peers invited me to drink wine with him and clink glasses and smoke tobacco in student fashion and enjoy the old classics together @-@ I would not ponder very long . What prudery , they shout . <unk> ? I do not think that it is so . In my opinion , all this beauty and cleverness , together with love and the eternal , have infinite worth , but without that a relation between man and woman , which nevertheless essentially wants to express this , is not worth a pipe of tobacco . In my opinion , when falling in love is separated from this @-@ please note , the eternal from falling in love @-@ one can properly speak only of what is left over , which would be the same as talking like a midwife , who does not beat about the bush , or like a dead and departed one who , “ seared to spirit , ” does not feel stimulus . It is comic that the action in the vaudeville revolves around four marks and eight shillings , and it is the same here also . When falling in love @-@ that is , the eternal in falling in love @-@ is absent , then the erotic , despite all possible cleverness , revolves around what becomes nauseating because spirit qua spirit wants to have an ambiguous involvement with it . It is comic that a mentally disordered man picks up any piece of granite and carries it around because he thinks it is money , and in the same way it is comic that Don Juan has 1 @,@ 003 mistresses , for the number simply indicates that they have no value . Therefore , one should stay within one ’ s means in the use of the word “ love . ” When there is need , one should not shy away from using descriptive terms that both the Bible and Holberg use , but neither should one be so <unk> that one believes that cleverness is the constituting factor , for it constitutes anything but an erotic relationship . Søren Kierkegaard , Stages on Life 's Way , Hong , p . 292 @-@ 293 
 = = = Essays read before the Symparanekromenoi = = = 
 The next three sections are essay lectures from ' A ' to the ' Symparanekromenoi ' , a club or fellowship of the dead who practice the art of writing posthumous papers . 
 The first essay , which discusses ancient and modern tragedy , is called the " Ancient Tragical Motif as Reflected in the Modern " . Once again he is writing about the inner and the outer aspects of tragedy . Can remorse be shown on a stage ? What about sorrow and pain ? Which is easier to portray ? He also discusses guilt , sin , fear , compassion , and responsibility in what can be considered a foreshadowing of Fear and Trembling and Repetition . He then writes a modern interpretation of Antigone which leads into The Concept of Anxiety . 
 Draw nearer to me , dear brothers of Symparanekromenoi ; close around me as I send my tragic heroine out into the world , as I give the daughter of sorrow a dowry of pain as a wedding gift . She is my creation , but still her outline is so vague , her form so nebulous , that each one of you is free to imagine her as you will , and each one of you can love her in your own way . She is my creation , her thoughts are my thoughts , and yet it is as if I had rested with her in a night of love , as if she had entrusted me with her deep secret , breathed it and her soul out in my embrace , and as if in the same moment she changed before me , vanished , so that her actuality could only be traced in the mood that remained , instead of the converse being true , that my mood brought her forth to a greater and greater actuality . I placed the words in her mouth , and yet it is as if I abused her confidence ; to me , it is as if she stood reproachfully behind me , and yet it is the other way around , in her mystery she becomes ever more and more visible . She is my possession , my lawful possession , and yet sometimes it is as if I had slyly insinuated myself into her confidence , as if I must constantly look behind me to find her , and yet , on the contrary , she lies constantly before me , she constantly comes into existence only as I bring her forth . She is called Antigone . This name I retain from the ancient tragedy , which for the most part I will follow , although , from another point of view , everything will be modern . Either / Or Part I , Swenson , p . 151 
 That which in the Greek sense affords the tragic interest is that Oedipus ’ sorrowful destiny re @-@ echoes in the brother ’ s unhappy death , in the sister ’ s collision with a simple human prohibition ; it is , so to say , the after effects , the tragic destiny of Oedipus , <unk> in every branch of his family . This is the totality which makes the sorrow of the spectator so infinitely deep . It is not an individual who goes down , it is a small world , it is the objective sorrow , which , released , now advances in its own terrible consistency , like a force of nature , and Antigone ’ s unhappy fate , an echo of her fathers , is an intensified sorrow . When , therefore , Antigone in defiance of the king ’ s prohibition resolves to bury her brother , we do not see in this so much a free action on her part as a fateful necessity , which visits the sins of the fathers upon the children . There is indeed enough freedom of action in this to make us love Antigone for her sisterly affection , but in the necessity of fate there is also , as it were , a higher refrain which envelops not only the life of Oedipus but also his entire family . Either / Or Part I , Swenson , p . 154 
 Kierkegaard may have been responding to what Hegel wrote about " divine commands and the State and country and community and Freedom and Reason " . 
 Subjective volition Passion is that which sets men in activity , that which effects " practical " realization . The Idea is the inner spring of action ; the State is the actually existing , realized moral life . For it is the Unity of the universal , essential Will , with that of the individual ; and this is “ Morality . " The Individual living in this unity has a moral " life ; possesses a value that consists in this substantiality alone . Sophocles in his Antigone , says , " The divine commands are not of yesterday , nor of to @-@ day ; no , they have an infinite existence , and no one could say whence they came . " The laws of morality are not accidental , but are the essentially Rational . It is the very object of the State that what is essential in the practical activity of men , and in their dispositions , should be duly recognized ; that it should have a manifest existence , and maintain its position . It is the absolute interest of Reason that this moral Whole should exist ; and herein lies the justification and merit of heroes who have founded states , however rude these may have been . In the history of the World , only those peoples can come under our notice which form a state . For it must be understood that this latter is the realization of Freedom , i.e. of the absolute final aim , and that it exists for its own sake . It must further be understood that all the worth which the human being possesses all spiritual reality , he possesses only through the State . For his spiritual reality consists in this , that his own essence Reason is objectively present to him , that it possesses objective immediate existence for him . Thus only is he fully conscious ; thus only is he a <unk> of morality of a just and moral social and political life . For Truth is the Unity of the universal and subjective Will ; and the Universal is to be found in the State , in its laws , its universal and rational arrangements . The State is the Divine Idea as it exists on Earth . We have in it , therefore , the object of History in a more definite shape than before ; that in which Freedom obtains objectivity , and lives in the enjoyment of this objectivity . For Law is the objectivity of Spirit ; volition in its true form . Only that will which obeys law , is free ; for it obeys itself ; it is independent and so free . When the State or our country constitutes a community of existence ; when the subjective will of man submits to laws , the contradiction between Liberty and Necessity vanishes . The Rational has necessary existence , as being the reality and substance of things , and we are free in recognizing it as law , and following it as the substance of our own being . The objective and the subjective will are then reconciled , and present one identical homogeneous whole . 
 Lectures on the History of History Vol 1 p . 40 @-@ 41 John <unk> translation ( 1857 ) , 1914 
 The second essay , called " <unk> : A Psychological Pastime " , discusses modern heroines , including Mozart 's Elvira and Goethe 's Gretchen ( Margaret ) . He studies how desire can come to grief in the single individual . He asks if love can be deceived . 
 It is this reflective grief which I now propose to bring before you and , as far as possible , render visible by means of some pictures . I call these sketches <unk> , partly by the designation to remind you at once that they derive from the darker side of life , partly because like other <unk> they are not directly visible . When I take a <unk> in my hand , it makes no impression upon me , and gives me no clear conception of it . Only when I hold it up opposite the wall , and now look not directly at it , but at that which appears on the wall , am I able to see it . So also with the picture which I wish to show here , an inward picture which does not become perceptible until I see it through the external . This external is perhaps quite unobtrusive but not until I look through it , do I discover that inner picture which I desire to show you , an inner picture too delicately drawn to be outwardly visible , woven as it is of the tenderest moods of the soul . If I look at a sheet of paper , there may seem to be nothing remarkable about it , but when I hold it up to the light and look through it , then I discover the delicate inner inscriptions , too ethereal , as it were , to be perceived directly . Turn your attention then , dear Symparanekromenoi , to this inner picture ; do not allow yourselves to be distracted by the external appearance , or rather , do not yourselves summon the external before you , for it shall be my task constantly to draw it aside , in order to afford you a better view of the inner picture . Either / Or Part I , Swenson , p . 171 
 Historically he 's asking if one person can bring the inner life of a historical figure into view . Psychologically he 's asking if psychologists can really give an accurate picture of the inner world . Religiously he 's asking if one person can accurately perceive the inner world of the spirituality of another person . He conducts several thought experiments to see if he can do it . 
 The third essay , called " The <unk> One " , discusses the hypothetical question : " who deserves the distinction of being <unk> than everyone else ? " Kierkegaard has progressed from a search for the highest to the search for the lowest . Now he wants to find the unhappy person by looking once again to the past . Is it Niobe , or Job , or the father of the prodigal son , or is it <unk> , Abraham , or Christ ? This is , of course , about the new science of anthropology , which digs up everyone and tells the world if the people were happy or sad . 
 = = = The First Love = = = 
 In this volume Kierkegaard examines the concept of ' First Love ' as a pinnacle for the <unk> , using his idiosyncratic concepts of ' <unk> ' ( <unk> in Danish ) and the ' demonic ' ( <unk> ) with reference to Eugène Scribe . Scribe wanted to create a template for all playwrights to follow . He insisted that people go to plays to escape from reality and not for instruction . Kierkegaard is against any template in the field of literature or of Christianity . He was against systematizing anything in literature because the system brings the artist to a stop and he or she just settles down in the system . 
 He wrote about the muse as the occasion for inspiration . How much of the calling of the muse depends on the muse , how much on the single individual , and how much on will or volition ? Can we ever know how inspiration happens ? Later in Concluding Unscientific Postscript he wrote ; " inspiration is indeed an object of faith , is qualitatively dialectical , not attainable by means of quantification . " 
 George Brandes described this systematizing tenancy in his book Main Currents in Nineteenth Century Literature Vol 1 1906 English translation : 
 Schlegel 's own masterly translations of many of Shakespeare 's and some of Calderon 's plays show what progress has been made in the comprehension of foreign poetry since Schiller , in his translation of Macbeth , cut up the play to suit the classical fancies of the day , and in so doing cut away all its boldness and realism . The defect , which is the defect of the whole school ( and in Denmark does not pass away with the school , but is to be observed in the following period too ) , lies in the conception of poetry , which , marked by German one @-@ sidedness , is so sweepingly transcendental that it quite shuts out the historical interpretation . One model , unquestioned , absolute , follows the other . The French had found their models in the Greeks and Aristotle ; now it is , say , Shakespeare who is alone absolutely worthy of imitation in poetry , Mozart ( as Kierkegaard maintains in Enten @-@ Eller ) who is the perfect model in music . The sober , trustworthy , historical view of the matter , which recognises no perfect models , is entirely disregarded . The great work is the model for a whole new style , is in itself a code of laws . To our Heiberg , for instance , St. <unk> @-@ <unk> is " the perfect realisation of the drama proper in lyrical form . " Instead of studying poetry in connection with history , with the whole of life , men evolve systems in which schools of poetry and poetic works grow out of each other like branches on a tree . They believe , for instance , that English tragedy is descended in a direct line from Greek tragedy , not perceiving that the tragedy of one nation is not the offspring of that of other nations , but the production of the environment , the civilisation , the intellectual life in the midst of which it comes into being . 
 Kierkegaard has been writing against reading about love instead of discovering love . Scribe 's play is 16 pages long and Kierkegaard writes a 50 @-@ page review of the book . He wrote against the practice of reading reviews instead of the actual books themselves . 
 In his review he goes to the play himself and sees his lover at a play called First Love ; for him this is a sign , like a four leaf clover , that she must be the one . But confusion sets in for the poor girl because of mistaken identity . She is unable to make up her mind about love and says , " The first love is the true love , and one loves only once . " But Kierkegaard says this is sophistry " because the category first , is at the same time a qualitative and a numerical category . " Her first impression of love , when she was eight , has become decisive for her whole life . Now she can love only to a certain degree because she 's comparing each new experience with the past experience . Kierkegaard discussed this again in 1845 . 
 take a little pity on me . I myself feel what a sorry figure I cut these days when even the girls die as passionately of love as Falstaff passionately falls in the battle with Percy @-@ and then rise up again , vigorous and nubile enough to drink to a fresh love . Bravo ! And by this kind of talk , or rather , by a life that justifies talking this way , I would think @-@ provided that one person can benefit another at all @-@ I would think that I have benefited my esteemed contemporaries more than by writing a paragraph in the system . What it depends on is the positing of life ’ s pathological elements absolutely , clearly , legibly , and powerfully , so that life does not come to be like the system , a secondhand store where there is a little of everything , so that one does everything to a certain degree , so that one does not tell a lie but is ashamed of oneself , does not tell a lie and then , erotically speaking , romantically dies of love and is a hero , but does not stop at that or just lie there but gets up again and goes further and become a hero of novels of everyday life , and goes further yet and becomes frivolous , witty , a hero in Scribe . Imagine eternity in a confusion like that ; imagine a man like that on Judgment Day ; imagine hearing the voice of God , “ Have you believed ? " Imagine hearing the answer , “ Faith is the immediate ; one should not stop with the immediate as they did in the Middle Ages , but since Hegel one goes further ; nevertheless one admits that it is the immediate and that the immediate exists but anticipates a new treatise . ” Søren Kierkegaard , Stages on Life 's Way , 1845 , Hong , p . 291 @-@ 292 
 = = = Crop Rotation : An Attempt at a Theory of Social Prudence = = = 
 To Kierkegaard 's aesthete , boredom is the root of all evil , and so one must go to the ends of the Earth to avoid it . In this section , ' A ' explains that , just as a farmer rotates the crops to keep the soil fertile , so must a man forever change himself in order to remain interesting . ' A ' speaks out against anything that may prevent this rotation and lock one into boredom , including friends , family , and most importantly for the second half of the book , marriage . 
 = = = Diary of a Seducer = = = 
 Written by ' Johannes the Seducer ' , this volume illustrates how the aesthete holds the " interesting " as his highest value and how , to satisfy his voyeuristic reflections , he manipulates his situation from the boring to the interesting . He will use irony , artifice , caprice , imagination and arbitrariness to engineer poetically satisfying possibilities ; he is not so much interested in the act of seduction as in willfully creating its interesting possibility . 
 The Seducer is very reminiscent of Goethe 's Faust Part 1 , Scene VII ( A Street ) . Faust says to Mephistopheles , " Listen , you must get that girl for me ! " Mephistopheles says she 's an " innocent " girl , but Faust says she 's " older than 14 " . Mephistopheles says he 's " speaking like some Don Juan " . Faust then calls the devil a Master <unk> . 
 But Goethe was probably responding to Christopher Marlowe 's The Tragical History of Doctor Faustus ( 1616 ) who has the characters German Valdes , Cornelius , Faustus , Mephistopheles , Lucifer , the good and evil angels , and a host of other devils . Faustus asks Mephistopheles to answer some questions . He asks how " many heavens and spheres there are " . Mephistopheles says there are nine . Faustus asks " Who made the world ? " Mephistopheles refuses to answer . 
 Goethe and Marlowe have devils and angels as third person or persons between him and his love , but Kierkegaard has a different third person involved in the discussions between Johannes the Seducer and Cordelia . He has this strange power called chance . The Seducer knows the value of chance and wants to use chance to be " a possibility which seems an impossibility . " He says , 
 Accursed Chance ! Never have I cursed you because you have appeared ; I curse you because you do not appear at all . Or is this perhaps a new invention of yours , unfathomable being , barren mother of all , sole remnant of the past , when necessity gave birth to freedom , when freedom was again lured back into its mother ’ s womb ? Accursed Chance ! You , my only confident , the only being whom I consider worthy of being my ally and my enemy , always the same by forever being different , always incomprehensible , always a riddle ! You whom I love with all my soul , in whose image I mold myself , why do you not show yourself ? 
 I do not beg you , I do not humbly entreat you to show yourself in this manner or that ; such worship would be idolatry , not acceptable unto you . I challenge you to battle , why do you not appear ? Or has the pendulum of the world system stopped , is your riddle solved , so that you too have hurled yourself into the sea of eternity ? Terrible thought , for thus the world comes to a standstill from boredom ! Accursed Chance ! I await you . I shall not overcome you with principles not with what foolish people call character ; no , I will still be your poet ! I will not be a poet for others ; show yourself ! I will be your poet . I consume my own verse , and that will sustain me . Or do you think I am not worthy ? Like a <unk> dancing to the honor of her gods , so have I devoted myself to your service . Nimble , thinly clad , agile , unarmed , I renounce everything for you . I own nothing . I desire to own nothing , I love nothing , I have nothing to lose , but I am not therefore more worthy of you , you who long ago must have wearied of tearing human beings away from what they love , tired of their cowardly signs and cowardly petitions . 
 Take me by surprise , I am ready . No stakes , let us fight for honor . Show her to me , show me a possibility which seems an impossibility ; show her to me among the shades of the underworld , I shall fetch her up ; let her hate me , despise me , be indifferent to me , love another , I am not afraid ; only let the waters be troubled , the silence be broken . To starve me in this way is paltry of you , you who imagine that you are stronger than I am . Either / Or Vol I Diary of the Seducer 5th day p . 322 @-@ 323 , Swenson translation 
 Kierkegaard has this seducer speak again in Stages on Life 's Way where he explores some of the possibilities and then once more where he tries to explain that misunderstanding can be the root of the unity of the tragic and the comic . " Anyone who , when he is twenty years old , does not understand that there is a categorical imperative — Enjoy — is a fool , and anyone who does not start doing it is a <unk> . .... Our young friend will always remain on the outside . Victor is a fanatic ; Constantin has paid too much for his intellect ; the Fashion Designer is a madman . All four of you after the same girl will turn out to be a fizzle ! Have enough fanaticism to idealize , enough appetite to join in the jolly conviviality of desire , enough understanding to break off in exactly the same way death breaks off , enough rage to want to enjoy it all over again — then one is the favorite of the gods and of the girls . " 
 Kierkegaard has the category of choice and the esthetic as well as the ethical . Both can choose to love each other but the " how " of love is what Kierkegaard is getting at . 
 The tragic is that the two lovers don 't understand each other ; the comic is that two who do not understand each other love each other . That such a thing can happen is not inconceivable , for erotic love itself has its dialectic , and even if it were unprecedented , the construction , of course , has the absolute power to construct imaginatively . When the heterogeneous is sustained the way I have sustained it , then both parties are right in saying that they love . Love itself has an ethical and an esthetic element . She declares that she loves and has the esthetic element and understands it <unk> ; he says that he loves and understands it ethically . Hence they both love and love each other , but nevertheless it is a misunderstanding . Stages on Life 's Way , Hong ( Letter to the Reader ) p . 421 
 = = Or = = 
 The second volume represents the ethical stage . Victor Eremita found a group of letters from a retired Judge Vilhelm or William , another pseudonymous author , to ' A ' , trying to convince ' A ' of the value of the ethical stage of life by arguing that the ethical person can still enjoy aesthetic values . The difference is that the pursuit of pleasure is tempered with ethical values and responsibilities . 
 " The Aesthetic Validity of Marriage " : The first letter is about the aesthetic value of marriage and defends marriage as a way of life . 
 " Equilibrium between the Aesthetic and the Ethical in the Development of Personality " : The second letter concerns the more explicit ethical subject of choosing the good , or one 's self , and of the value of making binding life @-@ choices . 
 " <unk> " : The volume ends in a discourse on the Upbuilding in the Thought that : against God we are always in the wrong . His spiritual advice for " A " and " B " is that they make peace with each other . Here Kierkegaard quotes from the Gospel of Luke Chapter 19 verses 42 to the end for this discourse . 
 And when he drew near and saw the city , he wept over it , saying : Would that even today you knew the things that make for peace ! But now they are hid from your eyes . For the days shall come upon you when your enemies will cast up a bank about you and surround you and hem you in on every side , and then will dash you to the ground and your children within you will not leave one stone upon another in you , because you did not know the time of your visitation . And he entered the temple and began to drive out those who sold , saying not them : It is written , “ My house is a house of prayer , ” but you have made it a den of robbers . And he taught daily in the temple . But the chief priests and the scribes and the principal men of the people sought to destroy him , but they did not find what they should do , for all the people clung to him and listened to him . Either / Or Part 2 , Hong , p . 341 ( Luke 19 : 41 @-@ 48 ) 
 It 's human nature to look to external forces when faced with our own inadequacies but the ethicist is against this . Comparison is an esthetic exercise and has nothing to do with ethics and religion . He says , " Let each one learn what he can ; both of us can learn that a person ’ s unhappiness never lies in his lack of control over external conditions , since this would only make him completely unhappy . " He also asks if a person " absolutely in love can know if he is more or less in love than others . " He completes this thought later in his Concluding Unscientific Postscript and expands on looking inward in Practice in Christianity . 
 The ethical and the ethical @-@ religious have nothing to do with the comparative . … All comparison delays , and that is why mediocrity likes it so much and , if possible , traps everyone in it by its despicable friendship among mediocrities . A person who blames others , that they have corrupted him , is talking nonsense and only informs against himself . Concluding Unscientific Postscript p . 549 @-@ 550 
 Comparison is the most disastrous association that love can enter into ; comparison is the most dangerous acquaintance love can make ; comparison is the worst of all seductions . Søren Kierkegaard , Works of Love ( 1847 ) , Hong , p . 186 
 Lord Jesus Christ , our foolish minds are weak ; they are more than willing to be drawn @-@ and there is so much that wants to draw us to itself . There is pleasure with its seductive power , the multiplicity with its bewildering distractions , the moment with its infatuating importance and the conceited <unk> of busyness and the careless time @-@ wasting of light @-@ mindedness and the gloomy brooding of heavy @-@ mindedness @-@ all this will draw us away from ourselves to itself in order to deceive us . But you , who are the truth , only you , Savior and Redeemer , can truly draw a person to yourself , which you have promised to do @-@ that you will draw all to yourself . Then may God grant that by repenting we may come to ourselves , so that you , according to your Word , can draw us to yourself @-@ from on high , but through lowliness and abasement . Søren Kierkegaard , Practice in Christianity , 1850 <unk> Hong 
 Introducing the ethical stage it is moreover unclear if Kierkegaard acknowledges an ethical stage without religion . Freedom seems to denote freedom to choose the will to do the right and to denounce the wrong in a secular , almost Kantian style . However , remorse ( <unk> ) seems to be a religious category specifically related to the Christian concept of deliverance . Moreover , Kierkegaard is constant in his point of view that each single individual can become conscious of a higher self than the externally visible human self and embrace the spiritual self in " an eternal understanding " . 
 In a spiritual sense that by which a person gives birth is the formative striving of the will and that is within a person ’ s own power . What are you afraid of then ? After all , you are not supposed to give birth to another human being ; you are supposed to give birth only to yourself . And yet I am fully aware that there is an earnestness about this that shakes the entire soul ; to become conscious in one ’ s eternal validity is a moment that is more significant than everything else in the world . It is as if you were captivated and entangled and could never escape either in time or in eternity ; it is as if you lost yourself , as if you ceased to be ; it is as if you would repent of it the next moment and yet it cannot be undone . It is an earnest and significant moment when a person links himself to an eternal power for an eternity , when he accepts himself as the one whose remembrance time will never erase , when in an eternal and unerring sense he becomes conscious of himself as the person he is . Judge Vilhelm , Either / Or II p . 206 Hong 1987 
 The self that is the objective is not only a personal self but a social , a civic self . He then possesses himself as a task in an activity whereby he engages in the affairs of life as this specific personality . Here his task is not to form himself but to act , and yet he forms himself at the same time , because , as I noted above , the ethical individual lives in such a way that he is continually transferring himself from one stage to another . Søren Kierkegaard , Either / Or II p . 262 @-@ 263 
 A Providence watches over each man ’ s wandering through life . It provides him with two guides . The one calls him forward . The other calls him back . They are , however , not in opposition to each other , these two guides , nor do they leave the wanderer standing there in doubt , confused by the double call . Rather the two are in eternal understanding with each other . For the one beckons forward to the Good , the other calls man back from evil . … . The two guides call out to a man early and late , and when he listens to their call , then he finds his way , then he can know where he is , on the way . Because these two calls designate the place and show the way . Of these two , the call of remorse is perhaps the best . For the eager traveler who travels lightly along the way does not , in this fashion , learn to know it as well as a <unk> with a heavy burden . The one who merely strives to get on does not learn to know the way as well as the remorseful man . The eager traveler hurries forward to the new , to the novel , and , indeed , away from experience . But the remorseful one , who comes behind , laboriously gathers up experience . Søren Kierkegaard , Purity of Heart is to Will One Thing , from Upbuilding Discourses in Various Spirits ( 1846 ) , Steere translation 1938 p . 39 @-@ 40 
 = = Discourses and sequel = = 
 Along with this work , Kierkegaard published , under his own name , Two Upbuilding Discourses on May 16 , 1843 intended to complement Either / Or , " The <unk> of Faith " and " Every Good and Every Perfect Gift is from Above " . Kierkegaard also published another discourse during the printing of the second edition of Either / Or in 1849 . 
 Kierkegaard ’ s discourse has to do with the difference between wishing and willing in the development of a particular expectancy . " As thought becomes more absorbed in the future , it loses its way in its restless attempt to force or entice an explanation from the riddle . " <unk> always looks to the future and can hope , but regret , which is what Goethe did in his book The Sorrows of Young Werther , closes the door of hope and love becomes unhappy . Kierkegaard points to “ faith as the highest ” expectancy because faith is something that everyone has , or can have . He says : " The person who wishes it for another person wishes it for himself ; the person who wishes it for himself wishes it for every other human being , because that by which another person has faith is not that by which he is different from him but is that by which he is like him ; that by which he possesses it is not that by which he is different from others but that by which he is altogether like all . " 
 The characters in Either / Or believe everyone is alike in that everyone has talent or everyone has the conditions that would allow them to live an ethical life . Goethe wanted to love and complained that he couldn ’ t be loved , but everyone else could be loved . But he wished , he didn ’ t have an expectancy to work his will to love . Kierkegaard responds to him in this way : 
 You know that you must not wish @-@ and thereupon he went further . When his soul became anxious , he called to it and said : When you are anxious , it is because you are wishing ; anxiety is a form of wishing , and you know that you must not wish @-@ then he went further . When he was close to despair , when he said : I cannot ; everyone else can @-@ only I cannot not . Oh , that I had never heard those words , that with my grief I had been allowed to go my way undisturbed @-@ and with my wish . Then he called to his soul and said : Now you are being crafty , for you say that you are wishing and pretend that it is a question of something external that one can wish , whereas you know that it is something internal that one can only will ; you are deluding yourself , for you say : Everyone else can @-@ only I cannot . And yet you know that that by which others are able is that by which they are altogether like you @-@ so if it really were true that you cannot , then neither could the others . So you betray not only your own cause but , insofar as it lies with you , the cause of all people ; and in your humbly shutting yourself out from their number , you are slyly destroying their power . Then he went further . After he had been slowly and for a long time brought up under the disciplinarian in this way , he perhaps would have arrived at faith . Søren Kierkegaard , Two Upbuilding Discourses , 1843 p . 9 @-@ 12 
 The " <unk> " at the end of the second volume of Either / Or hinted at a future discussion of the religious stage in The Two Upbuilding Discourses , " Ask yourself and keep on asking until you find the answer , for one may have known something many times , acknowledged it ; one may have willed something many times , attempted it @-@ and yet , only the deep inner motion , only the heart ’ s indescribable emotion , only that will convince you that what you have acknowledged belongs to you , that no power can take it from you @-@ for only the truth that builds up is truth for you . " This discussion is included in Stages on Life 's Way ( 1845 ) . The first two sections revisit and refine the aesthetic and ethical stages elucidated in Either / Or , while the third section , Guilty / Not Guilty is about the religious stage and refers specifically to Goethe 's other book , The Autobiography of Goethe : Truth and Poetry , from My Own Life vol 1 , 2 
 In addition to the discourses , one week after Either / Or was published , Kierkegaard published a newspaper article in <unk> , titled " Who Is the Author Of Either / Or ? " , attempting to create authorial distance from the work , emphasizing the content of the work and the embodiment of a particular way of life in each of the pseudonyms . Kierkegaard , using the pseudonym ' A.F. ' , writes , " most people , including the author of this article , think it is not worth the trouble to be concerned about who the author is . They are happy not to know his identity , for then they have only the book to deal with , without being bothered or distracted by his personality . " 
 = = Themes = = 
 The various essays in Either / Or help elucidate the various forms of aestheticism and ethical existence . Both A and Judge Vilhelm attempt to focus primarily upon the best that their mode of existence has to offer . 
 A fundamental characteristic of the aesthete is immediacy . In Either / Or , there are several levels of immediacy explored , ranging from unrefined to refined . Unrefined immediacy is characterized by immediate cravings for desire and satisfaction through enjoyments that do not require effort or personal cultivation ( e.g. alcohol , drugs , casual sex , sloth , etc . ) Refined immediacy is characterized by planning how best to enjoy life aesthetically . The " theory " of social prudence given in Crop Rotation is an example of refined immediacy . Instead of mindless hedonistic tendencies , enjoyments are contemplated and " cultivated " for maximum pleasure . However , both the refined and unrefined aesthetes still accept the fundamental given conditions of their life , and do not accept the responsibility to change it . If things go wrong , the aesthete simply blames existence , rather than one 's self , assuming some unavoidable tragic consequence of human existence and thus claims life is meaningless . Kierkegaard spoke of immediacy this way in his sequel to Either / Or , Stages on Life 's Way , 
 " The esthetic sphere is the sphere of immediacy , the ethical the sphere of requirement ( and this requirement is so infinite that the individual always goes bankrupt ) , the religious the sphere of fulfillment , but , please note , not a fulfillment such as when one fills an alms box or a sack with gold , for repentance has specifically created a boundless space , and as a consequence the religious contradiction : simultaneously to be out on 70 @,@ 000 fathoms of water and yet be joyful . Just as the ethical sphere is a passageway @-@ which one nevertheless does not pass through once and for all @-@ just as repentance is its expression , so repentance is the most dialectical . No wonder , then , that one fears it , for if one gives it a finger it takes the whole hand . Just as Jehovah in the Old Testament visits the iniquities of the fathers upon the children unto the latest generations , so repentance goes backward , continually <unk> the object of its investigation . In repentance there is the impulse of the motion , and therefore everything is reversed . This impulse signifies precisely the difference between the esthetic and the religious as the difference between the external and the internal . " Søren Kierkegaard , Stages on Life 's Way , Hong translation , p . 476 @-@ 477 
 Commitment is an important characteristic of the ethicist . Commitments are made by being an active participant in society , rather than a detached observer or outsider . The ethicist has a strong sense of responsibility , duty , honor and respect for his friendships , family , and career . Judge Vilhelm uses the example of marriage as an example of an ethical institution requiring strong commitment and responsibility . Whereas the aesthete would be bored by the repetitive nature of marriage ( e.g. married to one person only ) , the ethicist believes in the necessity of self @-@ denial ( e.g. self @-@ denying unmitigated pleasure ) in order to uphold one 's obligations . Kierkegaard had Judge William speak again in his 1845 book Stages on Life 's Way . Here he described the enemies the single individual faces when trying to make a commitment , probability and the outcome . 
 There is a phantom that frequently prowls around when the making of a resolution is at stake @-@ it is probability @-@ a spineless fellow , as dabbler , a Jewish peddler , with whom no freeborn soul becomes involved , a good @-@ for @-@ nothing fellow who ought to be jailed instead of quacks , male and female , since he tricks people out of what is more valuable than money . Anyone who with regard to resolution comes no further , never comes any further than to decide on the basis of probability , is lost for ideality , whatever he may become . If a person does not encounter God in the resolution , if he has never made a resolution in which he had a transaction with God , he might just as well have never lived . But God always does business wholesale , and probability is a security that is not registered in heaven . Thus it is so very important that there be an element in the resolution that impresses officious probability and renders it speechless . There is a <unk> that the person making a resolution chases after the way a dog chases its shadow in the water ; it is the outcome , a symbol of finiteness , a mirage of perdition @-@ woe to the person who looks to it , he is lost . Just as the person who , if bitten by serpents , looked at the cross in the desert and became healthy , so the person who fastens his gaze on the outcome is bitten by a serpent , wounded by the secular mentality , lost both for time and for eternity . Søren Kierkegaard , Stages on Life 's Way , Hong , p . 110 
 Kierkegaard stresses the " eternal " nature of marriage and says " something new comes into existence " through the wedding ceremony . The aesthete doesn 't see it that way . The aesthete makes a " half hour ’ s resolution | resolution " but the ethical person , and especially the religious person , makes the " good resolution " . Someone devoted to pleasure finds it impossible to make this kind of resolution . The ethical and " Christian religious " person make the resolution because they have the will to have a true conception of life and of oneself . " A resolution involves change but for the single individual this involves only change in oneself . It never means changing the whole world or even changing the other person . 
 = = Interpretation = = 
 The extremely nested <unk> of this work adds a problem of interpretation . A and B are the authors of the work , Eremita is the editor . Kierkegaard 's role in all this appears to be that he deliberately sought to disconnect himself from the points of view expressed in his works , although the absurdity of his pseudonyms ' bizarre Latin names proves that he did not hope to thoroughly conceal his identity from the reader . Kierkegaard 's Papers first edition VIII ( 2 ) , B 81 - 89 explain this method in writing . On interpretation there is also much to be found in The Point of View of My Work as an Author . 
 Furthermore , Kierkegaard was a close reader of the aesthetic works of Johann Wolfgang von Goethe and the ethical works of Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel . Each presented a way of living one 's life in a different manner . Kierkegaard 's writings in this book are close to what Goethe wrote in his Autobiography . 
 It was not long before I formed a connection with Lavater . Passages of my Letter of a Pastor to his Colleagues ' had greatly struck him , for much of it agreed perfectly with his own views . With his never @-@ tiring activity our correspondence soon became lively . At the time it commenced he was making preparations for his larger work on Physiognomy , — the introduction to which had already been laid before the public . He called on all the world to send him drawings and outlines , and especially representations of Christ ; and , although I could do as good as nothing in this way , he nevertheless insisted on my sending him a sketch of the Saviour such as I imagined him to look . 
 Such demands for the impossible gave occasion for jests of many kinds , for I had no other way of defending myself against his peculiarities but by bringing forward my own . The number of those who had no faith in Physiognomy , or , at least , regarded it as uncertain and deceitful , was very great ; and several who had a liking for Lavater felt a desire to try him , and , if possible , to play him a trick . He had ordered of a painter in Frankfort , who was not without talent , the profiles of several well known persons . Lavater 's agent ventured upon the jest of sending <unk> 's portrait as mine , which soon brought back a merry but thundering epistle , full of all kinds of expletives and <unk> that this was not my picture , - — together with everything that on such an occasion Lavater would naturally have to say in confirmation of the doctrine of Physiognomy . My true likeness , which was sent afterwards , he allowed to pass more readily , but even here the opposition into which he fell both with painters and with individuals showed itself at once . The former could never work for him faithfully and sufficiently ; the latter , whatever excellences they might have , came always too far short of the idea which he entertained of humanity and of men to prevent his being somewhat repelled by the special characteristics which constitute the personality of the individual . 
 The conception of Humanity which had been formed in himself and in his own humanity , was so completely akin to the living image of Christ which he cherished within him , that it was impossible for him to understand how a man could live and breathe without at the same time being a Christian . My own relation to the Christian religion lay merely in my sense and feeling , and I had not the slightest notion of that physical affinity to which Lavater inclined . I was , therefore , vexed by the importunity , with which a man so full of mind and heart , attacked me , as well as Mendelssohn and others , with him , a Christian of his sort , or else that one must bring him over to one ’ s own way of thinking , and convince him of precisely that in which one had found peace . This demand , so directly opposed to that liberal spirit of the world , to which I was more and more tending , did not have the best effect upon me . All unsuccessful attempts at conversion leave him who has been selected for a proselyte stubborn and obdurate , and this was especially the case with me when Lavater at last came out with the hard <unk> Either Christian or Atheist ! Upon this I declared that if he would not leave me my own Christianity as I had hitherto cherished it , I could readily decide for Atheism , particularly as I saw that nobody knew precisely what either meant . 
 The Autobiography of Johann Goethe Concluding books ( Fourteen and Fifteen ) 1849 , published 1811 @-@ 1833 , p . 8 @-@ 9 
 = = = Existential interpretation = = = 
 A common interpretation of Either / Or presents the reader with a choice between two approaches to life . There are no standards or guidelines which indicate how to choose . The reasons for choosing an ethical way of life over the aesthetic only make sense if one is already committed to an ethical way of life . Suggesting the aesthetic approach as evil implies one has already accepted the idea that there is a good / evil distinction to be made . Likewise , choosing an aesthetic way of life only appeals to the aesthete , ruling Judge Vilhelm 's ethics as inconsequential and preferring the pleasures of seduction . Thus , existentialists see Victor Eremita as presenting a radical choice in which no pre @-@ ordained value can be discerned . One must choose , and through one 's choices , one creates what one is . 
 Jean Jacques Rousseau had published a book in 1762 in which he discussed giving daughters the right to choose her own husband . This is a quote from the fifth book of Emile , The Creed of the Savoyard Priest about choice . Both German and Danish citizens were reading this book . This choosing for oneself verses having an authority choose for one is a difficult leap for some to make . 
 Scarcely had she resumed her home duties when they perceived that her temper had changed though her conduct was unaltered , she was forgetful , impatient , sad , and dreamy ; she wept in secret . At first they thought she was in love and was ashamed to own it ; they spoke to her , but she repudiated the idea . She protested she had seen no one who could touch her heart , and Sophy always spoke the truth . .... 
 Far from hiding her griefs from her mother , the young girl asked nothing better than to have her as friend and comforter ; but she could not speak for shame , her modesty could find no words to describe a condition so unworthy of her , as the emotion which disturbed her senses in spite of all her efforts . At length her very shame gave her mother a clue to her difficulty , and she drew from her the humiliating confession . Far from distressing her with reproaches or unjust blame , she consoled her , pitied her , wept over her ; she was too wise to make a crime of an evil which virtue alone made so cruel . But why put up with such an evil when there was no necessity to do so , when the remedy was so easy and so legitimate ? Why did she not use the freedom they had granted her ? Why did she not take a husband ? Why did she not make her choice ? Did she not know that she was perfectly independent in this matter , that whatever her choice , it would be approved , for it was sure to be good ? They had sent her to town , but she would not stay ; many suitors had offered themselves , but she would have none of them . What did she expect ? What did she want ? What an inexplicable contradiction ? 
 The reply was simple . If it were only a question of the partner of her youth , her choice would soon be made ; but a master for life is not so easily chosen ; and since the two cannot be separated , people must often wait and sacrifice their youth before they find the man with whom they could spend their life . 
 Amazed at these strange ideas , her mother found them so peculiar that she could not fail to suspect some mystery . Sophy was neither affected nor absurd . How could such exaggerated delicacy exist in one who had been so carefully taught from her childhood to adapt herself to those with whom she must live , and to make a virtue of necessity ? This ideal of the delightful man with which she was so enchanted , who appeared so often in her conversation , made her mother suspect that there was some foundation for her caprices which was still unknown to her , and that Sophy had not told her all . The unhappy girl , overwhelmed with her secret grief , was only too eager to confide it to another . Her mother urged her to speak ; she hesitated , she yielded , and leaving the room without a word , she presently returned with a book in her hand . " Have pity on your unhappy daughter , there is no remedy for her grief , her tears cannot be dried . You would know the cause : well , here it is , " said she , flinging the book on the table . Her mother took the book and opened it ; it was The Adventures of Telemachus . At first she could make nothing of this riddle ; by dint of questions and vague replies , she discovered to her great surprise that her daughter was the rival of <unk> . 
 Sophy was in love with Telemachus , and loved him with a passion which nothing could cure . .... 
 " Is it my fault if I love what has no existence ? I am no visionary ; I desire no prince , I seek no Telemachus , I know he is only an imaginary person ; I seek some one like him . And why should there be no such person , since there is such a person as I , I who feel that my heart is like his ? No , let us not wrong humanity so greatly , let us not think that an amiable and virtuous man is a figment of the imagination . He exists , he lives , perhaps he is seeking me ; he is seeking a soul which is capable of love for him . But who is he , where is he ? I know not ; he is not among those I have seen ; and no doubt I shall never see him . Oh ! mother , why did you make virtue too attractive ? If I can love nothing less , you are more to blame than I. " 
 Emile , by Jean Jacques Rousseau 1762 Foxley translation . 
 However , the aesthetic and the ethical ways of life are not the only ways of living . Kierkegaard continues to flesh out other stages in further works , and the Stages on Life 's Way is considered a direct sequel to Either / Or . It is not the same as Either / Or as he points out in Concluding Postscript in 1846 . 
 In connection with Tivoli entertainments and literary New Year ’ s presents it hold <unk> for the catch @-@ penny artists and those who are caught by them , that variety is the highest law of life . But in connection with the truth as inwardness in existence , in connection with a more incorruptible joy of life , which has nothing in common with the craving of the life @-@ weary for diversion , the opposite holds true ; the law is : , the same and yet changed , and still the same . That is why lovers of Tivoli are so little interested in eternity , for it is the nature of eternity always to be the same , and the sobriety of the spirit is recognizable in the knowledge that a change in externalities is mere diversion , while change in the same is inwardness . But so curious , by and large , is the reading public , that an author who desires to get rid of it has merely to give a little hint , just a name , and it will say : it is the same . For otherwise the differences between the Stages and Either / Or are obvious enough . Not to speak of the fact that two @-@ thirds of it is about as different as is categorically possible . The first two @-@ thirds of the book , Victor Eremita , who was before simply an editor , is now transformed into an existing individual ; Constantine and Johannes the Seducer have received a more profound characterization ; the Judge is occupied with marriage from quite a different point of view than in Either / Or ; while scarcely the most attentive reader will find a single expression , a single turn of thought or phrase , precisely as it was in Either / Or . Soren Kierkegaard , Concluding Unscientific Postscript , p . 254 @-@ 255 translation by David F. Swenson and Walter Lowrie 1941 , Princeton University Press 
 = = = Christian interpretation = = = 
 The whole book can be viewed as the struggle individuals go through as they attempt to find meaning in their lives . Victor Eremita bought a secretary ( desk ) , which was something external , and said , " a new period of your life must begin with the acquisition of the secretary " . " A " desires the absolute highest . He can find no meaning in his life until he begins to study . He writes letters for the dead like the historians do . He 's trying to find God by studying the past as Hegel did . Don Juan seduces him away from God and Faust robs him of his innocent faith through the power of language . For him , tautology is the highest realm of thought . He 's someone who is in complete " conflict with his environment " because he is relating himself to externals . 
 " B " argues with " A " . He says ethics are the highest . " A " wants to remain a mystery to himself but " B " says it 's the meaning of life to become open to yourself . It 's more important to know yourself than historical persons . The more you know about yourself the more you can find your eternal validity . God will bless the most ethical person . Each one knows what 's best for the other but neither knows what 's best for himself . 
 Kierkegaard , speaking in the voice of the <unk> discourse at the end , says they are both wrong . They 're both trying to find God in a childish way . Whatever they relate to in an external way will never make them happy or give them meaning . Art , science , dogma and ethics constantly change . We all want to be in the right and never in the wrong . Once we find what we desire we find that it wasn 't what we imagined it to be . So Kierkegaard says to leave it all to God . 
 How true human nature is to itself . With what native genius does not a little child often show us a living image of the greater relation . Today I really enjoyed watching little Louis . He sat in his little chair ; he looked about him with apparent pleasure . The nurse Mary went through the room . “ Mary , ” he cried . “ Yes , little Louis , ” she answered with her usual friendliness , and came to him . He tipped his head a little to one side , fastened his immense eyes upon her with a certain gleam of mischief in them , and thereupon said quite <unk> , “ Not this Mary , another Mary . ” What about us older folk ? We cry out to the whole world , and when it comes smiling to meet us , then we say : “ This is not the Mary . ” Either / Or I , Swenson , p . 34 @-@ 35 
 Father in heaven ! Teach us to pray rightly so that our hearts may open up to you in prayer and supplication and hide no furtive desire that we know is not acceptable to you , nor any secret fear that you will deny us anything that will truly be for our good , so that the labouring thoughts , the restless mind , the fearful heart may find rest in and through that alone in which and through which it can be found @-@ by always joyfully thanking you as we gladly confess that in relation to you we are always in the wrong . Amen . Either / Or Part II , p . 341 
 The three spheres of existence were neatly summed up in his Concluding Unscientific Postscript to Philosophical Fragments . 
 There are three existence spheres : the esthetic , the ethical , the religious . To these there is <unk> corresponding border territory : irony is the border territory between the esthetic and the ethical ; humor is the <unk> ( border territory ) between the ethical and the religious . Irony emerges by continually joining the particulars of the finite with the ethical infinite requirement and allowing the contradiction to come into existence . … Irony is the unity of ethical passion , which in inwardness infinitely accentuates one ’ s own I in relation to the ethical requirement @-@ and culture , which in externality infinitely abstracts from the personal I as a <unk> included among all other <unk> and particulars . An effect of this abstraction is that no one notices the first , and this is precisely the art , and through it the true <unk> of the first is conditioned . ( The desperate attempt of the miscarried Hegelian ethics to make the state into the court of last resort of ethics is a highly unethical attempt to <unk> individuals , an unethical flight from the category of individuality to the category of the race . The ethicist in Either / Or has already protested against this directly and indirectly , indirectly at the end of the essay on the balance between the esthetic and the ethical in the personality where he himself must make a concession with regard to the religious , and again at the end of the article on Marriage ( in Stages ) , where , even on the basis of the ethics he champions , which is diametrically opposite to Hegelian ethics , he certainly jacks up the price of the religious as high as possible but still makes room for it . Note p . 503 ) Most people live in the opposite way . They are busy with being something when someone is watching them . If possible , they are something in their own eyes as soon as others are watching them , but inwardly , where the absolute requirement is watching them , they have no taste for accentuating the personal I. Irony is the cultivation of the spirit and therefore follows next after immediacy ; then comes the ethicist , then the humorist , then the religious <unk> <unk> @-@ 504 
 = = = Kantian interpretation = = = 
 A recent way to interpret Either / Or is to read it as an applied Kantian text . Scholars for this interpretation include Alasdair MacIntyre and Ronald M. Green . In After Virtue , MacIntyre claims Kierkegaard is continuing the Enlightenment project set forward by Hume and Kant . Green notes several points of contact with Kant in Either / Or : 
 However , other scholars think Kierkegaard adopts Kantian themes in order to criticize them , while yet others think that although Kierkegaard adopts some Kantian themes , their final ethical positions are substantially different . George Stack argues for this latter interpretation , writing , " Despite the occasional echoes of Kantian sentiments in Kierkegaard 's writings ( especially in Either / Or ) , the bifurcation between his ethics of self @-@ becoming and Kant 's formalistic , meta @-@ empirical ethics is , mutatis mutandis , complete ... Since radical individuation , specificity , inwardness , and the development of subjectivity are central to Kierkegaard 's existential ethics , it is clear , essentially , that the spirit and intention of his practical ethics is divorced from the formalism of Kant . " 
 = = = Biographical interpretation = = = 
 From a purely literary and historical point of view , Either / Or can be seen as a thinly veiled autobiography of the events between Kierkegaard and his ex @-@ fianceé Regine Olsen . Johannes the Seducer in The Diary of a Seducer treats the object of his affection , Cordelia , much as Kierkegaard treats Regine : befriending her family , asking her to marry him , and breaking off the engagement . Either / Or , then , could be the poetic and literary expression of Kierkegaard 's decision between a life of sensual pleasure , as he had experienced in his youth , or a possibility of marriage and what social responsibilities marriage might or ought to entail . Ultimately however , Either / Or stands philosophically independent of its relation to Kierkegaard 's life . 
 Yet , Kierkegaard was concerned about Regine because she tended to assume the life @-@ view of characters she saw in the plays of Shakespeare at the theater . One day she would be " Beatrice in Much Ado about Nothing " and another Juliet . He thought this to be a difficulty she needed to surpass and diagnosed both her and himself like this in Stages on Life 's Way ( 1845 ) . 
 No , what she will be healed by is a life @-@ wisdom permeated with a certain religiousness , a not exactly unbeautiful compound of something of the esthetic , of the religious , and of a life @-@ philosophy . My view of life is a different one , and I force myself to the best of my ability to hold my life to the category and hold it firmly . This is what I will ; this is what I ask of anyone I am to admire , of anyone I am really to approve @-@ that during the day he think only of the category of his life and dream about it at night . I judge no one ; anyone busily engaged in judging others in <unk> rarely remains true to the category . It is the same as with the person who seeks in someone else ’ s testimony a proof that he is earnest ; he is eo ipso not in earnest , for earnestness is first and foremost positive confidence , in oneself . But every existence that wills something thereby indirectly judges , and the person who wills the category indirectly judges him who does not will . I also know that even if a person has only one step left to take he may stumble and relinquish his category ; but I do not believe that I would therefore escape from it and be rescued by nonsense ; I believe that it would hold on to me and judge me , and in this judgment there would in turn be the category . Søren Kierkegaard , Stages on Life 's Way , Hong , p . 304 @-@ 305 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Early reception = = = 
 Either / Or established Kierkegaard 's reputation as a respected author . Henriette Wulff , in a letter to Hans Christian Andersen , wrote , " Recently a book was published here with the title Either / Or ! It is supposed to be quite strange , the first part full of Don <unk> , skepticism , et cetera , and the second part toned down and conciliating , ending with a sermon that is said to be quite excellent . The whole book attracted much attention . It has not yet been discussed publicly by anyone , but it surely will be . It is actually supposed to be by a Kierkegaard who has adopted a pseudonym .... " 
 Johan Ludvig Heiberg , a prominent Hegelian , at first criticized the aesthetic section , Either ( Part I ) , then he had much better things to say about Or , Part II . Julie Watkin said " Kierkegaard replied to Heiberg in The Fatherland as Victor Eremita , blaming Heiberg for not reading the preface to Either / Or which would have given him the key to the work . " Kierkegaard later used his book Prefaces to publicly respond to Heiberg and Hegelianism . Kierkegaard and William Godwin were very similar in their criticism of critics . He also published a short article , Who is the Author of Either / Or ? , a week after the publication of Either / Or itself . 
 In 1886 Georg Brandes compared Either / Or with Frederik Paludan @-@ Müller 's Kalanus in Eminent Authors of the Nineteenth Century , which was translated into English at that time . Later , in 1906 , he compared Kierkegaard 's Diary of the Seducer with Rousseau 's Julie , or the New Heloise and with Goethe 's Sorrows of Young Werther . He also compared Either / Or to Henrik Ibsen 's Brand but Edmund Gosse disagreed with him . 
 Next to Adam Homo , the most interesting work of Paludan @-@ Muller is Kalanus . It is the positive expression of his ideal , as Adam Homo is the negative . Nowhere is his intellectual tendency more akin to the negative bent of his great contemporary Kierkegaard than in this work . The problem which Kalanus endeavors to solve is precisely the same as the one whose solution Kierkegaard attacked in his Either @-@ Or ( Enten @-@ Eller ) , namely , that of contrasting two personalities , one of whom is the direct representative of innate genius , of the pleasure @-@ loving , extremely energetic view of life ; and the other the incarnation of ethical profundity and moral grandeur , allowing them to struggle and contend , and convincing the reader of the decisive defeat of the purely natural views of life . With Kierkegaard the two opposing modes of contemplation of life are represented by a follower of aesthetics , and a judge of the supreme court , with Paludan @-@ Muller by celebrated names in history ; no less a man than the conqueror of the world , Alexander the Great , represents in Kalanus the aesthetic view of life , and the opponent allotted to him is the philosopher Kalanus . The ideal situation in the presentation of the intellectual wrestling @-@ match of this sort would be that the author should succeed in equipping the contending parties with an equal degree of excellency . The actual situation , in this case , is that with Kierkegaard the representative of aesthetics is lavishly endowed with intellectual gifts , while the endowments of the representative of ethics , on the other hand , appear somewhat wooden and weak ; and that with <unk> @-@ Muller , on the contrary , the representative of ethics is no less intellectual than inspired , a man of the purest spiritual beauty , while the great Alexander is not placed upon the pinnacle of his historic fame . 
 A third significant feature in [ Rousseau ’ s ] La Nouvelle Heloise is that , just as we have passion in place of gallantry and inequality of station in place of similarity of rank , we have also the moral conviction of the sanctity of marriage in place of that honour grounded on aristocratic pride and self @-@ respect , which stood for virtue in fashionable literature . This word , Virtue , little in vogue until now , became with Rousseau and his school a watchword which was in perfect harmony with their other watchword , Nature ; for to Rousseau virtue was a natural condition . Following the example of society , French literature had been making merry at the expense of marriage ; Rousseau , therefore , defied the spirit of the times by writing a book in its honour . His heroine returns the passion of her lover , but marries another , to whom she remains faithful . Here , as in Werther the lover proper loses the maiden , who is wedded to a Monsieur Wolmar ( the Albert of Werther and the Edward of Kierkegaard 's Diary of a Seducer ) , a man as irreproachable as he is uninteresting . The moral conviction which is vindicated and glorified in Rousseau as Virtue , is the same as that which in Chateaubriand , under the influence of the religious reaction , takes the form of a binding religious vow . Georg Morris Cohen Brandes , Main Currents in Nineteenth Century Literature Vol . 1 ( 1906 ) , p . 16 @-@ 17 
 In Kierkegaard ’ s “ Either @-@ Or ” is found the sentence , “ The are poets , who , through their poetic creations , have found themselves . ” This remark can well be applied to Paludan @-@ Muller . For what else has a poet done who has traversed the path from <unk> to simplicity , from the intellectual to the true , from the sportive and brilliant to the transparently clear , and from the pleasing to the great ? Georg Brandes , Creative Spirits in the Nineteenth Century , 1923 p . 277 
 Kierkegaard later referred to his concept of choosing yourself as the single individual in The Concept of Anxiety , June 17 , 1844 , and then in his Four Upbuilding Discourses , August 31 , 1844 , and once again in Upbuilding Discourses in Various Spirits , 1847 . William James echoed Kierkegaard in his lecture on The Sick Soul where he wrote , " the man must die to an unreal life before he can be born into the real life . " 
 You are outside yourself and therefore cannot do without the other as opposition ; you believe that only a restless spirit is alive , and all who are experienced believe that only a quiet spirit is truly alive . For you a turbulent sea is a symbol of life ; for me it is the quiet , deep water . Either / Or Part II p . 144 , Hong 
 Anxiety is a qualification of dreaming spirit , and as such it has its place in psychology . Awake , the difference between myself and my other is posited ; sleeping , it is suspended ; dreaming , it is an intimated nothing . The actuality of the spirit constantly shows itself as a form that tempts its possibility but disappears as soon as it seeks to grasp for it , and it is a nothing that can only bring anxiety . More it cannot do as long as it merely shows itself . The concept of anxiety is almost never treated in psychology . Therefore , I must point out that it is altogether different from fear and similar concepts that refer to something definite , whereas anxiety is freedom ’ s actuality as the possibility of possibility . For this reason , anxiety is not found in the beast , precisely because by nature the beast is not qualified as spirit . The Concept of Anxiety , Nichol p . 42 
 Now he discovers that the self he chooses has a boundless multiplicity within itself inasmuch as it has a history , a history in which he acknowledges identity with himself . This history is of a different kind , for in this history he stands in relation to other individuals in the race , and to the whole race , and this history contains painful things , and yet he is the person he is only through this history . That is why it takes courage to choose oneself , for at the same time as he seems to be isolating himself most radically he is most radically sinking himself into the root by which he is bound up with the whole . This makes him uneasy , and yet it must be so , for when the passion of freedom is aroused in him @-@ and it is aroused in the choice just as it presupposes itself in the choice @-@ he chooses himself and struggles for this possession as for his salvation , and it is his salvation . Either / Or Part II , Hong , p . 216 
 When a person turns and faces himself in order to understand himself , he steps , as it were , in the way of that first self , halts that which was turned outward in hankering for and seeking after the surrounding world that is its object , and summons it back from the external . In order to prompt the first self to this withdrawal , the deeper self lets the surrounding world remain what it is @-@ remain dubious . This is indeed the way it is ; the world around us is inconstant and can be changed into the opposite at any moment , and there is not one person who can force this change by his own might or by the conjuration of his wish . The deeper self now shapes the deceitful flexibility of the surrounding world in such a way that it is no longer attractive to the first self . Then the first self either must proceed to kill the deeper self , to render it forgotten , whereby the whole matter is given up ; or it must admit that the deeper self is right , because to want to predicate constancy of something that continually changes is indeed a contradiction , and as soon as one confesses that it changes , it can of course , change in that same moment . However much that first self shrinks from this , there is no wordsmith so ingenious or no thought @-@ twister so wily that he can invalidate the deeper self ’ s eternal claim . There is only one way out , and that is to silence the deeper self by letting the roar of inconstancy drown it out . Eighteen Upbuilding Discourses , 1845 , Hong translation , p . 314 
 Just as a man changes his clothes for celebration , so a person preparing for the holy act of confession is inwardly changed . It is indeed like changing one ’ s clothes to divest oneself of multiplicity in order to make up one ’ s mind about one thing , to interrupt the pace of busy activity in order to put on the repose of contemplation in unity with oneself . And this unity with oneself is the celebration ’ s simple festive dress that is the condition of admittance . Upbuilding Discourses in Various Spirits , Søren Kierkegaard , 1847 , Hong , p . 19 
 If a person whose life has been tried in some crucial difficulty has a friend and sometime later he is unable to retain the past clearly , if anxiety creates confusion , and if accusing thoughts assail him with all their might as he works his way back , then he may go to his friend and say , “ My soul is sick so that nothing will become clear to me , but I confided everything to you ; you remember it , so please explain the past to me again . ” But if a person has no friend , he presumably goes to God if under other circumstances he has confided something to him , if in the hour of decision he called God as witness when no one understood him . And the one who went to his friend perhaps was not understood at times , perhaps was filled with self @-@ loathing , which is even more oppressive , upon discovering that the one to whom he had confided his troubles had not understood him at all , even though he had listened , had not sensed what was making him anxious , but had only an inquisitive interest in his unusual encounter with life . But this would never happen with God ; who would dare to venture to think this of God , even if he is cowardly enough to prefer to forget God @-@ until he stands face @-@ to @-@ face with the judge , who passes judgment on him but not on the one who truly has God as a witness , because where God is the judge , there is indeed no judge if God is the witness . It by no means follows that a person ’ s life becomes easy because he learns to know God in this way . On the contrary , it can become very hard ; it may become more difficult than the contemptible easiness of <unk> human life , but in this difficulty life also acquires ever deeper and deeper meaning . Søren Kierkegaard , Four Upbuilding Discourses August 31 , 1844 ( Eighteen Upbuilding Discourses p . 324 ) 
 August Strindberg was familiar with Either / Or and this book made him “ forever a champion of the ethical as juxtaposed to the aesthetic life conception and he always remained faithful to the idea that art and knowledge must be subservient to life , and that life itself must be lived as we know best , chiefly because we are part of it and cannot escape from its promptings . ” Strindberg was obviously attracted to Either / Or Part II where Kierkegaard developed his categorical imperative . He wrote the following in Growth of a Soul published posthumously in 1913 about Kierkegaard ’ s Either — Or : " it was valid only for the priests who called themselves Christians and the seducer and Don Juan were the author himself , who satisfied his desires in imagination " . Part II was his " Discourse on Life as a Duty , and when he reached the end of the work he found the moral philosopher in despair , and that all this teaching about duty had only produced a Philistine . " He then states that Kierkegaard 's discourses might have led him closer to Christianity but he didn 't know if he could come back to something " which had been torn out , and joyfully thrown into the fire " . However , after reading the book he " felt sinful " . Then another writer began to influence his life . This is how he described Either / Or : 
 But another element now entered into his life , and had a decided influence both on his views of things and his work . This was his acquaintance with two men , — an author and a remarkable personality . Unfortunately they were both abnormal and therefore had only a disturbing effect upon his development . The author was Kierkegaard , whose book , Either — Or , John had borrowed from a member of the Song Club , and read with fear and trembling . His friends had also read it as a work of genius , had admired the style , but not been specialty influenced by it , — a proof that books have little effect , when they do not find readers in sympathy with the author . But upon John the book made the impression intended by the author . He read the first part containing " The Confessions of an <unk> . " He felt sometimes carried away by it , but always had an uncomfortable feeling as though present at a sick @-@ bed . The perusal of the first part left a feeling of emptiness and despair behind it . The book agitated him . " The Diary of a Seducer " he regarded as the fancies of an unclean imagination . Things were not like that in real life . Moreover John was no <unk> , but on the contrary inclined to asceticism and self @-@ torment . Such egotistic sensuality as that of the hero of Kierkegaard 's work was absurd because the suffering he caused by the satisfaction of his desires necessarily involved him in suffering and , therefore , defeated his object . 
 The second part of the work containing the philosopher 's " Discourse on Life as a Duty , " made a deeper impression on John . It showed him that he himself was an " esthete " who had conceived of authorship as a form of enjoyment . Kierkegaard said that it should be regarded as a calling . Why ? The proof was wanting , and John , who did not know that Kierkegaard was a Christian , but thought the contrary , not having seen his Edifying Discourses , imbibed unaware the Christian system of ethics with its doctrine of self @-@ sacrifice and duty . Along with these the idea of sin returned . Enjoyment was a sin , and one had to do one 's duty . Why ? Was it for the sake of society to which one was under obligations ? No ! merely because it was duty . That was simply Kant 's categorical imperative . When he reached the end of the work Either — Or and found the moral philosopher also in despair , and that all this teaching about duty had only produced a Philistine , he felt broken in two . " Then , " he thought , " better be an esthete . " But one cannot be an esthete if one has been a Christian for five @-@ sixths of one 's life , and one cannot be moral without Christ . Thus he was tossed to and fro like a ball between the two , and ended in sheer despair . August Strindberg , Growth of a Soul , 165 @-@ 166 
 Kierkegaard put an end to his own double @-@ mindedness about devoting himself completely to aesthetics or developing a balance between the aesthetic and the ethical and going on to an ethical / Christian religious existence in the first part of his authorship ( 1843 @-@ 1846 ) and then described what he had learned about himself and about being a Christian beginning with Upbuilding Discourses in Various Spirits ( 1847 ) . He learned to choose his own Either / Or . 
 each man who is mindful of himself knows what no science knows , since he knows who he himself is . Søren Kierkegaard , The Concept of Anxiety 1844 , Nichol p . 78 @-@ 79 
 David F. Swenson , University of Minneapolis , Saint Paul , lectured on Kierkegaard 's three modes of life in 1918 : First , the Life of Enjoyment – Folly and <unk> in the Pursuit of Pleasure ; second , the Life of Duty – Realizing the Self through Victorious Accomplishments ; third , the Life of Faith – The Religious Transformation of the Self through Suffering . 
 even the lowliest individual has a double existence . He , too has a history , and this is not simply a product of his own free acts . The interior deed , on the other hand , belongs to him and will belong to him forever ; history or world history cannot take it from him ; it follows him , either to his joy or to his despair . In this world there rules an absolute Either / Or . But philosophy has nothing to do with this world . Judge Vilhelm , Either / Or II p . 174 @-@ 175 Hong 1987 
 = = = Later reception = = = 
 Although Either / Or was Kierkegaard 's first major book , it was one of his last books to be translated into English , as late as 1944 . Frederick <unk> . <unk> , Jr. insisted that reviewers consider the book in this way : " In general , we have a right to discover , if we can , the meaning of a work as comprehensive as Either / Or , considering it upon its own merits and not reducing the meaning so as to fit into the author 's later perspective . It occurred to me that this was a service to understanding Kierkegaard , whose esthetic and ethical insights have been much slighted by those enamored of his religion of renunciation and transcendence . ... Kierkegaard 's brilliance seems to me to be showing that while goodness , truth , and beauty can not speculatively be derived one from another , yet these three are integrally related in the dynamics of a healthy character structure " . 
 David F. Swenson , University of Minneapolis , Saint Paul , professor introduced three lectures about Kierkegaard in 1918 in which he " presented Soren Kierkegaard ’ s delineation of three fundamental modes of life : First , the Life of Enjoyment – Folly and <unk> in the Pursuit of Pleasure ; second , the Life of Duty – Realizing the Self through Victorious Accomplishments ; third , the Life of Faith – The Religious Transformation of the Self through Suffering . 
 Thomas Henry <unk> was impressed by ' As thoughts on music in the essay , " The Immediate Stages of the Erotic , or Musical Erotic " . <unk> argues that " the essay should be taken seriously by a musician , because it makes one think , and think hard enough to straighten many of one 's ideas ; ideas , I mean , not only on art , but on life " and goes on to discuss the psychological , existential , and musical value of the work . 
 Johannes Edouard <unk> wrote a biography about Søren Kierkegaard in 1954 and in that book he speculated that the Diary of the Seducer was meant to depict the life of P.L. Moller who later ( 1845 ) wrote the articles in The Corsair detrimental to the character of Kierkegaard . The Diary of a Seducer by itself , is a provocative novella , and has been reproduced separately from Either / Or several times . John Updike said of the Diary , " In the vast literature of love , The Seducer 's Diary is an intricate curiosity – a feverishly intellectual attempt to reconstruct an erotic failure as a pedagogic success , a wound masked as a boast " . 
 Many authors were interested in separating the esthetic , the ethical and the religious but it may have been , as far as Kierkegaard was concerned , of more importance for the single individual to have a way to decide when one was becoming dominant over the other two . Henrik <unk> , ( 1937 @-@ 1998 ) a Danish writer , wrote three books as a way to illustrate Kierkegaard 's three stages of existence , 1981 , The Road to Lagoa Santa , which was about Kierkegaard 's brother @-@ in @-@ law Peter Wilhelm Lund ( the ethicist ) , 1985 The Seducer : It Is Hard to Die in Dieppe , Peder Ludvig Moller was the esthetic in that novel , and in 1991 Brother Jacob which describes Søren Kierkegaard as a Franciscan monk . 
 In contemporary times , Either / Or received new life as a grand philosophical work with the publication of Alasdair MacIntyre 's After Virtue ( 1981 ) , where MacIntyre situates Either / Or as an attempt to capture the Enlightenment spirit set forth by David Hume and Immanuel Kant . After Virtue renewed Either / Or as an important ethical text in the Kantian vein , as mentioned previously . Although MacIntyre accuses Victor Eremita of failing to provide a criterion for one to adopt an ethical way of life , many scholars have since replied to MacIntyre 's accusation in Kierkegaard After MacIntyre . 
 = = = Primary references = = = 
 = = = Secondary references and notes = = = 
 = Chalcogen = 
 The chalcogens ( / <unk> / ) are the chemical elements in group 16 of the periodic table . This group is also known as the oxygen family . It consists of the elements oxygen ( O ) , sulfur ( S ) , selenium ( Se ) , tellurium ( Te ) , and the radioactive element polonium ( Po ) . The chemically uncharacterized synthetic element livermorium ( Lv ) is predicted to be a chalcogen as well . Often , oxygen is treated separately from the other chalcogens , sometimes even excluded from the scope of the term " chalcogen " altogether , due to its very different chemical behavior from sulfur , selenium , tellurium , and polonium . The word " chalcogen " is derived from a combination of the Greek word <unk> ( <unk> ) principally meaning copper ( the term was also used for bronze / brass , any metal in the poetic sense , ore or coin ) , and the Latinised Greek word <unk> , meaning born or produced . 
 Sulfur has been known since antiquity , and oxygen was recognized as an element in the 18th century . Selenium , tellurium and polonium were discovered in the 19th century , and livermorium in 2000 . All of the chalcogens have six valence electrons , leaving them two electrons short of a full outer shell . Their most common oxidation states are − 2 , + 2 , + 4 , and + 6 . They have relatively low atomic radii , especially the lighter ones . 
 Lighter chalcogens are typically nontoxic in their elemental form , and are often critical to life , while the heavier chalcogens are typically toxic . All of the chalcogens have some role in biological functions , either as a nutrient or a toxin . The lighter chalcogens , such as oxygen and sulfur , are rarely toxic and usually helpful in their pure form . Selenium is an important nutrient but is also commonly toxic . Tellurium often has unpleasant effects ( although some organisms can use it ) , and polonium is always extremely harmful , both in its chemical toxicity and its radioactivity . 
 Sulfur has more than 20 allotropes , oxygen has nine , selenium has at least five , polonium has two , and only one crystal structure of tellurium has so far been discovered . There are numerous organic chalcogen compounds . Not counting oxygen , organic sulfur compounds are generally the most common , followed by organic selenium compounds and organic tellurium compounds . This trend also occurs with chalcogen pnictides and compounds containing chalcogens and carbon group elements . 
 Oxygen is generally extracted from air and sulfur is extracted from oil and natural gas . Selenium and tellurium are produced as byproducts of copper refining . Polonium and livermorium are most available in particle accelerators . The primary use of elemental oxygen is in steelmaking . Sulfur is mostly converted into sulfuric acid , which is heavily used in the chemical industry . Selenium 's most common application is glassmaking . Tellurium compounds are mostly used in optical disks , electronic devices , and solar cells . Some of polonium 's applications are due to its radioactivity . 
 = = Properties = = 
 = = = Atomic and physical = = = 
 Chalcogens show similar patterns in electron configuration , especially in the outermost shells , where they all have the same number of valence electrons , resulting in similar trends in chemical behavior : 
 All chalcogens have six valence electrons . All of the solid , stable chalcogens are soft and do not conduct heat well . Electronegativity decreases towards the chalcogens with higher atomic numbers . Density , melting and boiling points , and atomic and ionic radii tend to increase towards the chalcogens with higher atomic numbers . 
 = = = Isotopes = = = 
 Out of the six known chalcogens , one ( oxygen ) has an atomic number equal to a nuclear magic number , which means that their atomic nuclei tend to have increased stability towards radioactive decay . Oxygen has three stable isotopes , and 14 unstable ones . Sulfur has four stable isotopes , 20 radioactive ones , and one isomer . Selenium has six observationally stable or nearly stable isotopes , 26 radioactive isotopes , and 9 isomers . Tellurium has eight stable or nearly stable isotopes , 31 unstable ones , and 17 isomers . Polonium has 42 isotopes , none of which are stable . It has an additional 28 isomers . In addition to the stable isotopes , some radioactive chalcogen isotopes occur in nature , either because they are decay products , such as 210Po , because they are primordial , such as <unk> , because of cosmic ray spallation , or via nuclear fission of uranium . Livermorium isotopes 290 through 293 have been discovered . The most stable livermorium isotope is 293Lv , which has a half @-@ life of 0 @.@ 061 seconds . 
 Among the lighter chalcogens ( oxygen and sulfur ) , the most neutron @-@ poor isotopes undergo proton emission , the moderately neutron @-@ poor isotopes undergo electron capture or β + decay , the moderately neutron @-@ rich isotopes undergo β − decay , and the most neutron rich isotopes undergo neutron emission . The middle chalcogens ( selenium and tellurium ) have similar decay tendencies as the lighter chalcogens , but their isotopes do not undergo proton emission and some of the most neutron @-@ starved isotopes of tellurium undergo alpha decay . Polonium 's isotopes tend to decay with alpha or beta decay . Isotopes with nuclear spins are more common among the chalcogens selenium and tellurium than they are with sulfur . 
 = = = Allotropes = = = 
 Oxygen 's most common allotrope is diatomic oxygen , or O2 , a reactive paramagnetic molecule that is ubiquitous to aerobic organisms and has a blue color in its liquid state . Another allotrope is O3 , or ozone , which is three oxygen atoms bonded together in a bent formation . There is also an allotrope called <unk> , or <unk> , and six allotropes of solid oxygen including " red oxygen " , which has the formula <unk> . 
 Sulfur has over 20 known allotropes , which is more than any other element except carbon . The most common allotropes are in the form of eight @-@ atom rings , but other molecular allotropes that contain as few as two atoms or as many as 20 are known . Other notable sulfur allotropes include rhombic sulfur and monoclinic sulfur . <unk> sulfur is the more stable of the two allotropes . <unk> sulfur takes the form of long needles and is formed when liquid sulfur is cooled to slightly below its melting point . The atoms in liquid sulfur are generally in the form of long chains , but above 190 ° Celsius , the chains begin to break down . If liquid sulfur above 190 ° Celsius is frozen very rapidly , the resulting sulfur is amorphous or " plastic " sulfur . Gaseous sulfur is a mixture of diatomic sulfur ( S2 ) and 8 @-@ atom rings . 
 Selenium has at least five known <unk> gray allotrope , commonly referred to as the " metallic " allotrope , despite not being a metal , is stable and has a hexagonal crystal structure . The gray allotrope of selenium is soft , with a Mohs hardness of 2 , and brittle . The four other allotropes of selenium are metastable . These include two monoclinic red allotropes and two amorphous allotropes , one of which is red and one of which is black . The red allotrope converts to the red allotrope in the presence of heat . The gray allotrope of selenium is made from spirals on selenium atoms , while one of the red allotropes is made of stacks of selenium rings ( Se8 ) . 
 Tellurium is not known to have any allotropes , although its typical form is hexagonal . Polonium has two allotropes , which are known as α @-@ polonium and β @-@ <unk> α @-@ polonium has a cubic crystal structure and converts the rhombohedral β @-@ polonium at 36 ° C. 
 The chalcogens have varying crystal structures . Oxygen 's crystal structure is monoclinic , sulfur 's is orthorhombic , selenium and tellurium have the hexagonal crystal structure , while polonium has a cubic crystal structure . 
 = = = Chemical = = = 
 Oxygen , sulfur , and selenium are nonmetals , and tellurium is a metalloid , meaning that its chemical properties are between those of a metal and those of a nonmetal . It is not certain whether polonium is a metal or a metalloid . Some sources refer to polonium as a metalloid , although it has some metallic properties . Also , some allotropes of selenium display characteristics of a metalloid , even though selenium is usually considered a nonmetal . Even though oxygen is a chalcogen , its chemical properties are different from those of other chalcogens . One reason for this is that the heavier chalcogens have vacant d @-@ orbitals . Oxygen 's electronegativity is also much higher than those of the other chalcogens . This makes oxygen 's electric polarizability several times lower than those of the other chalcogens . 
 The oxidation number of the most common chalcogen compounds with positive metals is − 2 . However the tendency for chalcogens to form compounds in the − 2 state decreases towards the heavier chalcogens . Other oxidation numbers , such as − 1 in pyrite and peroxide , do occur . The highest formal oxidation number is + 6 . This oxidation number is found in sulfates , selenates , <unk> , <unk> , and their corresponding acids , such as sulfuric acid . 
 Oxygen is the most electronegative element except for fluorine , and forms compounds with almost all of the chemical elements , including some of the noble gases . It commonly bonds with many metals and metalloids to form oxides , including iron oxide , titanium oxide , and silicon oxide . Oxygen 's most common oxidation state is − 2 , and the oxidation state − 1 is also relatively common . With hydrogen it forms water and hydrogen peroxide . Organic oxygen compounds are ubiquitous in organic chemistry . 
 Sulfur 's oxidation states are − 2 , + 2 , + 4 , and + 6 . Sulfur @-@ containing analogs of oxygen compounds often have the prefix <unk> . Sulfur 's chemistry is similar to oxygen 's , in many ways . One difference is that sulfur @-@ sulfur double bonds are far weaker than oxygen @-@ oxygen double bonds , but sulfur @-@ sulfur single bonds are stronger than oxygen @-@ oxygen single bonds . Organic sulfur compounds such as thiols have a strong specific smell , and a few are utilized by some organisms . 
 Selenium 's oxidation states are − 2 , + 4 , and + 6 . Selenium , like most chalcogens , bonds with oxygen . There are some organic selenium compounds , such as selenoproteins . Tellurium 's oxidation states are − 2 , + 2 , + 4 , and + 6 . Tellurium forms the oxides tellurium monoxide , tellurium dioxide , and tellurium trioxide . Polonium 's oxidation states are + 2 and + 4 . 
 There are many acids containing chalcogens , including sulfuric acid , sulfurous acid , selenic acid , and telluric acid . All hydrogen chalcogenides are toxic except for water . Oxygen ions often come in the forms of oxide ions ( O2 − ) , peroxide ions ( O2 − 
 2 ) , and hydroxide ions ( OH − ) . Sulfur ions generally come in the form of sulfides ( S2 − ) , sulfites ( SO2 − 
 3 ) , sulfates ( SO2 − 
 4 ) , and <unk> ( S 
 2O2 − 
 3 ) . Selenium ions usually come in the form of selenides ( Se2 − ) and selenates ( SeO2 − 
 4 ) . Tellurium ions often come in the form of <unk> ( TeO2 − 
 4 ) . Molecules containing metal bonded to chalcogens are common as minerals . For example , pyrite ( FeS2 ) is an iron ore , and the rare mineral calaverite is the <unk> ( Au , Ag ) Te2 . 
 Although all group 16 elements of the periodic table , including oxygen , can be defined as chalcogens , oxygen and oxides are usually distinguished from chalcogens and chalcogenides . The term chalcogenide is more commonly reserved for sulfides , selenides , and tellurides , rather than for oxides . 
 Except for polonium , the chalcogens are all fairly similar to each other chemically . They all form X2 − ions when reacting with electropositive metals . 
 <unk> minerals and analogous compounds produce gases upon reaction with oxygen . 
 = = Compounds = = 
 = = = With halogens = = = 
 Chalcogens also form compounds with halogens known as <unk> . Such compounds are known as chalcogen halides . The majority of simple chalcogen halides are well @-@ known and widely used as chemical reagents . However , more complicated chalcogen halides , such as <unk> , <unk> , and sulfuryl halides , are less well @-@ known to science . Out of the compounds consisting purely of chalcogens and halogens , there are a total of 13 chalcogen fluorides , nine chalcogen chlorides , eight chalcogen bromides , and six chalcogen iodides that are known . The heavier chalcogen halides often have significant molecular interactions . Sulfur fluorides with low valences are fairly unstable and little is known about their properties . However , sulfur fluorides with high valences , such as sulfur hexafluoride , are stable and well @-@ known . Sulfur tetrafluoride is also a well @-@ known sulfur fluoride . Certain selenium fluorides , such as selenium difluoride , have been produced in small amounts . The crystal structures of both selenium tetrafluoride and tellurium tetrafluoride are known . Chalcogen chlorides and bromides have also been explored . In particular , selenium dichloride and sulfur dichloride can react to form organic selenium compounds . <unk> dihalides , such as <unk> also are known to exist . There are also mixed chalcogen @-@ halogen compounds . These include <unk> , with X being chlorine or bromine . Such compounds can form in mixtures of sulfur dichloride and selenium halides . These compounds have been fairly recently structurally characterized , as of 2008 . In general , <unk> and <unk> chlorides and bromides are useful chemical reagents . Chalcogen halides with attached metal atoms are soluble in organic solutions . One example of such a compound is <unk> . Unlike selenium chlorides and bromides , selenium iodides have not been isolated , as of 2008 , although it is likely that they occur in solution . <unk> diiodide , however , does occur in equilibrium with selenium atoms and iodine molecules . Some tellurium halides with low valences , such as <unk> and <unk> , form polymers when in the solid state . These tellurium halides can be synthesized by the reduction of pure tellurium with <unk> and reacting the resulting product with tellurium tetrahalides . <unk> dihalides tend to get less stable as the halides become lower in atomic number and atomic mass . Tellurium also forms iodides with even fewer iodine atoms than <unk> . These include TeI and <unk> . These compounds have extended structures in the solid state . <unk> and chalcogens can also form <unk> anions . 
 = = = Organic = = = 
 <unk> , phenols and other similar compounds contain oxygen . However , in thiols , selenols and tellurols ; sulfur , selenium , and tellurium replace oxygen . <unk> are better known than selenols or tellurols . <unk> are the most stable <unk> and tellurols are the least stable , being unstable in heat or light . Other organic chalcogen compounds include thioethers , <unk> and <unk> . Some of these , such as dimethyl sulfide , diethyl sulfide , and <unk> sulfide are commercially available . <unk> are in the form of <unk> or <unk> . <unk> such as dimethyl telluride are typically prepared in the same way as thioethers and <unk> . Organic chalcogen compounds , especially organic sulfur compounds , have the tendency to smell unpleasant . Dimethyl telluride also smells unpleasant , and <unk> is renowned for its " metaphysical stench " . There are also thioketones , selenoketones , and telluroketones . Out of these , thioketones are the most well @-@ studied with 80 % of <unk> papers being about them . <unk> make up 16 % of such papers and telluroketones make up 4 % of them . <unk> have well @-@ studied non @-@ linear electric and <unk> properties . <unk> are less stable than thioketones and telluroketones are less stable than selenoketones . <unk> have the highest level of polarity of <unk> . 
 = = = With metals = = = 
 Elemental chalcogens react with certain lanthanide compounds to form lanthanide clusters rich in chalcogens . Uranium ( IV ) chalcogenol compounds also exist . There are also transition metal <unk> which have potential to serve as catalysts and stabilize nanoparticles . 
 There is a very large number of metal chalcogenides . One of the more recent discoveries in this group of compounds is <unk> . There are also compounds in which alkali metals and transition metals such as the fourth period transition metals except for copper and zinc . In highly metal @-@ rich metal chalcogenides , such as <unk> and <unk> have domains of the metal 's crystal lattice containing chalcogen atoms . While these compounds do exist , analogous chemicals that contain lanthanum , praseodymium , gadolinium , holmium , terbium , or ytterbium have not been discovered , as of 2008 . The boron group metals aluminum , gallium , and indium also form bonds to chalcogens . The <unk> + ion forms chalcogenide dimers such as <unk> . Metal chalcogenide dimers also occur as lower tellurides , such as <unk> . 
 = = = With pnictogens = = = 
 Compounds with chalcogen @-@ phosphorus bonds have been explored for more than 200 years . These compounds include unsophisticated phosphorus chalcogenides as well as large molecules with biological roles and phosphorus @-@ chalcogen compounds with metal clusters . These compounds have numerous applications , including strike @-@ anywhere matches and quantum dots . A total of 130 @,@ 000 compounds with at least one phosphorus @-@ sulfur bond , 6000 compounds with at least one phosphorus @-@ selenium bond , and 350 compounds with at least one phosphorus @-@ tellurium bond have been discovered . The decrease in the number of chalcogen @-@ phosphorus compounds further down the periodic table is due to diminishing bond strength . Such compounds tend at least one phosphorus atom in the center , surrounded by four chalcogens and side chains . However , some phosphorus @-@ chalcogen compounds also contain hydrogen ( such as secondary phosphine chalcogenides ) or nitrogen ( such as <unk> ) . Phosphorus selenides are typically harder to handle that phosphorus sulfides , and compounds in the from <unk> have not been discovered . Chalcogens also bond with other pnictogens , such as arsenic , antimony , and bismuth . Heavier chalcogen pnictides tend to form ribbon @-@ like polymers instead of individual molecules . Chemical formulas of these compounds include <unk> and <unk> . Ternary chalcogen pnictides are also known . Examples of these include <unk> and <unk> salts containing chalcogens and pnictogens also exist . Almost all chalcogen <unk> salts are typically in the form of [ <unk> ] 3 − , where Pn is a pnictogen and E is a chalcogen . Tertiary phosphines can react with chalcogens to form compounds in the form of <unk> , where E is a chalcogen . When E is sulfur , these compounds are relatively stable , but they are less so when E is selenium or tellurium . Similarly , secondary phosphines can react with chalcogens to form secondary phosphine chalcogenides . However , these compounds are in a state of equilibrium with <unk> acid . Secondary phosphine chalcogenides are weak acids . Binary compounds consisting of antimony or arsenic and a chalcogen . These compounds tend to be colorful and can be created by a reaction of the constituent elements at temperatures of 500 to 900 ° C ( 932 to 1 @,@ 652 ° F ) . 
 = = = Other = = = 
 Chalcogens form single bonds and double bonds with other carbon group elements than carbon , such as silicon , germanium , and tin . Such compounds typically form from a reaction of carbon group halides and chalcogenol salts or chalcogenol bases . Cyclic compounds with chalcogens , carbon group elements , and boron atoms exist , and occur from the reaction of boron <unk> and carbon group metal halides . Compounds in the form of M @-@ E , where M is silicon , germanium , or tin , and E is sulfur , selenium or tellurium have been discovered . These form when carbon group hydrides react or when heavier versions of carbenes react . Sulfur and tellurium can bond with organic compounds containing both silicon and phosphorus . 
 All of the chalcogens form hydrides . In some cases this occurs with chalcogens bonding with two hydrogen atoms . However tellurium hydride and polonium hydride are both volatile and highly labile . Also , oxygen can bond to hydrogen in a 1 : 1 ratio as in hydrogen peroxide , but this compound is unstable . 
 Chalcogen compounds form a number of <unk> . For instance , sulfur forms the toxic sulfur dioxide and sulfur trioxide . Tellurium also forms oxides . There are some chalcogen sulfides as well . These include selenium sulfide , an ingredient in some shampoos . 
 Since 1990 , a number of borides with chalcogens bonded to them have been detected . The chalcogens in these compounds are mostly sulfur , although some do contain selenium instead . One such chalcogen boride consists of two molecules of dimethyl sulfide attached to a boron @-@ hydrogen molecule . Other important boron @-@ chalcogen compounds include <unk> systems . Such compounds tend to feature sulfur as the chalcogen . There are also chalcogen borides with two , three , or four chalcogens . Many of these contain sulfur but some , such as <unk> contain selenium instead . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Early discoveries = = = 
 Sulfur has been known since ancient times and is mentioned in the Bible fifteen times . It was known to the ancient Greeks and commonly mined by the ancient Romans . It was also historically used as a component of Greek fire . In the Middle Ages , it was a key part of alchemical experiments . In the 1700s and 1800s , scientists Joseph Louis Gay @-@ Lussac and Louis @-@ Jacques Thénard proved sulfur to be a chemical element . 
 Early attempts to separate oxygen from air were hampered by the fact that air was thought of as a single element up to the 17th and 18th centuries . Robert Hooke , Mikhail Lomonosov , Ole Borch , and Pierre <unk> all successfully created oxygen , but did not realize it at the time . Oxygen was discovered by Joseph Priestley in 1774 when he focused sunlight on a sample of mercuric oxide and collected the resulting gas . Carl Wilhelm Scheele had also created oxygen in 1771 by the same method , but Scheele did not publish his results until 1777 . 
 Tellurium was first discovered in 1783 by Franz Joseph Müller von Reichenstein . He discovered tellurium in a sample of what is now known as calaverite . Müller assumed at first that the sample was pure antimony , but tests he ran on the sample did not agree with this . Muller then guessed that the sample was bismuth sulfide , but tests confirmed that the sample was not that . For some years , Muller pondered the problem . Eventually he realized that the sample was gold bonded with an unknown element . In 1796 , Müller sent part of the sample to the German chemist Martin Klaproth , who purified the undiscovered element . Klaproth decided to call the element tellurium after the Latin word for earth . 
 Selenium was discovered in 1817 by Jöns Jacob Berzelius . Berzelius noticed a reddish @-@ brown sediment at a sulfuric acid manufacturing plant . The sample was thought to contain arsenic . Berzelius initially thought that the sediment contained tellurium , but came to realize that it also contained a new element , which he named selenium after the Greek moon goddess Selene . 
 = = = Periodic table placing = = = 
 Three of the chalcogens ( sulfur , selenium , and tellurium ) were part of the discovery of periodicity , as they are among a series of triads of elements in the same group that were noted by Johann Wolfgang Döbereiner as having similar properties . Around 1865 John Newlands produced a series of papers where he listed the elements in order of increasing atomic weight and similar physical and chemical properties that recurred at intervals of eight ; he likened such periodicity to the octaves of music . His version included a " group b " consisting of oxygen , sulfur , selenium , tellurium , and osmium . 
 After 1869 , Dmitri Mendeleev proposed his periodic table placing oxygen at the top of " group VI " above sulfur , selenium , and tellurium . Chromium , molybdenum , tungsten , and uranium were sometimes included in this group , but they would be later rearranged as part of group <unk> ; uranium would later be moved to the actinide series . Oxygen , along with sulfur , selenium , tellurium , and later polonium would be grouped in group VIA , until the group 's name was changed to group 16 in 1988 . 
 = = = Modern discoveries = = = 
 In the late 19th century , Marie Curie and Pierre Curie discovered that a sample of pitchblende was emitting four times as much radioactivity as could be explained by the presence of uranium alone . The Curies gathered several tons of pitchblende and refined it for several months until they had a pure sample of polonium . The discovery officially took place in 1898 . Prior to the invention of particle accelerators , the only way to create polonium was to extract it over several months from uranium ore . 
 The first attempt at creating livermorium was from 1976 to 1977 at the <unk> , who bombarded curium @-@ 248 with calcium @-@ 48 , but were not successful . After several failed attempts in 1977 , 1998 , and 1999 by research groups in Russia , Germany , and the USA , livermorium was created successfully in 2000 at the Joint Institute for Nuclear Research by bombarding curium @-@ 248 atoms with calcium @-@ 48 atoms . The element was known as <unk> until it was officially named livermorium in 2012 . 
 = = = Etymology = = = 
 In the 19th century , <unk> Jacob Berzelius suggested calling the elements in group 16 " <unk> " , as the elements in the group formed <unk> salts ( salts of <unk> ) The term received some use in the early 1800s but is now obsolete . The name chalcogen comes from the Greek words <unk> ( <unk> , literally " copper " ) , and <unk> ( genes , born , gender , kindle ) . It was first used in 1932 by Wilhelm Biltz 's group at the University of Hanover , where it was proposed by Werner Fischer . The word " chalcogen " gained popularity in Germany during the 1930s because the term was analogous to " halogen " . Although the literal meanings of the Greek words imply that chalcogen means " copper @-@ former " , this is misleading because the chalcogens have nothing to do with copper in particular . " Ore @-@ former " has been suggested as a better translation , as the vast majority of metal ores are chalcogenides and the word <unk> in ancient Greek was associated with metals and metal @-@ bearing rock in general ; copper , and its alloy bronze , was one of the first metals to be used by humans . 
 Oxygen 's name comes from the Greek words oxy genes , meaning " acid @-@ forming " . Sulfur 's name comes from either the Latin word <unk> or the Sanskrit word <unk> ; both of those terms are ancient words for sulfur . Selenium is named after the Greek goddess of the moon , Selene , to match the previously @-@ discovered element tellurium , whose name comes from the Latin word <unk> , meaning earth . Polonium is named after Marie Curie 's country of birth , Poland . Livermorium is named for the Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory . 
 = = Occurrence = = 
 The four lightest chalcogens ( oxygen , sulfur , selenium , and tellurium ) are all primordial elements on Earth . Sulfur and oxygen occur as constituent copper ores and selenium and tellurium occur in small traces in such ores . Polonium forms naturally after the decay of other elements , even though it is not primordial . Livermorium does not occur naturally at all . 
 Oxygen makes up 21 % of the atmosphere by weight , 89 % of water by weight , 46 % of the earth 's crust by weight , and 65 % of the human body . Oxygen also occurs in many minerals , being found in all oxide minerals and hydroxide minerals , and in numerous other mineral groups . Stars of at least eight times the mass of the sun also produce oxygen in their cores via nuclear fusion . Oxygen is the third @-@ most abundant element in the universe , making up 1 % of the universe by weight . 
 Sulfur makes up 0 @.@ 035 % of the earth 's crust by weight , making it the 17th most abundant element there and makes up 0 @.@ 25 % of the human body . It is a major component of soil . Sulfur makes up 870 parts per million of seawater and about 1 part per billion of the atmosphere . Sulfur can be found in elemental form or in the form of sulfide minerals , sulfate minerals , or <unk> minerals . Stars of at least 12 times the mass of the sun produce sulfur in their cores via nuclear fusion . Sulfur is the tenth most abundant element in the universe , making up 500 parts per million of the universe by weight . 
 Selenium makes up 0 @.@ 05 parts per million of the earth 's crust by weight . This makes it the 67th most abundant element in the earth 's crust . Selenium makes up on average 5 parts per million of the soils . Seawater contains around 200 parts per trillion of selenium . The atmosphere contains 1 nanogram of selenium per cubic meter . There are mineral groups known as selenates and selenites , but there are not many of minerals in these groups . Selenium is not produced directly by nuclear fusion . Selenium makes up 30 parts per billion of the universe by weight . 
 There are only 5 parts per billion of tellurium in the earth 's crust and 15 parts per billion of tellurium in seawater . Tellurium is one of the eight or nine least abundant elements in the earth 's crust . There are a few dozen tellurate minerals and telluride minerals , and tellurium occurs in some minerals with gold , such as <unk> and calaverite . Tellurium makes up 9 parts per billion of the universe by weight . 
 Polonium only occurs in trace amounts on earth , via radioactive decay of uranium and thorium . It is present in uranium ores in concentrations of 100 micrograms per metric ton . Very minute amounts of polonium exist in the soil and thus in most food , and thus in the human body . The earth 's crust contains less than 1 part per billion of polonium , making it one of the ten rarest metals on earth . 
 Livermorium is always produced artificially in particle accelerators . Even when it is produced , only a small number of atoms at a time are synthesized . 
 = = = Chalcophile elements = = = 
 Chalcophile elements are those that remain on or close to the surface because they combine readily with chalcogens other than oxygen , forming compounds which do not sink into the core . Chalcophile ( " chalcogen @-@ loving " ) elements in this context are those metals and heavier nonmetals that have a low affinity for oxygen and prefer to bond with the heavier chalcogen sulfur as sulfides . Because sulfide minerals are much denser than the silicate minerals formed by <unk> elements , chalcophile elements separated below the <unk> at the time of the first crystallisation of the Earth 's crust . This has led to their depletion in the Earth 's crust relative to their solar abundances , though this depletion has not reached the levels found with <unk> elements . 
 = = Production = = 
 Approximately 100 million metric tons of oxygen are produced yearly . Oxygen is most commonly produced by fractional distillation , in which air is cooled to a liquid , then warmed , allowing all the components of air except for oxygen to turn to gases and escape . <unk> distilling air several times can produce 99 @.@ 5 % pure oxygen . Another method with which oxygen is produced is to send a stream of dry , clean air through a bed of molecular sieves made of zeolite , which absorbs the nitrogen in the air , leaving 90 to 93 % pure oxygen . 
 Sulfur can be mined in its elemental form , although this method is no longer as popular as it used to be . In 1865 a large deposit of elemental sulfur was discovered in the U.S. states of Louisiana and Texas , but it was difficult to extract at the time . In the 1890s , Herman <unk> came up with the solution of liquefying the sulfur with superheated steam and pumping the sulfur up to the surface . These days sulfur is instead more often extracted from oil , natural gas , and tar . 
 The world production of selenium is around 1500 metric tons per year , out of which roughly 10 % is recycled . Japan is the largest producer , producing 800 metric tons of selenium per year . Other large producers include Belgium ( 300 metric tons per year ) , the United States ( over 200 metric tons per year ) , Sweden ( 130 metric tons per year ) , and Russia ( 100 metric tons per year ) . Selenium can be extracted from the waste from the process of electrolytically refining copper . Another method of producing selenium is to farm selenium @-@ gathering plants such as milk vetch . This method could produce three kilograms of selenium per acre , but is not commonly practiced . 
 Tellurium is mostly produced as a by @-@ product of the processing of copper . Tellurium can also be refined by electrolytic reduction of sodium telluride . The world production of tellurium is between 150 and 200 metric tons per year . The United States is one of the largest producers of tellurium , producing around 50 metric tons per year . Peru , Japan , and Canada are also large producers of tellurium . 
 Until the creation of nuclear reactors , all polonium had to be extracted from uranium ore . In modern times , most isotopes of polonium are produced by bombarding bismuth with neutrons . Polonium can also be produced by high neutron fluxes in nuclear reactors . Approximately 100 grams of polonium are produced yearly . All the polonium produced for commercial purposes is made in the <unk> nuclear reactor in Russia . From there , it is taken to Samara , Russia for purification , and from there to St. Petersburg for distribution . The United States is the largest consumer of polonium . 
 All livermorium is produced artificially in particle accelerators . The first successful production of livermorium was achieved by bombarding curium @-@ 248 atoms with calcium @-@ 48 atoms . As of 2011 , roughly 25 atoms of livermorium had been synthesized . 
 = = Applications = = 
 Steelmaking is the most important use of oxygen ; 55 % of all oxygen produced goes to this application . The chemical industry also uses large amounts of oxygen ; 25 % of all oxygen produced goes to this application . The remaining 20 % of oxygen produced is mostly split between medical use , water treatment ( as oxygen kills some types of bacteria ) , rocket fuel ( in liquid form ) , and metal cutting . 
 Most sulfur produced is transformed into sulfur dioxide , which is further transformed into sulfuric acid , a very common industrial chemical . Other common uses include being a key ingredient of gunpowder and Greek fire , and being used to change soil pH . Sulfur is also mixed into rubber to <unk> it . Sulfur is used in some types of concrete and fireworks . 60 % of all sulfuric acid produced is used to generate phosphoric acid . 
 Around 40 % of all selenium produced goes to glassmaking . 30 % of all selenium produced goes to metallurgy , including manganese production . 15 % of all selenium produced goes to agriculture . Electronics such as photovoltaic materials claim 10 % of all selenium produced . Pigments account for 5 % of all selenium produced . Historically , machines such as <unk> and light meters used one @-@ third of all selenium produced , but this application is in steady decline . 
 Tellurium suboxide , a mixture of tellurium and tellurium dioxide , is used in the rewritable data layer of some CD @-@ RW disks and DVD @-@ RW disks . Bismuth telluride is also used in many microelectronic devices , such as photoreceptors . Tellurium is sometimes used as an alternative to sulfur in vulcanized rubber . Cadmium telluride is used as a high @-@ efficiency material in solar panels . 
 Some of polonium 's applications relate to the element 's radioactivity . For instance , polonium is used as an alpha @-@ particle generator for research . Polonium alloyed with beryllium provides an efficient neutron source . Polonium is also used in nuclear batteries . Most polonium is used in antistatic devices . Livermorium does not have any uses whatsoever due to its extreme rarity and short half @-@ life . 
 <unk> compounds are involved in the semiconductor process . These compounds also feature into ligand chemistry and biochemistry . One application of chalcogens themselves is to manipulate redox couples in <unk> chemistry ( chemistry involving non @-@ covalent bond interactions ) . This application leads on to such applications as crystal packing , assembly of large molecules , and biological recognition of patterns . The secondary bonding interactions of the larger chalcogens , selenium and tellurium , can create organic solvent @-@ holding acetylene nanotubes . Chalcogen interactions are useful for conformational analysis and <unk> effects , among other things . Chalcogenides with through bonds also have applications . For instance , divalent sulfur can stabilize <unk> , cationic centers , and radical . Chalcogens can confer upon ligands ( such as <unk> ) properties such as being able to transform Cu ( II ) to Cu ( I ) . Studying chalcogen interactions gives access to radical cations , which are used in mainstream synthetic chemistry . Metallic redox centers of biological importance are tunable by interactions of ligands containing chalcogens , such as methionine and selenocysteine . Also , chalcogen through @-@ bonds can provide insight about the process of electron transfer . 
 = = Biological role = = 
 Oxygen is needed by almost all organisms for the purpose of generating ATP . It is also a key component of most other biological compounds , such as water , amino acids and DNA . Human blood contains a large amount of oxygen . Human bones contain 28 % oxygen . Human tissue contains 16 % oxygen . A typical 70 @-@ kilogram human <unk> 43 kilograms of oxygen , mostly in the form of water . 
 All animals need significant amounts of sulfur . Some amino acids , such as cysteine and methionine contain sulfur . Plant roots take up sulfate ions from the soil and reduce it to sulfide ions . <unk> also use sulfur to attach to useful metal atoms in the body and sulfur similarly attaches itself to poisonous metal atoms like cadmium to haul them to the safety of the liver . On average , humans consume 900 milligrams of sulfur each day . Sulfur compounds , such as those found in skunk spray often have strong odors . 
 All animals and some plants need trace amounts of selenium , but only for some specialized enzymes . Humans consume on average between 6 and 200 micrograms of selenium per day . Mushrooms and <unk> nuts are especially noted for their high selenium content . Selenium in foods is most commonly found in the form of amino acids such as selenocysteine and selenomethionine . Selenium can protect against heavy metal poisoning . 
 Tellurium is not known to be needed for animal life , although a few fungi can incorporate it in compounds in place of selenium . Microorganisms also absorb tellurium and emit dimethyl telluride . Most tellurium in the blood stream is excreted slowly in urine , but some is converted to dimethyl telluride and released through the lungs . On average , humans ingest about 600 micrograms of tellurium daily . Plants can take up some tellurium from the soil . Onions and garlic have been found to contain as much as 300 parts per million of tellurium in dry weight . 
 Polonium has no biological role , and is highly toxic on account of being radioactive . 
 = = Toxicity = = 
 Oxygen is generally nontoxic , but oxygen toxicity has been reported when it is used in high concentrations . In both elemental gaseous form and as a component of water , it is vital to almost all life on earth . Despite this , liquid oxygen is highly dangerous . Even gaseous oxygen is dangerous in excess . For instance , sports divers have occasionally drowned from convulsions caused by breathing pure oxygen at a depth of more than 10 meters ( 33 feet ) underwater . Oxygen is also toxic to some bacteria . Ozone , an allotrope of oxygen , is toxic to most life . It can cause lesions in the respiratory tract . 
 Sulfur is generally nontoxic and is even a vital nutrient for humans . However , in its elemental form it can cause redness in the eyes and skin , a burning sensation and a cough if inhaled , a burning sensation and diarrhea if ingested , and can irritate the mucous membranes . An excess of sulfur can be toxic for cows because microbes in the <unk> of cows produce toxic hydrogen sulfide upon reaction with sulfur . Many sulfur compounds , such as hydrogen sulfide ( H2S ) and sulfur dioxide ( SO2 ) are highly toxic . 
 Selenium is a trace nutrient required by humans on the order of tens or hundreds of micrograms per day . A dose of over 450 micrograms can be toxic , resulting in bad breath and body odor . Extended , low @-@ level exposure , which can occur at some industries , results in weight loss , anemia , and dermatitis . In many cases of selenium poisoning , selenous acid is formed in the body . Hydrogen selenide ( H2Se ) is highly toxic . 
 Exposure to tellurium can produce unpleasant side effects . As little as 10 micrograms of tellurium per cubic meter of air can cause notoriously unpleasant breath , described as smelling like rotten garlic . Acute tellurium poisoning can cause vomiting , gut inflammation , internal bleeding , and respiratory failure . Extended , low @-@ level exposure to tellurium causes tiredness and indigestion . Sodium tellurite ( Na2TeO3 ) is lethal in amounts of around 2 grams . 
 Polonium is dangerous both as an alpha particle emitter and because it is chemically toxic . If ingested , polonium @-@ 210 is a billion times as toxic as hydrogen cyanide by weight ; it has been used as a murder weapon in the past , most famously to kill Alexander Litvinenko . Polonium poisoning can cause nausea , vomiting , anorexia , and <unk> . It can also damage hair follicles and white blood cells . Polonium @-@ 210 is only dangerous if ingested or inhaled because its alpha particle emissions cannot penetrate human skin . Polonium @-@ 209 is also toxic , and can cause leukemia . 
 = Monroe Doctrine Centennial half dollar = 
 The Monroe Doctrine Centennial half dollar was a fifty @-@ cent piece struck by the United States Bureau of the Mint . Bearing portraits of former presidents James Monroe and John Quincy Adams , the coin was issued in commemoration of the centennial of the Monroe Doctrine and was produced at the San Francisco Mint in 1923 . Sculptor Chester Beach is credited with the design , although the reverse closely resembles an earlier work by Raphael Beck . 
 In 1922 , the motion picture industry was faced with a number of scandals , including manslaughter charges against star Roscoe " Fatty " Arbuckle . Although Arbuckle was eventually acquitted , motion picture executives sought ways of getting good publicity for Hollywood . One means was an exposition , to be held in Los Angeles in mid @-@ 1923 . To induce Congress to issue a commemorative coin as a fundraiser for the fair , organizers associated the exposition with the 100th anniversary of the Monroe Doctrine , and legislation for a commemorative half dollar for the centennial was passed . 
 The exposition was a financial failure . The coins did not sell well , and the bulk of the mintage of over 270 @,@ 000 was released into circulation . Beach faced accusations of plagiarism because of the similarity of the reverse design to a work by Beck , though he and fellow sculptor James Earle Fraser denied any impropriety . Many of the pieces that had been sold at a premium and saved were spent during the Depression ; most surviving coins show evidence of wear . 
 = = Background = = 
 In the early 1820s , the United States deemed two matters untoward interference by European powers in its zone of influence . The first was the Russian <unk> of 1821 , asserting exclusive territorial and trading rights along much of what is today Canada 's Pacific coast . The United States considered this area to be part of the Oregon Country and hoped to eventually gain control of it . The second was possible European threats against the Latin American nations , newly independent from Spain . United States officials feared that a Quadruple Alliance of Prussia , Austria , Russia , and France would restore Spain to power in the Americas . 
 British foreign minister George Canning was concerned that in the event of a Spanish restoration in Latin America , his nation would lose the trade which it had gained there since the Spanish had been ousted . In 1823 , he proposed to the American minister to Great Britain , Richard Rush , that their two nations issue a joint statement against the retaking of the former Spanish colonies by force . Rush asked for instructions from President James Monroe . The President consulted with his predecessors , Thomas Jefferson and James Madison , who favored the joint statement , as an alliance with Britain would protect the United States . Nevertheless , Monroe 's Secretary of State , future president John Quincy Adams , felt that if the United States was going to set forth its principles , it should speak for itself and not seem to be following the lead of powerful Britain . Accordingly , Rush was instructed to decline the opportunity to enter into a joint statement , although he was to inform the British that the two nations agreed on most issues . 
 The policy which would , some 30 years later , come to be called the " Monroe Doctrine " was contained in the President 's annual message to Congress on December 2 , 1823 . It warned European nations against new colonial ventures in the Americas , and against interference with Western Hemisphere governments . The doctrine had little practical effect at the time , as the United States lacked the ability to enforce it militarily and most European powers ignored it , considering it beneath their dignity even to respond . When Britain and other powers seized additional land in the Guianas in the 1830s , the United States did not issue a formal protest . The Mexican – American War of 1846 – 1848 increased Latin American suspicions over the doctrine , as many south of the border felt that the American purpose in warning European powers to keep out was to reserve the land for itself . Nevertheless , the Monroe Doctrine became an important part of United States foreign policy in the second half of the 19th and into the 20th century . 
 = = Inception = = 
 By 1922 , the Hollywood film industry was in serious trouble . Established in the Los Angeles area during the 1910s after moving from such eastern venues as Fort Lee , New Jersey , the industry had been rocked by a number of scandals . These included the mysterious shooting death of film director William Desmond Taylor , and the subsequent evasive testimony concerning it by actress Mabel Normand , which helped destroy her career . Another notorious scandal of the early 1920s was the death of actress Virginia Rappe following an orgy at a San Francisco hotel . Actor Roscoe " Fatty " Arbuckle was , after three trials , acquitted of manslaughter , but the negative publicity ended his career as well . These scandals , together with the death of romantic lead Wallace Reid from a drug overdose and a number of instances of onscreen sexual explicitness , led to nationwide calls for a boycott of Hollywood films . 
 Film moguls sought means of damage control . They hired former Postmaster General Will H. Hays as censor to the industry ; the Hays Code would govern how explicit a motion picture could be for decades to come . Another idea was an exposition and film festival to give good publicity to the industry , with the profits to be used for the making of educational films . Planning for this fair , to be held in Los Angeles in mid @-@ 1923 , began in 1922 . As other fairs , such as the World 's Columbian Exposition and the Panama – Pacific Exposition , had procured the issuance of commemorative coins as a fundraiser , organizers sought a piece for the film fair . The city of Los Angeles was wanted to use the fair to show it had come of age , as had Chicago for the Columbian Exposition and San Francisco with the Panama @-@ Pacific event . 
 Realizing that Congress might not pass legislation for a coin to commemorate a film industry celebration , the organizers sought a historical event with a major anniversary to occur in 1923 , which could be honored both at the fair and on the coin . The obvious candidate was the Boston Tea Party of 1773 , but according to numismatists Anthony Swiatek and Walter Breen in their volume on U.S. commemorative coins , that episode " could not be tortured into even the vaguest relevance to California , let alone to Los Angeles " . On December 18 , 1922 , California Congressman Walter Franklin Lineberger introduced a bill to strike a half dollar in commemoration of the centennial of the Monroe Doctrine , with the Los Angeles Clearing House ( an association of banks ) given the exclusive right to purchase the pieces from the government at face value . Lineberger claimed that Monroe 's declaration had kept California , then owned by Mexico , out of the hands of European powers . The bill was questioned in the House of Representatives by Michigan Congressman Louis Cramton , and in the Senate by Vermont 's Frank Greene , who stated , " it seems to me that the question is not one of selling a coin at a particular value or a particular place . The question is whether the United States government is going to go on from year to year submitting its coinage to this — well — harlotry . " Despite these objections , the bill was enacted on January 24 , 1923 ; a mintage of 300 @,@ 000 pieces was authorized . 
 = = Preparation = = 
 The fair organizers did not await congressional approval to begin planning the coin . According to Swiatek and Breen , the fair 's director general Frank B. Davison came up with the concept for the designs . On December 7 , 1922 , Commission of Fine Arts chairman Charles Moore wrote to Buffalo nickel designer and sculptor member of the commission James Earle Fraser , " The Los Angeles people are planning to celebrate the Monroe Doctrine Centennial . They are going to have a 50 @-@ cent piece and have decided that on the obverse shall be the heads of President Monroe and John Quincy Adams ... On the reverse will be the western continents from Hudson Bay to Cape Horn with some dots for the West Indies and some indication of the Panama Canal ... It strikes me that the designs having been settled upon , the [ plaster ] models could be worked out quite readily and that a pretty swell thing could be made . " 
 Fraser contacted fellow New York sculptor Chester Beach , who agreed to do the work . On December 27 , Moore wrote to Davison , informing him of Beach 's hiring , and that Fraser and Beach had decided to change the reverse . Moore quoted Beach 's description of the revised design : 
 Map of North and South America . North America is in the form of a draped figure , with the laurel of Peace [ an olive branch ] , reaching to South America , also a draped figure carrying a Horn of Plenty . Their hands to touch at the Panama Canal . The West Indies are indicated . The current of the oceans are lightly shown . Between the dates 1823 – 1923 are a scroll and a quill pen , symbolizing the " Treaty " . 
 Moore informed Davison that the commission had concurred with the revision , and that Beach had been instructed to complete work as quickly as possible so as to have the coins available at an early date . On February 24 , 1923 , commission secretary Hans <unk> showed the completed models to Assistant Director of the Mint Mary Margaret O 'Reilly , who was pleased with them . O 'Reilly suggested that if Beach was certain there would be no further changes , that he send photographs of the models to the commission 's offices , to be forwarded with its endorsement to the Bureau of the Mint in Washington . This was done , and the designs were approved by both Mint Director Frank Edgar Scobey and Secretary of the Treasury Andrew Mellon on March 8 . Moore was enthusiastic about the designs , writing to Davison on March 21 that " I feel great exultation over the way the model ... has turned out ... I do not know of a memorial [ commemorative ] coin which for sheer beauty equals this ... " 
 = = Design = = 
 William E. Pike , in his 2003 article in The Numismatist about the coin , deems the design " uninspired " and complains that the low relief of the coin leaves it without sufficient detail . Coin dealer and numismatic historian Q. David Bowers states that because of the shallow relief , " newly minted coins had an insipid appearance . Few if any observers called them attractive . " Art historian Cornelius Vermeule also complained about the relief , stating that it made the allegorical figures on the reverse " seem like mounted cut @-@ outs ... the way the females are contoured to achieve their appearance of continents is a clever tour de force of calligraphic relief but an aesthetic monstrosity , a bad pun in art . " He had no more praise for the obverse , " Adams , with his staring eye , is scarcely a portrait , and Monroe would not be recognized even by an expert . " 
 The faint lines in the field around the continents represent various ocean currents , with the Gulf Stream to the upper right of the reverse . Swiatek and Breen speculate that the reason ocean currents were shown was to symbolize the trade routes between the continents . They also consider the design to have an Art Deco look , though noting that the lettering has more of an older , Art Nouveau appearance . Beach 's monogram , CB made into a circle , is found at lower right of the reverse . 
 On July 23 , 1923 , Raphael Beck , who had designed the seal for the 1901 Pan @-@ American Exposition , wrote to Mint Director Scobey to complain that the reverse design resembled his seal , which he had copyrighted in 1899 , and that Beach should be given no further credit for it . The letter was forwarded to the Commission of Fine Arts for comment . In October , Fraser wrote to Beck , stating that he had suggested to Beach that he use figures to represent the continents instead of maps , and that he had never seen the Pan @-@ American seal until Scobey forwarded the letter . According to Bowers , " A comparison of the 1901 and 1923 designs , however , shows that this was highly unlikely . " 
 = = Distribution and collecting = = 
 In May and June 1923 , 274 @,@ 077 of the new half dollars were struck at the San Francisco Mint . Most of these were sent to the Los Angeles Clearing House , though 77 pieces were set aside for transmission to Philadelphia and examination by the 1924 United States Assay Commission . 
 The American Historical Revue and Motion Picture Industry Exposition was open from July 2 to August 4 , 1923 . The fair was located off of Figueroa Street in Exposition Park , just to the east of the brand @-@ new Los Angeles Coliseum , where every evening a complimentary show for exposition visitors , " Montezuma and the Fall of the Aztecs " , was given . Admission to the fair was fifty cents , though fairgoers could purchase a coin for a dollar at the box office and enter without further charge . After the first week , organizers realized the public was not interested in the historical theme , but was there to see favorite movie stars . Exhibitors accordingly greatly expanded the space devoted to movie attractions , but the exposition was a financial failure . Those in charge of the fair had hoped to attract a million visitors ; the actual attendance was about 300 @,@ 000 , many of whom were teenagers given complimentary admission in the final two weeks of the fair . With the fair flirting with insolvency throughout its run , officials hoped the planned visit of President Warren Harding on August 6 would increase gate receipts , but Harding fell ill in San Francisco and died on August 2 . According to Pike in his article , " its effect on the industry [ was ] hard to measure . However , if Hollywood owes its current status in any way to the event , then it was quite a success indeed . " 
 Approximately 27 @,@ 000 half dollars were sold at the price of $ 1 , by mail , at banks , and at the fair . Sales continued after it closed , but by October 1923 , they had dropped off to almost nothing , and the banks holding them released the remaining nine @-@ tenths of the mintage into circulation , which accounts for the wear on most surviving specimens . Of those set aside , thousands more were spent during the Depression . The 2015 edition of A Guide Book of United States Coins lists it at $ 75 in uncirculated MS @-@ 60 . Swiatek , in his 2012 volume on commemoratives , notes that many specimens have been treated to make them appear brighter or less worn ; these , like other circulated pieces , are worth less . An exceptional specimen , certified in MS @-@ 67 condition , sold at auction for $ 29 @,@ 900 in 2009 . 
 = Drive ( The X @-@ Files ) = 
 " Drive " is the second episode of the sixth season of the science fiction television series The X @-@ Files . It premiered on the Fox network in the United States on November 15 , 1998 . The episode is a " Monster @-@ of @-@ the @-@ Week " story , unconnected to the series ' wider mythology . " Drive " earned a Nielsen household rating of 11 @.@ 0 , being watched by 18 @.@ 5 million people in its initial broadcast . The episode received largely positive reviews from television critics . 
 The show centers on FBI special agents Fox Mulder ( David Duchovny ) and Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) who work on cases linked to the paranormal , called X @-@ Files . Mulder is a believer in the paranormal , while the skeptical Scully has been assigned to debunk his work . In the episode , Mulder is trapped in a car by a seemingly deranged man , and Scully races to determine if the man is suffering from a deadly illness — and if Mulder is in danger of becoming the next victim of some sort of government conspiracy . 
 The episode was written by Vince Gilligan , directed by Rob Bowman , and featured a guest appearance by Bryan Cranston . Gilligan cast Cranston to play the antagonist because he felt he could successfully humanize the role . Cranston 's success in " Drive " later led to his casting as Walter White in Gilligan 's AMC series Breaking Bad . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Via a live news report , a high @-@ speed car chase comes to an end in the Nevada desert . Assuming it to be a kidnapping , the female passenger is pulled from the vehicle and placed into the protective custody of a police vehicle . The driver , Patrick Crump ( Bryan Cranston ) , is pushed to the asphalt and handcuffed . The woman in the police car begins violently banging her head against the car window . As the news chopper catches all of this on film , the woman 's head explodes , sending a spray of blood across the window . 
 Mulder and Scully get wind of this bizarre car chase as they 're doing work in Buhl , Idaho investigating possible domestic terrorism . Mulder coerces Scully into taking a detour to Elko , Nevada on a hunch that this may be an X @-@ File . Crump , who has started to develop symptoms of a sickness , is put in an ambulance . Mulder , wishing to speak to Crump , follows the ambulance , and ends up being kidnapped by Crump , who has escaped from the police . 
 Mulder realizes that Crump is in a considerable amount of pain and that the only way to ease the pain is to drive west . At first , Scully believes that Crump is suffering from some sort of biological contagion , but after investigating the <unk> ' home , she discovers a U.S. Navy antenna array emitting ELF waves stretches beneath their property . Scully deduces that an abnormal surge in these waves somehow caused a rising pressure in the inner ear of the nearby inhabitants . Westward motion and an increase in speed seems to be the only thing to help ease the pain of the increasing pressure . 
 Initially , Crump , thinking that Mulder is in on some sort of government conspiracy , forces Mulder to drive by brandishing a gun . He further infuriates Mulder by calling him antisemitic slurs . Eventually , Mulder and Crump make amends and attempt to work out a solution before it is too late . Mulder explains to Crump that Scully will meet them at the Pacific Coast , the end of the highway . There she will insert a needle into Crump 's inner ear , hopefully relieving the pressure . Unfortunately , when Scully arrives , it is too late and the pressure in Crump 's ear has already exploded , killing him . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Conception , writing , and filming = = = 
 The idea for the episode can be traced back to an early idea Vince Gilligan , the writer of the episode , had . His original idea featured a man holding an individual hostage on a Tilt @-@ A @-@ Whirl . Gilligan pitched this idea at several meetings and it soon became a recurring joke . Most of the comments Gilligan received noted that his premise lacked an explicit mystery to investigate and so Gilligan decided that after the ride was shut off , the man 's head would explode . Researching various government experiments , Gilligan discovered the controversial use of low @-@ frequency waves . The secret military experiment featured in this episode is based on two real @-@ life military experiments , Project HAARP and Project ELF . The former is a U.S. Army experiment dealing with electromagnetic radiation in the Earth 's ionosphere , and the second is a U.S. Navy experiment dealing with long wavelengths . Thus , a script was crafted that featured an individual that , due to a secret experiment , could not slow down for fear of rupturing his head . 
 Gilligan admitted that the episode was partially an homage to the 1994 film Speed , and the episode even features an explicit reference to the film : when Crump and Mulder discover that speed is the key to success , Mulder mentions that he thinks he " saw this movie . " The opening teaser footage is done in the style of a news report , a stylistic direction that IGN suggested was intended to echo the O.J. Simpson incident of just a few years earlier . 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 Vince Gilligan , the writer of the episode , wanted Bryan Cranston to play the antagonist because he felt he would humanize the role . “ We needed a guy who could be scary and kind of loathsome but at the same time had a deep , resounding humanity , " he later said . In an interview with The New York Times , Gilligan stated , " We had this villain , and we needed the audience to feel bad for him when he died . Bryan alone was the only actor who could do that , who could pull off that trick . And it is a trick . I have no idea how he does it . ” Rick Millikan , the casting director for The X @-@ Files noted that Cranston was nearly not chosen for this episode . Initially , the part of Crump had been assigned to a different actor , but Cranston came prepared to audition for the part . Although the character had already been cast , Millikan allowed him to audition and was very pleased with his performance and chose him for the part instead . 
 Cranston 's work on this episode later impacted his career ; Gilligan cast him in the series Breaking Bad , but AMC executives were initially unsure of this decision as they were familiar only with Cranston 's work on the sitcom Malcolm in the Middle . They were convinced after viewing his performance in " Drive " . Gilligan , a fan of country musician Junior Brown , cast Brown as Virgil Nokes , the farmer who Mulder and Scully investigate at the beginning of the episode . Brown was flown in at the request and personal expense of Gilligan , and would later perform a song on the trailer for the Breaking Bad spin @-@ off Better Call Saul . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 " Drive " first aired in the United States on November 15 , 1998 . This episode earned a Nielsen rating of 11 @.@ 0 , with a 16 share , meaning that roughly 11 @.@ 0 percent of all television @-@ equipped households , and 16 percent of households watching television , were tuned in to the episode . It was viewed by 18 @.@ 50 million viewers . The episode aired in the United Kingdom and Ireland on Sky1 on March 14 , 1999 and was watched by 0 @.@ 70 million viewers , making it the sixth most viewed episode that week . Fox promoted the episode with the tagline " He 'll stop at nothing . " 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 " Drive " received largely positive reviews from critics . Zack Handlen from The A.V. Club wrote positively of the episode , awarding it an A , and writing that the entry was " a great example of the engine that keeps great television moving . " Handlen noted that the climax of the episode was " as moving as it is suspenseful " and drew parallels between Bryan Cranston 's portrayal of Mr. Crump and his eventual portrayal of Walter White from Breaking Bad , noting that both illustrate the idea that " you have to keep moving . If you stop , you die . " Review website IGN named it the ninth best standalone X @-@ Files episode of the entire series and complimented the interaction between Crump and Mulder , writing " it 's the interplay between Mulder and Crump that makes this episode a standout . [ ... ] Crump here is an antagonistic yet heartbreaking character , and as he and Mulder become unlikely allies in their ' drive , ' ' Drive ' in turn becomes a memorably scary X @-@ Files episode [ ... ] because of the perhaps most frightening element of the show 's world ever : mankind itself , and the governments that supposedly protect us . " 
 Colin Ellis from The Dashing Fellows called " Drive , " " arguably one of the best episodes post @-@ Fight the Future of [ The X @-@ Files ] . " Tom Kessenich , in his book Examination : An Unauthorized Look at Seasons 6 – 9 of the X @-@ Files wrote positively of the episode , saying " [ T ] hank God for ' Drive ' , which taps into the idea of Speed , the hit movie starring [ Keanu ] Reeves , but pushes it in an excitingly different direction . " Paula Vitaris from Cinefantastique gave the episode a largely positive review and awarded it three stars out of four . Although she slightly criticized the case being investigated as " pure hokum " , Vitaris praised Mulder and Scully 's teamwork , and their ability to work together despite being separated . 
 = = = Awards = = = 
 " Drive " earned an ASC Award by the American Society of Cinematographers for Outstanding Achievement in Cinematography – Regular Series . 
 = Lactifluus piperatus = 
 Lactifluus piperatus ( synonym Lactarius piperatus ) , commonly known as the peppery milk @-@ cap , is a semi @-@ edible basidiomycete fungus of the genus Lactifluus . Despite being edible , it is not recommended because of its poor taste , though can be used as seasoning when dried . The fruiting body is a creamy @-@ white mushroom which is funnel @-@ shaped when mature , with exceptionally crowded gills . It bleeds a whitish peppery @-@ tasting milk when cut . Widely distributed across Europe and eastern North America , Lactifluus piperatus has been accidentally introduced to Australia . Mycorrhizal , it forms a symbiotic relationship with various species of deciduous tree , including beech , and hazel , and fruiting bodies are found on the forest floor in deciduous woodland . 
 = = Systematics and taxonomy = = 
 The species was one of the many species named by Linnaeus who officially described it in Volume Two of his Species Plantarum in 1753 as Agaricus piperatus , the specific epithet deriving from the Latin adjective piperatus meaning " peppery " . For many years , Tyrolian naturalist Giovanni Antonio Scopoli had been considered the author of the first description ; however , a recent revision of the International Code of Botanical Nomenclature in 1987 changed the rules regarding the starting date and primary work for names of fungi . Previously , the starting date had been set as January 1 , 1821 , the date of the works of the ' father of mycology ' , Swedish naturalist Elias Magnus Fries , but now names can be considered valid as far back as May 1 , 1753 , the date of publication of Linnaeus ' seminal work . 
 Lactifluus piperatus was the original type species of the genus Lactarius . However , after the finding that Lactarius actually represented more than one genus , the species Lactarius torminosus was conserved as type for that genus . Thus , L. piperatus is now the type species of Lactifluus , which was split from Lactarius and contains mainly tropical milk @-@ caps , but also some species of the north temperate zone . Phylogenetic research showed that L. glaucescens , sometimes considered only a variety of L. piperatus , is a distinct species in Europe . Furthermore , the existence of at least ten lineages worldwide , with no overlap among continents , was shown for the group around L. piperatus , suggesting that populations in North America might actually be distinct species . 
 It is commonly known as the peppery milk cap , pepper milkcap , peppery Lactarius , peppery milk mushroom , white peppery milk @-@ cap , or other similar names . Similarly , in German it is known as the <unk> ( " pepper milk cap " ) . 
 = = Description = = 
 Lactifluus piperatus has a cap that varies from 6 – 16 cm ( 2 @.@ 5 – 6 @.@ 5 in ) across and is convex with a widely funnel @-@ shaped center . The cap is creamy @-@ white in colour , glabrous and not glossy ; its surface may become cracked in dry locales . The stipe is white in colour , smooth , 3 – 7 cm ( 1 – 3 in ) long by 2 – 3 cm ( 1 – 1 in ) thick and is cylindrical , sometimes tapering towards the base . There is a thick layer of firm white flesh , and the decurrent gills are particularly crowded and narrow , sharing the white colouration of the stem but becoming creamy with age . As with other species of Lactarius , there is abundant milk ( latex ) , which is white , and dries olive @-@ green . It has a white spore print with elongate , elliptic or amyloid spores which are ornamented , as with L. vellereus . The spores measure from 6 @.@ 5 – 9 @.@ 5 by 5 – 8 μm , and have tiny warts . 
 L. vellereus is larger with a thick stipe , woolly cap and less crowded gills , but is not as tall . Russula delica is similar in colour and shape , though has adnate blue @-@ green tinged gills and no milk . L. deceptivus is also similar , but is differentiated by its less crowded gills , firmer cap margin and less acrid milk . Close to L. piperatus is L. glaucescens , which is differentiated by its milk that dries with a greenish colour . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 Lactifluus piperatus in the wide sense , i.e. including probably several species , is found in Europe , the Black sea region in northeastern Turkey , and eastern and central North America east of Minnesota . It has been accidentally introduced into Australasia , where it is found under introduced and native trees . It is found on the floor in deciduous woodland , particularly under beech ( Betula ) , and can be found throughout summer and autumn and into early winter . It is relatively common , though not as common as the similar species L. vellereus . L. piperatus is found solitarily or in scattered groups . It is sometimes found growing together with Russula <unk> . 
 = = Edibility = = 
 Despite being described by some mycologists as inedible or even poisonous , Lactifluus piperatus is generally considered edible . However , it is not recommended , because of its unpleasant taste . It is difficult to digest when eaten raw , but is used as a seasoning when dried , or sometimes is eaten fresh after parboiling , though its taste is still <unk> . Some recommend frying in butter with bacon and onion or pickling , or baking in a pie or pastry as other ways to prepare it . The milk has a very hot and acrid taste , which is removed if boiled . The mushroom used to be highly regarded in Russia , where it would be picked in dry seasons when other edible species were less available . The mushroom is also popular in Finland , where cooks boil it repeatedly , disposing of the water each time , and then store it in salt water and keep it refrigerated , after which it is pickled or served in salads . When eaten fresh and raw , the mushroom has been known to cause an irritant reaction on the lips and tongue , which subsides after an hour . The close L. glaucescens has been reported to be poisonous , but it has been speculated that the " poisonings " were caused by the extremely strong , peppery taste , rather than by the presence of actual poisons . 
 Lactifluus piperatus forms part of an unusual and highly regarded dish in North America , being one of several species parasitized by the lobster mushroom Hypomyces lactifluorum . Once colonized by the parasite , an orange @-@ red crust forms over the surface of the mushroom , and the taste becomes delicious as the parasite infiltrates its host 's tissues . It is also a common source of food among red squirrels . 
 = = Other uses = = 
 Because of the presence of auxins in Lactifluus piperatus metabolites , it can be applied as a rooting hormone to aid the growth of seedlings of various species of plants , including hazel , beech and oak . In the 19th century , it was used as a folk cure for tuberculosis , though it had no effect . In more recent times , it has been found that L. piperatus can be used as an antiviral agent , and the latex has been used against viral warts . 
 = Johannes S. Andersen = 
 Johannes <unk> Andersen ( 9 July 1898 – 29 July 1970 ) was a Norwegian resistance fighter during the Second World War , a member of the Norwegian Independent Company 1 ( <unk> ) . He was nicknamed " Gulosten " ; ' The Yellow Cheese ' . He also used the surname Ostein during the war . Andersen was a controversial character , because of his pre @-@ war life as a well @-@ known career criminal and a series of incidents that occurred during the war years . These incidents included Andersen working as an assassin during the war , and shortly after the war killing two German prisoners of war during a drinking binge . After the war , Andersen started a wood furniture business . He was supported financially by King Haakon VII of Norway , whose friendship he had gained during the war . Andersen was repeatedly accused of crimes after the war , and on one occasion convicted . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Andersen was born on 9 July 1898 in Kristiania ( now Oslo ) , and had a difficult childhood , the latter part of it in an orphanage . He was the son of construction worker Ole Andersen and Josefine Hansen . Soon after Johannes was born , Norway entered a period of economic difficulties , with little construction work available . This led to his father having to change jobs from mason to milkman . Johannes ' mother became obsessed with religion . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 At age 10 Johannes was declared a ward of court and sent to the school institution Toftes gave on the island Helgøya in the lake Mjøsa . While at the strict institution Johannes received parcels from home , with yellow cheese . The cheese was needed because of the meagre rations given the boys at Toftes gave . The parcels with yellow cheese led to Johannes being given the nickname " Gulosten " ( English : " The Yellow Cheese " ) by the other boys at the institution , a name that stuck with him for the rest of his life . After four years on Helgøya he was transferred to Bastøy school home for maladjusted boys , an equally harsh institution . When 29 boys rebelled at Bastøy in 1915 , police officers and the Norwegian Armed Forces were employed to crush the riot , and the leaders taken away in handcuffs . Physical punishment was common at Bastøy , including being locked away in a dark cellar , a punishment Johannes had to endure . When Johannes was 15 his mother died , and he was not informed until several days after her funeral . This led to him making suicide threats , and going amok at the warden 's office , for which he was punished with a stay in the dark cell . 
 = = = Leaving Helgøya = = = 
 Andersen went to sea at age 15 , and later found work as a mason 's assistant . On 7 November 1916 he married <unk> Kristine Klausen , who worked as a waitress at a restaurant frequented by Andersen . They soon got an apartment at Torshov and had a son . Andersen got a better @-@ paid job , laying the foundation for the headquarters of Oslo <unk> , but when that job was done he had to seek day @-@ to @-@ day work at the harbour . When Norway 's financial situation again turned for the worse after the upturn of the First World War , no @-@ one would hire a man with an institutional background , and he was out of work . He made a last @-@ ditch attempt to make money ; he bought liquor in Tønsberg and sold it on the black market in Kristiania , but this was not enough for his wife , who left him to pursue a more financially secure future . 
 It has been written that the marriage did not end until 1931 . In the meantime , Andersen befriended a woman named Nancy . She helped hide him when he was wanted by the authorities , she lied during a police interrogation at Møllergata 19 to cover for him and she also helped him with practical things such as acquiring a passport . They agreed to part ways when Andersen was set to pursue a trapper career in Canada ; when going to visit her one last time he stumbled upon a police officer who recognized him and arrested him . Also , when frequenting Hamburg , Andersen spent time with two prostitutes . They were described as " not [ ... ] extraordinarily beautiful " , and Andersen helped them with buying food . 
 = = Criminal career = = 
 Norway 's prohibition from 1916 onwards opened up possibilities for a lucrative criminal career , and Andersen joined up in 1921 with old friends from his days at Toftes gave in grand @-@ scale smuggling operations . Using ingenious methods for hiding the spirits , they smuggled alcohol into Norway by sea . In his smuggling years Andersen cooperated with future award @-@ winning author Arthur <unk> , serving as both crew and skipper on <unk> 's boats before getting his own smuggling vessel . Eventually his cover was blown , and being a wanted man in Norway he had to flee to Germany . While in Germany he worked for one of the biggest suppliers of spirits for the illegal Norwegian market . In 1925 Norway requested that Germany extradite him , and he was arrested in the harbour of Hamburg . Prison life was harsh , but Andersen managed to get transferred to a hospital when faking syphilis by burning his member with a cigarette . He was then deported under police escort back to Norway on the steamship Kong Dag , but when the ship entered the Oslofjord , Andersen escaped by jumping overboard near <unk> . For several months he was on the run before being recaptured . In the years that followed he was in and out of prison repeatedly . He gained considerable renown for his elegantly executed burglaries , being labelled by the media " gentleman @-@ <unk> i Grünerløkka @-@ <unk> " ( English : gentleman criminal , Grünerløkka edition ) . He was also well known for his safe @-@ cracking skills . Andersen once more tried to evade justice when he fled a crowded court room in Drammen in 1929 , jumping out a window as the sentence was being proclaimed . He was then smuggled from Drammen inside a chest of drawers which was to undergo reparation in Oslo . He was recaptured shortly before intending to board a cargo ship bound for Canada . 
 His criminal escapades made Andersen a national celebrity in pre @-@ war Norway , and his nickname " Gulosten " a household name . Between 1919 and 1937 he was sentenced to prison terms nine times , spending a total of around seven years behind bars . During the mid @-@ 1930s Andersen attempted to end his criminal career , became engaged , and started a furniture repair business . He remarried on 18 March 1939 , wedding Ruth Johanne ( born 1905 ) , née Nilsen . They had one son . In 1935 Andersen attempted to get a children 's book published , but it was rejected because of its inclusion of a number of " brutal scenes , unsuited for youths " . The nature scenes in the book were , however , commended by the reviewer . After yet another spell in prison , Andersen was released on 9 April 1940 , the day Germany invaded Norway as a part of World War II . 
 = = Second World War = = 
 = = = Early resistance work = = = 
 The German invasion of Norway in 1940 led to Andersen 's life once more taking a turn into illegal activities . His furniture workshop was used as a weapons depot by the Norwegian resistance movement , and he took part in looting German military stores . He was first arrested by the Germans after he had responded to rumours that he was a Nazi by writing the Norwegian national socialist party Nasjonal Samling 's official publication Fritt Folk and stating that " although I have done many wrong things in my life , a Nazi I am not . Yours sincerely Johs . S. Andersen " . The letter was published unedited by the newspaper , although Andersen was later arrested by the occupying authorities and sentenced to one year in prison , after spending half a year in detention . Using techniques he had learned during his earlier criminal career , Andersen managed to be transferred to prison hospital during his time in detention . While there he acquired false x @-@ ray images and tuberculosis germs to fake illnesses in other captured resistance men who were on their way to interrogation . He also infected a German interrogator with malaria by contaminating his insulin . At night , he would sneak out of the hospital and operate in Oslo , amongst other activities breaking into Nasjonal Samling offices and stealing documents , copying them and having them shipped to the United Kingdom together with evidence of torture in Nazi @-@ run prisons . He served the last part of his sentence in <unk> near Hamburg , Germany . His wife was also active in resistance work , dealing with propaganda and espionage . Author Egil <unk> doubts the veracity of Andersen 's prison exploits , which are based mostly on Andersen 's own testimony . 
 = = = Assassin , SOE agent and naval rating = = = 
 After his return to Norway in 1942 , Andersen carried out the assassination of well @-@ known informer Raymond Colberg and then made good his escape to Sweden . Colberg had been active in the Sandefjord area , uncovering an illegal radio transmitter . This led to the arrest of eight resistance members in March 1941 , three of whom were executed ( <unk> Ask , Andreas <unk> and Johan Midttun were shot 4 December 1941 ) . Andersen carried out the assassination of the Abwehr agent together with his wife and two acquaintances , kidnapping him and killing him at the animal hospital <unk> <unk> . According to Ruth Andersen 's later interrogation records , the killing was carried out by crucifying him with four knives and crushing his bones with iron pipes , then dismembering the body , putting it in a container for animal carcasses and dumping it in the river <unk> . The confession may have been made under torture , and included no reference to the bullet holes found on Colberg 's corpse when it was recovered . According to historian and leader of Norway 's Resistance Museum , Arnfinn Moland , the claims of Colberg having been tortured and mutilated are fabrications . Moland cites autopsy reports and German archives to back up his claims . Colberg 's body was discovered by a Norwegian civilian on 15 June 1942 with two 7 @,@ 62 mm calibre bullet holes in the head , and was identified through Colberg 's dental records . The killing was , according to <unk> , also motivated by Andersen 's personal feelings towards Colberg , and Moland states that Andersen " may have had " such motives , a claim that is refuted by history professor Tore <unk> . 
 Andersen then fled to Sweden , and travelled on to the United Kingdom , where he was recruited by Professor Leif Tronstad for work with the British Special Operations Executive . In this context he used the surname Ostein during the war . In the United Kingdom , Andersen suggested a series of further assassinations in Oslo , naming targets and describing plans for how to carry out the killings . The British saw great potential as an agent in a man with Andersen 's background . Andersen and his group was parachuted from a Halifax bomber to <unk> near <unk> in Nordmarka , Oslo . Received by Gunnar <unk> and Sverre <unk> , this was the first parachute drop received by the resistance group Milorg 's District 13 . The group spent a month training Milorg resistance people in weapons handling . They were originally intended to carry out assassinations of leading Norwegian Nazis and informers as part of Operation Bittern , first and foremost police minister and <unk> SS Norge leader Jonas Lie , but this was refused by the local resistance leaders because of fears of reprisals . Andersen had suggested killing the top @-@ ranking Nazi leader , and the SOE approved . According to a plan formulated by the SOE , Andersen was to don a light suit , enter Lie 's office in broad daylight , shoot the police minister in the head with a Colt pistol , change to a dark suit hidden underneath the light one , and disappear in the confusion . Andersen commented on the SOE plan : " Lie might survive this assassination attempt , but I won 't . " Andersen instead wanted to kill Lie on his way from the office to his home . The Bittern operation was severely criticized by the Norwegian Home Forces in a letter to the Norwegian exile government in London . 
 Andersen returned to the United Kingdom via Sweden , after episodes of unruly behaviour in Oslo . In the United Kingdom he had a personal audience with King Haakon VII of Norway . During the audience , Andersen and the King lunched at the Norwegian Club in London , and Andersen entertained the exiled monarch with stories . The King promised to take care of Andersen once the war was over . Andersen then joined the exiled Royal Norwegian Navy and served on a Motor Torpedo Boat ( MTB ) for the duration of the war . The MTB on which Andersen served repeatedly attacked shipping off the Norwegian coast . 
 Many resistance people in Norway had been shocked when they found out that Andersen had been allowed to serve in <unk> Leading saboteur Max Manus wrote shortly after the war in his book Det vil <unk> gå <unk> : " It was one hell of a risk to send a man with Gulosten 's reputation and history out on secret military missions . It would have been a great embarrassment if Fritt Folk had been able to publish that Gulosten made a career in King Håkon 's armed forces " . Andersen protested against Manus ' account when it was published . 
 = = Post @-@ war life = = 
 = = = Loss of wife and third marriage = = = 
 When Andersen returned to Norway after the German surrender in 1945 , he had hoped to reunite with his wife Ruth . Instead , he discovered that his wife had been arrested by the Germans on 9 May 1944 . She had been taken to Møllergata 19 , tortured during her captivity and executed at Grini detention camp by Sonderkommando Hans on 21 July 1944 together with five others . They were buried in a mass grave but her body was exhumed and identified on 25 May 1945 . Ruth 's sister together with Ruth 's friend Hertha <unk> organized a proper funeral . Andersen and <unk> later married . 
 = = = POW killing controversy = = = 
 On 3 July 1945 Andersen killed two German prisoners of war with his Thompson submachine gun . Andersen had broken into German barracks in <unk> in Sogn during a drinking binge , killing the German soldiers Herbert Neumann and Hermann Beckmann . He later claimed to have acted in rage over his wife 's death . The Norwegian court system started working on Andersen 's case , eventually reaching judge advocate Ivar Follestad . Andersen was defended by Reidar <unk> , who was made Supreme Court Justice in 1945 . Follestad deemed it necessary to prosecute Andersen , but wanted to pardon him after the verdict . After spending more than a year in the civilian and military court systems Andersen 's murder case reached the top levels of the Royal Norwegian Navy , and on 5 August 1946 it was decided to take the case to the Gulating Military Court of Appeal . Three months later Follestad made a decision of non @-@ indictment , despite there being evidence to convict Andersen . In January 1947 the general jurisdiction chief , Thore <unk> , also declared for a decision of non @-@ indictment . Follestad and <unk> were supported in this by Minister of Defence Jens Christian Hauge , and the decision was made final by royal resolution on 25 April 1947 . This led to protests from , amongst others , leading Norwegian psychiatrist Johan <unk> . 
 = = = Later life = = = 
 With starting help from his new wife , Andersen started the wood product factory <unk> <unk> in Horten , running it for fifteen years . King Haakon VII personally helped him with money and credit , remaining Andersen 's friend and patron the rest of the king 's life . One time , Andersen 's company was hired to perform maintenance work on the Bygdøy Royal Estate . He eventually had to retire because of health problems sustained during the war . 
 Andersen was accused of crimes on several occasions in the post @-@ war years , but was most often acquitted in court . Amongst the crimes of which he was charged but acquitted in court was the theft of building materials in 1954 . Another time he was tricked into lending his car to two people who broke into a goldsmith 's shop in Tønsberg . Strongly intoxicated at the time of the crime , he was charged but fully acquitted . In 1955 he was , however , convicted and sentenced to 36 days in prison for selling 30 bottles of denatured alcohol , alcohol that was supposed to have been used at his factory . 
 In his later years Andersen became involved in speaking about children 's rights and correctional institutions . He called the institutions for maladjusted youths " schools for criminals " , and said that the loss and suffering of institutionalization naturally lead youths to crime , using his own life as an example . To explain his views on incarceration and of society 's response to institutionalized children and ex @-@ convicts Andersen said : " You are to be punished for having been punished . " Johannes " The Yellow Cheese " Andersen died on 29 July 1970 , aged 72 . He was buried in Horten . 
 In late 1968 the book En mann <unk> Gulosten was released , written by Bjørn <unk> . Already before the book was released , film rights for the story were bought by the company <unk> . <unk> employee Knut <unk> stated that the book contained enough material for three motion pictures , but that they would concentrate the story into one film at best . 
 = = Works = = 
 — — ( 1946 ) . Vi <unk> oss . Av <unk> <unk> . ( autobiography ) 
 = The Screaming Skull = 
 The Screaming Skull is a 1958 American horror film directed by Alex Nicol . The film stars John Hudson , Peggy Webber , Russ Conway , and Nicol . The film focuses on a neurotic woman who believes she is being haunted by the ghost of her new husband 's previous wife . The Screaming Skull marked Nicol 's directorial debut ; he decided to try it because he felt that he was not acting in the roles which he wanted . 
 The film was shot at the Huntington Hartford Estate in six weeks on a low budget , with each actor being paid $ 1 @,@ 000 . The film has received negative reception from critics and from Webber herself , though Nicol enjoyed the finished product . The film was later featured in a ninth season episode of Mystery Science Theater 3000 . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The film opens with a narrated disclaimer over footage of an opening coffin . The narrator explains that the film 's climax is so terrifying that it may kill the viewer , and reassures the audience that if they die of fright while watching the film , they will receive a free burial service , and it closes on the casket which has a card inside reading " Reserved for You . " 
 Newlyweds Jenni ( Peggy Webber ) and Eric ( John Hudson ) move into Eric 's palatial country home . Jenni is Eric 's second wife ; his first wife Marion died when she accidentally slipped and hit her head on the edge of a decorative pond on the estate . At the home they meet Eric 's friends , the Reverend Snow ( Russ Conway ) and his wife ( Toni Johnson ) , as well as Mickey ( Alex Nicol ) , the developmentally disabled gardener . Eric privately mentions to the Snows that Jenni spent time in an asylum following the sudden death of both her parents , and Mrs. Snow reveals that Jenni is very wealthy . 
 Jenni is disturbed both by Mickey 's belief that Marion 's ghost wanders the estate and by Marion 's self @-@ portrait inside the house , which Jenni believes resembles her mother . When she begins to hear unexplained screaming noises and see skulls around her house , she believes that Marion is haunting her . Though Eric speculates to Jenni that Mickey , who was a childhood friend of Marion and thus dislikes Jenni , may be behind the trickery , Jenni worries that she is going insane . Eric then suggests to remove Marion 's self @-@ portrait from the home . Eric and Jenni take the painting outside and burn it . While they clean up the remains of the painting , a skull emerges from the ashes . While Jenni panics at the sight of the skull , Eric denies that the skull is there . Jenni faints and Eric withdraws the skull and hides it , revealing that he was responsible for the trickery all along in an effort to get hold of her wealth . 
 Believing she has finally lost her sanity , Jenni resolves to be committed . She tells Eric that the entire property will be meticulously searched for the skull as a last resort . Before Eric can retrieve it , Mickey secretly steals the skull and brings it to the Reverend , revealing Eric 's plans . That night , Eric prepares to murder Jenni and stage it as a suicide . Jenni sees Marion 's ghost in Mickey 's greenhouse and flees back to the house . When she enters , Eric begins throttling her . The ghost then appears and chases Eric outside and about the property ; it finally corners and attacks him , drowning him in the decorative pond . 
 After Jenni regains consciousness , the Snows arrive . Mrs. Snow comforts a hysterical Jenni and the Reverend discovers Eric 's body in the pond . Some undisclosed time later , Jenni and the Snows depart from the house . Reverend Snow declares whether or not Marion 's death was an accident will remain a mystery . 
 = = Production = = 
 The Screaming Skull was directed by Alex Nicol , an actor who had roles on Broadway productions and often played supporting characters . He decided to try directing a film , as he felt that he had not been performing the roles that he desired . Nicol noted that " as an actor , you 're in perfect position , if you choose to do so , to watch the directors you 're working with setting up the shots , making decisions as to where to place the camera , and so I picked up a lot over the years . " 
 John Hudson stars as Eric , Jenni 's new husband . Jenni is played by Peggy Webber . In order to get Webber interested in starring in the film , Nicol told her that he was planning to do a remake of the Alfred Hitchcock film Rebecca and brought a copy of the screenplay to her house . Other cast members include Russ Conway as Reverend Snow and Toni Johnson as Snow 's wife . Nicol also stars as Mickey , the gardener . 
 The film 's cinematographer was Floyd Crosby , who had previously won an Academy Award for his work on Tabu . John Kneubuhl wrote the film 's screenplay ; he also produced the film alongside T. Frank Woods and John Coots . The music was composed by Ernest Gold , and the film was edited by Betty Jane Lane . 
 The film was shot over a period six weeks at the Huntington Hartford Estate , with a small budget . The film did not have a large crew , and according to Webber , the actors were paid around $ 1000 for their performances . During the production , Nicol promised the actors a cut of the film 's ultimate box office earnings , but due to an issue with the film 's distributor this never occurred . During filming , Webber discovered she was pregnant with a son , and so several scenes had to be re @-@ written like one where she was meant to fall down a staircase . 
 The Screaming Skull 's opening disclaimer that a free burial would be provided to anybody who died of fright while watching the film was inspired by a gimmick that had been used by William Castle in his film Macabre ( 1958 ) , in which he offered every viewer who bought a ticket life insurance in case they died watching the film . Unlike Castle , Nicol did not actually contact an insurance company . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 Distribution of The Screaming Skull was handled by American International Pictures . The film was released in August 1958 , on a double bill with the thriller Terror from the Year 5000 . The Screaming Skull was never copyrighted , despite the presence of an onscreen copyright notice belonging to Madera Productions . As such , it has seen many DVD releases , by companies such as Alpha Video , Echo Bridge Home Entertainment , and Mill Creek Entertainment . 
 Erick Harper of DVD Verdict remarked that the film was " of questionable value " and opined it was a " truly awful example of drive @-@ in cinema . " He believed that the film was not " worth the time to watch " . Leonard Maltin gave the film one and half star , calling it " dreary " , but he believed that it became " reasonably eerie toward the end , with a twist that 's actually a surprise . " Authors Phil Hardy and Tom Milne wrote of the film , " Nicol , an actor here directing for the first time , lets the action spin out much too slackly , dissipating the grasp of moody tension he displayed in his unpretentiously excellent war movie , Three Came Back . " 
 Film historian Steven H. Scheuer graded the film with one star and a half , writing " Wife is terrorized by unexplainable happenings . Or is it inexplicable ? Both describe the film . " VideoHound 's Golden Movie Retriever by Jim Craddock also gave the film one and half stars , and TV Guide gave it two . Webber herself did not like the film , stating that " it didn 't impress me " and she " wanted to throw up " after watching it . However , Nicol took a more positive stance , saying : " I liked it ; it had some nice dolly shots , a good atmosphere . So I was happy with that ; it was a nice change from the films I 'd been doing . " 
 The Screaming Skull was featured in a ninth season episode of Mystery Science Theater 3000 , a comedy television series which features a human and his robot creations watching bad films while providing a running commentary which mocks it . It was featured alongside an episode of The Gumby Show entitled " Robot Rumpus " . Series writer Bill Corbett disliked the film , saying that " making someone watch this even once is specifically outlawed by the Geneva Convention " . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Though it is never credited , the film is based on Francis Marion Crawford 's classic horror story of the same title , first published around 1906 . Crawford 's inspiration for the tale , in turn , came from the folklore surrounding the so @-@ called " screaming skull " that was kept on display at <unk> Manor in Dorset , England . The actual skull that inspired both the story and the movie is said to be that of a black slave whose request for burial in his native country was denied following his death and was subsequently followed by strange occurrences and unexplainable shrieking noises that emanated from the wooden box in which the skull was kept . The death @-@ mask on Marian 's tombstone is a reproduction of the famous " l <unk> de la Seine " , reputed to be the face of a young French suicide who , like the deceased wife in the film , died in the water . 
 = Christianity in Medieval Scotland = 
 Christianity in Medieval Scotland includes all aspects of Christianity in the modern borders of Scotland in the Middle Ages . Christianity was probably introduced to what is now Lowland Scotland by Roman soldiers stationed in the north of the province of Britannia . After the collapse of Roman authority in the fifth century , Christianity is presumed to have survived among the British enclaves in the south of what is now Scotland , but retreated as the pagan Anglo @-@ Saxons advanced . Scotland was largely converted by Irish missions associated with figures such as St Columba , from the fifth to the seventh centuries . These missions founded monastic institutions and collegiate churches that served large areas . Scholars have identified a distinctive form of Celtic Christianity , in which abbots were more significant than bishops , attitudes to clerical celibacy were more relaxed and there were significant differences in practice with Roman Christianity , particularly the form of tonsure and the method of calculating Easter , although most of these issues had been resolved by the mid @-@ seventh century . After the reconversion of Scandinavian Scotland in the tenth century , Christianity under papal authority was the dominant religion of the kingdom . 
 In the Norman period , from the eleventh to the thirteenth centuries , the Scottish church underwent a series of reforms and transformations . With royal and lay patronage , a clearer parochial structure based around local churches was developed . Large numbers of new monastic foundations , which followed continental forms of reformed monasticism , began to predominate . The Scottish church also established its independence from England , developing a clear diocesan structure and becoming a " special daughter of the see of Rome " , but continued to lack Scottish leadership in the form of Archbishops . 
 In the late Middle Ages the problems of schism in the Catholic Church allowed the Scottish Crown to gain greater influence over senior appointments and two archbishoprics had been established by the end of the fifteenth century . Historians have discerned a decline in traditional monastic life in the late Middle Ages , but the mendicant orders of friars grew , particularly in the expanding burghs , emphasised preaching and ministering to the population . New saints and cults of devotion also proliferated . Despite problems over the number and quality of clergy after the Black Death in the fourteenth century , and evidence of heresy in the fifteenth century , the Church in Scotland remained stable before the Reformation in the sixteenth century . 
 = = Early Middle Ages = = 
 = = = Early Christianisation = = = 
 Before the Middle Ages , most of the population of what is now Scotland probably practised a form of Celtic polytheism . Evidence of Christian symbols and the destruction of the shrines of other religions , suggest that Roman occupation brought Christianity to the north of Britannia ( the name they gave to the province under their control in the southern part of the island ) . From there it may have spread to parts of what they called Caledonia ( roughly corresponding to what is now Scotland ) . After the collapse of Roman authority in the early fifth century , four major circles of influence emerged in Northern Britain . In the east were the Picts , whose kingdoms eventually stretched from the river Forth to Shetland . In the west were the Gaelic ( Goidelic ) -speaking people of Dál Riata , who had close links with Ireland , from where they brought with them the name Scots . In the south were the British ( Brythonic @-@ speaking ) descendants of the peoples of the Roman @-@ influenced kingdoms of " The Old North " , the most powerful and longest surviving of which was the Kingdom of Strathclyde . Finally , there were the English or " Angles " , Germanic invaders who had overrun much of southern Britain and held the Kingdom of Bernicia ( later the northern part of Northumbria ) , which reached into what are now the Borders of Scotland in the south @-@ east . While the Picts and Scots would have remained pagan , most scholars presume that Christianity would have survived after the departure of the Romans among the Brythonic enclaves , but retreated as the pagan Anglo @-@ Saxons advanced . 
 The Christianisation of Scotland was carried out by Irish @-@ Scots missionaries and to a lesser extent those from Rome and England . Richard Fletcher argued that motivations may have included the example of St. Patrick , the idea of Peregrinatio and a growing interest in evangelism . In the sixth century missionaries from Ireland were operating on the British mainland . This movement is traditionally associated with the figures of St Ninian , St Kentigern and St Columba . Ninian is now regarded as a later construct and may have been the result of scribal confusion with the Irish saint Finnian . There was a church dedicated to him at Whithorn in the sixth century and from there St Kentigern seems to have created a new centre of worship at Govan or Inchinnan , from where Christian influence extended across the Strathclyde region . St Columba was probably a disciple of Finnian . He left Ireland after being exiled , and founded the monastery at Iona off the west coast of Scotland in 563 . From there missions were carried out to western Argyll and the islands around Mull . Later the influence of Iona would extend to the Hebrides . In the seventh century , St. Aidan went from Iona to found a church at Lindisfarne off the east coast of Northumbria . The influence of Lindisfarne would spread through the kingdom of Northumbria into what is now south @-@ east Scotland . The result was a series of overlapping and informally organised churches . Iona emerged as the most important religious centre , partly as a result of the work of Adomnan , who was abbot there from 679 to 704 . Although it is unclear whether the historic Columba did conduct missions outside of a small part of Dál Riata , Adomnan 's Life of St. Columba elevated him to become the apostle of North Britain in general . 
 The means and speed by which the Picts converted to Christianity is uncertain . The process may have begun early . Evidence for this includes the fact that St. Patrick , active in the fifth century , referred in a letter to " apostate Picts " , indicating that they had previously been Christian , but had abandoned the faith . In addition the poem Y Gododdin , set in the early sixth century and probably written in what is now Scotland , does not remark on the Picts as pagans . Conversion of the Pictish élite seems likely to have run over a considerable period , beginning in the fifth century and not complete until the seventh and conversion of the general population may have stretched into the eighth century . 
 Among the key indicators of Christianisation are cemeteries containing long cists which are generally east @-@ west in orientation . These cemeteries are suspected , or known to be Christian , because of their proximity to a church , or because of Christian inscriptions found in them . They are found for between the end of the Roman era in the early fifth century and the twelfth century . They are concentrated strongly in eastern Scotland south of the River Tay , in the modern East and Borders of Scotland . Most scholars agree that the place @-@ name element eccles- , from the Brythonic word for church , represents evidence of the British church of the Roman and immediate post @-@ Roman period . Most of these in Scotland are located in the south of the country . From the fifth and sixth centuries , inscribed stones indicate Christianity through their dedications and are spread across southern Scotland . The earliest is the so @-@ called Latinus stone of Whithorn , dating to c . 450 . In the east and north , Class II Pictish stones began to show Christian symbolism from the early eighth century . 
 Early church buildings may originally have been wooden , like that excavated at Whithorn , but of those for which evidence survives from this era are basic masonry @-@ built churches , beginning on the west coast and islands and spreading south and east . Early chapels tended to have square ended converging walls , similar to Irish chapels of this period . Medieval parish church architecture in Scotland was typically much less elaborate than in England , with many churches remaining simple oblongs , without transepts and aisles , and often without towers . In the Highlands they were often even simpler , many built of rubble masonry and sometimes indistinguishable from the outside from houses or farm buildings . 
 = = = Celtic Christianity = = = 
 The Celtic Church is a term that has been used by scholars to describe a specific form of Christianity with its origins in the conversion of Ireland , traditionally associated with St. Patrick . This form of Christianity later spread to northern Britain through Iona . It is also used as a general description for the Christian establishment of northern Britain prior to the twelfth century , when new religious institutions and ideologies of primarily French origin began to take root in Scotland . The Celtic form of Christianity has been contrasted with that derived from missions from Rome , which reached southern England in 587 under the leadership of St. Augustine of Canterbury . Subsequent missions from Canterbury then helped convert the Anglo @-@ Saxon kingdoms , reaching Northumbria in the early eighth century , where Iona had already begun to have a presence . As a result , Christianity in Northumbria became a mix of Celtic and Roman influences . 
 While Roman and Celtic Christianity were very similar in doctrine and both accepted ultimate papal authority , there were differences in practice . The most contentious were the method of calculating Easter , and the form of head shaving for priests known as tonsure . Other differences were in the rites of ordination and baptism , and in the form of service of the liturgy . In addition scholars have identified significant characteristics of the organisation of Irish and Scottish Christianity as relaxed ideas of clerical celibacy , intense secularisation of ecclesiastical institutions , and the lack of a diocesan structure . This made abbots ( or <unk> ) , rather than bishops , the most important element the church hierarchy . 
 In the seventh century the Northumbrian church was increasingly influenced by the Roman form of Christianity . The careers of St. Wilfred ( active from the 660s until his death in 709 ) , abbot of the monastery at Ripon and Bishop of Northumbria , and Benedict Biscop ( c . 628 – 690 ) , founder of the monasteries of Jarrow and Wearmouth , intensified ties with Rome . Wilfred was the major spokesman for the Roman case at the Synod of Whitby in 664 , which was called by king Oswiu of Northumbria to decide which form of observance would be used in his kingdom , and where he decided in favour of the Roman form of tonsure and of calculating Easter . In this period the Kingdom of Northumbria was expanding into what is now Lowland Scotland . A bishopric established at Abercorn in the region of West Lothian , is presumed to have adopted Roman forms of Christianity after the Synod of Whitby . However , the Pictish victory at the Battle of Dunnichen in 685 , ended the Northumbrian dominance of the region and the Bishop and his followers were ejected . Nechtan mac Der @-@ Ilei , king of the Picts from 706 , seems to have attempted to establish links with the church in Northumbria . Before 714 he wrote to Ceolfrith , abbot of Wearmouth , asking for a formal refutation of the Irish position over the calculation of the date of Easter and for help in building a stone church " in the manner of the Romans " . A. A. M. Duncan has suggested that there was a " <unk> group " among Nechtan 's clergy , perhaps led by Bishop <unk> , who took the name Latin name Boniface . This is also suggested by the presence of a church at Rosemarkie in Ross and Cromarty , dedicated to St Peter , seen as the first Bishop of Rome , by the early eighth century , and subsequent similar dedications in Pictish territory . 
 By the mid @-@ eighth century , Iona and Ireland had accepted Roman practices . Iona 's place as the centre of Scottish Christianity was disrupted by the arrival of the Vikings , first as raiders , then as conquerors . Iona was sacked by Vikings 795 and 802 . In 806 68 monks were killed and the next year the abbot withdrew to Kells in Ireland , taking the relics of St. Columba with him . There were periodic returns of abbots and relics , often ending in more massacres . Orkney , Shetland , Western Isles and the Hebrides eventually fell to the Pagan Norsemen , curtailing the influence of the church in the Highlands and Islands . The threat posed by the Vikings may have forced a union between the kingdoms of Dál Riata and the Picts under Kenneth mac Alpin , traditionally dated to 843 . In 849 , according to the Annals of Ulster the abbot of Iona once again took Columba 's relics to Ireland , but the earliest version of the Chronicles of the Kings of Scots says that in the same year they were removed by Kenneth mac Alpin , to a church he had built , probably at Dunkeld , perhaps indicating that the relics were divided . The abbot of the new monastery at Dunkeld emerged as the Bishop of the new combined Kingdom of Alba , which would subsequently come to be known as the Kingdom of Scotland . 
 = = = Early monasticism = = = 
 While there were a series of reforms of monasticism in continental Europe and England , particularly those associated with Cluny in France from the tenth century , Scotland remained largely unaffected these until the late eleventh century . Physically Scottish monasteries differed significantly from those on the continent , and were often an isolated collection of wooden huts surrounded by a wall . The Irish architectural influence can be seen in surviving round towers at Brechin and Abernethy . Some early Scottish establishments had dynasties of abbots , who were often secular clergy with families , most famously at Dunkeld and Brechin ; but these also existed across Scotland north of the Forth , as at Portmahomack , Mortlach , and Abernethy . Perhaps in reaction to this secularisation , a reforming movement of monks called Céli Dé ( lit . " vassals of God " ) , anglicised as culdees , began in Ireland and spread to Scotland in the late eighth and early ninth centuries . Some Céli Dé took vows of chastity and poverty and while some lived individually as hermits , others lived beside or within existing monasteries . In most cases , even after the introduction of new forms of reformed monasticism from the eleventh century , these Céli Dé were not replaced and the tradition continued in parallel with the new foundations until the thirteenth century . 
 Scottish monasticism played a major part in the Hiberno @-@ Scottish mission , by which Scottish and Irish clergy undertook missions to the expanding Frankish Empire . They founded monasteries , often called Schottenklöster ( meaning Gaelic monasteries in German ) , most of which became Benedictine establishments in what is now Germany . Scottish monks , such as St Cathróe of Metz , became local saints in the region . 
 = = High Middle Ages = = 
 = = = Conversion of Scandinavian Scotland = = = 
 While the official conversion of Scandinavian Scotland took place at the end of the tenth century , there is evidence that Christianity had already made inroads into the Viking controlled Highland and Islands . There are a large number of isles called Pabbay or Papa in the Western and Northern Isles , which may indicate a " hermit 's " or " priest 's isle " from this period . Changes in patterns of grave goods and Viking place names using -kirk also suggest that the Christianity had begun to spread before the official conversion . According to the Orkneyinga Saga , not written down until around 1230 , the Northern Isles were Christianised by Olav Tryggvasson , king of Norway , in 995 when he stopped at South Walls on his way from Ireland to Norway . The King summoned the local jarl Sigurd the Stout and said " I order you and all your subjects to be baptised . If you refuse , I 'll have you killed on the spot and I swear I will ravage every island with fire and steel " . The story may be apocryphal , but the islands became officially Christian , receiving their own bishop in the early eleventh century . The bishopric appears to have been under the authority of the Archbishops of York and of Hamburg @-@ Bremen at different points before the twelfth century and from then until 1472 it was subordinate to the Archbishop of Nidaros ( today 's Trondheim ) . Elsewhere in Scandinavian Scotland the record is less clear . There was a Bishop of Iona until the late tenth century , followed by a gap of more than a century , possibly filled by the Bishops of Orkney , before the appointment of the first Bishop of Mann in 1079 . One of the major effects of the conversion of the Vikings was to bring an end to plundering raids on Christian sites , which may have allowed them to recover some of their status as cultural and intellectual centres . It also probably curbed the excesses of Viking violence and led to a more settled society in northern Scotland . 
 = = = Reformed monasticism = = = 
 The introduction of continental forms of monasticism to Scotland is associated with Saxon princess Queen Margaret ( c . 1045 – 93 ) , the second wife of Máel Coluim III ( r . 1058 – 93 ) , although her exact role is unclear . It is known that she was in communication with Lanfranc , Archbishop of Canterbury , and he provided a few monks for a new Benedictine abbey at Dunfermline ( c . 1070 ) . Subsequent foundations under Margaret 's sons , Edgar ( r . 1097 – 1107 ) , Alexander ( r . 1107 – 24 ) and particularly David I ( r . 1124 – 53 ) , tended to be of the reformed type that followed the lead set by Cluny Abbey in the Loire from the late tenth century . Most belonged to the new religious orders that originated in France in the eleventh and twelfth centuries . These stressed the original Benedictine virtues of poverty , chastity and obedience , but also contemplation and service of the Mass and were followed in various forms by reformed Benedictine , Augustinian and Cistercian houses . This period also saw the introduction of more sophisticated forms of church architecture that had become common on the Continent and in England , known collectively as Romanesque . These used rectangular ashlar blocks that allowed massive reinforced walls and round arches that could bear the weight of rounded barrel vault roofs and could incorporate refined architectural moulding and detailing . 
 The Augustinians , dedicated to the Order of Saint Augustine and originally founded in northern Italy in the eleventh century , established their first priory in Scotland at Scone , with the sponsorship by Alexander I in 1115 . By the early thirteenth century Augustinians had settled alongside , taken over or reformed Céli Dé establishments at St Andrews , St Serf 's Inch , Inchcolm , Inchmahome , Inchaffray , <unk> and Iona , and had created numerous new establishments , such as Holyrood Abbey . The Cistercians , originating from the village of <unk> , near Dijon in eastern France , achieved two important Scottish foundations , at Melrose ( 1136 ) and Dundrennan ( 1142 ) , and the Tironensians , named after the location of the mother abbey <unk> Abbey near Chartres in France , achieved foundations at Selkirk , then Kelso , Arbroath , Lindores and Kilwinning . Cluniacs founded an abbey at Paisley , the <unk> , originating at <unk> near Laon in Picardy , had foundations at Whithorn and the <unk> , named after their first monastery at Val @-@ des @-@ <unk> in Burgundy , at Pluscarden . The military orders entered Scotland under David I , with the Knights Templer founding <unk> in Midlothian and the Knights Hospitallers being given <unk> , West Lothian . 
 = = = Cult of Saints = = = 
 Like every other Christian country , one of the main features of Medieval Scotland was the Cult of Saints . Saints of Irish origin who were particularly revered included various figures called St <unk> and St. Colman , and saints <unk> and Finan . Columba remained a major figure into the fourteenth century and a new foundation was endowed by William I ( r . 1165 – 1214 ) at Arbroath Abbey . His relics , contained in the Monymusk Reliquary , were handed over to the Abbot 's care . Regional saints remained important to local identities . In Strathclyde the most important saint was St Kentigern , whose cult ( under the pet name St. Mungo ) became focused in Glasgow . In Lothian it was St Cuthbert , whose relics were carried across Northumbria after Lindisfarne was sacked by the Vikings before being installed in Durham Cathedral . After his martyrdom around 1115 , a cult emerged in Orkney , Shetland and northern Scotland around Magnus Erlendsson , Earl of Orkney . One of the most important cults in Scotland , that of St Andrew , was established on the east coast at Kilrymont by the Pictish kings as early as the eighth century . The shrine , which from the twelfth century was said to have contained the relics of the saint brought to Scotland by Saint Regulus , began to attract pilgrims from across Scotland , but also from England and further away . By the twelfth century the site at Kilrymont had become known simply as St. Andrews and it became increasingly associated with Scottish national identity and the royal family . Its bishop would supplant that of Dunkeld as the most important in the kingdom and would begin to be referred to as Bishop of Alba . The site was renewed as a focus for devotion with the patronage of Queen Margaret , who also became important after her canonisation in 1250 and after the ceremonial transfer of her remains to Dunfermline Abbey , as one of the most revered national saints . In the late Middle Ages the " international " cults , particularity those centred on the Virgin Mary and Christ , but also St Joseph , St. Anne , the Three Kings and the Apostles , would become more significant in Scotland . 
 = = = Organisation = = = 
 Before the twelfth century , in contrast to England , there were few parish churches in Scotland . Churches had collegiate bodies of clergy who served over a wide area , often tied together by devotion to a particular missionary saint . From this period local lay landholders , perhaps following the example of David I , began to adopt the continental practice of building churches on their property for the local population and endowing them with land and a priest . The foundation of these churches began in the south , spreading to the north @-@ east and then the west , being almost universal by the first survey of the Scottish Church for papal taxation in 1274 . The administration of these parishes was often given over to local monastic institutions in a process known as appropriation . By the time of the Reformation in the mid @-@ sixteenth century 80 per cent of Scottish parishes were appropriated . 
 Before the Norman period , Scotland had little clear diocesan structure . There were bishoprics based on various ancient churches , but some are very obscure in the records and there appear to be long vacancies . From around 1070 , in the reign of Malcolm III , there was a " Bishop of Alba " resident at St. Andrews , but it is not clear what authority he had over the other bishops . After the Norman Conquest of England , the Archbishops of both Canterbury and York each claimed superiority over the Scottish church . When David I secured the appointment of John , a Tironensian monk , as Bishop of Glasgow around 1113 , Thurstan Archbishop of York demanded the new bishop 's submission . A long running dispute followed , with John travelling to Rome to unsuccessfully appeal his case before pope Calixtus II . John continued to withhold his submission despite papal pressure to do so . A new bishopric of Carlisle was created in what is now northern England , claimed as part of the Glasgow diocese and as territory by David I. In 1126 a new bishop was appointed to the southern Diocese of Galloway based at Whithorn , who offered his submission to York , a practice which would continue until the fifteenth century . David sent John to Rome to lobby for the Bishop of St. Andrew 's to be made an independent archbishop . At one point David and his bishops threatened to transfer their allegiance to the anti @-@ pope Anacletus II . When Bishop John died in 1147 David was able to appoint another Tironensian monk , Herbert abbot of Kelso , as his successor and submission to York continued to be withheld . The church in Scotland attained independent status after the Papal Bull of Celestine III ( Cum universi , 1192 ) by which all Scottish bishoprics except Galloway became formally independent of York and Canterbury . However , unlike Ireland which had been granted four <unk> in the same century , Scotland received no Archbishop and the whole Ecclesia <unk> , with individual Scottish bishoprics ( except Whithorn / Galloway ) , became the " special daughter of the see of Rome " . It was run by special councils made up of all the Scottish bishops , with the bishop of St Andrews emerging as the most important figure . 
 = = Late Middle Ages = = 
 = = = Church and politics = = = 
 Late Medieval religion had its political aspects . Robert I carried the <unk> ( or Monymusk reliquary ) , said to contain the remains of St. Columba , into battle at Bannockburn . In the Papal Schism ( 1378 – 1417 ) , the Scottish church and crown sided with the Avignon Popes , beginning with Clement VII , along with France and other countries , while nations including England and the Holy Roman Empire sided with the Roman popes beginning with Urban VI . In 1383 , Clement VII appointed Scotland 's first cardinal , Walter Wardlaw , Bishop of Glasgow . The withdrawal of France from support of Clement 's successor Benedict XIII created problems for Scottish clergy attending French universities and necessitated the creation of Scotland 's first university at St. Andrews from 1411 – 13 . Scotland was one of the last churches to abandon Benedict in favour of the compromise pope , Martin V , proposed by the Council of Constance ( 1414 – 28 ) . In the subsequent debates over <unk> and the authority of the pope , between those who backed the church council as the ultimate authority in the Church , and those that backed the papacy , divisions in loyalty mirrored political divisions in the country and Church . King James I and his chancellor John Cameron , Archbishop of Glasgow , became <unk> and William <unk> , Archdeacon of Teviotdale , the leading opponent of Cameron , became a <unk> . After his accession , James II backed the Pope , while the Douglases , who had dominated politics in the years after James I 's death , backed the conciliar movement . 
 As elsewhere in Europe , the collapse of papal authority in the Papal Schism allowed the Scottish Crown to gain effective control of major ecclesiastical appointments within the kingdom . This de facto authority over appointments was formally recognised by the Papacy in 1487 . This led to the placement of clients and relatives of the king in key positions , including James IV 's illegitimate son Alexander , who was nominated as Archbishop of St. Andrews at the age of 11 , intensifying royal influence and also opening the Church to accusations of venality and nepotism . James IV used his pilgrimages to Tain and Whithorn to help bring the respective regions of Ross and Galloway , which lay on the edges of the kingdom , under royal authority . Relationships between the Scottish Crown and the Papacy were generally good , with James IV receiving tokens of papal favour . In 1472 St Andrews became the first archbishopric in the Scottish church , to be followed by Glasgow in 1492 . 
 = = = Popular religion = = = 
 Traditional Protestant historiography tended to stress the corruption and unpopularity of the late Medieval Scottish church , but more recent research has indicated the ways in which it met the spiritual needs of different social groups . Historians have discerned a decline of monastic life in this period , with many religious houses keeping smaller numbers of monks , and those remaining often abandoning communal living for a more individual and secular lifestyle . The rate of new monastic endowments from the nobility also declined in the fifteenth century . In contrast , the burghs saw the flourishing of mendicant orders of friars in the later fifteenth century , who , unlike the older monastic orders , placed an emphasis on preaching and ministering to the population . The order of Observant Friars were organised as a Scottish province from 1467 and the older Franciscans and the Dominicans were recognised as separate provinces in the 1480s . 
 In most Scottish burghs , in contrast to English towns where churches and parishes tended to proliferate , there was usually only one parish church , but as the doctrine of Purgatory gained importance in the period , the number of chapelries , priests and masses for the dead within them , designed to speed the passage of souls to Heaven , grew rapidly . The number of altars dedicated to saints , who could intercede in this process , also grew dramatically , with St. Mary 's in Dundee having perhaps 48 and St Giles ' in Edinburgh over 50 . The number of saints celebrated in Scotland also proliferated , with about 90 being added to the missal used in St Nicholas church in Aberdeen . New cults of devotion connected with Jesus and the Virgin Mary began to reach Scotland in the fifteenth century , including the Five Wounds , the Holy Blood and the Holy Name of Jesus . There were also new religious feasts , including celebrations of the Presentation , the Visitation and Mary of the Snows . 
 In the early fourteenth century the Papacy managed to minimise the problem of clerical pluralism , by which clerics held two or more livings , which elsewhere resulted in parish churches being without priests , or serviced by poorly trained and paid vicars and clerks . However , the number of poor clerical livings and a general shortage of clergy in Scotland , particularly after the Black Death , meant that in the fifteenth century the problem intensified . As a result , parish clergy were largely drawn from the lower and less educated ranks of the profession , leading to frequent complaints about their standards of education or ability . Although there is little clear evidence that standards were declining , this would be one of the major grievances of the Reformation . Heresy , in the form of <unk> , began to reach Scotland from England and Bohemia in the early fifteenth century . Lollards were followers of John Wycliffe ( c . 1330 – 84 ) and later Jan Hus ( c . 1369 – 1415 ) , who called for reform of the Church and rejected its doctrine on the Eucharist . Despite evidence of a number of burnings of heretics and limited popular support for its anti @-@ sacramental elements , it probably remained a small movement . There were also further attempts to differentiate Scottish liturgical practice from that in England , with a printing press established under royal patent in 1507 to replace the English Sarum Use for services . 
 = Music of the Parasite Eve series = 
 The music of Parasite Eve , a 1998 role @-@ playing video game based on the novel of the same name by Hideaki Sena , was composed by Yoko Shimomura , and was one of her early popular successes . The music for its 2001 sequel Parasite Eve II was composed by Naoshi Mizuta and arranged by Hiroshi Nakajima . The 2010 spin @-@ off title The 3rd Birthday was composed for by Shimomura , Mitsuto Suzuki and Tsuyoshi Sekito . Shimomura 's work was described by herself as experimental , and incorporated multiple musical genres including opera music . The score for Parasite Eve was recorded at the Andora Studios in Los Angeles . For Parasite Eve II , Mizuta spent a year and a half on the project , using the game 's scenario and visuals as references and taking inspiration from multiple film genres . It was Mizuta 's first project after transferring from Capcom to Square Enix ( then Square ) . For The 3rd Birthday , Shimomura worked with Suzuki and Sekito to create a score reminiscent of Parasite Eve , while Japanese rock band Superfly provided the theme song " Eyes on Me " . 
 The original Parasite Eve Original Soundtrack album was released in May 1998 through DigiCube . Shimomura also produced an arrange album , Parasite Eve Remixes , which was released through DigiCube in July 1998 . The soundtrack album for the second game , Parasite Eve II Original Soundtrack , was released through DigiCube in December 1999 . It also released in North America through Tokyopop Soundtrax in September 2000 . The third game 's soundtrack album , The 3rd Birthday Original Soundtrack , released in December 2010 through Square Enix 's music label . The first two game 's original soundtracks were reissued through Square Enix in January 2010 due to popular demand , and a limited edition combined album titled Parasite Eve I & II Original Soundtrack Box was released alongside them . While some albums have received mixed responses from critics , the music of the Parasite Eve series has generally received positive reviews , with the score for the first game bringing Shimomura international acclaim . 
 = = Series overview = = 
 The Parasite Eve video game series is based on the 1995 science fiction novel of the same name by Japanese author Hideaki Sena . The role @-@ playing video game Parasite Eve , was released in 1998 for the PlayStation . Billed as a " cinematic RPG " , it was developed by a team of Japanese and North American staff with a western release in mind . Its 1999 sequel , the action role @-@ playing game Parasite Eve II , was designed to be similar to games from the Resident Evil survival horror series . While Parasite Eve II did not leave potential for a sequel , the series was brought back in the form of The 3rd Birthday , a 2010 spin @-@ off for the PlayStation Portable . Initially designed for mobile devices , it was shifted onto the PSP and designed as a disconnected game focusing on the series ' main protagonist Aya Brea . All three games were primarily developed by Square Enix . 
 = = Parasite Eve = = 
 = = = Parasite Eve Original Soundtrack = = = 
 The music for Parasite Eve was composed by Yoko Shimomura , who would later become a well @-@ established video game composer through her work on the Kingdom Hearts series . Additional arrangements were done by Shigeo Tamaru . Despite her previous work as lead composer on Super Mario RPG , Parasite Eve became Shimomura 's breakout project and garnered her international fame . During her work on Parasite Eve , Shimomura spent time in the United States , which was where much of the game 's staff came from . Because of this , Shimomura remembered the game as her most challenging project . She wanted the music to be experimental , not falling into ambient or techno classifications . One of her main goals was to create something " inorganic " and recognizable as a product of Square Enix ( then Square ) . Until Parasite Eve , Shimomura had written music in a straightforward manner that reflected her then @-@ current state of mind , but this time she restrained herself and took a more " emotionless " approach . She felt that this would best represent the game 's atmosphere and Aya 's stoic attitude . Ultimately , she felt that Parasite Eve was an experimental work in many ways . Due to its prevalence in the story , Shimomura used opera music , but as typical opera music did not translate well into battle themes , Shimomura added different rhythms : these rhythms were inspired when some of the game 's American staff took her to a nightclub and she heard the background music there . The music recording took place at the Andora Studios in Los Angeles . 
 Parasite Eve was the first of her projects to include a vocal theme , the ending theme " Somnia Memorias " . This was because the PlayStation system was the first to have sufficient processing power for this to be possible . For the vocalist , Shimomura avoided using someone well known . " Somnia Memorias " was sung by Shani Rigsbee , while the vocals for the orchestrated versions of " Influence of Deep " and " Se il Mio Amore Sta Vincino " were provided by Judith <unk> . " Somnia Memorias " was translated and adapted from Japanese into Latin by Raul Ferrando , while " Se il Mio Amore Sta Vincino " was translated by Daniella Spagnolo . The lyrics for all vocal pieces were written by Shimomura . The track " I Hear a Voice Asking Me to Awaken " was an arrangement of Wachet auf , ruft uns die Stimme , BWV 140 by Johann Sebastian Bach . 
 The two @-@ disc album Parasite Eve Original Soundtrack was released through DigiCube on May 21 , 1998 under the catalog number SSCX @-@ <unk> . Due to popular demand from fans , a reprint was issued through the Square Enix label on January 26 , 2011 under the catalog number SQEX @-@ <unk> / 3 . The music received generally positive reviews from music critics , and helped establish Shimomura as a popular composer with western video game fans . 
 = = = Parasite Eve Remixes = = = 
 Parasite Eve Remixes is a ten @-@ track album , featuring remixed versions of themes from Parasite Eve . The remixes were done by Shimomura , Tamaru , Hidenori Iwasaki and Keichi Takahashi . Multiple DJs also contributed , including Tomo , <unk> , Dan K , Tribal Masters , Kay Nakayama , and Dummy Run . According to Shimomura , the album came about when someone suggested to her creating full remixes of themes rather than making simple rearrangements . Shimomura was in charge of extending and remixing " Aya 's Theme " , which was the main theme for Parasite Eve . The album was released through DigiCube on July 30 , 1998 under the catalog number SSCX @-@ <unk> . Reviews of the album were mixed , with critics saying that it would not appeal to many and finding some of the remixes odd , repetitive or overly chaotic . 
 = = Other albums = = 
 = = = Parasite Eve II Original Soundtrack = = = 
 The music of Parasite Eve II was written , arranged and produced by Naoshi Mizuta . Parasite Eve II was Mizuta 's first project as lead composer at Square after transferring from Capcom . He spent a year and a half working on the soundtrack , frequently referencing the game 's scenario and visuals . He was also influenced by multiple unspecified films from multiple genres including action films . He matched his music to the scenario , characters and environments , since he desired to stir the players emotions without distracting from the game . Many of his tracks were created on request , but he otherwise had a high amount of creative freedom . Multiple tracks were remixes and rearrangements of Shimomura 's original music for Parasite Eve : according to Mizuta , the arrangements were easy due to the original tracks ' strength . In a later interview , Mizuta called his work on Parasite Eve II very different from his later work on Final Fantasy XI and The 4 Heroes of Light . Guitar elements for the tracks " Forbidden Power " and " Douglas ' Blues " were performed by Tsuyoshi Sekito and Yuji <unk> respectively . Arrangements for multiple tracks were done by Hiroshi Nakajima , who later felt that he intentionally " betrayed " Mizuta 's work while creating the arrangements . Additional mixing was done by Hiroshi Nakajima and Kenji Nagashima . Sound samples used in some tracks were taken from the Q Ups Art Sonic Images Library CD release . 
 Parasite Eve II Original Soundtrack was released through DigiCube on December 18 , 1999 under the catalog number SSCX @-@ <unk> . The soundtrack was released in North America through Tokyopop Soundtrax . This edition was released on September 12 , 2000 under the catalog number TPCD @-@ 0200 @-@ 2 . Due to popular demand from fans , a reprint was issued through the Square Enix label on January 26 , 2011 under the catalog number SQEX @-@ <unk> / 5 . Reception of the music was far less positive than for Parasite Eve , with reviewers generally citing Mizuta 's work as weaker than Shimomura 's . 
 = = = The 3rd Birthday Original Soundtrack = = = 
 The music for The 3rd Birthday was composed by Mitsuto Suzuki and Tsuyoshi Sekito , with additional work by Yoko Shimomura . Shimomura was involved from an early stage , when The 3rd Birthday was still a mobile game . When she was originally asked to compose for the title , she was involved with a number of other projects which made handling the entire score difficult . When asked whether she wanted to work with anyone on the composition , she suggested Suzuki and Sekito . The general instruction was to follow the pattern used by the music for Parasite Eve , with Suzuki and Sekito handling the majority of tracks , going so far as referring to the songs from the original Parasite Eve when handling remixes of old themes . In keeping with the game 's other development goals , Shimomura wanted to alter some of the established music , although she asked the team to include familiar themes from earlier games for fans . When she started out , she knew nothing about the game 's story , but became familiar with it later in development and also found the project less challenging than she initially anticipated . Suzuki was responsible for a large amount of track mixing . Sekito was mostly involved with choosing and helping with instrumentation , in particular whether to include symphonic music . The composers had a relatively high degree of freedom , but they also had problems when composing some tracks that did not fit into selected scenes . 
 Re @-@ orchestrations of two pieces of classical music , " Sleepers Wake " by Johann Sebastian Bach and popular Christmas song " Joy to the World " , were used by Suzuki and Shimomura respectively to represent key moments and motifs within the game . The order of songs in the game was created to reflect the situation in a level . These variations were emphasized during mixing , while they also needed to adjust the mixing and track length based on the game as a whole . For the game 's theme song , Square Enix collaborated with Japanese rock band Superfly . The resultant theme song " Eyes on Me " , described as a " standard love song " , was specially composed by the band for the game . It was the band 's first video game theme song . 
 The 3rd Birthday Original Soundtrack was released on December 22 , 2010 through Square Enix 's music label , under the catalog number SQEX @-@ <unk> ~ 19 . " Eyes on Me " was released as a separate single alongside another of Superfly 's songs . Upon release , it peaked at # 5 in the Oricon music charts , and remained in the charts for eleven weeks . The album received positive reviews from music journalists , with critics generally calling it a high quality album with strong music overall . Reviews of " Eyes on Me " were negative , with reviewers faulting both the quality of the song and its appropriateness within the game 's context . 
 = = = Parasite Eve I & II Original Soundtrack Box = = = 
 Parasite Eve I & II Original Soundtrack Box is a combined album featuring the re @-@ releases of the first two Parasite Eve soundtracks . It was released on January 26 , 2011 . Reviews of the boxset were mixed : while some considered both soundtracks to be good and contrast each other , others considered Parasite Eve II to be weaker and a detriment to the experience . 
 = 1893 Alabama Crimson White football team = 
 The 1893 Alabama Crimson White football team represented the University of Alabama in the 1893 college football season . The team was led by head coach Eli Abbott and played their home games at Lakeview Park in Birmingham and The Quad in Tuscaloosa , Alabama . In what was the second season of Alabama football , the team finished with a record of zero wins and four losses ( 0 – 4 ) . 
 Although they finished their inaugural year with a .500 record , head coach E. B. Beaumont was fired and replaced with Abbott prior to the start of the season . The 1893 squad opened the season with a pair of losses against the Birmingham Athletic Club , first in Tuscaloosa and then again a month later at Birmingham . The Crimson White was then shutout by Sewanee in their first game against an out @-@ of @-@ state opponent , and then closed the season with a 40 – 16 loss in the Iron Bowl against Auburn at Montgomery . The winless season was the first of only three in the history of the Alabama program . 
 = = Background = = 
 In their inaugural season , Alabama was led by head coach E. B. Beaumont to an overall record of two wins and two losses ( 2 – 2 ) . During the season they defeated Birmingham High School , split a pair against the Birmingham Athletic Club and lost to Auburn in their final game of the season . After the completion of the season , Beaumont was fired as head coach and replaced with former player Eli Abbott for the 1893 campaign . The team was called the " Crimson White " from 1893 to 1906 , when their name changed to the currently used " Crimson Tide . " 
 = = Schedule = = 
 Source : Rolltide.com : 1893 Alabama football schedule 
 = = Game notes = = 
 = = = Birmingham Athletic Club ( October ) = = = 
 In the first ever game played in Tuscaloosa , the Birmingham Athletic Club ( B.A.C. ) defeated Alabama 4 – 0 at The Quad on the campus of the University of Alabama . In a game controlled by both defenses , the only points came on an Athletics touchdown in the second half . With the loss , this and later the 1895 and 1955 squads represented the only seasons Alabama failed to win a game at Tuscaloosa during a season that at least one game was played there . 
 = = = Birmingham Athletic Club ( November ) = = = 
 In a rematch against the B.A.C. a month later at Lakeview Park in Birmingham , Alabama lost their second game of the season by a final score of 10 – 8 . After they trailed 4 – 0 at the end of the first half , Alabama scored their first points of the season on a William Walker touchdown run early in the second half and tied the game 4 – 4 . The Athletics retook a 10 – 4 lead when they scored a touchdown and converted the extra point , but then Walker scored his second touchdown of the game that made the final score 10 – 8 after a missed extra point . The second loss against the B.A.C. marked the only time in Alabama football history the same team defeated the Crimson Tide twice in the same season . 
 = = = Sewanee = = = 
 Against their first @-@ ever opponent from outside the state of Alabama , Sewanee shut out the Crimson White 20 – 0 at Lakeview Park . The Tigers took a 4 – 0 lead in the 22nd minute of the first half when Wilson scored on a short touchdown run . Early in the second half , Sewanee extended their lead to 8 – 0 when Norman scored on a 25 @-@ yard touchdown run behind the flying wedge formation . Nelson then scored the final two Tiger touchdowns on runs of 45 and one @-@ yard for the 20 – 0 victory . Sewanee later became one of Alabama 's biggest rivals in the early decades of the football program . 
 = = = Auburn = = = 
 After playing their previous game at Birmingham 's Lakeview Park , the city of Montgomery gave Alabama and the Agricultural & Mechanical College of Alabama ( now known as Auburn University ) $ 500 to play each other at Riverside Park . In the second edition of what has since become known as the Iron Bowl , Auburn won 40 – 16 . Auburn scored first when Rufus Dorsey scored on a 10 @-@ yard touchdown run and kicked the extra point for a 6 – 0 lead . Alabama responded on their next possession when John <unk> scored on a 35 @-@ yard touchdown run . However G. H. Kyser missed the extra point and Auburn still held a 6 – 4 lead . Auburn then extended their lead to 18 – 4 at halftime after a pair of touchdown from J. C. Dunham . 
 Alabama opened the second half with their second touchdown of the game . William Walker scored on a six @-@ yard touchdown run and cut the Tigers ' lead to 18 – 10 . Auburn responded with touchdown runs by Snow Perkins , Arthur Redding and J. V. Brown that made the score 34 – 10 . After a David Grayson touchdown for Alabama , Auburn responded with their final points of the game on a one @-@ yard Dorsey run that made the final score 40 – 16 . Governor of Alabama Thomas G. Jones presented a trophy to Auburn 's captain Rufus Dorsey for their victory . 
 = = Players = = 
 The following players were members of the 1893 football team according to the roster published in the 1894 edition of The Corolla , the University of Alabama yearbook . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 With their loss to Auburn , Alabama completed the first winless season in Alabama football history , and since then they have had only two other winless seasons in 1895 and 1955 . The losses of 1893 were attributed to the small stature of the Crimson players and not to the coaching and training of the team . As such , Abbott returned as head coach for the 1894 season and led Alabama to a winning season that included their first all @-@ time win over Auburn . 
 = Georgette Heyer = 
 Georgette Heyer / <unk> / ( 16 August 1902 – 4 July 1974 ) was an English historical romance and detective fiction novelist . Her writing career began in 1921 , when she turned a story for her younger brother into the novel The Black Moth . In 1925 Heyer married George Ronald Rougier , a mining engineer . The couple spent several years living in Tanganyika Territory and Macedonia before returning to England in 1929 . After her novel These Old Shades became popular despite its release during the General Strike , Heyer determined that publicity was not necessary for good sales . For the rest of her life , she refused to grant interviews , telling a friend : " My private life concerns no one but myself and my family . " 
 Heyer essentially established the historical romance genre and its subgenre Regency romance . Her Regencies were inspired by Jane Austen , but unlike Austen , who wrote about and for the times in which she lived , Heyer was forced to include copious information about the period so that her readers would understand the setting . To ensure accuracy , Heyer collected reference works and kept detailed notes on all aspects of Regency life . While some critics thought the novels were too detailed , others considered the level of detail to be Heyer 's greatest asset . Her meticulous nature was also evident in her historical novels ; Heyer even recreated William the Conqueror 's crossing into England for her novel The Conqueror . 
 Beginning in 1932 , Heyer released one romance novel and one thriller each year . Her husband often provided basic outlines for the plots of her thrillers , leaving Heyer to develop character relationships and dialogue so as to bring the story to life . Although many critics describe Heyer 's detective novels as unoriginal , others such as Nancy Wingate praise them " for their wit and comedy as well as for their well @-@ woven plots " . 
 Her success was sometimes clouded by problems with tax inspectors and alleged <unk> . Heyer chose not to file lawsuits against the suspected literary thieves , but tried multiple ways of minimizing her tax liability . Forced to put aside the works she called her " magnum opus " ( a trilogy covering the House of Lancaster ) to write more commercially successful works , Heyer eventually created a limited liability company to administer the rights to her novels . She was accused several times of providing an overly large salary for herself , and in 1966 she sold the company and the rights to seventeen of her novels to Booker @-@ McConnell . Heyer continued writing until her death in July 1974 . At that time , 48 of her novels were still in print ; her last book , My Lord John , was published posthumously . 
 = = Early years = = 
 Heyer was born in Wimbledon , London , in 1902 . She was named after her father , George Heyer . Her mother , Sylvia Watkins , studied both cello and piano and was one of the top three students in her class at the Royal College of Music . Heyer 's paternal grandfather had emigrated from Russia , while her maternal grandparents owned tugboats on the River Thames . 
 Heyer was the eldest of three children ; her brothers George Boris ( known as Boris ) and Frank were four and nine years younger than her . For part of her childhood , the family lived in Paris , France , but they returned to England shortly after World War I broke out in 1914 . Although the family 's surname had been pronounced " higher " , the advent of war led her father to switch to the pronunciation " hair " so they would not be mistaken for Germans . During the war , her father served as a requisitions officer for the British Army in France . After the war ended he was appointed a Member of the Order of the British Empire ( MBE ) . He left the army in 1920 with the rank of captain , taught at King 's College London and sometimes wrote for The Granta . 
 George Heyer strongly encouraged his children to read and never forbade any book . Georgette read widely and often met with her friends Joanna Cannan and Carola Oman to discuss books . Heyer and Oman later shared their works @-@ in @-@ progress with each other and offered criticism . 
 When she was 17 , Heyer began a serial story to amuse her brother Boris , who suffered from a form of haemophilia and was often weak . Her father enjoyed listening to her story and asked her to prepare it for publication . His agent found a publisher for her book , and The Black Moth , about the adventures of a young man who took responsibility for his brother 's card @-@ cheating , was released in 1921 . According to her biographer Jane Aiken Hodge , the novel contained many of the elements that would become standard for Heyer 's novels , the " saturnine male lead , the marriage in danger , the extravagant wife , and the group of idle , entertaining young men " . The following year one of her contemporary short stories , " A Proposal to Cicely " , was published in Happy Magazine . 
 = = Marriage = = 
 While holidaying with her family in December 1920 , Heyer met George Ronald Rougier , who was two years her senior . The two became regular dance partners while Rougier studied at the Royal School of Mines to become a mining engineer . In the spring of 1925 , shortly after the publication of her fifth novel , they became engaged . One month later , Heyer 's father died of a heart attack . He left no pension , and Heyer assumed financial responsibility for her brothers , aged 19 and 14 . Two months after her father 's death , on 18 August , Heyer and Rougier married in a simple ceremony . 
 In October 1925 Rougier was sent to work in the Caucasus Mountains , partly because he had learned Russian as a child . Heyer remained at home and continued to write . In 1926 , she released These Old Shades , in which the Duke of Avon courts his own ward . Unlike her first novel , These Old Shades focused more on personal relationships than on adventure . The book appeared in the midst of the 1926 United Kingdom general strike ; as a result , the novel received no newspaper coverage , reviews , or advertising . Nevertheless , the book sold 190 @,@ 000 copies . Because the lack of publicity had not harmed the novel 's sales , Heyer refused for the rest of her life to promote her books , even though her publishers often asked her to give interviews . She once wrote to a friend that " as for being photographed at Work or in my Old World Garden , that is the type of publicity which I find nauseating and quite unnecessary . My private life concerns no one but myself and my family . " 
 Rougier returned home in the summer of 1926 , but within months he was sent to the East African territory of Tanganyika . Heyer joined him there the following year . They lived in a hut made of elephant grass located in the bush ; Heyer was the first white woman her servants had ever seen . While in Tanganyika , Heyer wrote The <unk> ; set in 1745 , the book follows the romantic adventures of siblings who pretend to be of the opposite sex in order to protect their family , all former Jacobites . Although Heyer did not have access to all of her reference material , the book contained only one anachronism : she placed the opening of White 's a year too early . She also wrote an account of her adventures , titled " The Horned Beast of Africa " , which was published in 1929 in the newspaper The Sphere . 
 In 1928 , Heyer followed her husband to Macedonia , where she almost died after a dentist improperly administered an anaesthetic . She insisted they return to England before starting a family . The following year Rougier left his job , making Heyer the primary breadwinner . After a failed experiment running a gas , coke , and lighting company , Rougier purchased a sports shop in Horsham with money they borrowed from Heyer 's aunts . Heyer 's brother Boris lived above the shop and helped Rougier , while Heyer continued to provide the bulk of the family 's earnings with her writing . 
 = = Regency romances = = 
 Heyer 's earliest works were romance novels , most set before 1800 . In 1935 , she released Regency Buck , her first novel set in the Regency period . This bestselling novel essentially established the genre of Regency romance . Unlike other romance novels of the period , Heyer 's novels used the setting as a plot device . Many of her characters exhibited modern @-@ day sensibilities ; more conventional characters in the novels would point out the heroine 's eccentricities , such as wanting to marry for love . The books were set almost entirely in the world of the wealthy upper class and only occasionally mention poverty , religion , or politics . 
 Although the British Regency lasted only from 1811 to 1820 , Heyer 's romances were set between 1752 and 1825 . As noted by literary critic Kay Mussell , the books revolved around a " structured social ritual — the marriage market represented by the London season " where " all are in danger of ostracism for inappropriate behavior " . Her Regency romances were inspired by the writings of Jane Austen , whose novels were set in the same era . Austen 's works , however , were contemporary novels , describing the times in which she lived . According to Pamela Regis in her work A Natural History of the Romance Novel , because Heyer 's stories took place amidst events that had occurred over 100 years earlier , she had to include more detail on the period in order for her readers to understand it . While Austen could ignore the " minutiae of dress and decor " , Heyer included those details " to invest the novels ... with ' the tone of the time ' " . Later reviewers , such as Lillian Robinson , criticized Heyer 's " passion for the specific fact without concern for its significance " , and Marghanita Laski pointed out that " these aspects on which Heyer is so dependent for her creation of atmosphere are just those which Jane Austen ... referred to only when she wanted to show that a character was vulgar or ridiculous " . Others , including A. S. Byatt , believe that Heyer 's " awareness of this atmosphere — both of the minute details of the social pursuits of her leisured classes and of the emotional structure behind the fiction it produced — is her greatest asset " . 
 Determined to make her novels as accurate as possible , Heyer collected reference works and research materials to use while writing . At the time of her death she owned over 1 @,@ 000 historical reference books , including Debrett 's and an 1808 dictionary of the House of Lords . In addition to the standard historical works about the medieval and eighteenth @-@ century periods , her library included histories of snuff boxes , sign posts , and costumes . She often clipped illustrations from magazine articles and jotted down interesting vocabulary or facts onto note cards , but rarely recorded where she found the information . Her notes were sorted into categories , such as Beauty , Colours , Dress , Hats , Household , Prices , and Shops ; and even included details such as the cost of candles in a particular year . Other notebooks contained lists of phrases , covering such topics as " Food and <unk> " , " <unk> " , and " Forms of Address . " One of her publishers , Max Reinhardt , once attempted to offer editorial suggestions about the language in one of her books but was promptly informed by a member of his staff that no one in England knew more about Regency language than Heyer . 
 In the interests of accuracy , Heyer once purchased a letter written by the Duke of Wellington so that she could precisely employ his style of writing . She claimed that every word attributed to Wellington in An Infamous Army was actually spoken or written by him in real life . Her knowledge of the period was so extensive that Heyer rarely mentioned dates explicitly in her books ; instead , she situated the story by casually referring to major and minor events of the time . 
 = = Thrillers = = 
 In 1931 , Heyer released The Conqueror , her first novel of historical fiction to give a fictionalized account of real historical events . She researched the life of William the Conqueror thoroughly , even travelling the route that William took when crossing into England . The following year , Heyer 's writing took an even more drastic departure from her early historical romances when she released her first thriller , Footsteps in the Dark . The novel 's publication coincided with the birth of her only child , Richard George Rougier , whom she called her " most notable ( indeed peerless ) work " . Later in her life , Heyer requested that her publishers refrain from reprinting Footsteps in the Dark , saying " This work , published simultaneously with my son ... was the first of my thrillers and was perpetuated while I was , as any Regency character would have said , increasing . One husband and two ribald brothers all had fingers in it , and I do not claim it as a Major Work . " 
 For the next several years Heyer published one romance novel and one thriller each year . The romances were far more popular : they usually sold 115 @,@ 000 copies , while her thrillers sold 16 @,@ 000 copies . According to her son , Heyer " regarded the writing of mystery stories rather as we would regard tackling a crossword puzzle – an intellectual diversion before the harder tasks of life have to be faced " . Heyer 's husband was involved in much of her writing . He often read the proofs of her historical romances to catch any errors that she might have missed , and served as a collaborator for her thrillers . He provided the plots of the detective stories , describing the actions of characters " A " and " B " . Heyer would then create the characters and the relationships between them and bring the plot points to life . She found it difficult at times to rely on someone else 's plots ; on at least one occasion , before writing the last chapter of a book , she asked Rougier to explain once again how the murder was really committed . 
 Her detective stories , which , according to critic Earl F. <unk> , " specialize [ d ] in upper @-@ class family murders " , were known primarily for their comedy , melodrama , and romance . The comedy derived not from the action but from the personalities and dialogue of the characters . In most of these novels , all set in the time they were written , the focus relied primarily on the hero , with a lesser role for the heroine . Her early mystery novels often featured athletic heroes ; once Heyer 's husband began pursuing his lifelong dream of becoming a barrister , the novels began to feature solicitors and barristers in lead roles . 
 In 1935 , Heyer 's thrillers began following a pair of detectives named Superintendent <unk> and Sergeant ( later Inspector ) Hemingway . The two were never as popular as other contemporary fictional detectives such as Agatha Christie 's Hercule Poirot and Dorothy L. Sayers 's Lord Peter Wimsey . One of the books featuring Heyer 's characters , Death in the Stocks , was dramatized in New York City in 1937 as Merely Murder . The play focused on the comedy rather than the mystery , and it closed after three nights . 
 According to critic Nancy Wingate , Heyer 's detective novels , the last written in 1953 , often featured unoriginal methods , motives , and characters , with seven of them using inheritance as the motive . The novels were always set in London , a small village , or at a <unk> . Critic Erik Routley labelled many of her characters clichés , including the uneducated policeman , an exotic Spanish dancer , and a country vicar with a neurotic wife . In one of her novels , the characters ' surnames were even in alphabetical order according to the order they were introduced . According to Wingate , Heyer 's detective stories , like many of the others of the time , exhibited a distinct snobbery towards foreigners and the lower classes . Her middle @-@ class men were often crude and stupid , while the women were either incredibly practical or exhibited poor judgement , usually using poor grammar that could become vicious . Despite the stereotypes , however , Routley maintains that Heyer had " a quite remarkable gift for reproducing the brittle and ironic conversation of the upper middle class Englishwoman of that age ( immediately before 1940 ) " . Wingate further mentions that Heyer 's thrillers were known " for their wit and comedy as well as for their well @-@ woven plots " . 
 = = Financial problems = = 
 In 1939 , Rougier was called to the Bar , and the family moved first to Brighton , then to Hove , so that Rougier could easily commute to London . The following year , they sent their son to a preparatory school , creating an additional expense for Heyer . The Blitz bombing of 1940 – 41 disrupted train travel in Britain , prompting Heyer and her family to move to London in 1942 so that Rougier would be closer to his work . 
 After having lunch with a representative from Hodder & Stoughton , who published her detective stories , Heyer felt that her host had patronized her . The company had an option on her next book ; to make them break her contract , she wrote Penhallow , which the 1944 Book Review Digest described as " a murder story but not a mystery story " . Hodder & Stoughton turned the book down , thus ending their association with Heyer , and Heinemann agreed to publish it instead . Her publisher in the United States , Doubleday , also disliked the book and ended their relationship with Heyer after its publication . 
 During World War II , her brothers served in the armed forces , alleviating one of her monetary worries . Her husband , meanwhile , served in the Home Guard , besides continuing as a barrister . As he was new to his career , Rougier did not earn much money , and paper rationing during the war caused lower sales of Heyer 's books . To meet their expenses Heyer sold the Commonwealth rights for These Old Shades , Devil 's Cub , and Regency Buck to her publisher , Heinemann , for £ 750 . A contact at the publishing house , her close friend A.S. Frere , later offered to return the rights to her for the same amount of money she was paid . Heyer refused to accept the deal , explaining that she had given her word to transfer the rights . Heyer also reviewed books for Heinemann , earning 2 guineas for each review , and she allowed her novels to be serialized in Women 's Journal prior to their publication as hardcover books . The appearance of a Heyer novel usually caused the magazine to sell out completely , but she complained that they " always like [ d ] my worst work " . 
 To minimize her tax liability , Heyer formed a limited liability company called Heron Enterprises around 1950 . Royalties from new titles would be paid to the company , which would then furnish Heyer 's salary and pay directors ' fees to her family . She would continue to receive royalties from her previous titles , and foreign royalties – except for those from the United States – would go to her mother . Within several years , however , a tax inspector found that Heyer was withdrawing too much money from the company . The inspector considered the extra funds as undisclosed dividends , meaning that she owed an additional £ 3 @,@ 000 in taxes . To pay the tax bill , Heyer wrote two articles , " Books about the <unk> " and " How to be a Literary Writer " , that were published in the magazine Punch . She once wrote to a friend , " I 'm getting so tired of writing books for the benefit of the Treasury and I can 't tell you how utterly I resent the squandering of my money on such fatuous things as Education and Making Life Easy and Luxurious for So @-@ Called Workers . " 
 In 1950 , Heyer began working on what she called " the magnum opus of my latter years " , a medieval trilogy intended to cover the House of Lancaster between 1393 and 1435 . She estimated that she would need five years to complete the works . Her impatient readers continually clamored for new books ; to satisfy them and her tax liabilities , Heyer interrupted herself to write Regency romances . The manuscript of volume one of the series , My Lord John , was published posthumously . 
 The limited liability company continued to vex Heyer , and in 1966 , after tax inspectors found that she owed the company £ 20 @,@ 000 , she finally fired her accountants . She then asked that the rights to her newest book , Black Sheep , be issued to her personally . Unlike her other novels , Black Sheep did not focus on members of the aristocracy . Instead , it followed " the moneyed middle class " , with finance a dominant theme in the novel . 
 Heyer 's new accountants urged her to abandon Heron Enterprises ; after two years , she finally agreed to sell the company to Booker @-@ McConnell , which already owned the rights to the estates of novelists Ian Fleming and Agatha Christie . Booker @-@ McConnell paid her approximately £ 85 @,@ 000 for the rights to the 17 Heyer titles owned by the company . This amount was taxed at the lower capital transfer rate , rather than the higher income tax rate . 
 = = <unk> = = 
 As Heyer 's popularity increased , other authors began to imitate her style . In May 1950 , one of her readers notified her that Barbara Cartland had written several novels in a style similar to Heyer 's , reusing names , character traits and plot points and paraphrased descriptions from her books , particularly A Hazard of Hearts , which borrowed characters from Friday 's Child , and The Knave of Hearts which took off These Old Shades . Heyer completed a detailed analysis of the alleged <unk> for her solicitors , and while the case never came to court and no apology was received , the copying ceased . Her lawyers suggested that she leak the copying to the press . Heyer refused . 
 In 1961 , another reader wrote of similarities found in the works of Kathleen Lindsay , particularly the novel Winsome Lass . The novels borrowed plot points , characters , surnames , and plentiful Regency slang . After fans accused Heyer of " publishing shoddy stuff under a pseudonym " , Heyer wrote to the other publisher to complain . When the author took exception the accusations , Heyer made a thorough list of the borrowings and historical mistakes in the books . Among these were repeated use of the phrase " to make a cake of oneself " , which Heyer had discovered in a privately printed memoir unavailable to the public . In another case , the author referenced a historical incident that Heyer had invented in an earlier novel . Heyer 's lawyers recommended an injunction , but she ultimately decided not to sue . 
 = = Later years = = 
 In 1959 , Rougier became a Queen 's Counsel . The following year , their son Richard fell in love with the estranged wife of an acquaintance . Richard assisted the woman , Susanna Flint , in leaving her husband , and the couple married after her divorce was finalized . Heyer was shocked at the impropriety but soon came to love her daughter @-@ in @-@ law , later describing her as " the daughter we never had and thought we didn 't want " . Richard and his wife raised her two sons from her first marriage and provided Heyer with her only biological grandchild in 1966 , when their son Nicholas Rougier was born . 
 As Heyer aged she began to suffer more frequent health problems . In June 1964 , she underwent surgery to remove a kidney stone . Although the doctors initially predicted a six @-@ week recovery , after two months they predicted that it might be a year or longer before she felt completely well . The following year , she suffered a mosquito bite which turned septic , prompting the doctors to offer skin grafts . In July 1973 she suffered a slight stroke and spent three weeks in a nursing home . When her brother Boris died later that year , Heyer was too ill to travel to his funeral . She suffered another stroke in February 1974 . Three months later , she was diagnosed with lung cancer , which her biographer attributed to the 60 – 80 cork @-@ tipped cigarettes that Heyer smoked each day ( although she said she did not inhale ) . On 4 July 1974 , Heyer died . Her fans learned her married name for the first time from her obituaries . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Besides her success in the United Kingdom , Heyer 's novels were very popular in the United States and Germany and achieved respectable sales in Czechoslovakia . A first printing of one of her novels in the Commonwealth often consisted of 65 @,@ 000 – 75 @,@ 000 copies , and her novels collectively sold over 100 @,@ 000 copies in hardback each year . Her paperbacks usually sold over 500 @,@ 000 copies each . At the time of her death 48 of her books were still in print , including her first novel , The Black Moth . 
 Her books were very popular during the Great Depression and World War II . Her novels , which journalist Lesley McDowell described as containing " derring @-@ do , dashing blades , and maids in peril " , allowed readers to escape from the mundane and difficult elements of their lives . In a letter describing her novel Friday 's Child , Heyer commented , " ' I think myself I ought to be shot for writing such nonsense . ... But it 's unquestionably good escapist literature and I think I should rather like it if I were sitting in an air @-@ raid shelter or recovering from flu . " 
 Heyer essentially invented the historical romance and created the subgenre of the Regency romance . When first released as mass market paperbacks in the United States in 1966 , her novels were described as being " in the tradition of Jane Austen " . As other novelists began to imitate her style and continue to develop the Regency romance , their novels have been described as " following in the romantic tradition of Georgette Heyer " . According to Kay Mussell , " virtually every Regency writer covets [ that ] accolade " . 
 Heyer has been criticised for anti @-@ semitism , in particular a scene in The Grand Sophy ( published in 1950 ) . Her biographers confirm she held bigoted opinions . This was not a regular theme of her writing however . 
 Despite her popularity and success , Heyer was ignored by critics . Although none of her novels was ever reviewed in a serious newspaper , according to Duff Hart @-@ Davis , " the absence of long or serious reviews never worried her . What mattered was the fact that her stories sold in ever @-@ increasing numbers " . Heyer was also overlooked by the Encyclopædia Britannica . The 1974 edition of the <unk> , published shortly after her death , included entries on popular writers Agatha Christie and Dorothy Sayers , but did not mention Heyer . Biographies of Heyer have been published by Jane Aiken Hodge in 1984 and by Jennifer <unk> in 2011 . 
 = Morchella frustrata = 
 Morchella frustrata is a later synonym of Morchella tridentina , a species originally described by Giacomo Bresadola from north Italy in 1898 . It is a species of fungus in the family Morchellaceae referred to as the mountain blond or western blond morel in North America , but commonly found throughout the Mediterranean basin . It has conical , grey to buff fruit bodies that grow up to 20 cm ( 7 @.@ 9 in ) tall and 5 cm ( 2 @.@ 0 in ) wide . Recent molecular and morphological studies have also shown Morchella frustrata to be conspecific to M. quercus @-@ <unk> , M. <unk> , M. <unk> var. elegans and M. conica var. <unk> . So far , this cosmopolitan species is known from California and Oregon in North America , from Argentina and Chile in South America , from Spain , France , Cyprus , Italy and Turkey in Europe , and has also been reported from Israel and India . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 Morchella frustrata was described as new to science in a 2012 publication by Michael Kuo and colleagues . The report resulted from the Morel Data Collection Project , which aimed to clarify aspects of the biology , taxonomy and distribution of North American Morchella , and described 14 new morel species . The type locality was in Placer County , California . The morel was previously referred to as phylogenetic species ( i.e. , defined by DNA sequence rather than morphological characteristics ) Mel @-@ 2 in a study the year before , and informally as the " mountain blond morel " . Despite its light color , M. frustrata belongs to the Elata clade along with other black morels , including M. tomentosa and M. angusticeps . The specific epithet frustrata refers to the " frustrating combination of black and yellow morel features that characterize the species . " 
 In two subsequent studies , however , Richard and colleagues ( 2014 ) and <unk> and colleagues ( 2015 ) used DNA analysis to determine that this species is identical to morels collected in southern Europe , matching the original description of Morchella tridentina by Bresadola . This name therefore takes precedence over M. frustrata . 
 = = Description = = 
 The fruit bodies are often rufescent and 9 – 20 cm ( 3 @.@ 5 – 7 @.@ 9 in ) high . The conical cap is 4 – 6 cm ( 1 @.@ 6 – 2 @.@ 4 in ) high and 2 @.@ 5 – 4 cm ( 1 @.@ 0 – 1 @.@ 6 in ) wide at the widest point . The cap surface features pits and ridges , which are formed from the intersection of 16 – 22 primary vertical ridges and few shorter , secondary vertical ridges , with frequent , sunken , horizontal ridges . The cap is attached to the stipe with a distinct sinus about 2 – 4 mm deep and 2 – 4 mm wide . The smooth , splitting ridges remain persistently pale throughout the maturity process , easily distinguishing this species from other species in section Elata , or black morels , which have ridges that typically darken with age . Pits are usually elongated vertically . They are smooth , dull grayish to pale yellowish or nearly whitish when young , later becoming pale tan to pale pinkish tan . The stipe is 2 – 6 cm ( 0 @.@ 8 – 2 @.@ 4 in ) high by 1 – 4 cm ( 0 @.@ 4 – 1 @.@ 6 in ) wide and is more or less equal in width throughout its length or sometimes thicker at the base . Its whitish surface is smooth or finely mealy with whitish granules . The flesh is whitish and measures 1 – 2 mm thick in the hollow cap . The sterile inner surface of the cap is whitish and pubescent ( having soft , short and erect " hairs " ) . 
 The ascospores are smooth , elliptical , and measure 20 – 26 by 13 – 18 µm . Asci ( spore @-@ bearing cells ) are cylindrical , eight @-@ spored , hyaline ( translucent ) when mounted in dilute ( 2 % ) potassium hydroxide ( KOH ) , and measure 225 – 330 by 15 – 25 µm . Paraphyses are cylindrical to capitate or moniliform , measuring 95 – 250 long by 10 – 25 µm wide , and are septate . Their tips are rounded to somewhat club @-@ shaped or infrequently somewhat fuse @-@ shaped . Elements on the sterile ridges are 50 – 175 by 12 @.@ 5 – 20 µm , and septate . The terminal cells are club @-@ shaped or nearly so . 
 Although the edibility of M. frustrata was not mentioned in the original description , Kuo has elsewhere written of the edibility of North American Morchella . In general , morels should not be eaten raw , as they can trigger allergic reactions in susceptible individuals . Their flavor is enhanced after they are fried , stuffed , or dried . 
 = = = Similar species = = = 
 This species is very similar to Morchella rufobrunnea , another rufescent , cosmopolitan species with pale colours , which is nonetheless found in urban and suburban areas . The latter is distinguished by an adnate cap lacking a sinus and a distinct dark <unk> on the stem , more pronounced in young fruit bodies . Due to its similar light coloration , M. frustrata may also be confused with Morchella <unk> ; as Kuo states , " it looks like a black morel with the colors of a yellow morel . " The vertically arranged pits and ridges , as well as the slight indentation where the cap meets the stem on M. frustrata , however , more closely resemble the black morels such as M. elata . M. snyderi is somewhat similar in appearance to young specimens of M. frustrata , but mature specimens of the former species can be distinguished by the brown to black ridges on the cap , and the ridged and pocketed stipe . 
 = = Habitat and distribution = = 
 Morchella frustrata fruit bodies grow solitary , scattered , or in small groups in spring , in mountainous forests and maquis . The exact trophic status of the fungus is not yet known with certainty , but it is suspected to be <unk> mycorrhizal or biotrophic . Tree species associated with the fungus include pacific madrone ( Arbutus menziesii ) , oaks ( Quercus spp . ) , Douglas fir ( Pseudotsuga menziesii ) , ponderosa pine ( Pinus ponderosa ) , sugar pine ( Pinus <unk> ) , and white fir ( Abies concolor ) . In Europe it is often found with holm oak ( Quercus ilex ) , strawberry trees ( Arbutus <unk> ) , olive trees ( Olea europaea ) , Spanish fir ( Abies <unk> ) , Silver fir ( Abies alba ) and Scot 's pine ( Pinus sylvestris ) . Although it was originally hypothesized that collections of M. frustrata from Turkey might have been recently introduced from North America , numerous collections reported since from remote and undisturbed areas in the Mediterranean and the Alps ( including Bresadola 's original collection from Trentino ) , suggest a long @-@ time and well @-@ established presence of this species in Europe . Kuo suggests that it might be also widely distributed in western North America , but so far has only been confirmed to be present in Oregon and California . 
 = Papoose Peak Jumps = 
 Papoose Peak Jumps was a ski jumping hill located at Squaw Valley Ski Resort in the US state of California . The hill consisted of three jumps , with K @-@ points of 80 , 60 and 40 meters , respectively . Constructed upon the hill @-@ side of Little Papoose Peak , it was built for the 1960 Winter Olympics ; the 80 @-@ meter hill hosted the ski jumping event and the 60 @-@ meter hill the Nordic combined event . The jump was designed by Heini Klopfer and opened in 1958 . After the Olympics the venue saw little use ; it was renovated for the 1976 US National Ski Jumping Championships , but has since fallen into disrepair and demolished to make room for a ski lift . 
 = = History = = 
 As Squaw Valley was an undeveloped area when it was awarded the Olympics , the organizing committee was free to design a tailor @-@ made Olympic resort . Heini Klopfer from Oberstdorf , West Germany , was hired to design the ski jumping hills , which he finished in early 1957 . He chose to locate it on the hill @-@ side of Little Papoose Peak , opposite Blyth Arena . He described the location as " the type of hill one always seeks but seldom finds " . The construction contract was awarded to Diversified Builders , who constructed the jumps during the summer and fall of 1958 . 
 Papoose Peak Jumps was the first Olympic ski jump to have three in @-@ runs . Minor details were corrected in 1959 and 1960 . It was renovated ahead of the 1976 US National Championships . However , it fell out of use afterwards and instead the hill was converted to a speed skiing and snowboarding hill . Later the resort 's Far East Express chairlift was installed on the hill . 
 = = Facilities = = 
 The hill consisted of three jumps with a common out @-@ run , each with a construction point ( K @-@ point ) of 80 , 60 and 40 meters , respectively . It was located in the central area of the Olympic resort , next to the skating rinks and the Olympic Village . Tall trees on both sides of the hill gave good protection against the wind . The location was also ideal because of the sun was at the competitor 's backs . A judges ' tower was constructed on the side , which was both accessible by stairs from the bottom of the hill or from the chairlift which ran to the top of the in @-@ runs . The hill had an overall height of 140 meters ( 460 ft ) , the in @-@ run had a length of 113 meters ( 371 ft ) . The largest jump had a take @-@ off angle of 8 @.@ 5 degrees and a landing angle of 38 degrees . 
 = = Events = = 
 The first competitive use of the hills was the trial Olympics in February 1959 . During the 1960 Winter Olympics , the 80 @-@ meter hill was used for special jumping on 28 February , while the 60 @-@ meter hill was used for Nordic combined on 22 February . The special ski jumping event was won by Helmut <unk> of Germany , who also set a hill record of 93 @.@ 5 meters ( 307 ft ) . He was followed up by Finland 's <unk> Halonen and Austria 's Otto <unk> . In the ski jumping part of the Nordic combined event , Germany 's Georg Thoma received the highest points ahead of the Soviet Union 's Dmitriy <unk> and Norway 's Tormod Knutsen . The cross @-@ country part of the event took place at McKinney Creek Stadium . While Thoma won the discipline overall , Knutsen finished second overall ahead of the Soviet Union 's Nikolai Gusakov . In 1976 , the US National Championships in Ski Jumping were held at the large hill , and was won by Jim Denney . 
 = The God Complex = 
 " The God Complex " is the eleventh episode of the sixth series of the British television series Doctor Who , first broadcast on BBC One 17 September 2011 . It was written by Toby Whithouse and directed by Nick Hurran . 
 In the episode , alien time traveller the Doctor and his companions Amy Pond and her husband Rory find themselves trapped in what appears to be a 1980s hotel with constantly changing corridors . They meet Rita , Howie , Joe , and Gibbis , who have also appeared in the hotel , without any idea how they arrived . The Doctor learns that each hotel room contains the greatest fear of someone who has been in the hotel , and that a minotaur @-@ like creature is feeding off their fear . 
 Whithouse originally developed the concept of " The God Complex " for the previous series , but due to it being similar to episodes in that series , it was pushed back , with Whithouse contributing " The Vampires of Venice " instead . The episode ends with the departure of Amy and Rory , though this was not a permanent exit . " The God Complex " was filmed during the early months of 2011 , mainly on sets constructed for the hotel . The episode was seen by 6 @.@ 77 million viewers in the United Kingdom and received positive to mixed reviews from critics . While the performances in the episode , especially Smith 's , were praised , not all critics were impressed with the plot . 
 = = Plot = = 
 = = = Synopsis = = = 
 The TARDIS , while travelling to a new planet , arrives in what appears to be a 1980s Earth hotel , but the Doctor recognises it as an alien structure specifically designed to take that appearance . They soon meet a group of three individuals — humans Rita , Howie and the alien Gibbis — each of whom had previously been taken from their routine lives to find themselves in the hotel . They are also introduced to Joe , a human who has already succumbed to a madness that infects everyone who sets foot in the hotel , and so has been tied up for his own protection . The four explain that there is a beast in the hotel that consumes everyone who has been trapped here . It does this by enticing them to enter one of the many rooms in the hotel which contains their greatest fears , upon which they become brainwashed to " praise him " and allow themselves to be taken , their bodies left without any signs of life ; many others have experienced this , and photos of them and their fears cover many of the hotel 's walls . The hotel would seem inescapable — its doors and windows walled up — and its halls and rooms can change on a whim . The Doctor , Amy , and Rory soon find the TARDIS has also disappeared , and the Doctor warns them from opening any door they are drawn to , for fear of being possessed . 
 As the Doctor tries to ascertain the situation , the group is thrown into panic when they hear the beast coming for Joe , and hide in rooms where Rita and Gibbis face their fears . The Doctor spies the Minotaur @-@ like beast through a keyhole , just before Joe escapes from confinement and is killed . Howie soon becomes possessed after entering a room against the Doctor 's warnings . The remaining group set up a trap to lure the beast into the hotel 's hairdressing salon using Howie 's voice , upon which the Doctor questions the trapped creature and learns it is in agony wishing for its end . The Doctor realises the hotel is really a prison for the creature , and the " fears " in each room are harmless illusions . Howie also escapes from the group , allowing the beast to escape and chase him down , killing him before the Doctor can save him . While exploring more of the hotel , both Amy and the Doctor are separately lured to look into two specific rooms , facing their own fears . Rita also begins to praise the monster , and after thanking the Doctor for trying to save her , follows the fate of Joe and Howie . 
 The Doctor , Amy , Rory , and Gibbis regroup , and the Doctor surmises that the other three believed in some form of faith . The hotel and its rooms were , by design , meant to challenge their " faith " by fear to allow the beast to possess them . The Doctor identifies that Gibbis has survived due to the extreme cowardice of his species , while Rory lacks any such " faith " to be broken . However , the Doctor realises that it is Amy 's trust in him that is being challenged ; it is that faith that brought them to the hotel in the first place . Amy soon becomes possessed like the others . As the beast comes for Amy , the Doctor and the others grab her and take her to the room she opened previously . Inside , they find the illusion of young Amy , Amelia , still waiting for the return of her " raggedy Doctor " ( " The Eleventh Hour " ) . The Doctor asserts to Amy that he is " not a hero " but " just a mad man with a box " to break her blind trust in him ; once this is done , the beast outside the door collapses on the floor . 
 As they watch , the hotel is revealed to be part of a large simulation ; the Doctor identifies themselves aboard an automated prison spaceship , and the beast as a relative of the Nimon , a creature that feeds off the faith of others . The ship 's automated systems had provided it " food " by bringing aboard creatures who had a strong faith . The beast mutters that " death would be a gift " for the Doctor before it passes away . The Doctor finds his TARDIS nearby , Gibbis asks for a lift home and The Doctor then takes Amy and Rory to London , believing it best for the two to stop travelling with him before they end up getting killed . Giving them a new house and car , the Doctor sets off alone in the TARDIS . 
 = = = Continuity = = = 
 Several references to past Doctor Who species are displayed throughout the wall of photos of the past victims of the beast , including a Sontaran , a Judoon , a <unk> Sister of Plenitude and a Tritovore ( " Planet of the Dead " ) . The Doctor identifies the beast as being from a species that is distantly related to the Nimon , previously a foe in the serial The Horns of Nimon ; and the group witnesses two illusions of Weeping Angels , from the episodes " Blink " , " The Time of Angels " / " Flesh and Stone " . Though the audience is not shown the contents of the room ( numbered 11 ) that the Doctor is lured to open , the sound of the TARDIS ' cloister bell can be heard . Young Amelia is shown waiting for her " raggedy Doctor " to return from the episode " The Eleventh Hour . " The Doctor , being forced to break Amy 's faith in him , echoes a previous event in The Curse of <unk> where the Seventh Doctor is forced to break Ace 's faith in him . In a much later episode , the Eleventh Doctor 's swansong ( " The Time of the Doctor " ) , it is revealed that what the Doctor saw in Room 11 was the crack in reality that dominated his first series . 
 The episode also introduces the <unk> , a race of cowardly aliens who survive by <unk> allowing themselves to be conquered by other species on a regular basis . The season 9 episodes " Under the Lake " and " Before the Flood " feature another <unk> named <unk> , portrayed by Paul Kaye . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Writing = = = 
 Showrunner Steven Moffat originally pitched the episode to Toby Whithouse for the previous series with the idea of a hotel with shifting rooms . However , as production continued , Moffat thought that there were too many instances in which the characters were running through corridors in that series , so Whithouse wrote " The Vampires of Venice " instead and " The God Complex " was pushed to the next series . The idea to have a Minotaur be the monster came from Whithouse 's love for Greek mythology . Whithouse was more pleased with " The God Complex " than " School Reunion " and " The Vampires of Venice " , his previous Doctor Who scripts , as the tone was darker which he was " more comfortable " writing . 
 The first line of dialogue Whithouse wrote was the Doctor 's translation of the Minotaur 's words : " An ancient creature , drenched in the blood of the innocent , drifting in space through an endless shifting maze . For such a creature , death would be a gift " . The Minotaur then tells the Doctor he was not talking about himself , but rather the Doctor . This is foreshadowing of the upcoming event of the Doctor 's death , the story arc of the series . Amy and Rory 's departure in the episode was only temporary ; they return for the series finale , " The Wedding of River Song " and appear briefly at the end of the 2011 Christmas Special . They permanently leave in the fifth episode of the seventh series . 
 = = = Filming and costumes = = = 
 The read @-@ through for " The God Complex " took place in February 2011 . It was then filmed mainly on hotel sets constructed in the studio . The Doctor , Amy , and Rory 's first encounter with a fear in the hotel is the ventriloquist dummies found in Joe 's room ; Whithouse wanted to include something " big and bold " and noted that there was " something macabre about ventriloquist dummies " . Many members of the crew were brought in to operate the dummies , most of them having to lie underneath them on the floor . The actor who portrayed the Minotaur , Spencer Wilding , was six foot seven inches tall . Wilding received a costume fitting in early 2011 , after which the suit was dressed up with paint and fur . 
 David Walliams was asked to guest @-@ star in the episode in an email and he agreed , having been a fan of the show . He had previously appeared in the Fifth Doctor audio drama Phantasmagoria where he played two separate characters . Matt Smith called his co @-@ star " hilarious " and found it hard to take him seriously , as when he was in his prosthetics for the part he resembled a giant mole . The prosthetics took about two hours to apply . Walliams felt the make @-@ up was not limiting to his acting , finding it " quite expressive " . 
 = = Outside references = = 
 The hotel and setting has been compared to Stanley Kubrick 's film The Shining , using similar composition such as long corridor shots and odd angles . Critics also observed that the episode drew inspiration from George Orwell 's novel Nineteen Eighty @-@ Four , particularly in the concept of rooms ( or , in Orwell 's case , Room 101 ) containing each person 's deepest fear . Joe also quotes the old English nursery rhyme " Oranges and Lemons " , singing " Here comes a candle to light you to bed , here comes a chopper to chop off your head ! " . 
 = = Broadcast and reception = = 
 " The God Complex " was first broadcast in the United Kingdom on BBC One on 17 September 2011 and on the same date in the United States on BBC America . Overnight ratings showed that 5 @.@ 2 million viewers watched the episode on BBC One , beaten by direct competitor All @-@ Star Family Fortunes on ITV1 . This made Doctor Who third for the night behind The X Factor and Family Fortunes . The episode was ranked number 1 on BBC 's iPlayer the day after it aired service and was also popular on social networking site Twitter , where the phrase " Amy and Rory " trended the night it aired . When the final consolidated figures were calculated , an additional 1 @.@ 57 million time @-@ shifted viewers were added , bringing the total up to 6 @.@ 77 million . With these figures it beat Family Fortunes , which achieved a consolidated rating of only 5 @.@ 39 million viewers . The episode also received attention on BBC 's online iPlayer , where it placed fourth for the month of September . It was given an Appreciation Index of 86 , considered " excellent " . 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 The episode received positive to mixed reviews from critics . Radio Times reviewer Patrick Mulkern called Whithouse 's script " clever and original " and Walliams " endearing " as Gibbis , believing it was another entry into the series ' " fabulous " stand @-@ alone <unk> io9 's Charlie Jane Anders was also positive , especially of the way the Doctor 's character was explored through his overconfidence making others believe in him instead of themselves and praising Smith 's performance . Keith Phipps of The A.V. Club gave the episode a B + , praising the guest stars and the way the Doctor 's character was explored . Neela Debnath , writing for The Independent , also gave a positive review , praising the creepiness , Karan and Leonidas ' performances , and the sadness in the ending . However , she was surprised that Amy accepted the Doctor would be leaving her despite her wanting to find her child as seen earlier in the series . 
 Dan Martin of The Guardian praised the exits of Amy and Rory and highlighted Gillan and Smith 's performance , noting how more of his dark side is shown . Of the plot , he stated that it was " funny and thoughtful " but felt " like a runaround bolted on to make way for the ending " . Martin later rated it the fifth best episode of the series , though the finale was not included in the list . Digital Spy 's Morgan Jeffery wrote that Hurran " excelled " in directing and that the episode worked " incredibly well " on an emotional level . However , he felt it did not succeed as well in terms of plot , citing the " thin explanation " for the happenings . Gavin Fuller of The Daily Telegraph awarded the episode three and a half out of five stars , stating that " the surreal tone to the episode ... helped camouflage the fact that the plot made very little sense " . However , he praised the cast 's " impressive performances " , especially Smith 's . 
 Dave Golder of SFX also gave " The God Complex " three and a half out of five stars , questioning some logical aspects but noting that it was " extremely witty , particularly when it comes to David Walliams 's cowardly <unk> Gibbis " . He also did not believe Amy and Rory would be gone for long , especially as the Doctor had placed them in more perilous situations before . IGN 's Matt Risely rated the episode 7 out of 10 , calling it " a notably wonky episode , both in terms of tone and plot development " that came off as " a confused , slightly ill @-@ fitting hodgepodge of a tale " . While he praised Hurran 's directing and the performances of Walliams and Karan , he felt the characters were sidelined near the end . Risely noted that " things certainly <unk> along with a witty , sparkling vibrancy at least early on " , but the tone " lost its way halfway through " culminating in a " hollow and rushed " final scene where he left Amy and Rory . 
 = Jessica Gomes = 
 Jessica Gomes ( Chinese : <unk> , born 25 September 1985 ) is an Australian model who has appeared in the Swimsuit Issue of the American Publication Sports Illustrated since 2008 . She works extensively in Australia and Asia . She has strong followings in Korea and in the East Coast hip hop community . 
 Gomes is the featured spokesperson for Australian corporations David Jones Limited . She has also been a spokesperson for Korean conglomerates LG Electronics and Hyundai . Gomes served as the face of the <unk> Lauder / Sean John fragrance " Unforgivable " . She has been revealed as the voice of Rick Ross ' label Maybach Music Group . An early LG ad campaign is considered her breakout performance . 
 = = Modelling career = = 
 She is the daughter of a Portuguese father , Joe Gomes and a Chinese mother , Jenny . Although sources such as her Fashion Model Directory listing contain a Perth , Western Australia , birthplace , other sources state that Gomes was born in Sydney or nearby Wahroonga in New South Wales . Gomes says she was born in Sydney . She was raised in Perth . Ocean Drive writer Peter Cullum presents one of the more detailed biographical sketches of Gomes in which he claims she first lived in Sydney and then the family " opted out of Sydney for the <unk> isolation of Western Australia " where she had " a semi @-@ rural tomboy childhood " . She is the youngest child in her family that includes two older sisters and an older brother . Gomes ' mother sent her to modelling classes at Linda @-@ Ann Model Academy in Perth suburb Midland at the age of 13 . There her acting led to a modeling contest and the start of her career . In 2004 , she signed with IMG Models after moving to New York City . She has avoided Paris and Milan and done extensive work in most of Asia 's major markets — including Tokyo , Seoul , Hong Kong , Beijing , and Shanghai — where she feels mixed heritage models are more successful . According to Diane Smith , senior editor of the Sports Illustrated Swimsuit Issue , she is regarded as a " nontraditional " beauty and in her Australian homeland she is regarded for her multiracial background . 
 = = = Campaigns = = = 
 Gomes has enjoyed much success through South Korean advertising campaigns . In 2007 she appeared in advertisements for Hyundai Sonata . The following year , she appeared in an advertisement for LG Cyon Bikini Phone , in which she promoted the split screen cellphone wearing a two @-@ piece bikini , under the tagline " Touch the Wonder . " This ad campaign is credited as having pushed Gomes to stardom in South Korea . Her popularity grew , and by 2013 between her <unk> and Korean television show appearances , she had reached celebrity status . 
 Beyond her Korean success , Gomes has appeared in Vogue , Teen Vogue , Glamour , American Glamour and Victoria 's Secret catalogue , has modeled for DKNY Jeans , Garnier , Levi 's , Motorola , Urban Outfitters and Victoria 's Secret , and appeared on the cover of Biba . She signed with <unk> Lauder as the face of Sean John 's Unforgivable fragrance . She has been featured in ads for Jay @-@ Z Rocawear . In 2009 , she was in a Cass Beer ad campaign with Lee Min Ho . She was the Maxim Cover girl for November 2011 . On Friday 22 March 2013 , Gomes was announced as the fashion ambassador for Australian retail giant David Jones Limited , replacing Miranda Kerr and joining Megan Gale , Jason Dundas , Montana Cox , Gai Waterhouse and Emma Freedman . That July , she debuted for Jones on the runway . After Gomes became the face of <unk> Cosmetics , she launched a lip gloss named Gomes Pink . Gomes has also shot editorials for the Australian and Vietnamese editions of Harper 's Bazaar and graced the cover of Cleo . 
 = = = Sex symbol = = = 
 Gomes was listed at number 34 , 8 and 94 in the 2012 , 2013 and 2014 AskMen international poll of " world 's most desirable women " . She is listed at number 25 in the Maxim 's Top 25 Hottest Females of 2012 and number 8 in Maxim Australia 's Hot 100 of 2012 . In 2013 , she was listed at number 6 . 
 By 2015 she had appeared in eight Sports Illustrated Swimsuit Issues ( 2008 – 2015 ) . In 2008 , she was part of a record group of seven " rookie " Swimsuit Issue models , along with Quiana Grant , Melissa Haro , Yasmin Brunet , Melissa Baker , <unk> <unk> and <unk> Mariano . That year , she was featured in a bodypainting layout as a canvas for <unk> artist Joanne Gair . By the time of her fifth consecutive Swimsuit issue , she had surpassed all models of Asian heritage . 
 = = = Television = = = 
 Before Gomes began modeling in Midland , she appeared as an extra at age 10 on the Australian miniseries Bush Patrol which led to a modeling . While she lived in New York City , she studied at the Stella Adler Studio of Acting . Her Chinese @-@ Portuguese heritage has contributed to her popularity in the Asian market , and in 2009 , her reality TV @-@ show My Name Is Jessica Gomes was launched on the English language Korean television network On Style owned by On @-@ Media . In the shows second season it chronicled her time in New York . She is regarded as a choreographer and made her dancing debut in the Korean version of Dancing with the Stars on June 10 , 2011 . She placed third that season . 
 = = = Other = = = 
 Gomes has a variety of East Coast Hip Hop connections . In January 2012 , Gomes was revealed as the voice behind saying the name of Rick Ross ' label Maybach Music Group at the beginning of certain tracks that the company produces . She is " name @-@ checked " in the Kanye West GOOD Fridays song " Christian Dior Denim Flow " . Gomes participated as a celebrity driver in a promotional celebrity challenge racing event by Mazda associated with the 2013 Australian Grand Prix . Gomes also starred in <unk> 's music video " Crown " . 
 = = Personal = = 
 Gomes was born in Perth , Australia , and has an older brother . She counts Australian Elle MacPherson and the multiracial model China Machado , the first non @-@ White model to appear on the cover of a US fashion magazine , as her role models . She dined with Perth native and friend Heath Ledger in New York the day before he died . 
 In 2005 , Gomes moved to New York City and was a roommate of Gemma Ward . She formerly attended La Salle College . She continued to live in New York at the time of her Swimsuit Issue debut in 2008 and as late as 2011 . Gomes ' mother was born in Hong Kong and grew up in Singapore and her father is from Portugal before spending time in Paris . Both emigrated to Australia in the 1970s . 
 = Good Girl Gone Bad = 
 Good Girl Gone Bad is the third studio album by Barbadian singer Rihanna . It was released on May 31 , 2007 , by Def Jam Recordings and SRP Records . Rihanna worked with various producers on the album , including Christopher " Tricky " Stewart , Terius " Dream " Nash , Neo da Matrix , Timbaland , Carl Sturken , Evan Rogers and StarGate . Inspired by Brandy Norwood 's fourth studio album Afrodisiac ( 2004 ) , Good Girl Gone Bad is a pop , dance @-@ pop and R & B album with 1980s music influences . Described as a turning point in Rihanna 's career , it represents a departure from the Caribbean sound of her previous releases , Music of the Sun ( 2005 ) and A Girl like Me ( 2006 ) . Apart from the sound , she also endorsed a new image for the release going from an innocent girl to an edgier and more sexual look . 
 Critics gave generally positive reviews of the album , praising its composition and Rihanna 's new musical direction , though some criticized the record 's lyrics and inconsistency . The album received seven Grammy Award nominations and one win in the Best Rap / Sung Collaboration category for " Umbrella " at the 2008 ceremony . The album debuted at number two on the US Billboard 200 chart and sold 162 @,@ 000 copies in its first week . Certified quintuple platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) , it sold more than 2 @.@ 8 million copies in the United States . The album reached number one in Canada , Switzerland and the United Kingdom , and it has sold over 7 million copies worldwide . 
 Good Girl Gone Bad spawned five singles , including the international hits " Umbrella " and " Don 't Stop the Music " ; Rolling Stone placed the former at number 412 on the magazine 's 500 Greatest Songs of All Time list . In support of the album , Rihanna embarked on her first worldwide concert tour , the Good Girl Gone Bad Tour . The album was reissued as Good Girl Gone Bad : Reloaded in June 2008 with three new songs , including the Billboard Hot 100 number @-@ one hits " Take a Bow " and " Disturbia " . It was followed by Rihanna 's first remix album , Good Girl Gone Bad : The Remixes , in January 2009 , which featured remixes from Moto Blanco , Tony Moran , the Soul Seekerz and the Wideboys . 
 = = Background and title = = 
 Rihanna 's second studio album , A Girl like Me , was released in April 2006 . It is a pop @-@ oriented record with dancehall and R & B influences . It had a mixed critical reception : some critics praised Rihanna 's new musical direction , while others criticized some of the album 's songs . Around its time of release , many critics felt that Rihanna 's style , sound , and musical material were too similar to those of American singer Beyoncé . The album sold over 587 @,@ 308 copies in the United Kingdom and more than 1 @,@ 330 @,@ 000 copies in the United States . 
 In early 2007 , Rihanna began work on her third studio album . In an interview with MTV News , she announced that " the new music is going in a different direction . Not on purpose , but I just want to hear something fresh and mostly uptempo . I think that 's where I want to go on this one . You feel different every album , and [ at ] this stage I feel like I want to do a lot of uptempo [ songs ] . " The same year , Rihanna dismissed her innocent image for an edgier look with a new hairstyle , which was inspired by actress Charlize Theron 's bob cut in the 2005 science fiction thriller Æon Flux . 
 Rihanna explained that she wanted to keep the audience dancing and be soulful at the same time . She sought to make an album that people would listen to without skipping tracks . She cited Afrodisiac ( 2004 ) , the fourth studio album by American singer Brandy Norwood , as her main inspiration for the album . In May 2007 , Rihanna revealed that she called the album Good Girl Gone Bad because it represents her bolder and more independent image : " I 'm not the innocent Rihanna anymore . I 'm taking a lot more risks and chances . I felt when I cut my hair , it shows people I 'm not trying to look or be anybody else . The album is very edgy . " 
 = = Recording and production = = 
 Good Girl Gone Bad was recorded in Westlake Recording Studios and Conway Studios in Los Angeles , Battery Studios and Roc the Mic Studios in New York City , Chicago Recording Company and Pressure Studios in Chicago , Phase One Audio Group in Toronto , Lethal Studios in Bridgetown , Barbados , Espionage Studios in Oslo and Parr Street Studios in Liverpool . Rihanna spent the week of the 2007 Grammy Awards working with American R & B singer @-@ songwriter Ne @-@ Yo , who gave her vocal lessons . They wrote and sang " Hate That I Love You " , which was co @-@ written and produced by Norwegian duo StarGate . Ne @-@ Yo told Vibe magazine , " The best way to express an emotion like love is through storytelling . It makes it more ' I can relate to this character in this song , because I 've been through something similar . ' You hear that kind of storytelling in the song that I wrote for Rihanna called ' Hate That I Love You ' . " 
 American producers Tricky Stewart and Dream had written the track " Umbrella " in 2007 with pop singer Britney Spears in mind . Her label rejected the song before she could hear it , stating they had enough songs for her to record ; at the time , Spears was working on her fifth studio album Blackout . The producers then reached out to Mary J. Blige , who did not have time to consider the song for her next album . Finally , L.A. Reid , then @-@ CEO of Def Jam Recordings , bought the record and forwarded it to Rihanna . Initially , Stewart was unsure whether Rihanna was the right artist for the song , but after they had recorded the " ella , ella " catch phrase for the track , he felt optimistic . Rapper Jay Z added rap vocals . Stewart also co @-@ wrote and produced " Breakin ' Dishes " with Nash . 
 " Rehab " , " Sell Me Candy " , and " Lemme Get That " were composed and produced by Timbaland for the album . He was on the FutureSex / LoveShow concert tour with Justin Timberlake to promote Timberlake 's 2006 album FutureSex / LoveSounds . After a show in Chicago , they joined Rihanna in the studio , where Timberlake experimented with beats and melodies . Weeks later , the three met in New York City , where Timberlake had conceptualized a song for Rihanna . Timbaland , who penned a song for Rihanna under the title " Rehab " , was producing a beat , over which Timberlake improvised his lyrics . Hannon Lane also co @-@ wrote and co @-@ produced the song . Timberlake told Entertainment Weekly that he believed " Rehab " to be " the bridge for [ Rihanna ] to be accepted as an adult in the music industry " . Rihanna told Robert Copsey of Digital Spy that she enjoyed working with Timberlake , and learned much from the sessions . 
 = = Composition = = 
 A dance @-@ pop and pop / R & B album influenced by 1980s music , Good Girl Gone Bad is a departure from the Caribbean sound of Rihanna 's previous two records . Lyrically , the album is close to some teen pop records , " where sexual @-@ ism and consumerism supersede personal connection . " 
 The LP opens with the lead single " Umbrella " , an R & B song performed with drums and thundercloud synths . Dorian Lynskey of The Guardian compared the singer 's vocals to the voices of Ciara and Cassie . The second track , " Push Up On Me " , features echo electro claps and surging synths . " Don 't Stop the Music " is a dance @-@ pop and techno song that contains rhythmic devices used mainly in hip hop music . The song samples the line " Mama @-@ say , mama @-@ sa , ma @-@ ma @-@ ko @-@ ssa " from Michael Jackson 's 1983 single " Wanna Be Startin ' Somethin ' " . The fourth song is " Breakin ' Dishes " ; Peter Robinson of The Observer called it a " wronged @-@ woman bonanza , packed with hooks , chants and flashes of lyrical brilliance . " " Shut Up and Drive " is a new wave and pop rock song , influenced by 1970s and 1980s musical styles , sampling New Order 's 1983 single " Blue Monday " . The collaboration with Ne @-@ Yo , " Hate That I Love You " , is a folky R & B song ; Nick Levine of Digital Spy compared it to Ne @-@ Yo 's singles " Sexy Love " and " Because of You " . 
 The seventh track on the album , " Say It " , samples the 1990s song " Flex " by Mad Cobra ; it consists of silky and warm groove and features island @-@ oriented music characteristics . " Sell Me Candy " features jumbled and noisy production with chaotic beats . The ninth song , " Lemme Get That " , has boom @-@ bap beats and is produced by Timbaland . " Rehab " is an old @-@ styled R & B track with a groove that is built around tambourine shakes , acoustic guitar swirls and a subtle backbeat . Doug Rule of Metro Weekly noted similarities among the structures of " Rehab " and Timberlake 's 2002 single " Cry Me a River " . " Question Existing " is an " eerie , smoky , destitute , emotional , and a sonic sidestep . " Tom Breihan of Pitchfork Media described the opening lyrics of the song as inspired by " puerile <unk> " . The album concludes with the title track " Good Girl Gone Bad " , which is played with an acoustic guitar and click tracks . 
 = = Singles = = 
 Released as the lead single from Good Girl Gone Bad , " Umbrella " was sent to contemporary hit , rhythmic and urban radio in the US on April 24 , 2007 . The song received acclaim from music critics , who praised its production , vocals and the collaboration between Rihanna and Jay Z. " Umbrella " reached number one in more than seventeen countries worldwide , including on the UK Singles Chart and the US Billboard Hot 100 chart . In the United Kingdom , the song topped the singles chart for ten consecutive weeks , while in the United States , it was at the top for seven consecutive weeks . As of June 2013 , " Umbrella " has sold 4 @,@ 236 @,@ 000 digital copies there , making it Rihanna 's fifth @-@ best selling single in the country . Director Chris Applebaum shot the accompanying music video , which features scenes of Rihanna nude and covered in silver paint . The video earned the singer nominations at the 2007 MTV Video Music Awards for Best Direction , Video of the Year and Monster Single of the Year ; it won the latter two . 
 The second single from the album , " Shut Up and Drive " , was serviced to contemporary hit radio in the US on June 12 and rhythmic radio the following week . The song received mixed response from critics : some praised the composition , while others criticized the lyrics . It reached the top ten on more than twelve national charts , including number five on the UK Singles Chart and number 15 on the US Billboard Hot 100 . The music video for the song was shot by Anthony Mandler in Prague , the Czech Republic . The third single , " Hate That I Love You " , which features Ne @-@ Yo , was sent to contemporary hit , rhythmic and urban radio in the United States on August 21 . Critics gave the song positive reviews and praised the collaboration between the singers ; they compared it to the previous works written by Ne @-@ Yo , including the song " Irreplaceable " by Beyoncé . " Hate That I Love You " reached number seven on the US Billboard Hot 100 and number 15 on the UK Singles Chart . 
 " Don 't Stop the Music " was digitally released as an EP via the iTunes Store on September 7 . The song received positive reviews from music critics , who praised its production and the interpolation of the " Mama @-@ say , mama @-@ sa , ma @-@ ma @-@ ko @-@ ssa " hook . " Don 't Stop the Music " won Best International Song at the 2008 NRJ Music Awards . The single peaked atop of the singles charts in eight countries , reaching number three on the Hot 100 and number four on the UK Singles Chart . It is the seventh @-@ best selling single by Rihanna in the United States , with 3 @,@ 521 @,@ 000 digital copies sold as of June 2013 . Mandler shot the music video in a nightclub in Prague , the Czech Republic . " Rehab " was released as the fifth and final single from Good Girl Gone Bad ; it was sent to contemporary hit radio in the United States on October 6 , 2008 . Critics were divided on the song 's production and composition , and some compared its structure to that of Timberlake 's 2007 single " What Goes Around ... Comes Around " . It reached number 16 on the UK Singles Chart and number 18 on the US Billboard Hot 100 chart . Anthony Mandler directed the accompanying music video , which was shot in Vasquez Rocks Park , near Los Angeles . Timberlake also appears in the video . 
 = = Marketing = = 
 = = = Release = = = 
 Good Girl Gone Bad was first released by the Universal Music Group on CD in Portugal on May 31 , 2007 . It was released in the Netherlands and in Poland the following day . The album was launched in Finland and the United Kingdom on June 4 and in the United States the following day on CD and LP . Good Girl Gone Bad was released on CD in Germany on June 8 , on LP in Australia on June 12 and on CD in New Zealand on the same date . A deluxe edition of the album , featuring a bonus disc with dance remixes , was launched on June 27 in Japan . 
 In early 2008 , Rihanna unveiled a new song , " Take a Bow " , on the KIIS @-@ FM radio show On Air with Ryan Seacrest . MTV News reported that the track would serve as the lead single from Good Girl Gone Bad : Reloaded , a reissue of the original album to mark its first anniversary . Rihanna further announced that the expanded album would contain another two songs , " Disturbia " and the duet with American pop rock band Maroon 5 , titled " If I Never See Your Face Again " to supplement the original track listing . Among other achieved awards and nominations , " Disturbia " and " If I Never See Your Face Again " received nominations for Best Dance Recording and Pop Collaboration with Vocals respectively at the 2009 Grammy Awards . 
 Good Girl Gone Bad : The Remixes was released on January 27 , 2009 , and contains club remixes of tracks from the original album and the re @-@ issue . The songs were remixed by producers and disc jockeys such as Moto Blanco , Tony Moran , Soul Seekerz and Wideboys . Good Girl Gone Bad : The Remixes peaked at number 106 on the Billboard 200 and number four on the US Billboard Dance / Electronic Albums chart . As of July 2010 , it sold 49 @,@ 000 copies in the United States . 
 = = = Live performances = = = 
 Rihanna performed " Umbrella " with " Shut Up and Drive " and " Breakin ' Dishes " at BBC Radio 1 's Big Weekend on May 21 , 2007 . She performed " Umbrella " with Jay Z at the 2007 MTV Movie Awards at the Gibson Amphitheatre , Universal City , California , on June 3 . A reviewer of Rap @-@ Up wrote , " she looked hot and the production was on point " during the performance . She performed the song at the Tonight Show with Jay Leno on June 5 and on June 16 at The View . Rihanna performed " Shut Up and Drive " at the 2007 MTV Video Music Awards at The Palms in Las Vegas , and was joined by American rock band Fall Out Boy . In early October 2007 , Rihanna was the guest star at the Late Show with David Letterman , where she gave a performance of " Shut Up and Drive " . On November 18 , Rihanna performed a medley consisting of " Umbrella " and " Hate That I Love You " at the 2007 American Music Awards at the Nokia Theater in Los Angeles , California . Ne @-@ Yo accompanied her for the performance of " Hate That I Love You " . 
 Rihanna performed " Don 't Stop the Music " at the 2008 NRJ Music Awards in Cannes , France , on January 26 , 2008 . She also performed the song at the 50th Grammy Awards on February 10 in a medley with " Umbrella " . For the performance , she was joined by American funk band , The Time . On April 28 , 2008 , Rihanna performed at the Pepsi Center with Kanye West , N.E.R.D and Lupe Fiasco . She sang " Rehab " , " Hate That I Love You " , " Don 't Stop the Music " and " Umbrella " . On June 20 , she was a guest on NBC 's Today Concert Series in Rockefeller Center , New York City . She performed " Don 't Stop the Music " , " Umbrella " and " Take a Bow " . She also performed " Rehab " live on November 23 , 2008 , at the 2008 American Music Awards , where she won the awards for Favorite Pop / Rock Female Artist and Favorite Soul / R & B Female Artist . At the awards ceremony , she performed wearing an eye patch , which she removed after she was lowered to the main stage . 
 = = = Tour = = = 
 To further promote the album , Rihanna embarked on her first worldwide and second overall tour , the Good Girl Gone Bad Tour ( 2007 – 09 ) . She performed in Europe , North America , Oceania , Asia and Africa . During the concert shows she wore S & M @-@ inspired outfits and high boots . Mike Usinger of The Georgia Straight gave the show a mixed review ; he wrote that even though Rihanna 's vocals were improved , he felt she still struggled to keep the audience engaged . Jason MacNeil of Canadian Online Explorer gave a positive review of the concert after the show at Molson Amphitheatre , saying " the singer made a rather eye @-@ popping impression , opening with ' Pon de Replay ' and clad in a sexy , dominatrix @-@ like studded black leather ensemble . " During a show planned for February 13 in Malaysia , Malaysia 's conservative Islamic party recommended that Rihanna 's concert tour be banned from performing , citing her outfits . A video album , Good Girl Gone Bad Live , was filmed at the Manchester Arena show in Manchester , United Kingdom , on December 6 , 2007 . The Good Girl Gone Bad Live DVD was released on June 9 and 13 , 2008 , in the United Kingdom and Germany through Mercury Records and the Universal Music Group respectively . 
 = = Critical response = = 
 Good Girl Gone Bad received generally favorable reviews from music critics . At Metacritic , which assigns a normalized rating out of 100 to reviews from mainstream critics , the album received an average score of 72 based on 16 reviews . Uncut called it a " shiny , trans @-@ atlantic blend of Europop vim , R & B grit and Caribbean bounce . " Andy Kellman of AllMusic deemed it quintessential pop music and said each of its tracks was a potential hit . Quentin B. Huff of PopMatters praised the album , describing it as " more raw , perhaps edgier and more risqué " than Rihanna 's previous material . Kelefa Sanneh of The New York Times wrote that the album " sounds as if it were scientifically engineered to deliver hits " . Peter Robinson of The Observer commended her collaborators for " masking her own shortcomings " and commented that , " While Rihanna lacks her peers ' charisma , she 's a great vessel for exhilarating mainstream pop . " Pitchfork Media 's Tom Breihan found the album varied and satisfying . Neil Drumming of Entertainment Weekly felt that , although it " goes bad when Rihanna tries her hand at treacly ballads and glum sentiment " , at times Good Girl Gone Bad is a " thrilling throwback to more than a decade ago , when upstart producers haphazardly mashed R & B with hip @-@ hop to create chunky jeep anthems such as Mary J. Blige 's ' Real Love ' . " 
 In a mixed review , Rodney Dugue of The Village Voice felt that the album " never settles on a sound " and only cited its three Timbaland @-@ produced songs as highlights . Although he found the ballads to be improvements from Rihanna 's previous albums , Slant Magazine 's Sal Cinquemani criticized the lyrics , particularly those written by Justin Timberlake , as an " Achilles ' high heel for Rihanna " . Alex Macpherson of The Guardian found Rihanna to be " ill @-@ suited " for its dance @-@ pop songs and stated , " The gimmicky samples and pounding beats bury her personality , and the summery reggae of her first two albums is sorely missed . " Robert Christgau of MSN Music cited " Umbrella " as a " choice cut " , indicating " a good song on an album that isn 't worth your time or money " . 
 = = Commercial performance = = 
 In the United States , Good Girl Gone Bad debuted at number two on the Billboard 200 chart , selling 162 @,@ 000 copies in its first week . It became Rihanna 's then @-@ best start album entry . The next week , it fell to number seven with 81 @,@ 000 copies sold . The re @-@ issue sold 63 @,@ 000 copies in the first week and helped Good Girl Gone Bad jump from number 124 to number seven on the US Billboard 200 in its 55th week . It was certified quintuple platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) ; by November 2013 , both Good Girl Gone Bad and the reissue had sold 2 @,@ 800 @,@ 000 copies in the United States alone . To date , it is her best @-@ selling album in the former country . The album debuted atop of the Canadian Albums Chart and became Rihanna 's second number @-@ one album in the country . It was certified quintuple platinum by Music Canada , denoting shipments of more than 500 @,@ 000 copies . 
 Good Girl Gone Bad debuted at number one on the UK Albums Chart . It became her first album to top the chart , and stayed on the chart for 177 weeks . In 2011 , the album peaked at number 16 on the UK R & B Albums Chart . It was certified sextuple platinum by the British Phonographic Industry ( BPI ) and sold over 1 @,@ 850 @,@ 000 copies in the country . It ended at number 10 on the UK 2007 year @-@ end list and number six on the 2008 year @-@ end list . As of March 2015 , Good Girl Gone Bad is the 46th best @-@ selling album of the millennium in the United Kingdom . In Ireland , Good Girl Gone Bad debuted at number three on the Irish Singles Chart on June 7 , 2007 . After four weeks on the chart , it reached the top . The album peaked at number one on the Swiss Hitparade chart and stayed on the chart for 91 weeks . In Australia , it peaked at number two and was certified triple platinum by the Australian Recording Industry Association ( ARIA ) , denoting shipments of over 210 @,@ 000 copies . By November 2011 , Good Girl Gone Bad had sold over 11 million copies worldwide . 
 = = Impact = = 
 According to <unk> , Good Girl Gone Bad inspired Rihanna to transform her image from a " teen pop princess " persona into a " fully fledged superstar and sex symbol " . People magazine noted that Rihanna follows the likes of recording artists Janet Jackson and Christina Aguilera " when she sheds her innocent image for an edgier look and sound " . Jay @-@ Z also spoke about " Umbrella " and stated that the song represents an artistic grow for Rihanna , " If you listen to the lyrics to that song , you know the depth and how far she 's come . " Regarding the commercial impact of the album , Entertainment Weekly 's Margeaux Watson wrote , " For a pop star who was once dismissed as being incapable of yielding more than one hit song per album , Rihanna 's newfound staying power is nothing short of remarkable – and proof that there 's room for more than one diva in this game . " Jason Birchmeier of AllMusic concluded that it was Good Girl Gone Bad that made Rihanna a " full @-@ fledged international pop star with a regular presence atop the charts " . Nick Levine of Digital Spy described the album , as the closest thing to a Thriller that 2007 / 08 is likely to produce . 
 At the 2008 Grammy Awards ceremony , Good Girl Gone Bad received seven Grammy Awards nominations , including Record of the Year and Song of the Year for " Umbrella " , Best Dance Recording for " Don 't Stop the Music " , Best R & B Performance by a Duo or Group with Vocals and Best R & B Song for " Hate That I Love You " . It won the accolade for Best Rap / Sung Collaboration for " Umbrella " . Additionally , magazine Rolling Stone placed " Umbrella " at number 412 on their 500 Greatest Songs of All Time list . The album also won the International Album of the Year award at the 2008 Juno Awards . 
 Before its physical release , " Umbrella " achieved the biggest debut in the six @-@ year history of the iTunes Store in the United States , breaking a record previously held by the 2006 single " Hips Don 't Lie " . Following its digital release , the song debuted atop the Hot Digital Songs chart , with first @-@ week sales of more than 277 @,@ 000 units . The single became the highest digital debut in the United States since Nielsen SoundScan began tracking downloads in 2003 , surpassing Timberlake 's " SexyBack " 250 @,@ 000 sales record in 2006 . 
 = = Track listings = = 
 Notes 
 ^ a denotes a vocal producer 
