 ^ b denotes a co @-@ producer 
 ^ c denotes a remixer and additional producer 
 " Push Up on Me " samples " Running with the Night " , as written by Lionel Richie and Cynthia Weil , and performed by Richie . 
 " Don 't Stop the Music " samples " Wanna Be Startin ' Somethin ' " , as written and performed by Michael Jackson , which itself samples " Soul Makossa " , as performed by Manu Dibango . 
 " Shut Up and Drive " samples " Blue Monday " , as written and performed by New Order ( Stephen Morris , Peter Hook , Bernard Sumner and Gillian Gilbert ) . 
 " Say It " samples " Flex " , as written by Ewart Brown , Clifton Dillon , Sly Dunbar and Brian Thompson , and performed by Mad Cobra . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Credits for Good Girl Gone Bad adapted from AllMusic . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Thomas Hutchinson ( governor ) = 
 Thomas Hutchinson ( 9 September 1711 – 3 June 1780 ) was a businessman , historian , and a prominent Loyalist politician of the Province of Massachusetts Bay in the years before the American Revolution . A successful merchant and politician , Hutchinson was active at high levels of the Massachusetts government for many years , serving as lieutenant governor and then governor from 1758 to 1774 . He was a politically polarising figure who , despite initial opposition to Parliamentary tax laws directed at the colonies , came to be identified by John Adams and Samuel Adams as a proponent of hated British taxes . He was blamed by Lord North ( the British Prime Minister at the time ) for being a significant contributor to the tensions that led the outbreak of the American Revolutionary War . 
 Hutchinson 's Boston mansion was ransacked in 1765 during protests against the Stamp Act , damaging his collection of materials on early Massachusetts history . As acting governor in 1770 he exposed himself to mob attack in the aftermath of the Boston massacre , after which he ordered the removal of troops from Boston to Castle William . Letters of his calling for abridgement of colonial rights were published in 1773 , further intensifying dislike of him in the colony . He was replaced as governor in May 1774 by General Thomas Gage , and went into exile in England , where he advised the government on how to deal with the Americans . 
 Hutchinson had a deep interest in colonial history , collecting a large number of historical documents . He wrote a three volume History of the Province of Massachusetts Bay , whose last volume , published posthumously , covered his own period in office . Historian Bernard Bailyn wrote of Hutchinson , " If there was one person in America whose actions might have altered the outcome [ of the protests and disputes preceding the American Revolutionary War ] , it was he . " Scholars use Hutchinson 's career to represent the tragic fate of the many Loyalists marginalized by their attachment to an outmoded imperial structure at a time when the modern nation @-@ state was emerging . <unk> by his ideology and his dual loyalties to America and Britain , Hutchinson exemplifies the Loyalist @-@ as @-@ loser . He sacrificed his love for Massachusetts to his uncritical loyalty to Great Britain , where he spent his last years in unhappy exile . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Thomas Hutchinson was born on 9 September 1711 in the North End of Boston , the fourth of twelve children of Thomas and Sarah Foster Hutchinson . Descended from early New England settlers ( including Anne Hutchinson by her son , Edward Hutchinson ) , his parents were both from well @-@ to @-@ do merchant families . His father was involved in the family mercantile trade , but was also active in political , military , and charitable circles and served on the provincial council . 
 Young Thomas entered Harvard College at twelve , graduating in 1727 . His father introduced him to the business world early , and he displayed remarkable business acumen . According to his autobiographical sketch of his childhood , Hutchinson turned a modest gift of " five <unk> of fish " from his father into between £ 400 and £ 500 by the time he was 21 . In 1732 he received some exposure to politics when he accompanied Governor Jonathan Belcher on a voyage to Casco Bay for negotiations with the Abenaki of Maine , then part of Massachusetts . The voyage was made in a vessel of which Hutchinson was part owner . In 1734 he married Margaret Sanford , a granddaughter of Rhode Island Governor Peleg Sanford . The Sanford and Hutchinson families had a long history of business and personal connections ; Margaret was in fact a distant relative . { Mrs. Hutchinson was also descended from Rhode Island governor William Coddington } The Marriage secured a political alliance between Hutchinson and Andrew and Peter Oliver which lasted long after Margaret 's death . Mary Sanford 's sister Mary { 1713 @-@ 1773 } was the second wife of Andrew Oliver . Likewise a daughter of Thomas Hutchinson married a son of Peter Oliver . The Oliver brothers were also related to Massachusetts governor Jonathan Belcher and to New Hampshire Lt <unk> . William Partridge and George Vaughan ( Harvard Class of 1696 ) . The couple had twelve children , only five of whom survived to adulthood , before Margaret died in 1754 from complications of childbirth . 
 = = Legislator and councillor = = 
 In 1737 Hutchinson entered politics , being elected as a Boston selectman , and later in the year , to a seat in the General Court ( the provincial assembly ) . He spoke out against the province 's practice of issuing bills of credit ( as a form of paper currency ) , whose inflationary drop in value wrought havoc in the economy . This position was unpopular with the populist party in the province , and Hutchinson was voted out in the 1739 election . He was sent to England as an agent to plead on behalf of property owners affected by King George II 's decision concerning the boundary line between Massachusetts and New Hampshire which significantly favored New Hampshire . Hutchinson 's embassy was unsuccessful , although he returned with a bequest to Harvard for the construction of a new chapel ; Holden Chapel , built with these funds , still stands today . 
 In 1742 Hutchinson was again elected to the General Court , where he served until 1749 , being the body 's speaker from 1746 to 1749 . His continued advocacy of currency reforms so annoyed the populist faction that the need to guard his properties in Boston and Milton from possible mob action was discussed . When the British government was convinced to refund the province 's expense for mounting the 1745 Louisbourg expedition , Hutchinson seized upon the idea of using the massive payment ( about £ 180 @,@ 000 in gold and silver ) to retire the province 's paper currency . Despite significant opposition , Hutchinson successfully navigated a bill implementing the idea through the assembly 's general court in 1749 ; it received the agreement of the Governor 's Council , and also the signature of Governor William Shirley . Many of the bill 's opponents were pleasantly surprised when the exchange of paper for specie did not cause any financial shocks , and Hutchinson 's popularity soared . 
 Despite the success , Hutchinson was voted out of the assembly in 1749 . He was , however , immediately appointed to the Governor 's Council . In 1749 he headed a commission to arrange a treaty with the Indians in the District of Maine , which was then part of Massachusetts , and he served on boundary commissions to settle disputes with Connecticut and Rhode Island . In 1752 he was appointed judge of probate and a justice of the Common Pleas . Following the outbreak of the French and Indian War in 1754 , he was a delegate to the Albany Convention . In that meeting he took a leading part in the discussions , working with Benjamin Franklin to draft a plan for colonial union . Hutchinson agreed with Franklin that the present disunity endangered the British colonies , and that decisive action must be taken to knit the too @-@ often @-@ competing colonies into a coherent whole . Most important , the report drafted by Hutchinson concluded that the colonies must be encouraged to establish " a Union of His Majesty 's several governments on the continent , that so their councils , treasure , and strength may be employed in due proportion against their common enemy " . 
 Hutchinson 's wife died quite suddenly in 1754 ; Hutchinson thereafter threw himself into his work . His work was not entirely of a political nature : in a humanitarian streak he supported Acadian refugees who had been expelled from their Nova Scotia homelands , even though this support of Roman Catholics did not gain him friends in Protestant Massachusetts . He was also sensitive to the needs of the military men involved in the war , often giving aid to needy families of veterans . 
 = = Lieutenant Governor of Massachusetts = = 
 When Governor Shirley 's political opponents engineered his recall in 1757 , Hutchinson sought and received the endorsement of the British military leader Lord Loudoun in an effort to succeed Shirley as governor . During this time Hutchinson was the leading politician in the province due to the age and infirmity of Lieutenant Governor Spencer Phips . Hutchinson 's application was unsuccessful , but he did receive an appointment as lieutenant governor in 1758 , serving under Thomas Pownall . Hutchinson 's relationship with Pownall was awkward , for Pownall was at the center of political activities that dislodged Governor Shirley , under whose patronage Hutchinson had risen in power and influence . Pownall cultivated relations with the populist factions in the state , and sought to remove the influence of Shirley supporters , sometimes asking Hutchinson to turn against people he ( Hutchinson ) had earlier supported . This Hutchinson refused to do , since he saw these actions as harming the province 's stability and taking place at " the caprice of the governor " . Pownall , whose mistrust of Hutchinson was reciprocated , requested to leave to return to England in late 1759 . The political opposition of Shirley supporters and the death of some of his leading populist supporters may have contributed to this decision . He departed the province on 3 June 1760 , leaving Hutchinson as acting governor . Several months later Pownall 's replacement , Francis Bernard , arrived to take the reins of power . 
 = = = Writs of assistance = = = 
 One of Bernard 's early acts was the appointment of Hutchinson instead of James Otis , Sr. , as Chief Justice of the Massachusetts Superior Court of Judicature . This action by itself turned the province 's populists , whose vocal leaders included Otis and his son James Jr . , against both Hutchinson and Bernard , with long term consequences to Hutchinson 's reputation . Hutchinson , with no legal training , had not sought the post , and some emerging legal thinkers , notably a rising young lawyer named John Adams , were also outraged . 
 In 1761 Hutchinson brought upon himself a storm of protest and criticism by issuing writs of assistance , documents that authorised essentially arbitrary searches by customs officials . Although some had been issued ( ironically over Hutchinson 's objections ) in earlier years , the writs he authorised were in some cases renewals of existing writs necessitated by the accession of King George III to the throne . Adams and the Otises seized on the issue to rail against his monopolisation of power ( since he was also a lieutenant governor and sat on the council ) and lack of legal qualifications for the post of chief justice . 
 = = = Taxes and the Stamp Act = = = 
 When the Sugar Act was being discussed in Parliament in 1763 , proposals were put forward to send Hutchinson to England to represent the colony 's opposition to the proposal . Governor Bernard , however , objected to sending the sitting lieutenant governor , and the bill was enacted . Much colonial protest followed , and Hutchinson was in agreement with vocal opponents like the Otises ( who around this time began using the phrase " no taxation without representation " ) that the law harmed the Massachusetts economy . In the ensuing debates , however , differences emerged between Hutchinson and others over Parliament 's supremacy and the feasibility of having formal colonial representation there , which were exacerbated by the personal animosity that had developed between Hutchinson and the Otises . Led by James Otis , Jr. and Oxenbridge Thacher , the anti @-@ Parliament faction seized on every minor dispute to rail against Hutchinson and his faction 's monopolisation of power . Hutchinson was at first dismissive of these ongoing political attacks , believing that his opponents were either misguided or misled . Biographer Andrew Walmsley observes that Hutchinson at this stage seriously underestimated the impact of these attacks in building a coherent opposition to crown control , and in the damage it was doing to his own reputation . 
 In debates leading up to the passage of the 1765 Stamp Act , both Hutchinson and Bernard quietly warned London not to proceed . Hutchinson in particular wrote that " It cannot be good to tax the Americans ... You will lose more than you gain . " When the assembly met to draft a petition to London on the matter in October 1764 , Hutchinson opposed the inclusion of the radicals ' language , and eventually pushed through a more moderate statement of opposition . However , the Massachusetts petition was seen as weak in comparison to those prepared by other colonies , and Hutchinson was claimed to be secretly seeking to promote the Stamp Act . He was also accused of " treachery " and " betraying his country " . News of the act 's passage propelled one of the most vocal opponents of Parliamentary supremacy , Samuel Adams , into a larger role in provincial politics . Hutchinson privately supported calls for its repeal , but his unwillingness to publicly oppose the act merely provided additional fuel for his opponents . 
 = = = Mob violence = = = 
 Hutchinson 's brother @-@ in @-@ law , colonial secretary Andrew Oliver , was given the job of " stamp master " , with responsibility for implementing the act in the province . Although Hutchinson apparently had no hand in this assignment , his opponents were quick to accuse him of further duplicity . His attempts to explain his position only fuelled the opposition , who recounted his early unpopular acts and questioned his motives in those deeds . On 13 August 1765 , mobs descended on Oliver 's home and office , ransacking both . The next night Hutchinson 's Boston mansion was surrounded , and the crowd demanded that he formally deny arguing in favour of the Stamp Act in his correspondence with London . He refused , and only the intervention of a moderate leader prevented any action that night . 
 Twelve days later , on the evening of 26 August , a mob again formed outside of his mansion , and this time they would not be denied . Described by one architectural historian as " the first developed example of provincial Palladianism in New England , " the house was broken into ( Hutchinson and his family narrowly escaping ) , and systematically ransacked . The house finishings ( wainscoting and other decorative woodwork ) were effectively destroyed , and even the building 's cupola was taken down in violence that lasted the entire night . The family silver , furniture , and other items were stolen or destroyed ( although some items were eventually returned ) , and Hutchinson 's collection of historically important manuscripts was scattered . Hutchinson was then working on the final volume of his three volume history of the Massachusetts Bay colony . Many pages of the work were lost that night and had to be recreated . Hutchinson 's detailed inventory ( reprinted by biographer James Kendall Hosmer ) valued the damage done at more than £ 2 @,@ 200 , and he eventually received over £ 3 @,@ 100 from the province for his troubles . Hutchinson and his family temporarily took refuge at Castle William , and thereafter took up primary residence at Hutchinson 's estate in Milton . 
 = = Governor of Massachusetts = = 
 Because of the controversy over the Stamp Act , the radical faction came to control both the assembly and the governor 's council in 1766 , and Hutchinson was denied a seat on the governor 's council . Amid increased furor after the passage of the 1767 Townshend Acts , Governor Bernard requested and received British Army troops to protect crown officials . Letters written by Bernard describing conditions in the province were acquired by the radical opposition and published , leading to his recall . Bernard left for England on 1 August 1769 , leaving Hutchinson as acting governor . Hutchinson was unsuccessful in his attempts to distance himself from the unpopular Bernard administration , and he continued to be attacked in the assembly and the local press . Despite this , he continued to lobby for a formal appointment as governor . He categorically refused to again serve as lieutenant governor under another governor , preferring instead a posting elsewhere , or to resign the lieutenant governorship . 
 Hutchinson was still acting governor when protests over the Townshend taxes erupted into the Boston Massacre on 5 March 1770 , when British soldiers fired into a crowd , killing five people . Hutchinson went to the scene in the aftermath of the shooting , and promised that justice would be applied fairly . He had all of the British soldiers involved in the incident arrested the next day , but ongoing unrest in the city compelled him to request the withdrawal of British troops from the city to Castle William . Hutchinson was able to postpone the trial for almost 6 months to allow anger to settle and for Adams to prepare a solid case . The soldiers were eventually tried , and two were convicted of manslaughter , although their sentences were reduced . The episode shook Hutchinson 's confidence in his ability to manage affairs in the province , and he penned a resignation letter . 
 Governor Bernard had , in the mean time , taken up Hutchinson 's cause in London . In March 1771 Hutchinson 's commission as governor arrived in Boston , having been approved by the king while his resignation letter was going the other way . ( Colonial secretary Lord Hillsborough rejected his resignation . ) The instructions sent with the commission were fairly strict , and left Hutchinson relatively little room to manoeuvre politically . Instructions that particularly galled Samuel Adams included one restricting the meetings of the governor 's council , and another limiting the appointment of colonial agents to individuals having the governor 's approval . 
 One of Hutchinson 's instructions was to relocate the provincial assembly from Boston to Cambridge , where it would be less under the influence of radical Boston politics . This modest demand , accomplished by executive order , resulted in howls of complaint of gubernatorial arbitrariness in the assembly , and an exchange of arguments , rebuttals , and counterarguments between Hutchinson and the assembly that ran for thousands of pages and lasted until 1772 . The nature of the affair furthered the radical cause , whose proponents painted Hutchinson 's action as a bold and devious attempt to further the executive prerogative . The radicals were further outraged when Hutchinson announced in 1772 that his salary , which had previously been subject to appropriation by the assembly , would be paid by the crown instead . This was seen by the radicals as a further usurpation of power that rightfully belonged in the province . Written debates with the assembly extended to the role of Parliament in governing the policies , and further deepened the divide between it and Hutchinson . They also raised flags elsewhere in the colonies and in England , where observers noted that Hutchinson 's arguments had effectively driven moderates in the province to join with the political hardliners . 
 = = = Letters affair and Tea Party = = = 
 The Massachusetts debate reached a pitch in 1772 when Hutchinson , in a speech to the assembly , argued that either the colony was wholly subject to Parliament , or that it was effectively independent . The assembly 's response , authored by John Adams , Samuel Adams , and Joseph Hawley , countered that the colonial charter granted autonomy . In England the colonial secretary , Lord Dartmouth , insisted to colonial agent Benjamin Franklin that the Massachusetts assembly retract its response . Franklin had acquired a packet of letters , written in the late 1760s by Hutchinson and other colonial officials , from which he concluded that Hutchinson and Oliver had mischaracterized the situation in the colonies , and thus misled Parliament . Believing that wider knowledge of these letters would focus colonial anger away from Parliament and at those who had written the misleading letters , Franklin sent the letters to Thomas Cushing , the speaker of the Massachusetts assembly , in December 1772 . He insisted to Cushing that they not be published or widely circulated , because he was not " at liberty to make the letters public . " The letters came into the hands of Samuel Adams , then serving as the clerk of the assembly , who engineered their publication in June 1773 . Franklin 's belief was only partially vindicated : the publication of the letters unleashed a torrent of vitriol against Hutchinson , but did nothing to lessen opposition to Parliamentary policy : instead the opposition saw the letters as confirmation of a conspiracy against their rights . The letters were reprinted throughout the colonies , and Hutchinson was burned in effigy in places as far away as Philadelphia during the uproar . 
 Hutchinson 's letters , written between 1767 and 1769 to Thomas Whately , a retired former leading member of the British government , included the observation that it was impossible for colonists to have the full rights they would have in the home country , essentially requiring an " abridgement of what are called English liberties " . He made no specific proposals on how the colonial government should be reformed , writing in a letter that was not among those published , " I can think of nothing but what will produce as great an evil as that which it may remove or will be of a very uncertain event . " Letters by Andrew Oliver , in contrast , specifically proposed that the governor 's council , whose members where then elected by the assembly with the governor 's consent , be changed to one whose members were appointed by the crown . 
 Although much of what Hutchinson wrote in the letters was not particularly new , Samuel Adams masterfully manipulated the contents and implications of some of the statements by Hutchinson and Oliver to suggest they were conspiring with officials in London to deprive the colonists of their rights . Hutchinson was defended in print by provincial attorney general Jonathan Sewall , who claimed that Hutchinson was not actually expressing desired changes in the state of affairs , but ruminating instead on possible consequences of present conditions . 
 The Massachusetts assembly drafted a petition to the Board of Trade demanding Hutchinson 's removal from office , and Hutchinson , concerned with the effect the letter publication and the assembly petition would have in London , requested permission to come to England to defend himself . The letter authorizing his return did not reach Boston until November 1773 , too late for him to depart that year ; his request and the assembly 's petition would not be heard until early 1774 . 
 In the meantime , Parliament had repealed most of the Townshend taxes ( keeping only the one on tea ) , and passed the Tea Act , which authorised the British East India Company to ship tea directly to the colonies , eliminating colonial merchants from its supply chain and undercutting the price of smuggled Dutch tea . This caused colonial merchants all over the North American colonies to organise opposition to the deliveries of the company 's tea . In Massachusetts the arrival of ships carrying tea in November 1773 brought about a crisis , since duties were to be paid on <unk> cargo within twenty days of a ship 's arrival . Hutchinson and his sons were among the businessmen to whom the company had consigned its tea , although Hutchinson disclaimed any official role in the choice of <unk> . Other cargo was unloaded from the ships , but armed protestors patrolled the docks to ensure the tea was not landed . Hutchinson took a hard line , refusing to allow the tea ships to leave the harbour despite city @-@ wide protests that the tea be sent back to England , and insisting that the duty be paid and the tea landed . When the twenty @-@ day deadline arrived on 16 December , protestors ( some in Indian disguise ) boarded the ships that night and dumped the tea into the harbour . 
 Hutchinson justified the hardline stance that contributed to the crisis by claiming it was his duty as governor to uphold the revenue laws , while American opponents such as James Bowdoin observed that he could have just as easily refused to accept the tea when it was clear that popular sentiment would make it impossible to land the tea . British critics complained that he should have asked the British troops in Boston to intervene . After it became known that other tea ships sent to North America had turned back , Hutchinson continued to justify his actions in letters to England , anticipating hearings on the matter once he arrived there . 
 When the Board of Trade met to consider the assembly 's petition to recall Hutchinson , it also discussed the tea party . Franklin , as colonial agent , was forced to listen to a barrage of criticism , and was dismissed as colonial postmaster general . The assembly 's petition was dismissed as " groundless " and " vexatious " , but Hutchinson 's request for leave was granted . In May 1774 General Thomas Gage arrived in Boston to take over as governor , and to implement the " Coercive Acts " Parliament had passed as punishment for the tea party . Hutchinson , believing he would only be away from Massachusetts temporarily , sailed for England on 1 June 1774 . 
 = = Exile = = 
 Upon his arrival in London , Hutchinson was granted an audience with the king , who questioned him on affairs in North America , and he was well received by Rockingham , Dartmouth , and Lord North , the prime minister . In his interview with North he expressed dismay at the terms of the Massachusetts Government Act , and sought to establish a basis for the eventual repeal of the Boston Port Act , whose enactment by Governor Gage had a crippling effect on the province 's economy . One part of the Government Act , the appointment by the crown of the governor 's council , was something he had long opposed without formal hearings on the matter , but even colonial authorities sympathetic to his view believed events had by 1774 gone too far for the British political establishment to support alternatives . At the outbreak of the American Revolutionary War in April 1775 his Milton mansion was seized for use as an army barracks , and a trunk containing copies of much of his correspondence fell into rebel hands . 
 As the war progressed , Hutchinson was criticised by the Whigs in Parliament , which he answered in an unpublished manuscript . He continued to be treated favourably by the king , but was compelled to refuse the offer of a baronetcy because most of his fortune was lost due to his exile , and became marginalised from power as prosecution of the war took center stage . On 4 July 1776 , Hutchinson was awarded an honorary doctorate of law by Oxford University . His enemies in Massachusetts continued to attack his reputation , and his exile made it impossible to effectively dispute the charges they made . His properties , like those of other exiled Loyalists , were seized and sold off by the state ; his Milton home was eventually purchased by James and Mercy Otis Warren ( the latter being the sister of his long @-@ time enemy James Otis , Jr . ) 
 Bitter and disillusioned about his forced exile , and grieving the loss of his daughter Peggy in 1777 , Hutchinson continued to work on his history of the colony which was the fruit of many decades of research . Two volumes were published in his lifetime : Volume 1 of the History of Massachusetts appeared in 1764 , and Volume 2 in 1767 . The third volume would be published posthumously , and included his own tenure as lieutenant governor and governor . At the same time he worked to complete a history of the Hutchinson family , in which he encapsulated details on political affairs not found elsewhere . He suffered a stroke and died at Brompton , a part of London , on 3 June 1780 , aged 68 , and was buried at Croydon . 
 = = Legacy and memory = = 
 Because of his central role as the main focal point for the opposition to royal rule , Hutchinson 's reputation in America was generally quite poor . He was often seen as a traitor to his native Massachusetts and to the cause of freedom . John Adams was characteristically harsh in his assessment of him , calling him " avaricious " and describing him as a " courtier " who manipulated those at higher levels of power to achieve his aims . He was also criticized by British political figures : Thomas Pownall continued to disagree with Hutchinson after the latter 's exile , Francis Bernard ( despite working on Hutchinson 's behalf ) disapproved of some of his actions , and Lord North believed the publication of his letters to be responsible for the outbreak of the war . 
 Biographers in the 20th century have , however , rehabilitated his reputation , seeking to explain how and why he came to be demonized in this way . In recent decades historians have typically portrayed Hutchinson as a tragic figure torn between his rulers in London and his people in Massachusetts . Barbara Tuchman , for example , portrays Hutchinson as an " ill @-@ fated " and " tragic figure . " British scholar David Kenneth Fieldhouse says his tragedy emerged because he was “ a victim of the clash of two ideologies , his own archaic and static , that of his opponents contemporary and dynamic . " Carl L. Becker , a prominent American historian wrote : " Nothing would have pleased him [ Hutchinson ] more than that New England should have shown its emancipation from provincialism by meriting the good will of the King . His irritation with America in general and Boston in particular was the irritation of a proud and possessive father with a beloved but wayward child who fails to do him credit in high places . " Bailyn has changed his own interpretation over the years . In the 1970s he saw Hutchinson as a bewildered pragmatist . By 2004 he portrayed Hutchinson as a premodern thinker locked in an old mindset at a time when Enlightenment ideas were taking hold thanks to thinkers such as Adam Smith and Tom Paine . 
 Remnants of Hutchinson 's country estate in Milton have been preserved . The main piece , a parcel of land known as Governor Hutchinson 's Field , is owned by The Trustees of the Reservations , and is listed on the National Register of Historic Places . It is open to the public , and a nearby property features a ha @-@ ha constructed for Hutchinson in 1771 . The ha @-@ ha is listed on the National Register of Historic Places , and both properties are part of the Milton Hill Historic District . Boston , which had landmarks named after the Hutchinson family , took pains upon his departure to rename them . 
 = = Publications = = 
 Hutchinson , Thomas ( 1764 ) . The History of the Colony of Massachusett 's Bay : From the First Settlement <unk> in 1628 , until its Incorporation with the Colony of Plimouth Province , Province of Main etc . , by the Charter of King William and Queen Mary in 1691 . Boston : Thomas and John Fleet . First volume of Hutchinson 's History 
 Hutchinson , Thomas ( 1767 ) . The History of the Province of Massachusetts @-@ Bay : From the Charter of King William and Queen Mary in 1691 , Until the Year 1750 . Boston : Thomas and John Fleet . Second volume of Hutchinson 's History 
 Hutchinson , Thomas ( 1828 ) . Hutchinson , John , ed . The History of the Province of Massachusetts Bay : From 1749 to 1774 , Comprising a Detailed Narrative of the Origin and Early Stages of the American Revolution . London : John Murray . Third volume of Hutchinson 's History , published posthumously 
 Hutchinson , Thomas ( 1776 ) . Strictures Upon the Declaration . London : self @-@ published . Commentary on the United States Declaration of Independence 
 = Vígríðr = 
 In Norse mythology , Vígríðr or Óskópnir is a large field foretold to host a battle between the forces of the gods and the forces of Surtr as part of the events of Ragnarök . The field is attested in the Poetic Edda , compiled in the 13th century from earlier traditional material , and in the Prose Edda , written by Snorri Sturluson in the 13th century . The Poetic Edda briefly mentions the field as where the two forces will battle , whereas the Prose Edda features a fuller account , foretelling that it is the location of the future death of several deities ( and their enemies ) before the world is engulfed in flames and reborn . 
 = = Etymology = = 
 The Old Norse place name Vígríðr means " battle @-@ surge " or " place on which battle surges " . The name Vígríðr is sometimes modernly anglicized as <unk> , <unk> , or <unk> . The etymology of the name Óskópnir is a matter of scholarly debate , but has been proposed as meaning " the ( not yet ) created " , " not made " or " <unk> " . 
 = = Attestations = = 
 = = = Poetic Edda = = = 
 In the Poetic Edda poem Vafþrúðnismál , the god Odin , disguised as " Gagnráðr " faces off with the wise jötunn Vafþrúðnir in a battle of wits . Among numerous other questions , Vafþrúðnir asks Odin to tell him what the name of the plain is where the gods and Surtr will meet . Odin responds that the name of the plain is Vígríðr , and that the size of the field is 100 leagues in every direction : 
 In his translation notes for these stanzas , Henry Adams Bellows notes that " a hundred miles " is a " general phrase for a vast distance " . 
 In the Poetic Edda poem Fáfnismál , the dying wyrm Fáfnir is asked by the hero Sigurd what the name of the island is where Surtr and the gods will battle is called . Fáfnir replies that the island is called Óskópnir . 
 = = = Prose Edda = = = 
 In the Prose Edda book Gylfaginning , the enthroned figure of High foretells the events of Ragnarök . High says the Muspell 's forces will gather at the field Vígríðr , a field which he adds is " a hundred leagues in each direction " . Then the monstrous wolf Fenrir and the immense serpent Jörmungandr will arrive . By that time , the jötunn Hrym with all of the frost @-@ jötnar and Loki with " all Hel 's people " will have also arrived . 
 As these forces gather , the god Heimdallr will stand and blow into his horn , Gjallarhorn , which will awaken the gods . The gods will meet and hold a thing . Odin will ride to the well Mímisbrunnr and will consult Mímir on behalf of himself and his people . Yggdrasil , the cosmological tree , will shiver and all beings will be fearful . The gods and the einherjar will don their war gear and advance to Vígríðr . Odin , wearing a golden helmet , a coat of mail , and brandishing his spear Gungnir , will ride in the front . 
 Odin will make directly for Fenrir and the god Thor , by Odin 's side , will be unable to help him because he will be fighting Jörmungandr . The god Freyr will engage the fiery being Surtr and , since Freyr lacks the sword he gave his servant Skírnir , Freyr will fall after a rough struggle . The god Tyr will fight the hound Garmr and the two will kill one another . Thor will kill the serpent Jörmungandr but after nine steps will collapse to the ground , dead from Jörmungandr 's venom . Fenrir will eat Odin , but immediately after Odin 's son Víðarr will come forward and jet his foot on to the wolf 's lower jaw , and grasp its upper jaw , ripping its mouth apart , killing it . Loki and Heimdallr will kill one another and , after their death , Surtr will spray fire over the earth and burn the entire world . 
 Later in the same chapter , High quotes Odin 's response from the above @-@ mentioned chapter of Vafþrúðnismál . 
 = History of San Diego State University = 
 The history of San Diego State University began in the late 19th century with the establishment of a normal school in San Diego , California . Founded on March 13 , 1897 , the school opened on November 1 , 1898 with a class of 135 students . By 1921 , the school had become San Diego State Teachers College , allowing it to grant certificates and degrees . Due to the increased student enrollment , the college was relocated to its current location at the east side of Mission Valley , with classes beginning in February 1931 . The government works programs during the Great Depression assisted in construction of numerous buildings on the new campus . 
 World War I and II both affected student enrollment , and led many students and faculty members to serve in the armed forces . By the end of the 1950s , the student population was at 10 @,@ 000 , and the renamed San Diego State College was now the fourth largest California state institution . In the 1960s and 1970s the campus saw increased enrollment , the accreditation of its professional schools , multiple incidents of student activism , and on January 1 , 1974 , a new name : San Diego State University ( SDSU ) . By 1987 , the university 's population peaked at nearly 36 @,@ 000 students and attained the status of the largest university in California and tenth in the nation . 
 Recently , the university has worked to improve its academic rankings , and faced adversities including a school shooting and a large drug bust . As the university continues to grant numerous degrees in various fields , it has developed several construction plans for replacement of some of its older buildings and infrastructure . 
 = = Establishment = = 
 In the late 1890s , San Diego officials believed that a normal school should be established to help the town grow and increase certification of teachers . The tuition and travel for out @-@ of @-@ town normal schools were large and San Diegans desired to have a closer school . San Diego had to compete with Fresno , Los Angeles , and several other cities for a school , and its first attempt to establish one in 1895 was vetoed by California governor James Budd . On March 13 , 1897 Governor Budd changed course and signed legislation appropriating $ 50 @,@ 000 to allow for the establishment of a state normal school in San Diego , to be located in University Heights . By 1905 , total funds appropriated to the school totaled $ 333 @,@ 300 . 
 The Board of Trustees for San Diego Normal School was established by Budd and first met on June 3 , 1897 . They appointed Samuel T. Black , who had previously served as the California Superintendent for Public Instruction , as president of the new school by unanimous decision on October 1 , 1898 . On January 21 , 1898 , the San Diego firm <unk> and Gill was selected to design the new school building . The architect Irving Gill , who developed the building in a Beaux @-@ Arts style , was responsible for the design . The ground was broken for construction on August 1 , the cornerstone of the building was laid on December 10 , and the building was dedicated on May 1 , 1899 . During the building 's construction , the first classes were held at the Hill Block on the southwest corner of 6th and F street in downtown San Diego beginning on November 1 , 1898 . The classes moved to the Normal School in May 1899 , even as construction continued . 135 students ( 90 % of whom were women ) , were enrolled by the end of the first year ; enrollment grew to 400 by 1910 . 
 In the summer of 1899 , San Diego Normal School became the first California normal school to offer summer courses , and maintained this position until 1913 . On June 21 , 1900 , the first class was graduated : 23 women and three men . Later that year , the east wing of the initial building was finished , adding 18 rooms . In 1903 , $ 61 @,@ 000 was appropriated by the state for a west wing ; it included a gym , library , laboratories , lecture rooms , and a museum . The west wing was completed in September 1904 . In 1906 , the California legislature required that students have a high school diploma in order to be admitted to a normal school . This was the same requirement as for entry into the University of California . 
 In 1910 , Samuel Black resigned , and was replaced by Edward L. Hardy , who had previously served as the principal of San Diego High School . He increased the faculty size from 19 to 27 in 1912 to meet the demands of increased enrollment . The annual salary for the president increased to $ 4 @,@ 000 ( from $ 3 @,@ 400 ) in 1915 and salaries for the faculty and administration ranged from $ 600 – 2 @,@ 500 ( compared to the national average of $ 687 for all industries except for farm labor ) . Hardy argued for the pay increases , claiming increases would " give merited and much needed relief ... [ and ] will be entirely justified by the increased good of the service . " More buildings were added after appropriations of funds in 1907 and total expenditures for the campus reached $ 312 @,@ 000 . Even with the expansion , by 1910 space was limited , so the training school dropped the high school program , although it still taught the elementary and intermediate grades ( 7th and 8th grades ) . In 1914 , of the 136 new students for the school year , 17 were from California counties ( excluding San Diego ) , while 26 were from other states . This proportion would remain common throughout the school 's history as the majority of its students were from the San Diego area . 
 = = World War I = = 
 World War I had a large impact on the school . A newfound sense of patriotism had the administration require students to recite the Pledge of Allegiance as an entrance requirement to the school . The war also had an effect on enrollment as all of the male students gradually left the school to join the war efforts ; in 1916 there were 421 total students , 382 in 1917 , 172 in 1918 ( including only one male student ) , and in 1919 , 147 students . In addition to the students , some of the faculty members joined the military . Due to the decreased student enrollment , the remaining faculty had the opportunity to further their own training . On campus , both students and faculty worked with the Red Cross , organized bond drives , and sent packages to troops overseas . 
 During this period , Hardy pushed the notion of granting the school college status . In 1921 , the California legislature made the school a four @-@ year teacher 's school , which placed it under the management of the State Department of Education . On July 28 , 1921 , the San Diego Normal School became San Diego State Teachers College ( usually shortened to San Diego State College or SDS ) . With this ranking , the college could now grant certificates and degrees . Prior to the school 's conversion , it had graduated 1 @,@ 500 teachers , educated many of the San Diego children at its training school , and helped to expand the economic and cultural development of the city . Also in 1921 , the legislature moved San Diego Junior College , that was a part of San Diego High School , to the college campus due to crowding issues . Administrators moved the junior college believing it would only overlap the same material taught at the teacher 's school . The junior college remained with the school until 1947 , when it became independent . 
 On June 30 , 1923 the legislature allowed the college to begin granting Bachelor of Arts degrees , which included accountancy , agriculture , and industrial engineering . On July 1 , 1927 , the junior college courses became lower @-@ division courses and on July 12 , 1928 the State Board of Education granted the college the ability to offer credentials in secondary education with majors in English , history , chemistry , and the Romance languages . 
 = = Move to current location = = 
 The Normal School was initially built for a maximum capacity of 600 students . Hardy proposed in 1922 building on a new campus at a 125 @-@ acre ( 51 ha ) plot at Park Boulevard ( near Balboa Park ) , which was rejected by San Diego voters . However , the California legislature authorized a move to a new site in 1925 if San Diego was willing to buy the old school building and provide a new site . The following year the Citizen 's Advisory Committee , a 21 @-@ member committee led by Mayor John L. Bacon , initially recommended the northeast part of Balboa Park that would be located over 122 acres ( 49 ha ) , but the location was voted down by San Diego voters . In 1927 , another location was selected , this time in Encanto , but was also voted down . In total , ten locations would be proposed before the final location was chosen . By June 1928 , the Bell @-@ Lloyd Investment Company offered 125 acres ( 51 ha ) at Mission Palisades , $ 50 @,@ 000 , and a promise to build a road connecting the site to El Cajon Blvd . The site was located at the east side of Mission Valley , about 10 miles ( 16 km ) away from the old site . The group proposed the site in hopes of it being the center of a new retail and housing development . Before the new site could be built , San Diego voters had to approve of buying the old site , which it did overwhelmingly on May 15 , 1928 . After the move to the new campus , the old Normal School building was used for Horace Mann Junior High and administrative offices . In 1955 , it was demolished to make room for a new wing of an administrative building . 
 George B. McDougall was selected as the supervising architect and the State Department of Architecture for Public Buildings designed the new campus . The initial planned cost was $ 7 @,@ 500 @,@ 000 . On October 7 , 1929 classes were dismissed early so all current students could attend the groundbreaking held on that day . Pettifer & <unk> was selected as the construction firm , and it completed several buildings by September 1930 . The first classes made up of 1 @,@ 220 students were held at Montezuma Mesa in February 1931 . 
 The Great Depression , although negative to the local economy , also benefited the San Diego State Teachers College , as the federal government made money available for construction projects in an attempt to stimulate the economy . For the campus , some of these construction projects included new buildings ( such as a $ 500 @,@ 000 stadium completed in 1936 and a $ 200 @,@ 000 open air theater completed in 1941 ) , facilities , and art works . Several federal programs were also created to give jobs to students and to increase financial aid . 
 In June 1935 , President Hardy retired and was replaced by Walter R. Hepner . The bell tower on campus was named in honor of Hardy in 1976 . On September 15 , 1935 , as a result of the California legislature dropping " teachers " from the names of state colleges , San Diego State Teachers College became San Diego State College ( SDSC ) . In 1935 the college began offering engineering courses . During that period , the college acquired $ 18 @,@ 000 from the state for the purpose of purchasing an additional 94 acres ( 38 ha ) . 
 = = World War II = = 
 Just as World War I had a significant impact on the college , World War II was pivotal in the college 's history too . Within four days of the attack on Pearl Harbor , thirteen students withdrew from the college to join the military . The enrollment dropped from 2 @,@ 077 students in 1940 to a low of 860 students ( 21 % were men ) in spring 1943 . Faculty decreased to as low as 60 from 112 before the war had begun . Before the war was over , 3 @,@ 500 SDSC graduates , students , former students , and faculty entered the armed forces , with 135 losing their lives . Not surprisingly for a city dominated by a naval base , a large majority joined the Navy . Others joined the Air Corps , participating in the Doolittle Raid over Japan and battles over the Philippines and the East Indies . 
 In 1942 , the campus became a War Information Center , one of 140 in the nation . The center was established to boost civilian morale and practice air raid drills . Rationing on campus of sugar , gas , soft drinks , and paper became common throughout the war . Classes were cut back due to the limited staff and the courses were shifted to more scientific and technological emphasis . The majority of the sports were canceled during the war and various drives were held to increase supplies sent to troops . 
 As the war neared its end , enrollment increased , until it reached 2 @,@ 000 students in 1946 . Nearly half of these students were veterans from the war , and they received a monthly stipend to assist with housing and tuition costs . Sports and activities resumed to their prior levels and by the end of the 1940s , the faculty had expanded to 230 personnel and 40 part @-@ time staff . 
 In 1946 , Hepner grouped the various disciplines into seven divisions : Education , Fine Arts , Humanities , Social Sciences , Life Sciences , Physical Sciences , and Health , Physical Education , and Recreation . In 1950 , the college awarded its first Master ’ s degree , and by the end of the decade offered Master ’ s degrees in 38 areas . On May 23 , 1947 , Governor Earl Warren signed legislation making SDSC an official four @-@ year liberal arts institution . 
 = = Postwar changes and expansion = = 
 In 1952 President Hepner retired , and was replaced by Malcolm A. Love , who previously served as president of the University of Nevada ( since 1950 ) . At this point , the college had more than 4 @,@ 800 students , 222 faculty members , offered 27 majors , had a budget of $ 2 @,@ 010 @,@ 000 and contributed more than $ 14 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 to the local San Diego economy . 
 By the end of the 1950s , the student population was over 10 @,@ 000 , placing it as the fourth largest California state institution and larger than 96 % of the U.S. ’ s colleges and universities at the time . In 1957 , entering freshmen scores on examinations were ranked in the top 10 % of all universities in the U.S. In the following years , the college ’ s scores also surpassed most of the other California state colleges . In 1957 the college became the first to use an identification number for each student , which was necessary to simplify handling of records , grades , and other tasks of the large number of students . To keep up with student expansion , the square footage of the buildings and classrooms was increased from 255 @,@ 434 to 1 @,@ 243 @,@ 737 . 
 In 1959 , the school began offering classes at Central Union High School in El Centro as part of its Imperial Valley branch . The campus remained focused on teacher training until the mid @-@ 1970s . In 1960 , the school became the first California state college to have an educational radio station , KPBS @-@ FM . 
 Before World War II , less than 25 % of the faculty had doctorates , and in an attempt to reach university status for the school , the 1956 Statement of General Policy on Employment of Faculty stipulated that incoming faculty had to have their doctorates ( or soon receive one ) in order to be hired . By the end of the 1950s , 56 % of permanent faculty had doctorates . By the beginning of 1965 this had increased to 68 % . 
 During the Red Scare , psychology professor Harry C. Steinmetz was accused of being a Communist . San Diego representatives persuaded the California legislature along with Governor Earl Warren to attempt to remove him from his teaching position . After the State Board of Education was unable to get an answer from Steinmetz about whether or not he was a Communist , he was dismissed on February 5 , 1954 . He attempted to be reinstated but never was even after the legislation that had been developed during the Red Scare was later deemed unconstitutional . 
 On July 1 , 1961 as a result of the Donahue Act , SDSC became a part of the California State College system which included a new set of regulations for the school , along with a statewide board of trustees and a chancellor . The school continued to grow , with a population of 10 @,@ 700 in 1960 and 25 @,@ 500 in 1970 . The San Diego county administrator Fred Morey reflected on so many graduates being hired by the county : " We would find it difficult to keep the County running without the help of San Diego State . " 
 John F. Kennedy , then the U.S. President , gave the graduation commencement address at Aztec Bowl in front of 40 @,@ 000 people on June 6 , 1963 . Kennedy was given an honorary doctorate degree in law at the ceremony , making San Diego State the first in California to award an honorary doctorate degree . To commemorate his visit , the campus added his portrait to the campus library collection and a granite stone marker placed where his helicopter landed ( California Historical Landmark # 798 ) . In April 2008 , a plaque that commemorated his visit was stolen and has yet to be recovered . On May 29 , 1964 Martin Luther King Jr. spoke at the Open Air Theater about proposed legislation in improving rights for African Americans . 
 In 1965 , San Diego State began offering a doctorate in chemistry in a joint effort with University of California , San Diego . By 1991 , the campus had eight different doctorate programs . Research became a vital practice of the faculty during the 1960s . By 1965 , more than 200 books had been authored by SDSC faculty . Federal research grants increased from $ 398 @,@ 202 in 1961 to $ 1 @,@ 184 @,@ 387 in 1967 . Faculty research included medical and scientific research , teacher enhancement , Peace Corps training , and a review of nursing curricula . 
 In 1966 , the Carnegie Corporation named President Love one of the best college Presidents in the country . President Love changed the structure of the college , developing its divisions into professional schools , which would allow them to be accredited . The schools were developed into colleges , which increased the possibility of SDSC of becoming a university . He reflected on San Diego State ’ s progress in a Time magazine article : " Though we are called a college , we are in deed and in fact a university . " 
 Throughout the late 1960s and early 1970s there were numerous protests , sit @-@ ins , and radical changes in traditions among the students . Author Raymond Starr called this period " ... the liveliest , most colorful , and most challenging in State ’ s history . " Students mainly protested racism and the war in Vietnam . In March 1970 , 600 students held a week @-@ long sit @-@ in in protest of the decision of the campus leaders not to rehire four radical instructors . Protests expanded to the presence of Reserve Officer Training Corps ( ROTC ) , military recruiters , the Police Community Relations Training Institute , among others . Significant speakers visited the campus during the time including Cesar Chavez , Jane Fonda , Angela Davis , Donald Freed , Joan Baez , and Jerry Brown . On April 20 , 1972 , 75 demonstrators took ROTC students hostage while they were taking an examination in the Business Administration and Math building . Although there was some violence , the students were released peacefully . On May 3 , 1972 , 35 protesters ( later growing to 2 @,@ 000 ) smashed windows of the Administration building and burned copies of The Daily Aztec , the student newspaper . Protesters eventually entered the locked building and set fires on the first floor , and moved on to Aztec Center to set more fires and break windows . The mayhem resulted in six injuries and several thousand dollars in damages . On May 24 , 1972 a bomb exploded in <unk> Hall , injuring Lawrence Jackson , an African American student . A group of African American students marched on campus to show support for Jackson . 
 The first women 's studies program in the United States was established in 1970 at the college , after a year of intense organizing of women 's consciousness raising groups , rallies , petition circulating , and operating unofficial or experimental classes and presentations before seven committees and assemblies . 
 In early 1971 , President Love retired . With the extraordinary growth of students , faculty and facilities , there were plans for new library to be named in honor of him , which was dedicated in May 1971 . After a brief unsuccessful nomination of Walter <unk> to replace Dr. Love , and Academic Vice President Walker acting as president for 1971 – 72 , Brage Golding became the new president . He served from 1972 to 1977 , and although he did not implement any mainstream changes as prior presidents had , he was instrumental in bringing in qualified administrators who would improve the school during its upcoming years . He worked to establish the San Diego History Research Center for collecting materials on the city 's history and established the Educational Growth Opportunities program which offered classes for older people . At Golding 's leaving of the university , one person commented : " By the end of the five @-@ year administration , San Diego State University had grown into the institution implied by its name . This was the mark that Brage Golding left on San Diego State University . " 
 Golding left to lead Kent State , and with a brief intermission of Academic Vice President Trevor Colbourn serving as president , Thomas B. Day became the sixth president in 1978 . When Proposition 13 passed , the school faced budget issues and Day proposed abolishing some departments , combining others , and laying off approximately 80 faculty members . However , budget cuts were deemed not necessary , and on April 8 , 1980 , Day again proposed cutting 115 faculty members and four departments due to foreseeing upcoming budget cuts ; on May 16 , 1980 he recanted his comments . 
 President Love had fought hard throughout his tenure to increase SDSC 's ranking from a college to a university . In 1972 , the California legislature approved the renaming of the school to " California State University , San Diego " . San Diego State officials were still not happy with the name , and on January 1 , 1974 , it was renamed to " San Diego State University " ( SDSU ) , its current name . 
 = = Modern history = = 
 In 1987 , the school reached its peak attendance with 35 @,@ 945 students , resulting in SDSU being the largest university in California and 10th in the nation . Due to the overwhelming number of students and available facilities and majors , the California State University Board of Trustees decided to limit enrollment to 33 @,@ 000 . However , in 1993 , enrollment dropped to 26 @,@ 800 , the lowest attendance since 1973 as a result of the budget crisis of 1991 . 
 In 1984 , the California Higher Education Journal ranked SDSU as first among the CSU campuses and U.S. News and World Report ranked the school among the top five comprehensive universities in the west in 1983 , third in 1985 , and in the top fifteen in 1989 . In the 1980s , the College of Business ' School of Accountancy was the only accredited accountancy program in California . Throughout the decade students scored the highest score on the Certified Public Accountancy ( CPA ) exam three times , and by 1990 was second in the nation ( after the University of Texas ) for graduates passing the CPA exam . 
 In January 1987 , Playboy ranked SDSU as the 3rd best party school in the nation , which appalled some administrators , and amused students . The ranking was determined on a number of factors including the education offered at the university , social opportunities , the male – female ratio , and off @-@ campus activities located near the campus . Some students feared that the ranking would diminish the quality of their degree . In 2002 it dropped to tenth place , and in 2005 was included again without a specific rank , before jumping to fifth place in 2006 . 
 The Graduate School of Public Health was first offered to students in 1981 , and was one of only 24 accredited schools of public health in the nation and the only one in the CSU system in 1995 . President Day considered it the major achievement of his administration , and it provided training in hospitals , public health agencies , health maintenance organizations , ambulatory care , and mental health facilities . 
 In the 1990s , the College of Business was the fourth largest undergraduate program in the U.S. By 1989 – 90 SDSU was granting over 1 @,@ 100 Master ’ s degrees and 10 doctoral degrees a year . 
 As a result of the California state government proposed budget cuts to the CSU campuses , 1991 to 1994 at SDSU were marked by a long period of university budget stress , faculty unrest / layoffs , and student protests against SDSU fee increases and class cuts . 
 Spring of 1991 brought large fee increases and budget cuts by the governor and state legislature to the California State University ( CSU ) and University of California ( UC ) systems impacted SDSU in a unique way . While other schools in the systems chose an across the board approach on campus , the president of SDSU at the time , Thomas Day , chose to use a " deep and narrow " approach to program cuts . The result were largest student marches and protests since the Vietnam war . 
 Yet again in Spring 1992 , the CSU and UC systems were facing another round of severe budget cuts and dramatic student fee increases by the state government . Still a second time , SDSU President Thomas Day took the same deep and narrow approach for budget cuts for SDSU , but this time proposed elimination of not only full time faculty professors , but of entire majors such as Aerospace Engineering . In and attempt to alleviate fears of students in those majors , a large meeting by President Day was planned in the student center with hundreds of students and teachers . However , meeting quickly turned angry and chaotic with an overcapacity crowd pressing against the glass windows outside . Following the meeting , students feeling betrayed a 2nd time after 1991 , about a dozen students held a temporary occupation of President Day 's office . This occupation led to a 24 hour vigil in front of the Administration building , summer student bus trips to the state legislature in Sacramento , large campus student voter registration drive , and further student marches and protests in the Fall 1992 . Under heavy student , teacher , and public pressure , the conclusion of these events ended with CSU Chancellor Barry Munitz eventually reversing President Day 's deep and narrow approach , saving the majors and programs in Fall 1992 . 
 Central and parallel to the SDSU student protest movement was an 8 foot high wooden construction fence that encircled the a new campus building . Students quickly put up protest messages , paintings , and cartoons urging students to rally , vote , and challenge the school president . Citing a need to " clean up " the campus during graduation of 1991 , President Day attempted to paint over the now symbolic construction fence wall . The night before the attempted wall paint over by President Day , a large police force arrested eight students peacefully sitting in front of the wall . The next morning , word quickly gathered on campus about the arrests and dozens of student rushed to sit in front of the wall ultimately stopping the painters . 
 On May 1994 , the student government dedicated a permanent memorial to the wall in <unk> Lounge ( later a Starbucks and now the new Student Center ) a few yards from the wall 's edge . The student memorial to the protests included the wall painting of President Day 's head in a guillotine . 
 When President Day retired in July 1996 , SDSU 's incoming freshman had a 38 % success rate in graduating from the university within six years . Day was replaced by the university 's seventh president , Stephen Weber . Just one month later , on August 15 , in what is known as the San Diego State University shooting , a 36 @-@ year @-@ old graduate student pulled out a handgun while defending his thesis and killed three professors . The student pleaded guilty and is serving a life sentence prison term . On August 23 , 2003 , a memorial was dedicated to the three professors that included three trees along with a set of three tables and benches . 
 On July 10 , 2005 a new trolley station opened on the SDSU campus , after construction began in 1999 . The station connected students and faculty with other areas in San Diego county and helped to combat the low availability of parking around campus . The $ 103 million station was just one of the university 's several construction projects that occurred in the 2000s . Starting in the late 1990s , a $ 500 million College Community Redevelopment Project led to the development of the $ 8 @.@ 5 million Piedra del Sol Apartments , the $ 14 @.@ 3 million Fraternity Row , and future developments of a $ 15 million Sorority Row , a $ 150 million Paseo retail , office , and apartment project , as well as a $ 125 million research and office park . In 2003 , a pedestrian bridge opened , connecting several of the dorms to the main campus . In the same year , the campus 's most technologically advanced and largest classroom ( capable of holding 500 students ) was completed . Through 2008 and 2009 , the campus began work on constructing a new alumni center , expanding Aztec Center , and modifying Storm Hall and <unk> Hall to add more office and classroom space . 
 In June 2007 , SDSU was deemed the number one small research university in the nation . The ranking was determined based on faculty productivity , honorary awards , publications in journals , and number of research grants received . At any point , the campus usually has around 800 studies in progress in various fields . A 2007 study revealed that the campus has an economic impact of $ 2 @.@ 4 billion on the San Diego region . Due to projections of current and future growth , the study indicated that the school 's economic impact is expected to increase to $ 4 @.@ 5 billion by 2025 . 
 On May 6 , 2008 , the Drug Enforcement Administration ( DEA ) announced the arrest of 96 individuals , of whom 75 were San Diego State University students , on a variety of drug charges in a multiple @-@ month narcotics sting called Operation Sudden Fall . Two kilograms of cocaine were seized , along with 50 pounds of marijuana , 350 Ecstasy pills , hash oil , methamphetamine , other drug paraphernalia , three guns , and $ 60 @,@ 000 in cash . Several months after the May 6 announcement , it was reported that the majority of the defendants had pleaded guilty to the felony charges . The defendants were then either placed on probation or were required to enter drug diversion programs . Other defendants only received citations or had their cases dismissed . 
 In 2010 , after 15 years as president , Weber announced his upcoming retirement for the following year . Weber was credited for improving the graduation rate ; in 2003 , 66 % of freshmen were graduating within six years . In May 2011 , University of Maryland Baltimore County senior vice president Elliot Hirshman was named by the CSU Board of Trustees to replace Weber . Hirshman assumed his appointed role as president in July . 
 = Royal Wiltshire Yeomanry = 
 The Royal Wiltshire Yeomanry ( RWY ) was a Yeomanry regiment of the Kingdom of Great Britain and the United Kingdom established in 1794 . It was disbanded as an independent Territorial Army unit in 1967 , a time when the strength of the Territorial Army was greatly reduced . The regiment lives on in B ( RWY ) Squadron and Y ( RWY ) Squadron of the Royal Wessex Yeomanry . 
 The regiment took part in the Second Boer War as part of the Imperial Yeomanry . In the First World War it fought on the Western Front , but saw relatively little action as horsed cavalry . After conversion to infantry it fought in the trenches , notably during 3rd Ypres in 1917 and during the German Spring Offensive in 1918 . 
 In the Second World War , the regiment fought in the Middle East , seeing action in Syria against Vichy French forces , as well as operations in Iraq and Iran . It then joined 9th Armoured Brigade , seeing action in North Africa and Italy . With this formation it took part in the Second Battle of El Alamein , spearheading the break @-@ out of the 2nd New Zealand Division during Operation Supercharge on 2 November 1942 . 
 In 2003 , the Royal Yeomanry ( including A ( RWY ) Squadron ) contributed troops to the Joint NBC Regiment during the 2nd Gulf War , for which a battle honour was awarded to the unit . 
 The RWY cap badge is the Prince of Wales 's feathers on a red baize backing , and vehicles carry the New Zealand fern leaf emblem . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Formation and early history = = = 
 On 4 June 1794 , a meeting of country gentlemen at the Bear Inn in Devizes decided to raise a body of ten independent troops of Yeomanry for the county of Wiltshire . The decision was implemented by the High Sheriff Richard Long . In 1797 , the independent troops were amalgamated into a unit called The Regiment of Wiltshire Yeomanry Cavalry , the first such unit to be embodied in Britain , although independent troops were raised earlier in other counties . Neither the Yeomanry , nor the Militia ( the infantry counterpart of the Yeomanry ) , were liable for service overseas and so the regiment took no part in the Napoleonic or later wars of the 19th century . However the Royal Wiltshire Yeomanry was called to deal with civil disorders , such as a mutiny by the county Militia in Devizes , the Swing Riots and the ' machine riots ' . In recognition of this service the Regiment was awarded the title ' Royal ' by King William IV in 1831 ; the first yeomanry regiment to be so honoured . Contrary to common belief , the Regiment was not involved in the restoration of order after the Bristol riots , which followed the rejection of the 1830 Reform Bill ( although they did mobilise for the duty before regular troops restored order ) . 
 In 1863 , it provided an escort to the Prince of Wales ( later King Edward VII ) through the Savernake Forest , in recognition of which it was the first regiment in the British Army to be awarded the title of ' Prince of Wales 's Own ' ( entitling it to wear the Prince of Wales 's feathers as a badge ) . In 1884 , it was placed at the head of the newly formed Yeomanry Order of Precedence by Queen Victoria . 
 = = = Second Boer War = = = 
 The Yeomanry was not intended to serve overseas , but due to the string of defeats during Black Week in December 1899 , the British government realized they were going to need more troops than just the regular army . A Royal Warrant was issued on 24 December 1899 to allow volunteer forces to serve in the Second Boer War . The Royal Warrant asked standing Yeomanry regiments to provide service companies of approximately 115 men each for the Imperial Yeomanry . The regiment provided : 
 1st ( Wiltshire ) Company , 1st Battalion in 1900 
 2nd ( Wiltshire ) Company , 1st Battalion in 1900 
 63rd ( Wiltshire ) Company , 16th Battalion in 1900 , transferred to 1st Battalion in 1902 
 In 1900 the regiment represented the Yeomanry cavalry at the inauguration of the Commonwealth of Australia . 
 On 17 April 1901 , the regiment was renamed as the Royal Wiltshire Imperial Yeomanry ( Prince of Wales 's Own Royal Regiment ) and reorganised in four squadrons and a machine gun section . On 1 April 1908 , the regiment was renamed as the Royal Wiltshire Yeomanry ( Prince of Wales 's Own Royal Regiment ) and transferred to the Territorial Force , trained and equipped as hussars . Its organisation was : 
 It was ranked 1st ( of 55 ) in the order of precedence of the Yeomanry Regiments in the Army List of 1914 . 
 = = = First World War = = = 
 In accordance with the Territorial and Reserve Forces Act 1907 ( 7 Edw . 7 , <unk> ) which brought the Territorial Force into being , the TF was intended to be a home defence force for service during wartime and members could not be compelled to serve outside the country . However , on the outbreak of war on 4 August 1914 , many members volunteered for Imperial Service . Therefore , TF units were split in August and September 1914 into 1st Line ( liable for overseas service ) and 2nd Line ( home service for those unable or unwilling to serve overseas ) units . Later , a 3rd Line was formed to act as a reserve , providing trained replacements for the 1st and 2nd Line regiments . 
 = = = = 1 / 1st Royal Wiltshire Yeomanry = = = = 
 The regiment was mobilised in August 1914 in the 1st South Western Mounted Brigade but did not proceed to France until December 1915 . In May 1916 , two squadrons joined the XV Corps cavalry unit , with two further squadrons joining IX Corps Cavalry regiment . During 1916 – 17 , duties mainly involved policing , traffic control , despatch riding and similar activities . In March 1917 , the regiment played its only part in the War as horsed cavalry , during the German retreat to the Hindenburg Line . Over an eleven @-@ day period , German forces retreated 20 – 25 miles to prepared positions . The RWY formed part of the advanced guard of the British Army , attempting to keep in touch with the German rearguards , but this was difficult owing to the broken nature of the ground behind the original German lines . Contact was made several times with Uhlans and a lance captured in one of these engagements is still in possession of the regiment . 
 In September 1917 , it was finally conceded that there was little place for horsed cavalry in the Western Front . The regiment was converted to infantry and joined the 6th Battalion , The Wiltshire Regiment ( 6th Wilts ) , fighting in the trenches at Ypres and Cambrai in 1917 . In March 1918 , the German army mounted its Spring Offensive and 6th Wilts at one point took the whole weight of the offensive at Bapaume . After a week of combat , 6th Wilts ( half of whom were ex @-@ RWY ) had taken over 500 casualties . In April , they received reinforcements but later that month took another 400 casualties on the Messines Ridge . Shortly after this , it was decided to disband 6th Wilts as they had effectively ceased to exist . The regiment won 13 battle honours for the First World War , most earned with 6th Wilts . 
 = = = = 2 / 1st Royal Wiltshire Yeomanry = = = = 
 The 2nd Line regiment was formed in 1914 . In May 1915 it was with 2 / 1st South Western Mounted Brigade in the Calne area and moved in September to Canterbury . On 31 March 1916 , the remaining Mounted Brigades were ordered to be numbered in a single sequence ; the brigade became the 15th Mounted Brigade and joined 4th Mounted Division at Colchester . 
 In July 1916 there was a major reorganization of 2nd Line yeomanry units in the United Kingdom . All but 12 regiments were converted to cyclists and as a consequence the regiment was dismounted and joined the 6th Cyclist Brigade ( and the division became 2nd Cyclist Division ) at Tolleshunt d 'Arcy near Tiptree . Further reorganization in November 1916 saw the 2nd Cyclist Division being broken up and the regiment was merged with the 2 / 1st North Somerset Yeomanry to form 10th ( Wiltshire and North Somerset ) Yeomanry Cyclist Regiment in 4th Cyclist Brigade at Ipswich . In March 1917 it resumed its identity as 2 / 1st Royal Wiltshire Yeomanry , still in 4th Cyclist Brigade at Ipswich . In July it was at <unk> and later moved to <unk> and Clacton . Early in 1918 , the regiment moved to Ireland with 4th Cyclist Brigade and was stationed in Dublin ; there was no further change before the end of the war . 
 = = = = 3 / 1st Royal Wiltshire Yeomanry = = = = 
 The 3rd Line regiment was formed in 1915 and in the summer it was affiliated to a Reserve Cavalry Regiment at Tidworth . In the summer of 1916 it was affiliated to the 11th Reserve Cavalry Regiment , also at Tidworth . Early in 1917 it was absorbed in the 3rd Reserve Cavalry Regiment at Aldershot . By 1918 it had left the 3rd Reserve Cavalry Regiment as the 1st Line had been converted to infantry . It joined the 4th ( Reserve ) Battalion of the Wiltshire Regiment at Larkhill . 
 = = = Between the wars = = = 
 Post war , a commission was set up to consider the shape of the Territorial Force ( Territorial Army or TA from 1 October 1921 ) . The experience of the First World War made it clear that cavalry was surfeit . The commission decided that only the 14 most senior regiments were to be retained as cavalry ( though the Lovat Scouts and the Scottish Horse were also to remain mounted as " scouts " ) . Eight regiments were converted to Armoured Car Companies of the Royal Tank Corps ( RTC ) , one was reduced to a battery in another regiment , one was absorbed into a local infantry battalion , one became a signals regiment and two were disbanded . The remaining 25 regiments were converted to brigades of the Royal Field Artillery between 1920 and 1922 . As the most senior regiment in the order of precedence , the regiment was retained as horsed cavalry . 
 During the interwar period , it remained an important part of the social scene of the county having its officers drawn from the nobility , landowners , and larger farmers , while other ranks coming largely from their estates . Hunting , point @-@ to @-@ points , and social events seem to have been as important as military training . The chapter of the Regimental History relating to the period 1920 – 1939 is even entitled " The Long Weekend " . 
 This brought the regiment into contact for the first time with someone it would later meet more seriously , Brigadier Bernard Law Montgomery ( often referred to as " Monty " ) , then commanding the 9th Infantry Brigade in Portsmouth . In 1937 , the brigade was on an exercise in Wiltshire and RWY was attached to it for their two @-@ week annual camp . The brigade major wrote that " [ The Regiment ] was run like so much of the TA those days on rather feudal lines ... when they heard they were going to have those tremendous exercises – three nights out at a time – they <unk> violently .... Most of them had looked forward to exercises all day and then going out for a bit of jollity at night . " The upshot was that the regiment was banished to a distant part of the camp where their socialising would not be disturbed by the Regulars . However , apparently the Yeomanry were so intrigued by Monty 's exercises that their Commanding Officer ( CO ) approached him , asking to be included in the last brigade exercise . 
 = = = Second World War = = = 
 The regiment began to mobilise in August 1939 , a few days before the Second World War began . Initially , it was assigned as Divisional Cavalry to the 43rd ( Wessex ) Infantry Division , then to the 4th Cavalry Brigade commanded by Brigadier J. J. Kingstone , as part of the 1st Cavalry Division bound for Palestine . The regiment served there and in Syria , North Africa and Iraq . In North Africa , the unit served as a searchlight regiment in ports such as Tobruk and Benghazi . In January 1941 , after 150 years , its horses were finally replaced by motorised transport . In June , it was involved in the successful campaign against Vichy French forces in Syria , in spite of being desperately short of equipment and serviceable machine @-@ guns . In July 1941 , the 4th Cavalry Brigade became the 9th Armoured Brigade and participated in the expedition into Persia , with the regiment fighting as motorized infantry . In December , it received its first Honey tanks , finally becoming an armoured regiment . 
 In May 1942 , the regiment moved to Egypt with the brigade , which became an independent brigade placed under the operational control of Lieutenant @-@ General Bernard C. Freyberg 's 2nd New Zealand Division , part of the British Eighth Army , then under the command of General Claude Auchinleck , later replaced by Lieutenant @-@ General Bernard Montgomery . The brigade was in reserve during the Battle of Alam el Halfa in late August and in October began training for the Battle of El Alamein . 
 = = = = El Alamein – Lightfoot = = = = 
 The opening of the battle saw four divisions ( 9th Australian , 51st Highland , 2nd New Zealand and 1st South African ) in the assault on the north of the Axis positions . RWY was in support of the 5th New Zealand Brigade ( Brigadier Howard Kippenberger ) ; the aim was for infantry to secure the Miteiriya Ridge during darkness , with the armour to pass beyond them at first light to establish a screen . By now , the regiment was equipped with a mix of M4 Sherman , Crusader and Grant ( M3 Lee ) tanks . On the morning of 24 October 1942 , A and C squadrons were ahead of the infantry on the western slopes of the ridge . B squadron had been delayed in the devil 's gardens minefields and had lost numerous tanks . Throughout that day , A and C Squadrons engaged German panzers on the plain below , and were in turn hit by anti @-@ tank fire . Initially , the heavier Sherman tanks were not vulnerable to this , but , when the German 88mm anti @-@ tank guns joined in , they took severe casualties . By midday , the two squadrons were reduced to one Sherman and three Grants and the commanding officer had been badly wounded and evacuated . The 10th Armoured Division , under the command of Major @-@ General Alexander H. Gatehouse , was at this stage supposed to pass through and onwards to start the break @-@ out , but seemed to be reluctant to do so . 
 At 6 p.m. the regiment was ordered to withdraw . It had lost almost all of its tanks and taken 42 casualties killed or wounded . In reserve , the regiment was issued with new tanks , a hasty mix of Shermans , Grants , and Crusaders ( types II and III ) , mostly salvaged from the battlefield and rapidly repaired . Montgomery had been impressed with the performance of the 2nd New Zealand Division and wanted them to spearhead the next thrust , but Freyberg was unwilling to do so without reinforcements as his troops had suffered so many casualties . Montgomery therefore placed 151 ( from 50th Division ) and 152 Infantry ( from 51st Division ) brigades under Freyberg 's command for the next phase of the battle . 
 = = = = El Alamein – Supercharge = = = = 
 On the night of 1 / 2 November 1942 , the Eighth Army attacked again in the north , with 2nd New Zealand Division in the lead . Freyberg placed 151 Brigade on the right and 152 Brigade on the left . The aim was to attack directly westwards across the Rahman track , with the infantry leading the night assault and 9th Armoured Brigade ( now commanded by Brigadier John C. Currie ) again passing through to break the enemy gun line and allow X Corps to break out . The assault went to plan except that opposition on the left was heavier than expected which slowed the advance . As a result , the advancing tanks were highlighted against the dawn sky in the east and began to be picked off by Axis anti @-@ tank fire . The Regiment was in the centre of the 9th Armoured Brigade , and the CO lost touch with both his artillery support and close anti @-@ tank support . In the growing light , the B squadron commander ( Major <unk> ) realised that he was in a ring of enemy anti @-@ tank guns , ahead and to both flanks . He gave the order to ' Charge ' and B Squadron overran the anti @-@ tank positions , losing some vehicles but destroying the enemy gun line . Meanwhile , the 21st Panzer Division was counter @-@ attacking A and C Squadrons and at 4pm the Regiment ( now down to four tanks ) was withdrawn . The 1st Armoured Division from X Corps were just behind the 9th Armoured Brigade but there were no liaison officers between the units and 1st Armoured did not take the opportunity to push on through the broken Axis gun @-@ line . 
 After the 9th Armoured Brigade 's action , Brigadier Gentry of the 6th New Zealand Brigade went ahead to survey the scene . On seeing Brigadier Currie asleep on a stretcher , he approached him saying , ' Sorry to wake you John , but I 'd like to know where your tanks are ? ' Currie waved his hand at a group of tanks around him , replying ' There they are . ' Gentry was puzzled . ' I don 't mean your headquarters tanks , I mean your armoured regiments . Where are they ? ' Currie waved his arm and again replied , ' There are my armoured regiments , <unk> 
 Nevertheless , the assault of the 2nd New Zealand Division had drawn in both 15 and 21 Panzer Divisions , with the result that there was a wide gap in the Axis lines to the south west . Through this gap Montgomery pushed the remainder of his armour , breaking the Afrika Korps line and pushing westwards into its rear areas and supply lines . By 4 November , the battle was won and Montgomery was entertaining the captured Afrika Korps commander , von Thoma , to dinner in his caravan . 
 In an account of the battle published to mark its 25th anniversary , Montgomery wrote : 
 I must mention the magnificent fight put up by 9th Armoured Brigade — 3rd Hussars , Wiltshire Yeomanry , Warwickshire Yeomanry .... If the British armour owed any debt to the infantry of 8th army , the debt was paid on November 2nd by 9th Armoured Brigade in heroism and blood .... 
 = = = = Syria and Italy = = = = 
 Following El Alamein , the 9th Armoured Brigade was withdrawn first to Cairo and then to Syria for internal security duties , where it remained throughout 1942 and 1943 . In May 1944 , it reached the Italian Front and was placed under the command of Major @-@ General Charles F. Keightley 's 78th " Battleaxe " Division , then under Lieutenant @-@ General Sidney C. Kirkman 's XIII Corps . The RWY was to support the 36th Infantry Brigade , with one squadron in support of each of the brigade 's three infantry battalions . In May – June 1944 it took part in the advance on Rome , working its way up in close country between the central mountains and the sea to the west . At one point , the 78th Division withdrew but outlying elements of the regiment did not get the message and continued forwards . The Corps HQ diary for 23 June records ' RWY water truck reports <unk> clear of enemy ' . 
 In July and August , the 9th Armoured Brigade worked in support of the 4th and 10th Indian Infantry Divisions in the central mountains south east of Florence , on the approach to the Gothic Line . In August , the order was received that all men with over 4 ½ years service overseas should be repatriated , and this reduced the regiment 's strength by half . This made it impossible to function as a fighting unit and it was withdrawn from the line of battle . In October 1944 , the regiment returned to England to train replacements for armoured regiments still fighting in Europe . It continued in this role until 1946 , although the pace slowed after victory in Europe in May 1945 . 
 During the Second World War , officers and soldiers serving with the regiment received three Distinguished Service Orders , four Military Crosses and ten Military Medals . The regiment lost 59 dead during the war , with the biggest single loss being 20 dead on or around 2 November 1941 during Operation Supercharge . 
 = = = Post war = = = 
 In 1947 , the regiment again ceased to exist , but the following year was re @-@ established as a heavy tank unit in support of 43rd ( Wessex ) Infantry Division , equipped with Cromwell and Charioteer tanks . 
 In 1958 , the regiment converted to a light reconnaissance role equipped with armoured cars , such as the Daimler , Humber , Saladin and Ferret . By 1964 , there were just three armoured regiments in the Territorial Army and , in 1967 , it was decided to reduce the TA even further and the regiment was disbanded as an independent unit . However , a new TA unit , the Royal Yeomanry , was formed from five different predecessor units and the Royal Wiltshire Yeomanry was reborn as A Squadron , The Royal Yeomanry . During the Cold War , its role in the event of war would have been as a medium reconnaissance unit for the British Army of the Rhine ( BAOR ) . During the 1970s , a second RWY @-@ based squadron was raised , as B squadron , Royal Wessex Yeomanry . This was initially a home defence unit trained as infantry , but later equipped with stripped down Land Rovers to perform reconnaissance duties . 
 The Royal Yeomanry 's role changed in the 1990s to providing both main battle tank crews and soldiers for the Joint Chemical , Biological , Radiation and Nuclear Regiment . In January 2003 , the Royal Yeomanry deployed two of its squadrons for the Iraq war as part of the Joint NBC Regiment . It was the first mobilisation of a Territorial Army unit as a formed body ( TA soldiers under TA command ) for combat operations since the Suez Crisis in 1956 . Overall , over 200 members of the regiment have deployed on operational tours to Iraq since 2003 . In recognition of its service in the liberation of Iraq , the Royal Yeomanry was presented with the battle honour ' Iraq 2003 ' on 11 November 2005 , the only battle honour presented to a TA unit since the Second World War . Since the Iraq war , the importance of the CBRN ( Chemical , Biological , Radiological and Nuclear ) role , as it is now called , has been acknowledged and in 2005 all five of the RY 's squadrons adopted it . 
 All of the squadrons adopted a single cap badge in 2006 , crossed A 's given by the regiments patron – Princess Alexandra . 
 The regiment has supported operations in Iraq and Afghanistan . 
 The Royal Wessex Yeomanry operates as the Armoured Reserve Regiment providing formed crews for three Regular Army regiments operating the Challenger 2 main battle tank . B ( Royal Wiltshire Yeomanry ) squadron retains its Prince of Wales feathers capbadge and ( with A squadron , Royal Yeomanry ) its place as the senior Yeomanry unit of the Territorial Army . B ( RWY ) Squadron <unk> is based in Old Sarum , Salisbury and A ( RWY ) Squadron RY is based in Swindon . 
 A ( RWY ) Squadron Changed command and name from the Royal Yeomanry on 1 July 2014 to become Y ( RWY ) Squadron Royal Wessex Yeomanry and like its fellow RWY Sqn has started to train on Challenger 2 . Both Squadrons now wear the new Royal Wessex Yeomanry capbadge . 
 = = Battle honours = = 
 The Royal Wiltshire Yeomanry was awarded the following battle honours ( honours in bold are emblazoned on the regimental colours ) : 
 The regiment 's battle honours are summarised and illustrated in the picture of the RWY guidon which forms the frontispiece of the regimental history . 
 = = Uniforms and insignia = = 
 During the 19th century , the regiment , in common with other Yeomanry and Militia units , sported a range of uniforms . Jackets were always dark blue . Between 1812 and 1873 , a leather shako was worn , replaced in 1873 by a fur Busby with a red cloth bag . Service dress during the First World War was a khaki tunic and breeches , with a red stripe down the seam and a red lanyard worn by all ranks round the left armpit . The chevrons of sergeants and corporals were surmounted by a regimental badge on a red baize backing , a practice that continued through the inter @-@ war years and beyond . 
 The regimental colours of green , red and yellow , which appear on the regimental tie and Stable belt , were decided on in the late 19th century . One officer ( who was also a Conservative MP ) suggested green with a red stripe , but this was objected to because it was similar to the Rifle Brigade . Another officer ( a Liberal MP ) suggested adding yellow , which was agreed . The joke was that red and yellow were Liberal colours , and the Liberal MP got away with this under his rival 's nose . 
 The cap badge of the RWY is the Prince of Wales 's feathers is a slightly different design to other regiments wearing the same symbol , such as the Royal Regiment of Wales . It is worn on the brown beret with a red baize and a black baize backing . During the First World War , men from the RWY carved their cap badge into the chalk hillside above the village of <unk> where it can still be seen today , alongside those of other units . 
 The New Zealand ' fern leaf ' emblem was painted on the regiment 's vehicles when it was under the command of 2nd New Zealand Division , a tradition which continues to this day . The brigade sign , worn during the Italian campaign but not subsequently , was a white horse on a green square background . 
 = Ion Croitoru = 
 Ion ( John ) William Croitoru ( born December 7 , 1965 ) is a Canadian former professional wrestler . He was born and raised in Ontario , Canada . To wrestling fans , Croitoru is better known by his ring names , Johnny K @-@ 9 and Bruiser Bedlam . He competed in several Canadian wrestling promotions , including Stampede Wrestling , and later wrestled for New Japan Pro Wrestling , Smoky Mountain Wrestling , and the World Wrestling Federation ( WWF ) . He wrestled as a jobber in the WWF , but he was booked to win titles in several other promotions . 
 Croitoru is also famous for his history of legal problems . He was a member of Satan 's Choice , a biker gang , and has also been convicted of assault , trafficking cocaine and bombing a police station . In 2005 , Croitoru was arrested for the murder of lawyer Lynn Gilbank and her husband Fred . After a lengthy investigation , the charges were dropped in June 2006 because of insufficient evidence . He worked as a security guard in Vancouver , British Columbia until being arrested in May 2009 for conspiracy to commit murder . On January 24 , 2011 , Croitoru was charged with first degree murder in connection with the 2008 execution of Jonathan Barber in Burnaby , British Columbia . 
 = = Wrestling career = = 
 = = = Early years = = = 
 Croitoru trained with Nick DeCarlo and Vic <unk> before debuting in Stampede Wrestling in 1984 . Bruce Hart gave Croitoru the ring name Orhan <unk> , The Terrible Turk , a name Croitoru only wrestled under for a short time after leaving the promotion . He continued to wrestle in Canadian independent promotions , such as Grand Prix Wrestling in the Maritimes and Superstars of Wrestling in Windsor , Ontario . 
 In 1985 Croitoru wrestled for the American Wrestling Association ( AWA ) , where he received a push and was given a reign as AWA Southern Heavyweight champion . He defeated Jerry Lawler to win the belt on August 16 , but dropped it back to Lawler in a rematch on September 6 . The following month , Croitoru joined the World Wrestling Federation ( WWF ) as Johnny K @-@ 9 , where he competed until 1989 . Croitoru claims that he decided on this name while being arrested after a fight . He saw " K @-@ 9 " written on a paddywagon and decided on the ring name . He worked as a jobber to the stars , putting over such wrestlers as Pedro Morales , Tito Santana and Paul Orndorff . He wrestled in many tag team matches and formed a short @-@ lived team with Barry O in 1986 , but his biggest match in the WWF was a televised match against Hulk Hogan . After leaving the WWF , he wrestled on a tour of Japan for New Japan Pro Wrestling ; he later returned to Japan to compete for Frontier Martial @-@ Arts Wrestling and Wrestle Association R. In the late 1980s , Croitoru also worked as a promoter along with Mike Kelly and Bob Clarke , operating the short @-@ lived Canadian International Championship Wrestling in Hamilton , Ontario . 
 = = = Smoky Mountain Wrestling = = = 
 Croitoru joined Smoky Mountain Wrestling ( SMW ) in 1994 , where he was given the ring name Bruiser Bedlam . According to the storyline , he was brought in by manager Jim Cornette to help settle Cornette 's feud with Bob Armstrong . Bedlam and Cornette combined for a victory in a two @-@ on @-@ one handicap match over Armstrong at SMW 's Blue Grass Brawl II show on April 1 . That year , he wrestled many tag team and six @-@ man matches while teaming with Cornette . 
 Bedlam was booked for one title reign with the SMW Beat the Champ Television Championship during his stint in SMW . The kayfabe rules behind the title state that any wrestler winning five consecutive matches as champion would win $ 5 @,@ 000 but be forced to vacate the title . He won a match against Mike Furnas on April 4 , 1994 to win the title , and he defended it over the following month . Bedlam won his fifth match on May 2 with a victory over Anthony Michaels , and the storyline saw him forced to give up the title . He went on to feud with Tracy Smothers , and the two wrestled in a lengthy series of matches , including several <unk> 's glove matches , in which a glove is available for the wrestlers to use as a weapon . Later that year , Bedlam wrestled several matches against " Dirty White Boy " Tony Anthony . The series consisted of several steel cage matches in which Bedlam put Anthony over . 
 = = = Later career = = = 
 In 1994 , Croitoru also began wrestling in Midwest Territorial Wrestling , an independent promotion based in Michigan . He took on the ring name Taras Bulba and proclaimed himself " King of Chain matches " . He competed in a tournament to determine the promotion 's first heavyweight champion , but Al Snow defeated him in the final round . Bulba was pushed for a run with the belt , however , defeating Mickey Doyle on January 21 , 1995 to win the vacant title . He held the championship for almost four months before dropping it to Marty Jannetty . 
 As Johnny K @-@ 9 , Croitoru returned to the WWF for one match where he defeated Gary Scott in a dark match on January 23 , 1995 . He then competed briefly in Cleveland All Pro Wrestling , where he wrestled against Cactus Jack in a booked loss on March 23 . Croitoru also wrestled in Border City Wrestling ( BCW ) and was pushed to win the BCW Can @-@ Am Heavyweight Championship by defeating Scott D 'Amore on May 21 , 1995 . He held the title for a little over a month before dropping it back to D 'Amore . 
 Once again using the ring name Bruiser <unk> , he wrestled for Insane Championship Wrestling ( ICW ) for a short time in 1996 . While there , he competed in a barbed wire baseball bat match against Ian Rotten ; Bedlam was booked for the victory in the match . He also wrestled New Jack at ICW 's Holiday Hell supercard in a match that ended in a double countout . He wrestled on World Championship Wrestling 's first annual <unk> DiPaolo tribute show , teaming with Cowboy Johnson in a loss to Tony Parisi and Dominic DeNucci . In the late 1990s , Croitoru wrestled in Cambridge , Ontario @-@ based International Championship Wrestling . He feuded with Greg Valentine , and the two wrestled in a series of matches . Bedlam won the ICW Heavyweight Championship from Valentine and used heel tactics such as brass knuckles to defend the belt . 
 Croitoru has also trained several wrestlers , including Pure Wrestling Association 's Eddie Osbourne and Melissa <unk> , who competes under the ring name 21st Century Fox . 
 = = Legal trouble = = 
 = = = Satan 's Choice motorcycle gang = = = 
 Croitoru has a history of run @-@ ins with the police . Many of his <unk> problems came while he was president of the Hamilton , Ontario chapter of the Satan 's Choice Outlaw motorcycle club . He was arrested for trafficking cocaine and served ten months in prison . Soon after , he was convicted of assault and was given a sentence of seven months . He encountered more problems on December 15 , 1996 when he and several friends from Satan 's Choice were kicked out of a strip club for wearing their gang 's colors . To get revenge , Croitoru and his friends planned to blow up the strip club . They changed their minds , however , and decided to bomb the local police station instead . The bomb caused $ 133 @,@ 000 in damages to the Sudbury , Ontario police station and a nearby bank and injured a police officer . Croitoru and two friends were arrested and charged , but the trial did not begin until almost two years later . 
 While Croitoru was awaiting trial for the bombing , the Hamilton branch of Satan 's Choice was shut down after an informant gave the police information about the gang 's involvement with drug dealing and extortion . The gang 's clubhouse was confiscated and the club 's national leadership decided to disband the Hamilton chapter . Croitoru got in a fight in Hamilton with another former Satan 's Choice member on January 13 , 1998 . A police officer saw Croitoru punch the other man in the face and arrested Croitoru for assault . In addition to the assault change , Croitoru was charged with extortion from an unrelated incident as well as carrying a concealed weapon and breaking the conditions of his release following the police station bombing . In September 1998 , Croitoru was brought to trial for his role in the bombing . He was convicted and sentenced to 33 months in prison . 
 Hitman Ken Murdock , who was himself jailed in 1999 , has claimed he was hired by the mafia to kill Croitoru but instead chose to spare his life . 
 = = = Murder accusations = = = 
 Croitoru 's most famous encounter with the law occurred on January 6 , 2005 when he was charged with the November 16 , 1998 murders of Lynn and Fred Gilbank . The couple was shot execution @-@ style with a shotgun . Police suspect that the murders were in response to Lynn Gilbank 's assistance in getting William and Angie Smith into a witness protection program after William Smith gave the police information about the Gravelle crime family . Croitoru , who had several contacts within the Gravelle family ( including a contract to kill police inspector Rick Wills , who was investigating the <unk> ) , was a suspect in the investigation and had his phones tapped during the investigation . 
 After an investigation that lasted six years and cost $ 6 million , police laid charges against Croitoru and Andre Gravelle . Croitoru was charged with two counts of first degree murder and two counts of conspiracy to commit murder . After spending seven months in prison , Croitoru was released on $ 100 @,@ 000 bail . He was arrested on December 2 , 2005 for violating his bail terms , and police filed another extortion charge against him . 
 Evidence against Croitoru and Gravelle was presented over the course of eight weeks in 2006 , but the judge stated that the case against the two accused was not strong . Ontario Attorney General Michael Bryant withdrew the charges on June 12 , 2006 . Following this action by the attorney general , both Croitoru and Andre Gravelle announced plans to file lawsuits against people involved with the prosecution . Gravelle is suing for $ 25 million , and Croitoru is seeking $ 15 million for wrongful imprisonment and malicious prosecution . Hamilton Police Services was ordered to pay Gravelle $ 10 @,@ 000 for court costs . In June 2006 , Croitoru also pleaded guilty to the charges of extortion and violating the terms of his bail . As a result , he was forced to forfeit $ 10 @,@ 000 of the bail money . 
 = = = United Nations gang = = = 
 On May 15 , 2009 , Croitoru was arrested , along with seven other members of the United Nations gang . They were charged with conspiracy to commit murder for allegedly plotting to kill the Bacon Brothers and other members of the Red Scorpions gang . On January 24 , 2011 , Croitoru was charged with first degree murder in connection with the execution of Jonathan Barber and the attempted murder of Barber 's girlfriend Vicky King , then 17 , in Burnaby on 9 May 2008 . In July 2013 , he pleaded guilty to conspiracy to commit murder , and the murder charges were stayed . He was sentenced to 13 years in prison , which was reduced to four years and eight months after factoring in time served . In January 2015 , he applied for parole , stating that he had agreed to help with the murders to impress members of the United Nations gang , but that he did not intend to kill anyone . The application was denied . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Before entering wrestling , Croitoru played junior hockey for the Kitchener Rangers in the Ontario Hockey League . He was not drafted to the National Hockey League , however , and he decided to pursue professional wrestling instead . Croitoru is an accomplished weightlifter , and he once bench pressed 625 pounds . While awaiting his murder trial , Croitoru ran a home renovation business until he was unable to secure a bank loan to cover business expenses . After closing the business , Croitoru supported himself by working as a used car salesman . Croitoru came from a large family from Dundas , Ontario . 
 Croitoru currently lives in Vancouver , British Columbia with his common @-@ law wife to Tracy Edwards and his daughter Tiandra He most recently worked as a bodyguard for Lion 's Gate Entertainment , providing protection for such actors as Jack Nicholson and Cyndi Lauper . Croitoru also had a brief acting career , appearing in a movie titled Oklahoma Smugglers , in which he portrayed a wrestler , and such television shows as Reaper . 
 = = In wrestling = = 
 Finishing moves 
 Stomach claw 
 Signature moves 
 Diving headbutt 
 <unk> 
 Managers 
 Handsome Johnny Bradford 
 Jim Cornette 
 Pandora 
 = = Championships and accomplishments = = 
 American Wrestling Association 
 AWA Southern Heavyweight Championship ( 1 time ) 
 Border City Wrestling 
 BCW Can @-@ Am Heavyweight Championship ( 1 time ) 
 International Championship Wrestling ( Cambridge , Ontario ) 
 ICW Heavyweight Championship ( 1 time ) 
 Midwest Territorial Wrestling 
 <unk> Heavyweight Championship ( 1 time ) 
 Smoky Mountain Wrestling 
 SMW Beat the Champ Television Championship ( 1 time ) 
 = Calgary Hitmen = 
 The Calgary Hitmen are a major junior ice hockey team based in Calgary , Alberta , Canada . The Hitmen play in the Central Division of the Western Hockey League ( WHL ) . They play their home games at the Scotiabank Saddledome . Bret " The Hitman " Hart , a local @-@ born professional wrestler , was a founding owner as well as the inspiration for the team 's name . Established in 1994 , the team has been owned by the Calgary Flames hockey club since 1997 . They are the third WHL team to represent Calgary , preceded by the Centennials and Wranglers . 
 The Hitmen have finished with the best record in the WHL four times , and qualified for the playoffs for thirteen consecutive seasons between 1998 and 2010 . In 1999 , they became the first Calgary team to win the President 's Cup as league champions , and the first to represent the city in the Memorial Cup since the Calgary Canadians won the national junior title in 1926 . The Hitmen hold numerous WHL attendance records , and in 2004 – 05 became the first team in Canadian Hockey League history to average 10 @,@ 000 fans per game . Thirty @-@ nine former Hitmen players have gone on to play in the National Hockey League . 
 = = Franchise history = = 
 Graham James left his position as coach and general manager of the Swift Current Broncos to found the Hitmen in 1994 . He organized a group of eighteen investors in the club , including star National Hockey League players Theoren Fleury and Joe Sakic , along with Bret Hart , famous for his exploits in the World Wrestling Federation . The Calgary Flames , who had just assumed control of the then Saddledome and were looking to fill extra dates in the building , were receptive to the new team . 
 Calgary had been without a WHL team since the Wranglers moved south to become the Lethbridge Hurricanes in 1987 . The league 's expansion into Calgary was met with skepticism , as the league had previously failed in Western Canada 's largest markets of Vancouver , Edmonton , Calgary , and Winnipeg , when in competition with the NHL . 
 The Stampede Corral has served as a second home for the odd home game when the Saddledome is unavailable . They used the Corral for regular season home games in 1995 @-@ 1996 and playoff games in 1998 and 2016 . 
 = = = Controversial beginnings = = = 
 The club selected its name and logo as an homage to Bret " The Hitman " Hart . The team 's distinctive pink , grey and black jerseys were also modeled after Hart 's ring attire . The logo proved immensely popular and Hitmen merchandise sold well at many local retailers . However , the name and logo were also subject to heavy criticism from segments of the public and the business community , who panned both as negative stereotypes of violence within the sport . Among the chief critics of the new logo was the Flames organization . They had received calls from concerned business people over theme and shared that sentiment . Struggling to attract corporate sponsors , the Hitmen chose to scrap the " Jason Voorhees " -style logo in favour of an alternate " starburst " logo just two months after it was unveiled . The club went back to the original logo in 1996 . 
 The Hitmen entered their first season playing in the newly formed Central Division , and were predicted to finish as high as third in the five @-@ team division . Instead , they finished as the second @-@ worst regular season team in the league , posting an 18 – 51 – 3 record . The Hitmen lost CAD $ 250 @,@ 000 in their first season and saw their season ticket base halved to 700 for the 1996 – 97 season . The losses led to questions about the viability of the club . 
 Citing personal reasons , James stunned the organization when he resigned as coach and general manager on September 5 , 1996 . Two days later , the Calgary Police Service revealed that James was being investigated on allegations he sexually abused two former players while he was with the Swift Current Broncos . James was charged , and in January 1997 pleaded guilty to two counts of sexual assault . Upon James ' conviction , and sentencing to 3 ½ years in prison , the Hitmen attempted to distance themselves from their former coach . < 
 The Hitmen struggled on the ice as well , again missing the playoffs after falling to a record of 15 – 53 – 4 . The spectre of the Graham James scandal hurt the franchise . The original investors , many of whom played for or were otherwise associated with James , sold the team to the Flames for approximately $ 1 @.@ 5 million in June 1997 . It was widely speculated that the new owners would change the team name , possibly to the Junior Flames , however they chose to retain the name although they adopted a new colour scheme and updated the logo . 
 = = = First championship = = = 
 Dean Clark took over as head coach shortly after James ' resignation , and led the 1997 – 98 Hitmen to a remarkable turnaround . The team improved to a 40 – 28 – 4 record and first @-@ place finish in the Central Division , qualifying for the playoffs for the first time in franchise history . They defeated the Saskatoon Blades and Swift Current Broncos to reach the Eastern Conference final before falling to the Brandon Wheat Kings . Clark was awarded the Dunc McCallum Memorial Trophy as the WHL 's top coach , and also won the Canadian Hockey League 's Brian Kilrea Coach of the Year Award . Calgary improved to 51 – 13 – 8 in 1998 – 99 , finishing one point ahead of the Kamloops Blazers for the regular season title . Led by Brad Moran , Pavel Brendl and goaltender Alexandre Fomitchev , the Hitmen lost just five games in the playoffs en route to their first league championship . They won the title at home before a WHL playoff record crowd of 17 @,@ 139 . They became the first Calgary @-@ based team to qualify for the Memorial Cup since the Calgary Canadians won the 1926 title . 
 In the 1999 Memorial Cup , the Hitmen opened their tournament with a 5 – 3 victory over the Ontario Hockey League 's Belleville Bulls , followed by a 4 – 3 loss to the host Ottawa 67 's . They followed with a 3 – 1 win over the Acadie @-@ Bathurst Titan of the Quebec Major Junior Hockey League . Finishing atop the round robin standings , the Hitmen earned a bye into the championship game , and a rematch against the 67 's . The championship game was a back @-@ and @-@ forth affair . Ottawa held 4 – 1 and 6 – 5 leads , while Calgary led 5 – 4 at one point and tied the game late to send it to overtime . The Hitmen fell short of winning the title however , as Ottawa 's Matt <unk> scored the winning goal 1 : 58 into overtime . Brendl and Matt <unk> were named to the Memorial Cup All @-@ Star team . 
 The Hitmen entered the 1999 – 2000 season with a strong squad , along with expectations at making another run to the Memorial Cup . The club finished the regular season with a record of 58 – 12 – 2 – 2 , once again winning the regular season title . The team set franchise records for victories ( 58 ) and points ( 120 ) , which stood until the 2008 – 09 year . After sweeping the Moose Jaw Warriors and Saskatoon Blades , the Hitmen were upset by the Kootenay Ice in the Eastern Conference final , falling four games to one . 
 = = = 2000s = = = 
 The Hitmen went through a rebuilding period and finished third or fourth in the Central Division between 2001 and 2004 , winning only one playoff series during that time . The Hitmen acquired goaltender Justin Pogge from the Prince George Cougars during the 2004 – 05 season . Pogge 's goaltending , along with the offensive leadership of forward Andrew Ladd , saw the Hitmen win their first playoff series in four years . They could not follow up on their victory over the Lethbridge Hurricanes , however , losing their second round series against the Brandon Wheat Kings in seven games . 
 The Hitmen were heavily marketed by the Flames during the National Hockey League 's 2004 – 05 lockout . As a result , the Hitmen averaged 10 @,@ 062 fans per game and set a new league attendance record . The season total of 362 @,@ 227 fans smashed the old record by over 45 @,@ 000 . The Hitmen became the first Canadian Hockey League team to average over 10 @,@ 000 fans per game , having the highest average attendance of any hockey team — junior or professional — in North America that year . 
 The 2005 – 06 Hitmen battled the Medicine Hat Tigers for the top spot in the Western Hockey League for most of the season . Calgary finished with 101 points , their best total since 1999 – 2000 , however , finishing two points behind Medicine Hat for the best record in the league . The team again disappointed in the playoffs , falling to the Moose Jaw Warriors in the Eastern Conference semi @-@ final . Pogge 's performance during the season earned him honours as both the WHL player of the year and CHL goaltender of the year . Calgary fell to third in the Central Division in 2006 – 07 . In the playoffs , they upset the Kootenay Ice , who finished 19 @-@ points ahead of Calgary in the regular season . The Hitmen then defeated the East Division champion Brandon Wheat Kings to reach the Eastern Conference final for the fourth time in franchise history , where they were subsequently defeated by the Tigers . 
 The Hitmen entered the 2007 – 08 season with expectations of being strong contenders , voted the pre @-@ season pick to finish atop the Eastern Conference by the league 's coaches and general managers . The team lived up to expectations , winning the Central Division , and finishing with the best record in the East for the first time since 2000 . During a late season game , Calgary broke the league 's single @-@ game attendance record , as an announced crowd of 19 @,@ 305 watched Calgary defeat Kootenay by a score of 6 goals to 1 . In the playoffs , the Hitmen defeated the Moose Jaw Warriors and Swift Current Broncos in six games apiece , advancing to the Eastern Conference finals for the second consecutive season . 
 = = = Second championship = = = 
 Following the graduation of several players , including Karl <unk> , who was named both WHL player of the year and CHL defenceman of the year , the 2008 – 09 Hitmen were expected to enter a rebuilding period . Instead , they captured the franchise 's third Scotty Munro Memorial Trophy as the regular season champion , earning the top seed in the playoffs . The team tied or broke 21 franchise records during the regular season , including wins ( 59 ) , points ( 122 ) and goals for ( 334 ) . Joel Broda led the league with 53 goals , while Brandon Kozun and Brett Sonne finished second and third in league scoring with 108 and 100 points respectively ; it was only the second time in franchise history that two players topped the 100 @-@ point mark in the same season . In the playoffs , the Hitmen won 12 straight games , sweeping the Edmonton Oil Kings , Lethbridge Hurricanes and Brandon Wheat Kings to reach the WHL finals for the first time since 1999 . In the finals , they were stunned by the Kelowna Rockets , losing the first three games of the series before winning the next two to extend the series to a sixth game . The Hitmen lost game six in overtime , and the series 4 – 2 , to end their season . Sonne was named WHL Player of the Year , while General Manager Kelly Kisio was named Executive of the Year for the second time in recognition of the Hitmen 's season . 
 Calgary again finished with the best record in the regular season with 107 points on the strength of Kozun 's CHL leading 107 points and the goaltending of Martin Jones , who was named goaltender of the year in the WHL . The Hitmen 's playoffs nearly ended quickly as they lost three of the first four games in their opening round playoff series against the Warriors before winning three consecutive games to take the series in seven . They then beat the Tigers and Wheat Kings in six and five games respectively to reach the WHL championship series for the second consecutive year . Entering the final against the Tri @-@ City Americans , the 11 players who returned from the 2009 finals lost vowed not to suffer a repeat of their disappointing finish to the previous season . Named the playoff MVP , Jones allowed only seven goals against in the final as the Hitmen defeated the Americans in five games to win their second Ed Chynoweth Cup in franchise history . The victory , in front of a home crowd of over 15 @,@ 000 fans , earned the Hitmen a berth in the 2010 Memorial Cup tournament . At the tournament , Calgary posted a 2 – 1 record in the round robin , defeating the QMJHL 's Moncton Wildcats and the host Brandon Wheat Kings , but lost the semi @-@ final in overtime , also against Brandon . 
 Following the graduation of many of the team 's top scorers , the Hitmen fell to last place the WHL in 2010 – 11 , at one point tying a franchise record with 12 consecutive losses . As part of the 2011 Heritage Classic , the Hitmen hosted the Regina Pats in an outdoor game at McMahon Stadium on February 21 , 2011 . Regina won 3 – 2 before 20 @,@ 888 fans , setting new WHL and CHL attendance records , and proving the highest attended junior game of all @-@ time . 
 = = Community impact = = 
 The Hitmen are active within the community , supporting numerous programs and charities . They host an annual teddy bear toss each December . The 13th annual Petro Canada Teddy Bear Toss , held on December 2 , 2007 , saw what the Hitmen claim to be a world record 26 @,@ 919 bears tossed on to the ice by 17 @,@ 341 fans . The bears are donated to charities throughout the Calgary area . A few of the bears are personally delivered by the players to the Alberta Children 's Hospital , an event highly anticipated by patients attending the hospital . 
 The Hitmen are also partners with the Calgary Board of Education and their Read On ! Literacy for Life program . Author Sigmund Brouwer has released numerous young adult @-@ oriented mystery novels about the team and fictitious Hitmen players . The ninth book in the series , titled Hitmen Star , was published in 2008 . Copies of the books are distributed to sixth grade students throughout Calgary and southern Alberta schools ; with Hitmen and former National Hockey League players helping to encourage students to take an active interest in reading . 
 = = Current roster = = 
 Updated Feb @-@ 2 @-@ 16 
 = = Season @-@ by @-@ season record = = 
 Note : GP 
 = Games played , W = 
 Wins , L 
 = Losses , T = 
 Ties , OTL 
 = Overtime losses , <unk> = 
 Shootout losses , Pts 
 = Points , GF = 
 Goals for , GA = Goals against 
 = = NHL alumni = = 
 Thirty @-@ eight players have been selected from the Hitmen roster at the National Hockey League 's entry drafts . Of those , nine players were selected in the first round . The highest drafted players in club history were Pavel Brendl ( 1999 ) and Andrew Ladd ( 2004 ) . Both players were selected fourth overall . 
 Forty @-@ one former Hitmen players have gone on to play in the National Hockey League . The first was Ryan Bast , who played two games with the Philadelphia Flyers in 1998 – 99 . Andrew Ladd has gone on to win two Stanley Cup championships since graduating : with the Carolina Hurricanes in 2006 and the Chicago Blackhawks in 2010 . His former Hitmen teammate , Ryan Getzlaf won the Cup with the Anaheim Ducks in 2007 . 
 = = Head coaches = = 
 Dean Clark has thus far been the most successful coach for the Calgary Hitmen . He led the team between 1996 and 2001 , and in that time won more WHL games than any other coach . He was named coach of the year in both the WHL and CHL in 1998 . Clark led the Hitmen to three division titles , two regular season titles , one league championship , and coached the Hitmen to their first Memorial Cup final . Kelly Kisio is the team 's former head coach from the 2004 – 05 season to the end of the 2007 – 08 season , a role he shared with Dean <unk> in his first year at the helm of the Hitmen . Kisio stepped down as coach in 2008 , naming former assistant Dave Lowry , as head coach for the 2008 – 09 season . Lowry was promoted to an assistant with the Calgary Flames after leading the Hitmen to a 122 @-@ point season in his rookie year . He was replaced by Mike Williamson , who led the team to a WHL championship in 2010 but left the team in 2014 . The current head coach is Mark French . 
 = = Club records = = 
 Season 
 Individual 
 Most goals , 73 , Pavel Brendl , 1998 – 99 
 Most assists , 72 , Brad Moran , 1999 – 2000 
 Most points , 134 , Pavel Brendl , 1998 – 99 
 Most penalty minutes : 302 , Ryan Andres , 1997 – 98 
 Best goals against average , 1 @.@ 72 , Justin Pogge , 2005 – 06 
 Most shutouts , 11 , Justin Pogge , 2005 – 06 
 Most games played , goaltender : 60 , Alexandre Fomitchev , 1997 – 98 
 Most saves , goaltender : 1 @,@ 481 , Alexandre Fomitchev , 1997 – 98 
 Team 
 Most wins : 59 , 2008 – 09 
 Most points : 122 , 2008 – 09 
 Most goals for : 330 , 2008 – 09 
 Fewest goals against : 155 , 2005 – 06 
 Career 
 Most goals : 204 , Brad Moran , 1995 – 00 
 Most assists : 246 , Brad Moran , 1995 – 00 
 Most points : 450 , Brad Moran , 1995 – 00 
 Most penalty minutes : 704 , Mike <unk> , 2000 – 04 
 Most games played , individual : 357 , Brad Moran , 1995 – 2000 
 Best goals against average : 1 @.@ 92 , Justin Pogge , 2004 – 06 
 Most shutouts : 16 , Martin Jones , 2006 – 10 
 Most games played , goaltender : 179 , Dan Spence , 2004 – 08 
 Most saves , goaltender : 3390 , Chris Driedger , 2011 – 14 
 = = Awards and honours = = 
 The Calgary Hitmen have captured numerous awards during the franchise 's tenure . Hitmen players have been named the WHL 's most outstanding player four times . Defenceman Karl <unk> won the Four Broncos Memorial Trophy in 2007 – 08 , also named the defenceman of the year , and Brett Sonne won the trophy in 2008 – 09 . Goaltender Martin Jones captured numerous awards in Calgary 's championship season of 2009 – 10 , including being named the top goaltender of the Memorial Cup , and Brandon Kozun led the entire Canadian Hockey League in scoring . 
 As a whole , the Hitmen have won the Central Division six times , and four times have been the regular season champions . Brad Moran , the franchise 's all @-@ time leading scorer , had his number 20 retired in 2005 , the only player to be so honoured . Following the lead of the Calgary Flames , the team introduced a new program in 2015 to honour former players . Called " Forever a Hitmen " , the team named Ryan Getzlaf the first inductee . 
 = Uxbridge = 
 Uxbridge ( / <unk> / ) is a town in west London , England , and the administrative headquarters of the London Borough of Hillingdon . Fifteen miles ( 24 @.@ 1 km ) west @-@ northwest of Charing Cross , it is one of the major metropolitan centres identified in the London Plan . Uxbridge historically formed part of the parish of Hillingdon in the county of Middlesex , and was a significant local commercial centre from an early time . As part of the suburban growth of London in the 20th century it expanded and increased in population , becoming a municipal borough in 1955 , and has formed part of Greater London since 1965 . It is a significant retail and commercial centre , and is the location of Brunel University and the Uxbridge campus of Buckinghamshire New University . The town is close to the boundary with Buckinghamshire , which is locally the River Colne . 
 Several historical events have taken place in and around the town , including attempted negotiations between King Charles I and the Parliamentary Army during the English Civil War . The public house at the centre of those events , since renamed the Crown & Treaty , still stands . Uxbridge also houses the Battle of Britain Bunker , from where the air defence of the south @-@ east of England was coordinated during the Battle of Britain . Situated in RAF Uxbridge , the No. 11 Group Operations Room within the bunker played a crucial rule during the battle and was later used during the D @-@ Day landings . 
 The wards of Uxbridge North and Uxbridge South are used for the election of councillors to Hillingdon Council and for statistical purposes . The 2011 Census recorded population figures of 12 @,@ 048 for Uxbridge North and 13 @,@ 979 for Uxbridge South . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Toponymy = = = 
 The name of the town is derived from " Wixan 's Bridge " , which was sited near the bottom of Oxford Road where a modern road bridge now stands , beside the Swan and Bottle public house . The Wixan were a 7th @-@ century Saxon tribe from Lincolnshire who also began to settle in what became Middlesex . Anglo @-@ Saxons began to settle and farm in the area of Uxbridge in the 5th century , clearing the dense woodland and remaining there for around 500 years . Two other places in Middlesex bore the name of the Wixan : <unk> ( " Wixan 's Hill " ) , a name now preserved only in the street names of <unk> Hill and Crescent in Harrow , and <unk> ( " Wixan 's Wood " ) near Southall . 
 Archaeologists found Bronze Age remains ( before 700 BC ) and medieval remains during the construction of The Chimes shopping centre ; two miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) away at Denham , Upper Paleolithic remains have been found . Uxbridge is not mentioned in the Domesday Book of the 11th century , but a hundred years later the existing church , St Margaret 's , was built . The town appears in records from 1107 as " <unk> " , and became part of the Elthorne Hundred with other settlements in the area . 
 = = = Early developments = = = 
 The Parliamentary Army garrisoned the town upon the outbreak of the English Civil War in 1642 and established their headquarters there in June 1647 on a line from Staines to Watford , although the king passed through Uxbridge in April 1646 , resting at the Red Lion public house for several hours . Charles I met with representatives of Parliament at the Crown Inn in Uxbridge in 1645 , but negotiations for the end of hostilities were unsuccessful due in part to the king 's stubborn attitude . The town had been chosen as it was located between the Royal headquarters at Oxford and the Parliamentary stronghold of London . 
 The covered market was built in 1788 , replacing a building constructed in 1561 . In the early 19th century , Uxbridge had an unsavoury reputation ; the jurist William <unk> said of its residents " They will steal the very teeth out of your mouth as you walk through the streets . I know it from experience . " For about 200 years most of London 's flour was produced in the Uxbridge area . 
 The Grand Junction Canal opened in 1794 , linking Uxbridge with Birmingham . By 1800 Uxbridge had become one of the most important market towns in Middlesex , helped by its status as the first stopping point for stagecoaches travelling from London to Oxford . The development of Uxbridge declined after the opening of the Great Western Railway in 1838 , which passed through West Drayton . A branch line to Uxbridge was not built until 1904 . 
 Harman 's Brewery was established in Uxbridge by George Harman in 1763 , and moved into its new headquarters in Uxbridge High Street in 1875 . The eventual owners of the brewery , Courage , closed the headquarters in 1964 . It was demolished and replaced by a Budgen 's supermarket , which in turn was demolished with the construction of The Chimes shopping centre . The brewery building in George Street remained in place until it was demolished in 1967 . The office building Harman House was built on the site in 1985 , named after the brewery . 
 = = = Urban development = = = 
 The enclosure of Hillingdon Parish in 1819 saw the reduction in size of Uxbridge Common , which at its largest had been 4 miles ( 6 @.@ 4 km ) in circumference . The common originally covered both sides of Park Road to the north of the town centre but now covers 15 acres ( 6 @.@ 1 ha ) . 
 In 1871 the town 's first purpose @-@ built police station was built in Windsor Street . The building included three cells and stables . The Metropolitan Police continued to use the building until 1988 , when operations moved to a new site in Harefield Road . The building subsequently became the Old Bill public house in 1996 , renamed the Fig Tree in 2006 . 
 In the early 1900s the Uxbridge and District Electricity Supply Company had been established in Waterloo Road , and much of the town was connected by 1902 , although some houses still had gas lighting in 1912 . A water tower on Uxbridge Common was built in 1906 , resembling a church tower , to improve the supply to the town . 
 Wood panelling from a room in the Crown & Treaty public house was sold in 1924 to an American businessman , who installed it in his office in the Empire State Building in New York . It was returned in 1953 as a gift to the newly crowned Queen Elizabeth II and returned to the house , although the monarch retained ownership . 
 On 31 August 1935 Uxbridge Lido , an outdoor swimming pool built in the " Moderne " or Art Deco style , was officially opened . Before the opening , many residents swam in a section of the <unk> River near Harefield Road , and the Colne . The pool , pavilion building , entrance building and both fountains were designated Grade II listed buildings in 1998 . Despite the listing , the pool was closed to the public and the buildings became subject to heavy vandalism . Uxbridge open @-@ air pool was fully refurbished during 2009 and re @-@ opened in May 2010 . Added to the site , now named Hillingdon Sports and Leisure Complex , is a 50 m indoor competition pool , a leisure pool , a 100 @-@ station gym , a wide range of exercise classes , an athletics stadium and track , 3G floodlit pitches , a sports hall , a café and a crèche . The Grade II listed buildings are still standing . 
 During the Second World War Uxbridge adopted the Royal Navy destroyer HMS Intrepid in 1942 , to help towards the ship 's costs ; Intrepid was lost to enemy action the following year . The town and surrounding areas suffered bombing by the Luftwaffe . V1 flying bombs fell on the town between June 1944 and March 1945 . The first recorded bombing using a V1 was on 22 June 1944 at 07 : 00 , when the bomb passed over the top of a bus and hit four houses nearby . Seven people were killed and 25 injured , leaving 46 houses in the area uninhabitable . 
 In 1958 the 199 @-@ acre ( 81 ha ) Lowe & <unk> plant nursery to the west of RAF Uxbridge entered voluntary liquidation . The nursery had stood in Kingston Lane since 1868 , and was the largest producer of cut flowers in the country . Demolition work began in 1962 , and the construction of Brunel University commenced . <unk> are included the coat of arms of the Borough of Uxbridge in memory of the nursery . The Uxbridge ( Vine Street ) railway branch line , which partly ran alongside the site , was closed in 1964 and in 1966 the university opened , purchasing the land where the railway had run from the local council for £ 65 @,@ 000 . 
 Uxbridge Cricket Club moved from <unk> Road in 1971 to make way for the new Civic Centre . The club had been at <unk> Road since 1858 , but moved to a new site on part of Uxbridge Common on Park Road . The Market Square shopping precinct in the town centre was built in the late 1970s , but its lack of shelter made it unpopular and it did not attract the expected levels of custom . Many buildings along the High Street and Windsor Street had been demolished to make way for the new precinct , which was eventually sold to the Prudential Assurance Company and redeveloped with a roof in the early 1980s to become the Pavilions Shopping Centre . The Peacock public house in one of the two main squares was demolished and replaced with a café named The Chequers , which remains . Rayner 's pharmacy shop was also demolished during the Market Square development , although the shopfront was saved by the Museum of London and is held in storage . 
 The Chimes shopping centre was built beside Uxbridge station in 2001 , incorporating many of the existing buildings into the new structure . The centre was originally to be named St George 's Centre in plans dating back to the early 1990s , though this name was eventually taken by another shopping centre in Harrow on the Hill . Instead , The Chimes was said to refer to the sound of the bells from the nearby market house on the High Street . An Odeon cinema opened as a major part of the centre , with the smaller cinema at the opposite end of the High Street closing . Some houses on Chippendale Way and the St George 's car park were demolished to allow for the construction of the new shopping centre car park . The offices of the local building company Fassnidge were also included in the new development ; built in the 19th century , they now house a Pizza Express restaurant . Preserved timber from earlier demolished buildings in Uxbridge was used in the construction of a new building beside the former offices of Fassnidge , designed to resemble a much older structure . 
 In 2002 the dry ski slope near Park Road and the Uxbridge Lido was closed and the remaining buildings and structures removed . The Hillingdon Ski Centre had been subject to several arson attacks during 2001 and the company operating it became insolvent . The slope , which had been built in 1977 , was left to return to nature . 
 Work began in 2008 to extensively refurbish and extend Uxbridge Lido , and it reopened to the public in February 2010 as the Hillingdon Sports and Leisure Complex . On 8 September 2010 the 75th anniversary of the first opening of the Lido was celebrated at the pool . 
 = = Government = = 
 Uxbridge originally formed a chapelry within the parish of Hillingdon . It was split off as a separate civil parish in 1866 , and became part of the Uxbridge Urban District under the Local Government Act 1894 . In 1955 the urban district council successfully petitioned for a charter of incorporation and became a municipal borough . This remained until 1965 , when the borough was incorporated into the new London Borough of Hillingdon . Within the borough , Uxbridge is split into two wards : Uxbridge North and Uxbridge South . Each is served by three Conservative Party councillors . 
 Uxbridge had its own parliamentary constituency until boundary changes at the 2010 general election meant it became part of the Uxbridge and South Ruislip constituency . Uxbridge and South Ruislip is represented by Boris Johnson MP , of the Conservative Party . He took over from John Randall in 2015 , who was first elected to represent Uxbridge in a 1997 by @-@ election after the sitting MP , Sir Michael <unk> , died shortly after the 1997 general election . 
 = = Geography = = 
 Uxbridge lies at a mean elevation of 130 feet ( 40 m ) above mean sea level . Like much of the rest of the UK its climate is generally temperate , with few extremes of temperature or weather . 
 The landscape upon which the settlement of Uxbridge was established is largely unchanged from the Mesolithic era . Much of it was covered by oak and elm trees , which were gradually cleared by early settlers . An archaeological excavation by the Museum of London in the 1990s found evidence of flint items shaped by Mesolithic hunters , as well as various animal bones and traces of charcoal from the remains of campfires . 
 The River Pinn runs through Uxbridge , passing through the former site of RAF Uxbridge and the grounds of Brunel University . It joins the <unk> River , which branches off from the River Colne and acts as the boundary between Uxbridge and the neighbouring county of Buckinghamshire . 
 = = Demography = = 
 The approximate population figure for Uxbridge North was recorded in 2009 by the Office for National Statistics as 11 @,@ 812 , and 11 @,@ 887 in Uxbridge South . The majority of residents in Uxbridge North were white , with 85 % categorised , against 79 % for the entire borough of Hillingdon . Uxbridge South also had a majority of white residents , matching the borough figure . In both wards , the remaining percentage was made up of mixed @-@ race , Asian or Asian British , Black or Black British , and Chinese or other ethnic groups . Of the two wards , Uxbridge South had a higher percentage of black and Chinese residents , when compared with the borough . 
 By the 2011 Census , the population of Uxbridge had reached 12 @,@ 048 in Uxbridge North and 13 @,@ 979 in Uxbridge South . The most common ethnic group remained white in Uxbridge North , measured as 69 @.@ 8 % , followed by Asian or Asian British ( 19 @.@ 5 % ) and Black or Black British ( 4 @.@ 1 % ) . The remaining percentage was made up of mixed @-@ race and other unspecified ethnic groups . White was also the most common ethnic group in Uxbridge South , measured as 62 @.@ 1 % , followed by Asian or Asian British ( 22 @.@ 6 % ) , Black or Black British ( 7 @.@ 3 % ) and mixed @-@ race ( 4 @.@ 3 % ) . The remaining percentage was made up of other unspecified ethnic groups . 
 In terms of employment , Uxbridge North had a larger number of residents employed in managerial roles , when measured during the 2001 census . The majority of residents in Uxbridge South were categorised as " not classifieds " . 
 The life expectancy for men is 77 in Uxbridge North , compared with 74 in Uxbridge South . The figures for women are 83 in Uxbridge North and 81 in Uxbridge South . 
 = = Religion = = 
 In the 2011 census , 72 @.@ 8 % of residents in the Uxbridge North ward answered that they had a religion , compared with 19 @.@ 3 % who did not and 7 @.@ 9 % who did not answer . Of those who answered , 53 % identified as Christian , followed by 6 @.@ 7 % who identified as Muslim and 6 @.@ 2 % as Sikh . The percentage identifying as Hindu was 5 @.@ 4 % . Figures for residents identifying as either Jewish , Buddhist or other unspecified religions were each below 1 % . 
 Within the Uxbridge South ward , 69 @.@ 2 % of residents answered that they had a religion , compared with 23 @.@ 8 % who did not and 7 % who did not answer . As with Uxbridge North , the majority ( 46 @.@ 4 % ) identified as Christian , followed by 13 @.@ 4 % who identified as Muslim and 5 % as Hindu . The percentage identifying as Sikh was 2 @.@ 3 % and those identifying as Buddhist were 1 @.@ 2 % . Figures for residents identifying as either Jewish or other unspecified religions were each below 1 % . 
 = = = Churches = = = 
 = = = = St Margaret 's Church = = = = 
 This is the original parish church of Uxbridge , and one of the oldest buildings in the town . Located in Windsor Street , it is known to have existed since at least 1245 , when a series of hearings took place there in which the Abbot of Bec in Normandy brought an action against the rector of Great <unk> in Suffolk for non @-@ payment of tithes . On parchments kept at St. George 's Chapel , Windsor , in connection with this event , St. Margaret 's is mentioned by name , and there are several other references between 1245 and 1247 to the " chapel at Uxbridge " . 
 The oldest portion of the existing building is part of the north tower , which was built in the late 14th century . The north aisle , together with the nave and its arcades , dates from the early 15th century , while the south aisle , with its fine hammer @-@ beam roof , was added about 1450 . The carved stone font was placed in the church soon afterwards , dating from about 1480 . 
 For most of its history , St Margaret 's served as a chapel @-@ of @-@ ease to St John the Baptist 's Church in Hillingdon ; it was not until 1827 that it was given its own parish . 
 = = = = St Andrew 's Church = = = = 
 By the 1850s the population of both Hillingdon and Uxbridge was beginning to rise . With new housing being built between the two centres the then Vicar of Hillingdon , the Rev Richard Croft ( 1856 – 69 ) gained permission to build a new church in the area , sometimes referred to as Hillingdon West . He asked the well @-@ known architect Sir George Gilbert Scott : 
 " to draw up plans to build a church without unnecessary ornament but in handsome proportions suitable to its position at the entrance to Uxbridge Town ... " 
 Scott produced his plans and local Uxbridge builder William Fassnidge was employed to construct the church . On St Peter ’ s Day , 29 June 1864 , the foundation stone was laid at the south end of the chancel arch by the Lord Bishop of London , Archibald Campbell Tait . He returned less than a year later to consecrate and open the church on the feast of SS Philip and James , 1 May 1865 . 
 The spire was completed the following year . Together with the bells , vestry and organ and other embellishments , the cost of the building , located in Hillingdon Road , was some £ 12 @,@ 000 . 
 = = = = Church of Our Lady of Lourdes and St Michael = = = = 
 After St Margaret 's turned Protestant in the 16th century , there was no official Roman Catholic place of worship in Uxbridge until the late 19th century , following the passing of the Catholic Emancipation Act . In 1892 Father Michael Aloysius Wren bought a presbytery at 37 Lawn Road , next to which a temporary church was built of corrugated iron , dedicated to Our Lady of Lourdes and St Michael . St Mary ’ s School was also founded on Rockingham Road at this time . Fr Wren was helped by his nephew John , who acted as his assistant priest . They covered an extensive area , including the modern Catholic parishes of Ruislip and Hillingdon . 
 The mission grew from strength to strength and by 1907 the congregation numbered 150 , with school attendance at 60 . In time plans were made for a larger , more permanent church . This was the brainchild of Father Thomas Moloney , who bought the current presbytery and acquired the land that stood at the back so that a church could be built . The foundation stone was eventually laid on Low Sunday 1931 by Archbishop Alban Goodier , an English Jesuit who had been Archbishop of Bombay between 1919 and 1926 . The new church , in Oxford Road , was designed by the diocesan architect , T. H. B. Scott . It was built of brick in the Romanesque style , seating 350 . The church was built quickly and opened by Cardinal Bourne on 29th September 1931 . It was officially consecrated on 14 May 1936 , after its debts were cleared . 
 = = Economy = = 
 Uxbridge has two shopping centres , The Pavilions and <unk> Uxbridge ( formerly The Chimes ) . Much of the town centre is pedestrianised . Just off the High Street is Windsor Street , a short road populated by older shops . A notable landmark on the road is Randalls , the Art Deco style former department store owned by the family of the former MP for Uxbridge and South Ruislip , John Randall . The present store was constructed in 1939 on the site of another that had been built in 1900 . It was awarded Grade II listed status in October 2008 . The store closed in January 2015 following a decline in trade . 
 The town centre consists of retail outlets and a number of office buildings , including the main European offices of international companies such as Canon , PricewaterhouseCoopers , Apple , WMS Gaming , Unisys , Kuehne + Nagel , <unk> , Xerox , Arri , Bristol @-@ Myers Squibb , Monster Energy , APL , <unk> Europe and <unk> International . Other employers include NetApp , <unk> Solicitors , F. Hinds , The Coca @-@ Cola Company , Coca @-@ Cola Enterprises , General Mills and <unk> . Cadbury plc moved its head office to Uxbridge from Mayfair in January 2008 . The company announced the plan in 2007 as part of efforts to cut costs . 
 Within the borough of Hillingdon , 55 @.@ 1 % of residents travel to the Uxbridge North and Uxbridge South wards to work , and only 8 % of residents working there also live within the wards . The 2001 census measured a total of 6 @,@ 007 ( 35 @.@ 9 % ) of residents leaving the North ward to go to work . Uxbridge South had a figure of 5 @,@ 666 ( 26 @.@ 5 % ) of residents leaving the ward to work elsewhere . 
 = = Education = = 
 Primary schools in Uxbridge include Hermitage Primary School , St Andrew 's Church of England Primary School , St Mary 's Catholic Primary School , Whitehall Infant School , and Whitehall Junior School . Uxbridge High School is a comprehensive secondary school in the town . 
 Uxbridge is also home to Brunel University and the Buckinghamshire New University 's nursing campus . The main campus of Uxbridge College is also in the town . 
 = = Transport = = 
 Uxbridge tube station is the western terminus for branches of the Metropolitan and Piccadilly lines of the London Underground . The station , built in 1933 , is fronted by a pedestrian high street and is connected to a bus terminus with connections to Hillingdon , Hayes , Ealing , Ruislip , and Slough . 
 There were once two railway stations : Uxbridge Vine Street ( originally just Uxbridge Station ) and Uxbridge High Street . Both were planned to be linked , hence High Street ending on a half @-@ built bridge . High Street closed to passengers as a war economy and never reopened . Despite having the most intensive service , the Vine Street line was one of the first Western Region urban branches to close under the Beeching axe . Uxbridge Belmont Road was the first underground station , built slightly outside the town centre to allow for a possible extension to High Wycombe . This was subsequently replaced by the current station . 
 The <unk> road connects the centre of Uxbridge with the Swakeleys Roundabout junction of the A40 . Uxbridge is also connected by major roads to Slough , Denham , Ickenham , Cowley , Iver Heath , Hillingdon Heath and Hayes . 
 The Grand Union Canal , formerly the Grand Junction Canal , connects London with Birmingham and passes immediately to the west of Uxbridge , forming part of the borough boundary . The first stretch was built in the late 18th century from Brentford to Uxbridge . Further upstream is Uxbridge Lock , and nearby is a derelict flour mill formerly owned by Allied Mills . The mill was bought in the 19th century by William King , who named it " Kingsmill " . Kingsmill continues to be used as a brand of bread by Associated British Foods . 
 London Buses routes 222 , 331 , 427 , 607 , A10 , U1 , U2 , U3 , U4 , U5 , <unk> , <unk> , U10 and N207 serve the area , alongside five non @-@ Transport for London ( TfL ) routes : First Berkshire & The Thames Valley route 58 , Green Line route 724 and Carousel Buses routes 730 , A40 and 740 . 
 The proposed West London Tram was postponed indefinitely by TfL in August 2007 after it was announced that the Crossrail project would be going ahead . TfL cited " an effective bus @-@ based solution " as an alternative , delivered in conjunction with local councils . Since 2013 the route has been served by the 427 , 207 , and 607 bus services . 
 = = Landmarks = = 
 = = = Civic Centre = = = 
 The London Borough of Hillingdon 's Civic Centre was built in Uxbridge High Street in 1973 , as part of an effort to unite the services of the council , which had formed in 1965 with the merger of the Municipal Borough of Uxbridge , Ruislip @-@ Northwood Urban District , Hayes and Harlington Urban District and <unk> and West Drayton Urban District . Before the new building was completed , council services had been spread throughout Uxbridge and the rest of the borough and various buildings , as a result of the merging of the former district councils . 
 Part of the original Middlesex County Council office building that stood on site was incorporated into the new Civic Centre . The centre 's clock tower is the only visible section from the old building . The Uxbridge Cricket Club Ground and Uxbridge fire station were relocated as part of the new development , which became controversial owing to its size and cost . Areas of the building , particularly the council chambers , continue to suffer from poor acoustics . 
 = = = Uxbridge Magistrates ' Court = = = 
 The original Magistrates ' Court opened in 1907 in an Edwardian style . A new building with little exterior styling opened nearby in the 1990s and legal proceedings were transferred . 
 = = = RAF Uxbridge , Battle of Britain Bunker and Hillingdon House = = = 
 Uxbridge had a Royal Air Force station , known as RAF Uxbridge , until its closure on 31 March 2010 . The station was built within the grounds of Hillingdon House , a 19th @-@ century mansion bought by the British government in 1915 , and became most famous as the home of RAF Fighter Command 's No. 11 Group Operations Room during the Battle of Britain . Fighter squadrons at airfields in the south @-@ east of England were directed from the station , which was visited by Prime Minister Winston Churchill during the battle , and other foreign leaders throughout the rest of the war . 
 Following the station 's closure , the replica No. 33 Squadron Supermarine Spitfire gate guardian was removed from the main entrance for restoration work and moved to the entrance of the Operations Room ( now known as the Battle of Britain Bunker ) . The area around the bunker was retained as an enclave under the RAF Uxbridge name , under the care of RAF Northolt . An additional guardian , a Hawker Hurricane in the colours of No. 303 ( Polish ) Squadron , was added to the area in November 2010 . 
 = = Sport and leisure = = 
 Uxbridge has a Non @-@ League football team , Uxbridge F.C. , which plays at Honeycroft , West Drayton . Uxbridge Cricket Club is also based in Uxbridge and is a member of the Middlesex County Cricket League , a designated ECB Premier League . Hillingdon Sports and Leisure Complex has recently been refurbished and contains an indoor and outdoor swimming pool , an athletic track and large sports complex . The South Korean Olympic Team used the centre for training during the 2012 Olympic Games . 
 = = Notable people = = 
 A number of notable people have lived in Uxbridge . 
 Christine Keeler , the 1960s model who became involved in the 1963 Profumo Affair , was born here , as was the actor , writer and director Bernard Miles ( 1907 – 1991 ) , who attended <unk> Grammar School . Also born here was the poet , novelist and illustrator Peggy Eileen Whistler ( 1909 – 1958 ) , who used the pseudonym <unk> Evans , and John Stears ( 1934 – 1999 ) , the Academy Award @-@ winning creator of James Bond 's Aston Martin DB5 and Star Wars robots . 
 = Ernesto Pérez Balladares = 
 Ernesto Pérez Balladares González @-@ <unk> ( born June 29 , 1946 in Panama City ) , nicknamed El Toro ( " The Bull " ) , was the President of Panama between 1994 and 1999 . 
 = = Biography = = 
 Son of the renown doctor Ernesto Pérez Balladares and of María Enriqueta González <unk> Delgado . His education began in the province of Chiriquí in David where he attended school at San Vicente de <unk> . Upon his graduation , Pérez Balladares would then attend the prestigious institute of the University of Notre Dame the United States where he would receive a bachelor 's degree in Finance . Soon after , Pérez Balladares continued his studies and received a Master 's degree in Business Administration from the Wharton School of the University of Pennsylvania . 
 Upon his arrival back to Panamá , his experience and expertise would soon allow him to become the Director of City Bank for Panama and Central America from 1971 to 1975 . 
 = = Background = = 
 Pérez Balladares received master 's degrees in Economics the US at the University of Notre Dame and the Wharton School of the University of Pennsylvania . From 1971 to 1975 , he was the director of City Bank for Panama and Central America . He is married to Dora Boyd de Pérez Balladares . 
 = = Political career = = 
 In 1976 Perez Balladares was appointed by General Omar Torrijos to be Panama 's Minister of Estate and Treasury . Soon after in March , 1979 Perez Balladares would become a co @-@ founder of the Revolutionary Democratic Party also known as the PRD . He would then become the General Secretary in 1982 . 
 After distancing himself due to disputes with General Manuel Noriega , Perez Balladares returned to the PRD party in 1991 where he once again regained the position of General Secretary in order to form part of the PRD National Executive Committee . 
 In the Presidential election of May 8 , 1994 representing the PRD party , Perez Balladares won the <unk> race with the 33 @.@ 3 % of the votes , ousting opponents : Mireya Moscoso of the Partido Panameñista 29 @.@ 4 % , Ruben Blades of the Partido Papa <unk> 17 @.@ 1 % , Ruben Dario Carles of the <unk> party 16 @.@ 1 % , Eduardo Vallarino of the Partido <unk> Cristiano 2 @.@ 4 % , Samuel Lewis Galindo of the Partido Solidaridad 1 @.@ 7 % and Jose Salvador Muñoz of the Partido Panameñista <unk> with 0 @.@ 3 % . 
 Perez Balladares would succeed the late Guillermo Endara <unk> . 
 = = Presidency = = 
 Pérez Balladares 's government was characterized by pro @-@ free market policies which helped modernize the country and in 1997 Panama entered the World Trade Organization . During his time in office , Pérez Balladares modernized the country by <unk> <unk> and turned both the <unk> and telephone companies into mixed enterprises by selling 49 % to England 's Cable & <unk> for 659 million dollars leaving 49 % for the government and 2 % for the employees . He also modernized the communications sector by bringing in the cell phone , internet and <unk> services which turned Panama into one of the most important multimodal centers in America . 
 In the same way , Pérez Balladares also <unk> the Institute of Hydraulic Resources and Electrification ( <unk> ) which provided a greater amount of income than when it was privatized under the hands of previous governments which operated under the notion of privatization , a guideline set forth by the World Bank in order to give loans to developing countries which in Panama was adopted by the government of Guillermo Endara under the Ford Plan . This plan set out to sell the entire entity of the companies : Cemento <unk> to <unk> , <unk> de Chiriquí , El <unk> de <unk> , Proyecto de Palma <unk> de <unk> , the Hotel Washington of Colón and Hotel <unk> . 
 In addition , Pérez Balladares established the entry of new operators in the market to help end state monopoly in the electric sectors and others as well . He also created the The Commission of Free Competition and Consumer Affairs also known as ( <unk> ) in Panama which would later become known as the Authority for Consumer Protection and Competition Issues ( <unk> ) . 
 Pérez Balladares is also known for creating the Development Trust Fund also known as Fondo <unk> del Desarrollo ( <unk> ) , where the funds obtained from the sale of the 49 % of state businesses and <unk> region of the previous canal zone are deposited . 
 Moreover , Pérez Balladares created the <unk> Areas Authority of the <unk> Region , also known as ( ARI ) to administer the funds collected from the sales and tenders of the lands that were once part of the Canal Zone . In addition , this authority managed to consistently collect capital for the Panamanian Development Trust Fund , which would serve the future governments as a national trust fund to carry out their projects . 
 One of Pérez Balladares ' most notable achievements was his ability to carry out and complete the North and South corridors , a highway system that would provide the citizens of Panama a quicker and easier way to travel throughout the country . He also expanded the Interamerican highway to four lanes , reducing a problematic traffic flow , created the highway to Colón and made the railway system operational . 
 By the same token , Pérez Balladares had the vision to take the Airport of <unk> and move it to <unk> , with this e modernized it and allowed it to receive the status of an international airport , where it still stands today . 
 Pérez Balladares forged closer ties with the US , agreeing with President Bill Clinton to take in 10 @,@ 000 Cuban boat people at US military bases that Endara had refused to accept , as well as providing exile to Haitian former military ruler Raoul <unk> as part of a negotiated settlement . Pérez Balladares also pledged to join the US anti @-@ drug effort and pass new laws to prevent money laundering . 
 = = Present Day = = 
 As of today , Pérez Balladares works on personal business matters while at the same staying in contact with the matters related to the Revolutionary Democratic Party ( PRD ) . 
 Since 2015 , Pérez Balladares has been <unk> becoming more involved in the political agenda and discussions of Panama as he seeks to become president of the Republic for a second time . Coupled with his path for president , Pérez Balladares continues with his strong support as his public appearances are followed with great enthusiasm by the public and elected officials from all over the country . 
 Apart from his aspiration to run for president , Pérez Balladares is also seeking to become the General Secretary of the PRD once again with the intention of solidifying the Revolutionary Democratic Party to bring forth a stronger and more unified party . 
 It has also been taken into account that Pérez Balladares , over the last 20 years has always kept his personal office open with the intention of staying in touch with public concerns and national topics . In fact , his office has become a meeting point for topics concerning the nation . 
 = Matt Groening = 
 Matthew Abram " Matt " Groening ( / <unk> / <unk> @-@ <unk> ; born February 15 , 1954 ) is an American cartoonist , writer , producer , animator , and voice actor . He is the creator of the comic strip Life in Hell ( 1977 – 2012 ) and the television series The Simpsons ( 1989 – present ) and Futurama ( 1999 – 2003 , 2008 – 2013 ) . The Simpsons has gone on to become the longest running U.S. primetime television series in history , as well as the longest running animated series and sitcom . 
 Groening made his first professional cartoon sale of Life in Hell to the avant @-@ garde Wet magazine in 1978 . At its peak , the cartoon was carried in 250 weekly newspapers . Life in Hell caught the attention of James L. Brooks . In 1985 , Brooks contacted Groening with the proposition of working in animation for the Fox variety show The Tracey Ullman Show . Originally , Brooks wanted Groening to adapt his Life in Hell characters for the show . Fearing the loss of ownership rights , Groening decided to create something new and came up with a cartoon family , the Simpson family , and named the members after his own parents and sisters — while Bart was an anagram of the word brat . The shorts would be spun off into their own series The Simpsons , which has since aired 596 episodes . In 1997 , Groening and former Simpsons writer David X. Cohen developed Futurama , an animated series about life in the year 3000 , which premiered in 1999 , running for four years on Fox , then picked up by Comedy Central for additional seasons . 
 Groening has won 12 Primetime Emmy Awards , ten for The Simpsons and two for Futurama as well as a British Comedy Award for " outstanding contribution to comedy " in 2004 . In 2002 , he won the National Cartoonist Society Reuben Award for his work on Life in Hell . He received a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame on February 14 , 2012 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Groening was born on February 15 , 1954 in Portland , Oregon , the middle of five children ( older brother Mark and sister Patty were born in 1950 and 1952 , while the younger sisters Lisa and Maggie in 1956 and 1958 , respectively ) . His Norwegian @-@ American mother , Margaret Ruth ( née Wiggum ; March 23 , 1919 – April 22 , 2013 ) , was once a teacher , and his German American father , Homer Philip Groening ( December 30 , 1919 – March 15 , 1996 ) , was a filmmaker , advertiser , writer and cartoonist . Homer , born in Main Centre , Saskatchewan , Canada , grew up in a Mennonite , <unk> @-@ speaking family . 
 Matt 's grandfather , Abram Groening , was a professor at Tabor College , a Mennonite Brethren liberal arts college in Hillsboro , Kansas before moving to Albany College ( now known as Lewis and Clark College ) in Oregon in 1930 . 
 Groening grew up in Portland , and attended Ainsworth Elementary School and Lincoln High School . From 1972 to 1977 , Groening attended The Evergreen State College in Olympia , Washington , a liberal arts school that he described as " a hippie college , with no grades or required classes , that drew every weirdo in the Northwest . " He served as the editor of the campus newspaper , The Cooper Point Journal , for which he also wrote articles and drew cartoons . He befriended fellow cartoonist Lynda Barry after discovering that she had written a fan letter to Joseph Heller , one of Groening 's favorite authors , and had received a reply . Groening has credited Barry with being " probably [ his ] biggest inspiration . " He first became interested in cartoons after watching the Disney animated film One Hundred and One Dalmatians , and he has also cited Peanuts and its creator Charles M. Schulz as inspirations . 
 = = Career = = 
 = = = Early career = = = 
 In 1977 , at the age of 23 , Groening moved to Los Angeles to become a writer . He went through what he described as " a series of lousy jobs , " including being an extra in the television movie When Every Day Was the Fourth of July , busing tables , washing dishes at a nursing home , clerking at the Hollywood Licorice Pizza record store , landscaping in a sewage treatment plant , and chauffeuring and ghostwriting for a retired Western director . 
 = = = Life in Hell = = = 
 Groening described life in Los Angeles to his friends in the form of the self @-@ published comic book Life in Hell , which was loosely inspired by the chapter " How to Go to Hell " in Walter Kaufmann 's book Critique of Religion and Philosophy . Groening distributed the comic book in the book corner of Licorice Pizza , a record store in which he worked . He made his first professional cartoon sale to the avant @-@ garde Wet magazine in 1978 . The strip , titled " Forbidden Words , " appeared in the September / October issue of that year . 
 Groening had gained employment at the Los Angeles Reader , a newly formed alternative newspaper , delivering papers , typesetting , editing and answering phones . He showed his cartoons to the editor , James Vowell , who was impressed and eventually gave him a spot in the paper . Life in Hell made its official debut as a comic strip in the Reader on April 25 , 1980 . Vowell also gave Groening his own weekly music column , " Sound Mix , " in 1982 . However , the column would rarely actually be about music , as he would often write about his " various enthusiasms , obsessions , pet <unk> and problems " instead . In an effort to add more music to the column , he " just made stuff up , " concocting and reviewing fictional bands and non @-@ existent records . In the following week 's column , he would confess to fabricating everything in the previous column and swear that everything in the new column was true . Eventually , he was finally asked to give up the " music " column . Among the fans of the column was Harry Shearer , who would later become a voice on The Simpsons . 
 Life in Hell became popular almost immediately . In November 1984 , Deborah Caplan , Groening 's then @-@ girlfriend and co @-@ worker at the Reader , offered to publish " Love is Hell " , a series of relationship @-@ themed Life in Hell strips , in book form . Released a month later , the book was an underground success , selling 22 @,@ 000 copies in its first two printings . Work is Hell soon followed , also published by Caplan . Soon afterward , Caplan and Groening left and put together the Life in Hell Co . , which handled merchandising for Life in Hell . Groening also started Acme Features Syndicate , which syndicated Life in Hell , Lynda Barry and John Callahan , but now only syndicates Life in Hell . At the end of its run , Life in Hell was carried in 250 weekly newspapers and has been anthologized in a series of books , including School is Hell , Childhood is Hell , The Big Book of Hell , and The Huge Book of Hell . Although Groening has stated , " I 'll never give up the comic strip . It 's my foundation , " he announced that the June 16 , 2012 strip would mark Life in Hell 's conclusion . After Groening ended the strip , the Center for Cartoon Studies commissioned a poster that was presented to Groening in honor of his work . The poster contained tribute cartoons by 22 of Groening 's cartoonist friends who were influenced by Life in Hell . 
 = = = The Simpsons = = = 
 = = = = Creation = = = = 
 Life in Hell caught the eye of Hollywood writer @-@ producer and Gracie Films founder James L. Brooks , who had been shown the strip by fellow producer Polly Platt . In 1985 , Brooks contacted Groening with the proposition of working in animation on an undefined future project , which would turn out to be developing a series of short animated skits , called " bumpers , " for the Fox variety show The Tracey Ullman Show . Originally , Brooks wanted Groening to adapt his Life in Hell characters for the show . Groening feared that he would have to give up his ownership rights , and that the show would fail and would take down his comic strip with it . Groening conceived of the idea for The Simpsons in the lobby of James L. Brooks 's office and hurriedly sketched out his version of a dysfunctional family : Homer , the overweight father ; Marge , the slim mother ; Bart , the bratty oldest child ; Lisa , the intelligent middle child ; and Maggie , the baby . Groening famously named the main Simpson characters after members of his own family : his parents , Homer and Margaret ( Marge or Marjorie in full ) , and his younger sisters , Lisa and Margaret ( Maggie ) . Claiming that it was a bit too obvious to name a character after himself , he chose the name " Bart , " an anagram of brat . However , he stresses that aside from some of the sibling rivalry , his family is nothing like the Simpsons . Groening also has an older brother and sister , Mark and Patty , and in a 1995 interview Groening divulged that Mark " is the actual inspiration for Bart. " 
 Maggie Groening has co @-@ written a few Simpsons books featuring her cartoon namesake . 
 = = = = The Tracey Ullman Show = = = = 
 The family was crudely drawn , because Groening had submitted basic sketches to the animators , assuming they would clean them up ; instead , they just traced over his drawings . The entire Simpson family was designed so that they would be recognizable in silhouette . When Groening originally designed Homer , he put his own initials into the character 's hairline and ear : the hairline resembled an ' M ' , and the right ear resembled a ' G ' . Groening decided that this would be too distracting though , and redesigned the ear to look normal . He still draws the ear as a ' G ' when he draws pictures of Homer for fans . Marge 's distinct beehive hairstyle was inspired by Bride of Frankenstein and the style that Margaret Groening wore during the 1960s , although her hair was never blue . Bart 's original design , which appeared in the first shorts , had spikier hair , and the spikes were of different lengths . The number was later limited to nine spikes , all of the same size . At the time Groening was primarily drawing in black and " not thinking that [ Bart ] would eventually be drawn in color " gave him spikes that appear to be an extension of his head . Lisa 's physical features are generally not used in other characters ; for example , in the later seasons , no character other than Maggie shares her hairline . While designing Lisa , Groening " couldn 't be bothered to even think about girls ' hair styles " . When designing Lisa and Maggie , he " just gave them this kind of spiky starfish hair style , not thinking that they would eventually be drawn in color " . Groening storyboarded and scripted every short ( now known as The Simpsons shorts ) , which were then animated by a team including David Silverman and Wes Archer , both of whom would later become directors on the series . 
 The Simpsons shorts first appeared in The Tracey Ullman Show on April 19 , 1987 . Another family member , Grampa Simpson , was introduced in the later shorts . Years later , during the early seasons of The Simpsons , when it came time to give Grampa a first name , Groening says he refused to name him after his own grandfather , Abraham Groening , leaving it to other writers to choose a name . By coincidence , they chose Abraham , unaware that it was the name of Groening 's grandfather . 
 = = = = Half @-@ hour = = = = 
 Although The Tracey Ullman Show was not a big hit , the popularity of the shorts led to a half @-@ hour spin @-@ off in 1989 . A team of production companies adapted The Simpsons into a half @-@ hour series for the Fox Broadcasting Company . The team included what is now the Klasky Csupo animation house . James L. Brooks negotiated a provision in the contract with the Fox network that prevented Fox from interfering with the show 's content . Groening said his goal in creating the show was to offer the audience an alternative to what he called " the mainstream trash " that they were watching . The half @-@ hour series premiered on December 17 , 1989 with " Simpsons Roasting on an Open Fire " , a Christmas special . " Some Enchanted Evening " was the first full @-@ length episode produced , but it did not broadcast until May 1990 , as the last episode of the first season , because of animation problems . 
 The series quickly became a worldwide phenomenon , to the surprise of many . Groening said : " Nobody thought The Simpsons was going to be a big hit . It sneaked up on everybody . " The Simpsons was co @-@ developed by Groening , Brooks , and Sam Simon , a writer @-@ producer with whom Brooks had worked on previous projects . Groening and Simon , however , did not get along and were often in conflict over the show ; Groening once described their relationship as " very contentious . " Simon eventually left the show in 1993 over creative differences . 
 Like the main family members , several characters from the show have names that were inspired by people , locations or films . The name " Wiggum " for police chief Chief Wiggum is Groening 's mother 's maiden name . The names of a few other characters were taken from major street names in Groening 's hometown of Portland , Oregon , including Flanders , Lovejoy , Powell , Quimby and Kearney . Despite common fan belief that Sideshow Bob Terwilliger was named after SW Terwilliger Boulevard in Portland , he was actually named after the character Dr. Terwilliker from the film The 5 @,@ 000 Fingers of Dr. T. 
 Although Groening has pitched a number of spin @-@ offs from The Simpsons , those attempts have been unsuccessful . In 1994 , Groening and other Simpsons producers pitched a live @-@ action spin @-@ off about Krusty the Clown ( with Dan Castellaneta playing the lead role ) , but were unsuccessful in getting it off the ground . Groening has also pitched " Young Homer " and a spin @-@ off about the non @-@ Simpsons citizens of Springfield . 
 In 1995 , Groening got into a major disagreement with Brooks and other Simpsons producers over " A Star Is Burns " , a crossover episode with The Critic , an animated show also produced by Brooks and staffed with many former Simpsons crew members . Groening claimed that he feared viewers would " see it as nothing but a pathetic attempt to advertise The Critic at the expense of The Simpsons , " and was concerned about the possible implication that he had created or produced The Critic . He requested his name be taken off the episode . 
 Groening is credited with writing or co @-@ writing the episodes " Some Enchanted Evening " , " The Telltale Head " , " Colonel Homer " and " 22 Short Films About Springfield " , as well as The Simpsons Movie , released in 2007 . He has had several cameo appearances in the show , with a speaking role in the episode " My Big Fat Geek Wedding " . He currently serves at The Simpsons as an executive producer and creative consultant . 
 = = = Futurama = = = 
 After spending a few years researching science fiction , Groening got together with Simpsons writer / producer David X. Cohen ( still known as David S. Cohen at the time ) in 1997 and developed Futurama , an animated series about life in the year 3000 . By the time they pitched the series to Fox in April 1998 , Groening and Cohen had composed many characters and storylines ; Groening claimed they had gone " overboard " in their discussions . Groening described trying to get the show on the air as " by far the worst experience of [ his ] grown @-@ up life . " The show premiered on March 28 , 1999 . Groening 's writing credits for the show are for the premiere episode , " Space Pilot 3000 " ( co @-@ written with Cohen ) , " Rebirth " ( story ) and " In @-@ A @-@ Gadda @-@ Da @-@ Leela " ( story ) . 
 After four years on the air , the show was canceled by Fox . In a situation similar to Family Guy , however , strong DVD sales and very stable ratings on Adult Swim brought Futurama back to life . When Comedy Central began negotiating for the rights to air Futurama reruns , Fox suggested that there was a possibility of also creating new episodes . When Comedy Central committed to sixteen new episodes , it was decided that four straight @-@ to @-@ DVD films — Bender 's Big Score ( 2007 ) , The Beast with a Billion Backs ( 2008 ) , Bender 's Game ( 2008 ) and Into the Wild Green Yonder ( 2009 ) — would be produced . 
 Since no new Futurama projects were in production , the movie Into the Wild Green Yonder was designed to stand as the Futurama series finale . However , Groening had expressed a desire to continue the Futurama franchise in some form , including as a theatrical film . In an interview with CNN , Groening said that " we have a great relationship with Comedy Central and we would love to do more episodes for them , but I don 't know ... We 're having discussions and there is some enthusiasm but I can 't tell if it 's just me . " Comedy Central commissioned an additional 26 new episodes , and began airing them in 2010 . The show continued in to 2013 , before Comedy Central announced in April 2013 that they would not be renewing it beyond its seventh season . The final episode aired on September 4 , 2013 . 
 = = = Other pursuits = = = 
 In 1994 , Groening formed Bongo Comics ( named after the character Bongo from Life in Hell ) with Steve Vance , Cindy Vance and Bill Morrison , which publishes comic books based on The Simpsons and Futurama ( including Futurama Simpsons Infinitely Secret Crossover Crisis , a crossover between the two ) , as well as a few original titles . According to Groening , the goal with Bongo is to " [ try ] to bring humor into the fairly grim comic book market . " He also formed Zongo Comics in 1995 , an imprint of Bongo that published comics for more mature readers , which included three issues of Mary Fleener 's Fleener and seven issues of his close friend Gary Panter 's Jimbo comics . 
 Groening is known for his eclectic taste in music . His favorite band is Frank Zappa and The Mothers of Invention and his favorite album is Trout Mask Replica by Captain Beefheart ( which was produced by Zappa ) . He guest @-@ edited Da Capo Press 's Best Music Writing 2003 and curated a US All Tomorrow 's Parties music festival in 2003 . He illustrated the cover of Frank Zappa 's posthumous album Frank Zappa Plays the Music of Frank Zappa : A Memorial Tribute ( 1996 ) . In May 2010 , he curated another edition of All Tomorrow 's Parties in Minehead , England . He also plays the drums in the all @-@ author rock and roll band The Rock Bottom <unk> ( although he is listed as the cowbell player ) , whose other members include Dave Barry , Ridley Pearson , Scott Turow , Amy Tan , James McBride , Mitch Albom , Roy Blount Jr . , Stephen King , Kathi Kamen Goldmark , Sam Barry and Greg Iles . In July 2013 , Groening co @-@ authored Hard Listening ( 2013 ) with the rest of the Rock Bottom <unk> ( published by <unk> , LLC ) . 
 On January 15 , 2016 , it was announced that Groening is in talks with Netflix to develop a new animated series . Netflix is considering giving the series a two @-@ season order , totalling 20 episodes . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Groening and Deborah Caplan married in 1986 and had two sons together , Homer ( who goes by Will ) and Abe , both of whom Groening occasionally portrays as rabbits in Life in Hell . The couple divorced in 1999 after thirteen years of marriage . In 2011 , Groening married Argentinian artist Agustina Picasso after a four @-@ year relationship , and became stepfather to her daughter Camille . In May 2013 , Picasso gave birth to Nathaniel Philip Picasso Groening , named after writer Nathanael West . She joked that " his godfather is SpongeBob 's creator Stephen Hillenburg " . Matt is the brother @-@ in @-@ law of Hey Arnold ! and Dinosaur Train creator , Craig Bartlett , who is married to Groening 's sister , Lisa . Arnold used to appear in Simpsons Illustrated . 
 Groening identifies himself as agnostic and a liberal and has often made campaign contributions to Democratic Party candidates . His first cousin , Laurie <unk> Anderson , is a member of the Oregon State Senate representing eastern Multnomah County . 
 = = Filmography = = 
 = = = Film = = = 
 = = = Television = = = 
 = = = Video games = = = 
 = = = Music video = = = 
 = = = As a crew member = = = 
 = = Awards = = 
 Groening has been nominated for 25 Emmy Awards and has won twelve : ten for The Simpsons and two for Futurama in the " Outstanding Animated Program ( for programming one hour or less ) " category . Groening received the 2002 National Cartoonist Society Reuben Award , and had been nominated for the same award in 2000 . He received a British Comedy Award for " outstanding contribution to comedy " in 2004 . In 2007 , he was ranked fourth ( and highest American by birth ) in a list of the " top 100 living geniuses " , published by British newspaper The Daily Telegraph . 
 He received the <unk> star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame on February 14 , 2012 . 
 = Ali Larter = 
 Alison Elizabeth " Ali " Larter ( born February 28 , 1976 ) is an American actress . She is best known for playing the dual roles of Niki Sanders and Tracy Strauss on the NBC science fiction drama Heroes as well as her guest roles on several television shows in the 1990s . 
 Larter 's screen debut came in the 1999 film Varsity Blues , followed by the horror films House on Haunted Hill as Sara Wolfe , and Final Destination and Final Destination 2 as Clear Rivers . Major supporting roles in the comedy Legally Blonde and the romantic comedy A Lot Like Love led her to lead roles as the title character in Marigold and in the 2009 thriller Obsessed . Larter achieved wider fame after her portrayal of video game heroine Claire Redfield in Resident Evil : Extinction and Resident Evil : Afterlife . 
 Larter 's presence in the media is reinforced by her appearances in lists compiled by Maxim , FHM and Stuff as well as People magazine 's " Best Dressed List " in 2007 . After a three @-@ year @-@ long relationship with actor Hayes MacArthur , the two married in August 2009 . They have a son , Theodore Hayes MacArthur ( born December 2010 ) and daughter Vivienne Margaret ( born in January 2015 ) . 
 = = Early life and modeling = = 
 Larter was born in Cherry Hill , New Jersey , Larter is the daughter of Margaret , a realtor , and Danforth Larter , a trucking executive . She attended Carusi Middle School and later graduated from Cherry Hill High School West during her time as a model , but she didn 't finish senior year of high school because of modeling . Her mom accompanied her everywhere until she turned 18 . Her parents have since moved to Allentown , Pennsylvania . 
 Larter said she was a tomboy until she turned 13 . Suddenly she sprouted six inches , gained weight and significant curves . The next year she was signed by the Ford modeling agency . Larter began her modeling career at the age of 14 when a modeling scout discovered her on the street and was asked to star in a Phillies commercial ; this led to a modeling contract with the prestigious Ford Modeling Agency in New York . Larter subsequently skipped her senior year to model in Australia , Italy , and Japan , the latter a country she would temporarily settle in at the age of seventeen . 
 While modeling in Italy , Larter met fellow model and aspiring actress Amy Smart and the two " became instant friends " , according to Larter . A modelling job later took her to Los Angeles , while there , she decided to take acting classes with Smart . The two then moved into an apartment together . In November 1996 , Larter portrayed fictional model Allegra Coleman in an Esquire magazine hoax . When speaking about the cover and her subsequent fame , Larter said , " When the door opens for you in Hollywood , you need to run with it . You know ? " Larter is currently signed to IMG Models . 
 = = Career = = 
 = = = First acting roles : 1997 – 2005 = = = 
 Larter landed her first professional acting roles in 1997 when she appeared in several television programs . She appeared in an episode of the Brooke Shields television series Suddenly Susan , and the short @-@ lived series Chicago Sons . These roles were followed by a number of other appearances on Dawson 's Creek , Chicago Hope , and Just Shoot Me ! 
 In 1999 , Larter began her film career with an appearance in Varsity Blues , which re @-@ united her with Dawson 's Creek star James Van Der Beek and close friend Amy Smart . Smart had persuaded Larter to audition for the movie , in which she played Darcy Sears , a love interest for one of the main characters . Varsity Blues drew a domestic box office gross of $ 53 million . That year she made appearances in the teen comedies Giving It Up and Drive Me Crazy . Larter also starred in the horror remake House on Haunted Hill which was made for around $ 20 million . The movie was panned by critics , but grossed $ 15 million on its opening weekend and went on to earn over $ 40 million overall . 
 In 2000 , Larter starred as one of the main characters , Clear Rivers , in the teen supernatural horror film Final Destination . Also starring Devon Sawa and Kerr Smith , the movie 's premise followed several teenagers who survive a plane crash but are stalked and killed by death itself . Final Destination made $ 112 million by the end of its theatrical run . The following year , she appeared in the comedy Legally Blonde with Reese Witherspoon . She played Brooke Taylor Windham , a widow accused of her husband 's murder . The film earned the top spot with $ 20 million in its opening weekend and ended up grossing $ 141 million worldwide . With $ 96 million of it total gross deriving from domestic markets , Legally Blonde is Larter 's highest @-@ grossing film domestically . 
 Larter next appeared as Zerelda Mimms in the western comedy American Outlaws . Directed by Les Mayfield and co @-@ starring Colin Farrell and Scott Caan , the movie was poorly received by critics and at the box office making $ 13 million at the end of its theatrical run . She also starred in Kevin Smith 's Jay and Silent Bob Strike Back . That year , Larter appeared on the cover of Maxim magazine and performed in the stage play The Vagina Monologues in New York City . In Spring 2002 , Larter moved from Los Angeles to New York . " I was too young and impressionable to handle the pressures of L.A. " Larter recalled in an interview , " I 'm a woman now . I am no longer the little girl who could be easily influenced . " 
 Her first project there was to reprise her role as Clear Rivers in the sequel to Final Destination entitled Final Destination 2 . In an interview with IGN , Larter explained her return to the franchise : " When New Line asked me to come back , I thought it was great . They showed me the script and let me have some input , and it was really terrific . " The film opened at number 2 with $ 16 million to mixed critical reception . A year later , Larter served as an associate producer of and starred in the thriller Three Way . In 2005 , Larter appeared in the independent political thriller , Confess , and had a role in the romantic comedy A Lot Like Love alongside Amanda Peet and Ashton Kutcher . 
 = = = International recognition : 2006 – 2009 = = = 
 Larter moved back to Los Angeles in 2005 . Her first audition was for the NBC science fiction drama television series Heroes . Larter played the characters of Niki Sanders , who suffered from DID , and Tracy Strauss on the show created by Tim Kring . Larter 's initial character Niki Sanders , was a wife , mother , and a former internet stripper from Las Vegas who exhibits superhuman strength and alternate personalities who go by the names of Jessica and Niki . " Ali read for the part and just owned it from the second she walked in . " , Kring said to The Chicago Tribune , " It was a very impressive audition . " The series collected a number of accolades in its first season including a People 's Choice Award and nominations from the Primetime Emmy Awards and Golden Globes . As of the third season , Larter began to play a new character , Tracy Strauss , who possessed the ability to freeze objects ; and later , turn her body into water . Larter ultimately decided against starring in the sequel to House on Haunted Hill stating , " I feel so lucky with the things I am doing right now , and that 's so long ago for me . " 
 In 2007 , Larter starred in Marigold as the title character alongside Salman Khan . The movie , released in August 2007 , was about an American actress ( Larter ) who goes to India and gets caught up in the exotic world of Bollywood . Filming took place in North India and London , commencing in June 2004 . In an interview with the BBC , Larter explained how she came about the role of Marigold and expressed why she wanted to star in the film : " I was living in ( director ) Willard Carroll 's guesthouse when he gave me the script . He had written this really strong female character and for me , it was an opportunity to overcome my fear of singing and dancing because I have no professional training . Also , I would get to live in another country for couple of months . With Heroes I didn 't think of it as that huge sci @-@ fi series and it was the same for Marigold . I really focused on the character and loved this journey she went on and the experiences she had . " She was paid a seven @-@ figure salary for the role of Marigold . 
 It was this year that she was cast alongside Milla Jovovich in the film Resident Evil : Extinction , portraying the character of Claire Redfield . Her role sent her to Mexicali , Mexico for filming from May to late July , and required her hair to be dyed a light red . Larter explained her character Claire : " She became the leader of this convoy . She 's incredibly strong , patient . I think she serves a role for everyone within this convoy , let it be a mother to someone , a buddy , a best friend . " Larter also attended the 2007 Comic Con International , her second appearance at the event , to promote the movie . The movie was released in theaters on September 21 , 2007 and made a total of $ 147 million worldwide . She appeared with Hayes McArthur in the comedy Homo Erectus the same year . She also appeared as Evelyn Garland in the biographical film Crazy , based on guitarist Hank Garland . 
 In April 2009 , Larter starred opposite Beyoncé and Idris Elba in the Screen Gems @-@ produced thriller Obsessed . The film follows an office executive ( Elba ) whose marriage to Knowles ' character is threatened by the aggressive interests of a co @-@ worker , portrayed by Larter . In an interview with Glam , Larter said that she " was excited to get the chance to play a femme fatale . I love playing women that are dark and vulnerable and sort of filled with a little bit of crazy emotion . " Derek Malcolm of The London Evening Standard said the movie was a " dim reworking of Fatal Attraction " and noted , " Larter as the pathological minx is the best thing about it . " Obsessed suffered critically but eventually opened at # 1 in its opening weekend with $ 28 million and with a total domestic gross of $ 68 million , became Larter 's second highest @-@ grossing film in North @-@ America . It resulted in Larter 's third Teen Choice Award nomination and an MTV Movie Award for Best Fight with Beyonce . 
 = = = Recent and future roles : 2010 – present = = = 
 Larter reprised her role as Claire Redfield in Resident Evil : Afterlife , which was filmed in 3D and directed by Paul W.S. Anderson . She attended WonderCon and Comic Con to promote the movie . In an interview with JoBlo.com , Larter talked about her role in the film : " I guess people liked me as her ... I 'm excited that they brought me back . I love working with Milla , and it 's also very excited to have Paul back directing this . To work with the man who really created this world and this vision was what excited me about joining this next installment . " The movie was an international success , earning $ 296 million worldwide and becoming Larter 's highest grossing picture to date . As of July 2013 , Larter 's films have grossed a total of $ 552 million domestically and $ 1 @.@ 07 billion worldwide . 
 While at WonderCon in 2010 , Larter commented on Heroes ' possible fifth season . " I think that we 'll be back ... I think that there are still stories that need to be told . " NBC announced the show 's cancellation on May 14 , 2010 . 
 Larter portrayed the lead role in a pilot for a series written by Josh Friedman entitled , " The Asset " . The show , which was expected to air on Fox , was not picked up for a series commission . However , Larter gained a role in TNT 's drama Legends as Crystal Quest , the female lead alongside Sean Bean . Her character plays an operative with the FBI 's Deep Cover Operations who has a history with Bean 's character . On May 8 , 2013 , the series was picked up for 10 episodes to air in 2014 . In 2014 , Larter portrayed Madison in the supernatural thriller film The Diabolical . In August 2015 , Larter was announced to reprise her role as Claire in the sixth and final Resident Evil film Resident Evil : The Final Chapter . 
 = = Other projects = = 
 After serving as an associate producer for her 2004 film Three Way , Larter commented about future producing endeavors during an interview for Resident Evil : Extinction , " I definitely have many ideas and different avenues that I want to take as my career goes on . " 
 In 2010 , Larter appeared as the title character in a short film for Absolut Vodka entitled " Lemon Drop " . In June of the same year , Larter was one of thousands of delegates from 130 countries who participated in a United Nations conference , ' Women Deliver ' in Washington D.C .. 
 Larter , along with her husband Hayes MacArthur , hosted The Art of Elysium Gala in 2013 and are to be recipients of the Spirit of Elysium Award at the January 2014 ceremony . 
 In September 2013 , Larter released her first cookbook entitled Kitchen <unk> : A Year of Festive Menus from My Home to Yours . The book was published by St. Martin ’ s Press . Speaking at the Aspen Culinary Festival to The Hollywood Reporter , Larter said , “ It ’ s about having a good time and getting wild , ... it ’ s for people who want to entertain , whether it ’ s two people or a dinner party of 16 . ” 
 = = In the media = = 
 Larter first appeared in the media when she portrayed the fictional character of Allegra Coleman in the November 1996 issue of Esquire . The magazine , which billed Coleman as the movies ' next dream girl , told of Allegra 's relationship with David Schwimmer , how Quentin Tarantino broke up with Mira Sorvino to date her , and how Woody Allen overhauled a film to give her a starring role . When the magazine was published , Esquire received hundreds of phone calls about the non @-@ existent Coleman and various talent agencies sought to represent her , even after the hoax was revealed . Larter herself received a considerable amount of attention after the cover ; she received phone calls from morning TV shows and others for interviews . The Esquire cover led Larter to a role on Varsity Blues . One particular scene where Larter 's character , Darcy Sears , wears nothing but whipped cream to cover herself has become a media favorite . It has been referenced a number of times in the media including on MTV 's Jersey Shore where one character refers to it as the " Varsity Blues outfit " . The scene also made Maxim 's list of Earth @-@ Shattering Nude Scenes at # 9 . 
 In 2002 , Larter ranked # 40 in Stuff magazine 's " 102 Sexiest Women in the World " . She was listed as # 49 , # 19 and # 91 in FHM 's " 100 Sexiest Women in the World " in 2007 , 2008 and 2009 respectively . Maxim also ranked her # 6 in their Hot 100 for 2007 and # 92 in 2008 . In 2008 , AskMen.com featured her as # 92 on the " 100 Most Desirable Women in the World " . Also ranking # 2 on Maxim 's " Hottest Women of Horror Movies " list , Larter has been acknowledged as a Scream queen by MSN due to her appearances in horror / thriller films . After the success of Heroes , Larter appeared on People 's " Ten Best Dressed List " as " The Newcomer " in 2007 . Victoria 's Secret also acknowledged her in their list , naming her Sexiest Legs of 2008 . In 2009 , Larter was named Cosmopolitan magazine 's Fun Fearless Female of the year at a ceremony held in Beverly Hills . 
 Larter promotes natural beauty . At the 2007 Emmy Awards , Larter styled her own hair as opposed to using her hair @-@ styling team . This was part of the Dove Hair 's " Real Beauty " challenge which required her to use Dove 's new moisturizing shampoos , conditioners and treatments . She also states that she refuses to conform to the idea of the perfect Hollywood body . In an interview with Allure , Larter revealed she once was asked by producers , by faxes sent out to her agent and manager , to lose weight . " I just remember sitting in my trailer hysterically crying from the embarrassment I felt about myself , my body – and that no one could talk to me directly . " 
 Larter appeared in Glamour along with fellow actresses Rachel Bilson and Diane Lane in 2007 . When asked if she still wishes she had the same body she had at 20 she replied , " No . I actually think I look better now because I feel so much better about myself now . And that 's what 's so exciting . As you get older , you get better ... . Look at all these incredible women , like Vanessa Redgrave , who are still so beautiful . The reason is because they embrace who they are . " She has appeared on the covers of Shape , Cosmopolitan , Allure , Glamour , Lucky , InStyle , Maxim and Entertainment Weekly . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 During her time as a model , Larter moved to Los Angeles to pursue acting . In 2002 , she moved to New York for a period of three years . In an interview with <unk> , Larter gave reason for the move : " I took some time off to define myself outside the pressures of the industry . Part of me really needed to know if this is what I wanted to do with the rest of my life . " In January 2005 , she moved to Los Angeles for a role in Heroes . 
 In December 2007 , Larter and her then longtime boyfriend , Hayes MacArthur , were engaged to marry . They had met on the set of National Lampoon 's Homo Erectus . In a 2007 interview with Cosmo , Larter said " I told my boyfriend after three weeks that I wanted to marry him and that we could do it tomorrow . " On August 1 , 2009 , Larter married MacArthur in an intimate outdoor ceremony which took place at MacArthur 's parent 's estate in Kennebunkport , Maine . During the ceremony , guests arrived via trolleys to the sounds of Irish music playing in honor of MacArthur 's heritage ; among the invited was Larter 's close friend Amy Smart . The couple later purchased a three @-@ story home in the Hollywood Hills for $ 2 @.@ 9 million . On July 20 , 2010 , Larter announced that she and MacArthur were expecting their first child and later , on the September 10 episode of Late Night with Jimmy Fallon , announced that she was expecting a boy . Larter admitted that she and MacArthur left the country for Europe in an effort to hide the news of the pregnancy . Larter gave birth to the couple 's son , Theodore Hayes MacArthur , on December 20 , 2010 . In August 2014 , Larter confirmed that she and MacArthur were expecting their second child that winter . She gave birth to her second child , a girl named Vivienne Margaret on January 15 , 2015 . 
 In an interview with Cosmopolitan , Larter " mused " on the state of her life , " I work on a TV show I love , I have the opportunity to do movies with actors I respect , and I 'm in love with the man I want to spend the rest of my life with , who pushes me and excites me ... There 's this fighter in me that kind of needs to be put to rest a little bit . I don 't need to be so tough to protect myself . " While speaking to Vanity Fair at the premiere of her film Obsessed , Larter spoke about her own obsessions , " I love to cook . I spend weekends reading cookbooks — it 's really my relaxation . " She has ranked Scarface , The Bourne Identity , Best in Show , Blue Sky and Grey Gardens as her favorite films . 
 Larter has openly revealed that she has a severe case of ADHD and has been taking Ritalin for it ever since she was in grade school . 
 Speaking to People in 2013 about her transition from actress to author , Larter explained , " After my son was born , I realized how much time I spend on set acting and how much I love that , but when I ’ m not on set , I ’ m usually throwing dinner parties or cooking and entertaining in some way , [ ... ] So I thought you know what , maybe I ’ ll try to put a book together , that sounds like kind of a fun thing to do in my off @-@ time . " Larter has two dogs , Jackpot and Ella . 
 = = Filmography = = 
 = = = Film = = = 
 = = = Television = = = 
 = Motte @-@ and @-@ bailey castle = 
 A motte @-@ and @-@ bailey castle is a fortification with a wooden or stone keep situated on a raised earthwork called a motte , accompanied by an enclosed courtyard , or bailey , surrounded by a protective ditch and palisade . Relatively easy to build with unskilled , often forced , labour , but still militarily formidable , these castles were built across northern Europe from the 10th century onwards , spreading from Normandy and Anjou in France , into the Holy Roman Empire in the 11th century . The Normans introduced the design into England and Wales following their invasion in 1066 . Motte @-@ and @-@ bailey castles were adopted in Scotland , Ireland , the Low Countries and Denmark in the 12th and 13th centuries . By the end of the 13th century , the design was largely superseded by alternative forms of fortification , but the earthworks remain a prominent feature in many countries . 
 = = Architecture = = 
 = = = Structures = = = 
 A motte @-@ and @-@ bailey castle was made up of two structures , a motte , a type of mound – often artificial – topped with a wooden or stone structure known as a keep ; and at least one bailey , a fortified enclosure built next to the motte . The term " motte and bailey " is a relatively modern one , and is not medieval in origin . The word " motte " is the French version of the Latin <unk> , and in France the word motte was initially an early word for a turf ; it then became used to refer to a turf bank , and by the 12th century was used to refer to the castle design itself . The word " bailey " comes from the Norman @-@ French <unk> , or basse @-@ cour , referring to a low yard . In medieval sources , the Latin term castellum was used to describe the bailey complex within these castles . 
 One contemporary account of these structures comes from Jean de Colmieu around 1130 , describing the Calais region in northern France . De Colmieu described how the nobles would build " a mound of earth as high as they can and dig a ditch about it as wide and deep as possible . The space on top of the mound is enclosed by a palisade of very strong hewn logs , strengthened at intervals by as many towers as their means can provide . Inside the enclosure is a citadel , or keep , which commands the whole circuit of the defences . The entrance to the fortress is by means of a bridge , which , rising from the outer side of the moat and supported on posts as it ascends , reaches to the top of the mound . " At Durham Castle , contemporaries described how the motte @-@ and @-@ bailey superstructure arose from the " tumulus of rising earth " with a keep rising " into thin air , strong within and without " with a " stalwart house ... glittering with beauty in every part " . 
 <unk> were made out of earth and flattened on top , and it can be very hard to determine whether a mound is artificial or natural without excavation . Some were also built over older artificial structures , such as Bronze Age barrows . The size of mottes varied considerably , with these mounds being 3 metres to 30 metres in height ( 10 feet to 100 feet ) , and from 30 metres to 90 metres in diameter ( 100 feet to 300 feet ) . This minimum height of 3 metres ( 10 feet ) for mottes is usually intended to exclude smaller mounds which often had non @-@ military purposes . In England and Wales , only 7 % of mottes were taller than ten metres high ; 24 % were between ten and five metres , and 69 % were less than five metres tall . A motte was protected by a ditch around it , which would typically have also been a source of the earth and soil for constructing the mound itself . 
 A keep and a protective wall would usually be built on top of the motte . Some walls would be large enough to have a wall @-@ walk around them , and the outer walls of the motte and the wall @-@ walk could be strengthened by filling in the gap between the wooden walls with earth and stones , allowing it to carry more weight ; this was called a <unk> . Smaller mottes could only support simple towers with room for a few soldiers , whilst larger mottes could be equipped with a much grander building . Many wooden keeps were designed with a <unk> , a square building that overhung from the upper floors of the building , enabling better defences and a more sturdy structural design . The early 12th @-@ century chronicler Lambert of Ardres described the wooden keep on top of the motte at the castle of Ardres , where the " first storey was on the surface of the ground , where were cellars and granaries , and great boxes , tuns , casks , and other domestic utensils . In the storey above were the dwelling and common living @-@ rooms of the residents in which were the <unk> , the rooms of the bakers and butlers , and the great chamber in which the lord and his wife slept ... In the upper storey of the house were garret rooms ... In this storey also the watchmen and the servants appointed to keep the house took their sleep " . Wooden structures on mottes could be protected by skins and hides to prevent them being easily set alight during a siege . 
 The bailey was an enclosed courtyard overlooked by the motte and surrounded by a wooden fence called a palisade and another ditch . The bailey was often kidney @-@ shaped to fit against a circular motte , but could be made in other shapes according to the terrain . The bailey would contain a wide number of buildings , including a hall , kitchens , a chapel , barracks , stores , stables , forges or workshops , and was the centre of the castle 's economic activity . The bailey was linked to the motte either by a flying bridge stretching between the two , or , more popularly in England , by steps cut into the motte . Typically the ditch of the motte and the bailey joined , forming a figure of eight around the castle . Wherever possible , nearby streams and rivers would be dammed or diverted , creating water @-@ filled moats , artificial lakes and other forms of water defences . 
 In practice , there was a wide number of variations to this common design . A castle could have more than one bailey : at Warkworth Castle an inner and an outer bailey was constructed , or alternatively , several baileys could flank the motte , as at Windsor Castle . Some baileys had two mottes , such as those at Lincoln . Some mottes could be square instead of round , such as at Cabal Trump . Instead of single ditches , occasionally double @-@ ditch defences were built , as seen at Berkhamsted . Local geography and the intent of the builder produced many unique designs . 
 = = = Construction and maintenance = = = 
 Various methods were used to build mottes . Where a natural hill could be used , scarping could produce a motte without the need to create an artificial mound , but more commonly much of the motte would have to be constructed by hand . Four methods existed for building a mound and a tower : the mound could either be built first , and a tower placed on top of it ; the tower could alternatively be built on the original ground surface and then buried within the mound ; the tower could potentially be built on the original ground surface and then partially buried within the mound , the buried part forming a cellar beneath ; or the tower could be built first , and the mound added later . 
 Regardless of the sequencing , artificial mottes had to be built by piling up earth ; this work was undertaken by hand , using wooden shovels and hand @-@ barrows , possibly with picks as well in the later periods . Larger mottes took disproportionately more effort to build than their smaller equivalents , because of the volumes of earth involved . The largest mottes in England , such as Thetford , are estimated to have required up to 24 @,@ 000 man @-@ days of work ; smaller ones required perhaps as little as 1 @,@ 000 . Contemporary accounts talk of some mottes being built in a matter of days , although these low figures have led to suggestions by historians that either these figures were an underestimate , or that they refer to the construction of a smaller design than that later seen on the sites concerned . Taking into account estimates of the likely available manpower during the period , historians estimate that the larger mottes might have taken between four and nine months to build . This contrasted favourably with stone keeps of the period , which typically took up to ten years to build . Very little skilled labour was required to build motte and bailey castles , which made them very attractive propositions if forced peasant labour was available , as was the case after the Norman invasion of England . Where the local workforce had to be paid - such as at Clones in Ireland , built in 1211 using imported labourers – the costs would rise quickly , in this case reaching £ 20 . 
 The type of soil would make a difference to the design of the motte , as clay soils could support a steeper motte , whilst <unk> soils meant that a motte would need a more gentle incline . Where available , layers of different sorts of earth , such as clay , gravel and chalk , would be used alternatively to build in strength to the design . Layers of turf could also be added to stabilise the motte as it was built up , or a core of stones placed as the heart of the structure to provide strength . Similar issues applied to the defensive ditches , where designers found that the wider the ditch was dug , the deeper and steeper the sides of the scarp could be , making it more defensive . Although militarily a motte was , as Norman Pounds describes it , " almost indestructible " , they required frequent maintenance . Soil wash was a problem , particularly with steeper mounds , and mottes could be clad with wood or stone slabs to protect them . Over time , some mottes suffered from subsidence or damage from flooding , requiring repairs and stabilisation work . 
 Although motte @-@ and @-@ bailey castles are the best known castle design , they were not always the most numerous in any given area . A popular alternative was the ringwork castle , involving a palisade being built on top of a raised earth rampart , protected by a ditch . The choice of motte and bailey or ringwork was partially driven by terrain , as mottes were typically built on low ground , and on deeper clay and alluvial soils . Another factor may have been speed , as ringworks were faster to build than mottes . Some ringwork castles were later converted into motte @-@ and @-@ bailey designs , by filling in the centre of the ringwork to produce a flat @-@ topped motte . The reasons for why this decision was taken are unclear ; motte @-@ and @-@ bailey castles may have been felt to be more prestigious , or easier to defend ; another theory is that like the terpen in Netherlands , or <unk> and <unk> in Lower Rhineland , raising the height of the castle was done to create a drier site . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Emergence of the design = = = 
 The motte @-@ and @-@ bailey castle is a particularly northern European phenomenon , most numerous in Normandy and Britain , but also seen in Denmark , Germany , Southern Italy and occasionally beyond . European castles first emerged in the 9th and 10th centuries , after the fall of the Carolingian Empire resulted in its territory being divided among individual lords and princes and local territories became threatened by the Magyars and the Norse . Against this background , various explanations have been put forward to explain the origins and spread of the motte @-@ and @-@ bailey design across northern Europe ; there is often a tension among the academic community between explanations that stress military and social reasons for the rise of this design . One suggestion is that these castles were built particularly in order to protect against external attack – the Angevins , it is argued , began to build them to protect against the Viking raids , and the design spread to deal with the attacks along the Slav and Hungarian frontiers . Another argument is that , given the links between this style of castle and the Normans , who were of Viking descent , it was in fact originally a Viking design , transported to Normandy and Angers . The motte @-@ and @-@ bailey castle was certainly effective against assault , although as historian André Debord suggests , the historical and archaeological record of the military operation of motte @-@ and @-@ bailey castles remains relatively limited . 
 An alternative approach focuses on the links between this form of castle and what can be termed a feudal mode of society . The spread of motte @-@ and @-@ bailey castles was usually closely tied to the creation of local fiefdoms and feudal landowners , and areas without this method of governance rarely built these castles . Yet another theory suggests that the design emerged as a result of the pressures of space on ringworks , and that the earliest motte @-@ and @-@ baileys were converted ringworks . Finally , there may be a link between the local geography and the building of motte @-@ and @-@ bailey castles , which are usually built on low @-@ lying areas , in many cases subject to regular flooding . Regardless of the reasons behind the initial popularity of the motte @-@ and @-@ bailey design , however , there is widespread agreement that the castles were first widely adopted in Normandy and Angevin territory in the 10th and 11th centuries . 
 = = = Initial development , 10th and 11th centuries = = = 
 The earliest purely documentary evidence for motte @-@ and @-@ bailey castles in Normandy and Angers comes from between 1020 and 1040 , but a combination of documentary and archaeological evidence pushes the date for the first motte and bailey castle , at <unk> , back to 979 . The castles were built by the more powerful lords of Anjou in the late 10th and 11th centuries , in particular Fulk III and his son , Geoffrey II , who built a great number of them between 987 and 1060 . Many of these earliest castles would have appeared quite crude and rustic by later standards , belying the power and prestige of their builders . William the Conqueror , as the Duke of Normandy , is believed to have adopted the motte @-@ and @-@ bailey design from neighbouring Anjou . Duke William went on to prohibit the building of castles without his consent through the <unk> et <unk> , with his legal definition of castles centring on the classic motte @-@ and @-@ bailey features of ditching , banking and <unk> . 
 By the 11th century , castles were built throughout the Holy Roman Empire , which then spanned central Europe . They now typically took the form of an enclosure on a hilltop , or , on lower ground , a tall , free @-@ standing tower ( German Bergfried . ) The largest castles , known in German as <unk> , had well @-@ defined inner and outer courts , but no mottes . The motte @-@ and @-@ bailey design began to spread into Alsace and the northern Alps from France during the first half of the 11th century , spreading further into Bohemia and Austria in the subsequent years . This form of castle was closely associated with the colonisation of newly cultivated areas within the Empire , as new lords were granted lands by the emperor and built castles close to the local <unk> , or town . Motte @-@ and @-@ bailey castle building substantially enhanced the prestige of local nobles , and it has been suggested that their early adoption was because they were a cheaper way of imitating the still more prestigious <unk> , but this is usually regarded as unlikely . In many cases , <unk> were converted into motte and bailey designs by burying existing castle towers within the mounds . 
 In England , William invaded from Normandy in 1066 , resulting in three phases of castle building in England , around 80 % of which were in the motte @-@ and @-@ bailey pattern . The first of these was the establishment by the new king of royal castles in key strategic locations , including many towns . These urban castles could make use of the existing town 's walls and fortification , but typically required the demolition of local houses to make space for them . This could cause extensive damage : records suggest that in Lincoln 166 houses were destroyed , with 113 in Norwich and 27 in Cambridge . The second and third waves of castle building in the late @-@ 11th century were led by the major magnates and then the more junior knights on their new estates . Some regional patterns in castle building can be seen - relatively few castles were built in East Anglia compared to the west of England or the Marches , for example ; this was probably due to the relatively settled and prosperous nature of the east of England and reflected a shortage of unfree labour for constructing mottes . In Wales , the first wave of the Norman castles were again predominantly made of wood in a mixture of motte @-@ and @-@ bailey and ringwork designs . The Norman invaders spread up the valleys , using this form of castle to occupy their new territories . After the Norman conquest of England and Wales , the building of motte @-@ and @-@ bailey castles in Normandy accelerated as well , resulting in a broad swath of these castles across the Norman territories , around 741 motte @-@ and @-@ bailey castles in England and Wales alone . 
 = = = Further expansion , 12th and 13th centuries = = = 
 Having become well established in Normandy , Germany and Britain , motte @-@ and @-@ bailey castles began to be adopted elsewhere , mainly in northern Europe , during the 12th and 13th centuries . Conflict through the Low Countries encouraged castle building in a number of regions from the late 12th century to the 14th century . In Flanders , the first motte and bailey castles began relatively early at the end of the 11th century . The rural motte @-@ and @-@ bailey castles followed the traditional design , but the urban castles often lacked the traditional baileys , using parts of the town to fulfil this role instead . Motte @-@ and @-@ bailey castles in Flanders were particularly numerous in the south along the Lower Rhine , a fiercely contested border . Further along the coast in Friesland , the relatively decentralised , egalitarian society initially discouraged the building of motte and bailey castles , although terpen , raised " dwelling mounds " which lacked towers and were usually lower in height than a typical motte , were created instead . By the end of the medieval period , however , the terpen gave way to <unk> <unk> , non @-@ residential defensive towers , often on motte @-@ like mounds , owned by the increasingly powerful nobles and landowners . On Zeeland the local lords had a high degree of independence during the 12th and 13th centuries , owing to the wider conflict for power between neighbouring Flanders and Friesland . The Zeeland lords had also built terpen mounds , but these gave way to larger werven constructions – effectively mottes – which were later termed <unk> . Sometimes both terpen and werven are called <unk> , or " refuge castles " . During the 12th and 13th centuries a number of terpen mounds were turned into werven mottes , and some new werven mottes were built from scratch . Around 323 known or probable motte and bailey castles of this design are believed to have built within the borders of the modern Netherlands . 
 In neighbouring Denmark , motte @-@ and @-@ bailey castles appeared somewhat later in the 12th and 13th centuries and in more limited numbers than elsewhere , due to the less feudal society . Except for a handful of mote and bailey castles in Norway , built in the first half of the 11th century and including the royal residence in Oslo , the design did not play a role further north in Scandinavia . 
 The Norman expansion into Wales slowed in the 12th century but remained an ongoing threat to the remaining native rulers . In response , the Welsh princes and lords began to build their own castles , frequently motte @-@ and @-@ bailey designs , usually in wood . There are indications that this may have begun from 1111 onwards under Prince Cadwgan ap Bleddyn , with the first documentary evidence of a native Welsh castle being at Cymmer in 1116 . These timber castles , including Tomen y <unk> , Tomen y <unk> , Gaer <unk> , were of equivalent quality to the equivalent Norman fortifications in the area , and it can prove difficult to distinguish the builders of some sites from the archaeological evidence alone . 
 Motte @-@ and @-@ bailey castles in Scotland emerged as a consequence of the centralising of royal authority in the 12th century . David I encouraged Norman and French nobles to settle in Scotland , introducing a feudal mode of landholding and the use of castles as a way of controlling the contested lowlands . The quasi @-@ independent polity of Galloway , which had resisted the rule of David and his predecessors , was a particular focus for this colonisation . The size of these Scottish castles , primarily wooden motte and bailey constructions , varied considerably , from larger designs such as the Bass of Inverurie to smaller castles like Balmaclellan . 
 Motte @-@ and @-@ bailey castles were introduced to Ireland following the Norman invasion of Ireland that began between 1166 and 1171 under first Richard de Clare and then Henry II of England , with the occupation of southern and eastern Ireland by a number of Anglo @-@ Norman barons . The rapid Norman success depended on key economic and military advantages ; their cavalry enabled Norman successes in battles , and castles enabled them to control the newly conquered territories . The new lords rapidly built castles to protect their possessions ; most of these were motte @-@ and @-@ bailey constructions , many of them strongly defended . Unlike Wales , the indigenous Irish lords do not appear to have constructed their own castles in any significant number during the period . Between 350 and 450 motte @-@ and @-@ bailey castles are believed to remain today , although the identification of these earthwork remains can be contentious . 
 A small number of motte @-@ and @-@ bailey castles were built outside of northern Europe . In the late @-@ 12th century , the Normans invaded southern Italy and Sicily ; although they had the technology to build more modern designs , in many cases wooden motte @-@ and @-@ bailey castles were built instead for reasons of speed . The Italians came to refer to a range of different castle types as <unk> , however , and there may not have been as many genuine motte @-@ and @-@ bailey castles in southern Italy as was once thought on the basis of the documentary evidence alone . In addition , there is evidence of the Norman crusaders building a motte and bailey using sand and wood in Egypt in 1221 during the Fifth Crusade . 
 = = = Conversion and decline , 13th – 14th centuries = = = 
 Motte and bailey castles became a less popular design in the mid @-@ medieval period . In France , motte @-@ and @-@ bailey castles were not built after the start of the 12th century , and mottes ceased to be built in most of England after around 1170 , although they continued to be erected in Wales and along the Marches . Many motte @-@ and @-@ bailey castles were occupied relatively briefly and in England many were being abandoned by the 12th century , and others neglected and allowed to lapse into disrepair . In the Low Countries and Germany , a similar transition occurred in the 13th and 14th centuries . 
 One factor was the introduction of stone into castle building . The earliest stone castles had emerged in the 10th century , with stone keeps being built on mottes along the Catalonia frontier and several , including Château de Langeais , in Angers . Although wood was a more powerful defensive material than was once thought , stone became increasingly popular for military and symbolic reasons . Some existing motte @-@ and @-@ bailey castles were converted to stone , with the keep and the gatehouse usually the first parts to be upgraded . Shell keeps were built on many mottes , circular stone shells running around the top of the motte , sometime protected by a further chemise , or low protective wall , around the base . By the 14th century , a number of motte and bailey castles had been converted into powerful stone fortresses . 
 Newer castle designs placed less emphasis on mottes . Square Norman keeps built in stone became popular following the first such construction in Langeais in 994 . Several were built in England and Wales after the conquest ; by 1216 there were around 100 in the country . These massive keeps could be either erected on top of settled , well established mottes , or could have mottes built around them – so @-@ called " buried " keeps . The ability of mottes , especially newly built mottes , to support the heavier stone structures , was limited , and many needed to be built on fresh ground . Concentric castles , relying on several lines of baileys and defensive walls , made increasingly little use of keeps or mottes at all . 
 Across Europe , motte @-@ and @-@ bailey construction came to an end . At the end of the 12th century the Welsh rulers began to build castles in stone , primarily in the principality of North Wales and usually along the higher peaks where mottes were unnecessary . In Flanders , decline came in the 13th century as feudal society changed . In the Netherlands , cheap brick started to be used in castles from the 13th century onwards in place of earthworks , and many mottes were levelled , to help develop the surrounding , low @-@ lying fields ; these " levelled mottes " are a particularly Dutch phenomenon . In Denmark , motte and baileys gave way in the 14th century to a castrum @-@ curia model , where the castle was built with a fortified bailey and a fortified mound , somewhat smaller than the typical motte . By the 12th century , the castles in Western Germany began to thin in number , due to changes in land ownership , and various mottes were abandoned . In Germany and Denmark , motte @-@ and @-@ bailey castles also provided the model for the later <unk> , or " water castle " , a stronghold and bailey construction surrounded by water , and widely built in the late medieval period . 
 = = = Today = = = 
 In England , motte @-@ and @-@ bailey earthworks were put to various uses over later years ; in some cases , mottes were turned into garden features in the 18th century , or reused as military defences during the Second World War . Today , almost no mottes of motte @-@ and @-@ bailey castles remain in regular use in Europe , with one of the few exceptions being that at Windsor Castle , converted for the storage of royal documents . The landscape of northern Europe remains scattered with their earthworks , and many form popular tourist attractions as part of the European heritage industry . 
 = Dead Putting Society = 
 " Dead Putting Society " is the sixth episode of The Simpsons ' second season . It originally aired on the Fox network in the United States on November 15 , 1990 . In the episode , Homer 's son , Bart , and Ned Flanders ' son , Todd , decide to enter a miniature golf tournament . Homer becomes confident that Bart will win and makes a bet with Ned that the father of the boy that does not win will have to mow their neighbors lawn in their wife 's Sunday dress . On the day of the tournament , Bart and Todd make the finals but decide to call it a draw , forcing both Homer and Ned to fulfill the requirements of their bet . 
 The episode , which was the first to prominently feature Ned and the rest of his family , was written by Jeff Martin and directed by Rich Moore . While animating " Dead Putting Society " , the animators went on a field trip to a local miniature golf course to study the mechanics of a golf club swing . Since airing , the episode has received positive reviews from television critics . It acquired a Nielsen rating of 14 @.@ 3 and was the highest @-@ rated show on the Fox network the week it aired . 
 = = Plot = = 
 When Homer is mowing his lawn with obvious frustration , his next @-@ door neighbor Ned Flanders invites him into his basement rumpus room for a beer . Upon seeing Ned 's house and observing his exaggeratedly perfect relationships with his wife and son , Homer erupts at Ned , accusing him of showing off . Ned angrily asks Homer to leave in response . Later , however , he feels guilty and writes a letter to Homer saying that he is really sorry and that he loves him as a brother . Homer is amused by Ned 's sentimentality and reads the letter to the family at the breakfast table . Marge is not happy with the family 's reaction , despite being unable to control her laughter , and chastises Homer for making light of Ned 's sincere apology . Afterwards , Homer takes Bart and Maggie to Sir Putt @-@ A @-@ Lot 's Merrie Olde Fun Centre for a round of miniature golf . They unexpectedly run into Ned and his son Todd , and end up going golfing together . 
 The game does not go well for Homer , who is obviously still jealous of Ned . Meanwhile , Bart and Todd find out about an upcoming children 's miniature golf tournament , with a first prize of $ 50 . They enter it , and although Todd is very good at miniature golf , Homer becomes confident that Bart will win . He tells Bart that it is not okay to lose and forces him to stare angrily at a picture of Todd for 15 minutes every day . Later , when Bart looks at his meager collection of trophies in his room , Lisa offers to help him practice . Utilizing spiritual books that calm Bart 's mind , they meditate . Meanwhile , Homer makes a bet with Ned on whose boy is a better golfer : the father of the boy who does not win the tournament will mow the other father 's lawn in his wife 's Sunday dress . 
 On the day of the tournament , Homer threatens Bart to win no matter what . In an extremely close match , Bart and Todd each do well , and tie by the time they reach the eighteenth hole . Bart and Todd agree that the competition is not worth the stress , that they are equally good and that they should call it a draw , splitting the award evenly . As a result , Ned and Homer are forced to wear their respective wives ' Sunday dresses and mow each other 's lawn . People around the neighborhood laugh at them and Ned actually enjoys it ( commenting that it reminds him of his fraternity days in college ) , much to Homer 's dismay . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Dead Putting Society " was written by Jeff Martin and directed by Rich Moore . Martin was an experienced miniature golfer and based much of the golf @-@ related scenes in the script on his own experiences . Parts of this episode are also based on the 1984 film The Karate Kid , including the way Bart practices for the miniature golf tournament by balancing on a trash can in a " crane position " . For " Dead Putting Society " , the animators went on a field trip to a local miniature golf course to study the mechanics of a golf club swing . Moore commented that the reason for this was that much of the humor on The Simpsons comes from making the scenery look lifelike ; " The realism of the background serves as the straight man for the absurd situations . " 
 This episode was the first to prominently feature Ned Flanders and the rest of the Flanders family , and contained the first appearances of Maude and Rod Flanders . Maggie Roswell was given the role of Maude , Ned 's loving wife , and became a regular cast member with this episode . She had previously played supporting parts in the show 's first season . Nancy Cartwright , the voice of Bart , commented on Roswell 's acting : " Maggie has been blessed with a skill in creating one of the hardest things to create : the ' normal sound , ' whatever that is . So she can easily slip into the gal next door [ ... ] . " 
 = = Reception = = 
 " Dead Putting Society " originally aired on the Fox network in the United States on November 15 , 1990 . In its original American broadcast , the episode finished 35th in the ratings for the week of November 12 – 18 , 1990 , with a Nielsen rating of 14 @.@ 3 , equivalent to approximately 13 @.@ 3 million viewing households . It was the highest @-@ rated show on the Fox network that week . 
 Since airing , the episode has received positive reviews from television critics . The Orlando Sentinel 's Gregory Hardy named it the ninth best episode of the show with a sports theme . Doug Pratt , a DVD reviewer and Rolling Stone contributor , praised the episode as one of the best from season two . He commented that the miniature golf challenges " are delightful , the denouncement is highly amusing [ ... ] , and the beauty of the whole episode is that it could just as easily be an episode in a live action TV sitcom , though the slight touches of fancy enabled by the animation enhance its comic impact . " Dusty Sanders of the Rocky Mountain News commented that the title of the episode is " funnier than the content of most TV sitcoms . " The reference to The Karate Kid was named the 21st greatest film reference in the history of the show by Total Film 's Nathan Ditum . 
 DVD Movie Guide 's Colin Jacobson commented that " considering what a prominent character Flanders became , it 's strange to realize that " Dead Putting Society " was the first show to feature him heavily . He 'd made some token appearances in the past — most notably in season one 's ' Call of the Simpsons ' — but ' Dead Putting Society ' much more clearly defined the Ned we 'd come to know and love . It also featured scads of good little bits and gags and seemed like a solid program . " The authors of the book I Can 't Believe It 's a Bigger and Better Updated Unofficial Simpsons Guide , Warren Martyn and Adrian Wood , commented that apart from " the memorable lawn mowing sequence at the end , this episode is notable for our first viewing of the gaudy , gadget @-@ filled , God @-@ fearing splendour that is the <unk> ' home . " 
 = Hydrus = 
 Hydrus / <unk> / is a small constellation in the deep southern sky . It was first depicted on a celestial atlas by Johann Bayer in his 1603 Uranometria . The French explorer and astronomer Nicolas Louis de Lacaille charted the brighter stars and gave their Bayer designations in 1756 . Its name means " male water snake " , as opposed to Hydra , a much larger constellation that represents a female water snake . It remains below the horizon for most Northern Hemisphere observers . 
 The brightest star is the 2 @.@ 8 @-@ magnitude Beta Hydri , also the closest reasonably bright star to the south celestial pole . Pulsating between magnitude 3 @.@ 26 and 3 @.@ 33 , Gamma Hydri is a variable red giant some 60 times the diameter of our Sun . Lying near it is VW Hydri , one of the brightest dwarf novae in the heavens . Four star systems have been found to have exoplanets to date , most notably HD 10180 , which could bear up to nine planetary companions . 
 = = History = = 
 Hydrus was one of the twelve constellations established by the Dutch astronomer Petrus Plancius from the observations of the southern sky by the Dutch explorers Pieter Dirkszoon Keyser and Frederick de Houtman , who had sailed on the first Dutch trading expedition , known as the Eerste Schipvaart , to the East Indies . It first appeared on a 35 @-@ cm ( 14 in ) diameter celestial globe published in 1598 in Amsterdam by Plancius with Jodocus Hondius . The first depiction of this constellation in a celestial atlas was in the German cartographer Johann Bayer 's Uranometria of 1603 . De Houtman included it in his southern star catalogue the same year under the Dutch name De <unk> , " The Water Snake " , it representing a type of snake encountered on the expedition rather than a mythical creature . The French explorer and astronomer Nicolas Louis de Lacaille called it l ’ <unk> <unk> on the 1756 version of his planisphere of the southern skies , distinguishing it from the feminine Hydra . The French name was retained by Jean Fortin in 1776 for his Atlas Céleste , while Lacaille Latinised the name to Hydrus for his revised Coelum Australe <unk> in 1763 . 
 = = Characteristics = = 
 Irregular in shape , Hydrus is bordered by Mensa to the southeast , Eridanus to the east , Horologium and <unk> to the northeast , Phoenix to the north , Tucana to the northwest and west , and Octans to the south ; Lacaille had shortened Hydrus ' tail to make space for this last constellation he had drawn up . Covering 243 square degrees and 0 @.@ 589 % of the night sky , it ranks 61st of the 88 constellations in size . The three @-@ letter abbreviation for the constellation , as adopted by the International Astronomical Union in 1922 , is ' <unk> ' . The official constellation boundaries , as set by Eugène Delporte in 1930 , are defined by a polygon of 12 segments . In the equatorial coordinate system , the right ascension coordinates of these borders lie between <unk> <unk> and 04h <unk> , while the declination coordinates are between − 57 @.@ 85 ° and − 82 @.@ 06 ° . As one of the deep southern constellations , it remains below the horizon at latitudes north of the 30th parallel in the Northern Hemisphere , and is circumpolar at latitudes south of the 50th parallel in the Southern Hemisphere . Indeed , Herman Melville mentions it and Argo Navis in Moby Dick " beneath effulgent Antarctic Skies " , highlighting his knowledge of the southern constellations from whaling voyages . A line drawn between the long axis of the Southern Cross to Beta Hydri and then extended 4 @.@ 5 times will mark a point due south . Hydrus culminates at midnight around the 26th of October . 
 = = Notable features = = 
 = = = Stars = = = 
 Keyzer and de Houtman assigned 15 stars to the constellation in their Malay and Madagascan vocabulary , with a star that would be later designated as Alpha Hydri marking the head , Gamma the chest and a number of stars that were later allocated to Tucana , <unk> , Mensa and Horologium marking the body and tail . Lacaille charted and designated 20 stars with the Bayer designations Alpha through to Tau in 1756 . Of these , he used the designations Eta , Pi and Tau twice each , for three sets of two stars close together , and omitted Omicron and Xi . He assigned Rho to a star that subsequent astronomers were unable to find . 
 Beta Hydri , the brightest star in Hydrus , is a yellow star of apparent magnitude 2 @.@ 8 , lying 24 light @-@ years from Earth . It has about 104 % of the mass of the Sun and 181 % of the Sun 's radius , with more than three times the Sun 's luminosity . The spectrum of this star matches a stellar classification of G2 IV , with the luminosity class of ' IV ' indicating this is a subgiant star . As such , it is a slightly more evolved star than the Sun , with the supply of hydrogen fuel at its core becoming exhausted . It is the nearest subgiant star to the Sun and one of the oldest stars in the solar neighbourhood . Thought to be between 6 @.@ 4 and 7 @.@ 1 billion years old , this star bears some resemblance to what the Sun may look like in the far distant future , making it an object of interest to astronomers . It is also the closest bright star to the south celestial pole . 
 Located at the northern edge of the constellation and just southwest of Achernar is Alpha Hydri , a white sub @-@ giant star of magnitude 2 @.@ 9 , situated 72 light @-@ years from Earth . Of spectral type <unk> , it is beginning to cool and enlarge as it uses up its supply of hydrogen . It is twice as massive and 3 @.@ 3 times as wide as our sun and 26 times more luminous . A line drawn between Alpha Hydri and Beta Centauri is bisected by the south celestial pole . 
 In the southeastern corner of the constellation is Gamma Hydri , a red giant of spectral type M2III located 214 light @-@ years from Earth . It is a semi @-@ regular variable star , pulsating between magnitudes 3 @.@ 26 and 3 @.@ 33 . Observations over five years were not able to establish its periodicity . An ageing star , it is around 1 @.@ 5 to 2 times as massive as our Sun , yet has expanded to have about 60 times the Sun 's diameter . It shines with about 655 times the luminosity of our Sun . Located 3 ° northeast of Gamma is the VW Hydri , a dwarf nova of the SU Ursae Majoris type . It is a close binary system that consists of a white dwarf and other star , the former drawing off matter from the latter into a bright accretion disk . These systems are characterised by frequent eruptions and less frequent <unk> . The former are smooth , while the latter exhibit short " <unk> " of heightened activity . One of the brightest dwarf novae in the sky , it has a baseline magnitude of 14 @.@ 4 and can brighten to magnitude 8 @.@ 4 during peak activity . BL Hydri is another close binary system composed of a low mass star and a strongly magnetic white dwarf . Known as a polar or AM Herculis variable , these produce polarized optical and infrared emissions and intense soft and hard X @-@ ray emissions to the frequency of the white dwarf 's rotation period — in this case 113 @.@ 6 minutes . 
 There are two notable optical double stars in Hydrus . Pi Hydri , composed of Pi1 Hydri and Pi2 Hydri , is divisible in binoculars . Around 476 light @-@ years distant , Pi1 is a red giant of spectral type M1III that varies between magnitudes 5 @.@ 52 and 5 @.@ 58 . Pi2 is an orange giant of spectral type K2III and shining with a magnitude of 5 @.@ 7 , around 488 light @-@ years from Earth . 
 Eta Hydri is the other optical double , composed of Eta1 and Eta2 . Eta1 is a blue @-@ white main sequence star of spectral type B9V that was suspected of being variable , and is located just over 700 light @-@ years away . Eta2 has a magnitude of 4 @.@ 7 and is a yellow giant star of spectral type <unk> around 218 light @-@ years distant , which has evolved off the main sequence and is expanding and cooling on its way to becoming a red giant . Calculations of its mass indicate it was most likely a white A @-@ type main sequence star for most of its existence , around twice the mass of our Sun . A planet , Eta2 Hydri b , greater than 6 @.@ 5 times the mass of Jupiter was discovered in 2005 , orbiting around Eta2 every 711 days at a distance of 1 @.@ 93 astronomical units ( AU ) . 
 Three other systems have been found to have planets , most notably the Sun @-@ like star HD 10180 , which has seven planets , plus possibly an additional two for a total of nine — as of 2012 more than any other system to date , including the Solar System . Lying around 127 light @-@ years ( 39 parsecs ) from the Earth , it has an apparent magnitude of 7 @.@ 33 . 
 GJ 3021 is a solar twin — a star very like our own Sun — around 57 light @-@ years distant with a spectral type G8V and magnitude of 6 @.@ 7 . It has a Jovian planet companion ( GJ 3021 b ) . Orbiting about 0 @.@ 5 AU from its sun , it has a minimum mass 3 @.@ 37 times that of Jupiter and a period of around 133 days . The system is a complex one as the faint star GJ <unk> orbits at a distance of 68 AU ; it is a red dwarf of spectral type <unk> . 
 HD <unk> is a star of magnitude 8 @.@ 37 . It is a yellow main sequence star of spectral type G8V a little cooler and smaller than our Sun around 143 light @-@ years away . It has two planets that are around 12 and 13 @.@ 5 times as massive as the Earth with periods of just under 12 and 34 days respectively . 
 = = = Deep @-@ sky objects = = = 
 Hydrus contains only faint deep @-@ sky objects . IC 1717 was a deep @-@ sky object discovered by the Danish astronomer John Louis Emil Dreyer in the late 19th century . However , the object at the coordinate Dreyer observed is no longer there , and is now a mystery . It was very likely to have been a faint comet . Known as the white rose galaxy , PGC <unk> is a giant spiral galaxy surrounded by shells resembling rose petals , located around 345 million light years from the Solar System . Unusually , it has cohorts of globular clusters of three distinct ages suggesting bouts of post @-@ starburst formation following a merger with another galaxy . The constellation also contains a spiral galaxy NGC 1511 that lies edge on to observers on Earth and is readily viewed in amateur telescopes . 
 Located mostly in Dorado , the Large Magellanic Cloud extends into Hydrus . The globular cluster NGC 1466 is an outlying component of the galaxy , and contains many RR Lyrae @-@ type variable stars . It has a magnitude of 11 @.@ 59 and is thought to be over 12 billion years old . Two stars , HD <unk> of magnitude 6 @.@ 3 and HD <unk> of magnitude 9 @.@ 0 , lie nearby in its foreground . NGC 602 is composed of an emission nebula and a young , bright open cluster of stars that is an outlying component on the eastern edge of the Small Magellanic Cloud , a satellite galaxy to the Milky Way . Most of the cloud is located in the neighbouring constellation Tucana . 
 = Veðrfölnir and eagle = 
 In Norse mythology , Veðrfölnir ( Old Norse " storm pale , " " wind bleached " , or " wind @-@ <unk> " ) is a hawk sitting between the eyes of an unnamed eagle that is perched on top of the world tree Yggdrasil . Veðrfölnir is sometimes modernly anglicized as Vedrfolnir or <unk> . 
 The unnamed eagle is attested in both the Poetic Edda , compiled in the 13th century from earlier traditional sources , and the Prose Edda , written in the 13th century by Snorri Sturluson , while Veðrfölnir is solely attested in the Prose Edda . In both the Poetic Edda and the Prose Edda , the squirrel Ratatoskr carries messages between the unnamed eagle and <unk> , the wyrm that resides below the world tree . Scholars have proposed theories about the implications of the birds . 
 = = Attestations = = 
 In the Poetic Edda poem Grímnismál , the god Odin ( disguised as Grimnir ) says that : 
 The eagle is again attested in chapter 16 of the Prose Edda book Gylfaginning , yet here with the company of Veðrfölnir . In the chapter , Gangleri ( described as king Gylfi in disguise ) asks the enthroned figure of High what other notable facts there are to know about Yggdrasil . High responds ( Veðrfölnir is here anglicized as Vedrfolnir ) : 
 'There is much to be told . An eagle sits at the top of the ash , and it has knowledge of many things . Between its eyes sits the hawk called Vedrfolnir [ ... ] . The squirrel called Ratatosk runs up and down the ash . He tells slanderous gossip , provoking the eagle and <unk> 
 = = Theories = = 
 John Lindow points out that Snorri does not say why a hawk should be sitting between the eyes of an eagle or what role it may play . Lindow theorizes that " presumably the hawk is associated with the wisdom of the eagle " and that " perhaps , like Odin 's ravens , it flies off acquiring and bringing back knowledge " . 
 Hilda Ellis Davidson says that the notion of an eagle atop a tree and the World Serpent coiled around the roots of the tree has parallels in other cosmologies from Asia , and that Norse cosmology may have been influenced by these Asiatic cosmologies from a northern route . On the other hand , Davidson adds , the Germanic peoples are attested as worshipping their deities in open forest clearings , and that a sky god was particularly connected with the oak tree , and therefore " a central tree was a natural symbol for them also " . 
 = Torf @-@ Einarr = 
 Einarr <unk> often referred to by his byname Torf @-@ Einarr ( sometimes anglicised as Turf @-@ Einarr ) , ( fl. early 890s – c . 910 ) was one of the Norse Earls of Orkney . The son of the Norse jarl , Rognvald Eysteinsson and a concubine , his rise to power is related in sagas which apparently draw on verses of Einarr 's own composition for inspiration . After battling for control of the Northern Isles of Scotland and a struggle with Norwegian royals , Einarr founded a dynasty which retained control of the islands for centuries after his death . 
 He is portrayed as a successful warrior and has various characteristics in common with the Norse God Odin but his historicity is not in doubt . The reasons for his nickname of " Turf " are not certain . 
 = = Family background = = 
 Einarr was the youngest son of Rognvald Eysteinsson , Earl of Møre , Norway , by a concubine . According to the sagas and the Historia <unk> Rognvald 's family conquered the Orkney and Shetland islands in the late ninth century . Rognvald 's brother , Sigurd Eysteinsson , was made Earl of Orkney and after his death on campaign he was succeeded by his son , <unk> , who died shortly afterward . Rognvald then sent one of his own sons , Hallad , to govern the islands . 
 The Orkneyinga saga provides Einarr with five brothers including Hallad . Ivar 's death on an earlier campaign with King Harald Finehair resulted in the <unk> being gifted to his family as compensation . <unk> " was so big that no horse could carry him " , hence his byname of " <unk> @-@ <unk> " ( " <unk> the Walker " ) , and he is identified by the saga writers with Rollo , ancestor of the Dukes of Normandy . In addition to Ivar and <unk> , Thorir the Silent was Rognvald 's third son by his marriage to Ragnhild . Hallad , Einarr and <unk> were natural sons , all three being " grown men when their brothers born in marriage were still children " . 
 Ari <unk> quotes a short section from the lost Torf @-@ Einarr ’ s Saga in the Landnámabók . It begins : 
 Earl Turf @-@ Einarr ( of Orkney ) had a daughter in his youth , she was called Thordis . Earl Rognvald brought her up and gave her in marriage to <unk> <unk> , their son was Einar , he went to Orkney to see his kinsmen ; they would not own him for a kinsman ; then Einar bought a ship in partnership with two brothers , <unk> and <unk> , and they went to Iceland . 
 and goes on to make brief reference to young Einar 's travels there . It also lists his two sons , <unk> and Ljot , and some details about them and their descendents . The sagas describe Einarr as tall , ugly and blind in one eye , but sharp @-@ sighted nonetheless . 
 = = Rise to power = = 
 Einarr 's brother Hallad was unable to maintain control in Orkney due to the predations of Danish pirates . He resigned his earldom and returned to Norway as a common landholder , which " everyone thought was a huge joke . " Hallad 's failure led to Rognvald flying into a rage and summoning his sons Thorir and Hrolluag . He asked which of them wanted the islands but Thorir said the decision was up to the earl himself . Rognvald predicted that Thorir 's path would keep him in Norway and that Hrolluag was destined seek his fortune in Iceland . Einarr , the youngest of the natural sons , then came forward and offered to go to the islands . Rognvald said : " Considering the kind of mother you have , slave @-@ born on each side of her family , you are not likely to make much of a ruler . But I agree , the sooner you leave and the later you return the happier I 'll be . " 
 Rognvald agreed to provide Einarr with a ship and crew in the hope that he would sail away and never return . Despite his father 's misgivings , on arrival in the Scottish islands , Einarr fought and defeated two Danish warlords , Þórir <unk> ( Thorir Treebeard ) and <unk> <unk> ( Kalf the Scurvy ) , who had taken residence there . Einarr then established himself as earl of a territory that comprised the two archipelagoes of Orkney and Shetland . 
 = = Relations with Norway = = 
 After Einarr had settled in Orkney two of Harald Finehair 's unruly sons , Halvdan <unk> ( English : Hálfdan <unk> ) and Gudrød <unk> ( English : <unk> the Gleaming ) , killed Einarr 's father Rognvald by trapping him in his house and setting it alight . Gudrød took possession of Rognvald 's lands while Hálfdan sailed westwards to Orkney and then displaced Einarr . The sagas say that King Harald , apparently appalled by his sons ' actions , overthrew Gudrød and restored Rognvald 's lands to his son , Thorir . From a base in Caithness on the Scottish mainland Einarr resisted Hálfdan 's occupation of the islands . After winning a battle at sea , and a ruthless campaign on land , Einarr spied Hálfdan hiding on North Ronaldsay . The sagas claim that Hálfdan was captured , and sacrificed to Odin as a blood eagle . 
 While the killing of Hálfdan by the Orkney islanders is recorded independently in the Historia <unk> , the manner of his death is unspecified . The blood eagle sacrifice may be a misunderstanding or an invention of the <unk> as it does not feature directly in the earlier skaldic verses , which instead indicate that Hálfdan was killed by a volley of spears . The verses do mention the eagle as a carrion bird , and this may have influenced the saga writers to introduce the blood eagle element . The sagas then relate that Harald sought vengeance for his son 's ignoble death , and set out on campaign against Einarr , but was unable to dislodge him . Eventually , Harald agreed to end the fight in exchange for a fine of 60 gold marks levied on Einarr and the allodial owners of the islands . Einarr offered to pay the whole fine if the allodial landowners passed their lands to him , to which they agreed . Einarr 's assumption of control over the islands appears well @-@ attested and was considered by later commentators to be the moment at which the Earls of Orkney came to own the entire island group in fee to the King of Norway . Others have interpreted the payment of 60 gold marks as <unk> or blood money . 
 The sagas incorrectly claim that the Earl of Orkney was called " Turf @-@ Einarr " because he introduced the practice of burning turf or peat to the islands since wood was so scarce . This practice long pre @-@ dates the Norse and the real reason for the nickname is unknown . The Orkneyinga saga has him organising peat cutting at Tarbat Ness far to the south of the Orkney heartland . While depletion of woodland could have caused a cultural shift from burning timber to peat , potentially the name arose because the sequestration of the common or allodial rights of the islanders by Einarr forced them away from coppicing towards cutting turves . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 The remainder of Einarr 's long reign was apparently unchallenged , and he died in his bed of a sickness , leaving three sons , <unk> , Erlend and Thorfinn who became jarls of Orkney after him . Despite his apparent physical shortcomings , as well as his low @-@ born mother , Einarr established a dynasty which ruled the Orkney islands until 1470 . 
 At this early period , many of the dates relating to the Orkney earldom are uncertain . Einarr 's death is stated as being circa 910 in several sources . Crawford ( 2004 ) suggests he lived until the 930s and Ashley ( 1998 ) states that " allowing for the ages of his sons to succeed him he must have ruled to at least the year 920 or later . " 
 There are five verses recorded in the Landnámabók attributed to Einarr that describe a feud between the families of Rognvald Eysteinsson and that of Harald Finehair . Apart from these verses , no other examples of Torf @-@ Einarr 's poetry are known to survive , though they appear to be part of a larger body of work . A couplet that commemorates Einarr 's defeat of the two pirate Vikings , Thorir Treebeard and Kalf the Scurvy , has a matching metre and alliterative similarities to the attributed verses . 
 Hann <unk> <unk> <unk> , 
 Torf @-@ Einarr <unk> <unk> . 
 He gave Treebeard to the trolls , 
 Torf @-@ Einarr slew Scurvy . 
 Einarr must have had some fame as a poet , as his name is used in the Háttatal , an examination of Old Norse poetry written in the thirteenth @-@ century , to refer to a specific type of metre , Torf @-@ <unk> . 
 = = Interpretations = = 
 Much of Einarr 's story in the sagas appears to be derived from the five skaldic verses attributed to Einarr himself and it is not certain that this account Einarr 's conquest is historically accurate . Though the Historia <unk> , written at the same time as the sagas but from a different source , confirms that Rognvald 's family conquered the islands , it gives few details . The scene in the sagas where Einarr 's father scorns him is a literary device which often figures in Old Norse literature . After Hallad 's failure in Orkney the dialogue between the father and his sons has been interpreted as being about Rognvald 's desire to cement his own position as Earl of Møre and an allusion to the early history of Iceland , where the sagas were written . Thorir is a compliant son who Rognvald is happy to keep at home . Hrolluag is portrayed as a man of peace who will go to Iceland . Einarr is aggressive and a threat to his father 's position so can be spared for the dangers of Orkney . In the Landnámabók version the equally aggressive <unk> is also present , and his destiny is anticipated to be in conveniently far @-@ away Normandy . 
 The writer of the Orkneyinga saga established Einarr 's status in two contradictory ways . Although in the Historia Rognvald 's family are described as " pirates " the saga provides them with a legally established earldom instated by the king . Einarr 's success is however largely down to his own efforts and he negotiates with King Harald rather than offers blind obedience . The author is thus able to emphasise both the legitimacy and independence of his house . 
 Einarr is also provided with various characteristics associated with Odin . Both have but one eye and Halfdan 's hideous death at Einarr 's hands is offered to the god — an act that contains a hint of Odin 's own sacrifice to himself in the Hávamál . Einarr is a man of action who is self @-@ made , and he is a successful warrior who ( unlike his brothers ) avenges his father 's death . He leads a dramatic and <unk> life and emerges as " ancient , powerful and mysterious — but as a literary figure rather than a real person " . He is also a heathen whose appearance at the commencement of the saga contrasts with the later martyrdom of his descendent St Magnus which marks a " moral high @-@ point " of the story . 
 = John Hadley ( philosopher ) = 
 John Hadley ( born 27 September 1966 ) is an Australian philosopher whose research concerns moral and political philosophy , including animal ethics , environmental ethics and metaethics . He is currently a senior lecturer in philosophy in the School of Humanities and Communication Arts at Western Sydney University . He has previously taught at Charles Sturt University and the University of Sydney , where he studied as an undergraduate and doctoral candidate . In addition to a variety of articles in peer @-@ reviewed journals and edited collections , he is the author of the 2015 monograph Animal Property Rights ( Lexington Books ) and the co @-@ editor , with Elisa Aaltola , of the 2015 collection Animal Ethics and Philosophy ( Rowman & Littlefield International ) . 
 Hadley is known for his account of animal property rights theory . He proposes that wild animals be offered property rights over their territories , and that guardians be appointed to represent their interests in decision @-@ making procedures . He suggests that this account could be justified directly , on the basis of the interests of the animals concerned , or indirectly , so that natural environments are protected . The theory has received discussion in popular and academic contexts , with critical responses from farming groups and mixed responses from moral and political theorists . Hadley has also conducted research on normative issues related to animal rights extremism , the aiding of others and utilitarianism . 
 = = Career = = 
 Hadley read for a bachelor of arts and doctorate in philosophy at the University of Sydney ( USYD ) . His doctoral thesis was supervised by Caroline West , in USYD 's Department of Philosophy , and was submitted in 2006 under the title of Animal Property : Reconciling Ecological Communitarianism and Species @-@ egalitarian Liberalism . During his doctoral research , the " basic elements " of his animal property rights theory were " first assembled " , leading to the publication of " Nonhuman Animal Property : Reconciling Environmentalism and Animal Rights " in the Journal of Social Philosophy . During this time , he also published in the Journal of Value Inquiry , Philosophy in the Contemporary World , and the Journal of Applied Philosophy , as well as working as a lecturer in the USYD philosophy department and a guest lecturer for the USYD Laboratory Animal Services . 
 After his PhD , Hadley worked as a lecturer in communication ethics in the Charles Sturt University ( CSU ) School of Communication and a lecturer in philosophy at the CSU School of Humanities and Social Sciences . He then joined the University of Western Sydney School of Humanities and Communication Arts , first as a lecturer in philosophy , and then as a senior lecturer in philosophy . Animal Ethics and Philosophy : Questioning the Orthodoxy , a collection edited by Hadley with the Finnish philosopher Elisa Aaltola , was published in 2015 by Rowman & Littlefield International . The book aimed to move debate in animal ethics beyond developing <unk> accounts and to examine the <unk> and <unk> problems with <unk> accounts . Hadley 's own contribution drew attention to a perceived inconsistent triad in animal rights philosophy : the idea that moral status is determined by psychological factors ( like sentience ) , and not species ; that human and nonhuman animals are of the same kind ; and that genomic plasticity offers the best explanation for change in natural selection . In the same year , Hadley published a monograph with Lexington Books entitled Animal Property Rights : A Theory of Territory Rights for Wild Animals . The book , partially building upon his doctoral research , presents a large amount of new material on Hadley 's animal property rights theory . 
 = = Research = = 
 = = = Animal property rights = = = 
 Hadley is known for his theory of animal property rights , according to which animals should be afforded property rights over their territory . Hadley has developed his theory of animal property rights through his doctoral research , his 2015 monograph , and other academic works . In addition , he has authored popular articles on the subject for The Conversation and The Ethics Centre . He also discussed the topic on Knowing Animals , a podcast series produced by Siobhan O 'Sullivan . His proposal has received attention in the popular press , with strong criticism from farmers ' groups and journalists writing on rural affairs . 
 The practical side of Hadley 's proposal rests on two key principles : a guardianship system , according to which knowledgeable guardians would be appointed to represent animal property holders in land management decision @-@ making , and the use of animals ' territory @-@ marking behaviour to determine the limits of their property . Hadley rejects first occupancy and labour @-@ mixing accounts of appropriation , and instead suggests that there are two ways that his account might fruitfully be justified . First , it might be justified directly , with reference to the interests of animals . This relies upon the fact that wild animals require their territory in order to satisfy their basic needs and the claim that this results in an interest in territory strong enough to ground a right . If animals have a right to use their territory , Hadley claims , then they necessarily have a property right in that territory . Second , it might be justified indirectly , as animals ( of some species , at least ) might be given property rights as a means of protecting natural environments . Hadley presents his proposal against the backdrop of an explicit pragmatism , and holds that animal property rights theory has the potential to reconcile animal and environmental ethics . 
 Hadley 's proposal has been placed in the context of the " political turn " in animal ethics ; the emergence of animal ethics literature focused on justice . Another academic who has proposed that wild animals be afforded property rights over their habitats is the British philosopher Steve Cooke . Like Hadley , he utilises an interest @-@ based account of animal rights , but , unlike Hadley , he suggests that sovereignty would be an appropriate tool to protect animals ' interest in their habitat if property fails . Other theorists exploring the normative aspects of human relationships with wild animals explicitly deny that they are extending property rights to animals . The US @-@ based ethicist Clare Palmer , for instance , argues for a duty to respect wild animals ' space , but claims that arguing for a property right for these animals would be " difficult " , and instead bases her account on the fact that human actions can make animals " painful , miserable and vulnerable " . 
 The Canadian theorists Sue Donaldson and Will Kymlicka are critical of Hadley 's proposal to extend property rights to animals , claiming that property rights are insufficient to protect animals ' interests . Instead , they argue that animals should be considered sovereign over their territories . They write that 
 It is one thing to say that a bird has a property right in its nest , or that a wolf has a property right in its den – specific bits of territory used exclusively by one animal family . But the habitat that animals need to survive extends far beyond such specific and exclusive bits of territory – animals often need to fly or roam over vast territories shared by many other animals . Protecting a bird ’ s nest is of little help if the nearby watering holes are polluted , or if tall buildings block its flight path . It ’ s not clear how ideas of property rights can help here . 
 They also compare the possibility of extending property rights to animals to the approach of European colonists , who were prepared to extend property , but not sovereignty , rights to native peoples , resulting in oppression . Hadley , however , is himself critical of Donaldson and Kymlicka 's sovereignty proposal , though the British philosopher Josh Milburn suggests that the proposals may not be as far apart as the authors indicate . 
 The British political theorist Alasdair Cochrane also questions the extension of property rights to animals . Though describing Hadley 's proposal as " ingenious " , he criticises it on two grounds . First , he questions Hadley 's claim of a relationship between property and basic needs , and , second , denies that animal property rights would appease environmentalists , given that they would allow the destruction of environments which do not contain sentient animals . In a book review , Milburn stresses the significance of Hadley 's theory , but questions the extent to which the implementation of animal property rights would be desirable without the achievement of other animal rights and the extent to which Hadley 's account is genuinely about property rights . 
 = = = Other research = = = 
 Hadley has considered the ethics of humans ' relationships with wild animals and environments beyond his property rights theory . He argues that there is a duty to aid wild animals in need , and that these duties are essentially no different to humans ' duties to aid distant strangers who are severely cognitively impaired . He argues that libertarian property rights , consistent with Robert Nozick 's interpretation of the Lockean proviso , should limit the right to destroy human @-@ owned natural environments . 
 Hadley has conducted research on animal rights extremism , concluding that the phenomenon is a complex one , and that a full understanding of individual extremists ' intentions and targets are necessary to understand the ethical acceptability of extremist acts and whether such acts are appropriately classified as terrorism . He holds that while direct action should be tolerated in liberal democracies , this toleration should not extend to certain campaigning tactics used by extremists , such as threat @-@ making . 
 With O 'Sullivan , Hadley has conducted research on utilitarianism and the relationship between obligations to animals and obligations to needy humans . The scholars argue that there is a conflict in Singer 's philosophy between the obligation to aid needy humans and to protect animals , and that Westerners who own pets should , rather than spending large amounts of money extending the lives of their companions , euthanise severely ill animals and instead donate money to aiding those in the developing world . 
 Hadley has been critical of the <unk> and <unk> stances of mainstream animal ethicists , as well as the views of Tibor Machan and J. Baird Callicott . He has also written on J. M. Coetzee , the ethics of " <unk> " animals , the ethics of animal testing , and the relationship of self @-@ defence theory to abortion and animal ethics . 
 = = Publications = = 
 = = = Books = = = 
 Hadley , John ( <unk> ) . Animal Property Rights . London , United Kingdom : Lexington Books . 
 Aaltola , Elisa , and John Hadley ( eds ) ( 2015 ) . Animal Ethics and Philosophy . London , United Kingdom : Rowman & Littlefield International . 
 = = = Selected articles = = = 
 Hadley , John ( 2015 ) . " A <unk> Problem for Animal Rights Theory " . In Elisa Aaltola and John Hadley . Animal Ethics and Philosophy . London , United Kingdom : Rowman & Littlefield <unk> pp. 15 – 30 . 
 Hadley , John ( 2015 ) . " Animal Rights Advocacy and Legitimate Public Deliberation " . Political Studies 63 ( 3 ) : 696 – 712 @.@ doi : 10 @.@ 1111 / 1467 @-@ <unk> @.@ <unk> . 
 Hadley , John ( 2013 ) . " Liberty and valuing sentient life " . Ethics and the Environment 18 ( 1 ) : 87 – 103 @.@ doi : 10 @.@ <unk> / <unk> 
