 Radiocarbon dating ( also referred to as carbon dating or carbon @-@ 14 dating ) is a method for determining the age of an object containing organic material by using the properties of radiocarbon ( 14C ) , a radioactive isotope of carbon . 
 The method was developed by Willard Libby in the late 1940s and soon became a standard tool for archaeologists . Libby received the Nobel Prize for his work in 1960 . The radiocarbon dating method is based on the fact that radiocarbon is constantly being created in the atmosphere by the interaction of cosmic rays with atmospheric nitrogen . The resulting radiocarbon combines with atmospheric oxygen to form radioactive carbon dioxide , which is incorporated into plants by photosynthesis ; animals then acquire 14C by eating the plants . When the animal or plant dies , it stops exchanging carbon with its environment , and from that point onwards the amount of 14C it contains begins to decrease as the 14C undergoes radioactive decay . Measuring the amount of 14C in a sample from a dead plant or animal such as a piece of wood or a fragment of bone provides information that can be used to calculate when the animal or plant died . The older a sample is , the less 14C there is to be detected , and because the half @-@ life of 14C ( the period of time after which half of a given sample will have decayed ) is about 5 @,@ 730 years , the oldest dates that can be reliably measured by radiocarbon dating are around 50 @,@ 000 years ago , although special preparation methods occasionally permit dating of older samples . 
 The idea behind radiocarbon dating is straightforward , but years of work were required to develop the technique to the point where accurate dates could be obtained . Research has been ongoing since the 1960s to determine what the proportion of 14C in the atmosphere has been over the past fifty thousand years . The resulting data , in the form of a calibration curve , is now used to convert a given measurement of radiocarbon in a sample into an estimate of the sample 's calendar age . Other corrections must be made to account for the proportion of 14C in different types of organisms ( fractionation ) , and the varying levels of 14C throughout the biosphere ( reservoir effects ) . Additional complications come from the burning of fossil fuels such as coal and oil , and from the above @-@ ground nuclear tests done in the 1950s and 1960s . Because the time it takes to convert biological materials to fossil fuels is substantially longer than the time it takes for its 14C to decay below detectable levels , they contain almost no 14C , and as a result there was a noticeable drop in the proportion of 14C in the atmosphere beginning in the late 19th century . Conversely , nuclear testing increased the amount of 14C in the atmosphere , which attained a maximum in 1963 of almost twice what it had been before the testing began . 
 Measurement of radiocarbon was originally done by beta @-@ counting devices , which counted the amount of beta radiation emitted by decaying 14C atoms in a sample . More recently , accelerator mass spectrometry has become the method of choice ; it counts all the 14C atoms in the sample and not just the few that happen to decay during the measurements ; it can therefore be used with much smaller samples ( as small as individual plant seeds ) , and gives results much more quickly . The development of radiocarbon dating has had a profound impact on archaeology . In addition to permitting more accurate dating within archaeological sites than previous methods , it allows comparison of dates of events across great distances . Histories of archaeology often refer to its impact as the " radiocarbon revolution " . Radiocarbon dating has allowed key transitions in prehistory to be dated , such as the end of the last ice age , and the beginning of the Neolithic and Bronze Age in different regions . 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = History = = = 
 In the early 1930s , Willard Libby was a chemistry student at the University of California , Berkeley , receiving his Ph.D. in 1933 . He remained there as an instructor until the end of the decade . In 1939 the Radiation Laboratory at Berkeley began experiments to determine if any of the elements common in organic matter had isotopes with half @-@ lives long enough to be of value in biomedical research . It was soon discovered that 14C 's half @-@ life was far longer than had been previously thought , and in 1940 this was followed by proof that the interaction of slow neutrons with 14N was the main pathway by which 14C was created . It had previously been thought that 14C would be more likely to be created by deuterons interacting with 13C . At some time during World War II Libby read a paper by W. E. Danforth and S. A. Korff , published in 1939 , which predicted the creation of 14C in the atmosphere by neutrons from cosmic rays that had been slowed down by collisions with molecules of atmospheric gas . It was this paper that gave Libby the idea that radiocarbon dating might be possible . 
 In 1945 , Libby moved to the University of Chicago . He published a paper in 1946 in which he proposed that the carbon in living matter might include 14C as well as non @-@ radioactive carbon . Libby and several collaborators proceeded to experiment with methane collected from sewage works in Baltimore , and after isotopically enriching their samples they were able to demonstrate that they contained radioactive 14C . By contrast , methane created from petroleum showed no radiocarbon activity . The results were summarized in a paper in Science in 1947 , in which the authors commented that their results implied it would be possible to date materials containing carbon of organic origin . 
 Libby and James Arnold proceeded to experiment with samples of wood of known age . For example , two samples taken from the tombs of two Egyptian kings , <unk> and Sneferu , independently dated to <unk> BC plus or minus 75 years , were dated by radiocarbon measurement to an average of 2800 BC plus or minus 250 years . These results were published in Science in 1949 . In 1960 , Libby was awarded the Nobel Prize in Chemistry for this work . 
 = = = Physical and chemical details = = = 
 In nature , carbon exists as two stable , nonradioactive isotopes : carbon @-@ 12 ( 12C ) , and carbon @-@ 13 ( 13C ) , and a radioactive isotope , carbon @-@ 14 ( 14C ) , also known as " radiocarbon " . The half @-@ life of 14C ( the time it takes for half of a given amount of 14C to decay ) is about 5 @,@ 730 years , so its concentration in the atmosphere might be expected to reduce over thousands of years , but 14C is constantly being produced in the lower stratosphere and upper troposphere by cosmic rays , which generate neutrons that in turn create 14C when they strike nitrogen @-@ 14 ( 14N ) atoms . The following nuclear reaction creates 14C : 
 n + 14 
 7N → 14 
 6C + p 
 where n represents a neutron and p represents a proton . 
 Once produced , the 14C quickly combines with the oxygen in the atmosphere to form carbon dioxide ( CO 
 2 ) . Carbon dioxide produced in this way diffuses in the atmosphere , is dissolved in the ocean , and is taken up by plants via photosynthesis . Animals eat the plants , and ultimately the radiocarbon is distributed throughout the biosphere . The ratio of 14C to 12C is approximately 1 @.@ 5 parts of 14C to 1012 parts of 12C . In addition , about 1 % of the carbon atoms are of the stable isotope 13C . 
 The equation for the radioactive decay of 14C is : 
 14 
 6C → 14 
 7N + e − + ν 
 e 
 By emitting a beta particle ( an electron , e − ) and an electron antineutrino ( ν 
 e ) , one of the neutrons in the 14C nucleus changes to a proton and the 14C nucleus reverts to the stable ( non @-@ radioactive ) isotope 14N . 
 = = = Principles = = = 
 During its life , a plant or animal is exchanging carbon with its surroundings , so the carbon it contains will have the same proportion of 14C as the atmosphere . Once it dies , it ceases to acquire 14C , but the 14C within its biological material at that time will continue to decay , and so the ratio of 14C to 12C in its remains will gradually decrease . Because 14C decays at a known rate , the proportion of radiocarbon can be used to determine how long it has been since a given sample stopped exchanging carbon – the older the sample , the less 14C will be left . 
 The equation governing the decay of a radioactive isotope is : 
 <formula> 
 where N0 is the number of atoms of the isotope in the original sample ( at time t = 0 , when the organism from which the sample was taken died ) , and N is the number of atoms left after time t. λ is a constant that depends on the particular isotope ; for a given isotope it is equal to the reciprocal of the mean @-@ life – i.e. the average or expected time a given atom will survive before undergoing radioactive decay . The mean @-@ life , denoted by τ , of 14C is 8 @,@ 267 years , so the equation above can be rewritten as : 
 <formula> 
 The sample is assumed to have originally had the same 14C / 12C ratio as the ratio in the atmosphere , and since the size of the sample is known , the total number of atoms in the sample can be calculated , yielding N0 , the number of 14C atoms in the original sample . Measurement of N , the number of 14C atoms currently in the sample , allows the calculation of t , the age of the sample , using the equation above . 
 The half @-@ life of a radioactive isotope ( usually denoted by t1 / 2 ) is a more familiar concept than the mean @-@ life , so although the equations above are expressed in terms of the mean @-@ life , it is more usual to quote the value of 14C 's half @-@ life than its mean @-@ life . The currently accepted value for the half @-@ life of 14C is 5 @,@ 730 years . This means that after 5 @,@ 730 years , only half of the initial 14C will remain ; a quarter will remain after 11 @,@ 460 years ; an eighth after 17 @,@ 190 years ; and so on . 
 The above calculations make several assumptions , such as that the level of 14C in the atmosphere has remained constant over time . In fact , the level of 14C in the atmosphere has varied significantly and as a result the values provided by the equation above have to be corrected by using data from other sources . This is done by calibration curves , which convert a measurement of 14C in a sample into an estimated calendar age . The calculations involve several steps and include an intermediate value called the " radiocarbon age " , which is the age in " radiocarbon years " of the sample : an age quoted in radiocarbon years means that no calibration curve has been used − the calculations for radiocarbon years assume that the 14C / 12C ratio has not changed over time . Calculating radiocarbon ages also requires the value of the half @-@ life for 14C , which for more than a decade after Libby 's initial work was thought to be 5 @,@ 568 years . This was revised in the early 1960s to 5 @,@ 730 years , which meant that many calculated dates in papers published prior to this were incorrect ( the error in the half @-@ life is about 3 % ) . For consistency with these early papers , and to avoid the risk of a double correction for the incorrect half @-@ life , radiocarbon ages are still calculated using the incorrect half @-@ life value . A correction for the half @-@ life is incorporated into calibration curves , so even though radiocarbon ages are calculated using a half @-@ life value that is known to be incorrect , the final reported calibrated date , in calendar years , is accurate . When a date is quoted , the reader should be aware that if it is an uncalibrated date ( a term used for dates given in radiocarbon years ) it may differ substantially from the best estimate of the actual calendar date , both because it uses the wrong value for the half @-@ life of 14C , and because no correction ( calibration ) has been applied for the historical variation of 14C in the atmosphere over time . 
 = = = Carbon exchange reservoir = = = 
 Carbon is distributed throughout the atmosphere , the biosphere , and the oceans ; these are referred to collectively as the carbon exchange reservoir , and each component is also referred to individually as a carbon exchange reservoir . The different elements of the carbon exchange reservoir vary in how much carbon they store , and in how long it takes for the 14C generated by cosmic rays to fully mix with them . This affects the ratio of 14C to 12C in the different reservoirs , and hence the radiocarbon ages of samples that originated in each reservoir . The atmosphere , which is where 14C is generated , contains about 1 @.@ 9 % of the total carbon in the reservoirs , and the 14C it contains mixes in less than seven years . The ratio of 14C to 12C in the atmosphere is taken as the baseline for the other reservoirs : if another reservoir has a lower ratio of 14C to 12C , it indicates that the carbon is older and hence that some of the 14C has decayed . The ocean surface is an example : it contains 2 @.@ 4 % of the carbon in the exchange reservoir , but there is only about 95 % as much 14C as would be expected if the ratio were the same as in the atmosphere . The time it takes for carbon from the atmosphere to mix with the surface ocean is only a few years , but the surface waters also receive water from the deep ocean , which has more than 90 % of the carbon in the reservoir . Water in the deep ocean takes about 1 @,@ 000 years to circulate back through surface waters , and so the surface waters contain a combination of older water , with depleted 14C , and water recently at the surface , with 14C in equilibrium with the atmosphere . 
 Creatures living at the ocean surface have the same 14C ratios as the water they live in , and as a result of the reduced 14C / 12C ratio , the radiocarbon age of marine life is typically about 440 years . Organisms on land are in closer equilibrium with the atmosphere and have the same 14C / 12C ratio as the atmosphere . These organisms contain about 1 @.@ 3 % of the carbon in the reservoir ; sea organisms have a mass of less than 1 % of those on land and are not shown on the diagram . Accumulated dead organic matter , of both plants and animals , exceeds the mass of the biosphere by a factor of nearly 3 , and since this matter is no longer exchanging carbon with its environment , it has a 14C / 12C ratio lower than that of the biosphere . 
 = = Dating considerations = = 
 The variation in the 14C / 12C ratio in different parts of the carbon exchange reservoir means that a straightforward calculation of the age of a sample based on the amount of 14C it contains will often give an incorrect result . There are several other possible sources of error that need to be considered . The errors are of four general types : 
 variations in the 14C / 12C ratio in the atmosphere , both geographically and over time ; 
 isotopic fractionation ; 
 variations in the 14C / 12C ratio in different parts of the reservoir ; 
 contamination . 
 = = = Atmospheric variation = = = 
 In the early years of using the technique , it was understood that it depended on the atmospheric 14C / 12C ratio having remained the same over the preceding few thousand years . To verify the accuracy of the method , several artefacts that were datable by other techniques were tested ; the results of the testing were in reasonable agreement with the true ages of the objects . Over time , however , discrepancies began to appear between the known chronology for the oldest Egyptian dynasties and the radiocarbon dates of Egyptian artefacts . Neither the pre @-@ existing Egyptian chronology nor the new radiocarbon dating method could be assumed to be accurate , but a third possibility was that the 14C / 12C ratio had changed over time . The question was resolved by the study of tree rings : comparison of overlapping series of tree rings allowed the construction of a continuous sequence of tree @-@ ring data that spanned 8 @,@ 000 years . ( Since that time the tree @-@ ring data series has been extended to 13 @,@ 900 years . ) In the 1960s , Hans Suess was able to use the tree @-@ ring sequence to show that the dates derived from radiocarbon were consistent with the dates assigned by Egyptologists . This was possible because although annual plants , such as corn , have a 14C / 12C ratio that reflects the atmospheric ratio at the time they were growing , trees only add material to their outermost tree ring in any given year , while the inner tree rings don 't get their 14C replenished and instead start losing 14C through decay . Hence each ring preserves a record of the atmospheric 14C / 12C ratio of the year it grew in . Carbon @-@ dating the wood from the tree rings themselves provides the check needed on the atmospheric 14C / 12C ratio : with a sample of known date , and a measurement of the value of N ( the number of atoms of 14C remaining in the sample ) , the carbon @-@ dating equation allows the calculation of N0 – the number of atoms of 14C in the sample at the time the tree ring was formed – and hence the 14C / 12C ratio in the atmosphere at that time . Armed with the results of carbon @-@ dating the tree rings , it became possible to construct calibration curves designed to correct the errors caused by the variation over time in the 14C / 12C ratio . These curves are described in more detail below . 
 Coal and oil began to be burned in large quantities during the 19th century . Both are sufficiently old that they contain little detectable 14C and , as a result , the CO 
 2 released substantially diluted the atmospheric 14C / 12C ratio . Dating an object from the early 20th century hence gives an apparent date older than the true date . For the same reason , 14C concentrations in the neighbourhood of large cities are lower than the atmospheric average . This fossil fuel effect ( also known as the Suess effect , after Hans Suess , who first reported it in 1955 ) would only amount to a reduction of 0 @.@ 2 % in 14C activity if the additional carbon from fossil fuels were distributed throughout the carbon exchange reservoir , but because of the long delay in mixing with the deep ocean , the actual effect is a 3 % reduction . 
 A much larger effect comes from above @-@ ground nuclear testing , which released large numbers of neutrons and created 14C . From about 1950 until 1963 , when atmospheric nuclear testing was banned , it is estimated that several tonnes of 14C were created . If all this extra 14C had immediately been spread across the entire carbon exchange reservoir , it would have led to an increase in the 14C / 12C ratio of only a few per cent , but the immediate effect was to almost double the amount of 14C in the atmosphere , with the peak level occurring in about 1965 . The level has since dropped , as the " bomb carbon " ( as it is sometimes called ) percolates into the rest of the reservoir . 
 = = = Isotopic fractionation = = = 
 Photosynthesis is the primary process by which carbon moves from the atmosphere into living things . In photosynthetic pathways 12C is absorbed slightly more easily than 13C , which in turn is more easily absorbed than 14C . The differential uptake of the three carbon isotopes leads to 13C / 12C and 14C / 12C ratios in plants that differ from the ratios in the atmosphere . This effect is known as isotopic fractionation . 
 To determine the degree of fractionation that takes place in a given plant , the amounts of both 12C and 13C isotopes are measured , and the resulting 13C / 12C ratio is then compared to a standard ratio known as PDB . The 13C / 12C ratio is used instead of 14C / 12C because the former is much easier to measure , and the latter can be easily derived : the depletion of 13C relative to 12C is proportional to the difference in the atomic masses of the two isotopes , so the depletion for 14C is twice the depletion of 13C . The fractionation of 13C , known as δ13C , is calculated as follows : 
 <formula> 
 where the ‰ sign indicates parts per thousand . Because the PDB standard contains an unusually high proportion of 13C , most measured δ13C values are negative . 
 For marine organisms , the details of the photosynthesis reactions are less well understood , and the δ13C values for marine photosynthetic organisms are dependent on temperature . At higher temperatures , CO 
 2 has poor solubility in water , which means there is less CO 
 2 available for the photosynthetic reactions . Under these conditions , fractionation is reduced , and at temperatures above 14 ° C the δ13C values are correspondingly higher , while at lower temperatures , CO 
 2 becomes more soluble and hence more available to marine organisms . The δ13C value for animals depends on their diet . An animal that eats food with high δ13C values will have a higher δ13C than one that eats food with lower δ13C values . The animal 's own biochemical processes can also impact the results : for example , both bone minerals and bone collagen typically have a higher concentration of 13C than is found in the animal 's diet , though for different biochemical reasons . The enrichment of bone 13C also implies that excreted material is depleted in 13C relative to the diet . 
 Since 13C makes up about 1 % of the carbon in a sample , the 13C / 12C ratio can be accurately measured by mass spectrometry . Typical values of δ13C have been found by experiment for many plants , as well as for different parts of animals such as bone collagen , but when dating a given sample it is better to determine the δ13C value for that sample directly than to rely on the published values . 
 The carbon exchange between atmospheric CO 
 2 and carbonate at the ocean surface is also subject to fractionation , with 14C in the atmosphere more likely than 12C to dissolve in the ocean . The result is an overall increase in the 14C / 12C ratio in the ocean of 1 @.@ 5 % , relative to the 14C / 12C ratio in the atmosphere . This increase in 14C concentration almost exactly cancels out the decrease caused by the upwelling of water ( containing old , and hence 14C depleted , carbon ) from the deep ocean , so that direct measurements of 14C radiation are similar to measurements for the rest of the biosphere . <unk> for isotopic fractionation , as is done for all radiocarbon dates to allow comparison between results from different parts of the biosphere , gives an apparent age of about 440 years for ocean surface water . 
 = = = Reservoir effects = = = 
 Libby 's original exchange reservoir hypothesis assumed that the 14C / 12C ratio in the exchange reservoir is constant all over the world , but it has since been discovered that there are several causes of variation in the ratio across the reservoir . 
 Marine effect 
 The CO 
 2 in the atmosphere transfers to the ocean by dissolving in the surface water as carbonate and bicarbonate ions ; at the same time the carbonate ions in the water are returning to the air as CO 
 2 . This exchange process <unk> from the atmosphere into the surface waters of the ocean , but the 14C thus introduced takes a long time to percolate through the entire volume of the ocean . The deepest parts of the ocean mix very slowly with the surface waters , and the mixing is uneven . The main mechanism that brings deep water to the surface is upwelling , which is more common in regions closer to the equator . Upwelling is also influenced by factors such as the topography of the local ocean bottom and coastlines , the climate , and wind patterns . Overall , the mixing of deep and surface waters takes far longer than the mixing of atmospheric CO 
 2 with the surface waters , and as a result water from some deep ocean areas has an apparent radiocarbon age of several thousand years . Upwelling mixes this " old " water with the surface water , giving the surface water an apparent age of about several hundred years ( after correcting for fractionation ) . This effect is not uniform – the average effect is about 440 years , but there are local deviations of several hundred years for areas that are geographically close to each other . The effect also applies to marine organisms such as shells , and marine mammals such as whales and seals , which have radiocarbon ages that appear to be hundreds of years old . 
 Hemisphere effect 
 The northern and southern hemispheres have atmospheric circulation systems that are sufficiently independent of each other that there is a noticeable time lag in mixing between the two . The atmospheric 14C / 12C ratio is lower in the southern hemisphere , with an apparent additional age of 30 years for radiocarbon results from the south as compared to the north . This is probably because the greater surface area of ocean in the southern hemisphere means that there is more carbon exchanged between the ocean and the atmosphere than in the north . Since the surface ocean is depleted in 14C because of the marine effect , 14C is removed from the southern atmosphere more quickly than in the north . 
 Other effects 
 If the carbon in freshwater is partly acquired from aged carbon , such as rocks , then the result will be a reduction in the 14C / 12C ratio in the water . For example , rivers that pass over limestone , which is mostly composed of calcium carbonate , will acquire carbonate ions . Similarly , groundwater can contain carbon derived from the rocks through which it has passed . These rocks are usually so old that they no longer contain any measurable 14C , so this carbon lowers the 14C / 12C ratio of the water it enters , which can lead to apparent ages of thousands of years for both the affected water and the plants and freshwater organisms that live in it . This is known as the hard water effect because it is often associated with calcium ions , which are characteristic of hard water ; other sources of carbon such as humus can produce similar results . The effect varies greatly and there is no general offset that can be applied ; additional research is usually needed to determine the size of the offset , for example by comparing the radiocarbon age of deposited freshwater shells with associated organic material . 
 Volcanic eruptions eject large amounts of carbon into the air . The carbon is of geological origin and has no detectable 14C , so the 14C / 12C ratio in the vicinity of the volcano is depressed relative to surrounding areas . <unk> volcanoes can also emit aged carbon . Plants that photosynthesize this carbon also have lower 14C / 12C ratios : for example , plants on the Greek island of Santorini , near the volcano , have apparent ages of up to a thousand years . These effects are hard to predict – the town of Akrotiri , on Santorini , was destroyed in a volcanic eruption thousands of years ago , but radiocarbon dates for objects recovered from the ruins of the town show surprisingly close agreement with dates derived from other means . If the dates for Akrotiri are confirmed , it would indicate that the volcanic effect in this case was minimal . 
 = = = Contamination = = = 
 Any addition of carbon to a sample of a different age will cause the measured date to be inaccurate . Contamination with modern carbon causes a sample to appear to be younger than it really is : the effect is greater for older samples . If a sample that is 17 @,@ 000 years old is contaminated so that 1 % of the sample is modern carbon , it will appear to be 600 years younger ; for a sample that is 34 @,@ 000 years old the same amount of contamination would cause an error of 4 @,@ 000 years . Contamination with old carbon , with no remaining 14C , causes an error in the other direction independent of age – a sample contaminated with 1 % old carbon will appear to be about 80 years older than it really is , regardless of the date of the sample . 
 = = Samples = = 
 Samples for dating need to be converted into a form suitable for measuring the 14C content ; this can mean conversion to gaseous , liquid , or solid form , depending on the measurement technique to be used . Before this can be done , the sample must be treated to remove any contamination and any unwanted constituents . This includes removing visible contaminants , such as rootlets that may have penetrated the sample since its burial . Alkali and acid washes can be used to remove humic acid and carbonate contamination , but care has to be taken to avoid destroying or damaging the sample . 
 = = = Material considerations = = = 
 It is common to reduce a wood sample to just the cellulose component before testing , but since this can reduce the volume of the sample to 20 % of its original size , testing of the whole wood is often performed as well . Charcoal is often tested but is likely to need treatment to remove contaminants . 
 <unk> bone can be tested ; it is usual to date it using collagen , the protein fraction that remains after washing away the bone 's structural material . <unk> , one of the constituent amino acids in bone , was once thought to be a reliable indicator as it was not known to occur except in bone , but it has since been detected in groundwater . 
 For burnt bone , <unk> depends on the conditions under which the bone was burnt . If the bone was heated under reducing conditions , it ( and associated organic matter ) may have been carbonized . In this case the sample is often usable . 
 Shells from both marine and land organisms consist almost entirely of calcium carbonate , either as aragonite or as calcite , or some mixture of the two . Calcium carbonate is very susceptible to dissolving and <unk> ; the recrystallized material will contain carbon from the sample 's environment , which may be of geological origin . If testing recrystallized shell is unavoidable , it is sometimes possible to identify the original shell material from a sequence of tests . It is also possible to test conchiolin , an organic protein found in shell , but it constitutes only 1 – 2 % of shell material . 
 The three major components of peat are humic acid , <unk> , and <unk> acid . Of these , <unk> give the most reliable date as they are insoluble in alkali and less likely to contain contaminants from the sample 's environment . A particular difficulty with dried peat is the removal of rootlets , which are likely to be hard to distinguish from the sample material . 
 Soil contains organic material , but because of the likelihood of contamination by humic acid of more recent origin , it is very difficult to get satisfactory radiocarbon dates . It is preferable to sieve the soil for fragments of organic origin , and date the fragments with methods that are tolerant of small sample sizes . 
 Other materials that have been successfully dated include ivory , paper , textiles , individual seeds and grains , straw from within mud bricks , and charred food remains found in pottery . 
 = = = Preparation and size = = = 
 Particularly for older samples , it may be useful to enrich the amount of 14C in the sample before testing . This can be done with a thermal diffusion column . The process takes about a month and requires a sample about ten times as large as would be needed otherwise , but it allows more precise measurement of the 14C / 12C ratio in old material and extends the maximum age that can be reliably reported . 
 Once contamination has been removed , samples must be converted to a form suitable for the measuring technology to be used . Where gas is required , CO 
 2 is widely used . For samples to be used in liquid scintillation counters , the carbon must be in liquid form ; the sample is typically converted to benzene . For accelerator mass spectrometry , solid graphite targets are the most common , although iron carbide and gaseous CO 
 2 can also be used . 
 The quantity of material needed for testing depends on the sample type and the technology being used . There are two types of testing technology : detectors that record radioactivity , known as beta counters , and accelerator mass spectrometers . For beta counters , a sample weighing at least 10 grams ( 0 @.@ 35 ounces ) is typically required . Accelerator mass spectrometry ( AMS ) is much more sensitive , and samples as small as 0 @.@ 5 milligrams ( 0 @.@ 0077 grains ) can be used . 
 = = Measurement and results = = 
 For decades after Libby performed the first radiocarbon dating experiments , the only way to measure the 14C in a sample was to detect the radioactive decay of individual carbon atoms . In this approach , what is measured is the activity , in number of decay events per unit mass per time period , of the sample . This method is also known as " beta counting " , because it is the beta particles emitted by the decaying 14C atoms that are detected . In the late 1970s an alternative approach became available : directly counting the number of 14C and 12C atoms in a given sample , via accelerator mass spectrometry , usually referred to as AMS . AMS counts the 14C / 12C ratio directly , instead of the activity of the sample , but measurements of activity and 14C / 12C ratio can be converted into each other exactly . For some time , beta counting methods were more accurate than AMS , but as of 2014 AMS is more accurate and has become the method of choice for radiocarbon measurements . In addition to improved accuracy , AMS has two further significant advantages over beta counting : it can perform accurate testing on samples much too small for beta counting ; and it is much faster – an accuracy of 1 % can be achieved in minutes with AMS , which is far quicker than would be achievable with the older technology . 
 = = = Beta counting = = = 
 Libby 's first detector was a Geiger counter of his own design . He converted the carbon in his sample to lamp black ( soot ) and coated the inner surface of a cylinder with it . This cylinder was inserted into the counter in such a way that the counting wire was inside the sample cylinder , in order that there should be no material between the sample and the wire . Any interposing material would have interfered with the detection of radioactivity , since the beta particles emitted by decaying 14C are so weak that half are stopped by a 0 @.@ 01 mm thickness of aluminium . 
 Libby 's method was soon superseded by gas proportional counters , which were less affected by bomb carbon ( the additional 14C created by nuclear weapons testing ) . These counters record bursts of ionization caused by the beta particles emitted by the decaying 14C atoms ; the bursts are proportional to the energy of the particle , so other sources of ionization , such as background radiation , can be identified and ignored . The counters are surrounded by lead or steel shielding , to eliminate background radiation and to reduce the incidence of cosmic rays . In addition , <unk> detectors are used ; these record events outside the counter , and any event recorded simultaneously both inside and outside the counter is regarded as an extraneous event and ignored . 
 The other common technology used for measuring 14C activity is liquid scintillation counting , which was invented in 1950 , but which had to wait until the early 1960s , when efficient methods of benzene synthesis were developed , to become competitive with gas counting ; after 1970 liquid counters became the more common technology choice for newly constructed dating laboratories . The counters work by detecting flashes of light caused by the beta particles emitted by 14C as they interact with a <unk> agent added to the benzene . Like gas counters , liquid scintillation counters require shielding and <unk> counters . 
 For both the gas proportional counter and liquid scintillation counter , what is measured is the number of beta particles detected in a given time period . Since the mass of the sample is known , this can be converted to a standard measure of activity in units of either counts per minute per gram of carbon ( <unk> / g C ) , or becquerels per kg ( Bq / kg C , in SI units ) . Each measuring device is also used to measure the activity of a blank sample – a sample prepared from carbon old enough to have no activity . This provides a value for the background radiation , which must be subtracted from the measured activity of the sample being dated to get the activity attributable solely to that sample 's 14C . In addition , a sample with a standard activity is measured , to provide a baseline for comparison . 
 = = = Accelerator mass spectrometry = = = 
 AMS counts the atoms of 14C and 12C in a given sample , determining the 14C / 12C ratio directly . The sample , often in the form of graphite , is made to emit C − ions ( carbon atoms with a single negative charge ) , which are injected into an accelerator . The ions are accelerated and passed through a stripper , which removes several electrons so that the ions emerge with a positive charge . The C3 + ions are then passed through a magnet that curves their path ; the heavier ions are curved less than the lighter ones , so the different isotopes emerge as separate streams of ions . A particle detector then records the number of ions detected in the 14C stream , but since the volume of 12C ( and 13C , needed for calibration ) is too great for individual ion detection , counts are determined by measuring the electric current created in a Faraday cup . Some AMS facilities are also able to evaluate a sample 's fractionation , another piece of data necessary for calculating the sample 's radiocarbon age . 
 The use of AMS , as opposed to simpler forms of mass spectrometry , is necessary because of the need to distinguish the carbon isotopes from other atoms or molecules that are very close in mass , such as 14N and <unk> . As with beta counting , both blank samples and standard samples are used . Two different kinds of blank may be measured : a sample of dead carbon that has undergone no chemical processing , to detect any machine background , and a sample known as a process blank made from dead carbon that is processed into target material in exactly the same way as the sample which is being dated . Any 14C signal from the machine background blank is likely to be caused either by beams of ions that have not followed the expected path inside the detector , or by carbon hydrides such as <unk> 
 2 or <unk> . A 14C signal from the process blank measures the amount of contamination introduced during the preparation of the sample . These measurements are used in the subsequent calculation of the age of the sample . 
 = = = Calculations = = = 
 The calculations to be performed on the measurements taken depend on the technology used , since beta counters measure the sample 's radioactivity whereas AMS determines the ratio of the three different carbon isotopes in the sample . 
 To determine the age of a sample whose activity has been measured by beta counting , the ratio of its activity to the activity of the standard must be found . To determine this , a blank sample ( of old , or dead , carbon ) is measured , and a sample of known activity is measured . The additional samples allow errors such as background radiation and systematic errors in the laboratory setup to be detected and corrected for . The most common standard sample material is oxalic acid , such as the <unk> standard , 1 @,@ 000 lb of which was prepared by NIST in 1977 from French beet harvests . 
 The results from AMS testing are in the form of ratios of 12C , 13C , and 14C , which are used to calculate Fm , the " fraction modern " . This is defined as the ratio between the 14C / 12C ratio in the sample and the 14C / 12C ratio in modern carbon , which is in turn defined as the 14C / 12C ratio that would have been measured in 1950 had there been no fossil fuel effect . 
 Both beta counting and AMS results have to be corrected for fractionation . This is necessary because different materials of the same age , which because of fractionation have naturally different 14C / 12C ratios , will appear to be of different ages because the 14C / 12C ratio is taken as the indicator of age . To avoid this , all radiocarbon measurements are converted to the measurement that would have been seen had the sample been made of wood , which has a known δ13C value of − 25 ‰ . 
 Once the corrected 14C / 12C ratio is known , a " radiocarbon age " is calculated using : 
 <formula> 
 The calculation uses Libby 's half @-@ life of 5 @,@ 568 years , not the more accurate modern value of 5 @,@ 730 years . Libby ’ s value for the half @-@ life is used to maintain consistency with early radiocarbon testing results ; calibration curves include a correction for this , so the accuracy of final reported calendar ages is assured . 
 = = = Errors and reliability = = = 
 The reliability of the results can be improved by lengthening the testing time . For example , if counting beta decays for 250 minutes is enough to give an error of ± 80 years , with 68 % confidence , then doubling the counting time to 500 minutes will allow a sample with only half as much 14C to be measured with the same error term of 80 years . 
 Radiocarbon dating is generally limited to dating samples no more than 50 @,@ 000 years old , as samples older than that have insufficient 14C to be measurable . Older dates have been obtained by using special sample preparation techniques , large samples , and very long measurement times . These techniques can allow measurement of dates up to 60 @,@ 000 and in some cases up to 75 @,@ 000 years before the present . 
 Radiocarbon dates are generally presented with a range of one standard deviation ( usually represented by the Greek letter sigma as 1σ ) on either side of the mean . However , a date range of 1σ represents only 68 % confidence level , so the true age of the object being measured may lie outside the range of dates quoted . This was demonstrated in 1970 by an experiment run by the British Museum radiocarbon laboratory , in which weekly measurements were taken on the same sample for six months . The results varied widely ( though consistently with a normal distribution of errors in the measurements ) , and included multiple date ranges ( of 1σ confidence ) that did not overlap with each other . The measurements included one with a range from about <unk> to about <unk> years ago , and another with a range from about <unk> to about <unk> . 
 Errors in procedure can also lead to errors in the results . If 1 % of the benzene in a modern reference sample accidentally evaporates , scintillation counting will give a radiocarbon age that is too young by about 80 years . 
 = = = Calibration = = = 
 The calculations given above produce dates in radiocarbon years : i.e. dates that represent the age the sample would be if the 14C / 12C ratio had been constant historically . Although Libby had pointed out as early as 1955 the possibility that this assumption was incorrect , it was not until discrepancies began to accumulate between measured ages and known historical dates for artefacts that it became clear that a correction would need to be applied to radiocarbon ages to obtain calendar dates . 
 To produce a curve that can be used to relate calendar years to radiocarbon years , a sequence of securely dated samples is needed which can be tested to determine their radiocarbon age . The study of tree rings led to the first such sequence : individual pieces of wood show characteristic sequences of rings that vary in thickness because of environmental factors such as the amount of rainfall in a given year . These factors affect all trees in an area , so examining tree @-@ ring sequences from old wood allows the identification of overlapping sequences . In this way , an uninterrupted sequence of tree rings can be extended far into the past . The first such published sequence , based on bristlecone pine tree rings , was created by Wesley Ferguson . Hans Suess used this data to publish the first calibration curve for radiocarbon dating in 1967 . The curve showed two types of variation from the straight line : a long term fluctuation with a period of about 9 @,@ 000 years , and a shorter term variation , often referred to as " wiggles " , with a period of decades . Suess said he drew the line showing the wiggles by " cosmic <unk> " , by which he meant that the variations were caused by extraterrestrial forces . It was unclear for some time whether the wiggles were real or not , but they are now well @-@ established . These short term fluctuations in the calibration curve are now known as de Vries effects , after Hessel de Vries . 
 A calibration curve is used by taking the radiocarbon date reported by a laboratory , and reading across from that date on the vertical axis of the graph . The point where this horizontal line intersects the curve will give the calendar age of the sample on the horizontal axis . This is the reverse of the way the curve is constructed : a point on the graph is derived from a sample of known age , such as a tree ring ; when it is tested , the resulting radiocarbon age gives a data point for the graph . 
 Over the next thirty years many calibration curves were published using a variety of methods and statistical approaches . These were superseded by the <unk> series of curves , beginning with <unk> , published in 1998 , and updated in 2004 , 2009 , and 2013 . The improvements to these curves are based on new data gathered from tree rings , varves , coral , plant <unk> , speleothems , and foraminifera . The <unk> data includes separate curves for the northern and southern hemispheres , as they differ systematically because of the hemisphere effect ; there is also a separate marine calibration curve . For a set of samples with a known sequence and separation in time such as a sequence of tree rings , the samples ' radiocarbon ages form a small subset of the calibration curve . The resulting curve can then be matched to the actual calibration curve by identifying where , in the range suggested by the radiocarbon dates , the wiggles in the calibration curve best match the wiggles in the curve of sample dates . This " wiggle @-@ matching " technique can lead to more precise dating than is possible with individual radiocarbon dates . Wiggle @-@ matching can be used in places where there is a plateau on the calibration curve , and hence can provide a much more accurate date than the intercept or probability methods are able to produce . The technique is not restricted to tree rings ; for example , a stratified tephra sequence in New Zealand , known to predate human colonization of the islands , has been dated to 1314 AD ± 12 years by wiggle @-@ matching . The wiggles also mean that reading a date from a calibration curve can give more than one answer : this occurs when the curve wiggles up and down enough that the radiocarbon age intercepts the curve in more than one place , which may lead to a radiocarbon result being reported as two separate age ranges , corresponding to the two parts of the curve that the radiocarbon age intercepted . 
 Bayesian statistical techniques can be applied when there are several radiocarbon dates to be calibrated . For example , if a series of radiocarbon dates is taken from different levels in a given stratigraphic sequence , Bayesian analysis can help determine if some of the dates should be discarded as anomalies , and can use the information to improve the output probability distributions . When Bayesian analysis was introduced , its use was limited by the need to use mainframe computers to perform the calculations , but the technique has since been implemented on programs available for personal computers , such as <unk> . 
 = = = Reporting dates = = = 
 Several formats for citing radiocarbon results have been used since the first samples were dated . As of 2014 , the standard format required by the journal Radiocarbon is as follows . 
 <unk> dates should be reported as " < laboratory > : < 14C year > ± < range > BP " , where : 
 < laboratory > identifies the laboratory that tested the sample , and the sample ID 
 < 14C year > is the laboratory 's determination of the age of the sample , in radiocarbon years 
 < range > is the laboratory 's estimate of the error in the age , at 1σ confidence . 
 BP stands for " before present " , referring to a reference date of 1950 , so that 500 BP means the year 1450 AD . 
 For example , the uncalibrated date " <unk> @-@ 2020 : 3510 ± 60 BP " indicates that the sample was tested by the Utrecht van der Graaf <unk> , where it has a sample number of 2020 , and that the uncalibrated age is 3510 years before present , ± 60 years . Related forms are sometimes used : for example , " 10 ka BP " means 10 @,@ 000 radiocarbon years before present ( i.e. 8 @,@ 050 BC ) , and 14C yr BP might be used to distinguish the uncalibrated date from a date derived from another dating method such as thermoluminescence . 
 Calibrated 14C dates are frequently reported as cal BP , cal BC , or cal AD , again with BP referring to the year 1950 as the zero date . Radiocarbon gives two options for reporting calibrated dates . A common format is " cal < date @-@ range > < confidence > " , where : 
 < date @-@ range > is the range of dates corresponding to the given confidence level 
 < confidence > indicates the confidence level for the given date range . 
 For example , " cal 1220 – 1281 AD ( 1σ ) " means a calibrated date for which the true date lies between 1220 AD and 1281 AD , with the confidence level given as 1σ , or one standard deviation . Calibrated dates can also be expressed as BP instead of using BC and AD . The curve used to calibrate the results should be the latest available <unk> curve . Calibrated dates should also identify any programs , such as <unk> , used to perform the calibration . In addition , an article in Radiocarbon in 2014 about radiocarbon date reporting conventions recommends that information should be provided about sample treatment , including the sample material , pretreatment methods , and quality control measurements ; that the citation to the software used for calibration should specify the version number and any options or models used ; and that the calibrated date should be given with the associated probabilities for each range . 
 = = Use in archaeology = = 
 = = = Interpretation = = = 
 A key concept in interpreting radiocarbon dates is archaeological association : what is the true relationship between two or more objects at an archaeological site ? It frequently happens that a sample for radiocarbon dating can be taken directly from the object of interest , but there are also many cases where this is not possible . Metal grave goods , for example , cannot be radiocarbon dated , but they may be found in a grave with a coffin , charcoal , or other material which can be assumed to have been deposited at the same time . In these cases a date for the coffin or charcoal is indicative of the date of deposition of the grave goods , because of the direct functional relationship between the two . There are also cases where there is no functional relationship , but the association is reasonably strong : for example , a layer of charcoal in a rubbish pit provides a date which has a relationship to the rubbish pit . 
 Contamination is of particular concern when dating very old material obtained from archaeological excavations and great care is needed in the specimen selection and preparation . In 2014 , Tom Higham and co @-@ workers suggested that many of the dates published for Neanderthal artefacts are too recent because of contamination by " young carbon " . 
 As a tree grows , only the outermost tree ring exchanges carbon with its environment , so the age measured for a wood sample depends on where the sample is taken from . This means that radiocarbon dates on wood samples can be older than the date at which the tree was felled . In addition , if a piece of wood is used for multiple purposes , there may be a significant delay between the felling of the tree and the final use in the context in which it is found . This is often referred to as the " old wood " problem . One example is the Bronze Age trackway at Withy Bed Copse , in England ; the trackway was built from wood that had clearly been worked for other purposes before being re @-@ used in the trackway . Another example is driftwood , which may be used as construction material . It is not always possible to recognize re @-@ use . Other materials can present the same problem : for example , bitumen is known to have been used by some Neolithic communities to waterproof baskets ; the bitumen 's radiocarbon age will be greater than is measurable by the laboratory , regardless of the actual age of the context , so testing the basket material will give a misleading age if care is not taken . A separate issue , related to re @-@ use , is that of lengthy use , or delayed deposition . For example , a wooden object that remains in use for a lengthy period will have an apparent age greater than the actual age of the context in which it is deposited . 
 = = = Notable applications = = = 
 = = = = Pleistocene / Holocene boundary in Two Creeks Fossil Forest = = = = 
 The Pleistocene is a geological epoch that began about 2 @.@ 6 million years ago . The Holocene , the current geological epoch , begins about 11 @,@ 700 years ago , when the Pleistocene ends . Establishing the date of this boundary − which is defined by sharp climatic warming − as accurately as possible has been a goal of geologists for much of the 20th century . At Two Creeks , in Wisconsin , a fossil forest was discovered ( Two Creeks Buried Forest State Natural Area ) , and subsequent research determined that the destruction of the forest was caused by the <unk> ice <unk> , the last southward movement of ice before the end of the Pleistocene in that area . Before the advent of radiocarbon dating , the fossilized trees had been dated by correlating sequences of annually deposited layers of sediment at Two Creeks with sequences in Scandinavia . This led to estimates that the trees were between 24 @,@ 000 and 19 @,@ 000 years old , and hence this was taken to be the date of the last advance of the Wisconsin glaciation before its final retreat marked the end of the Pleistocene in North America . In 1952 Libby published radiocarbon dates for several samples from the Two Creeks site and two similar sites nearby ; the dates were averaged to 11 @,@ 404 BP with a standard error of 350 years . This result was uncalibrated , as the need for calibration of radiocarbon ages was not yet understood . Further results over the next decade supported an average date of 11 @,@ 350 BP , with the results thought to be most accurate averaging 11 @,@ 600 BP . There was initial resistance to these results on the part of Ernst <unk> , the <unk> who had worked on the Scandinavian varve series , but his objections were eventually discounted by other geologists . In the 1990s samples were tested with AMS , yielding ( uncalibrated ) dates ranging from 11 @,@ 640 BP to 11 @,@ 800 BP , both with a standard error of 160 years . Subsequently a sample from the fossil forest was used in an <unk> test , with results provided by over 70 laboratories . These tests produced a median age of 11 @,@ 788 ± 8 BP ( <unk> confidence ) which when calibrated gives a date range of 13 @,@ 730 to 13 @,@ 550 cal BP . The Two Creeks radiocarbon dates are now regarded as a key result in developing the modern understanding of North American glaciation at the end of the Pleistocene . 
 = = = = Dead Sea Scrolls = = = = 
 In 1947 , scrolls were discovered in caves near the Dead Sea that proved to contain writing in Hebrew and Aramaic , most of which are thought to have been produced by the Essenes , a small Jewish sect . These scrolls are of great significance in the study of Biblical texts because many of them contain the earliest known version of books of the Hebrew bible . A sample of the linen wrapping from one of these scrolls , the Great Isaiah Scroll , was included in a 1955 analysis by Libby , with an estimated age of 1 @,@ 917 ± 200 years . Based on an analysis of the writing style , <unk> estimates were made of the age of 21 of the scrolls , and samples from most of these , along with other scrolls which had not been palaeographically dated , were tested by two AMS laboratories in the 1990s . The results ranged in age from the early 4th century BC to the mid 4th century AD . In many cases the scrolls were determined to be older than the palaeographically determined age . The Isaiah scroll was included in the testing and was found to have two possible date ranges at a <unk> confidence level , because of the shape of the calibration curve at that point : there is a 15 % chance that it dates from 355 − 295 BC , and an 84 % chance that it dates from 210 − 45 BC . Subsequently these dates were criticized on the grounds that before the scrolls were tested , they had been treated with modern castor oil in order to make the writing easier to read ; it was argued that failure to remove the castor oil sufficiently would have caused the dates to be too young . Multiple papers have been published both supporting and opposing the criticism . 
 = = = Impact = = = 
 Soon after the publication of Libby 's 1949 paper in Science , universities around the world began establishing radiocarbon @-@ dating laboratories , and by the end of the 1950s there were more than 20 active 14C research laboratories . It quickly became apparent that the principles of radiocarbon dating were valid , despite certain discrepancies , the causes of which then remained unknown . 
 The development of radiocarbon dating has had a profound impact on archaeology - often described as the " radiocarbon revolution " . In the words of anthropologist R. E. Taylor , " 14C data made a world prehistory possible by contributing a time scale that transcends local , regional and continental boundaries " . It provides more accurate dating within sites than previous methods , which usually derived either from stratigraphy or from typologies ( e.g. of stone tools or pottery ) ; it also allows comparison and synchronization of events across great distances . The advent of radiocarbon dating may even have led to better field methods in archaeology , since better data recording leads to firmer association of objects with the samples to be tested . These improved field methods were sometimes motivated by attempts to prove that a 14C date was incorrect . Taylor also suggests that the availability of definite date information freed archaeologists from the need to focus so much of their energy on determining the dates of their finds , and led to an expansion of the questions archaeologists were willing to research . For example , from the 1970s questions about the evolution of human behaviour were much more frequently seen in archaeology . 
 The dating framework provided by radiocarbon led to a change in the prevailing view of how innovations spread through prehistoric Europe . Researchers had previously thought that many ideas spread by diffusion through the continent , or by invasions of peoples bringing new cultural ideas with them . As radiocarbon dates began to prove these ideas wrong in many instances , it became apparent that these innovations must sometimes have arisen locally . This has been described as a " second radiocarbon revolution " , and with regard to British prehistory , archaeologist Richard Atkinson has characterized the impact of radiocarbon dating as " radical ... therapy " for the " progressive disease of <unk> " . More broadly , the success of radiocarbon dating stimulated interest in analytical and statistical approaches to archaeological data . Taylor has also described the impact of AMS , and the ability to obtain accurate measurements from very small samples , as ushering in a third radiocarbon revolution . 
 Occasionally , radiocarbon dating techniques date an object of popular interest , for example the Shroud of Turin , a piece of linen cloth thought by some to bear an image of Jesus Christ after his crucifixion . Three separate laboratories dated samples of linen from the Shroud in 1988 ; the results pointed to 14th @-@ century origins , raising doubts about the shroud 's authenticity as an alleged 1st @-@ century relic . 
 Researchers have studied other radioactive isotopes created by cosmic rays to determine if they could also be used to assist in dating objects of archaeological interest ; such isotopes include 3He , 10Be , 21Ne , 26Al , and <unk> . With the development of AMS in the 1980s it became possible to measure these isotopes precisely enough for them to be the basis of useful dating techniques , which have been primarily applied to dating rocks . Naturally occurring radioactive isotopes can also form the basis of dating methods , as with potassium – argon dating , argon – argon dating , and uranium series dating . Other dating techniques of interest to archaeologists include thermoluminescence , optically stimulated luminescence , electron spin resonance , and fission track dating , as well as techniques that depend on annual bands or layers , such as dendrochronology , tephrochronology , and varve chronology . 
 = Oroville Dam = 
 Oroville Dam is an earthfill embankment dam on the Feather River east of the city of Oroville , California in the United States . At 770 feet ( 230 m ) high , it is the tallest dam in the U.S. and serves mainly for water supply , hydroelectricity generation and flood control . The dam impounds Lake Oroville , the second largest man @-@ made lake in the state of California , capable of storing more than 3 @.@ 5 million acre @-@ feet ( 4 @.@ 4 km3 ) , and is located in the Sierra Nevada foothills east of the Sacramento Valley . 
 Built by the California Department of Water Resources ( DWR ) , Oroville Dam is one of the key features of the California State Water Project ( SWP ) , one of two major projects passed that set up California 's statewide water system . Construction was initiated in 1961 , and despite numerous difficulties encountered during its construction , including multiple floods and a major train wreck on the rail line used to transport materials to the dam site , the embankment was topped out in 1967 and the entire project was ready for use in 1968 . The dam began to generate electricity after completion of the Edward Hyatt Pump @-@ Generating Plant , then the country 's largest underground power station . 
 Since its completion in 1968 , the Oroville Dam has allocated the flow of the Feather River from the Sacramento @-@ San Joaquin Delta into the State Water Project 's California Aqueduct , which provides a major supply of water for irrigation in the San Joaquin Valley as well as municipal and industrial water supplies to coastal Southern California , and has prevented large amounts of flood damage to the area – more than $ 1 @.@ 3 billion between the years of 1987 and 1999 . The dam has confined fish migration up the Feather River and the controlled flow of the river as a result of the Oroville Dam has affected riparian habitat . Multiple aims at trying to counter the dam 's impacts on anadromous fish have included the construction of a salmon / steelhead incubator on the river which began shortly after the dam was completed . 
 = = History = = 
 In 1935 , work began on the Central Valley Project ( CVP ) , a federal water project that would develop the Sacramento and San Joaquin river systems for irrigation of the highly fertile Central Valley . However , after the end of World War II in 1945 , the state experienced an economic boom that led to rapid urban and commercial growth in the central and southern portions of the state , and it became clear that California 's economy could not depend solely on a state water system geared primarily towards agriculture . A new study of California 's water supplies by the Division of Water Resources ( now California Department of Water Resources , DWR ) was carried out under an act of the California State Legislature in 1945 . 
 In 1951 , California State Engineer A.D. <unk> proposed the Feather River Project , the direct predecessor to the SWP , which included a major dam on the Feather River at Oroville , and aqueducts and pumping plants to transfer stored water to destinations in central and southern California . The proposed project was strongly opposed by voters in Northern California and parts of Southern California that received water from the Colorado River , but was supported by other Southern Californians and San Joaquin Valley farmers . However , major flooding in the 1950s prompted the 1957 passage of an emergency flood @-@ control bill that provided sufficient funding for construction for a dam at Oroville , whether it would be part of the SWP or not . Groundbreaking on the dam site occurred in May 1957 with the relocation of the Western Pacific Railroad tracks that ran through the Feather River canyon . The Burns @-@ Porter Act , which authorized the SWP , was not passed until November 8 , 1960 – and only by a slim margin . Engineer Donald Thayer of the DWR was commissioned to design and head construction of Oroville Dam , and the primary work contract was awarded to Oro Dam Constructors Inc . , a joint venture led by Oman Construction Co . 
 Two concrete @-@ lined diversion tunnels , each 4 @,@ 400 feet ( 1 @,@ 300 m ) long and 35 feet ( 11 m ) in diameter , were excavated to channel the Feather River around the dam site . One of the tunnels was located at river level and would carry normal water flows , while the second one would only be used during floods . In May 1963 , workers poured the last of 252 @,@ 000 cubic yards ( 193 @,@ 000 m3 ) of concrete that comprised the 128 @-@ foot ( 39 m ) high cofferdam , which would protect the construction site from floods . This structure would later serve as an impervious core for the completed dam . With the cofferdam in place , an 11 @-@ mile ( 18 km ) rail line was constructed to move earth and rock to the dam site . An average of 120 train cars ran along the line each hour , transporting fill that was mainly excavated from enormous piles of hydraulic mining debris that were washed down by the Feather River after the California Gold Rush . 
 On December 22 , 1964 , disaster nearly struck when the Feather River , after days of heavy rain , reached a peak flow of 250 @,@ 000 cubic feet per second ( 7 @,@ 100 m3 / s ) above the Oroville Dam site . The water rose behind the partially completed embankment dam and nearly overtopped it , while a maximum of 157 @,@ 000 cubic feet per second ( 4 @,@ 400 m3 / s ) poured from the diversion tunnels . This Christmas flood of 1964 was one of the most disastrous floods on record in Northern California , but the incomplete dam was able to reduce the peak flow of the Feather River by nearly 40 percent , averting massive amounts of damage to the area . Ten months later , four men died in a tragic accident on the construction rail line . On October 7 , 1965 , two 40 @-@ car work trains , one fully loaded and the other empty , collided head @-@ on at a tunnel entrance , igniting 10 @,@ 000 US gallons ( 38 @,@ 000 l ) of diesel fuel , completely destroying the two locomotives . The burning fuel from the collision started a forest fire that burned 100 acres ( 40 ha ) before it could be extinguished . The crash delayed construction of the Dam by a week while the train wreckage was cleared . 
 Oroville Dam was designed to withstand the strongest possible earthquake for the region , and was fitted with hundreds of instruments that serve to measure water pressure and settlement of the earth fill used in its construction , earning it the nickname " the dam that talks back " . ( It is believed that a MW 5 @.@ 7 earthquake in the Oroville area in 1975 was caused by induced seismicity from the weight of the Oroville Dam and reservoir itself on a local fault line . ) The embankment was finally topped out on October 6 , 1967 , with the last of 155 million tons ( 140 @.@ 6 million t ) of material that took over 40 @,@ 000 train trips to transport . On May 4 , 1968 Oroville Dam was officially dedicated by the state of California . Among the notable figures present were Chief Justice ( formerly California governor ) Earl Warren , Senator Thomas <unk> , and California Representative Harold T. " Bizz " Johnson . The dedication was accompanied by a week of festivities in nearby Oroville , attended by nearly 50 @,@ 000 people . 
 = = Operations = = 
 Construction of the underground Edward Hyatt Pump @-@ Generating Plant was finished shortly after the completion of Oroville Dam . At the time , it was the largest underground power station in the United States , with three 132 megawatt ( MW ) conventional turbines and three 141 MW pump @-@ generators for a total installed capacity of 819 MW . The Hyatt Powerplant is capable of pumping water back into Lake Oroville when surplus power is available . The pump @-@ generators at Hyatt can lift up to 5 @,@ 610 cubic feet per second ( 159 m3 / s ) into Lake Oroville ( with a net consumption of 519 MW ) , while the six turbines combined utilize a flow of 16 @,@ 950 cubic feet per second ( 480 m3 / s ) at maximum generation . 
 Since 1969 , the Hyatt plant has worked in tandem with an extensive pumped @-@ storage operation comprising two offstream reservoirs west of Oroville . These two facilities are collectively known as the Oroville @-@ Thermalito Complex . Water is diverted into the upper Thermalito reservoir ( Thermalito Forebay ) via the Thermalito Diversion Dam on the Feather River . During periods of off @-@ peak power use , surplus energy generated at Hyatt is used to lift water from Thermalito 's lower reservoir ( the Thermalito <unk> ) to the forebay , which releases water back into the afterbay to generate up to 114 MW of power at times of high demand . The Hyatt and Thermalito plants produce an average of 2 @.@ 2 billion kilowatt hours ( KWh ) of electricity each year , about half of the total power produced by the SWP 's eight hydroelectric facilities . 
 Water released from Oroville Dam travels down the Feather River before joining with the Sacramento River , eventually reaching the Sacramento @-@ San Joaquin Delta , where the SWP 's California Aqueduct diverts the freshwater for transport to the arid San Joaquin Valley and Southern California . Oroville @-@ Thermalito hydroelectric facilities furnish about one @-@ third of the power necessary to drive the pumps that lift the water in the aqueduct from the delta into the valley , and then from the valley over the Tehachapi Mountains into coastal southern California . Water and power from the dam contributes to the irrigation of 755 @,@ 000 acres ( 306 @,@ 000 ha ) in the arid San Joaquin Valley Westside and municipal supplies to some 25 million people . 
 During the winter and early spring , Lake Oroville is required to have at least 750 @,@ 000 acre feet ( 0 @.@ 93 km3 ) , or a fifth of the reservoir 's storage capacity , available for flood control . The dam is operated to maintain an objective flood @-@ control release of 150 @,@ 000 cubic feet per second ( 4 @,@ 200 m3 / s ) , which may be further reduced during large storms when flows below the Feather 's confluence with the Yuba River exceed 300 @,@ 000 cubic feet per second ( 8 @,@ 500 m3 / s ) . In the particularly devastating flood of 1997 inflows to the reservoir hit more than 331 @,@ 000 cubic feet per second ( 9 @,@ 400 m3 / s ) , but dam operators managed to limit the outflow to 160 @,@ 000 cubic feet per second ( 4 @,@ 500 m3 / s ) , sparing large regions of the Sacramento Valley from flooding . 
 Oroville Dam completely blocks migrations of Chinook salmon and steelhead in the Feather River . In 1967 , in an effort to compensate for lost habitat , the DWR and the California Department of Fish and Game completed the Feather River Fish Hatchery . The Fish Barrier Dam , built in 1962 , intercepts fish before they reach the base of the impassable Thermalito Diversion Dam and forces them to swim up a fish ladder to the hatchery , which is located on the north bank of the Feather River . The hatchery produces 10 million salmon smolt to stock in the river each year , with 20 % for the spring run and 80 % for the fall run . This facility has been successful enough that there is concern that salmon of hatchery stock is out @-@ competing remaining wild salmon in the Feather River system . 
 = Constantine II of Scotland = 
 Constantine , son of Áed ( Medieval Gaelic : Constantín mac <unk> ; Modern Gaelic : <unk> mac Aoidh , known in most modern regnal lists as Constantine II ; before 879 – 952 ) was an early King of Scotland , known then by the Gaelic name Alba . The Kingdom of Alba , a name which first appears in Constantine 's lifetime , was in northern Great Britain . The core of the kingdom was formed by the lands around the River Tay . Its southern limit was the River Forth , northwards it extended towards the Moray Firth and perhaps to Caithness , while its western limits are uncertain . Constantine 's grandfather Kenneth I of Scotland ( Cináed mac Ailpín , died 858 ) was the first of the family recorded as a king , but as king of the Picts . This change of title , from king of the Picts to king of Alba , is part of a broader transformation of Pictland and the origins of the Kingdom of Alba are traced to Constantine 's lifetime . 
 His reign , like those of his predecessors , was dominated by the actions of Viking rulers in the British Isles , particularly the Uí Ímair ( " the grandsons of Ímar " , or Ivar the Boneless ) . During Constantine 's reign the rulers of the southern kingdoms of Wessex and Mercia , later the Kingdom of England , extended their authority northwards into the disputed kingdoms of Northumbria . At first allied with the southern rulers against the Vikings , Constantine in time came into conflict with them . King Æthelstan was successful in securing Constantine 's submission in 927 and 934 , but the two again fought when Constantine , allied with the Strathclyde Britons and the Viking king of Dublin , invaded Æthelstan 's kingdom in 937 , only to be defeated at the great battle of Brunanburh . In 943 Constantine abdicated the throne and retired to the Céli Dé ( Culdee ) monastery of St Andrews where he died in 952 . He was succeeded by his predecessor 's son Malcolm I ( Máel Coluim mac Domnaill ) . 
 Constantine 's reign of 43 years , exceeded in Scotland only by that of King William the Lion before the Union of the Crowns in 1603 , is believed to have played a defining part in the gaelicisation of Pictland , in which his patronage of the Irish Céli Dé monastic reformers was a significant factor . During his reign the words " Scots " and " Scotland " ( Old English : <unk> , Scotland ) are first used to mean part of what is now Scotland . The earliest evidence for the ecclesiastical and administrative institutions which would last until the Davidian Revolution also appears at this time . 
 = = Pictland from Constantín mac Fergusa to Constantine I = = 
 The dominant kingdom in eastern Scotland before the Viking Age was the northern Pictish kingdom of Fortriu on the shores of the Moray Firth . By the 9th century , the Gaels of Dál Riata ( Dalriada ) were subject to the kings of Fortriu of the family of Constantín mac Fergusa ( Constantine son of Fergus ) . Constantín 's family dominated Fortriu after 789 and perhaps , if Constantín was a kinsman of Óengus I of the Picts ( Óengus son of Fergus ) , from around 730 . The dominance of Fortriu came to an end in 839 with a defeat by Viking armies reported by the Annals of Ulster in which King <unk> of Fortriu and his brother Bran , Constantín 's nephews , together with the king of Dál Riata , Áed mac Boanta , " and others almost innumerable " were killed . These deaths led to a period of instability lasting a decade as several families attempted to establish their dominance in Pictland . By around 848 Kenneth MacAlpin had emerged as the winner . 
 Later national myth made Kenneth MacAlpin the creator of the kingdom of Scotland , the founding of which was dated from 843 , the year in which he was said to have destroyed the Picts and inaugurated a new era . The historical record for 9th century Scotland is meagre , but the Irish annals and the 10th @-@ century Chronicle of the Kings of Alba agree that Kenneth was a Pictish king , and call him " king of the Picts " at his death . The same style is used of Kenneth 's brother Donald I ( Domnall mac Ailpín ) and sons Constantine I ( Constantín mac Cináeda ) and Áed ( Áed mac Cináeda ) . 
 The kingdom ruled by Kenneth 's descendants — older works used the name House of Alpin to describe them but descent from Kenneth was the defining factor , Irish sources referring to Clann Cináeda meic Ailpín ( " the Clan of Kenneth MacAlpin " ) — lay to the south of the previously dominant kingdom of Fortriu , centred in the lands around the River Tay . The extent of Kenneth 's nameless kingdom is uncertain , but it certainly extended from the Firth of Forth in the south to the Mounth in the north . Whether it extended beyond the mountainous spine of north Britain — Druim Alban — is unclear . The core of the kingdom was similar to the old counties of Mearns , Forfar , Perth , Fife , and Kinross . Among the chief ecclesiastical centres named in the records are Dunkeld , probably seat of the bishop of the kingdom , and Cell <unk> ( modern St Andrews ) . 
 Kenneth 's son Constantine died in 876 , probably killed fighting against a Viking army which had come north from Northumbria in 874 . According to the king lists , he was counted the 70th and last king of the Picts in later times . 
 = = Britain and Ireland at the end of the 9th century = = 
 In 899 Alfred the Great , king of Wessex , died leaving his son Edward the Elder as ruler of Britain south of the River Thames and his daughter Æthelflæd and son @-@ in @-@ law Æthelred ruling the western , English part of Mercia . The situation in the Danish kingdoms of eastern Britain is less clear . King Eohric was probably ruling in East Anglia , but no dates can reliably be assigned to the successors of Guthfrith of York in Northumbria . It is known that Guthfrith was succeeded by Sigurd and Cnut , although whether these men ruled jointly or one after the other is uncertain . Northumbria may have been divided by this time between the Viking kings in York and the local rulers , perhaps represented by Eadulf , based at Bamburgh who controlled the lands from the River Tyne or River Tees to the Forth in the north . 
 In Ireland , Flann Sinna , married to Constantine 's aunt Máel <unk> , was dominant . The years around 900 represented a period of weakness among the Vikings and Norse @-@ Gaels of Dublin . They are reported to have been divided between two rival leaders . In 894 one group left Dublin , perhaps settling on the Irish Sea coast of Britain between the River Mersey and the Firth of Clyde . The remaining Dubliners were expelled in 902 by Flann Sinna 's son @-@ in @-@ law Cerball mac Muirecáin , and soon afterwards appeared in western and northern Britain . 
 To the south @-@ west of Constantine 's lands lay the kingdom of Strathclyde . This extended north into the Lennox , east to the River Forth , and south into the Southern Uplands . In 900 it was probably ruled by King Dyfnwal . 
 The situation of the Gaelic kingdoms of Dál Riata in western Scotland is uncertain . No kings are known by name after Áed mac Boanta . The Frankish Annales Bertiniani may record the conquest of the Inner Hebrides , the seaward part of Dál Riata , by Northmen in 849 . In addition to these , the arrival of new groups of Vikings from northern and western Europe was still commonplace . Whether there were Viking or Norse @-@ Gael kingdoms in the Western Isles or the Northern Isles at this time is debated . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Áed , Constantine 's father , succeeded Constantine 's uncle and namesake Constantine I in 876 but was killed in 878 . Áed 's short reign is glossed as being of no importance by most king lists . Although the date of his birth is nowhere recorded , Constantine II cannot have been born any later than the year after his father 's death , that is 879 . His name may suggest that he was born rather earlier , during the reign of his uncle Constantine I. 
 After Áed 's death there is a two decade gap until the death of Donald II ( Domnall mac Constantín ) in 900 during which nothing is reported in the Irish annals . The entry for the reign between Áed and Donald II is corrupt in the Chronicle of the Kings of Alba , and in this case the Chronicle is at variance with every other king list . According to the Chronicle , Áed was followed by Eochaid , a grandson of Kenneth MacAlpin , who is somehow connected with Giric , but all other lists say that Giric ruled after Áed and make great claims for him . Giric is not known to have been a kinsman of Kenneth 's , although it has been suggested that he was related to him by marriage . The major changes in Pictland which began at about this time have been associated by Alex Woolf and Archie Duncan with Giric 's reign . 
 Woolf suggests that Constantine and his cousin Donald may have passed Giric 's reign in exile in Ireland where their aunt Máel <unk> was wife of two successive High Kings of Ireland , Áed Findliath and Flann Sinna . Giric died in 889 . If he had been in exile , Constantine may have returned to Pictland where his cousin Donald II became king . Donald 's reputation is suggested by the epithet <unk> , a word used of violent madmen and mad bulls , attached to him in the 11th @-@ century writings of Flann <unk> , echoed by the his description in the Prophecy of <unk> as " the rough one who will think relics and psalms of little worth " . Wars with the Viking kings in Britain and Ireland continued during Donald 's reign and he was probably killed fighting yet more Vikings at Dunnottar in the Mearns in 900 . Constantine succeeded him as king . 
 = = Vikings and bishops = = 
 The earliest event recorded in the Chronicle of the Kings of Alba in Constantine 's reign is an attack by Vikings and the plundering of Dunkeld " and all Albania " in his third year . This is the first use of the word Albania , the Latin form of the Old Irish Alba , in the Chronicle which until then describes the lands ruled by the descendants of Cináed as <unk> . 
 These Northmen may have been some of those who were driven out of Dublin in 902 , but could also have been the same group who had defeated Domnall in 900 . The Chronicle states that the Northmen were killed in <unk> <unk> , which is confirmed by the Annals of Ulster which records the death of Ímar grandson of Ímar and many others at the hands of the men of Fortriu in 904 . This Ímar was the first of the Uí Ímair , that is the grandsons of Ímar , to be reported ; three more grandsons of Ímar appear later in Constantín 's reign . The Fragmentary Annals of Ireland contain an account of the battle , and this attributes the defeat of the Norsemen to the intercession of Saint Columba following fasting and prayer . An entry in the Chronicon Scotorum under the year 904 may possibly contain a corrupted reference to this battle . 
 The next event reported by the Chronicle of the Kings of Alba is dated to 906 . This records that : 
 King Constantine and Bishop Cellach met at the Hill of Belief near the royal city of Scone and pledged themselves that the laws and disciplines of the faith , and the laws of churches and gospels , should be kept <unk> cum Scottis . 
 The meaning of this entry , and its significance , have been the subject of debate . 
 The phrase <unk> cum Scottis in the Latin text of the Chronicle has been translated in several ways . William Forbes Skene and Alan Orr Anderson proposed that it should be read as " in conformity with the customs of the Gaels " , relating it to the claims in the king lists that Giric liberated the church from secular oppression and adopted Irish customs . It has been read as " together with the Gaels " , suggesting either public participation or the presence of Gaels from the western coasts as well as the people of the east coast . Finally , it is suggested that it was the ceremony which followed " the custom of the Gaels " and not the agreements . 
 The idea that this gathering agreed to uphold Irish laws governing the church has suggested that it was an important step in the gaelicisation of the lands east of Druim Alban . Others have proposed that the ceremony in some way endorsed Constantine 's kingship , prefiguring later royal inaugurations at Scone . Alternatively , if Bishop Cellach was appointed by Giric , it may be that the gathering was intended to heal a rift between king and church . 
 = = Return of the Uí Ímair = = 
 Following the events at Scone , there is little of substance reported for a decade . A story in the Fragmentary Annals of Ireland , perhaps referring to events some time after 911 , claims that Queen Æthelflæd , who ruled in Mercia , allied with the Irish and northern rulers against the Norsemen on the Irish sea coasts of Northumbria . The Annals of Ulster record the defeat of an Irish fleet from the kingdom of Ulaid by Vikings " on the coast of England " at about this time . 
 In this period the Chronicle of the Kings of Alba reports the death of Cormac mac <unk> , king of Munster , in the eighth year of Constantine 's reign . This is followed by an undated entry which was formerly read as " In his time Domnall [ i.e. Dyfnwal ] , king of the [ Strathclyde ] Britons died , and Domnall son of Áed was elected " . This was thought to record the election of a brother of Constantine named Domnall to the kingship of the Britons of Strathclyde and was seen as early evidence of the domination of Strathclyde by the kings of Alba . The entry in question is now read as " ... <unk> ... and Domnall son Áed king of <unk> died " , this Domnall being a son of Áed Findliath who died on 21 March 915 . Finally , the deaths of Flann Sinna and Niall Glúndub are recorded . 
 There are more reports of Viking fleets in the Irish Sea from 914 onwards . By 916 fleets under Sihtric Cáech and Ragnall , said to be grandsons of Ímar ( that is , they belonged to the same Uí Ímair kindred as the Ímar who was killed in 904 ) , were very active in Ireland . Sihtric inflicted a heavy defeat on the armies of Leinster and retook Dublin in 917 . The following year Ragnall appears to have returned across the Irish sea intent on establishing himself as king at York . The only precisely dated event in the summer of 918 is the death of Queen Æthelflæd on 12 June 918 at Tamworth , Staffordshire . Æthelflæd had been negotiating with the Northumbrians to obtain their submission , but her death put an end to this and her successor , her brother Edward the Elder , was occupied with securing control of Mercia . 
 The northern part of Northumbria , and perhaps the whole kingdom , had probably been ruled by Ealdred son of Eadulf since 913 . Faced with Ragnall 's invasion , Ealdred came north seeking assistance from Constantine . The two advanced south to face Ragnall , and this led to a battle somewhere on the banks of the River Tyne , probably at Corbridge where Dere Street crosses the river . The Battle of Corbridge appears to have been indecisive ; the Chronicle of the Kings of Alba is alone in giving Constantine the victory . 
 The report of the battle in the Annals of Ulster says that none of the kings or mormaers among the men of Alba were killed . This is the first surviving use of the word mormaer ; other than the knowledge that Constantine 's kingdom had its own bishop or bishops and royal villas , this is the only hint to the institutions of the kingdom . 
 After Corbridge , Ragnall enjoyed only a short respite . In the south , Alfred 's son Edward had rapidly secured control of Mercia and had a burh constructed at Bakewell in the Peak District from which his armies could easily strike north . An army from Dublin led by Ragnall 's kinsman Sihtric struck at north @-@ western Mercia in 919 , but in 920 or 921 Edward met with Ragnall and other kings . The Anglo @-@ Saxon Chronicle states that these king " chose Edward as father and lord " . Among the other kings present were Constantine , Ealdred son of Eadwulf , and the king of Strathclyde , either Dyfnwal II or , more probably , Owen I. Here , again , a new term appears in the record , the Anglo @-@ Saxon Chronicle for the first time using the word <unk> , from which Scots derives , to describe the inhabitants of Constantine 's kingdom in its report of these events . 
 Edward died in 924 . His realms appear to have been divided with the West Saxons recognising Ælfweard while the Mercians chose Æthelstan who had been raised at Æthelflæd 's court . Ælfweard died within weeks of his father and Æthelstan was inaugurated as king of all of Edward 's lands in 925 . 
 = = Æthelstan = = 
 By 926 Sihtric had evidently acknowledged Æthelstan as over @-@ king , adopting Christianity and marrying a sister of Æthelstan at Tamworth . Within the year he may have abandoned his new faith and repudiated his wife , but before Æthelstan and he could fight , Sihtric died suddenly in 927 . His kinsman , perhaps brother , Gofraid , who had remained as his deputy in Dublin , came from Ireland to take power in York , but failed . Æthelstan moved quickly , seizing much of Northumbria . In less than a decade , the kingdom of the English had become by far the greatest power in Britain and Ireland , perhaps stretching as far north as the Firth of Forth . 
 John of Worcester 's chronicle suggests that Æthelstan faced opposition from Constantine , from Owain of Strathclyde , and from the Welsh kings . William of Malmesbury writes that Gofraid , together with Sihtric 's young son Olaf Cuaran fled north and received refuge from Constantine , which led to war with Æthelstan . A meeting at Eamont Bridge on 12 July 927 was sealed by an agreement that Constantine , Owen of Strathclyde , Hywel Dda , and Ealdred would " renounce all idolatry " : that is , they would not ally with the Viking kings . William states that Æthelstan stood godfather to a son of Constantine , probably Indulf ( Ildulb mac Constantín ) , during the conference . 
 Æthelstan followed up his advances in the north by securing the recognition of the Welsh kings . For the next seven years , the record of events in the north is blank . Æthelstan 's court was attended by the Welsh kings , but not by Constantine or Owen of Strathclyde . This absence of record means that Æthelstan 's reasons for marching north against Constantine in 934 are unclear . 
 Æthelstan 's campaign is reported by in brief by the Anglo @-@ Saxon Chronicle , and later chroniclers such as John of Worcester , William of Malmesbury , Henry of Huntingdon , and Symeon of Durham add detail to that bald account . Æthelstan 's army began gathering at Winchester by 28 May 934 , and reached Nottingham by 7 June . He was accompanied by many leaders , including the Welsh kings Hywel Dda , Idwal Foel , and Morgan ab Owain . From Mercia the army went north , stopping at Chester @-@ le @-@ Street , before resuming the march accompanied by a fleet of ships . Owen of Strathclyde was defeated and Symeon states that the army went as far north as Dunnottar and Fortriu , while the fleet is said to have raided Caithness , by which a much larger area , including Sutherland , is probably intended . It is unlikely that Constantine 's personal authority extended so far north , and while the attacks may have been directed at his allies , they may also have been simple looting expeditions . 
 The Annals of Clonmacnoise state that " the Scottish men compelled [ Æthelstan ] to return without any great victory " , while Henry of Huntingdon claims that the English faced no opposition . A negotiated settlement may have ended matters : according to John of Worcester , a son of Constantine was given as a hostage to Æthelstan and Constantine himself accompanied the English king on his return south . He witnessed a charter with Æthelstan at Buckingham on 13 September 934 in which he is described as subregulus , that is a king acknowledging Æthelstan 's overlordship . The following year , Constantine was again in England at Æthelstan 's court , this time at Cirencester where he appears as a witness , appearing as the first of several subject kings , followed by Owen of Strathclyde and Hywel Dda , who subscribed to the diploma . At Christmas of 935 , Owen of Strathclyde was once more at Æthelstan 's court along with the Welsh kings , but Constantine was not . His return to England less than two years later would be in very different circumstances . 
 = = Brunanburh and after = = 
 Following his disappearance from Æthelstan 's court after 935 , there is no further report of Constantine until 937 . In that year , together with Owen of Strathclyde and Olaf Guthfrithson of Dublin , Constantine invaded England . The resulting battle of Brunanburh — Dún <unk> — is reported in the Annals of Ulster as follows : 
 a great battle , lamentable and terrible was cruelly fought ... in which fell uncounted thousands of the Northmen . ... And on the other side , a multitude of Saxons fell ; but Æthelstan , the king of the Saxons , obtained a great victory . 
 The battle was remembered in England a generation later as " the Great Battle " . When reporting the battle , the Anglo @-@ Saxon Chronicle abandons its usual terse style in favour of a heroic poem vaunting the great victory . In this the " hoary " Constantine , by now around 60 years of age , is said to have lost a son in the battle , a claim which the Chronicle of the Kings of Alba confirms . The Annals of Clonmacnoise give his name as Cellach . For all its fame , the site of the battle is uncertain and several sites have been advanced , with Bromborough on the Wirral the most favoured location . 
 Brunanburh , for all that it had been a famous and bloody battle , settled nothing . On 27 October 939 Æthelstan , the " pillar of the dignity of the western world " in the words of the Annals of Ulster , died at Malmesbury . He was succeeded by his brother Edmund , then aged 18 . Æthelstan 's empire , seemingly made safe by the victory of Brunanburh , collapsed in little more than a year from his death when Amlaíb returned from Ireland and seized Northumbria and the Mercian Danelaw . Edmund spent the remainder of Constantín 's reign rebuilding the empire . 
 For Constantine 's last years as king there is only the meagre record of the Chronicle of the Kings of Alba . The death of Æthelstan is reported , as are two others . The first of these , in 938 , is that of <unk> , mormaer of Angus or son of the mormaer . Unlike the report of 918 , on this occasion the title mormaer is attached to a geographical area , but it is unknown whether the Angus of 938 was in any way similar to the later <unk> or earldom . The second death , entered with that of Æthelstan , is that of Eochaid mac Ailpín , who may , from his name , have been a kinsman of Constantín . 
 = = Abdication and posterity = = 
 By the early 940s Constantine was an old man , perhaps more than 70 years of age . The kingdom of Alba was too new to be said to have a customary rule of succession , but Pictish and Irish precedents favoured an adult successor descended from Kenneth MacAlpin . Constantine 's surviving son Indulf , probably baptised in 927 , would have been too young to be a serious candidate for the kingship in the early 940s , and the obvious heir was Constantine 's nephew , Malcolm I. As Malcolm was born no later than 901 , by the 940s he was no longer a young man , and may have been impatient . Willingly or not — the 11th @-@ century Prophecy of Berchán , a verse history in the form of a supposed prophecy , states that it was not a voluntary decision — Constantine abdicated in 943 and entered a monastery , leaving the kingdom to Malcolm . 
 Although his retirement may have been involuntary , the Life of Cathróe of Metz and the Prophecy of Berchán portray Constantine as a devout king . The monastery which Constantine retired to , and where he is said to have been abbot , was probably that of St Andrews . This had been refounded in his reign and given to the reforming Céli Dé ( Culdee ) movement . The Céli Dé were subsequently to be entrusted with many monasteries throughout the kingdom of Alba until replaced in the 12th century by new orders imported from France . 
 Seven years later the Chronicle of the Kings of Alba says : 
 [ Malcolm I ] plundered the English as far as the river Tees , and he seized a multitude of people and many herds of cattle : and the Scots called this the raid of <unk> , that is , <unk> . But others say that Constantine made this raid , asking of the king , Malcolm , that the kingship should be given to him for a week 's time , so that he could visit the English . In fact , it was Malcolm who made the raid , but Constantine incited him , as I have said . 
 Woolf suggests that the association of Constantine with the raid is a late addition , one derived from a now @-@ lost saga or poem . 
 Constantine 's death in 952 is recorded by the Irish annals , who enter it among ecclesiastics . His son Indulf would become king on Malcolm 's death . The last of Constantine 's certain descendants to be king in Alba was a great @-@ grandson , Constantine III ( Constantín mac <unk> ) . Another son had died at Brunanburh , and , according to John of Worcester , Amlaíb mac Gofraid was married to a daughter of Constantine . It is possible that Constantine had other children , but like the name of his wife , or wives , this has not been recorded . 
 The form of kingdom which appeared in Constantine 's reign continued in much the same way until the Davidian Revolution in the 12th century . As with his ecclesiastical reforms , his political legacy was the creation of a new form of Scottish kingship that lasted for two centuries after his death . 
 = Portrait Diptych of Dürer 's Parents = 
 Portrait Diptych of Dürer 's Parents ( or Dürer 's Parents with <unk> ) is the collective name for two small late @-@ 15th century portrait panels by the German painter and printmaker Albrecht Dürer . They show the artist 's parents , Barbara Holper ( c . 1451 – 1514 ) and Albrecht Dürer the Elder ( c . 1427 – 1502 ) , when she was around 39 and he was 63 years . The portraits are unflinching records of the physical and emotional effects of ageing . The Dürer family was close and Dürer may have intended the panels either to display his skill to his parents or as keepsakes while he travelled soon after as a journeyman painter . 
 They were created either as pendants , that is conceived as a pair and intended to hang alongside each other , or diptych wings . However this formation may have been a later conception ; Barbara 's portrait seems to have been executed some time after her husband 's and it is unusual for a husband to be placed to the viewer 's right in paired panels . His father 's panel is considered the superior work and has been described as one of Dürer 's most exact and honest portraits . They are among four paintings or drawings Dürer made of his parents , each of which unsentimentally examines the deteriorating effects of age . His later writings contain eulogies for both parents , from which the love and respect he felt toward them is evident . 
 Each panel measured 47 @.@ 5 cm x 39 @.@ 5 cm ( 18 @.@ 7 in x 15 @.@ 6 in ) , but the left hand panel has been cut down . They have been separated since at least 1628 , until Barbara 's portrait — long considered lost — was <unk> in 1977 . The panels were reunited in the Germanisches Nationalmuseum 's 2012 exhibition " The Early Dürer " . 
 = = Description = = 
 Albrecht the Elder was 62 or 63 when his panel was painted early in 1490 . Barbara 's portrait may have been completed soon after , when she would have been around 39 . Their son was around 18 and had just completed his apprenticeship with Michael Wolgemut , and would soon leave for Nuremberg to travel as a journeyman painter . The father panel was painted first ; for aesthetic reasons Dürer may have waited a year or two until his mother looked older . 
 The sitters are presented in three @-@ quarter view before flat , nondescript lacquer @-@ like green backgrounds , which although lushly coloured , are thinly layered . Each has a white ground and light red <unk> with lead content . The sitter 's form and pose echo and in many ways counterbalance each other . Brand Philip draws attention to the similarities of the panels ' linear construction , especially the manner in which the folds and lines of their clothing form triangular shapes . The train of Barbara 's headdress across her chest corresponds with the opening of Albrecht 's fur @-@ lined coat . It was more usual in pendant portraits of this type for the male to be on the left @-@ hand side ; the positioning here may be an indication that Dürer originally intended his father 's panel to stand alone , given that Barbara 's was painted some time later . 
 Albrecht the Elder 's panel is regarded as the superior of the two works . This may in part be attributed to differing contemporary treatments of male and female portraits ; men were allowed more individuality , while female portraits were bound by stereotypes and were not as daring , for example showing evidence of ageing . In either case , the father painting is far more closely detailed , especially in the lining of clothing , which is summary in Barbara 's panel , compared to the long seam of her husband 's gown . This contrast in detail can also be seen in the treatment of the rosaries , which are given prominence and a glowing red colour in his panel , but are small and relegated in hers . 
 Albrecht the Elder 's panel is usually , but not always , thought to be the first of the two to be executed and , if so , is the earliest extant example of his son 's painting . In contrast , a number of art historians have noted that his mother 's portrait contains bland passages , especially around the eyes and may be a near @-@ contemporary copy of a lost original . Lotte Brand Philip believes the clumsiness in the mother panel indicated that Dürer painted it first , as a youthful attempt at portraiture , and that Albrecht the Elder might have later " commissioned " his own portrait to pair with Barbara 's . Recent technical examination of the two panels confirms that Barbara 's portrait was painted later than her husband 's . 
 = = = Barbara Holper = = = 
 Barbara Holper was the daughter of Hieronymus Holper , under whom Albrecht the Elder served his apprenticeship as a goldsmith . The two men became friends , and when she came of age Holper gave his daughter into marriage when Dürer senior was 40 and she was 15 . The couple were compatible , well @-@ matched and fond of each other . Yet their son 's writings detail their difficult lives and many setbacks ; three of their 18 children survived into adulthood – 17 of whom had been born by the time of this portrait . After her husband died Barbara was destitute and went to live with her son . After she in turn died in 1514 , her son wrote " This my pious Mother ... often had the plague and many other severe and strange illnesses , and she suffered great poverty , scorn , contempt , mocking words , terrors , and great adversities . Yet she bore no malice . Also she died hard ... I felt so grieved for her that I cannot express it . " 
 Barbara is shown wearing a red dress and a matte white bonnet which fully covers her hair , indicating her marital status . Her headdress is draped with a long scarf or train which stretches down her neck and across her left shoulder , contrasting in colour and shape against the black head @-@ wear of her husband . The lines of her face contain touches of white paint to give a highlighting and enlivening effect ; they are especially evident around her eyes , the bridge of her nose and around her upper lip . Barbara was attractive in her youth ; her son described her as having been " comely and of erect bearing " . However , by the time of this portrait the effects of time and losing so many children weigh heavily on her face . The panel was grounded with white paint , while the composition seems to have changed significantly from the <unk> . Faint traces of the original figuration are visible in parts of the background and in the darkened areas of her hood . At some point the panel was cut down at the left side , shifting the compositional balance and removing a portion of her shoulder and headdress . 
 The panel closely resembles Dürer 's 1514 drawing Portrait of the artist 's mother at the age of 63 . David Price writes of the drawing 's " rough depiction of her flesh emaciated by old age " , and the " existential piety in the cast of Barbara Dürer 's right eye , which , almost unnaturally , directs her vision heavenward " . Although Barbara is some 25 years older in the later drawing and by then terminally ill , the facial resemblance and pose are unmistakable . However , there is a dramatic difference between the relatively young looking 39 @-@ year @-@ old woman in the diptych and the aged and terminally ill widow in the 1514 drawing . A family resemblance can be detected between both works and Dürer 's Vienna self @-@ portrait ; most evidently around the mouth . <unk> concludes that these passages are so closely modeled that it is reasonable to presume they were drawn by the same hand , but is conservative in saying definitively that the sitters were related by blood , as Dürer was very young , and though precociously talented , to some extent still reliant on facial " types " . 
 = = = Albrecht Dürer the Elder = = = 
 Dürer 's father wears a dark shirt , russet coat and a black hat lined with fur . His skin is slack at the mouth and chin , and he has small , intelligent eyes , which Von <unk> describes as " dark and serious " . Their curves echo those of the heavy lids beneath . His eyes are lined with crow 's feet and shadowed with brown hatched paint . His facial features are built from brush strokes more typical of drawing than painting — at this young age Dürer was a far more skilled draughtsman than painter . Technical analysis carried out in 2013 by Dagmar Hirschfelder revealed a detailed background which was over @-@ painted by the artist . The abandoned interior space consisted of a corner of a room with an arched window looking out to a countryside view . This type of interior can be traced to the Netherlandish tradition , and is rare in German portraiture of the period . 
 Albrecht the Elder 's lips are thin and tightly pursed and his mouth is broad and down @-@ turned , yet his features are those of a handsome man . Marcel Brion described him as appearing " mild and thoughtful " , an impression reinforced by the uncomplicated design of the painting . This view is reinforced by the relative drabness or simplicity of his clothes , which seem intended to convey a reserved , ascetic piousness . Dürer presents his father more like a low @-@ ranking ecclesiastic than a tradesman : a calm , considerate and straightforward man dressed up in his best , albeit modest , clothes . After his father 's death in 1502 , Dürer wrote that Albrecht the Elder " passed his life in great toil and stern hard labour , having nothing for his support save what he earned with his hand for himself , his wife and his children ... He underwent manifold afflictions , trials and adversities . But he won just praise from all who knew him ... he was also of few words , and was a God @-@ fearing man . " 
 Martin Conway describes the portrayal of a dignified man marked by a grave expression and deep " furrows ploughed by seventy years of labour and sorrow " . Conway believed the strength of the portrait is in part achieved through Dürer 's ability to convey this hardship , while at the same time presenting a man still imbued with traces of pride , and possessing " a kind old face " . Noting the obvious affection between the father and son as well as the half smile of the older man , he wonders if that grin might have been born of Albrecht the Elder 's satisfaction that his toil has been rewarded by a son of such talent , who was now about to set out on the world for his <unk> . A contributing factor to this pride is that Albrecht the Elder trained his son in his own profession , as a jeweller , but at one point came to regret the choice of apprenticeship as the younger man was so obviously suited to drawing and painting . However , his son learned many skills during that period and it gave him a discipline with his hands that became a defining factor of his work , especially in his ability as an engraver . 
 Conway described the panel as indicating " an astonishing depth of psychological insight " for an artist not yet 20 years old . In its simple design and detail it shares many of the characteristics of , and is a key precursor to , Dürer 's mature work . He portrayed his father again in 1497 , when the older man would have been around 70 . He has aged noticeably in the intervening seven years : his skin is <unk> , the wrinkles deeper and more pronounced . In this later portrait Dürer seems at pains to convey these effects of ageing , which are all too evident on his father 's face . According to Brion , his eyes have lost their " distant , mystic " appearance and now seem less contented . Conway agrees , seeing traces of <unk> agitation , but holds that the two paintings convey a similar overall highly favourable and compassionate impression of the man . 
 = = = The panels = = = 
 Each canvas is mounted on two boards of equal width , which have been cut vertically and appear have come from the same tree . Tree @-@ ring dating of the wood suggests it was felled around 1482 . Wood intended for use in panel painting was generally allowed to mature for around 10 years , giving an approximate dates of 1490 – 92 for the works . The panels are covered with canvas made of fine but loosely woven linen , and <unk> in white paint . Whether Dürer prepared the panels himself or purchased them already prepared is unknown . 
 The father panel is signed and dated on both sides , in what may be the oldest extant instance of Dürer 's signature monogram of a large open A and small d . However this inscription and the 1490 date are later additions . The Florence canvas is in relatively poor condition : retouching has largely removed Dürer 's top layer of brushwork and left the paint hard and dry . Barbara 's panel underwent a restoration in 1974 , when the surface was cleaned and partially <unk> , with repairs to damage on the reverse sustained from woodboring . 
 The reverse of Albrecht 's panel contains a rendition of the allied Dürer and Holper families ' coats of arms , which are shown beneath a winged Moor wearing a red dress . The Dürer family are represented by a crest showing an open door , a pun on the word Dürer ( <unk> meaning ' <unk> ' ) . Albrecht the Elder was born in the Hungarian village of <unk> . <unk> is Hungarian for " door " — when his parents moved to Germany their name changed from Tür to <unk> . The Holper crest features a stag , but its significance is lost . The back of Barbara 's panel contains imagery of a dragon in a lightning storm set against a rocky landscape or cliff . 
 = = Provenance and attribution = = 
 After the painter 's death in 1528 , the portraits were held by his brother , and then his brother 's widow before they passed into the collection of Willibald Imhoff , a grandson of Dürer 's friend Willibald <unk> . Inventories from the Imhoff collection from 1573 – 74 , 1580 and 1588 list both panels . The next surviving Imhoff inventory , of 1628 , again lists the mother 's portrait , but it disappears after mention in the 1633 – 58 account books of Hans Hieronymus Imhoff , after which its whereabouts became unknown . Dürer expert Matthias Mende described the missing portrait of Barbara Holper as " among the most severe losses in the Dürer oeuvre " . 
 In 1977 , art historian Lotte Brand Philip proposed that Unknown Woman in a Coif , held by the Germanisches Nationalmuseum in Nuremberg , was the original portrait of Barbara Holper . The Nuremberg panel was previously thought to have originated from a member of Wolgemut 's workshop , a Franconian artist in his circle , or the anonymous Mainz painter Master W. B. Brand Philip 's attribution was based on striking similarities in composition and its shared tone , theme and size with the father panel at the Uffizi . In both works the sitters are holding rosary beads , and Dürer attentively describes their hands . Both portraits show the sitter in the same pose , against a similarly coloured background . Both are lit from the upper left . The boards are identically cut in width and depth , although 3 cm was removed from the left edge of Barbara 's panel . Brand Philip noted the similarities between the panel and Dürer 's 1514 charcoal drawing Portrait of the Artist 's Mother at the Age of 63 . <unk> <unk> agreed with the attribution , noting that both portraits bear , on their reverse , the catalogue number recorded in the Imhoff inventories , as well as " precisely the same design of masses of dark clouds " . 
 <unk> speculated that the father 's portrait , which was not listed in the 1628 Imhoff inventory , had been broken off and sold to Rudolph II of Austria . Hans Hieronymus Imhoff 's lukewarm description of Barbara 's portrait — " the mother of Albrecht Dürer in oil colors on wood , [ but ] there are many who do not believe it to be a work of Dürer " — led Brand Philip to conclude that Albrecht 's panel was likely sold individually as the more accomplished and marketable of the two . The attribution is widely accepted today . In 2013 Stephan <unk> noted the sophistication of the Nuremberg portrait and that its three @-@ dimensional modeling of the head displays a level of skill beyond Wolgemut and his circle . 
 The two panels were reunited in 2012 during a Dürer exhibition in Nuremberg having been separated since sometime between 1588 and 1628 . 
 = The Inbetweeners 2 = 
 The Inbetweeners 2 is a 2014 British comedy film and sequel to The Inbetweeners Movie ( 2011 ) , which is based on the E4 sitcom The Inbetweeners . It was written and directed by series creators Damon Beesley and Iain Morris . 
 The film involves four school friends who meet up again for a holiday in Australia , and stars Simon Bird , Joe Thomas , James Buckley and Blake Harrison . In media interviews , the film 's writers and actors stated that it was to be an end to the series . 
 The Inbetweeners 2 was released on 6 August 2014 in the United Kingdom and the Republic of Ireland , to positive reception from critics . It surpassed the record of its predecessor for the highest gross on the opening day of a comedy in the UK , with £ 2 @.@ 75 million , and ended its first weekend with a gross of £ 12 @.@ 5 million , the largest opening of any film in 2014 , then remained on top for a second week . With an overall gross of £ 33 @.@ 3 million , it was the highest @-@ grossing British film in the domestic market in 2014 . On 21 August , it was released in Australia , to a mixed reception , and topped the box office in its opening weekend . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Will , Neil and Jay 's girlfriends have all broken up with them since the events of the last film , and Simon is unhappy with his girlfriend Lucy , who has become obsessive and abusive . Simon and Will are depressed and ostracised at university ; Neil is working in a bank ; and Jay is taking a gap year in Australia . He emails Neil , claiming that he is now a top DJ at a popular night club , lives in a luxury mansion , and has daily sex with multiple partners . This convinces them to visit him in Australia for their Easter holidays . Once they arrive at the club they find that Jay in fact only works as a toilet attendant , while Will meets Katie , an old friend from his private school days , who is backpacking , and she persuades him to join her . 
 The next day , the four travel to a youth hostel in Byron Bay , as Will wants to follow Katie there . He attempts to become friends with one of the backpackers , Ben , but is unsuccessful when the backpackers quickly deduce that he is a tourist , rather than a " traveller " . Will struggles to fit in with the ' spiritual ' activities of the travellers and discovers that Katie is seeing multiple people at once , launching him into one of his foul @-@ mouthed tirades towards them , which leads Katie into having sex with Ben . 
 The boys and the backpackers visit a water park , where Jay intends to find his ex @-@ girlfriend , Jane . The park staff tell Jay that Jane has found a new job in the vast Outback , which leaves Jay feeling very dejected . Lucy tells Simon via Skype that Jane is working on a stud farm in the remote settlement of <unk> , and the boys intend to drive there . Their car runs out of petrol in the middle of the desert . The group hold hands together as they realise that they will most likely die , but are rescued by Jane and her co @-@ workers . She realises how far Jay came to win her over again , and although she is touched by the gesture , she does not take him back . Back at Jay 's uncle 's house , the boys find that their parents have travelled to find them after hearing of their near @-@ death experience . The boys are shocked to find Mr Gilbert ( their old head of sixth form and Will 's nemesis ) there too , and Will 's mother announces that she and Gilbert are in a relationship , to the abject horror of Will and amusement of the other three friends . Over Skype , Lucy breaks @-@ up with Simon because she is now in a relationship with his university ' best friend ' Pete , which Simon responds to by cheering and abruptly hanging @-@ up on her . 
 The four boys decide to travel to Vietnam in a montage during the film 's credits . As they return to England , Neil begins a relationship with one of the travellers while Will 's mother reveals that she and Gilbert are engaged . Will attempts to run back to the plane , but is wrestled to the ground by security . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Daisy Ridley 's scenes were cut from the final version . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Origin = = = 
 Although originally intended as an unambiguous ending to the television series , the unexpected popularity and box office success of The Inbetweeners Movie led to speculation over the possibility of a sequel . These rumours began in early September 2011 , while the film was still in cinemas , and were denied by its writers and actors . Around the same time , producer Christopher Young openly recognised the possibility of another film based on the series , claiming that " if there is a sequel it will come from the creative elements ... We 've talked about it . In the short term people are dispersing and doing other things but I 'm sure in the medium term a sequel is very possible . It won 't be immediate but it 's definitely not closed . " Co @-@ writer Damon Beesley later admitted " we didn 't know how successful it would be and that it would have a life on screen . But they did translate to big @-@ screen characters , people did care about them and did go back and see it more than once – and that 's very rare in cinema . The idea of not following that up seemed insane to most people " . The actors had mixed emotions on making a sequel . Although Buckley and Thomas felt put off by the success of the first film , Harrison and Bird became convinced on reading the script . 
 Iain Morris received inspiration for the film from his own experiences as a high school exchange student on Australia 's Gold Coast , describing it as " a place where people go to get drunk , pick some fruit and get drunk again " . 
 = = = Development = = = 
 On 21 August 2012 , it was announced that a sequel was in early stages of pre @-@ production . On 8 November , it was announced by series creators Morris and Beesley that a script was being written and it was at " version 0 @.@ 5 " On 1 May 2013 , it was announced that , although nothing had been signed , a sequel was in the planning stage possibly set in Australia and to be released sometime in 2014 . 
 On 2 August 2013 , the sequel was officially confirmed for release in August 2014 . The series ' Facebook page revealed on 15 March 2014 that the sequel would be released on 6 August 2014 . 
 On 9 May 2014 , a teaser trailer was released , in which the characters drive through the Outback and call an Aborigine a " fire wanker " . A second trailer , this time full length , was released on The Inbetweeners official Facebook page on 18 June , showing more of the storyline . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 Filming began in Australia on 7 December 2013 , before moving to the UK in January 2014 . Part of the film was shot in <unk> , South Australia , an isolated Outback settlement without mobile reception or Internet . 
 Ben Palmer , the director of the first Inbetweeners film , was involved with Simon Pegg 's film Man Up , so Morris and Beesley directed The Inbetweeners 2 . Bird said that the actors were initially disheartened by the absence of Palmer , and nervous about the direction of Morris and Beesley due to their lack of experience in the position . 
 Morris had considered filming the Australian scenes in South Africa due to the comparatively high costs in Australia , which despite a higher budget caused the sequel to have fewer resources than its predecessor . While all locations for the first film had been within 10 minutes of the hotel , locations in the second were separated by a three @-@ hour flight and nine @-@ hour car journey . During filming in the Outback , the Australian crew provided two doctors and 40 litres of IV fluid , although the only point in which a doctor was called was when Buckley thought that he was having a heart attack , which was in reality indigestion from chips and lager . Beesley considered it " the maniac 's choice of a film to be your first film " . The water park scenes were filmed at Wet 'n'Wild Gold Coast , which Thomas described as " some quite challenging scenes " . 
 When asked whether he ever felt averse to any material in the film due to perceived offence , Morris said that the crew 's attitude was " let ’ s shoot everything , push it , and then if it feels like too much when we ’ re watching it , we can always pull it back in the editing room " . 
 = = Release = = 
 The film premiered at Leicester Square , London , on 5 August 2014 . In attendance were guests including Beverley Knight , Union J and Alex Zane . In Australia it was distributed by Roadshow Entertainment and released on 21 August . The same company took the film to New Zealand a week later . 
 = = = Box office = = = 
 The Inbetweeners 2 grossed £ 2 @.@ 75 million on its opening day of 6 August 2014 , surpassing its predecessor as the top grossing opening day in the UK for a comedy film . By the end of its first weekend , it topped the UK box office with a gross of £ 12 @.@ 5 million , surpassing Transformers : Age of Extinction ( £ 11 @.@ 7 million ) as the largest UK opening in 2014 ; this , however , was less than the £ 13 @.@ 2 million opening of The Inbetweeners Movie in 2011 . It topped the box office for a second week , in which it grossed £ 9 @.@ 83 million . In its third week , it fell to second spot behind new release Lucy . 
 In its opening week in Australia , the film grossed $ 3 @.@ 155 million in Australian dollars , topping the box office and pushing Guardians of the Galaxy into second place . It fell to second place in its second week , with Guardians of the Galaxy returning to top spot . 
 As of 12 October 2014 , the film had made $ 55 @,@ 652 @,@ 783 in the United Kingdom , $ 6 @,@ 598 @,@ 273 in Australia , and $ 473 @,@ 316 in New Zealand . 
 With an overall gross of £ 33 @.@ 3 million , The Inbetweeners 2 was the highest grossing British or Irish film in the domestic market in 2014 , ahead of Paddington ( £ 27 @.@ 9 million ) . It was the third highest grossing of any film in the UK and Ireland in 2014 , after The Lego Movie and The Hobbit : The Battle of the Five Armies . 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 Of the thirty @-@ five reviews surveyed by review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes , 69 % of reviews were positive . On Metacritic , the film has a 55 / 100 rating based on 7 critics , indicating " mixed or average reviews " . 
 = = = = United Kingdom = = = = 
 Robbie Collin of The Daily Telegraph gave the film four stars out of five , saying " Perhaps the biggest compliment you could pay the film , apart from that it ’ s by and large hysterically funny , is that it is unmistakably film @-@ like , with a smoothly arcing plot and gross @-@ out moments staged with the verve and ceremony of an action @-@ movie set @-@ piece . " In The Guardian , Mike <unk> gave the film three stars . He found fault in its treatment of female characters , saying " Some of the abundant thought channelled into knob gags could have been diverted towards developing the boys ' female counterparts beyond harpies and lust objects " . Unlike Collin , he found The Inbetweeners 2 to resemble a television show more than a film : " as with the first film , number 2 never quite shakes its resemblance to primetime E4 , complete with ad @-@ ready <unk> and Walkabout interiors ... couldn 't the vehicles transporting them to the wider world display slightly more ambition ? " . Chris Hewitt of Empire magazine gave the film four stars out of five , summing it up as " The <unk> Four leave us on a poo @-@ flecked , piss @-@ soaked , sun @-@ burned high that more than overcomes its familiar flaws to become a real contender for the year ’ s funniest film . Four star wankers " . 
 A negative review came from Graham Young of the Birmingham Mail , who found the film 's humour to be repetitive : " Damon Beesley and Iain Morris have both directed this sequel which lacks an emotional arc to create momentum ... Yes , it can be funny , and you ’ d have to be a prude not to laugh ... But the endless , alliterative phrases for sex and countless in @-@ your @-@ face sight gags dilute the characters and turn the mood <unk> lewd . Like Nick Frost ’ s The Cuban Fury [ sic ] earlier this year , The Inbetweeners 2 takes a funny premise – and then ruins it . " Writing in The Observer , Jonathan Romney gave the film two stars out of five , summing it up as " British TV comedy 's favourite Four Stooges take another holiday , resulting in <unk> poo , pee and puke , rampant misogyny , ' ironic ' rampant misogyny , rampant ' irony ' , and that old Carry On staple , horror of sex ( especially among the over @-@ 25s ) " . He however predicted that on the record of the first film , The Inbetweeners 2 would be a financial success . In Time Out , Tom Huddleston gave the film one star out of five , saying " ‘ The Inbetweeners 2 ’ is riddled with contempt : for its characters , for its audience and most notably for the entire female gender . That a film in 2014 can still get away with depicting all women as either dumb , hapless <unk> or ball @-@ busting <unk> is frankly unbelievable . " 
 = = = = Australia = = = = 
 In Australia , Matthew Toomey , a film critic for 612 ABC Brisbane , gave The Inbetweeners 2 a B + . He said " Don ’ t expect a deep , underlying narrative . This is just a bunch of horny teenagers doing really dumb things . To each their own ... but I was entertained . First and foremost , it shocked me – and that ’ s not easy given how many movies I watch . It pushes the envelope a lot further than I expected and I 'd highly recommend seeing the film in a packed cinema . The audience reactions would be hilarious . " Louise Keller of Urban Cinefile wrote a mixed review , stating that the film takes a long time to " get going " due to a " silly establishment skit " . However , she concluded that " there is genuine affection with which the filmmakers portray their characters and as a consequence , the level of offence is lessened to some degree " . Simon Miraudo of Quickflix gave the film three stars out of five , calling it " the biggest ribbing since The Simpsons invaded [ Australia 's ] shores " . Although opining that the film was " slightly more insensitive to its female leads than previous efforts " , he concluded that a scene in which faeces chase Will down a waterslide " challenges Caddyshack for the mantle of ' Best Ever S * * * in Water ' gag " . 
 In the Herald Sun , Leigh Paatsch gave the film one star . He criticised the casting , describing the main characters as " supposed to be aged about 20 [ but ] played by blokes who all look as if they ’ re 30 @-@ plus , and carry on as if they ’ re not yet 10 " , and also found the film misogynistic , saying " the derogatory manner in which women are spoken of ( and often depicted ) is relentlessly , callously crass . Sometimes even hateful " . A mixed review from Philippa Hawker of the Sydney Morning Herald concluded " The Australian elements seem hastily inserted and incidental : the movie could have been set in any country that had a water park and a place to get lost . But as a hymn to male bonding , and an exploration of the comic possibilities of what happens when a turd hits a water slide , The Inbetweeners 2 is a precisely crafted , assured piece of work " . 
 = = = Home media = = = 
 The Inbetweeners 2 was released on DVD and Blu @-@ ray in the United Kingdom on 1 December 2014 . A DVD edition also including the first film was released at the same time . 
 The DVD featured two audio commentaries — one with Morris and Beesley and the other by the four lead actors — in addition to a behind @-@ the @-@ scenes featurette , deleted scenes , and a blooper reel . The film 's release on home media was sponsored by STA Travel , who offered a prize of a holiday to the Australian state of Queensland . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 At its premiere on 5 August 2014 , Bird said of the film : 
 In an interview with the BBC , Thomas said that Morris and Beesley had been " very adamant " that the series had finished . On his co @-@ stars , he added " There is a bond there that I think would be a stupid thing to waste . You don 't get that bond very often with other performers and we do have it and it 's a valuable thing " . 
 In the same interview , when asked whether the series had finished , both co @-@ creators answered with a simultaneous " Yes ! " . Morris expressed that " I think the time is right . After the first film , I wanted to hear more from Jay , Will , Neil and Simon . But this time I feel there is enough . There is more than enough Jay in this world " , and Beesley added " The end of the story has always felt like the time where they go off and start living their adult life . And I think this film takes us up to that point " . 
 Various media outlets blamed The Inbetweeners 2 for an increase in a craze of deliberate defecation in swimming pools to distress other guests . They linked the craze , known as " logging " or " Code Brown " , to a scene akin to it in the film . 
 = Bedřich Smetana = 
 Bedřich Smetana ( Czech pronunciation : [ <unk> ̝ <unk> <unk> ] ; 2 March 1824 – 12 May 1884 ) was a Czech composer who pioneered the development of a musical style which became closely identified with his country 's aspirations to independent statehood . He is thus widely regarded in his homeland as the father of Czech music . Internationally he is best known for his opera The Bartered Bride and for the symphonic cycle Má vlast ( " My Homeland " ) , which portrays the history , legends and landscape of the composer 's native land . 
 Smetana was naturally gifted as a pianist , and gave his first public performance at the age of six . After his conventional schooling , he studied music under Josef Proksch in Prague . His first nationalistic music was written during the 1848 Prague uprising , in which he briefly participated . After failing to establish his career in Prague , he left for Sweden , where he set up as a teacher and choirmaster in Gothenburg , and began to write large @-@ scale orchestral works . During this period of his life Smetana was twice married ; of six daughters , three died in infancy . 
 In the early 1860s , a more liberal political climate in Bohemia encouraged Smetana to return permanently to Prague . He threw himself into the musical life of the city , primarily as a champion of the new genre of Czech opera . In 1866 his first two operas , The Brandenburgers in Bohemia and The Bartered Bride , were premiered at Prague 's new Provisional Theatre , the latter achieving great popularity . In that same year , Smetana became the theatre 's principal conductor , but the years of his conductorship were marked by controversy . Factions within the city 's musical establishment considered his identification with the progressive ideas of Franz Liszt and Richard Wagner inimical to the development of a distinctively Czech opera style . This opposition interfered with his creative work , and may have hastened the health breakdown that precipitated his resignation from the theatre in 1874 . 
 By the end of 1874 , Smetana had become completely deaf but , freed from his theatre duties and the related controversies , he began a period of sustained composition that continued for almost the rest of his life . His contributions to Czech music were increasingly recognised and honoured , but a mental collapse early in 1884 led to his incarceration in an asylum and his subsequent death . Smetana 's reputation as the founding father of Czech music has endured in his native country , where advocates have raised his status above that of his contemporaries and successors . However , relatively few of Smetana 's works are in the international repertory , and most foreign commentators tend to regard Antonín Dvořák as a more significant Czech composer . 
 = = Biography = = 
 = = = Family background and childhood = = = 
 Bedřich Smetana was born as Friedrich Smetana on 2 March 1824 , in Litomyšl , east of Prague near the traditional border between Bohemia and Moravia , then provinces of the Habsburg Empire . He was the third child , and first son , of František Smetana and his third wife Barbora <unk> . František had fathered eight children in two earlier marriages , five daughters surviving infancy ; he and Barbora had ten more children , of whom seven reached adulthood . At this time , under Habsburg rule , German was the official language of Bohemia . František knew Czech , but for business and social reasons rarely used it , and his children were ignorant of the correct literary Czech until much later in their lives . 
 The Smetana family came from the Hradec Králové region of Bohemia . František had initially learned the trade of a brewer , and had acquired moderate wealth during the Napoleonic Wars by supplying clothing and provisions to the French Army . He subsequently managed several breweries before coming to Litomyšl in 1823 as brewer to Count Waldstein , whose Renaissance castle dominates the town . 
 The elder Smetana , although uneducated , had a natural gift for music and played in a string quartet . Bedřich was introduced to music by his father and in October 1830 , at the age of six , gave his first public performance . At a concert held in Litomyšl 's Philosophical Academy he played a piano arrangement of Auber 's overture to La muette de Portici , to a rapturous reception . In 1831 the family moved to <unk> Hradec in the south of Bohemia – the region where , a generation later , Gustav Mahler grew up . Here , Smetana attended the local elementary school and later the gymnasium . He also studied violin and piano , discovering the works of Mozart and Beethoven , and began composing simple pieces , of which one , a dance ( <unk> , or " Little Galop " ) , survives in sketch form . 
 In 1835 , František retired to a farm in the south @-@ eastern region of Bohemia . There being no suitable local school , Smetana was sent to the gymnasium at Jihlava , where he was homesick and unable to study . He then transferred to the Premonstratensian school at <unk> Brod , where he was happier and made good progress . Among the friends he made here was the future Czech revolutionary poet Karel Havlíček , whose departure for Prague in 1838 may have influenced Smetana 's own desire to experience life in the capital . The following year , with František 's approval , he enrolled at Prague 's Academic Grammar School under Josef Jungmann , a distinguished poet and linguist who was a leading figure in the movement for Czech national revival . 
 = = = Apprentice musician = = = 
 = = = = First steps = = = = 
 Smetana arrived in Prague in the autumn of 1839 . Finding Jungmann 's school uncongenial ( he was mocked by his classmates for his country manners ) , he soon began missing classes . He attended concerts , visited the opera , listened to military bands and joined an amateur string quartet for whom he composed simple pieces . After Liszt gave a series of piano recitals in the city , Smetana became convinced that he would find satisfaction only in a musical career . He confided to his journal that he wanted " to become a Mozart in composition and a Liszt in technique " . However , the Prague idyll ended when František discovered his son 's truancy , and removed him from the city . František at this time saw music as a diverting pastime , not as a career choice . Smetana was placed temporarily with his uncle in Nové <unk> , where he enjoyed a brief romance with his cousin Louisa . He commemorated their passion in Louisa 's Polka , Smetana 's earliest complete composition that has survived . 
 An older cousin , Josef Smetana , a teacher at the Premonstratensian School in Plzeň ( Pilsen ) , then offered to supervise the boy 's remaining schooling , and in the summer of 1840 Smetana departed for Plzeň . He remained there until he completed his schooling in 1843 . His skills as a pianist were in great demand at the town 's many soirées , and he enjoyed a hectic social life . This included a number of romances , the most important of which was with Kateřina <unk> , whom he had known briefly in his early childhood . Smetana was entirely captivated with her , writing in his journal : " When I am not with her I am sitting on hot coals and have no peace " . He composed several pieces for her , among which are two <unk> , a song duet , and an incomplete piano study for the left hand . He also composed his first orchestral piece , a B @-@ flat minuet . 
 = = = = Student and teacher = = = = 
 By the time Smetana completed his schooling , his father 's fortunes had declined . Although František now agreed that his son should follow a musical career , he could not provide financial support . In August 1843 Smetana departed for Prague with twenty gulden , and no immediate prospects . Lacking any formal musical training , he needed a teacher , and was introduced by Kateřina <unk> 's mother to Josef Proksch , head of the Prague Music Institute – where Kateřina was now studying . Proksch used the most modern teaching methods , drawing on Beethoven , Chopin , Berlioz and the Leipzig circle of Liszt . In January 1844 Proksch agreed to take Smetana as a pupil , and at the same time the young musician 's financial difficulties were eased when he secured an appointment as music teacher to the family of a nobleman , Count Thun . 
 For the next three years , besides teaching piano to the Thun children , Smetana studied theory and composition under Proksch . The works he composed in these years include songs , dances , bagatelles , impromptus and the G minor Piano Sonata . In 1846 Smetana attended concerts given in Prague by Berlioz , and in all likelihood met the French composer at a reception arranged by Proksch . At the home of Count Thun he met Robert and Clara Schumann , and showed them his G minor sonata , but failed to win their approval for this work — they detected too much of Berlioz in it . Meanwhile , his friendship with Kateřina blossomed . In June 1847 , on resigning his position in the Thun household , Smetana recommended her as his replacement . He then set out on a tour of Western Bohemia , hoping to establish a reputation as a concert pianist . 
 = = = Early career = = = 
 = = = = Revolutionary = = = = 
 Smetana 's concert tour to Western Bohemia was poorly supported , so he abandoned it and returned to Prague , where he made a living from private pupils and occasional appearances as an accompanist in chamber concerts . He also began work on his first major orchestral work , the Overture in D major . 
 For a brief period in 1848 , Smetana was a revolutionary . In the climate of political change and upheaval that swept through Europe in that year , a pro @-@ democracy movement in Prague led by Smetana 's old friend Karel Havlíček was urging an end to Habsburg absolutist rule and for more political autonomy . A Citizens ' Army ( " Svornost " ) was formed to defend the city against possible attack . Smetana wrote a series of patriotic works , including two marches dedicated respectively to the Czech National Guard and the Students ' Legion of the University of Prague , and The Song of Freedom to words by Ján <unk> . In June 1848 , as the Habsburg armies moved to suppress rebellious tendencies , Prague came under attack from the Austrian forces led by the Prince of Windisch @-@ Grätz . As a member of Svornost , Smetana helped to man the barricades on the Charles Bridge . The nascent uprising was quickly crushed , but Smetana avoided the imprisonment or exile received by leaders such as Havlíček . During his brief spell with Svornost , he met the writer and leading radical , Karel Sabina , who would later provide libretti for Smetana 's first two operas . 
 = = = = Piano Institute = = = = 
 Early in 1848 , Smetana wrote to Franz Liszt , whom he had not yet met , asking him to accept the dedication of a new piano work , Six Characteristic Pieces , and recommend it to a publisher . He also requested a loan of 400 gulden , to enable him to open a music school . Liszt replied cordially , accepting the dedication and promising to help find a publisher , but he offered no financial assistance . This encouragement was the beginning of a friendship that was of great value to Smetana in his subsequent career . Despite Liszt 's lack of financial support , Smetana was able to start a Piano Institute in late August 1848 , with twelve students . After a period of struggle the Institute began to flourish and became briefly fashionable , particularly among supporters of Czech nationalism in whose eyes Smetana was developing a reputation . Proksch wrote of Smetana 's support for his people 's cause , and said that he " could well become the transformer of my ideas in the Czech language . " In 1849 the Institute was relocated to the home of Kateřina 's parents , and began to attract distinguished visitors ; Liszt came regularly , and the former Austrian emperor Ferdinand , who had settled in Prague , attended the school 's matinée concerts . Smetana 's performances in these concerts became a recognised feature of Prague 's musical life . In this time of relative financial stability Smetana married Kateřina , on 27 August 1849 . Four daughters were born to the couple between 1851 and 1855 . 
 = = = = Budding composer = = = = 
 In 1850 , notwithstanding his revolutionary sentiments , Smetana accepted the post of Court Pianist in Ferdinand 's establishment in Prague Castle . He continued teaching in the Piano Institute , and devoted himself increasingly to composition . His works , mainly for the piano , included the three @-@ part Wedding Scenes , some of the music of which was later used in The Bartered Bride . He also wrote numerous short experimental pieces collected under the name Album Leaves , and a series of polkas . During 1853 – 54 he worked on a major orchestral piece , the Triumphal Symphony , composed to commemorate the wedding of Emperor Franz Joseph . The symphony was rejected by the Imperial Court , possibly on the grounds that the brief musical references to the Austrian national anthem were not sufficiently prominent . Undeterred , Smetana hired an orchestra at his own expense to perform the symphony at the <unk> Hall in Prague on 26 February 1855 . The work was coolly received , and the concert was a financial failure . 
 = = = = Private sorrows and professional disenchantment = = = = 
 In the years between 1854 and 1856 Smetana suffered a series of personal blows . In July 1854 his second daughter , Gabriela , died of tuberculosis . A year later his eldest daughter Bedřiška , who at the age of four was showing signs of musical precocity , died of scarlet fever . Smetana wrote his Piano Trio in G minor as a tribute to her memory ; it was performed in Prague on 3 December 1855 and , according to the composer , was received " harshly " by the critics , although Liszt praised it . Smetana 's sorrows continued ; just after Bedřiška 's death a fourth daughter , Kateřina , had been born but she , too , died in June 1856 . By this time Smetana 's wife Kateřina had also been diagnosed with tuberculosis . 
 In July 1856 , Smetana received news of the death in exile of his revolutionary friend Karel Havlíček . The political climate in Prague was a further source of gloom ; hopes of a more enlightened government and social reform following Franz Joseph 's accession in 1848 had faded as Austrian absolutism reasserted itself under Baron Alexander von Bach . Despite the good name of the Piano Institute , Smetana 's status as a concert pianist was generally considered to be below that of contemporaries such as Alexander Dreyschock . Critics acknowledged Smetana 's " delicate , crystalline touch " , closer in style to Chopin than Liszt , but believed that his physical frailty was a serious drawback to his concert @-@ playing ambitions . His main performance success during this period was his playing of Mozart 's D minor Piano Concerto at a concert celebrating the centenary of Mozart 's birth , in January 1856 . His disenchantment with Prague was growing and , perhaps influenced by Dreyschock 's accounts of opportunities to be found in Sweden , Smetana decided to seek success there . On 11 October 1856 , after writing to his parents that " Prague did not wish to acknowledge me , so I left it " , he departed for Gothenburg . 
 = = = Years of travel = = = 
 = = = = Gothenburg = = = = 
 Smetana initially went to Gothenburg without Kateřina . Writing to Liszt , he said that the people there were musically unsophisticated , but he saw this as an opportunity " ... for an impact I could never have achieved in Prague . " Within a few weeks of his arrival , he had given his first recital , opened a music school that was rapidly overwhelmed by applications , and become conductor of the Gothenburg Society for Classical Choral Music . In a few months Smetana had achieved both professional and social recognition in the city , although he found little time for composition ; two intended orchestral works , provisionally entitled Frithjof and The Viking 's Voyage , were sketched but abandoned . 
 In summer 1857 , Smetana came home to Prague and found Kateřina in failing health . In June , Smetana 's father František died . That autumn Smetana returned to Gothenburg , with Kateřina and their surviving daughter Žofie , but before doing so he visited Liszt in Weimar . The occasion was the Karl August Goethe @-@ Schiller Jubilee celebrations ; Smetana attended performances of Liszt 's Faust Symphony and the symphonic poem Die Ideale , which invigorated and inspired him . Liszt was Smetana 's principal teacher throughout the latter 's creative life , and at this time was crucially able to revive his spirits and rescue him from the relative artistic isolation of Gothenburg . 
 Back in Sweden , Smetana found among his new pupils a young housewife , <unk> Benecke , who briefly became his muse and his mistress . In her honour Smetana transcribed two songs from Schubert 's Die schöne <unk> cycle , and transformed one of his own early piano pieces into a polka entitled Vision at the Ball . He also began composing on a more expansive scale . In 1858 he completed the symphonic poem Richard III , his first major orchestral composition since the Triumphal Symphony . He followed this with Wallenstein 's Camp , inspired by Friedrich Schiller 's Wallenstein drama trilogy , and began a third symphonic poem Hakon Jarl , based on the tragic drama by Danish poet Adam Oehlenschläger . Smetana also wrote two large @-@ scale piano works : Macbeth and the Witches , and an Étude in C in the style of Liszt . 
 = = = = Bereavement , remarriage and return to Prague = = = = 
 Kateřina 's health gradually worsened and in the spring of 1859 failed completely . Homeward bound , she died at Dresden on 19 April 1859 . Smetana wrote that she had died " gently , without our knowing anything until the quiet drew my attention to her . " After placing Žofie with Kateřina 's mother , Smetana spent time with Liszt in Weimar , where he was introduced to the music of the comic opera Der Barbier von Bagdad , by Liszt 's pupil Peter Cornelius . This work would influence Smetana 's own later career as an opera composer . Later that year he stayed with his younger brother Karel , and fell in love with Karel 's sister @-@ in @-@ law Barbora ( Bettina ) <unk> , sixteen years his junior . He proposed marriage , and having secured her promise returned to Gothenburg for the 1859 – 60 winter . The marriage took place the following year , on 10 July 1860 , after which Smetana and his new wife returned to Sweden for a final season . This culminated in April 1861 with a piano performance in Stockholm , attended by the Swedish royal family . The couple 's first daughter , Zdeňka , was born in September 1861 . 
 Meanwhile , the defeat of Franz Joseph 's army at <unk> in 1859 had weakened the Habsburg Empire , and led to the fall from power of von Bach . This had gradually brought a more enlightened atmosphere to Prague , and by 1861 Smetana was seeing prospects of a better future for Czech nationalism and culture . Before deciding his own future , in September Smetana set out on a concert tour of the Netherlands and Germany . He was still hoping to secure a reputation as a pianist , but once again he experienced failure . Back in Prague , he conducted performances of Richard III and Wallenstein 's Camp in the <unk> Island concert hall in January 1862 , to a muted reception . Critics accused him of adhering too closely to the " New German " school represented primarily by Liszt ; Smetana responded that " a prophet is without honour in his own land . " In March 1862 he made a last brief visit to Gothenburg , but the city no longer held his interest ; it appeared to him a provincial backwater and , whatever the difficulties , he now determined to seek his musical future in Prague : " My home has rooted itself into my heart so much that only there do I find real contentment . It is to this that I will sacrifice myself . " 
 = = = National prominence = = = 
 = = = = Seeking recognition = = = = 
 In 1861 , it was announced that a Provisional Theatre would be built in Prague , as a home for Czech opera . Smetana saw this as an opportunity to write and stage opera that would reflect Czech national character , similar to the portrayals of Russian life in Mikhail Glinka 's operas . He hoped that he might be considered for the theatre 's conductorship , but the post went to Jan Nepomuk Maýr , apparently because the conservative faction in charge of the project considered Smetana a " dangerous modernist " , in thrall to avant garde composers such as Liszt and Wagner . Smetana then turned his attention to an opera competition , organised by Count Jan von Harrach , which offered prizes of 600 gulden each for the best comic and historical operas based on Czech culture . With no useful model on which to base his work — Czech opera as a genre scarcely existed — Smetana had to create his own style . He engaged Karel Sabina , his comrade from the 1848 barricades , as his librettist , and received Sabina 's text in February 1862 , a story of the 13th century invasion of Bohemia by Otto of Brandenburg . In April 1863 he submitted the score , under the title of The Brandenburgers in Bohemia . 
 At this stage in his career , Smetana 's command of the Czech language was poor . His generation of Czechs was educated in German , and he had difficulty expressing himself in what was supposedly his native tongue . To overcome these linguistic deficiencies he studied Czech grammar , and made a point of writing and speaking in Czech every day . He had become Chorus Master of the nationalistic Hlahol Choral Society soon after his return from Sweden , and as his fluency in the Czech language developed he composed patriotic choruses for the Society ; The Three Riders and The Renegade were performed at concerts in early 1863 . In March of that year Smetana was elected president of the music section of <unk> Beseda , a society for Czech artists . By 1864 he was proficient enough in the Czech language to be appointed as music critic to the main Czech language newspaper <unk> listy . Meanwhile , Bettina had given birth to another daughter , <unk> . 
 On 23 April 1864 , Smetana conducted Berlioz 's choral symphony Roméo et Juliette at a concert celebrating the Shakespeare tercentenary , adding to the programme his own March for the Shakespearean Festival . That year , Smetana 's bid to become Director of the Prague Conservatory failed . He had set high hopes on this appointment : " My friends are trying to persuade me that this post might have been especially created for me , " he wrote to a Swedish friend . Again his hopes were thwarted by his association with the perceived radical Liszt , and the appointing committee chose the conservative patriot Josef Krejčí for the post . 
 Almost three years passed before Smetana was declared the winner of Harrach 's opera competition . Before then , on 5 January 1866 , The Brandenburgers had been performed to an enthusiastic reception at the Provisional Theatre — over strong opposition from Maýr , who had refused to rehearse or conduct the piece . The idiom was too advanced for Maýr 's liking , and the opera was eventually staged under the composer 's own direction . " I was called on stage nine times , " Smetana wrote , recording that the house was sold out and that the critics were full of praise . Music historian Rosa Newmarch believes that , although The Brandenburgers has not stood the test of time , it contains all the germs of Smetana 's operatic art . 
 = = = = Opera maestro = = = = 
 In July 1863 , Sabina had delivered the libretto for a second opera , a light comedy entitled The Bartered Bride , which Smetana composed during the next three years . Because of the success of The Brandenburgers , the management of the Provisional Theatre readily agreed to stage the new opera , which was premiered on 30 May 1866 in its original two @-@ act version with spoken dialogue . The opera went through several revisions and restructures before reaching the definitive three @-@ act form that in due course established Smetana 's international reputation . The opera 's first performance was a failure ; it was held on one of the hottest evenings of the year , on the eve of the Austro @-@ Prussian War , with Bohemia under imminent threat of invasion by Prussian troops . Unsurprisingly the occasion was poorly attended , and receipts failed to cover costs . When presented at the Provisional Theatre in its final form , in September 1870 , it was a tremendous public success . 
 Back in 1866 , as the composer of The Brandenburgers with its overtones of German military aggression , Smetana thought he might be targeted by the invading Prussians , so he absented himself from Prague until hostilities ceased . He returned in September , and almost immediately achieved a long @-@ standing ambition – appointment as principal conductor of the Provisional Theatre , at an annual salary of 1 @,@ 200 gulden . In the absence of a body of suitable Czech opera , Smetana in his first season presented standard works by Weber , Mozart , Donizetti , Rossini and Glinka , with a revival of his own Bartered Bride . The quality of Smetana 's production of Glinka 's A Life for the Tsar angered Glinka 's champion Mily Balakirev , who expressed himself forcefully . This caused prolonged hostility between the two men . On 16 May 1868 Smetana , representing Czech musicians , helped to lay the foundation stone for the future National Theatre ; he had written a Festive Overture for the occasion . That same evening Smetana 's third opera , Dalibor , was premièred at Prague 's New Town Theatre . Although its initial reception was warm its reviews were poor , and Smetana resigned himself to its failure . 
 = = = = Opposition = = = = 
 Early in his Provisional Theatre conductorship Smetana had made a powerful enemy in František Pivoda , the Director of the Prague School of Singing . Formerly a supporter of Smetana 's , Pivoda was aggrieved when the conductor recruited singing talent from abroad rather than from Pivoda 's school . In an increasingly bitter public correspondence , Pivoda claimed that Smetana was using his position to further his own career , at the expense of other composers . 
 Pivoda then took issue with Dalibor , calling it an example of extreme " Wagnerism " and thus , unsuited as a model for Czech national opera . " Wagnerism " meant the adoption of Wagner 's theories of a continuous role for the orchestra and the building of an integrated musical drama , rather than a stringing together of lyrical numbers . The Provisional Theatre 's chairman , František Rieger , had first accused Smetana of <unk> tendencies after the first performance of The Brandenburgers , and the issue eventually divided Prague 's musical society . The music critic Otakar <unk> believed that Wagner 's theories should be the basis of the national opera , and argued that Dalibor was the beginning of the " correct " direction . The opposite camp , led by Pivoda , supported the principles of Italian opera , in which the voice rather than the orchestra was the predominant dramatic device . 
 Even within the theatre itself there was division . Rieger led a campaign to eject Smetana from the conductorship and reappoint Maýr , and in December 1872 a petition signed by 86 subscribers to the theatre called for Smetana 's resignation . Strong support from vice @-@ chairman Antonín <unk> , and an ultimatum from prominent musicians among whom was Antonín Dvořák , ensured Smetana 's survival . In January 1873 he was reappointed , with a bigger salary and increased responsibility as Artistic Director . 
 Smetana gradually brought more operas by emergent Czech composers to the theatre , but little of his own work . By 1872 he had completed his monumental fourth opera , Libuše , his most ambitious work to date , but was withholding its premiere for the future opening of the forthcoming National Theatre . The machinations of Pivoda and his supporters distracted Smetana from composition , and he had further vexation when The Bartered Bride was produced in Saint Petersburg , in January 1871 . Although the audience was enthusiastic , press reports were hostile , one describing the work as " no better than that of a gifted fourteen @-@ year @-@ old boy . " Smetana was deeply offended , and blamed his old adversary , Balakirev , for inciting negative feelings against the opera . 
 = = = Final decade = = = 
 = = = = <unk> = = = = 
 In the respite following his reappointment , Smetana concentrated on his fifth opera , The Two Widows , composed between June 1873 and January 1874 . After its first performance at the Provisional Theatre on 27 March 1874 , Smetana 's supporters presented him with a decorative baton . But his opponents continued to attack him , comparing his conductorship unfavourably with the Maýr regime and claiming that under Smetana " Czech opera sickens to death at least once annually . " By the summer Smetana was ill ; a throat infection was followed by a rash and an apparent blockage to the ears . By mid @-@ August , unable to work , he transferred his duties to his deputy , Adolf Čech . A press announcement stated that Smetana had " become ill as a result of nervous strain caused by certain people recently . " 
 In September , Smetana told the theatre he would resign his appointment unless his health improved . He had become totally deaf in his right ear , and in October lost all hearing in his left ear also . After his subsequent resignation the theatre offered him an annual pension of 1 @,@ 200 gulden for the continued right to perform his operas , an arrangement Smetana reluctantly accepted . Money raised in Prague by former students , and by former lover <unk> Benecke in Gothenburg , amounted to 1 @,@ 244 gulden . This allowed Smetana to seek medical treatment abroad , but to no avail . In January 1875 Smetana wrote in his journal : " If my disease is incurable , then I should prefer to be liberated from this life . " His spirits were further lowered at this time by a deterioration in his relationship with Bettina , mainly over money matters . " I cannot live under the same roof as a person who hates and <unk> me " , Smetana informed her . Although divorce was considered , the couple stayed unhappily together . 
 = = = = Late flowering = = = = 
 In worsening health , Smetana continued to compose . In June 1876 he , Bettina and their two daughters left Prague for <unk> , the home of his eldest daughter Žofie where , in tranquil surroundings , Smetana was able to work undisturbed . Before leaving Prague he had begun a cycle of six symphonic poems , called Má vlast ( " My Fatherland " ) , and had completed the first two , Vyšehrad and Vltava , which had both been performed in Prague during 1875 . In <unk> Smetana composed four more movements , the complete cycle being first performed on 5 November 1882 under the baton of Adolf Čech . Other major works composed in these years were the E minor String Quartet , From My Life , a series of Czech dances for piano , several choral pieces and three more operas : The Kiss , The Secret and The Devil 's Wall , all of which received their first performances between 1876 and 1882 . 
 The long @-@ delayed premiere of Smetana 's opera Libuše finally arrived when the National Theatre opened on 11 June 1881 . He had not initially been given tickets , but at the last minute was asked into the theatre director 's box . The audience received the work enthusiastically , and Smetana was called to the stage repeatedly . Shortly after this event the new theatre was destroyed by fire ; despite his infirmities , Smetana helped to raise funds for the rebuilding . The restored theatre reopened on 18 November 1883 , again with Libuše 
 These years saw Smetana 's growing recognition as the principal exponent of Czech national music . This status was celebrated by several events during Smetana 's final years . On 4 January 1880 , a special concert in Prague marked the 50th anniversary of his first public performance ; Smetana attended , and played his Piano Trio in G minor from 1855 . In May 1882 The Bartered Bride was given its 100th performance , an unprecedented event in the history of Czech opera . It was so popular that a repeat " 100th performance " was staged . A gala concert and banquet was arranged to honour Smetana 's 60th birthday in March 1884 , but he was too ill to attend . 
 = = = Illness and death = = = 
 In 1879 , Smetana had written to a friend , the Czech poet Jan Neruda , revealing fears of the onset of madness . By the winter of 1882 – 83 he was experiencing depression , insomnia , and hallucinations , together with giddiness , cramp and a temporary loss of speech . In 1883 he began writing a new symphonic suite , Prague Carnival , but could get no further than an Introduction and a Polonaise . He started a new opera , Viola , based on the character in Shakespeare 's Twelfth Night , but wrote only fragments as his mental state gradually deteriorated . In October 1883 his behaviour at a private reception in Prague disturbed his friends ; by the middle of February 1884 he had ceased to be coherent , and was periodically violent . On 23 April his family , unable to nurse him any longer , removed him to the <unk> Lunatic Asylum in Prague , where he died on 12 May 1884 . 
 The hospital registered the cause of death as senile dementia . However , Smetana 's family believed that his physical and mental decline was due to syphilis . An analysis of the autopsy report , published by the German neurologist Dr Ernst Levin in 1972 , came to the same conclusion . Tests carried out by Prof. Emanuel <unk> in the late 20th century on samples of muscular tissue from Smetana 's exhumed body provided further evidence of the disease . However , this research has been challenged by Czech physician Dr Jiří Ramba , who has argued that <unk> 's tests do not provide a basis for a reliable conclusion , citing the age and state of the tissues and highlighting reported symptoms of Smetana 's that were incompatible with syphilis . 
 Smetana 's funeral took place on 15 May , at the <unk> Church in Prague 's Old Town . The subsequent procession to the Vyšehrad Cemetery was led by members of the Hlahol , bearing torches , and was followed by a large crowd . The grave later became a place of pilgrimage for musical visitors to Prague . On the funeral evening , a scheduled performance of The Bartered Bride at the National Theatre was allowed to proceed , the stage draped with black cloth as a mark of respect . 
 Smetana was survived by Bettina , their daughters Zdeňka and <unk> , and by Žofie . None of them played any significant role in Smetana 's musical life . Bettina lived until 1908 ; Žofie , who had married Josef Schwarz in 1874 , predeceased her stepmother , dying in 1902 . The younger daughters eventually married , living out their lives away from the public eye . A permanent memorial to Smetana 's life and work is the Bedřich Smetana Museum in Prague , originally founded in 1926 within the Charles University 's Institute for Musicology . In 1936 the museum moved to the former Waterworks building on the banks of the Vltava , and since 1976 has been part of the Czech Museum of Music . 
 = = Music = = 
 The basic materials from which Smetana fashioned his art , according to Newmarch , were nationalism , realism and romanticism . A particular feature of all his later music is its descriptive character – all his major compositions outside his operas are written to programmes , and many are specifically autobiographical . Smetana 's champions have recognised the major influences on his work as Liszt , Wagner and Berlioz – the " progressives " – while those same advocates have often played down the significance of " traditionalist " composers such as Rossini , Donizetti , Verdi and Meyerbeer . 
 = = = Piano works = = = 
 All but a handful of Smetana 's compositions before his departure for Gothenburg had been piano works . Some of these early pieces have been dismissed by music historian Harold Schonberg as " bombastic virtuoso rhetoric derived from Liszt " . Under Proksch , however , Smetana acquired more polish , as revealed in works such as the G minor Sonata of 1846 and the E @-@ flat Polka of the same year . The set of Six Characteristic Pieces of 1848 was dedicated to Liszt , who described it as " the most outstanding , finely felt and finely finished pieces that have recently come to my note . " In this period Smetana planned a cycle of so @-@ called " album leaves " , short pieces in every major and minor key , after the manner of Chopin 's Preludes . The project became somewhat disorganised ; in the pieces completed , some keys are repeated while others are unrepresented . After Smetana 's final return from Gothenburg , when he committed himself primarily to the development of Czech opera , he wrote nothing for the piano for 13 years . 
 In his last decade Smetana composed three substantial piano cycles . The first , from 1875 , was entitled Dreams . It was dedicated to former pupils of Smetana 's , who had raised funds to cover medical expenses , and is also a tribute to the composer 's models of the 1840s — Schumann , Chopin and Liszt . Smetana 's last major piano works were the two Czech Dances cycles of 1877 and 1879 . The first of these had the purpose , as Smetana explained to his publisher , of " idealising the polka , as Chopin in his day did with the mazurka . " The second cycle is a medley of dances , each given a specific title so that people would know " ... which dances with real names we Czechs have . " 
 = = = Vocal and choral = = = 
 Smetana 's early songs are settings of German poems for single voice . Apart from his 1848 Song of Freedom , he did not begin to write pieces for a full choir until after his Gothenburg sojourn , when he composed numerous works for the Hlahol choral society , mostly for unaccompanied male voices . Smetana 's choral music is generally nationalistic in character , ranging in scale from the short Ceremonial Chorus written after the death of the composer 's revolutionary friend Havlíček , to the setting of Song of the Sea , a substantial work with the character of a choral drama . 
 Towards the end of his life Smetana returned to simple song @-@ writing , with five Evening Songs ( 1879 ) to words by the poet Vítězslav <unk> . His final completed work , Our Song ( 1883 ) , is the last of four settings of texts by Josef Srb @-@ <unk> . Despite the state of Smetana 's health , this is a happy celebration of Czech song and dance . The piece was lost for many years , and only received its first performance after rediscovery in 1924 . 
 = = = Chamber = = = 
 Apart from a juvenile fantasia for violin and piano , Smetana composed only four chamber works , yet each had a deep personal significance . The Piano Trio in G minor of 1855 was composed after the death of his daughter Bedřiška ; its style is close to that of Robert Schumann , with hints of Liszt , and the overall tone is elegiac . It was 20 years before he returned to the chamber genre with his first String Quartet . This E minor work , subtitled From My Life , was autobiographical in character , illustrating the composer 's youthful enthusiasm for his art , his friendships and loves and , in a change of mood , the onset of his deafness represented by a long harmonic E in the final movement above ominous string tremolos . His second String Quartet , in D minor , written in 1882 – 83 in defiance of his doctor 's orders to refrain from all musical activity , was composed in short snatches , " a swirl of music of a person who has lost his hearing . " It represents Smetana 's frustrations with his life , but is not wholly gloomy , and includes a bright polka . It was one of his final compositions ; between the two quartets he wrote a violin and piano duet From the homeland , a mixture of melancholy and happiness with strong affinity to Czech folk material . 
 = = = Orchestral = = = 
 Dissatisfied with his first large @-@ scale orchestral work , the D major Overture of 1848 , Smetana studied passages from Beethoven , Mendelssohn , Weber and Berlioz before producing his Triumphal Symphony of 1853 . Though this is dismissed by Rosa Newmarch as " an epithalamium for a Habsburg Prince " , Smetana 's biographer Brian Large identifies much in the piece that characterises the composer 's more mature works . Despite the symphony 's rejection by the Court and the lukewarm reception on its premiere , Smetana did not abandon the work . It was well received in Gothenburg in 1860 , and a revised version was performed in Prague in 1882 , without the " triumphal " tag , under Adolf Čech . The piece is now sometimes called the Festive Symphony . 
 Smetana 's visit to Liszt at Weimar in the summer of 1857 , where he heard the latter 's Faust Symphony and Die Ideale , caused a material reorientation of Smetana 's orchestral music . These works gave Smetana answers to many compositional problems relating to the structure of orchestral music , and suggested a means for expressing literary subjects by a synthesis between music and text , rather than by simple musical illustration . These insights enabled Smetana to write the three Gothenburg symphonic poems , ( Richard III , Wallenstein 's Camp and Hakon Jarl ) , works that transformed Smetana from a composer primarily of salon pieces to a modern neo @-@ Romantic , capable of handling large @-@ scale forces and demonstrating the latest musical concepts . 
 From 1862 Smetana was largely occupied with opera and , apart from a few short pieces , did not return to purely orchestral music before beginning Má vlast in 1872 . In his introduction to the Collected Edition Score , František Bartol brackets Má vlast with the opera Libuše as " direct symbols of [ the ] consummating national struggle " . Má vlast is the first of Smetana 's mature large @-@ scale works that is independent of words , and its musical ideas are bolder than anything he had tried before . To musicologist John Clapham , the cycle presents " a cross @-@ section of Czech history and legend and impressions of its scenery , and ... conveys vividly to us Smetana 's view of the ethos and greatness of the nation . " Despite its nationalistic associations this work has , according to Newmarch , carried Smetana 's name further afield than anything he wrote , with the exception of The Bartered Bride Overture . Smetana dedicated Má vlast to the city of Prague ; after its first performance in November 1882 it was acclaimed by the Czech musical public as the true representation of Czech national style . Its Vltava ( or " The <unk> " in German ) movement , depicting the river that runs through Prague towards its junction with the Elbe , is Smetana 's best @-@ known and most internationally popular orchestral composition . 
 = = = Opera = = = 
 Smetana had virtually no precursors in Czech opera apart from František <unk> , whose works had rarely lasted beyond one or two performances . In his mission to create a new canon , rather than using traditional folksong Smetana turned to the popular dance music of his youth , especially the polka , to establish his link with the vernacular . He drew on existing European traditions , notably Slavonic and French , but made only scarce use of arias , preferring to base his scores on ensembles and choruses . 
 Although a follower of Wagner 's reforms of the operatic genre , which he believed would be its salvation , Smetana rejected accusations of excessive Wagnerism , claiming that he was sufficiently occupied with " <unk> , for that is the only honest style ! " The predominantly " national " character of the first four operas is tempered by the lyrical romanticism of those written later , particularly the last three , composed in the years of Smetana 's deafness . The first of this final trio , The Kiss , written when Smetana was receiving painful medical treatment , is described by Newmarch as a work of serene beauty , in which tears and smiles alternate throughout the score . Smetana 's librettist for " The Kiss " was the young feminist <unk> <unk> , who also supplied the texts for his final two operas . She dominated the ailing composer , who had no say in the subject @-@ matter , the voice types or the balance between solos , duets and ensembles . Nevertheless , critics have noted few signs of a decline in Smetana 's powers in these works , while his increasing proficiency in the Czech language meant that his settings of the language are much superior to those of his earlier operas . 
 Smetana 's eight operas created the bedrock of the Czech opera repertory , but of these only The Bartered Bride is performed regularly outside the composer 's homeland . After reaching Vienna in 1892 , and London in 1895 , it rapidly became part of the repertory of every major opera company worldwide . Newmarch argues that The Bartered Bride , while not a " gem of the first order " , is nevertheless " a perfectly cut and polished stone of its kind . " Its trademark overture , which Newmarch says " lifts us off our feet with its madcap vivacity " , was composed in a piano version before Smetana received the draft libretto . Clapham believes that this has few precedents in the entire history of opera . Smetana himself was later inclined to disparage his achievement : " The Bartered Bride was merely child 's play , written straight off the reel " . In the view of German critic William Ritter , Smetana 's creative powers reached their zenith with his third opera , Dalibor . 
 = = = Reception = = = 
 Even in his own homeland the general public was slow to recognise Smetana . As a young composer and pianist he was well regarded in Prague musical circles , and had the approval of Liszt , Proksch and others , but the public 's lack of acknowledgement was a principal factor behind his self @-@ imposed exile in Sweden . After his return he was not taken particularly seriously , and was hard put to get audiences for his new works , hence his " prophet without honour " remark after the nearly empty hall and indifferent reception of Richard III and Wallenstein 's Camp at <unk> Island in January 1862 . 
 Smetana 's first noteworthy public success was his initial opera The Brandenburgers in Bohemia , in 1866 when he was already 42 years old . His second opera , The Bartered Bride , survived the unfortunate mistiming of its opening night and became an enduring popular triumph . The different style of his third opera , Dalibor , closer to that of Wagnerian music drama , was not readily understood by the public and was condemned by critics who believed that Czech opera should be based on folk @-@ song . It disappeared from the repertory after only a handful of performances . Thereafter the machinations that accompanied Smetana 's tenure as Provisional Theatre conductor restricted his creative output until 1874 . 
 In his final decade , the most fruitful of his compositional career despite his deafness and increasing ill @-@ health , Smetana belatedly received national recognition . Of his later operas , The Two Widows and The Secret were warmly received , while The Kiss was greeted by an " overwhelming ovation " . The ceremonial opera Libuše was received with thunderous applause for the composer ; by this time ( 1881 ) the disputes around his music had declined , and the public was ready to honour him as the founder of Czech music . Nevertheless , the first few performances in October 1882 of an evidently under @-@ rehearsed The Devil 's Wall were chaotic , and the composer was left feeling " dishonoured and dispirited . " This disappointment was swiftly mitigated by the acclaim that followed the first performance of the complete Má vlast cycle in November : " Everyone rose to his feet and the same storm of unending applause was repeated after each of the six parts ... At the end of <unk> [ the final part ] the audience was beside itself and the people could not bring themselves to take leave of the composer . " 
 = = Character and reputation = = 
 Smetana 's biographers describe him as physically frail and unimpressive in appearance yet , at least in his youth , he had a joie @-@ de @-@ vivre that women evidently found attractive . He was also excitable , passionate and strong @-@ willed , determined to make his career in music whatever the hardships , over the wishes of his father who wanted him to become a brewer or a civil servant . Throughout his career he stood his ground ; when under the severest of criticism for the " Wagnerism " in Dalibor he responded by writing Libuše , even more firmly based on the scale and concept of Wagnerian music drama . His personal life became stressful ; his marriage to Bettina was loveless , and effectively broke down altogether in the years of illness and relative poverty towards the end of his life . Little of his relationships with his children is on record , although on the day that he was transferred to the asylum , Žofie was " crying as though her heart would break " . 
 There is broad agreement among most commentators that Smetana created a canon of Czech opera where none had previously existed , and that he developed a style of music in all his compositions that equated with the emergent Czech national spirit . A modified view is presented by the music writer Michael Steen , who questions whether " nationalistic music " can in fact exist : " We should recognise that , whereas music is infinitely expressive , on its own it is not good at describing concrete , earthly objects or concepts . " He concludes that much is dependent upon what listeners are conditioned to hear . 
 According to the musicologist John Tyrrell , Smetana 's close identification with Czech nationalism and the tragic circumstances of his last years , have affected the objectivity of assessments of his work , particularly in his native land . Tyrrell argues that the almost iconic status awarded to Smetana in his homeland " <unk> him into a figure where any criticism of his life or work was discouraged " by the Czech authorities , even as late as the last part of the 20th century . As a result , Tyrrell claims , a view of Czech music has been propagated that downplays the contributions of contemporaries and successors such as Dvořák , Janáček , Josef Suk and other , lesser known , composers . This is at odds with perceptions in the outside world , where Dvořák is far more frequently played and much better known . Harold Schonberg observes that " Smetana was the one who founded Czech music , but Antonín Dvořák ... was the one who popularized it . " 
 = I 'm Goin ' Down = 
 " I 'm Goin ' Down " is a song written and performed by American singer Bruce Springsteen that was released as the sixth single from his album Born in the U.S.A. in August 1985 . The song is one of several of the album 's tracks that he recorded with the E Street Band in May 1982 at the Power Station music studio . The release of these full @-@ band tracks was put into question when Springsteen used solo material for his September 1982 LP , Nebraska , and considered doing the same for his next album , which would become Born in the U.S.A. He later decided to use several of the May 1982 recordings on Born in the U.S.A. " I 'm Goin ' Down " beat out contender " Pink Cadillac " for a spot on the album . 
 " I 'm Goin ' Down " , which features a prominent drum performance and possesses an energetic feel , deals with the frustration of diminishing sexual activity in romantic relationships . As a single , it reached No. 9 in the United States and the top 40 in Sweden , Canada , and Italy . The song , which has received positive appraisal from critics , has not been performed often by Springsteen since his Born in the U.S.A. Tour ; between 2009 and 2014 , he played it at less than 12 percent of his concerts whose set lists his official website has published . Cover versions of " I 'm Goin ' Down " include renditions by Frank Black and the Catholics , Free Energy , Vampire Weekend , <unk> , and Trampled by Turtles . 
 = = Background and recording = = 
 In October 1980 , Springsteen released his fifth album , The River . For his next album , which would become Nebraska , he initially recorded a demo cassette by himself of over a dozen songs on January 3 , 1982 . In April 1982 , he began recording sessions at the Power Station studio in New York City with the E Street Band — whose line @-@ up then consisted of Roy Bittan , Clarence Clemons , Danny Federici , Garry Tallent , Steve Van Zandt , and Max Weinberg — with production by Springsteen , Van Zandt , Jon Landau , and Chuck Plotkin . 
 At first , Springsteen attempted full @-@ band versions of Nebraska songs at these sessions , including " Atlantic City " , " Nebraska " , and " Mansion on the Hill " . However , he and his co @-@ producers were unsatisfied with the group renditions of the demo songs . To buy time to decide on a solution , by May the band had begun recording other material , including " I 'm Goin ' Down " , " Born in the U.S.A. " , " Glory Days " , " <unk> Train " , " Darlington County " , " Working on the Highway " , and " I 'm on Fire " . " I 'm Goin ' Down " was recorded on May 12 . Eventually , Springsteen decided to release the January demos as the Nebraska album , which came out in September 1982 , such that " I 'm Goin ' Down " and other band tracks from May were temporarily shelved . 
 In 1983 , he did more songs with the E Street Band , but was considering instead recording his next album solo , like Nebraska . By the following year , Landau and Plotkin had convinced Springsteen to release band tracks , including several from May 1982 and a number of subsequently recorded songs . At one point , Springsteen was not going to include " I 'm Goin ' Down " on Born in The U.S.A. , but later added it in place of " Pink Cadillac " , which he used as the B @-@ side of the " Dancing in the Dark " single . 
 = = Music and lyrics = = 
 " I 'm Goin ' Down " features an energetic rhythm , propelled by a heavy drumbeat by Weinberg , and contains a saxophone solo by Clemons . The music has a basic chord progression of A – E – F # m – D. In concerts in 1984 , Springsteen introduced the song by describing the diminishing intimacy and sexual activity that can occur over the course of a romantic relationship : " [ First ] you 're making love to ' em all the time , three or four times a day . Then you come back a little bit later , and , uh @-@ oh ... it 's like ' Are you gonna make love to me tonight , or are we gonna wait for the full moon again ' , y 'know ? " The song 's lyrics include lines such as " I 'm sick and tired of you setting me up / Setting me up just to knock @-@ a knock @-@ a knock @-@ a me down " and " You used to love to drive me wild / But lately girl you get your kicks from just driving me down " . The lyrics later turn into a stream of gibberish syllables . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 The Born in the U.S.A. album was released on June 4 , 1984 , and " I 'm Goin ' Down " , the album 's sixth single , came out in August 1985 . The 7 " single version includes B @-@ side " Janey , Don 't You Lose Heart " while the 12 " Maxi has this and " Held Up Without a Gun " . In the United States , " I 'm Goin ' Down " entered the Billboard Hot 100 singles chart on September 7 , and peaked at No. 9 on October 26 . It was one of a record @-@ tying seven top 10 singles to be released from Born in the U.S.A. It also reached No. 13 in Sweden , No. 23 in Canada , No. 29 in Italy , and No. 61 in Germany . No music video was made for the song . The track was additionally released on 12 " Singles Collection in 1985 , and The Album Collection Vol . 1 1973 – 1984 in 2014 . 
 " I 'm Goin ' Down " has generally been well received by critics . Debbie Miller of Rolling Stone describes the song as " wonderfully exuberant " and " hilarious " . For Billboard 's Caryn Rose , it is " a prime exemplar of the kind of good @-@ time party song that Springsteen and E Street do best , sliding easily through the verses with a ... bouncing rhythm ... and a fun , jumping end " . Writer Chuck Klosterman , who is not a fan of Born in the U.S.A. , nonetheless rates " I 'm Goin ' Down " as one of two decent tracks on the album . A 2014 Rolling Stone article ranks " I 'm Goin ' Down " as the 52nd best Bruce Springsteen song ever . In the book Counting Down Bruce Springsteen : His 100 Finest Songs , writer Jim <unk> puts " I 'm Goin ' Down " as the 131st best Springsteen track , calling it " a fun but relatively minor " work . Critic Bruce Pollock lists it and several other Born in the U.S.A. tracks in Rock Song Index : The 7500 Most Important Songs for the Rock and Roll Era . In Uncut magazine 's 2015 Ultimate Collector 's Edition : Springsteen , " I 'm Goin ' Down " is rated four stars out of five . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 Springsteen has played " I 'm Goin ' Down " infrequently since the end of the Born in the U.S.A. Tour . For Springsteen 's tours since 2009 , most of his set lists are available on his official website , <unk> Of the concert dates whose set lists the website has published , Springsteen performed " I 'm Goin ' Down " 13 times out of 85 concerts on his Working on a Dream Tour in 2009 , 14 times out of 138 concerts on his Wrecking Ball World Tour in 2012 – 2013 , and three times out of 34 concerts on his High Hopes Tour in 2014 — for a total of 30 times out of 257 concerts . At some of these 30 shows , Springsteen played the entire Born in the U.S.A. album . 
 = = Cover versions = = 
 Various musicians have covered " I 'm Goin ' Down " . In 1998 , Frank Black and the Catholics included a version on their " Dog Gone " single , and in 2015 on The Complete Recordings . In 2010 , Free Energy performed the song live in Atlanta , and released a version of the song as a single ; the same year , Vampire Weekend performed the song in Vancouver and Seattle , as well as including a recording of the song on their iTunes Session ; their version also appeared on the TV soundtrack Girls , Vol . 2 : All Adventurous Women Do ... in 2014 . Rancid frontman Tim Armstrong put out a cover in 2012 as part of his Tim Timebomb and Friends collection , and included it on his album Special Lunacy . <unk> released a version on her 2013 album Parts of Speech , and the following year , Trampled by Turtles did likewise on Dead Man 's Town : A Tribute to Born in the U.S.A. 
 = = Formats and track listing = = 
 7 " and 12 " singles 
 " I 'm Goin ' Down " – 3 : 29 
 " Janey , Don 't You Lose Heart " – 3 : 23 
 " Held Up Without a Gun " – 1 : 15 ( in only 12 " single ) 
 = = Charts = = 
 = Linn Isobarik = 
 The Linn Isobarik , nicknamed " <unk> " or " <unk> " , is a loudspeaker designed and manufactured by Linn Products . The Isobarik is known for both its reproduction of low bass frequencies and being very demanding on amplifiers . 
 Launched in 1973 , the Isobarik DMS , Linn 's maiden and flagship loudspeaker was based on and named for the isobaric loading principle invented in the 1950s . The speaker exists also as the Isobarik PMS – destined for the professional market . Although discontinued in 1992 , it remains popular among audiophiles . 
 = = History = = 
 While other loudspeaker manufacturers sought to outperform each other to produce more quantum bass output from their products , Linn was seeking clear undistorted low frequency bass . Linn theorised a design whose bass could go all the way to DC and be without fundamental resonance . The quest for that extra octave of " dry and extended bass sound " and more accurate reproduction resulted in the Isobarik . 
 Linn launched the original Isobarik DMS loudspeaker in 1973 , the year following the release of its first product , the Sondek LP12 . " DMS " is the contraction for " domestic monitor system " , and is designed to be driven passively in the home setting – it incorporated a crossover within the loudspeaker cabinet . The Isobarik PMS ( " professional monitor system " ) loudspeaker launched in 1977 , destined for the professional market is without the internal crossover . This latter configuration opens up more wiring and driving options , in particular active operation and tri @-@ amping . 
 The Isobarik is so named as it employs the isobaric loading principle invented by Harry Olson in the 1950s : two bass units are mounted in a sealed container and driven in parallel so as to effectively double the speaker enclosure volume and extend its bass frequency response beyond what would be possible for otherwise identical speakers . Linn used a variant of the isobaric principle and patented the use of two bass drive units ( " woofers " ) facing forward in an isobaric arrangement in early 1974 . 
 In 1988 , Linn <unk> the crossover of the DMS to boards with nominal 4 @-@ ohm impedance designed to lie flat at the base of the stands . Upon that change , the original distinction between DMS and PMS disappeared along with the suffix designation . The " DMS " was thus discontinued , although " Isobarik PMS " remained on price lists until the speaker was discontinued in 1992 . 
 = = Speaker = = 
 Linn brochures dwell little on performance specifications , mentioning somewhat vaguely that the frequency response " varies by only a few db from <unk> to <unk> with the isobaric loading extending usable bass response to below <unk> " . Linn also claimed " very low distortion " and " high sound pressure levels " , without quantification . Recommended amplifier power rating is in the range of 50 – 500 watts . Hi @-@ Fi for Pleasure noted that the speakers ' impedance , although quoted at 3 ohms nominal , dipped considerably at some parts of the audio spectrum . This made the DMS Isobarik very hard for amplifiers to drive , potentially causing many amplifiers ' output protection to trip . Equally , the two heavy woofers in each Isobarik made them twice as power @-@ hungry . Such demands happened to make Naim amplification the perfect match because of its high current delivery capabilities and its toleration of near short circuits . The Isobarik was famously used as the acid test for the budget @-@ priced NAD 3020 amplifier at its UK launch . In the 1970s , the DMS Isobarik , available in a number of veneers , sold for £ 1 @,@ 000 . 
 As part of their corporate philosophy , Linn intended significant dealer involvement in customer education and decision @-@ making , and included teaching customers how to listen correctly for musical attributes . The trial and evaluation of the product prior to purchase and dealer 's expert installation are considered by Linn to be important parts of the value added of their top @-@ end products . As such , no instructions were supplied with the product . The Isobaric PMS retailed at £ 2 @,@ 400 including stands in May 1991 , and the 4 @-@ ohm crossover was priced at just under £ 500 . 
 = = = Design = = = 
 As a three @-@ way loudspeaker system employing six individual drive units , each Isobarik <unk> has two tweeters , two midrange drivers and two woofers . One driver of each frequency range faces forward ; a second tweeter and midrange are mounted on the top surface of the enclosure , and one bass unit is hidden from view . While the bass units are isobaric loaded , the midrange is mounted in a terminated transmission line . Crossover points are set at 375 Hz between the woofer and midrange , and 3 kHz between the tweeter and midrange . The upward @-@ firing drivers were designed to aid dispersion and improve the off @-@ axis listening experience . 
 The Isobarik , like the Sara and Kan that were developed in the 1970s and 80s , was designed to work best near room boundaries . Manufacturer 's leaflets advise positioning of the speaker close to a rear wall and approximately 2 to 3 feet ( 60 to 90 cm ) from corners . The trade @-@ off is the less than solid stereo image . Linn declared forthrightly that loudspeakers that were not designed to work tight against a wall were without merit . According to Art Dudley of Stereophile , Linn also maintained provocatively that " anyone who would design , manufacture , buy , sell , or positively review a loudspeaker made to be installed away from room boundaries was a fool " . 
 In early product manuals , Linn recommended using the Isobarik PMS in tri @-@ amped configuration with Naim amplifiers . Three NAP 250 amplifiers , fed by a 3 @-@ way Naim electronic crossover , would typically be used , one for each pair of the doubled @-@ up treble , midrange and bass units . From its introduction in 1984 , the monaural NAP 135 can be used in a " 6 @-@ pack " configuration . 
 After Linn had started manufacturing electronics and upon the release of the Isobarik <unk> crossover , Linn declared that the ' <unk> ' system comprises : the source components plus one Linn <unk> preamplifier , one Linn <unk> Isobarik crossover , three Linn <unk> power amplifiers , one pair of Linn Isobarik loudspeakers and the necessary cables . 
 = = = Construction = = = 
 The loudspeaker cabinet measures 15 × 15 × 30 inches ( 38 × 38 × 76 cm ) . The extremely rigid 55 @-@ litre cabinet is constructed using 19mm high @-@ density particle board that is strategically damped in places , and extensively braced . According to the manufacturer , there is an array of stressed steel rods inside the enclosure to control energy flows . The techniques employed ensure that energy that would have caused the unwanted motion of the front panel and drivers is cancelled by a similar but opposite energy from the upward facing units , resulting in the minimum amount of resonances . The cabinets were initially made by Linn in their own factory , but the manufacturing was later outsourced to furniture @-@ makers Leon Levin of Glasgow . 
 Although the speaker uses bought @-@ in drivers , they have been rebuilt using stronger materials . Drivers ' metal baskets are treated to reduce the effects of vibration , and the enclosure designed and constructed to control energy . The drive units ( T27 , B110 and <unk> ) were sourced from KEF in kit form , and two <unk> kits were judiciously used for each cabinet . However , Linn found the T27 tweeter too fragile and replaced it with the more robust and better @-@ sounding <unk> from Scan @-@ Speak after a very short run ; the Scan @-@ Speak tweeter was later changed to a Linn D20 @-@ LP @-@ 1 , sourced from <unk> in Denmark . The midrange KEF B110 , known for its use in the LS3 / 5A BBC monitor , is a 100mm @-@ diameter unit to which Linn applied a layer of doping . The woofer is a KEF <unk> . 
 Each unit of the Isobarik cabinet weighs 40 kilograms ( 88 lb ) , and is designed to be placed on stands that are 33 centimetres ( 13 in ) tall so that the tweeter is positioned at the listener 's ear @-@ level . The speaker is supplied with heavy stands made from welded square cross @-@ section tubing , to which top and bottom spikes are fitted prior to positioning the speaker cabinet . 
 Input connections are established through 3 @-@ pin XLR connectors . Later versions and the PMS version have banana sockets ( see image ) . 
 = = = Product revisions = = = 
 1973 Isobarik DMS launched . 
 1976 Sep Revised cabinet style . 
 1977 Isobarik PMS launched . 
 1978 Sep Damping : Midrange enclosure and cabinet damping changed . SN . <unk> / 4 
 1979 The smaller Isobarik Sara launched . 
 1979 Nov Midrange unit : <unk> . SN . 10 @,@ 800 / 1 
 1980 Feb Treble unit : Scan @-@ Speak treble unit replaced SN . 10 @,@ 925 / 6 
 1980 Mar <unk> : common earth at cannon socket . SN . 11 @,@ 035 / 6 
 1981 Oct Treble unit : Fitted with t @-@ nuts . SN . <unk> / 2 
 1982 Jan Cabinet : Changed from chipboard to medite and veneered on both sides . SN . 2859 / 60 
 1983 Mar Bass / Midrange units : Sound deadening material painted on bass and midrange units . SN . 3000 / 1 
 1984 May Crossover / Treble units : circuit board with wider tracks and improved layout . New treble units with a smoother response . Linn logo incorporated on front plate . SN . <unk> / 40 
 1985 Dec Cabinet : improved internal sealing and damping SN . <unk> / 6 
 1986 Apr Midrange units : harder rubber used for surround . SN . <unk> / 4 
 1987 Cabinet : Crossover moved to compartment in bottom of speaker . SN . <unk> / 6 
 1987 Sep Isobarik Sara 9 replaces Isobarik Sara 
 1988 Crossover : New 4 ohm external crossover fitted in stand . Facility for tri @-@ wiring . 
 1988 DMS discontinued – PMS can be driven passively ( 4 ohm ) or actively . SN . <unk> / 2 
 1989 Isobarik Sara 9 discontinued 
 1991 Dec Speaker : Addition of Ku @-@ Stone ceramic absorber , sealant changed to gaskets from silicone , improved cabinet bracing ( non @-@ <unk> ) SN . <unk> / 4 
 1992 Isobarik discontinued . 
 Source : Linn 
 = = = Reception = = = 
 The Isobarik loudspeaker has received some polarised opinions , although Hi @-@ fi News noted that the speaker kept its promise by managing to " play the lowest bass guitar notes cleanly and give an impression of unlimited bass extension " . The Linn / Naim <unk> active system , using a LP12 source , Naim amplification and electronic crossovers together with the Isobarik PMS , was regarded as the pinnacle of " flat @-@ <unk> " hi @-@ fi systems , and the speaker is integral to the general aura of mysticism that went with the Linn / Naim equipment . 
 = = Other Isobarik products = = 
 The Isobarik Sara is a product concurrent with the PMS for the whole of its life . This 2 @-@ way , 4 @-@ ohm , design was a physically much smaller product – measuring 425 × 332 × 244 mm ( 16 @.@ 7 × 13 @.@ 1 × 9 @.@ 6 in ) – that required tall speaker stands . Launched in 1978 , it was Linn 's entry @-@ level loudspeaker until the Kan ( a non @-@ isobaric bookshelf speaker using the same Linn D20 @-@ LP @-@ 1 and KEF B110 drive units as its big brother ) was released . The Kan was discontinued in 1990 . 
 In the late 1980s , Linn worked on a replacement for the Isobarik . The project bearing the codename " Isobarik <unk> " became the <unk> . Although the final product does not bear the Isobarik name , the technology was mentioned in marketing materials and the product manual . Other products bearing the trade @-@ marked " Isobarik " name include the <unk> Active Isobarik Bass and the <unk> Isobarik ( 2011 – ) 
 = Prior Park Landscape Garden = 
 Prior Park Landscape Garden surrounding the Prior Park estate south of Bath , Somerset , England , was designed in the 18th century by the poet Alexander Pope and the landscape gardener Capability Brown , and is now owned by the National Trust . The garden was influential in defining the style known as the " English landscape garden " in continental Europe . The garden is Grade I listed in the Register of Historic Parks and Gardens of special historic interest in England . 
 Around 1100 the site was part of a deer park set out by the Bishop of Bath and Wells John of Tours . In 1720s it was bought by Ralph Allen and landscaped to complement his new house . Further development was undertaken after the house became a seminary and then a Roman Catholic grammar school ( which later became Prior Park College ) . In the 1990s 11 @.@ 3 hectares ( 28 acres ) of the park and pleasure grounds were acquired by the National Trust and a large scale restoration undertaken . Features of Prior Park Landscape Garden include a Palladian architecture bridge , lake and ancillary buildings . 
 = = History = = 
 Set in a small steep valley overlooking the city of Bath a park was established on the site by John of Tours , the Bishop of Bath and Wells , in around 1100 as a deer park . It was subsequently sold to Humphrey Colles , a lawyer and member of parliament for Somerset , and then another member of parliament , Matthew Colthurst . Even before the Dissolution of the Monasteries the walls which had enclosed the deer park had fallen into disrepair and the deer had escaped . The land was then returned to agricultural use . 
 = = = 18th @-@ century design = = = 
 Purchased by the local entrepreneur and philanthropist Ralph Allen in the 1720s , Prior Park 's 11 @.@ 3 hectares ( 28 acres ) English landscape garden was laid out with advice from the poet Alexander Pope during the construction of the house , overseen by Allen between the years 1734 and his death in 1764 . During 1737 , at least 55 @,@ 200 trees , mostly elm and Scots pine , were planted , along the sides and top of the valley . The valley floor remained as grassland and drainage water was channelled to form fish ponds at the bottom of the valley . 
 Later work , during the 1750s and 1760s , was undertaken by the landscape gardener Capability Brown ; this included extending the gardens to the north , removing the central cascade and making the wooded hillside ( <unk> ) into a single sweep . " The garden was influential in defining the style of garden known as the ' English garden ' in continental Europe " . The gardens were laid out in two distinct areas : those on the east side of the house were set out as vegetable plots on either side of the serpentine path , while on the western side were statues and grottoes , trees and evergreens with climbing and scented plants . Exotic plants which had only recently arrived in Britain included <unk> , Passiflora and <unk> . 
 In 1828 the house and estate were purchased by Bishop Augustine Baines to create a seminary and then Bishop William Clifford for a Roman Catholic grammar school which later became Prior Park College . Further landscaping was carried out in the 1880s . 
 = = = Restoration = = = 
 In 1993 the park and pleasure grounds were acquired by the National Trust and it was opened to the public in 1996 . In November 2002 , a large @-@ scale restoration project began on the cascade , serpentine lake and Gothic temple in the wilderness area , this is now complete . Extensive planting also took place in 2007 . Future plans include re @-@ roofing the grotto and building a replica Gothic temple . 
 = = Garden features = = 
 The garden 's features include a Palladian architecture bridge ( one of only four of this design left in the world ) , Gothic temple , gravel cabinet , Mrs Allen 's Grotto , the ice house , lodge and three pools with curtain walls as well as a serpentine lake . The curtain wall by the lake is known as the Sham Bridge and is similar to Kent 's Cascade at Chiswick House and <unk> Vale at <unk> House . Ralph Allen was also responsible for the construction of Sham Castle on a hill overlooking Bath . 
 The rusticated stone piers on either side of the main entrance gates are surmounted by entablatures and large ornamental vases , while those at the drive entrance have ornamental carved finials . The Porter 's Lodge was built along with the main house to designs by John Wood the Elder . 
 = = = Palladian bridge = = = 
 The Palladian bridge , which is a copy of the one at Wilton House , has been designated as a Grade I listed building and scheduled monument . It was repaired in 1936 . 
 = = Bath Skyline = = 
 A five @-@ minute walk from the garden leads on to the Bath Skyline , a six @-@ mile ( 10 km ) circular walk around the city that encompasses woodlands , meadows , an Iron Age hill @-@ fort , Roman settlements , 18th @-@ century follies and views over the city . 
 = Aldermaston = 
 Aldermaston / <unk> / is a mostly rural , dispersed settlement , civil parish and electoral ward in Berkshire , South @-@ East England . In the United Kingdom Census 2011 , the parish had a population of 1015 . The village is in the south the mid @-@ Kennet alluvial plain and bounds to the south Hampshire . It is roughly equidistant from Newbury , Basingstoke and Reading , centred 46 miles ( 74 km ) west @-@ by @-@ south @-@ west of London . 
 Aldermaston may have been inhabited as early as 1690 CE ; a number of postholes and remains of cereal grains have been found in the area . Written history of the village is traced back at least as far as the 9th century AD . The Anglo @-@ Saxon Chronicles show that the Ealdorman of Berkshire had his country estate in the village . The manor of Aldermaston was established by the early 11th century , when the village was given to the Achard family by Henry I ; the manor is documented in the Domesday survey . The village church was established in the 13th century , and some of the original Norman architecture remains in the building 's structure . The last resident Lord of the Manor , Charles Keyser , died in 1929 . The manor estate has been subsequently occupied by Associated Electrical Industries , the XIX Tactical Air Command , the Women 's Land Army , Collier Macmillan Schools , Blue Circle Industries , and the Compass Group , who ran it as a hotel and corporate venue . It was bought by the Praxis Group in 2013 for £ 4 @.@ 7 million and is now subject to plans for restoration that include 227 new homes in order to finance the restoration of the manor house and grounds . 
 The name " Aldermaston " is well known in connection with the UK 's nuclear weapons programme , as well as the Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament . The Atomic Weapons Establishment ( AWE ) , which develops , maintains , and disposes of the UK 's nuclear weaponry is in the parish . Built on the site of the former RAF Aldermaston , the plant has been the destination of numerous Aldermaston Marches . Until 2006 , the village was home to the Aldermaston Pottery , which was established by Alan Caiger @-@ Smith and Geoffrey <unk> in 1955 . 
 = = History = = 
 Evidence suggests that Aldermaston was inhabited in the 12th century CE , possibly extending back to 1690 CE . Radiocarbon dating on postholes and pits in the area show activity from 1690 to 1390 , 1319 to 1214 , and 977 to 899 CE . Wheat and barley grains have been found in these excavations . Tests show that most of the barley was <unk> , but that absence of such debris may mean that the cereal was brought in from other areas . 
 = = = Middle ages = = = 
 Before the 1066 Norman conquest of England , the land and properties of Aldermaston formed part of the estates of Harold Godwinson , the Earl of Wessex , who later became King Harold II of England . Harold 's assessment of Aldermaston valued the village 's 15 hides at £ 20 a year . As with much of the land seized by William the Conqueror after his arrival in England in 1066 , Aldermaston was held in demesne . His Domesday Survey of 1086 identified the existence of a mill , worth twenty shillings , and two fisheries , worth five shillings . During the rest of William 's reign , and that of his son William Rufus , Aldermaston was owned by the Crown . 
 The history of the Lords of the Manor of Aldermaston Court can be traced to Achard D <unk> , who was born in 1036 . Six families have had lordship of the Aldermaston estate . In the 11th century , Henry I gave Aldermaston to Robert Achard ( or <unk> ) of <unk> . In the mid @-@ 12th century , the Achard family founded the church of St Mary the Virgin . In 1292 , Edward I granted the right for the lord of the manor to hold a market in the village . Another charter was granted by Henry IV , with evidence that the market existed until approximately 1900 . The <unk> also established an annual fair to observe the feast of St. Thomas the Martyr on 7 July . 
 Aldermaston was held by the Achard family until the 14th century , when it passed through marriage to Thomas De La Mare of Nunney Castle , Somerset . The De La Mare family governed Aldermaston for approximately 120 years , until Elizabeth de la Mare — whose male relatives predeceased her — married into the Forster family . In about 1636 , the Forsters built a large manor house to the east of the church . The house incorporated parts of an earlier ( 15th century ) house , including the chimney stacks . The Forsters ' house was fronted by two porches , separated by a central section with seven bays . The porches had ornate Solomonic columns , similar to those at the University Church of St Mary the Virgin in Oxford . The interior of the house featured a number of mythical statues , as well as artwork by Gaspard <unk> , portraits of William Congreve and Godfrey Kneller , and Tintoretto 's Esther Before <unk> . The house 's Jacobean garden featured patterns of groves and avenues of oak , yew , Spanish chestnut and lime trees . In the early 18th century the Forsters oversaw the building of almshouses in Church Road . Built by R Dixon in 1706 , the houses became known as " Dixon 's Cottages " . The manor passed through the Forster family until 1752 , when the Forster lineage ended and the estate was inherited by Ralph Congreve , the husband of the last Forster 's grand @-@ niece . 
 = = = Victorian era = = = 
 On Ralph 's death a second @-@ cousin of dramatist William Congreve inherited the manor . The Congreve Family owned the estate at the time of the 1830 Swing Riots . The rioters marched across Aldermaston , wrecking twenty @-@ three agricultural machines . Workers were so frightened by the riots that they left their machinery in the open in an attempt to limit additional damage . Around the same time , the River Kennet ( along the north side of the estate ) was made navigable between Reading and Newbury . 
 In 1843 , the manor house was destroyed by fire , news of which was carried in The Illustrated London News . The estate passed into the Court of Chancery and was purchased by Daniel <unk> <unk> Burr . In 1848 , Burr commissioned the building of a neoclassical mansion to the south west of the original building . Burr saved the 17th @-@ century manor 's wooden staircase , though all that remains of the building is a staircase to the cellar ( which is now home to a colony of bats ) . By 1851 the new building was complete , costing £ 20 @,@ 000 and having a Tudor @-@ like appearance . Burr held the estate until his death 50 years later , when was inherited by his son , who sold it in 1893 . 
 The buyer was wealthy stockbroker Charles Edward Keyser , who was preoccupied with the idea of keeping the village unchanged — or , as he described it , " unspoilt " . He forbade advertisements , opposed all modernisation and refused to allow any expansion by the building of houses . He did , however , commission the building of a parish hall in 1897 and provided the village with a water supply , and the water fountain on the small village green was installed to commemorate Queen Victoria 's Diamond Jubilee . Keyser oversaw the restoration of the village almshouses in 1906 and 1924 , and defrayed the cost of a memorial oak tablet in memory of those killed in World War I. Of the 100 men from the village who served in the war , 22 were killed ( the highest percentage of town population in the country ) . The tablet bears the name of each man lost in action . 
 During Keyser 's lordship , John Marius Wilson 's Imperial Gazetteer of England and Wales listed <unk> as a possible name for the village . On his death in 1929 , his wife , Mary , continued to occupy the house until she died in 1938 . The estate was auctioned off in September 1938 , and many lots were purchased by their occupiers . The manor house was bought by Associated Electrical Industries ( AEI ) for £ 16 @,@ 000 . One of the houses in the village is recorded as having fetched £ 1 @,@ 375 . As AEI 's chairman , Felix Pole became the de jure Lord of the Manor upon their purchase of Aldermaston Court . 
 = = = Post @-@ World War II = = = 
 During the 1940s RAF Aldermaston was created on the parkland at the southern end of the parish , with XIX Tactical Air Command stationed at the manor house . After World War II , the manor was returned to AEI who built the MERLIN reactor on part of the land . The reactor was opened on 6 November 1959 by The Duke of Edinburgh . With the opening of the Atomic Weapons Research Establishment ( AWRE ) in 1950 , Aldermaston became synonymous with a number of CND marches . 
 In 1953 , Pole stepped down as Lord of the Manor and was succeeded by AEI 's senior representative , Thomas Allibone . Allibone held the position for 32 years , until Blue Circle Industries acquired the estate in 1985 . Allibone was succeeded by Tony Jackson , and the current Lord of the Manor is Andy Hall . Blue Circle could not gain planning permission in the grounds of the court , so the MERLIN reactor was demolished to make way for Portland House . With a full redevelopment of Aldermaston Manor , the £ 14 million office development became Blue Circle 's international headquarters and the complex was opened by Prince Richard , Duke of Gloucester . 
 = = = Toponymy = = = 
 The village of Aldermaston derives its name from <unk> , <unk> or <unk> , the Old English for " Ealdorman 's Homestead " . The Ealdorman — or Alderman — was a person of extreme importance , equating to the modern @-@ day Lord @-@ Lieutenant of the County . Although his country estate was in Aldermaston , he would have spent most of the time in the original county town of Wallingford . The Anglo @-@ Saxon Chronicle states that the first known Ealdorman of Berkshire , <unk> , fought the Danes with Ethelred of Wessex at the nearby Battle of Englefield in 871 . 
 Other documented names include Aldermaston ad <unk> ( 11th century ) , <unk> ( 12th century ) , <unk> ( 13th century ) , <unk> and <unk> Achard ( 14th century ) , and <unk> ( 19th century ) . 
 = = Government = = 
 Historically , Aldermaston was a hundred , though for a period it was within the <unk> hundred . By the 19th century , the hundreds had been superseded by other sub @-@ divisions . From then on , Aldermaston was , at times , part of the Bradfield Poor Law Union and Sanitary District , and the registration sub @-@ districts of Mortimer ( late 19th century ) and <unk> ( early 20th century ) . It was at all times an ecclesiastical parish and acquired civil parish status in the 1890s . 
 The civil parish council is elected by every resident on West Berkshire elections . It is in the area of West Berkshire unitary authority . The electoral ward of Aldermaston includes the neighbouring parishes of Wasing , Brimpton , Midgham , and Woolhampton . The ward is the smallest in West Berkshire by population . The ward 's councillor is Dominic <unk> , who represents the Conservative Party . 
 Aldermaston is under the catchment of Thames Valley Police and is covered by the Brimpton Neighbourhood Policing Team . In a meeting with Aldermaston Parish Council , the police reported that 57 criminal offences were reported to have taken place in the parish between 2009 and 2010 . Of this , the majority was theft from non @-@ dwelling properties . Vehicle crime had dropped by 57 % on the previous year but violent crime had risen from four to six incidents . Five of these crimes were reported to be domestic violence . There have been no reported cases of robbery in Aldermaston since 2006 . 
 = = Geography = = 
 Aldermaston is in West Berkshire , about 2 miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) from the Hampshire boundary . The village is 1 mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) south of the A4 road that links the parish with Newbury and Reading . The main road in Aldermaston , The Street , is part of the A340 road and links the village with Pangbourne and Basingstoke . The course of <unk> Street , the Roman road that linked Calleva Atrebatum ( Silchester ) with <unk> ( Gloucester ) via <unk> <unk> ( Cirencester ) runs south of the village , but none of the road survives in the area . 
 At the southern end of The Street is a small triangular village green called The Loosey — supposedly named after a " Lucy " who planted the oak tree which stands on the green . The Loosey is the site of a Roman well , discovered in 1940 by a cow that almost fell down it . The Loosey was previously home to the village maypole ( which was often climbed by Daniel Burr 's monkey ) and a drinking fountain erected by Charles Keyser to celebrate the Diamond Jubilee of Queen Victoria . 
 The River Kennet and River <unk> flow through the parish . The confluence of the rivers is approximately 0 @.@ 6 miles ( 0 @.@ 97 km ) north of the village . The Kennet and Avon Canal forms part of the parish 's boundaries with Woolhampton and Padworth . 
 Sections of Grim 's Bank are in the parish . Part of the earthwork in the AWE complex survives at a height of 3 @.@ 3 metres ( 11 ft ) and with a ditch 0 @.@ 9 metres ( 3 @.@ 0 ft ) deep . 
 = = = Geology = = = 
 The landscape of Aldermaston is influenced by Paices Hill and Rag Hill , which are extremities of the chalk formation the North Wessex Downs as part of the Thames Basin Heaths . The topography of the land in the parish generally slopes northward to the River Kennet . 
 The soil in the parish is high in clay . Due to the parish 's location within the Kennet Valley there is a high concentration of alluvium , with the content largely determined by the London Clay Formation , the Bagshot Formation , and the <unk> Beds . 
 = = = Flooding = = = 
 The quite flat low clay of Aldermaston 's north has with exceptional rainfall led to flooding certain populous streets on three occasions — 1971 , 1989 , and 2007 . The flood in 1971 caused by torrential rain was exacerbated by the non @-@ porous tarmac and buildings of the Atomic Weapons Establishment which managed for the first time to overwhelm its balancing ponds . This happened again in July 1989 , when an average of 6 inches ( 150 mm ) of rain was deposited across the parish in two hours ; water rose 5 feet ( 1 @.@ 5 m ) above the ponds and broke through a brick wall . The destroyed wall was rebuilt with 17 grilles to avoid another build @-@ up of water . A donation of £ 10 @,@ 000 was given to the village by Blue Circle . 
 In July 2007 , torrential rain flooded some of the traditional village centre and primary school . The storm coincided with the annual Glade music festival and jeopardised the event . The festival gates were temporarily closed while organisers assessed the flooding , which submerged one of the stages . The festival 's car park was incapacitated , with thousands of revellers stranded in the village and surrounding lanes . 
 The floods also hit the Church of England primary school , with the Royal Berkshire Fire and Rescue Service evacuating pupils and staff from the school in life rafts . The evacuation used four rafts , rescuing pupils and teachers from the school through windows . The 165 people ( 140 pupils and 25 members of staff ) were taken uphill to the parish hall , where blankets and sleeping bags had been provided . 
 Ian Henderson , a police constable at Thames Valley Police stated that the emergency services were " really stretched because of what happened over the county and the Glade event " , that " the [ A340 ] junction was two or three @-@ foot under water " , and predicted that " a lot of householders [ would be ] homeless . " 
 = = Demography = = 
 The 1831 census showed that 68 % of the employed population of Aldermaston were working class or " labourers and servants " . 20 % were middle class ( " middling sorts " ) , 10 % were upper class ( " employers and professionals " ) and 2 % were unclassified . 
 In 1887 the population of the parish was 528 . By 1896 , the population had grown to 585 . The population fluctuated steadily around 550 until the 1950s and 1960s , when a population explosion resulted in the 1961 UK census reporting 2 @,@ 186 residents in the parish . This coincides with the opening of the Atomic Weapons Establishment in the early 1950s , and the majority of this figure counts residents in the parts of Tadley within the parish of Aldermaston — between 1901 and 1961 , 368 houses were built in the parish . 
 A number of parish border changes occurred in the first half of the 20th century , including the net loss of 307 acres ( 124 ha ) to <unk> and Woolhampton on 1 April 1934 alone . By 2001 , the parish population had reduced to 927 . 
 The 2001 United Kingdom Census identified that 99 @.@ 3 % of householders in the parish as white . In 2005 30 % of parish residents lived in the village . Of the 70 % outside the village , 30 % lived at Aldermaston Wharf , 20 % in the local mobile home parks , 10 % in the Falcon Fields development and 10 % in " other outlying areas " . Falcon Fields is a housing development on the southern border of the parish , completed in the early 2000s . Ravenswing and Pinelands are mobile home parks near the Hampshire border . <unk> is an industrial area to the east of the parish , which has some light residential developments . 
 The average age of residents in the parish is approximately 50 with 31 @.@ 5 % of residents in the 45 – 64 age group . The average age of residents of Aldermaston Wharf is 30 @.@ 7 , and in the mobile home parks the average age is 53 @.@ 9 . Of these , 53 @.@ 3 % were female . This is in contrast with the 2001 census data , which showed that 49 @.@ 8 % were female . 
 In 2005 , 3 % of the parish population were unemployed and 25 % were retired . The retirement figure increased in the Pinelands and Ravenswing areas , with a statistic of 42 % . Most residents ' places of work are in surrounding towns , with their location in the parish largely dictating where to look for work . The 2005 survey identified that residents in the south of the parish ( Falcon Fields and Ravenswing / Pinelands ) travel towards Tadley and Basingstoke whereas those further north in the parish tend to find work in Reading , Newbury and London . 
 = = Economy = = 
 Historically , the main source of industry in Aldermaston has been agriculture . According to the 1831 census , approximately 66 % of working men ( aged 20 and over ) were employed in some form of agriculture . The next highest industry by workers was " retail and handicrafts " , which employed approximately 20 % . Employment categories in the 1881 census were more discreet ; just 20 % of working men identified their employment as agriculture . 30 % however , were listed as " general or unspecified commodities " . In this census , women 's employment was also documented . Of the 137 working women in the parish , 40 ( slightly fewer than 30 % ) worked in domestic services , whereas 82 ( approximately 60 % ) were of an unknown occupation . 
 = = = Agriculture = = = 
 In about 1797 a schoolmaster living in the village cultivated the Williams pear . The schoolmaster ( either Mr Wheeler or his successor , John Stair ) was the original cultivator , but the pear ( a cultivar of the European Pear ) was named after Richard Williams of Turnham Green , who grew several grafts of the original tree . On 5 December 1956 , a plaque commemorating the tree was unveiled on the wall of the village school . 
 Locally @-@ farmed wheat was milled at Aldermaston Mill until the 1920s . In existence at the time of the Domesday survey , the mill was previously called the " Kingsmill " , and at one time supplied flour to Huntley & Palmers in Reading . Now known as The Old Mill , it was owned by Wasing 's Mount family throughout the 18th and 19th centuries . William Mount let the mill to Francis Webb ( 1797 – 1811 ) , Mr Sherwood ( 1811 – 1820 ) , Mr King ( 1820 – 1824 ) , Mr <unk> ( 1824 – 1828 ) , Mr Mathews ( 1828 – 1848 ) , and William Gilchrist ( 1848 – 1856 ) . Gilchrist ( Mathews ' business partner ) bought the mill from Mount in 1856 using money inherited from his brother 's death the previous year . Owning it outright for approximately a year , he drowned in the River Kennet in 1857 after visiting the Angel public house in Woolhampton . Joseph Crockett purchased the mill in an auction the same year , before it was acquired by a Richard <unk> of Godalming in 1858 . In approximately 1860 , the mill was purchased by the Kersley family . Between then and 1885 , it was operated by Anthony Kersley , a miller and maltster who employed " six men and a boy , a carter , several domestic servants and a governess " . Kersley 's son , also named Anthony , ran the mill until 1895 . That year , Walter Parson bought the mill and operated it until approximately 1897 . Charles Keyser subsequently oversaw restoration on the mill building which " had been <unk> for upwards of three years " . He let the mill out to a Mr Iremonger from 1901 . Iremonger used the mill until the late 1920s , shortly before Keyser 's death . After Keyser had died and the Aldermaston estate had been divided and sold , his widow , Mary , approached Evelyn Arlott to run the mill as a tea room and guesthouse . The Arlott family purchased the mill in approximately 1939 , after the death of Mary Keyser . 
 In 1939 , there were seven farms on the Aldermaston estate — Forsters Farm , Village Farm , Church Farm , Upper Church Farm , <unk> Farm , Park Farm , and Soke Farm . These accounted for approximately 75 % of the estate 's land . Aside from these , there were six smallholdings within the parish but outside the land owned by the court . These were Springhill Farm , Court Farm , Strawberry Farm , Circus Farm , Ravenswing Farm , and <unk> Farm . 
 Of these , Church Farm and Forster 's Farm remain in operation . Upper Church Farm was originally known as Harry 's Farm , after a William Harry who died in 1544 . 
 = = = Pubs and brewing = = = 
 The local pub is named The Hind 's Head in honour of the Forster family crest . Built in the 17th century and originally operating as a coaching inn , the establishment was named The Pack Horse during the De La Mare and Forster lordships and The Congreve Arms throughout the <unk> ' ownership . 
 The building has a large black and gold clock set into the gable , and a small <unk> upon which is a gilt fox @-@ shaped weather vane . The bell was intended to be rung as an air @-@ raid siren during the Second World War . In the early 19th century the pub 's signboard carried the arms of the Congreve family , as well as branding for a company named " Adams " . In the British Parliamentary Papers of 1817 , the Committee on the State of the Police in the Metropolis reported evidence of a John Adams — a Reading @-@ based distiller and hop merchant — who competed for business against Simonds ' Brewery . By 1850 , the pub brewed beer on @-@ site ; a brewery was built as an out @-@ building behind the main pub building . John Knight produced beer at the pub for 40 years , selling it for 2d . The brewery building is still in existence , with the wooden louvres still operational . The building is now the pub 's kitchen . In the 1970s , the pub was owned by Whitbread . In the mid @-@ 1990s the pub was taken over by Gales Brewery ( having previously been a free house ) , later becoming tied to Fuller 's Brewery on their acquisition of Gales in 2006 . In the 1970s , the pub was home to the Kennet Folk Club . 
 The pub has its own gaol @-@ house , the lock @-@ up , at the rear . Built out of red brick , the small single @-@ storey building has a shallow domed roof . The inside of the lock @-@ up measures approximately 7 @.@ 5 feet ( 2 @.@ 3 m ) by 6 feet ( 1 @.@ 8 m ) , and is enclosed by a studded door with a grille . It was last used in 1865 and its drunk inhabitant burnt himself to death trying to keep warm . The lock @-@ up was designated as a Grade II listed building in April 1967 . On 11 September 2010 the lock @-@ up was opened to the public as part of the Heritage Open Days scheme . 
 Another pub in the parish , The Butt Inn , is located approximately 1 @.@ 25 miles ( 2 @.@ 01 km ) north @-@ east of the village . The pub is named after the archery butts that were located in the fields opposite the pub . The Falcon Inn was on the southern border of the parish . The pub , which closed in 2009 , was demolished in 2011 to improve traffic flow to AWE . In 2013 , the adjacent petrol station was rebuilt , extending onto the pub site . 
 The Aldermaston Brewery was established at Aldermaston Wharf in 1770 , and was demolished in the 1950s . It was replaced with a cable factory , which was demolished in 1990 . 
 = = = Cricket bats = = = 
 Old Village Farm ( on Fishermans Lane ) is now the location of a wood yard , used since the 1930s to prepare local willow for the production of cricket bats . The trees are grown at Harbour Hill Copse , where 70 trees are felled annually for this purpose . There are approximately 1000 trees growing at any given time . The workers at the yard cut the wood into approximate bat shapes , then cure the wood in a kiln . The clefts of wood are then shipped to India where the final manufacturing can be undertaken under moisture @-@ controlled conditions . 
 The yard would take on three up @-@ coming cricketers for the winter , in the hope that the hard work would " toughen them up " to get them picked for the England cricket team . One year the yard had help from Frank Tyson , Alan Moss , and Peter Loader . The following year they hosted three Davids — David Kaufman , David <unk> , and David Gibson . 
 The wood yard was featured on A Question of Sport , when cricketer Graham Gooch took part in the programme 's " Mystery Guest " round . Gooch endorsed the bats made from Aldermaston willow , which were sold by Surridge . When he scored 333 runs against India at Lord 's in the 1990 test season , the Turbo 333 bat , made from Aldermaston wood , was launched in his honour . 
 In the 1960s , Blue Peter aired a short documentary on the cricket bat production entitled " The Life of a Cricket Bat " . It was presented by Christopher Trace . 
 = = = Pottery = = = 
 In 1955 , the Aldermaston Pottery was established on the main street by studio potters Alan Caiger @-@ Smith and Geoffrey <unk> . The pottery was renowned for tin @-@ glazed and porcelain wares , which used scrap wood from the Village Farm <unk> to fire the kiln . The pottery closed in 2006 . It had previously scaled back its output in 1993 due to Caiger @-@ Smith 's partial retirement after the 1992 recession . 
 = = = Atomic Weapons Establishment = = = 
 The Atomic Weapons Establishment ( AWE ) , for which Aldermaston has become known , is less than 1 mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) south of the village . The establishment is where the UK designs and manufactures Trident missiles , and where decommissioned and redundant nuclear weapons are dismantled . In April 1958 , the first Aldermaston March was held . The march saw around 3 @,@ 000 protesters march from London to Aldermaston over four days , with a total attendance of 12 @,@ 000 at the establishment 's gates . The 50th anniversary of the event was marked on 24 March 2008 with the " Bomb Stops Here " protest , attended by Vivienne Westwood and CND president Walter Wolfgang . The 2008 demonstration was the biggest protest staged by CND in ten years . Until 2005 , AWE discharged " pre @-@ treated waste water " into the River Thames at Pangbourne via an 11 @.@ 8 miles ( 19 @.@ 0 km ) pipeline which runs under roads and fields within the parish . A water processing facility was installed on @-@ site in 2006 , though the Pangbourne Pipeline remains in situ . 
 = = = Other businesses = = = 
 Lafarge Aggregates owns various sites in the parish . In 1974 the village won an appeal against Pioneer Concrete 's application for gravel extraction near the village . Similar events took place in March 2003 when hundreds of local residents protested against an application of gravel extraction by Lafarge . <unk> 's initial appeal , in April 2003 , was turned down by West Berkshire Council . A further application to extract aggregate at the Wasing Estate was due to be decided in 2010 . One former extraction site , Butts Lake Quarry , is now a nature reserve and the flooded lakes have been identified as a Site of Special Scientific Interest and is now operated by the Berkshire , Buckinghamshire and Oxfordshire Wildlife Trust . The reserve contains specimens of trees such as alder , cherry , hawthorn , oak , and willow . Examples of reeds present include <unk> latifolia , <unk> australis , <unk> aquatica , and <unk> <unk> . Numerous species of bird nest in the reserve , including the common teal , shoveler , warbler , kingfisher , water rail , and nightingale . 
 Britain 's first roadside petrol filling station was opened by The AA on the Bath Road near Aldermaston on 2 March 1919 . The following year , one villager requested that a pump be installed by his house . " <unk> " Ford , who lived in The Forge with his wife Olive , was told by Keyser that it must be " behind a wall and recessed " . A hole was cut in the brick wall beside Ford 's yard to house the Shell @-@ branded pump . The location of this pump is marked by a square hole in the present wall . Ford 's business offered other motoring services , with signage reading " vacuum , oil , and cycles " . 
 There is a number of small businesses in the village , including a hairdressing salon , a software development company and the village shop . In the 1970s the hairdressers was a music shop , which was opened by Terry Wogan . Before this it was a cooperative village stores started by Charles Keyser . 
 There are two business parks in the parish — Calleva Business Park ( on the Berkshire / Hampshire border ) and Youngs Industrial Estate ( on Paices Hill ) . The latter opened in the early 1980s , and is the location of Paices Wood Country Parkland , a wildlife project sponsored by English Nature . 
 In 2007 Aldermaston won the Business Category Award in the regional final of the Calor Village of the Year competition . The judges stated that the village " has a very successful business community " and that " local businesses are well @-@ supported by villagers and in return these businesses support village activities " . In addition to the business award , the village was announced as the Overall Winner of the Calor " Berkshire Village of the Year " competition in 2006 , as well as category winners in the " Building Community Life " , " Business " , " Young People " and " ICT " categories . 
 = = Architecture = = 
 The majority of houses in the village were built between the 17th and late 19th centuries , including examples of Victorian Gothic architecture . Only one house has been built on the village 's main street since the early 20th century . The parish hall , built in 1897 , is predominantly flint and brick . 
 Most of the houses in the village are Grade II listed buildings , and many were built using local red and blue bricks . In total , 51 structures in the parish are listed , including gatepiers , greenhouses , a tomb , railings and a wall , the village telephone box and Aldermaston Lock . 
 = = Culture = = 
 Since the early 1800s , Aldermaston has held a candle auction every three years . The open auction starts with a horseshoe nail driven through a tallow candle an inch below the wick and lit in the parish hall . The lot is the lease of Church Acre , a plot of 2 acres ( 0 @.@ 81 ha ) granted to the church in 1815 after the <unk> Act . The proceedings are overseen by the vicar and churchwardens , who drink rum punch throughout the auction . Traditionally , the churchwardens smoked clay pipes during the event . 
 The parish hall often holds other events , such as plays produced by the village 's own amateur dramatics society . The society , known as The Aldermaston Players , have staged fundraising events in the village 1966 . In 1976 , the parish hall hosted an episode of the BBC 's Any Questions ? . 
 The village , along with the neighbouring parish of Wasing , holds an annual produce show at The Old Mill . The show , which was previously held behind the Hind 's Head pub , hosts produce competitions in approximately 100 classes . In the 1990s , a team of gardeners formed from the produce show entered the Chelsea Flower Show . They won a silver gilt in the Best Courtyard Garden Award in two consecutive years , for gardens named " Calma " and " Time Lords " . 
 Since 1957 there has been an annual performance of the York Nativity Play from the 15th century York Mystery Cycle . The play follows a script by E. Martin Browne with carols by William Byrd , Johannes <unk> , and Michael Praetorius . The performances are at the Church of St Mary the Virgin in early December , and the actors are local people who have appeared in the play for many years . In 1964 , the play was recorded and broadcast by the BBC Home Service under the title of Star Over Aldermaston . One member of the production team was David Shute . 
 Aldermaston was mentioned in Plum Pie ( 1966 ) by P. G. Wodehouse — " Every now and then we march from Aldermaston , protesting like a ton of bricks ... And then we sit a good deal . " This was a reference to the demonstrations of the Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament ( the Aldermaston Marches ) which took the form of marches from Aldermaston to London ( apart from in 1958 , when the march went from London to Aldermaston ) . This was an annual march from 1958 to 1963 . Aldermaston was the original location of The Glade Festival . The 2007 event was jeopardised by torrential rains and flooding but cautiously went ahead . In 2009 , the festival moved from the area and was held near Winchester . Since 2006 , the village has held a blues festival known as " Blues on the Meadow " . 
 The parish of Aldermaston forms a group with the local parishes of Wasing and Brimpton . The three share a monthly Parish Magazine featuring stories from churches , organisations , schools , businesses and various miscellany . 
 = = Transport = = 
 Aldermaston railway station is in Aldermaston Wharf , 1 @.@ 5 miles ( 2 @.@ 4 km ) from the village itself . The station is managed by National Rail and served by First Great Western services between Reading and Newbury . 
 The village is on the A340 road , and has nearby access to the A4 road and the M4 motorway . Newbury Buses route 104 serves the village , with services terminating in Newbury , Calcot and Reading . The 2005 Parish Plan identified a need for a relief road near the village . A report was presented in 2009 evaluating the problems caused by HGV traffic through the village , and described solutions which included support from Newbury MP Richard Benyon . 
 The nearest operating airstrip , Brimpton Airfield , is less than 1 mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) west of the village , within AWE 's restricted airspace . RAF Aldermaston ceased to operate as a civilian airport in 1950 . 
 The village is 1 @.@ 5 miles ( 2 @.@ 4 km ) south @-@ east of the Reading Marine Company 's headquarters on the Kennet and Avon Canal , which provides waterway links to London ( via the Thames ) and Bristol ( via the River Avon ) . 
 = = Education = = 
 The parish of Aldermaston has two primary schools . Aldermaston Primary School is a Local Authority @-@ run Church of England school in Wasing Lane and has about 150 pupils . It was established in 1836 and originally located in Church Road , moving to the present site in 1988 . The school uses the names of the manor 's squires in its house system . 
 The Cedars is a private school opened in 1992 in the former buildings of the Church of England school . The school has approximately 40 pupils enrolled . 
 Alder Bridge Steiner School , although located in Aldermaston Wharf , is within the parish of Padworth . Padworth College is situated on the border of Aldermaston and Padworth parishes . 
 = = Religious sites = = 
 = = = Parish church = = = 
 The Church of England parish church of Saint Mary the Virgin and was built in the mid @-@ 12th century . The Norman building was altered throughout the following millennium , particularly in 13th , 14th , 15th and 17th centuries . The 12th @-@ century building now comprises the current nave , with additions seen in the Forster Chapel and chancel ( 13th century ) , the steeple ( 14th century ) , and vestry ( 17th century ) . The 17th @-@ century Jacobean pulpit is an unusual heptagonal design . Various additions were made to the structure in the 14th and 15th centuries , primarily to the walls and ogee windows . A scratch dial was added to the south @-@ west buttress in the 14th century . 
 The church features architecture by Edward Doran Webb and stained glass by Charles <unk> Kempe . The Forster Chapel , a lady chapel added to the south face in the 13th century , contains the alabaster <unk> monument of Sir George Forster and his wife Elizabeth which was built in 1530 . Evidence suggests that the chapel may originally have been a chantry dedicated to St Nicholas . The roundel windows in the north wall date from the 13th century and are the oldest glass in Berkshire . 
 The tower has a peal of eight bells dating from 1681 to 1900 . The current organ , which has 16 stops , was installed in 1880 . 
 Individuals buried in the churchyard include squires Charles Keyser ( 1847 – 1929 ) and Daniel Burr ( <unk> – 1885 ) , schoolmaster John Stair ( <unk> – 1820 ) , and Maria Hale ( 1791 – 1879 ) . 
 = = Sport = = 
 Aldermaston has a number of sports teams . The village cricket team , Aldermaston Village CC , play at nearby Wasing Park . The club , which first played in 1786 as " The Gentlemen of Aldermaston " , originally played at a pitch at Aldermaston Court . The ground was lost when the airfield was built . Sir William Mount , 2nd Baronet , the grandfather of British Prime Minister David Cameron , allowed a cricket pitch to be established on a portion of his Wasing estate . The original football club played next to the cricket pitch . The club 's strip was sponsored by Mr. George L <unk> , the proprietor of the village shop . 
 Aldermaston Rugby Club and A.F.C. Aldermaston both play their home games at the Recreational Society at AWE . Tadley RFC is in the parish , about 1 @.@ 5 miles ( 2 @.@ 4 km ) from the village . 
 Aldermaston Raceway , a banger racing , demolition derby and stock car venue , Fleet Motor Club , is the relocation of the Aldershot Raceway which closed in 2007 . A course for off @-@ road 4x4 trials is close to the Raceway . 
 = = Notable people = = 
 Thomas Allibone , Lord of the Manor ( 1953 – 1985 ) 
 Alan Caiger @-@ Smith , the studio potter , founded Aldermaston Pottery 
 Duncan Grant , painter , lived in the village with Paul Roche for the last few years of his life , and died in the village 
 Felix Pole , Lord of the Manor ( 1939 – 1953 ) 
 Paul Roche , poet , lived in the village 
 = Major League Baseball = 
 Major League Baseball ( MLB ) is a professional baseball organization , the oldest of the four major professional sports leagues in the United States and Canada . A total of 30 teams now play in the American League ( AL ) and National League ( NL ) , with 15 teams in each league . The AL and NL operated as separate legal entities from 1901 and 1876 respectively . After cooperating but remaining legally separate entities since 1903 , the leagues merged into a single organization led by the Commissioner of Baseball in 2000 . The organization also oversees Minor League Baseball , which comprises about 240 teams affiliated with the Major League clubs . With the World Baseball Softball Confederation , MLB manages the international World Baseball Classic tournament . 
 Baseball 's first professional team was founded in Cincinnati in 1869 . The first few decades of professional baseball were characterized by rivalries between leagues and by players who often jumped from one team or league to another . The period before 1920 in baseball was known as the dead @-@ ball era ; players rarely hit home runs during this time . Baseball survived a conspiracy to fix the 1919 World Series , which came to be known as the Black Sox Scandal . The sport rose in popularity in the 1920s , and survived potential downturns during the Great Depression and World War II . Shortly after the war , baseball 's color barrier was broken by Jackie Robinson . 
 The 1950s and 1960s were a time of expansion for the AL and NL , then new stadiums and artificial turf surfaces began to change the game in the 1970s and 1980s . Home runs dominated the game during the 1990s , and media reports began to discuss the use of anabolic steroids among Major League players in the mid @-@ 2000s . In 2006 , an investigation produced the Mitchell Report , which implicated many players in the use of performance @-@ enhancing substances , including at least one player from each team . 
 Today , MLB is composed of thirty teams : twenty @-@ nine in the United States and one in Canada . Teams play 162 games each season and five teams in each league advance to a four @-@ round postseason tournament that culminates in the World Series , a best @-@ of @-@ seven championship series between the two league champions that dates to 1903 . Baseball broadcasts are aired throughout North America and in several other countries throughout the world . Games are aired on television , radio , and the Internet . MLB has the highest season attendance of any sports league in the world with more than 73 million spectators in 2015 . 
 = = Organizational structure = = 
 MLB is governed by the Major League Baseball Constitution . This document has undergone several incarnations since 1875 , with the most recent revisions being made in 2012 . Under the direction of the Commissioner of Baseball , MLB hires and maintains the sport 's umpiring crews , and negotiates marketing , labor , and television contracts . MLB maintains a unique , controlling relationship over the sport , including most aspects of Minor League Baseball . This is due in large part to the 1922 U.S. Supreme Court ruling in Federal Baseball Club v. National League , which held that baseball is not interstate commerce and therefore not subject to federal antitrust law . This ruling has been weakened only slightly in subsequent years . The weakened ruling granted more stability to the owners of teams and has resulted in values increasing at double @-@ digit rates . There were several challenges to MLB 's primacy in the sport between the 1870s and the Federal League in 1916 ; the last attempt at a new major league was the aborted Continental League in 1960 . 
 The chief executive of MLB is the commissioner , Rob Manfred . The chief operating officer is Tony <unk> . There are six executive vice @-@ presidents in charge of the following areas : baseball development , business , labor relations and human resources , finance , administration ( whose vice @-@ president is MLB 's Chief Information Officer ) , and baseball operations . As of November 19 , 2013 , the MLB website lists only five executive VPs ; the office of executive VP for labor relations and human resources is not listed . 
 The multimedia branch of MLB , which is based in Manhattan , is MLB Advanced Media . This branch oversees MLB.com and each of the 30 teams ' websites . Its charter states that MLB Advanced Media holds editorial independence from the league , but it is under the same ownership group and revenue @-@ sharing plan . MLB Productions is a similarly structured wing of the league , focusing on video and traditional broadcast media . MLB also owns 67 percent of MLB Network , with the other 33 percent split between several cable operators and satellite provider DirecTV . It operates out of studios in Secaucus , New Jersey , and also has editorial independence from the league . 
 = = League organization = = 
 In 1920 , the weak National Commission , which had been created to manage relationships between the two leagues , was replaced with the much more powerful Commissioner of Baseball , who had the power to make decisions for all of professional baseball unilaterally . For 60 years , the American and National Leagues fielded eight teams apiece . 
 In the 1960s , MLB expansion added eight teams , including the first non @-@ U.S. team ( the Montreal Expos ) . Two teams ( the Seattle Mariners and the Toronto Blue Jays ) were also added in the 1970s . From 1969 through 1993 , each league consisted of an East and West Division . A third division , the Central Division , was added in each league in 1994 . Through 1996 , the two leagues met on the field only during the World Series and the All @-@ Star Game . Regular @-@ season interleague play was introduced in 1997 . 
 In March 1995 , two new franchises — the Arizona Diamondbacks and Tampa Bay Devil Rays ( now known simply as the Tampa Bay Rays ) — were awarded by MLB , to begin play in 1998 . This addition brought the total number of franchises to 30 . In early 1997 , MLB decided to assign one new team to each league : Tampa Bay joined the AL and Arizona joined the NL . The original plan was to have an odd number of teams in each league ( 15 per league , with 5 in each division ) . In order for every team to be able to play daily , this would have required interleague play to be scheduled throughout the entire season . However , it was unclear at the time if interleague play would continue after the 1998 season , as it had to be approved by the players ' union . For this and other reasons , it was decided that both leagues should continue to have an even number of teams ; one existing club would have to switch leagues . The Milwaukee Brewers agreed in November 1997 to move from the AL to the NL , thereby making the NL a 16 @-@ team league . Later , when the Houston Astros changed ownership prior to the 2013 season , the team moved from the NL Central to the AL West , resulting in both leagues having three divisions of five teams each and allowing all teams to have a more balanced schedule . <unk> play is held throughout the season . 
 In 2000 , the AL and NL were dissolved as legal entities , and MLB became a single , overall league de jure , similar to the National Football League ( NFL ) , National Basketball Association ( NBA ) and National Hockey League ( NHL ) — albeit with two components called " leagues " instead of " conferences . " The same rules and regulations are used in both leagues , with one exception : the AL operates under the designated hitter rule , while the NL does not . This difference in rules between leagues is unique to MLB ; the other sports leagues of the U.S. and Canada have one set of rules for all teams . 
 = = Current teams = = 
 An asterisk ( * ) denotes a relocation of a franchise . See respective team articles for more information . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Founding = = = 
 In the 1860s , aided by the Civil War , " New York " -style baseball expanded into a national game and spawned baseball 's first governing body , The National Association of Base Ball Players . The NABBP existed as an amateur league for 12 years . By 1867 , more than 400 clubs were members . Most of the strongest clubs remained those based in the northeastern U.S. For professional baseball 's founding year , MLB uses the year 1869 — when the first professional team , the Cincinnati Red Stockings , was established . 
 A schism developed between professional and amateur ballplayers after the founding of the Cincinnati club . The NABBP split into an amateur organization and a professional organization . The National Association of Professional Base Ball Players , often known as the National Association ( NA ) , was formed in 1871 . Its amateur counterpart disappeared after only a few years . The modern Chicago Cubs and Atlanta Braves franchises trace their histories back to the National Association of Professional Base Ball Players in the 1870s . 
 In 1876 , the National League of Professional Base Ball Clubs ( later known as the National League or NL ) was established after the NA proved ineffective . The league placed its emphasis on clubs rather than on players . Clubs could now enforce player contracts , preventing players from jumping to higher @-@ paying clubs . Clubs were required to play the full schedule of games instead of forfeiting scheduled games when the club was no longer in the running for the league championship , which happened frequently under the NA . A concerted effort was made to curb gambling on games , which was leaving the validity of results in doubt . The first game in the NL — on Saturday , April 22 , 1876 ( at the Jefferson Street Grounds , Philadelphia ) — is often pointed to as the beginning of MLB . 
 The early years of the NL were tumultuous , with threats from rival leagues and a rebellion by players against the hated " reserve clause " , which restricted the free movement of players between clubs . Competitor leagues formed regularly and also disbanded regularly . The most successful was the American Association ( 1882 – 1891 ) , sometimes called the " beer and whiskey league " for its tolerance of the sale of alcoholic beverages to spectators . For several years , the NL and American Association champions met in a postseason championship series — the first attempt at a World Series . The two leagues merged in 1892 as a single 12 @-@ team NL , but the NL dropped four teams after the 1899 season . This led to the formation of the American League in 1901 under AL president Ban Johnson , and the resulting bidding war for players led to widespread contract @-@ breaking and legal disputes . 
 The war between the AL and NL caused shock waves throughout the baseball world . At a meeting at the Leland Hotel in Chicago in 1901 , the other baseball leagues negotiated a plan to maintain their independence . A new National Association was formed to oversee these minor leagues . While the NA continues to this day ( known as Minor League Baseball ) , at the time Ban Johnson saw it as a tool to end threats from smaller rivals who might expand in other territories and threaten his league 's dominance . 
 After 1902 , the NL , AL , and NA signed a new National Agreement which tied independent contracts to the reserve @-@ clause contracts . The agreement also set up a formal classification system for minor leagues , the forerunner of today 's system that was refined by Branch Rickey . 
 Several other early defunct baseball leagues are officially considered major leagues , and their statistics and records are included with those of the two current major leagues . These include the AA , the Union Association ( 1884 ) , the Players ' League ( 1890 ) , and the Federal League ( 1914 – 1915 ) . Both the UA and AA are considered major leagues by many baseball researchers because of the perceived high caliber of play and the number of star players featured . Some researchers dispute the major @-@ league status of the UA by pointing out that franchises came and went and that the St. Louis club was deliberately " stacked " ; the St. Louis club was owned by the league 's president and it was the only club that was close to major @-@ league caliber . 
 = = = Dead @-@ ball era = = = 
 The period between 1900 and 1919 is commonly called the " dead @-@ ball era . " Games of this era tended to be low scoring and were often dominated by pitchers , such as Walter Johnson , Cy Young , Christy Mathewson , Mordecai Brown , and Grover Cleveland Alexander . The term also accurately describes the condition of the baseball itself . The baseball used American rather than the modern Australian wool yarn and was not wound as tightly as it would become later , affecting the distance that it would travel . More significantly , balls were kept in play until they were mangled , soft and sometimes lopsided : a baseball cost three dollars , equal to $ 40 @.@ 95 today ( in inflation @-@ adjusted U.S. dollars ) , and owners were reluctant to purchase new balls . Fans were expected to throw back fouls and ( rare ) home runs . Baseballs also became stained with tobacco juice , grass , and mud , and sometimes the juice of licorice , which some players would chew for the purpose of discoloring the ball . 
 Also , pitchers could manipulate the ball through the use of the spitball . ( In 1921 use of this pitch was restricted to a few pitchers with a grandfather clause ) . Additionally , many ballparks had large dimensions , such as the West Side Grounds of the Chicago Cubs , which was 560 feet ( 170 m ) to the center field fence , and the Huntington Avenue Grounds of the Boston Red Sox , which was 635 feet ( 194 m ) to the center field fence , thus home runs were rare , and " small ball " tactics such as singles , bunts , stolen bases , and the hit @-@ and @-@ run play dominated the strategies of the time . Hitting methods like the Baltimore Chop were used to increase the number of infield singles . On a successful Baltimore chop , the batter hits the ball forcefully into the ground , causing it to bounce so high that the batter reaches first base before the ball can be fielded and thrown to the first baseman . 
 The adoption of the foul strike rule in the early twentieth century quickly sent baseball from a high @-@ scoring game to one where scoring runs became a struggle . Prior to the institution of this rule , foul balls were not counted as strikes : a batter could foul off any number of pitches with no strikes counted against him ; this gave an enormous advantage to the batter . In 1901 , the NL adopted the foul strike rule , and the AL followed suit in 1903 . 
 After the 1919 World Series between the Chicago White Sox and Cincinnati Reds , baseball was rocked by allegations of a game fixing scheme known as the Black Sox Scandal . Eight players — Joe Jackson , Eddie Cicotte , Claude Williams , Buck Weaver , Arnold " Chick " <unk> , Fred McMullin , Charles " Swede " <unk> , and Oscar " Happy " Felsch — intentionally lost the World Series in exchange for a ring worth $ 100 @,@ 000 . Despite being acquitted , all were permanently banned from Major League Baseball . 
 = = = Rise in popularity = = = 
 Baseball 's popularity increased in the 1920s and 1930s . The 1920 season was notable for the death of Ray Chapman of the Cleveland Indians . Chapman , who was struck in the head by a pitch and died a few hours later , became the only MLB player to die of an on @-@ field injury , a tragedy which led directly to both leagues requiring the placing into play new , white baseballs whenever a ball became scuffed or dirty , helping bring the " dead @-@ ball " era to an end . The following year , the New York Yankees made their first World Series appearance . By the end of the 1930s , the team had appeared in 11 World Series , winning eight of them . Yankees slugger Babe Ruth had set the single season home run record in 1927 , hitting 60 home runs ; a few years earlier , Ruth had set the same record with 29 home runs . 
 Affected by the difficulties of the Great Depression , baseball 's popularity had begun a downward turn in the early 1930s . By 1932 , only two MLB teams turned a profit . Attendance had fallen , due at least in part to a 10 % federal amusement tax added to baseball ticket prices . Baseball owners cut their rosters from 25 men to 23 men , and even the best players took pay cuts . Team executives were innovative in their attempts to survive , creating night games , broadcasting games live by radio and rolling out promotions such as free admission for women . Throughout the period of the Great Depression , no MLB teams moved or folded . 
 = = = World War II era = = = 
 The onset of World War II created a significant shortage of professional baseball players , as more than 500 men left MLB teams to serve in the military . Many of them played on service baseball teams that entertained military personnel in the US or in the Pacific . MLB teams of this time largely consisted of young men , older players , and those with a military classification of 4F , indicating mental , physical , or moral unsuitability for service . Men like Pete Gray , a one @-@ armed outfielder , got the chance to advance to the major leagues . However , MLB rosters did not include any black players through the end of the war . Black players , many of whom served in the war , were still restricted to playing Negro league baseball . 
 Wartime blackout restrictions , designed to keep outdoor lighting at low levels , caused another problem for baseball . These rules limited traveling and night games to the point that the 1942 season nearly had to be cancelled . On January 14 , 1942 , MLB Commissioner Kenesaw Mountain Landis wrote a letter to U.S. President Franklin D. Roosevelt and pleaded for the continuation of baseball during the war in hopes for a start of a new major league season . President Roosevelt responded , " I honestly feel that it would be best for the country to keep baseball going . There will be fewer people unemployed and everybody will work longer hours and harder than ever before . And that means that they ought to have a chance for recreation and for taking their minds off their work even more than before . " 
 With the approval of President Roosevelt , spring training began in 1942 with few repercussions . The war interrupted the careers of stars including Stan Musial , Ted Williams , and Joe DiMaggio , but baseball clubs continued to field their teams . 
 = = = Breaking the color barrier = = = 
 Branch Rickey , president and general manager of the Brooklyn Dodgers , began making efforts to introduce a black baseball player to the previously all @-@ white professional baseball leagues in the mid @-@ 1940s . He selected Jackie Robinson from a list of promising Negro league players . After obtaining a commitment from Robinson to " turn the other cheek " to any racial antagonism directed at him , Rickey agreed to sign him to a contract for $ 600 a month . In what was later referred to as " The Noble Experiment " , Robinson was the first black baseball player in the International League since the 1880s , joining the Dodgers ' farm club , the Montreal Royals , for the 1946 season . 
 The following year , the Dodgers called Robinson up to the major leagues . On April 15 , 1947 , Robinson made his major league debut at Ebbets Field before a crowd of 26 @,@ 623 spectators , including more than 14 @,@ 000 black patrons . Black baseball fans began flocking to see the Dodgers when they came to town , abandoning their Negro league teams which they had followed exclusively . Robinson 's promotion met a generally positive , although mixed , reception among newspapers and white major league players . Manager Leo Durocher informed his team , " I do not care if the guy is yellow or black , or if he has stripes like a fuckin ' zebra . I 'm the manager of this team , and I say he plays . What 's more , I say he can make us all rich . And if any of you cannot use the money , I will see that you are all traded . " 
 After a strike threat by some players , NL President Ford Frick and Baseball Commissioner Happy Chandler let it be known that any striking players would be suspended . Robinson received significant encouragement from several major league players , including Dodgers teammate Pee Wee Reese who said , " You can hate a man for many reasons . Color is not one of them . " That year , Robinson earned the inaugural Major League Baseball Rookie of the Year Award ( separate NL and AL Rookie of the Year honors were not awarded until 1949 ) . 
 Less than three months later , Larry Doby became the first African @-@ American to break the color barrier in the American League with the Cleveland Indians . The next year , a number of other black players entered the major leagues . Satchel Paige was signed by the Indians and the Dodgers added star catcher Roy Campanella and Don Newcombe , who was later the first winner of the Cy Young Award for his outstanding pitching . 
 = = = Ban on women = = = 
 Major League Baseball banned the signing of women to contracts in 1952 , and that ban lasted until 1992 . 
 = = = Expanding west , south , and north = = = 
 From 1903 to 1953 , the two major leagues consisted of two eight @-@ team leagues . The 16 teams were located in ten cities , all in the northeastern and midwestern United States : New York City had three teams and Boston , Chicago , Philadelphia , and St. Louis each had two teams . St. Louis was the southernmost and westernmost city with a major league team . The longest possible road trip , from Boston to St. Louis , took about 24 hours by railroad . In 1953 , the NL 's Boston Braves became the Milwaukee Braves . In 1954 , the St. Louis Browns became the Baltimore Orioles . In 1955 , the Philadelphia Athletics became the Kansas City Athletics . 
 Baseball experts consider the Brooklyn / Los Angeles Dodgers ' boss Walter O 'Malley to be " perhaps the most influential owner of baseball 's early expansion era . " Before the 1958 Major League Baseball season , he moved the Brooklyn Dodgers to Los Angeles . When O 'Malley moved the Dodgers from Brooklyn , he appeared on the cover of TIME . O 'Malley was also influential in persuading the rival New York Giants to move west to become the San Francisco Giants . The Giants were already suffering from slumping attendance records at their aging ballpark , the Polo Grounds . Had the Dodgers moved out west alone , the St. Louis Cardinals — 1 @,@ 600 mi ( 2 @,@ 575 km ) away — would have been the closest NL team . The joint move made West Coast road trips economical for visiting teams . O 'Malley invited San Francisco Mayor George Christopher to New York to meet with Giants owner Horace Stoneham . Stoneham was considering moving the Giants to Minnesota , but he was convinced to join O 'Malley on the West Coast at the end of 1957 . The meetings between Stoneham , Christopher and O 'Malley occurred against the wishes of Commissioner of Baseball Ford Frick . The dual moves were successful for both franchises — and for MLB . The Dodgers set a single @-@ game MLB attendance record in their first home appearance with 78 @,@ 672 fans . 
 In 1961 , the first Washington Senators franchise moved to Minneapolis – St. Paul to become the Minnesota Twins . Two new teams were added to the American League at the same time : the Los Angeles Angels ( who soon moved from downtown L.A. to nearby Anaheim ) and a new Washington Senators franchise . The NL added the Houston Astros and the New York Mets in 1962 . The Astros ( known as the " Colt .45s " during their first three seasons ) became the first southern major league franchise since the Louisville Colonels folded in 1899 and the first franchise to be located along the Gulf Coast . The Mets established a reputation for futility by going 40 – 120 during their first season of play in the nation 's media capital — and by playing only a little better in subsequent campaigns — but in their eighth season ( 1969 ) the Mets became the first of the 1960s expansion teams to play in the post @-@ season , culminating in a World Series title over the heavily @-@ favored Baltimore Orioles . 
 In 1966 , the major leagues moved to the " Deep South " when the Braves moved to Atlanta . In 1968 , the Kansas City Athletics moved west to become the Oakland Athletics . In 1969 , the American and National Leagues both added two expansion franchises . The American League added the Seattle Pilots ( who became the Milwaukee Brewers after one disastrous season in Seattle ) and the Kansas City Royals . The NL added the first Canadian franchise , the Montreal Expos , as well as the San Diego Padres . 
 In 1972 , the second Washington Senators moved to the Dallas – Fort Worth metroplex to become the Texas Rangers . In 1977 , baseball expanded again , adding a second Canadian team , the Toronto Blue Jays , as well as the Seattle Mariners . Subsequently , no new teams were added and no teams moved until the 1990s . In 1993 , the NL added the Florida Marlins in the Miami area and the Colorado Rockies in Denver . In 1998 , the Brewers switched leagues by joining the National League and two new teams were added : the NL 's Arizona Diamondbacks in Phoenix and the American League 's Tampa Bay Devil Rays in St. Petersburg , Florida . 
 After the 2001 season , the team owners voted in favor of contraction . Several MLB teams had been considered for elimination in early talks about contraction , but the Montreal Expos and the Minnesota Twins were the two teams that came closest to folding under the plan . Plans for MLB contraction were halted when the Twins landlord was awarded a court injunction that required the team to play its 2002 home games at their stadium . MLB owners agreed to hold off on reducing the league 's size until at least 2006 . 
 The Montreal Expos became the first franchise in over three decades to move when they became the Washington Nationals in 2005 . This move left Canada with just one team , but it also returned baseball to the United States capital city after a 33 @-@ year absence . This franchise shift , like many previous ones , involved baseball 's return to a city which had been previously abandoned . Not counting the short @-@ lived Federal League , Montreal is the only city granted an MLB franchise since 1901 that does not currently host a team . 
 = = = Pitching dominance and rule changes = = = 
 By the late 1960s , the balance between pitching and hitting had swung in favor of the pitchers . In 1968 — later nicknamed " the year of the pitcher " — Boston Red Sox player Carl Yastrzemski won the American League batting title with an average of just .301 , the lowest in the history of Major League Baseball . Detroit Tigers pitcher Denny McLain won 31 games , making him the only pitcher to win 30 games in a season since Dizzy Dean in 1934 . St. Louis Cardinals starting pitcher Bob Gibson achieved an equally remarkable feat by allowing an ERA of just 1 @.@ 12 . 
 Following these pitching performances , in December 1968 the MLB Playing Rules Committee voted to reduce the strike zone from knees to shoulders to top of knees to armpits and lower the pitcher 's mound from 15 to 10 inches , beginning in the 1969 season . 
 In 1973 the American League , which had been suffering from much lower attendance than the National League , sought to increase scoring even further by initiating the designated hitter ( DH ) rule . 
 = = = New stadiums and artificial surfaces = = = 
 Throughout the 1960s and 1970s , as baseball expanded , NFL football had been surging in popularity , making it economical for many of these cities to build multi @-@ purpose stadiums instead of single @-@ purpose baseball fields . Because of climate and economic issues many of these facilities had playing surfaces made from artificial turf , as well as the oval designs characteristic of stadiums designed to house both baseball and football . This often resulted in baseball fields with relatively more foul territory than older stadiums . These characteristics changed the nature of professional baseball , putting a higher premium on speed and defense over home @-@ run hitting power , since the fields were often too big for teams to expect to hit many home runs and foul balls hit in the air could more easily be caught for outs . 
 Teams began to be built around pitching — particularly their bullpens — and speed on the basepaths . Artificial surfaces meant balls traveled quicker and bounced higher , so it became easier to hit ground balls " in the hole " between the corner and middle infielders . Starting pitchers were no longer expected to throw complete games ; it was enough for a starter to go 6 – 7 innings and turn the game over to the team 's closer , a position which grew in importance over these decades . As stolen bases increased , home run totals dropped . After Willie Mays hit 52 home runs in 1965 , only one player ( George Foster ) reached that mark until the 1990s . 
 = = = Power age = = = 
 <unk> in the late 1990s and early 2000s , baseball players hit 40 or 50 home runs in a season , a feat that was considered rare even in the 1980s . It has since become apparent that at least some of this power surge was a result of players using steroids and other performance @-@ enhancing drugs . Many modern baseball theorists believe that the need of pitchers to combat the rise in power could lead to a pitching revolution at some point . New pitches , such as the mysterious <unk> , could shift the balance of power back to the defensive side . Several pitches have changed the game of baseball , including the slider in the 1950s and 60s and the split @-@ fingered fastball in the 1970s to 90s . Since the 1990s , the changeup has made a resurgence , being thrown masterfully by pitchers such as Trevor Hoffman , Greg Maddux , Jamie Moyer , Tom Glavine , Johan Santana , Pedro Martínez and Tim Lincecum . Recently , pitchers such as Lincecum , Jonathan Sánchez , and Ubaldo Jiménez have been throwing changeups with a split @-@ finger grip , creating a dropping movement , dubbed the " split change . " 
 = = Uniforms = = 
 A baseball uniform is a type of uniform worn by baseball players , and by some non @-@ playing personnel , such as field managers and coaches . It is worn to indicate the person 's role in the game and — through the use of logos , colors , and numbers — to identify the teams and their players , managers , and coaches . 
 Traditionally , home uniforms display the team name on the front , while away uniforms display the team 's home location . In modern times , however , exceptions to this pattern have become common , with teams using their team name on both uniforms . Most teams also have one or more alternate uniforms , usually consisting of the primary or secondary team color on the vest instead of the usual white or gray . In the past few decades throwback uniforms have become popular . 
 The New York Knickerbockers were the first baseball team to use uniforms , taking the field on April 4 , 1849 , in pants made of blue wool , white flannel shirts ( jerseys ) and straw hats . Caps and other types of headgear have been a part of baseball uniforms from the beginning . Baseball teams often wore full @-@ brimmed straw hats or no cap at all since there was no official rule regarding headgear . Under the 1882 uniform rules , players on the same team wore uniforms of different colors and patterns that indicated which position they played . 
 In the late 1880s , the Detroit Wolverines and Washington Nationals of the National League and the Brooklyn Bridegrooms of the American Association were the first to wear striped uniforms . By the end of the 19th century , teams began the practice of having two different uniforms , one for when they played at home in their own baseball stadium and a different one for when they played away ( on the road ) at the other team 's ballpark . It became common to wear white pants with a white color vest at home and gray pants with a gray or solid ( dark ) colored vest when away . By 1900 , both home and away uniforms were standard across the major leagues . 
 = = Season structure = = 
 = = = Spring training = = = 
 Spring training is a series of practices and exhibition games preceding the start of the regular season . Spring training allows new players to audition for roster and position spots , and gives existing team players practice time prior to competitive play . The teams are divided into the Cactus League and the Grapefruit League . Spring training has always attracted fan attention , drawing crowds who travel to the warmer climates to enjoy the weather and watch their favorite teams play , and spring training usually coincides with spring break for many college students . Autograph seekers also find greater access to players during spring training . 
 Spring training typically lasts almost two months , starting in mid February and running until just before the season opening day , traditionally the first week of April . As pitchers benefit from a longer training period , pitchers and catchers begin spring training several days before the rest of the team . 
 = = = Regular season = = = 
 The current MLB regular season , consisting of 162 games per team , typically begins on the first Sunday in April and ends on the first Sunday in October . Each team 's schedule is typically organized into three @-@ game series , with occasional two- or four @-@ game series . Postponed games or continuations of suspended games can result in an ad hoc one @-@ game or five @-@ game series . A team 's series are organized into <unk> and road trips that group multiple series together . Teams generally play games five to seven days per week , commonly having Monday or Thursday as an off day . Frequently , games are scheduled at night . Sunday games are generally played during the afternoon , allowing teams to travel to their next destination prior to a Monday night game . In addition , teams will play day games frequently on Opening Day , holidays , and getaway days . 
 Each team plays 19 games against each of its four divisional opponents . It plays one home series and one away series , amounting to six or seven games , against the 10 other teams in its league . A team also plays one of the divisions in the other league , rotating each year , with two opponents in a three @-@ game home series , two in a three @-@ game away series , and one with four games split between home and away . Furthermore , each team has an interleague " natural rival " ( in many cases its counterpart in the same metro area ) with which it plays two home games and two away games each year . 
 With an odd number of teams in each league ( 15 ) , it is necessary to have two teams participate in interleague play for most days in the season , except when two or more teams have a day off . Each team plays 20 interleague games throughout the season , usually with just one interleague game per day , but for one weekend in late May all teams will participate in an interleague series . Use of the DH rule is determined by the home team 's league rules . Before 2013 interleague play was structured differently : there would be one weekend in mid @-@ May and another period consisting typically of the last two @-@ thirds of June in which all teams played interleague games ( save for two NL teams each day ) , and no interleague games were scheduled outside those dates . 
 Over the course of a season , teams compete for one of the five playoff berths in their league . They can win one of these berths by either winning their division , or by capturing a wild card spot . 
 After the conclusion of the 162 @-@ game season , an additional tie @-@ breaking game ( or games ) may be needed to determine postseason participation . 
 = = = All @-@ Star Game = = = 
 In early @-@ to @-@ mid July , just after the midway point of the season , the Major League Baseball All @-@ Star Game is held during a four @-@ day break from the regular @-@ season schedule . The All @-@ Star game features a team of players from the American League ( AL ) — led by the manager of the previous AL World Series team — and a team of players from the National League ( NL ) , similarly managed , in an exhibition game . From 1959 to 1961 , two games were held each season , one was held in July and one was held in August . The designated @-@ hitter rule was used in the All @-@ Star game for the first time in 1989 . Following games used a DH when the game was played in an AL ballpark . Since 2010 , the DH rule has been in effect regardless of venue . 
 The first official All @-@ Star Game was held as part of the 1933 World 's Fair in Chicago , Illinois , and was the idea of Arch Ward , then sports editor for The Chicago Tribune . Initially intended to be a one @-@ time event , its great success resulted in making the game an annual one . Ward 's contribution was recognized by Major League Baseball in 1962 with the creation of the " Arch Ward Trophy " , given to the All @-@ Star Game 's Most Valuable Player each year . ( In 2002 , this was renamed the Ted Williams Most Valuable Player Award . ) 
 Beginning in 1947 , the eight position players in each team 's starting lineup have been voted into the game by fans . The fan voting was discontinued after a 1957 ballot @-@ box @-@ stuffing scandal in Cincinnati : seven of the eight slots originally went to Reds players , two of whom were subsequently removed from the lineup to make room for Willie Mays and Hank Aaron . Fan voting was reinstated in 1970 and has continued ever since , including Internet voting in recent years . 
 The 2002 contest in Milwaukee controversially ended in an 11 @-@ inning tie . Since 2003 , the league which wins the All @-@ Star game gets home @-@ field advantage in the World Series : the league champion hosts the first two games at its own ballpark as well as the last two ( if necessary ) . The National League did not win an All @-@ Star game and thus gain home @-@ field advantage until 2010 ; it was able to overcome this disadvantage and win in three of the seven World Series from 2003 to 2009 . 
 MLB All @-@ Star game players from both leagues have worn their team uniforms at the game with one exception . In the 1933 All @-@ Star Game , the National League All @-@ Star Team members wore special gray uniforms with " National League " written in navy blue letters across the front of the jersey . 
 = = = Postseason = = = 
 When the regular season ends after the first Sunday in October ( or the last Sunday in September ) , ten teams enter the postseason playoffs . These ten teams consist of six teams that are division champions by earning the best regular season overall win @-@ loss record for their respective divisions , and four who are " wild @-@ card " teams that are each one of two teams in their respective leagues who have earned the best regular season win @-@ loss record , but are not division champions . Four rounds of series of games are played to determine the champion : 
 Wild Card Game , a one @-@ game playoff between the two wild @-@ card teams in each league . 
 American League Division Series and National League Division Series , each a best @-@ of @-@ five @-@ games series . 
 American League Championship Series and National League Championship Series , each a best @-@ of @-@ seven @-@ games series played between the surviving teams from the ALDS and NLDS . The league champions are informally referred to as the AL and NL pennant winners . 
 World Series , a best @-@ of @-@ seven @-@ games series played between the pennant winners of each league . 
 Within each league , the division winners are the # 1 , # 2 and # 3 seeds , based on win – loss records . The team with the best record among non division winners will be the first wildcard and the # 4 seed . The team with the second best record among non division winners will be the second wildcard and the # 5 seed . In the wildcard round , the # 5 seed will play at the # 4 seed in a one @-@ game playoff . For the division series , the matchup will be the # 1 seed against the Wild Card Game winner and the # 2 seed against the # 3 seed . The team belonging to the league that won the mid @-@ season All @-@ Star Game receives home @-@ field advantage in the World Series . 
 Because each postseason series is split between the home fields of the two teams , home @-@ field advantage does not usually play a large role in the postseason unless the series goes to its maximum number of games , giving one team an additional game at home . However , the first two games of a postseason series are hosted by the same team . That team may have an increased chance of starting the series with two wins , thereby gaining some momentum for the rest of the series . 
 Use of the DH rule in the World Series is determined by the home team 's league rules . 
 = = International play = = 
 Since 1986 an All @-@ Star team from MLB is sent to a biennial end @-@ of @-@ the @-@ season tour of Japan , dubbed as MLB Japan All @-@ Star Series , playing exhibition games in a best @-@ of format against the All @-@ Stars from Nippon Professional Baseball ( NPB ) or recently as of 2014 their national team Samurai Japan . 
