 In 2008 , MLB played the MLB China Series in the People 's Republic of China . It was a series of two spring @-@ training games between the San Diego Padres and Los Angeles Dodgers . The games were an effort to popularize baseball in China . 
 MLB played the MLB Taiwan Series in Taiwan in November 2011 . It was a series of five exhibition games played by a team made up of MLB players called the MLB All @-@ Stars and the Chinese Taipei National Team . The MLB All @-@ Stars swept the series , five games to zero . At the end of the 2011 season , it was announced that the Seattle Mariners and the Oakland Athletics would play their season openers in Japan . In October 2013 , Phil Rogers of the Chicago Tribune wrote that MLB was considering postseason all @-@ star tours in Taiwan and Korea ; baseball is increasing in popularity in both countries . 
 The Arizona Diamondbacks opened the 2014 season against Los Angeles Dodgers on March 22 – 23 in Australia . The teams played each other at the historic Sydney Cricket Ground , which has a seating capacity of 46 @,@ 000 . The two games represented the first MLB regular @-@ season play held in that country . The games counted as home games for the Diamondbacks , so they played 79 home games at Chase Field . 
 Together with the World Baseball Softball Confederation , MLB sponsors the World Baseball Classic , an international baseball tournament contested by national teams . 
 = = Steroids in baseball = = 
 In 1998 , both Mark McGwire and Sammy Sosa hit more than the long @-@ standing single @-@ season MLB record of 61 home runs . Barry Bonds topped the record in 2001 with 73 home runs . McGwire , Bonds and Sosa became the subjects of speculation regarding the use of performance @-@ enhancing substances . McGwire later admitted that he used a steroid hormone that was still legal in baseball during the 1998 season . Baseball 's original steroid testing policy , in effect from 2002 to 2005 , provided for penalties ranging from a ten @-@ game suspension for a first positive test to a one @-@ year suspension for a fourth positive test . Players were tested at least once per year , with the chance that several players could be tested many times per year . 
 A 2006 book , Game of Shadows by San Francisco Chronicle investigative reporters Lance Williams and Mark Fainaru @-@ Wada , chronicled alleged extensive use of performance enhancers , including several types of steroids and growth hormone by baseball superstars Barry Bonds , Gary Sheffield , and Jason Giambi . Former Senate Majority Leader George Mitchell was appointed by Selig on March 30 , 2006 to investigate the use of performance @-@ enhancing drugs in MLB . The appointment was made after several influential members of the U.S. Congress made negative comments about both the effectiveness and honesty of MLB 's drug policies and Commissioner Selig . 
 The day before the Mitchell Report was to be released in 2007 , Selig said , " I haven 't seen the report yet , but I 'm proud I did it . " The report said that after mandatory random testing began in 2004 , HGH treatment for athletic enhancement became popular among players , as HGH is not detectable in tests . It pointed out that HGH is likely a placebo with no performance @-@ enhancing effects . The report included substance use allegations against at least one player from each MLB team . 
 According to ESPN , some people questioned whether Mitchell 's director role with the Boston Red Sox created a conflict of interest , especially because no " prime [ Sox ] players were in the report . " The report named several prominent Yankees who were parts of World Series clubs ; there is a long @-@ running and fierce Yankees – Red Sox rivalry . Former U.S. prosecutor John M. Dowd brought up Mitchell 's conflict of interest , but he later said that the former senator had done a good job . Mitchell acknowledged that his " tight relationship with Major League Baseball left him open to criticism " , but he said that readers who examine the report closely " will not find any evidence of bias , of special treatment of the Red Sox " . 
 On January 10 , 2013 , MLB and the players union reached an agreement to add random , in @-@ season HGH testing . They also agreed to implement a new test to reveal the use of testosterone for the 2013 season . The current MLB drug policy provides for an 80 @-@ game suspension for a first positive test , a 162 @-@ game suspension for a second positive test , and a lifetime suspension for a third positive test . In 2009 , allegations surfaced against Alex Rodriguez and David Ortiz , and Manny Ramirez received a 50 @-@ game suspension after testing positive for banned substances . In early April 2011 , Ramirez retired from baseball rather than face a 100 @-@ game suspension for his second positive steroid test . 
 = = MLB in media = = 
 = = = Television = = = 
 Several networks televise baseball games , including Fox , ESPN , and MLB Network . Since 2008 , Fox Sports has broadcast MLB games on Fox Saturday Baseball throughout the entire season ; Fox previously only broadcast games from May to September . Fox also holds rights to the All @-@ Star Game each season . Fox also alternates League Championship Series broadcasts , broadcasting the American League Championship Series ( ALCS ) in odd @-@ numbered years and the National League Championship Series ( NLCS ) in even @-@ numbered years . Fox broadcasts all games of the World Series . ESPN continues to broadcast MLB games through 2013 as well , beginning with national Opening Day coverage . ESPN broadcasts Sunday Night Baseball , Monday Night Baseball , Wednesday Night Baseball , and Baseball Tonight . ESPN also has rights to the Home Run Derby at the All @-@ Star Game each July . 
 TBS airs Sunday afternoon regular season games ( non @-@ exclusive ) nationally . In 2007 , TBS began its exclusive rights to any tiebreaker games that determine division or wild card champions ; it also airs exclusive coverage of the Division Series round of the playoffs . TBS carries the League Championship Series that are not included under Fox 's television agreement ; TBS shows the NLCS in odd @-@ numbered years and the ALCS in even @-@ numbered years . 
 In January 2009 , MLB launched the MLB Network , featuring news and coverage from around the league , and airing 26 live games in the 2009 season . Each team also has local broadcasts for all games not carried by Fox on Saturdays or ESPN on Sunday nights . These games are typically split between a local broadcast television station and a local or regional sports network ( <unk> ) , though some teams only air local games through <unk> or through their own team networks . As Canada only contains one team , Sportsnet broadcasts Toronto Blue Jays games nationally . The channel is owned by Rogers Communications , who is also the parent company of the Blue Jays . Sportsnet also televises Fox 's Saturday afternoon games , the All @-@ Star Game , playoff games , and the World Series . In April 2011 , TSN2 began carrying ESPN Sunday Night Baseball in Canada . 
 = = = Blackout policy = = = 
 MLB has several blackout rules . A local broadcaster has priority to televise games of the team in their market over national broadcasters . For example , at one time TBS showed many Atlanta Braves games nationally and internationally in Canada . Fox Sports Networks also show many games in other areas . If the Braves played a team that FSN or another local broadcaster showed , the local station will have the broadcast rights for its own local market , while TBS would have been blacked out in the same market during the game . A market that has a local team playing in a weekday ESPN or ESPN2 game and is shown on a local station will see ESPNews , or , in the past , another game scheduled on ESPN or ESPN2 at the same time ( if ESPN or ESPN2 operates a regional coverage broadcasting and operates a game choice ) , or will be subject to an alternative programming feed . MLB 's streaming Internet video service is also subject to the same blackout rules . 
 = = = Radio and Internet = = = 
 ESPN Radio holds national broadcast rights and broadcasts Sunday Night Baseball weekly throughout the season in addition to all playoff games . The rights to the World Series are exclusive to ESPN . 
 In addition , each team employs its own announcers , who broadcast during the regular season . Most teams operate regional networks to cover their fan bases ; some of these supposedly regional networks ( such as the New York Yankees Radio Network ) have a national reach with affiliates located across the United States . Major League Baseball has an exclusive rights deal with XM Satellite Radio , which includes the channel MLB Network Radio and live play @-@ by @-@ play of all games . Many teams also maintain a network of stations that broadcast their games in Spanish ; the former Montreal Expos broadcast their games in both English and French . 
 MLB games are also broadcast live on the internet . All television and radio broadcasts of games are available via subscription to <unk> at Major League Baseball 's website , MLB.com , and radio @-@ only broadcasts are also available via subscription to MLB.com Gameday Audio . Blackout rules are still applied for live television broadcasts , but not radio broadcasts . 
 = = = International broadcasting = = = 
 ESPN Deportes televises a large number of MLB games in Spanish throughout Latin America . <unk> 2 airs games in Puerto Rico , including spring training games and most of the World Baseball Classic games involving the team from Puerto Rico . In Brazil , ESPN Brasil has exclusive rights on TV ( ESPN and ESPN + ) and Internet ( WatchESPN ) , with Fox Sports also broadcasting some games . 
 Five in the United Kingdom previously screened MLB games , including the All @-@ Star Game and the postseason games , on Sunday and Wednesday usually starting at 1 am BST . Most recently , Johnny Gould and Josh Chetwynd presented MLB on Five on that station . The channel covered baseball beginning on its opening night in 1997 , but for financial reasons , the decision was made not to pick up MLB for the 2009 season . ESPN UK show live and recorded games several times a week — it is available with BT Sport and ( on a subscriber @-@ basis ) Virgin Media in the UK . ESPN America televised a large number of games in the UK and dozens of other countries ; in May 2013 , ESPN announced that it would shut down the channel on July 31 , 2013 . 
 In Australia , MLB games are regularly shown on ESPN Australia ( subscription ) . 
 In the Middle East & North Africa , MLB games are broadcast on beIN Sports channels . 
 = Raemer Schreiber = 
 Raemer Edgar Schreiber ( November 11 , 1910 – December 24 , 1998 ) was an American physicist from McMinnville , Oregon who served Los Alamos National Laboratory during World War II , participating in the development of the atomic bomb . He saw the first one detonated in the Trinity nuclear test in July 1945 , and prepared the Fat Man bomb that was used in the bombing of Nagasaki . After the war , he served at Los Alamos as a group leader , and was involved in the design of the hydrogen bomb . In 1955 , he became the head of its Nuclear Rocket Propulsion ( N ) Division , which developed the first nuclear @-@ powered rockets . He served as deputy director of the laboratory from 1972 until his retirement in 1974 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Raemer Edgar Schreiber was born in McMinnville , Oregon on November 11 , 1910 , the son of Bertha ( née Raemer ) and Michael Schreiber . He was educated at Masonville Grade School and McMinnville High School . In 1927 he entered Linfield College in McMinnville , where he majored in physics and mathematics , and received his Bachelor of Arts degree in 1931 . He then earned his Master of Arts degree from the University of Oregon in 1932 . He married Marguerite Elizabeth Doak , a Linfield College French major in 1933 . They had two daughters , Paula and Sara . 
 Schreiber was a graduate assistant at Oregon State College from 1932 to 1935 , when he became an instructor at Purdue University . He was awarded his Ph.D. from Purdue in 1941 , writing a thesis on an " Investigation of Nuclear Reactions and Scattering Produced by Neutrons " . For his thesis , he constructed a neutron generator , and originally intended to discuss the possibilities of studying neutron diffraction in crystals , but this really only became possible with the development of nuclear reactors that produced large quantities of high energy neutrons . After the discovery of nuclear fission in 1939 , he became interested in the phenomenon , and re @-@ oriented his thesis to the study of neutrons emitted by fission . 
 = = Manhattan Project = = 
 From 1942 to 1943 , Schreiber was a researcher with the Purdue Research Foundation . He participated in early work for the Manhattan Project there using the university 's cyclotron . In 1943 , he joined the Los Alamos Laboratory , and moved to Los Alamos , New Mexico with his wife and 16 @-@ month @-@ old daughter . At Los Alamos , he worked on the Water Boiler , an aqueous homogeneous reactor . The Water Boiler group was headed by Donald W. Kerst from the University of Illinois , and consisted mainly of people from Purdue who had been working on calculations for Edward Teller 's thermonuclear " Super " bomb . The group designed and built the Water Boiler , which commenced operation in May 1944 . It was intended as a laboratory instrument to test critical mass calculations and the effect of various tamper materials . It was the first reactor to use enriched uranium as a fuel , and the first to use liquid fuel in the form of soluble uranium sulfate dissolved in water . 
 Schreiber worked on improved reactor designs until April 1945 , when he was transferred to Robert Bacher 's Gadget ( G ) Division as a member of the pit assembly team for the Trinity nuclear test . He observed the explosion from the Base Camp on July 16 . Nine days later , Lieutenant Colonel Peer de Silva , the official courier , and Schreiber collected another plutonium pit , which Schreiber carried in a magnesium case . They took it to Kirtland Army Air Field , where they boarded a C @-@ 54 transport plane on July 26 . Two days later , they arrived on the Pacific island of Tinian , where Schreiber helped assemble the Fat Man bomb that was used in the bombing of Nagasaki on August 9 . Comparing it with the firebombing of Tokyo by B @-@ 29 bombers that killed 100 @,@ 000 people in one night in March 1945 , Schreiber noted that : 
 Just the fact you could do the same thing with one airplane and one bomb proved the efficiency , but it didn ’ t change the effect very much . But the firebombing , the saturation bombing of the B @-@ 29s , was not bringing Japan to its knees , and the shock effect of one airplane being able to wipe out a city , I think , is what finally convinced the Japanese military they had to give up . 
 = = Later career = = 
 After the war , Schreiber remained at Los Alamos , where he became a group leader in the Weapon ( W ) Division . His first assignment was to ready bombs for the Operation Crossroads nuclear tests at Bikini Atoll in the Pacific . During the preparations , he witnessed the accident in which Louis Slotin was exposed to a fatal dose of neutron radiation when a screwdriver Slotin was using during a criticality experiment with one of the plutonium pits for Operation Crossroads slipped and the core went critical . Slotin would die from radiation poisoning nine days later but his quick reaction saved the lives of Schreiber and the others in the room ( see also : demon core ) . Schreiber became an exponent of remote handling of dangerous substances , and designed remote @-@ control machines to perform such experiments with all personnel at a quarter @-@ mile distance . 
 He went on to lead the pit teams on Bikini Atoll in June and July 1946 . 
 Schreiber became the associate leader of W Division in 1947 , and then the head of the division in 1951 . During this time , W Division worked on the development of the hydrogen bomb . He was once again in charge of the pit crew for the Ivy Mike nuclear test on Enewetak Atoll in the Pacific , the first test of a thermonuclear device . Even the veteran Schreiber was impressed by the 10 @-@ megaton @-@ of @-@ TNT ( 42 PJ ) explosion . " It really filled up the sky , " he recalled , " It was awesome . It just went on and on . " 
 In 1955 , Schreiber became the head of the Nuclear Rocket Propulsion ( N ) Division , which was responsible for Project Rover and NERVA . N Division developed nuclear rocket engines required for deep space exploration . He oversaw the first successful test of a nuclear rocket engine in 1959 , In this capacity , he greeted President John F. Kennedy during the president 's visit to Los Alamos in 1962 . That year , he became Technical Associate Director , with responsibility for the entire nuclear rocket propulsion program . He became Deputy Director of Los Alamos in 1972 , and served as a member of the United States Air Force Scientific Advisory Board and NASA 's Advisory Committee on Nuclear Systems . 
 = = Retirement = = 
 Schreiber retired in 1974 , but remained as a consultant until 1995 . He served as a member of the Laboratory 's History Advisory Council in the late 1980s , and assisted in the publication of Critical Assembly : A Technical History of Los Alamos during the Oppenheimer Years , 1943 @-@ 1945 ( 1993 ) . He also helped the Human Studies Project Team by reviewing its history of medical studies at the Laboratory . 
 Schreiber and Marguerite bought a property at Pajarito Village in the Española Valley in the late 1940s , where they built an adobe home on the weekends . They lived there from 1955 until 1972 , when they returned to Los Alamos . He died at his home there on December 24 , 1998 . He was survived by his wife Marguerite , daughters Paula and Sara , and his sister Anna . The Laboratory 's Advanced Nuclear Technology Group ( NIS @-@ 6 ) named its conference room the Raemer E. Schreiber Room in his honor . 
 = The X @-@ Files Mythology , Volume 3 – Colonization = 
 The X @-@ Files Mythology – Volume 3 collection is the third DVD release containing selected episodes from the fifth to the eighth seasons of the American science fiction television series The X @-@ Files . The episodes collected in the release form the middle of the series ' mythology , and are centered on alien colonization efforts , the fall of the Syndicate , and Fox Mulder 's ( David Duchovny ) abduction . 
 The collection contains three episodes from the fifth season , five from the sixth , six from the seventh , and two from the eighth . The episodes follow the investigations of paranormal @-@ related cases , or X @-@ Files , by FBI Special Agents Fox Mulder and Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) . Mulder is a believer in the paranormal , while the skeptical Scully has been assigned to debunk his work . Events covered in the episodes include the discovery of alien @-@ human hybrid Cassandra Spender ( Veronica Cartwright ) , the destruction of the Syndicate ; the discovery of the remains of a space ship in Africa ; the fate of Mulder 's sister , Samantha ; and the abduction of the former , as well as the subsequent hunt for him under the direction of John Doggett ( Robert Patrick ) . 
 The collection features the closure of several long @-@ running arcs , as well as new introductions to the series ' mythology . Series creator Chris Carter felt that the series ' ongoing story lines were becoming too confusing , so he scrapped them and started over . Released on September 27 , 2005 , the collection generally received mixed to positive reviews from critics . William B. Davis , Mitch Pileggi , Nicholas Lea and Laurie Holden all play supporting roles in the collection . 
 = = Plot summary = = 
 The show centers on FBI special agents Fox Mulder ( David Duchovny ) and Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) who work on cases linked to the paranormal , called X @-@ Files . Mulder is a former believer in the paranormal — having lost his belief in the fifth season opener " Redux " , while the skeptical Scully has been assigned to debunk his work . As a rebel alien race secretly attacks several groups of former alien abductees , the agents meet Cassandra Spender ( Veronica Cartwright ) , a woman who claims to be a multiple abductee and wants to deliver a positive message about aliens . Eventually , Mulder has Scully put under hypnosis to learn the truth about her abduction after Cassandra goes missing and her son , Jeffrey Spender ( Chris Owens ) , angrily attempts to push his way up in the FBI . The Syndicate , meanwhile , quicken their tests for the black oil vaccine , sacrificing their own to do so . Later , the assassination of a chess grandmaster leads Mulder and Scully into an investigation that they soon discover strikes at the heart of the X @-@ Files ; they learn that the real target was a telepathic boy named Gibson Praise ( Jeff Gulka ) . 
 In Washington , D.C. , Mulder appears before an FBI panel regarding his experiences in Antarctica , but is later denied reassignment to the X @-@ Files division : Mulder and Scully have been replaced by Spender and Diana Fowley ( Mimi Rogers ) . Later , Skinner is mysteriously poisoned by a nanorobot infection . The culprit is revealed to be Alex Krycek ( Nicholas Lea ) , a rogue FBI agent who formerly worked for the Syndicate , who continues to control the potentially debilitating nanotechnology in Skinner 's system in order to achieve his goals . Mulder and Scully later learn of reports of rebel aliens burning doctors who were working on Cassandra . After finding her , she informs Mulder and Scully that the aliens are here to destroy all life on Earth and that she is a successful alien @-@ human hybrid . The Smoking Man ( William B. Davis ) reveals everything to Diana Fowley , who agrees to help him and betray Mulder . Fowley forcibly takes Mulder , Cassandra , and Scully to a Centers for Disease Control facility at Fort Marlene . Meanwhile , the Syndicate rendezvous at a check point , preparing to be taken away by the Colonists , who are prepping for invasion . However , they are met by the alien rebels , who incinerate them all , including Cassandra — save The Smoking Man and Fowley , who escape . Jeffrey Spender is then purportedly killed by The Smoking Man . 
 Several months later , a metallic artifact with inscriptions is discovered on the beach of Côte d 'Ivoire in Africa . After Mulder examines rubbings of the object , he falls into a dangerous coma . Hoping to find a cure for her partner , Scully rushes to Africa and discovers a massive wreck of a large spacecraft partially buried in the ocean . Skinner and Michael Kritschgau ( John Finn ) desperately attempt to find the truth behind the alien object . Unsuccessful , Scully returns from Africa to revisit Mulder , but instead she finds out that he has disappeared . She contacts Kritschgau and Skinner to find her partner . The Smoking Man has taken Mulder away to transplant the telepathic part of Mulder 's brain into his own cranium , but the surgery is a failure . 
 While investigating a bizarre disappearance of a young girl from her home , Mulder soon discovers the truth about his sister 's disappearance . It is revealed that his sister was taken by " walk @-@ ins " , benevolent spirit who save the souls of children doomed to live unhappy lives . Together , Mulder and Scully locate evidence that proves that Samantha was abducted by The Smoking Man , and was forced to live in a now @-@ abandoned US Army base . Mulder eventually is reunited with the spirit of his sister , allowing him to finally let go . Mulder and Scully investigate a case of alien abduction which leads them back to Oregon , the site of their first case together . While investigating , Mulder is taken by a UFO . Scully soon meets Special Agent John Doggett ( Robert Patrick ) , the leader of an FBI taskforce organized to conduct a search for Fox Mulder . Although the search ultimately proves unsuccessful , Doggett is assigned to the X @-@ Files and works with Scully to look for explanations to several cases . 
 = = Background = = 
 From the third season to the sixth season , the mysterious Syndicate was explored in detail . In the two part episode " Two Fathers " / " One Son " , the Syndicate was destroyed . The plan to eliminate the Syndicate and relaunch the series ' mythology in a new direction was originally conceived in September 1998 . Director Kim Manners stated " I 've said for years that the show really resolved itself , if you will , by accident . The whole story line of the Syndicate and the bees and the aliens and the chips in the neck , they all seemed to just accidentally fall into place and create an intriguing , mysterious storyline that eventually got so mysterious and so intriguing that Chris had to blow it up , because he couldn 't deal with it anymore . " 
 The " Biogenesis " / " The Sixth Extinction " / " Amor Fati " trio of episodes started a new mythology for the series , questioning the origin of human life . Series creator Chris Carter claimed to be interested in the subject for a while , citing the possibility of extraterrestrial involvement in great extinctions that had happened millions of years ago . Carter claimed that early in the show he had met with a man who was one of the people responsible for leading the project of mapping the human genome and that he was interested enough in the subject to tie it into the show 's alien mythology . The scientific basis for extraterrestrials pursued the writers to help Mulder an Scully 's beliefs come together , which was furthered in the later seasons of the show . Frank Spotnitz claimed that the ideas used in this episode had been discussed between him and Carter for a few years , and had become easier to bring up after clearing away elements of the conspiracy in the episodes " Two Fathers " and " One Son " . 
 " Closure " was written to create an end to Mulder 's quest for his sister , Samantha , who had been abducted when he was a child . The idea to close the story arc received mixed reactions from various production and crew members . However , many of the show 's producers realized that the time had come to answer one of the show 's biggest questions . Spotnitz explained that , " I think [ series star , David Duchovny ] grew tired of playing the man who is missing his sister . [ ... ] I told him , ' This is going to be the last time you 're going to have to play [ that part ] . ' " Paul Rabwin noted that , " It 's been seven years . I don 't think any of us are going to miss Samantha Mulder . That device and motivation were very strong in the early years of the show . But as the years have gone by , the speculation kind of melted away . " 
 " Requiem " was written as a way to potentially end the series . While filming was underway for the seventh season , many members of the crew felt that the show had entered into its final season . Executive producer Frank Spotnitz later explained , " There was a pretty strong sentiment inside and outside the show that it was time to call it a day . " Eventually , it was decided that Mulder would be abducted at the end of the seventh season , leaving things open for the actor 's return in 11 episodes the following year . They eventually replaced Duchovny 's Mulder with Robert Patrick 's John Doggett . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Critical reception to the release ranged from mixed to positive . Monica S. Kuebler from Exclaim magazine noted that , while the set was " only for diehards , completists " , the compilation was " the strongest of the mythology boxes thus far [ released ] " . She went on to name the " Biogenesis " / " The Sixth Extinction " / " Amor Fati " arc the " best " of the set . Jeffrey Robinson from DVD Talk , was more critical , however . He wrote that , although the story was " interesting , intriguing , and entertaining " , the selection of episodes " does not offer the same level of excitement " when compared to the previous two volumes . He concluded by commenting that there is " enough entertainment value for you to enjoy " . Keith Uhlich from Slant Magazine awarded the box set three @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half stars out of five . He commented on the conclusion of many of the show 's long @-@ running arcs , and noted that Mulder was often only a witness to these events , such as the destruction of the Syndicate and the death of his sister . Of the latter , Uhlich wrote that he " waver [ s ] back and forth on how emotionally effective it is " . He did , however , award the image quality of the DVDs four stars out of five and refer to their presentation as " excellent " . 
 = = Episodes = = 
 = = Special features = = 
 = 1910 Cuba hurricane = 
 The 1910 Cuba hurricane , popularly known as the Cyclone of the Five Days , was an unusual and destructive tropical cyclone that struck Cuba and the United States in October 1910 . It formed in the southern Caribbean on October 9 and strengthened as it moved northwestward , becoming a hurricane on October 12 . After crossing the western tip of Cuba , it peaked in intensity on October 16 , corresponding to Category 4 on the Saffir @-@ Simpson Hurricane Scale . That same day , the hurricane moved in a counterclockwise loop and hit Cuba again . It then tracked toward Florida , landing near Cape Romano . After moving through the state , it hugged the coast of the Southeastern United States on its way out to sea . 
 Due to its unusual loop , initial reports suggested it was two separate storms that developed and hit land in rapid succession . Its track was subject to much debate at the time ; eventually , it was identified as a single storm . Analysis of the event gave a greater understanding of weather systems that took similar paths . 
 The hurricane is considered one of the worst natural disasters in Cuban history . Damage was extensive , and thousands were left homeless . It also had a widespread impact in Florida , including the destruction of houses and flooding . Although total monetary damage from the storm is unknown , estimates of losses in Havana , Cuba exceed $ 1 million and in the Florida Keys , $ 250 @,@ 000 . At least 100 deaths occurred in Cuba alone . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 On October 9 , the fifth tropical depression of the 1910 season formed from a tropical disturbance in the extreme southern Caribbean , to the north of Panama . It tracked steadily northwestward , and attained tropical storm intensity on October 11 . It continued to strengthen , and became a hurricane the next day . On October 13 , the storm was observed to the southwest of Cuba . Early on October 14 , the hurricane briefly reached an intensity corresponding to Category 3 status on the modern @-@ day Saffir @-@ Simpson Hurricane Scale before tracking ashore along the western tip of Cuba . However , it weakened somewhat after crossing the island . Upon emerging into the Gulf of Mexico , the hurricane slowed considerably . 
 Steered by currents from an area of high pressure to the north , the storm began to drift northwestward and rapidly deepen over warm waters of the Gulf . It executed a tight counterclockwise loop , and continued to mature ; on October 16 it reached peaked winds of 150 mph ( 240 km / h ) with a minimum barometric pressure of 924 mbar ( hPa ; 27 @.@ 29 inHg ) . The hurricane turned northeastward , again approaching western Cuba , and began to accelerate towards the Florida Peninsula on October 17 . Its center passed west of Key West and made landfall near Cape Romano . The storm moved due north for a time as it moved inland , and deteriorated into a tropical storm . From northeastern Florida , the cyclone curved northeastward and hugged the coast of the Southeast United States before heading out to sea . The storm is estimated to have dissipated on October 23 . 
 The storm is unusual in that due to its loop near Cuba , initial reports suggested that it was actually two separate cyclones . The Monthly Weather Review describes the event as multiple disturbances and reports that the first hurricane dissipated in the central Gulf of Mexico after crossing Cuba , while the second formed subsequently and hit Florida . At the time , the storm 's track was subject to much debate . It was later identified as a single storm , although observations on the hurricane led to advances in the understanding of tropical cyclones with similar paths . On October 19 , The Washington Post wrote , " Whether two storms have been raging in Cuban waters within the past week , or whether the same storm has revisited Cuba , traversing southern Florida in its backwards course , remains to be determined . If the later supposition be correct , the recurve of the storm , after its entrance into the Gulf of Mexico , must have been unusually sudden and sharp . " 
 = = Impact = = 
 On October 15 , all vessels within a 500 mi ( 800 km ) radius of Key West were warned of the approaching storm , and many ships anchored in harbors . Throughout the region , storm warnings and advisories were issued . 
 = = = Cuba = = = 
 The storm wrought severe destruction in Cuba , considered to be among the worst effects from a tropical cyclone on record . High winds and torrential rainfall flooded streets , destroyed crops , and damaged plantations . In particular , the storm caused substantial damage to the tobacco in the region of Vuelta Abajo . Many towns were severely damaged or destroyed . The city of Casilda was devastated , while the town of <unk> was inundated by flood waters . The hurricane cut off communications to inland areas . The majority of the fatalities and property damages were suspected to be in the Pinar del Río province . 
 The New York Times wrote that Cuba had " probably suffered the greatest material disaster in all its history " . It was reported that thousands of peasants were left homeless due to the cyclone . Losses in Havana were also extensive ; along the shore , scores of ships carrying valuable cargo had sunk . The storm also seriously damaged goods stored on local wharves and barges . " Tremendous " waves crashed ashore , flooding coastal areas . Numerous ships and small watercraft were wrecked by the cyclone . The raging seas submerged about 1 sq mi ( 2 @.@ 6 km2 ) of Havana 's oceanfront land . The <unk> sea wall breached , allowing flood waters to engulf the roadway there and residences in the area . 
 It is estimated that at least 100 people lost their lives , mostly due to mudslides , including five persons in Havana . However , reports range as high as 700 . Initial estimates of the financial damage caused by the storm were in the millions of dollars , including losses of $ 1 million in Havana , largely from the destruction of Customs House sheds there , which were filled with many valuable goods . Some of these buildings were swept 0 @.@ 5 mi ( 0 @.@ 80 km ) away , and the winds tore the roof off the main warehouse . In the aftermath — while the hurricane was still widely considered to be two separate storms — rumors arose " of the approach of a third storm " , although in actuality no additional storms were known to have occurred in the 1910 season . 
 = = = Holliswood = = = 
 A four @-@ masted schooner , the Holliswood , became trapped in the storm in the Gulf of Mexico . The vessel departed from New Orleans on October 1 , carrying cypress wood . The crew fought the storm for days and eventually the masts were cut to avoid capsizing . <unk> , the ship was blown miles off course . As described by the owner of the schooner , Paul Mangold : 
 On Wednesday , the 12th , we began to get the first of the hurricane . We were running under very little canvas . Early Saturday morning we got the full force of the storm . We managed to get the sails fast and ran with the hurricane under bare poles . The wind circled about us sometimes at a hundred @-@ mile rate . The seas came from all directions , though it was from the starboard that the real trouble seemed to come . 
 The steamboat Harold spotted the ship and rescued all of its crew except Captain E. E. Walls , who opted to stay behind with the order " Report me to my owners " . At the time , the Holliswood was badly damaged , with her house destroyed and her rudder torn away . The crew apparently advised the captain that the ship would not stay afloat for another five hours , although he dismissed their concerns . After the crew was rescued , Captain Walls struggled against the storm for days without food or fresh water . On October 20 , the Parkwood rescued Walls unconscious , but initially feared to be dead . Once aboard , he regained consciousness and , reportedly amidst an episode of delirium , asked to be returned to the Holliswood . Ultimately , the captain of the Parkwood agreed to tow the battered ship to shore . 
 = = = Southern Florida = = = 
 At Key West , pressures began to fall at midnight on October 12 as the storm approached from the southwest . By late on October 13 , heavy rain had begun to fall , and winds began to increase , reaching 50 mph ( 80 km / h ) on October 14 . Gusts reached 110 mph ( 180 km / h ) and storm tide ran 15 ft ( 4 @.@ 6 m ) ; swells in the area attained " unusually high " levels . Many docks were destroyed , and on October 17 , the basement of the Weather Bureau office was submerged by rising waters . Before the rain gauge was washed out to sea , 3 @.@ 89 in ( 99 mm ) of precipitation was recorded . Damage throughout the Florida Keys was moderate , estimated at worth around $ 250 @,@ 000 ( 1910 USD ) . Property damage was generally limited to structures along the shore . 
 As the storm progressed westward , Tampa and nearby locations started to experience its effects . Strong winds from the northeast blew water out of the Tampa Bay to the lowest level ever recorded . The barometer fell to 961 mbar ( hPa ; 28 @.@ 4 inHg ) , and extremely high waves battered the shore from Flamingo to Cape Romano . The surf continued well inland , forcing survivors to cling atop trees . North of Tampa , the hurricane 's effects were moderate or light , while in the southwestern part of the state , damage increased in severity . A portion of the local citrus crop was destroyed . Property damage was widespread from Tampa to Jacksonville and points south . High winds tore the roofs off homes and shook some structures off their foundations . 
 Seven men lost their lives in the wreckage of several Cuban schooners at Punta Gorda . Nearby , one man and a baby drowned as a result of the storm surge , and another died while attempting to cross a flooded river . A French steamship , the Louisiane , went ashore with 600 passengers ; all people aboard the vessel were rescued by the Forward , a Revenue cutter . 
 = = = Northeastern Florida and southern United States = = = 
 Damage on the Atlantic coast was less severe , although at Jupiter , the Weather Bureau office reported : " the rainfall at this point did more damage than the wind . It had rained every day from the 3rd to the 13th , with a total fall of 5 @.@ 96 inches ( 151 mm ) , and the creeks and flat woods were full of water when the first storm began . From the 14th to the 18th , inclusive , 14 @.@ 27 inches ( 362 mm ) more fell . The inlet being closed the rivers rose 8 feet ( 2 @.@ 4 m ) above normal high water , which in a flat country like this , puts practically all land under water from 1 foot ( 0 @.@ 30 m ) to 8 feet ( 2 @.@ 4 m ) . Fortunately the sea remained low and comparatively smooth so that it was possible to open the inlet and let the water out . " 
 A large number of pine trees were blown down near the city of Jupiter . One man near Lemon City was killed by falling timber . Small watercraft , docks and boathouses sustained damage , but otherwise the storm 's effects on the east coast were more moderate compared to other areas . Portions of the Florida East Coast Railroad bed were washed out , and repairs were anticipated to be costly . An American schooner blew ashore at Boca Raton , killing three and leaving the rest of the crew stranded for 12 hours until help arrived . Estimates of the cyclone 's impact on citrus crops in the region vary widely . 
 On its way to sea , the storm passed just west of Jacksonville . Although very little damage occurred in and around the city , persistent northeasterly winds caused flooding in low @-@ lying coastal areas . Minor flooding extended northward into Georgia and South Carolina ; initially , interruptions of communication between cities led to exaggerated reports of damage in those states . Early on October 18 , light precipitation began to fall in Savannah as the winds picked up . By October 19 , winds had reached 70 mph ( 110 km / h ) . However , it was said that the city 's worst damage came as a result of the high tides rather than the intense winds . Certain rivers exceeded their banks , submerging surrounding farmland . Minor damage occurred in Charleston , South Carolina . 
 = If Day = 
 If Day ( French : " Si un jour " , " If one day " ) was a simulated Nazi German invasion and occupation of the Canadian city of Winnipeg , Manitoba , and surrounding areas on 19 February 1942 , during the Second World War . It was organized by the Greater Winnipeg Victory Loan organization , which was led by prominent Winnipeg businessman J. D. Perrin . The event was the largest military exercise in Winnipeg to that point . 
 If Day included a staged firefight between Canadian troops and volunteers dressed as German soldiers , the internment of prominent politicians , the imposition of Nazi rule , and a parade . The event was a fundraiser for the war effort : over C $ 3 million was collected in Winnipeg on that day . It was the subject of a 2006 documentary , and was included in Guy Maddin 's film My Winnipeg . 
 = = Background = = 
 If Day was an elaborate campaign to promote the purchase of Victory Bonds . These bonds , which were loans to the government to allow for increased war spending , were sold to individuals and corporations throughout Canada . If Day was the second Victory Loan campaign of the Second World War . The campaign began on 16 February 1942 , and continued until 9 March . Manitoba 's fundraising target was $ 45 million ( $ 620 million in 2011 dollars ) , including $ 24 @.@ 5 million from Winnipeg . The Greater Winnipeg Victory Loan committee , a regional branch of the National War Finance Committee , organized If Day under chairman John Draper Perrin . The organizers believed that bringing the war ( or , rather , a simulation thereof ) to people 's homes would result in a change of attitude among those not directly affected by the war . 
 The committee drew up a map of Manitoba , which was divided into 45 sections , each representing $ 1 million of their fundraising target . As money came in from those selling Victory Bonds , the sections were " reclaimed " from the Nazi invaders . The map was posted at the corner of Portage and Main , the city 's central intersection . The campaign was publicized in local newspapers for a few days before the event , although the " invasion " took many citizens by surprise . To prevent a rush to emergency shelters , residents of neighbouring northern Minnesota were also warned because radio broadcasts dramatizing the event could be received in that area . Royal Canadian Air Force aircraft painted to look like German fighter planes flew over the city on 18 February 1942 . Selkirk , a small town northeast of Winnipeg , held its own fundraising simulation , a one @-@ hour blackout and mock bombing , on 18 February 1942 in preparation for the main If Day event . 
 = = Events = = 
 The simulation included 3 @,@ 500 Canadian Army members , representing all of Winnipeg 's units , making it the largest military exercise in Winnipeg to that point . The defending forces were commanded by Colonels E. A. Pridham and D. S. McKay . Troops were drawn from the 18th ( Manitoba ) Armoured Car Regiment , No. 10 District Engineers and Signals , the Royal Winnipeg Rifles , the Winnipeg Grenadiers , the Winnipeg Light Infantry , the Queen 's Own Cameron Highlanders of Canada , Veteran 's Guard of Canada ( including over 300 veterans of the First World War ) , and a number of reserve and civilian groups . The ' Nazi ' troops were volunteers from the Young Men 's Board of Trade , using uniforms rented from Hollywood and with painted sabre scars on their faces . They were commanded by Erich von Neurenberg . Approximately $ 3 @,@ 000 was spent on the event . 
 <unk> ' patrols in the city began before 5 : 30 am on 19 February . A radio announcer was detained and his microphone commandeered for radio broadcasts , beginning at 5 : 45 am . ' Nazi ' troops assembled on the west side of the city half an hour after the first patrols . Canadian troops were massed at Fort Osborne barracks and the Minto and Macgregor armouries at 6 : 30 am , and at 7 am air @-@ raid sirens were sounded and a blackout ordered in preparation for the invasion . The aerial blitzkrieg began before 7 am with mock bombings . Beginning at 7 : 03 am , troops started their simulated attack on the city , which was defended by a small group of active and reserve troops assisted by local community groups . The defenders formed a perimeter around the industrial and downtown areas of the city , approximately 5 kilometres ( 3 mi ) from City Hall , retreating to a 3 @-@ kilometre ( 2 mi ) perimeter at 7 : 45 . 
 The firefight included large @-@ scale troop movements and the simulated destruction of major bridges . Nine troop formations held three positions each during the tightly scripted invasion sequence ; they were directed via telephone ( one line per formation ) and flash @-@ lamp signals from the headquarters established at the Chamber of Commerce building . The defensive pattern employed was similar to that used during the First World War in Paris to conduct soldiers to the front . Light tanks were stationed at road and rail junctions as fighting intensified . Thirty anti @-@ aircraft vehicles fired blanks at fighter planes overhead , assisted by anti @-@ aircraft gunners on buildings downtown . The first mock casualty was reported at 8 am . Dressing stations were set up at strategic points to treat the mock casualties ; they also treated the two real casualties of the event – a soldier who sprained his ankle , and a woman who cut her thumb preparing toast during the early @-@ morning blackout . 
 At 9 : 30 am , the defenders surrendered to the ' Nazis ' and withdrew to the downtown muster point , and the city was occupied . The fake Nazis began a widespread harassment campaign , sending armed troops throughout the city . A tank was driven down Portage Avenue , one of the main streets of the downtown area . Some people were taken to an internment camp at Lower Fort Garry ; those interned included prominent local politicians like Premier John Bracken ( arrested with several members of his cabinet at a caucus meeting ) , Mayor John Queen , Lieutenant Governor of Manitoba Roland Fairbairn McWilliams , and visiting Norwegian ambassador to the United States Wilhelm de <unk> . One council member , Dan McClean , escaped but was recaptured after an intensive search . Chief of Police George Smith avoided capture because he was dining out when soldiers arrived at his office . The Union Flag at Lower Fort Garry was replaced with the swastika . The city was renamed " <unk> " , and Main Street was termed " <unk> " . 
 Erich von Neurenberg was installed as <unk> ( provincial leader ) ; he was assisted by George <unk> , who acted as the local Gestapo chief . Their stated purpose was to assist Hitler in his plans to take advantage of Canada 's relatively low population density by colonizing the country . Von Neurenberg issued the following decree , which was posted throughout the city : 
 This territory is now a part of the Greater Reich and under the jurisdiction of Col. Erich Von <unk> , Gauleiter of the Fuehrer . 
 No civilians will be permitted on the streets between 9 : 30 pm and daybreak . 
 All public places are out of bounds to civilians , and not more than 8 persons can gather at one time in any place . 
 Every householder must provide billeting for 5 soldiers . 
 All organizations of a military , semi @-@ military or fraternal nature are hereby disbanded and banned . Girl Guide , Boy Scout and similar youth organizations will remain in existence but under direction of the Gauleiter and Storm troops . 
 All owners of motor cars , trucks and buses must register same at Occupation Headquarters where they will be taken over by the Army of Occupation . 
 Each farmer must immediately report all stocks of grain and livestock and no farm produce may be sold except through the office of the <unk> of supplies in Winnipeg . He may not keep any for his own consumption but must buy it back through the Central Authority in Winnipeg . 
 All national emblems excluding the Swastika must be immediately destroyed . 
 Each inhabitant will be furnished with a ration card , and food and clothing may only be purchased on presentation of this card . 
 The following offences will result in death without trial 
 Attempting to organize resistance against the Army of Occupation 
 Entering or leaving the province without permission . 
 Failure to report all goods possessed when ordered to do so . 
 Possession of firearms . 
 No one will act , speak or think contrary to our decrees . 
 Notices were posted on churches forbidding worship services , and priests who objected were arrested . Buses were stopped and their passengers searched by armed troops . The Winnipeg Tribune was renamed Das <unk> <unk> ( " The Winnipeg Lies @-@ sheet " ) , a ' Nazi ' publication featuring heavily @-@ censored columns and a front page written almost entirely in German . One satirical story noted that " this is a great day for Manitoba ... The Nazis , like Der Fuehrer , are patient , kind and tolerant , but <unk> <unk> IS <unk> <unk> <unk> " , while another included an " official joke " , approved by the German authorities , at which all readers were ordered to laugh or be imprisoned . Henry <unk> , a newspaper seller for the Winnipeg Free Press , was attacked and his papers ripped up . The Winnipeg Free Press featured a front @-@ page story about the " invasion " , describing in great detail the devastation caused by the Nazis in Winnipeg . 
 Books were burned in front of the main Carnegie branch of the Winnipeg Public Library ( the books had been pre @-@ selected for incineration as damaged or outdated ) . Soldiers entered the cafeteria at Great West Life and stole lunches from workers . They seized buffalo coats from the police station and wore them throughout the day , as the temperature was below − 8 ° C ( 18 ° F ) . At one local elementary school , the principal was arrested and replaced with a ' Nazi ' educator dedicated to teaching the " Nazi Truth " ; special lessons were prepared for high @-@ school students throughout the city . Some stores and homes were looted by the fake troops . Canadian currency was replaced with fake German Reichsmarks , the only propaganda notes that Canada created during the war . 
 The day ended at 5 : 30 pm with a ceremonial release of prisoners , a parade , and speeches from the released dignitaries . Members of the organizing committee and local businesspeople marched down Portage Avenue with banners reading " It MUST Not Happen Here ! " and " Buy Victory Bonds " . Following the parade , a banquet was held at the Hudson 's Bay Company building . Ambassador de <unk> spoke about his experiences with If Day and in Norway , suggesting that the " make @-@ believe Nazi occupation of [ Winnipeg ] was an authentic glimpse of German behavior in German @-@ ridden Europe " . 
 Surrounding towns were also affected by the invasion : for example , in <unk> ' Nazi ' soldiers confronted citizens in the streets . <unk> was renamed " <unk> " . A mock attack was planned for strategic targets in Brandon . The Canadian Broadcasting Corporation broadcast a program called " Swastika over Canada " on the radio throughout the province , along with military music and extracts of Hitler 's speeches . 
 = = Effects = = 
 The If Day event not only resulted in Victory Bond sales well over Greater Winnipeg 's goal , but brought Winnipeg 's innovative efforts to the attention of people throughout North America . Life Magazine ran a pictorial spread of the If Day activities in Winnipeg and in smaller centres across Manitoba , photographed by William <unk> . Reporters from several American publications , including Newsweek , The New York Times and The Christian Science Monitor , were also present for the event ; cameraman Lucien Roy shot newsreel footage for BBC News . Newspapers as far away as New Zealand included stories about the event . An estimated 40 million people worldwide saw coverage of If Day . 
 The money raised for the Victory Loan campaign on If Day was $ 3 @.@ 2 million , which was the city 's largest single @-@ day total . Winnipeg passed its $ 24 million Victory Loan quota on 24 February , largely because of the effects of If Day . The provincial total for the entire campaign was $ 60 million , well above its target quota of $ 45 million . The campaign raised approximately $ 2 billion nationwide for the war effort , and If Day was considered one of the most successful fundraising events of the nationwide drive . Officials had expected a significant increase in army recruits as a result of the event , but it failed to end the long @-@ term decline in recruitment numbers : 23 people enlisted at the Winnipeg recruitment office on If Day , compared to an average of 36 per day for the first half of February . 
 If Day was successful enough to spark imitations in other communities . The US government contacted the organizing committee for details of the event . A smaller @-@ scale invasion was staged in Vancouver , using promotional materials from the Winnipeg campaign . 
 In 2006 , a television documentary of the events was made by Aaron <unk> for CTV 's local series Manitoba Moments . The work incorporates newsreel footage from the event , as well as interviews with historians and participants . Filmmaker Guy Maddin included a brief newsreel clip of If Day in his film My Winnipeg . 
 = Take On Me = 
 " Take On Me " is a song by Norwegian new wave / synthpop band A @-@ ha . Written by the band members , the original version was produced by Tony Mansfield and remixed by John Ratcliff . The second version of the song was produced by Alan Tarney for the group 's debut studio album Hunting High and Low ( 1985 ) . The song combines synthpop with a varied instrumentation that includes acoustic guitars , keyboards and drums . 
 The original " Take On Me " was recorded in 1984 and it took two versions and three releases to finally chart in the United Kingdom , reaching number two on the UK Singles Chart in October 1985 . In the United States in October 1985 , the song became the only A @-@ ha song to reach the top position of the Billboard Hot 100 , due in no small part to the wide exposure on MTV of its innovative music video , directed by Steve Barron . The video features the band in a pencil @-@ sketch animation method called rotoscoping , combined with live action . The video won six awards and was nominated for two others at the 1986 MTV Video Music Awards . 
 = = Background = = 
 Pål Waaktaar and Magne Furuholmen began their music careers playing in a band called Bridges , together with Viggo Bondi and Øystein <unk> . In 1981 , the band produced <unk> ( Torch @-@ light parade ) , an LP for which all of the music was composed by the group themselves , most of it being written by Waaktaar . One of the tracks rehearsed at this time ( although not included on the LP ) was called " The Juicy Fruit Song " . It included elements of the future " Take On Me " , including an early version of the central riff . Soon after , Bridges disbanded . Waaktaar and Furuholmen relocated to London to try their hand in the music industry there , but after six months of disappointment they returned to Norway . 
 The duo then decided to try to get Morten Harket to join them as lead singer . At the time , Harket was singing in a band called <unk> Blue , but he felt that his band was stagnating , and decided to join Waaktaar and Furuholmen . They stayed together for six months , writing some songs and working on demo tapes , including " Lesson One " , a new song based on " The Juicy Fruit Song " which would in turn evolve into " Take On Me " . In January 1983 , the trio returned to London in search of a recording contract . 
 = = Recording and production = = 
 The band moved into an apartment in London and began calling on record companies and publishing houses . After a few meetings with various A & R personnel , the band signed with a publishing house called Lionheart . A @-@ ha then returned to Norway to earn some money . When they returned to London , they left Lionheart out of frustration . They decided to record new demos , and chose the studio of musician and producer John Ratcliff , intending to re @-@ record five songs . The band signed with Ratcliff , who in return introduced them to his manager , Terry Slater . With this encouragement , the band managed to complete some songs , including " Take On Me " . After a few meetings , Slater signed them with Warner Bros. Records . 
 The band met with producer Tony Mansfield , an expert in the use of the Fairlight CMI , who mixed the demos with electronic instrumentation . The sound was not what A @-@ ha had hoped to achieve , and the album was remixed again . The band rushed to release " Take On Me " as a single in the United Kingdom but the single only charted at 137 , the lowest @-@ charted of all A @-@ ha songs . After this , Warner Brothers ' main office in the United States decided to invest in the band , and gave them the opportunity to re @-@ record the song . Terry Slater convinced Alan Tarney to produce the new version . The song was soon completed and re @-@ released in the United Kingdom , but the record label 's office in London gave them little support , and the single flopped for the second time . 
 In the United States , Warner Bros. put the group on high priority , and made the move to invest significant money in a revolutionary video for " Take On Me " using the audio version produced by Tarney . The single was released in the United States a month after the music video , and immediately appeared in the Billboard Hot 100 . 
 Magne played the main melody on a Roland Juno @-@ 60 " MIDI 'd up " to a Yamaha DX7 . The drum machine used on the second and third releases ( rotoscoped video version ) was a Linn LinnDrum - Paul overdubbed real cymbals and hi @-@ hat using this drum machine . Morten sang " Take On Me " using a Neumann U47 microphone as well as a Neve microphone pre @-@ amp and Neve equaliser . 
 Allmusic journalist Tim DiGravina described " Take On Me " as being " a new wave classic laced with rushing keyboards , made emotionally resonant thanks to Morten Harket 's touching vocal delicacy . " 
 = = Composition = = 
 " Take On Me " is a synthpop song that includes acoustic guitars and keyboards . It moves at a very quick tempo of 169 beats per minute . The lyrics are a plea for love , and are constructed in a verse @-@ chorus form with a bridge before the third and final chorus . With the chord progression of Bm @-@ E @-@ A @-@ <unk> , the song is written in the key of A Major . Harket demonstrates a vocal range of over two and a half octaves . He sings the lowest pitch in the song , A2 ( the tonic ) , at the beginning of the chorus , on the first syllable of the phrase " Take On me " . 
 As the chorus progresses , Harket 's voice hits ever higher notes , reaching a falsetto and hitting the song 's highest note ( E5 , the dominant note ) at the end . There is a temporary change of markings in the drum pattern in the chorus , where for two bars the drums play in half time , returning to the same rhythm as before for the climax of the vocal line . A mix of a drum machine , the LinnDrum , acoustic guitars and electronic instrumentation serves as the song 's backing track . 
 = = Music videos = = 
 The first release of " Take On Me " in 1984 includes a completely different recording , and was featured in the first video , which shows the band singing with a blue background . 
 The second video was directed by Steve Barron , and filmed at Kim 's Café ( now called " Savoy " cafe ) and on a sound stage in London , in 1985 . The video used a pencil @-@ sketch animation / live @-@ action combination called rotoscoping , in which the live @-@ action footage is traced over frame by frame to give the characters realistic movements . Approximately 3 @,@ 000 frames were rotoscoped , which took 16 weeks to complete . 
 The video 's main theme is a romantic fantasy narrative . It begins with a montage of pencil drawings in a comic @-@ book style representing motorcycle sidecar racing , in which the hero , played by Morten Harket , is pursued by two opponents , one of whom is played by English actor Philip Jackson . It then cuts to a scene in a cafe , in which a young woman , played by Bunty Bailey ( Harket 's girlfriend at the time ) , is seen drinking coffee and reading the comic book in a coffee shop . As the girl reads , the waitress brings her the bill . The comic 's hero , after winning the race , seemingly winks at the girl from the page . His pencil @-@ drawn hand reaches out of the comic book , inviting the girl into it . Once inside , she too appears in the pencil @-@ drawn form , as he sings to her and introduces her to his black @-@ and @-@ white world which features a sort of looking @-@ glass portal where people and objects look real on one side and pencil @-@ drawn on the other . 
 Meanwhile , back in the restaurant , the waitress returns to find that the girl is not there . Believing that the girl has left without paying the bill , she angrily <unk> and throws the girl 's comic book into a bin . This makes Harket 's two opposing racers reappear , armed with a large pipe wrench and apparently aggressive . The racers smash the looking glass with the pipe wrench , evidently trapping the girl in the comic book . Harket punches one of the thugs and retreats with the girl into a maze of paper . Arriving at a dead end , he tears a hole in the paper wall so that the girl can escape as the menacing opposing racers close in on him . The girl , now back in the real world and found lying beside the bin to the surprise of restaurant guests and staff , grabs the comic from the bin and runs home , where she attempts to smooth out the creases to learn what happens next . 
 The next panel shows Harket lying seemingly lifeless , and the girl begins to cry . But he wakes up and tries to break out of his comic @-@ book frames . At the same time , his image appears in the girl 's hallway , seemingly torn between real and comic form , hurling himself repeatedly left @-@ and @-@ right against the walls as he attempts to shatter his two @-@ dimensional barrier . ( This scene is largely patterned after a climactic scene in the 1980 film Altered States ) . He escapes from the comic book by becoming human and stands up . Smiling , the girl runs towards him and he embraces her . The video story is effectively concluded in the intro sequence of its successor , " The Sun Always Shines on T.V. " . 
 At the 1986 MTV Video Music Awards , the video for " Take On Me " won six awards — Best New Artist in a Video , Best Concept Video , Most Experimental Video , Best Direction , Best Special Effects , and Viewer 's Choice — and was nominated for two others , Best Group Video and Video of the Year . It was also nominated for Favorite Pop / Rock Video at the 13th American Music Awards in 1986 . 
 The second music video was produced by Limelight Productions . The crew of the video were director Steve Barron , producer Simon Fields , cinematographer Oliver Stapleton , editor Richard Simpson from Rushes Film Editing , and animators Michael Patterson and Candace <unk> . 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 " Take On Me " was originally released in 1984 , and was mixed by Tony Mansfield , but failed to make an impact in the United Kingdom . This release peaked at number three in Norway but failed to reach audiences abroad . The group re @-@ recorded the song with the help of producer Alan Tarney , releasing the new version in 1985 . 
 In the United States , Warner Bros. invested in the revolutionary second video for " Take On Me , " which used Tarney 's version of the song . The new video was released to dance clubs and television a month before the record was available in stores or played on the radio . Wide exposure on MTV made the song quickly soar to the top position of the Billboard Hot 100 on 19 October 1985 . It remained on the chart for twenty @-@ three weeks , and ended up at the tenth position of the 1985 year @-@ end chart . As of June 2014 , the song has sold 1 @,@ 463 @,@ 000 digital copies in the US after it became available for download in the digital era . 
 " Take On Me " was released for the third time in the United Kingdom in September 1985 . The song debuted on the UK Singles Chart at number fifty @-@ five , peaked at number two for three consecutive weeks , held off the top spot by Jennifer Rush 's " The Power of Love " , and received a gold certification by the British Phonographic Industry ( BPI ) . 
 In Norway , A @-@ ha 's native country , " Take On Me " reentered the VG @-@ lista singles chart , reaching a new peak of number one , a year after it was first released . The single was largely successful elsewhere , reaching the top of the Eurochart Hot 100 for nine weeks , topping the singles charts in 36 countries , including Austria , Belgium , Germany , Italy , the Netherlands , Sweden , and Switzerland , and reaching the top three in France and number two in Ireland . The success of " Take On Me " lies also in its sales , as the single would go on to sell over 7 million copies worldwide , making it one of the best @-@ selling singles of all time . 
 = = Formats and track listing = = 
 7 " : Warner Bros. / W <unk> United Kingdom ( 1984 ) 
 " Take On Me " ( Original version ) – 3 : 18 
 " And You Tell Me " – 1 : 48 
 Track 1 is produced by Tony Mansfield and remixed by John Ratcliff with A @-@ ha . 
 12 " : Warner Bros. / W <unk> United Kingdom ( 1984 ) 
 " Take On Me " ( Long version ) – 3 : 46 
 " And You Tell Me " – 1 : 48 
 " Stop ! And Make Your Mind Up " – 2 : 57 
 Track 1 is produced by Tony Mansfield and remixed by John Ratcliff . 
 7 " : Warner Bros. / W <unk> United Kingdom ( 1985 ) 
 " Take On Me " ( Single version ) – 3 : 49 
 " Love Is Reason " – 3 : 04 
 Track 1 is produced by Alan Tarney . 
 Track 1 is the same version as the album version . 
 12 " : Warner Bros. / W <unk> United Kingdom ( 1985 ) 
 " Take On Me " ( Extended version ) – 4 : 50 
 " Love Is Reason " ( LP version ) – 3 : 04 
 " Take On Me " ( Single version ) – 3 : 49 
 Track 1 & 3 is produced by Alan Tarney . 
 Track 3 is the same version as the album version . 
 7 " : Warner Bros. / 7 @-@ <unk> United States ( 1985 ) 
 " Take On Me " – 3 : 46 
 " Love Is Reason " – 3 : 04 
 Track 1 is produced by Alan Tarney . 
 Track 2 is produced by John Ratcliff with A @-@ ha . 
 12 " : Warner Bros. / PRO @-@ A @-@ <unk> ( Promo ) United States ( 1985 ) 
 " Take On Me " ( Long version ) – 4 : 47 ( a.k.a. " Extended Version " ) 
 " Take On Me " ( Single version ) – 3 : 46 
 Track 1 & 2 is produced by Alan Tarney . 
 = = 2015 remix = = 
 On August 27 , 2015 Norwegian DJ <unk> released a remixed version via iTunes . His version drops the iconic keyboard riffs and features a new one . The style of his version is described as " tropical house " . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Morten Harket – lead vocals 
 Magne Furuholmen – synthesizer , backing vocals 
 Pål Waaktaar – guitars , backing vocals 
 Neill King – engineering 
 Alan Tarney – production 
 John Ratcliff - production and re @-@ mixing 
 Barry Grint – mastering 
 = = Charts and certifications = = 
 = = Reel Big Fish version = = 
 In 1998 , ska punk band Reel Big Fish covered " Take On Me " for the film BASEketball . The song was later released on the BASEketball soundtrack and the international version of their album Why Do They Rock So Hard ? . The band also performed the song at concerts . Reel Big Fish released a video clip for " Take On Me " , directed by Jeff Moore , and features the band playing the song while walking down an aisle in the stadium , and playing a game of BASEketball interlaced with clips from the film . An alternative video for the song 's international release that contained only the stadium aisle footage was also released . Reel Big Fish also included a live version of the song in their live album Our Live Album Is Better than Your Live Album and live DVD 's You 're All in This Together and Reel Big Fish Live ! In Concert ! . 
 This song was released on Billboard and Sirius in 1999 – 2000 . 
 = = = Track listing = = = 
 CD single 
 " Take On Me " – 3 : 02 
 " Alternative Baby " – 2 : 56 
 " Why Do All the Girls Think They 're Fat ? " – 2 : 22 
 = = = Personnel = = = 
 Aaron Barrett – celesta , guitar , lead vocals , synthesizer 
 Grant Barry – trombone 
 Andrew Gonzales – drums 
 Scott <unk> – celesta , keyboards , trumpet , vocals 
 Dan Regan – screams , trombone 
 Tavis Werts – <unk> , trumpet 
 Matt Wong – bass guitar , vocals 
 = = A1 version = = 
 In August 2000 , British @-@ Norwegian boy band A1 released a cover of " Take On Me " for their second studio album The A List . Despite being panned by music critics , who called it a " lame cover version " , and a " note for note copy " that seems like " a re @-@ release of the original " ; it was commercially successful , topping the charts in the United Kingdom and Norway , 
 = = = Music video = = = 
 The music video was directed by Stuart Gosling . It features A1 entering the computer world by putting on virtual reality glasses after finding out about a deadly computer virus . After flying for a distance , they find the virus and destroy it , saving the world . The video was inspired by the 1982 science fiction film Tron . 
 = = = Formats and track listings = = = 
 CD , Maxi @-@ single , Enhanced , CD1 
 " Take On Me " – 3 : 31 
 " Beatles Medley ( I Feel Fine / She Loves You ) " – 3 : 20 
 " I Got Sunshine " – 3 : 41 
 CD , Maxi @-@ single , Enhanced , Limited Edition , CD2 
 " Take On Me " ( UK 2K Mix ) – 3 : 25 
 " Take On Me " ( Metro Extended Club Mix ) – 6 : 02 
 " Take On Me " ( D @-@ Bop Saturday Night Mix ) – 7 : 52 
 = = = Charts = = = 
 = = = Year @-@ end charts = = = 
 = = = Certifications = = = 
 = = In popular culture = = 
 = = = Other cover versions = = = 
 Despite being notoriously difficult to sing , the song has inspired many cover versions , including the following : 
 In the Lips Karaoke advertisement for Xbox 360 , a pair of lips animated in the music video 's style sang the song . 
 In 1986 Yomi , a drinking yogurt from <unk> Italia , used the video to explain that cartoons also like to drink yogurt . 
 Italian multi colored watches " Hip Hop " have used the song in their advertising . 
 In 1995 , punk rock band MxPx included this song on their album of covers , On the Cover . 
 In 1996 , German Eurodance duo Captain Jack covered the song for their first album The Mission . 
 In 1998 , American band Cap 'n Jazz cover the song for their two @-@ disc set <unk> . 
 In 2000 , German punk band <unk> covered the song on the compilation Punk <unk> Vol . 3 . 
 In 2000 , Belgian punk band Janez <unk> covered the song for their first major label release Janez <unk> . 
 In 2001 , German rock band Emil Bulls covered the song for their studio album Angel Delivery Service . 
 In 2002 , Italian progressive power metal Vision Divine covered the song on their album Send Me an Angel . 
 In 2004 , Trinidadian soca musician <unk> Garcia uses a cover of the instrumental in her song , " Bonnie and Clyde " . 
 In 2006 , Spanish folk metal band Mägo de Oz made a cover of the song , which was included in their compilation album The Best Oz . 
 In 2007 , Latvian instrumental cello rock trio Melo @-@ M included a cover version for their album <unk> . 
 In 2008 , Finnish symphonic metal cover group Northern Kings covered the song for their album , <unk> . 
 In 2008 , American boy band the Jonas Brothers covered this song during their When You Look Me in the Eyes Tour and on an episode of Dancing with the Stars . 
 In 2008 , American R & B duo Zo ! and <unk> ( <unk> , formerly of Little Brother ) recorded a cover for their EP entitled Zo ! & <unk> Love the 80s . 
 In 2008 , Danish experimental band <unk> covered the song on their Sunshine EP . 
 In 2009 , Spanish artist Anni B Sweet made an acoustic cover version of the song . 
 In 2009 , Carl Newman of The New Pornographers recorded a cover of the song on the Starbucks @-@ sponsored compilation album Sweetheart : Our Favorite Artists Sing Their Favorite Love Songs . 
 In 2010 , South Korean pop singer Seo In @-@ guk covered and released the song on 22 November of that year as a single . The verses of the song were re @-@ written into Korean while the chorus kept the original English lyrics . The song was re @-@ titled as " Take " . 
 In 2010 , Italian gothic metal singer Lord Vampyr , famous for being the former frontman of the extreme metal band Theatres des Vampires , covered the song on his third studio solo album , Horror Masterpiece . 
 In 2011 , Norwegian jazz singer Inger Marie Gundersen released a cover version of the song on her album For You . 
 In 2011 , Christian punk pop band <unk> released a cover of " Take On Me " on their Quota EP in April and on the Japan edition of their full @-@ length 2011 album , <unk> , in November . 
 American duo Letters Lost released a version of the song on its album You Are My Biggest Fan . 
 In 2011 , accordion players of the Kum Song School of Music of Pyongyang , North Korea performed a cover for Morten <unk> , a Norwegian cultural event organizer . <unk> 's video of the first performance was a YouTube hit in February 2012 , and the quintet subsequently performed at a cultural festival in Kirkenes , Norway , a few days after the YouTube video gained widespread attention . 
 In 2012 , Mexican musical group <unk> included the cover of Take On Me titled " Prisioneros . " It was the second single of the bands Forever 7 album . 
 Also in 2012 , American alternative rock band Lazlo Bane released a cover on Guilty Pleasures the 80 's Volume 1 EP . Their version was used in ABC 's Private Practice episode " Short Cuts " two years before its release . 
 In 2013 , " Feel This Moment " , by Pitbull featuring Christina Aguilera , was a global hit and although not a cover version , throughout the song it heavily sampled the hook from Take On Me . 
 In 2013 , <unk> 's advertising uses a cover by German singer Graziella <unk> . 
 In 2014 , Inverse Phase released a chiptune version titled " Take on XE " on his album <unk> . The title is a portmanteau of the original title and the Atari XE console it was created on . 
 In 2015 , the song was covered on the second episode of the sixth and final season of the American television series Glee . It was sung by Naya Rivera , Mark Salling , Amber Riley , Chris Colfer , Heather Morris , Dianna Agron , Kevin McHale , Lea Michelle , Jenna Ushkowitz and Chord Overstreet . 
 In 2015 , an instrumental version was released on YouTube by violinist Steve Bingham and arranger Phil Toms , performed on live violins with synth programming with a music video paying homage to the iconic original . 
 In 2015 , the song was used for the Toronto International Film Festival 's 2015 volunteer trailer ( which was played before each film being screened that year ) . 
 In 2016 , band Ninja Sex Party released their own cover version of the song as part of their album Under the Covers . 
 In 2016 , American J @-@ Pop singer Joshua P. Wood made a Japanese cover of the song , which he uploaded to YouTube on July 14 , 2016 . The video depicts the currently tentative art of the album that the song will be released on , titled " Just Being Me " outside of Japan . 
 = = = Live cover performances = = = 
 Japanese American singer Hikaru Utada covered the song on her " Bohemian Summer 2000 Tour " . It was included on the Bohemian Summer 2000 DVD . 
 Argentinian electropop band Miranda ! included a cover of the song in their 2005 live album En Vivo Sin <unk> . 
 American singer Sara Bareilles has performed acoustic versions of the song in live concerts . 
 The protagonist of Sleeping Dogs , Wei Shen , can choose to sing this during the game 's Karaoke minigame . 
 = = = Parodies = = = 
 Dustin McLean 's literal version cover of " Take on Me " was the first @-@ known example of the " literal music video " meme . 
 In the Family Guy episode Breaking Out is Hard to Do , Chris gets dragged into the music video while in the dairy section of the grocery store . The music video in the episode is nearly identical to the actual video , albeit much shorter and with minor differences . Towards the end of the video , the two hostile racers appear with the pipe wrench and pursue Chris and Harket , causing the chase scene through the maze of paper . When he escapes the video , Lois asks where he 's been , to which Chris replies in a panicked tone , " I don 't know ! " . 
 In the Psych episode American <unk> , Shawn Spencer and Burton Guster performed a rendition of " Take On Me " for their audition . 
 The <unk> and Bob episode " Paper " parodies both the song " Take On Me " and its music video . 
 <unk> Victim parodies " Take On Me " with their song " Corporate Tra $ h " on their Crack Rock Steady Demo . The song Corporate Tra $ h is mocking mainstream music and how it is written to simply make money . 
 Harry Hill did a parody of the song and video for Children in Need 2013 . 
 = = = Media = = = 
 A cover recording was used in the episode " <unk> " ( 2002 ) of the animated TV series South Park . 
 A GEICO commercial features the song being played by a dog with a synthesizer and a singing cockatoo . 
 The <unk> cover recording was used over the closing credits of the George Romero directed film Bruiser ( 2000 ) . 
 The song was featured on the soundtrack of the video game Saints Row 2 
 The song was sung by Jeffster ! in the series finale of Chuck , Chuck vs. the Goodbye . 
 The song was featured in the movie This Is 40 ( 2012 ) in the scene where Leslie Mann 's character is singing in the car with her family . 
 The song and its music video were featured in the Family Guy episode Breaking Out is Hard to Do . 
 The song <unk> by Norwegian duo <unk> pays homage to the song with the lines " Take me on / Take On me " . 
 The melody of the song was used in the opening sequence of the second season of the Israeli TV show Danny Hollywood ( 2009 ) , which its plot is set on the year 1986 . 
 During the 2012 Major League Baseball season , Washington Nationals player Michael Morse used a portion of the song for his walk @-@ up music prior to late @-@ game at @-@ bats . By the end of the season , fans at Nationals Park were singing along , enjoying the final falsetto . After the season , Morse was traded to the Seattle Mariners , but the song remained a part of the in @-@ game entertainment at Nationals Park in 2013 , being played over the public @-@ address system during the seventh @-@ inning stretch after the traditional " Take Me Out to the Ballgame . " 
 It is heard in a 2013 TV commercial for Volkswagen . The video was recreated , with a Volkswagen Passat NMS inserted as one of the cars . The video cuts to a man in an office drawing the photos for the animation while singing the falsetto note ( E5 ) out of tune ( referencing the song 's difficulty ) as everyone in the room stares at him . He then walks outside to his Volkswagen Passat , with the narrator stating that the car 's offer of " no @-@ charge scheduled maintenance " makes people " feel carefree " . 
 The song played in one episode of The CW 's The Carrie Diaries . 
 The musical comedy act The Axis of Awesome featured the song in their medley " Four Chords " ( 2012 ) accompanied by dozens of other songs that use the same chord progression . 
 A re @-@ recorded version was used in the Blu @-@ ray trailer for The Lego Movie . 
 This song is in Just Dance 3 . 
 The song was used in a 2015 ad by Ryanair celebrating 30 years of the airline . 
 The track is used in the video game Metal Gear Solid V : The Phantom Pain as an obtainable addition to the player 's music collection . 
 The song makes an appearance in the 2016 film Whiskey Tango Foxtrot , starring Tina Fey . It is used during the karaoke party scene . 
 = Italian cruiser San Marco = 
 The Italian cruiser San Marco was a San Giorgio @-@ class armoured cruiser built for the Royal Italian Navy ( Regia Marina ) in the first decade of the 20th century . She was the first large Italian ship fitted with steam turbines and the first turbine @-@ powered ship in any navy to have four propeller shafts . The ship participated in the Italo @-@ Turkish War of 1911 – 12 , during which time she supported the occupations of Benghazi and Derna , the island of Rhodes , and bombarded the fortifications defending the entrance to the Dardanelles . During World War I , San Marco 's activities were limited by the threat of Austro @-@ Hungarian submarines , although the ship did participate in the bombardment of Durazzo , Albania in late 1918 . She played a minor role in the Corfu incident in 1923 and was converted into a target ship in the first half of the 1930s . San Marco was captured by the Germans when they occupied northern Italy in 1943 and was found sunk at the end of the war . The ship was broken up and scrapped in 1949 . 
 = = Design and description = = 
 The ships of the San Giorgio class were designed as improved versions of the Pisa @-@ class design . San Marco 's design featured several new innovations that differentiated her from her sister ship San Giorgio . San Marco was given the first steam turbines fitted in a large Italian ship and she was the first turbine @-@ powered ship in any navy to have four shafts , the first with a gyroscopic compass , the first with <unk> tanks , and the first not to use wood in any way . 
 San Marco had a length between perpendiculars of 131 @.@ 04 metres ( 429 ft 11 in ) and an overall length of 140 @.@ 89 metres ( 462 ft 3 in ) . She had a beam of 21 @.@ 03 metres ( 69 ft 0 in ) and a draught of 7 @.@ 76 metres ( 25 ft 6 in ) . The ship displaced 10 @,@ 969 tonnes ( 10 @,@ 796 long tons ) at normal load , and 11 @,@ 900 tonnes ( 11 @,@ 700 long tons ) at deep load . Her complement was 32 officers and 666 to 673 enlisted men . 
 The ship was powered by four steam turbines , each driving one propeller shaft using steam supplied by 14 Babcock & Wilcox boilers . Designed for a maximum output of 23 @,@ 000 shaft horsepower ( 17 @,@ 000 kW ) and a speed of 23 knots ( 43 km / h ; 26 mph ) , San Marco handily exceeded this , reaching a speed of 23 @.@ 75 knots ( 43 @.@ 99 km / h ; 27 @.@ 33 mph ) during her sea trials from 23 @,@ 030 ihp ( 17 @,@ 170 kW ) . The ship was also required to be a half a knot faster than San Giorgio , a requirement she easily surpassed . San Marco had a cruising range of 4 @,@ 800 nautical miles ( 8 @,@ 900 km ; 5 @,@ 500 mi ) at a speed of 10 knots ( 19 km / h ; 12 mph ) . 
 The main armament of the San Giorgio @-@ class ships consisted of four Cannone da 254 / 45 A Modello 1908 guns in twin @-@ gun turrets fore and aft of the superstructure . The ships mounted eight Cannone da 190 / 45 A Modello 1908 in four twin @-@ gun turrets , two in each side amidships , as their secondary armament . For defense against torpedo boats , they carried 18 quick @-@ firing ( QF ) 40 @-@ caliber 76 mm ( 3 @.@ 0 in ) guns . Eight of these were mounted in embrasures in the sides of the hull and the rest in the superstructure . The ships were also fitted with a pair of 40 @-@ caliber QF 47 mm ( 1 @.@ 9 in ) guns . The San Giorgios were also equipped with three submerged 450 mm ( 17 @.@ 7 in ) torpedo tubes . During World War I , eight of the 76 mm guns were replaced by six 76 mm anti @-@ aircraft ( AA ) guns and one torpedo tube was removed . 
 The ships were protected by an armoured belt that was 200 mm ( 7 @.@ 9 in ) thick amidships and reduced to 80 mm ( 3 @.@ 1 in ) at the bow and stern . The armoured deck was 50 mm ( 2 @.@ 0 in ) thick and the conning tower armour was 254 mm thick . The 254 mm gun turrets were protected by 200 mm of armour while the 190 mm turrets had 160 mm ( 6 @.@ 3 in ) . 
 = = Construction and career = = 
 San Marco , named after Saint Mark , the patron saint of Venice , was ordered on 18 September 1905 and laid down on 2 January 1907 at the Regio Cantieri di Castellammare di Stabia in Castellammare di Stabia , on the Bay of Naples . The ship was launched on 20 December 1907 and completed on 7 February 1911 . 
 When the Italo @-@ Turkish War of 1911 – 12 began on 29 September 1911 , San Marco was not initially assigned to the 2nd Division of the 1st Squadron of the Mediterranean Fleet . She was assigned to the Division on 1 October and later escorted several Italian transports that arrived off Derna , Libya on 15 October together with the battleship Napoli and the armoured cruisers Pisa and Amalfi . After negotiations for a surrender of the town fell apart , Pisa shelled the barracks and a fort . There was no return fire from Derna , so a boat with offers of a truce was sent in . When it was greeted by a volley of rifle fire , San Marco and the other armoured cruisers opened fire on the town with their 190 mm guns and , according to a contemporary account , " completely destroyed " the town in 30 minutes time . A landing party was unable to reach the shore because of rough seas and gunfire from the shore . San Marco and her consorts then shelled the beach for two hours . Weather conditions prevented a landing until the 18th , when 1 @,@ 500 men took possession of Derna . The ship then supported Italian troops at Benghazi in December . In mid @-@ April 1912 the Italian fleet sortied into the eastern Aegean Sea with Pisa and Amalfi leading in an attempt to lure out the Ottoman fleet . When that failed , the Italians bombarded the fortifications defending the Dardanelles to little effect before the main body departed for Italy on the 19th . In May San Marco provided support for the occupation of Rhodes and finally returned home on 20 September . 
 She was used for experiments evaluating shipboard operation of seaplanes before the start of World War I. The ship was based at Brindisi when Italy declared war on the Central Powers on 23 May 1915 . That night , the Austro @-@ Hungarian Navy bombarded the Italian coast in an attempt to disrupt the Italian mobilization . Of the many targets , Ancona was hardest hit , with disruptions to the town 's gas , electric , and telephone service ; the city 's stockpiles of coal and oil were left in flames . All of the Austrian ships safely returned to port , putting pressure on the Regia Marina to stop the attacks . When the Austrians resumed bombardments on the Italian coast in mid @-@ June , Admiral Paolo Thaon di Revel responded by sending San Marco and the other armoured cruisers at Brindisi — the navy 's newest — to Venice to supplement the older ships already there . Shortly after their arrival at Venice , Amalfi was sunk by a submarine on 7 July and her loss severely restricted the activities of the other ships based at Venice . San Marco later participated in the bombardment of Durazzo ( now known as Durrës ) on 2 October 1918 which sank one merchantman and damaged two others . 
 On 21 September 1923 , the ship transported to Taranto the bodies of the members of the Boundary Commission killed on Corfu on 27 August ( their deaths sparked the Corfu incident ) . On 1 October , San Marco ferried the last occupation troops from Corfu to Brindisi . On 16 March 1924 , she saluted King Victor Emmanuel III when he arrived in Fiume to attend the ceremony commemorating the city 's annexation by Italy . San Marco escorted Crown Prince Umberto , travelling aboard San Giorgio , during his South American tour in July – September 1924 . 
 San Marco was disarmed and converted into a radio @-@ controlled ( by the elderly destroyer Audace ) target ship in 1931 – 35 . Her old boilers were replaced by four oil @-@ burning Thornycroft @-@ type boilers which reduced her maximum speed to 18 knots ( 33 km / h ; 21 mph ) from 13 @,@ 000 shaft horsepower ( 9 @,@ 700 kW ) . During a naval review for Adolf Hitler in the Bay of Naples on 5 May 1938 , the ship was used as a target by the heavy cruisers Fiume and Zara . She was captured by the Germans when they occupied La Spezia on 9 September 1943 ; the ship was found at the end of the war sunk in the harbor there . San Marco was formally stricken from the Navy List on 27 February 1947 and broken up in 1949 . 
 = Tom 's Divorce = 
 " Tom 's Divorce " is the 11th episode of the second season of American comedy television series Parks and Recreation , and the seventeenth overall episode of the series . It originally aired on NBC in the United States on December 3 , 2009 . In the episode , Tom gets a divorce and Leslie tries to cheer him up , unaware it was a green card marriage . Meanwhile , Andy challenges Mark to a game of pool with the hopes of winning back Ann 's affections . 
 The episode was written by Harris Wittels and was directed by Troy Miller . Although officially entitled " Tom 's Divorce " , it has also been referred to in some media reports as " The Fourth Floor " in reference to the pre @-@ credits sequence in which Leslie visits the horrifying and grotesque fourth floor of the Pawnee Hall , a scene that was praised by television reviews . 
 According to Nielsen Media Research , " Tom 's Divorce " was seen by 4 @.@ 83 million viewers , an increase over the previous episode , " Hunting Trip " . The episode received generally positive reviews , particularly for the development of Tom 's character , although commentators voiced less praise for the subplot involving Ann , Mark and Andy . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Ron ( Nick Offerman ) sends Leslie ( Amy Poehler ) to run an errand at the DMV in Pawnee Hall 's fourth floor , a dark and unsettling place that includes probation offices and divorce filings . A reluctant and frightened Leslie navigates past <unk> and blood stains on the floor and spots Tom ( Aziz Ansari ) leaving the divorce office with his wife Wendy ( Jama Williamson ) . Unaware that their relationship was a green card marriage to prevent Wendy from being deported back to Canada , Leslie later tries to comfort Tom , who insists he is fine . Nevertheless , Leslie persists in her efforts to cheer him up , in part by ordering a singing horse telegram to cheer him up . Ron , who knows about Tom 's fake marriage , suggests Tom act sad so Leslie can feel like she cheered him up . When Leslie sets up a social event to cheer him up , Tom suggests a strip club , but Leslie follows Jerry 's ( Jim O 'Heir ) suggestion they go to the dinosaur @-@ themed restaurant , Jurassic Fork . 
 The parks employees eat several dinosaur @-@ themed entrees , served by a depressed waiter ( Evan O 'Brien ) , they enjoy " <unk> @-@ Ceasar Salads " and " Surf and <unk> " . Tom seems so cheery that Leslie begins to suspect he is faking being sad . Ron pulls Tom aside and asks whether he could ask Wendy on a date once the divorce is finalized . Tom consents , but is visibly disappointed . Determined to cheer him up , Leslie agrees to compromise her morals and take Tom to his favorite strip club , the Glitter Factory . Leslie is horrified by the club and tries to encourage the strippers to change their lives . Ron is also uninterested in the strippers , but happily consumes the free breakfast buffet . 
 Tom remains depressed even after Leslie hires a stripper ( Cheryl <unk> ) to give him a lap dance and " grind the sorrow out of him " . A drunken Tom tells Leslie that Ron plans to ask out Wendy , prompting an angry reaction from her . When Tom passes out at the bar , they take him to Wendy 's house , and Leslie is shocked to find she is on a date with another man ( James Ball ) . She storms out after expressing her disgust with Wendy and Ron . The next morning at work , Tom confesses to Leslie that it was a green card marriage , and that he only recently realized he really likes Wendy . 
 Meanwhile , Andy ( Chris Pratt ) continues his efforts to break up the relationship between his ex @-@ girlfriend Ann ( Rashida Jones ) and her new boyfriend Mark ( Paul Schneider ) . Andy challenges Mark to a game of pool with the hopes of hustling him , but Mark turns out to be an excellent player and wins multiple games . Mark and Andy make one final wager : if Andy wins , he gets Ann , but if Mark wins he has to leave them alone . Mark dominates the game but loses when he scratches on the 8 ball . Initially delighted , Andy becomes confused when Ann leaves with Mark anyway . The next day , he tells Mark and Ann he will no longer be bothering them , and says a final goodbye to Ann . 
 = = Production and cultural references = = 
 " Tom 's Divorce " was written by Harris Wittels and directed by Troy Miller . Although officially titled " Tom 's Divorce " , it was referred to in some media reports by the name " The Fourth Floor " . Aziz Ansari said " Tom 's Divorce " was his favorite episode of the series so far . He said , " It was really fun because there was some serious acting for me to do , compared to my usual dick jokes . " 
 " Tom 's Divorce " included several references to previous Parks and Recreation episodes . Tom and Wendy 's green card marriage was first identified in the episode " Practice Date " . During the final scenes of the episode " Greg Pikitis " , Tom expresses sadness when Wendy mentions that the couple will eventually get a divorce , which set the scene for this film . Television reviewer Alan Sepinwall , television columnist with The Star @-@ Ledger , said this allowed the show to humanize and further develop Tom 's character . In certain shots in " Tom 's Divorce " , it appears the back of Ron 's head is missing patches of hair . This is a reference to the previous episode , " Hunting Trip " , in which he is accidentally shot in the back of the head while hunting . The episode also features scenes with Ron describing his admiration for strong women and his immense enjoyment of the strip club 's complimentary breakfast . Both of these refers to the elements of Ron 's character that were conveyed in the episode " Ron and Tammy " , which involves Ron 's romantic life and includes dialogue about his love of breakfast foods . Ron also identifies tennis player Steffi Graf and basketball player Sheryl Swoopes as ideal romantic partners . He previously declared Steffi Graf a " perfect ten " on his attractiveness scale in " Practice Date " . 
 The notion in " Tom 's Divorce " that the fourth floor refers to <unk> , the superstitious fear of the number four . Jokes about this have been featured in such pop culture works as the 1999 film Being John Malkovich and the NBC comedy series 30 Rock . The song " <unk> Bop " , a 1990 single by the band Poison , plays during one of the strip club scene . Leslie said Tom hides his emotions behind " a very thick layer of Axe body spray " , a reference to the real @-@ life male grooming product . The Parks department employees eat at a restaurant called Jurassic Fork , a reference to the Steven Spielberg dinosaur adventure film Jurassic Park , which was adapted from a novel of the same name by Michael Crichton . During one scene , Tom refers to Ron as " <unk> Rice " , a reference to former United States Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice . At the strip club , Leslie mistakenly refers to a stripper named Sierra by the name Seabiscuit , a champion thoroughbred racehorse . Reflecting on his marriage , Tom said , " At least we lasted longer than Avril Lavigne and that guy from Sum 41 " , a reference to the pop singer 's short @-@ lived marriage to Sum 41 guitarist Deryck Whibley . Tom says one of the strippers also works at Quiznos , a sandwich fast @-@ food franchise ; Tom says of her : " She 's really nice to me here , but really mean to me at Quiznos . " Andy said he has a T @-@ shirt that is " literally priceless " because he was wearing it when he tackled American singer Eddie Vedder . When Ron was commenting on how well Tom was pretending to be sad about his divorce , he tells Tom , " Take it down a notch . You 've already won your Oscar , DiCaprio , " which is a reference to the Academy Awards and the actor Leonardo DiCaprio . 
 = = Reception = = 
 On its original American broadcast on December 3 , 2009 , " Tom 's Divorce " was seen by 4 @.@ 83 million households , according to Nielsen Media Research . This amounted to a five percent ratings increase over the previous week 's episode , " Hunting Trip " . " Tom 's Divorce " drew a 2 @.@ 1 rating / 6 share among viewers aged between 18 and 49 . The episode received generally positive reviews , particularly for the development of Tom 's character and the " fourth floor " pre @-@ credits sequence , although commentators voiced less praise for the subplot involving Ann , Mark and Andy . Steve Heisler of The A.V. Club said the episode addressed two of the show 's more downbeat stories ( Tom 's divorce and Andy 's failed attempts to woo Ann ) but " managed to do so by keeping its plucky , upbeat sense of humor intact " . Heisler praised the growth of Tom 's character and the fourth floor joke , which he said " started with yet another delicious chapter in behind @-@ the @-@ scenes Pawnee lore " . 
 Time magazine television critic James Poniewozik said Ansari did " an excellent job " at showing a new side to Tom , and complimented the staging of the fourth floor sequence . Alan Sepinwall of The Star @-@ Ledger said " Tom 's Divorce " was " by design , more melancholy " than previous Parks and Recreation episodes , but served to develop Tom 's character and proved Aziz Ansari " could tone it down and play a quieter , sadder Tom for once " . Sepinwall said the Mark , Ann and Andy subplot was not as funny as in previous episodes . Entertainment Weekly writer Sandra Gonzalez said she had been awaiting a storyline centering on Tom , and said the episode " makes us love the show more " . However , she said Andy 's continued obsession with Ann was growing tiresome and expressed hope his character should go in a new direction . Matt Fowler of IGN said the episode further added to the strong character development that has been consistent throughout the show 's second season . Fowler also enjoyed the frightening portrayal of the fourth floor , which he said helps establish Pawnee as " a place where both the engrossingly real and the entertainingly surreal can co @-@ exist " . GQ writer Dan Fierman praised the episode , particularly Ron 's character and the singing telegram " divorce horse " . 
 = = DVD release = = 
 " Tom 's Divorce " , along with the other 23 second season episodes of Parks and Recreation , was released on a four @-@ disc DVD set in the United States on November 30 , 2010 . The DVD included deleted scenes for each episode . 
 = Monte Pearson = 
 Montgomery Marcellus " Monte " Pearson ( September 2 , 1908 – January 27 , 1978 ) was an American baseball pitcher who played ten seasons in Major League Baseball ( MLB ) . Nicknamed " Hoot " , he played for the Cleveland Indians , New York Yankees and Cincinnati Reds from 1932 to 1941 . He batted and threw right @-@ handed and served primarily as a starting pitcher . 
 Pearson played minor league baseball for three different teams until 1932 , when he signed with the Cleveland Indians . After spending four seasons with the organization , Pearson was traded to the New York Yankees , where he spent the next five years . At the conclusion of the 1940 season , he was traded to the Cincinnati Reds , with whom he played his last game on August 5 , 1941 . A four @-@ time World Series champion , Pearson holds the MLB record for lowest walks plus hits per inning pitched ( WHIP ) in the postseason . He is most famous for pitching the first no @-@ hitter at the original Yankee Stadium . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Pearson was born on September 2 , 1908 in Oakland , California . He was raised as a member of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter @-@ day Saints and was one of the first Mormons to find success in the major leagues . He later moved to Fresno , California and studied at Fresno High School , where he started playing baseball at catcher and third base and was a letterman in four sports . After graduating , he attended college at the University of California , Berkeley , where he played two seasons of baseball for the California Golden Bears from 1928 – 29 . He worked as a mechanic as one of his first jobs , and his ability to sing and play the guitar helped develop his reputation as a positive influence on the clubhouse throughout his major league career . 
 = = Professional career = = 
 = = = Minor leagues = = = 
 Pearson began his professional baseball career in 1929 with the Bakersfield Bees , a Minor League Baseball team that were members of the California State League . He was signed by the Oakland Oaks of the Pacific Coast League the following year , and was optioned to the Arizona State League 's Phoenix Senators after recording a 5 @.@ 77 earned run average ( ERA ) in 24 games pitched . However , he established himself in the Oaks ' pitching rotation in 1931 and compiled a 17 – 16 win – loss record and a 4 @.@ 46 ERA in 234 innings pitched . His performance that year , coupled with his heavy @-@ breaking curveball , caught the attention of the Cleveland Indians , who promptly bought his contract after the season ended . 
 = = = Cleveland Indians ( 1932 – 35 ) = = = 
 Pearson made his major league debut for the Indians on April 22 , 1932 , at the age of 23 , relieving Pete Appleton in the eighth inning and giving up 6 earned runs in 1 1 ⁄ 2 innings in a 16 – 3 loss against the Detroit Tigers . His subsequent games were disappointing and , after compiling a 10 @.@ 13 ERA in 8 innings from 8 games pitched , he was demoted back to the minor leagues . He played the rest of the season for the Toledo Mud Hens of the American Association ( AA ) , where continued his dismal performance with a 3 – 9 record and 3 @.@ 99 ERA . However , he improved significantly the following year , posting an 11 – 5 record and 3 @.@ 41 ERA in 148 innings with the Mud Hens , as well as leading the AA in strikeouts at the time he was called back up to the majors . His pitching during the first half of the season prompted the Indians to bring him back up to the first team in early July . He continued to pitch well in the majors and finished the season with a 10 – 5 record ; his 2 @.@ 33 ERA was the lowest in the American League ( AL ) that year and although he pitched only 135 1 ⁄ 3 innings , he is recognized as the AL ERA champion by Baseball @-@ Reference.com. 
 Pearson followed up his impressive 1933 season with another strong showing in 1934 . That year , he finished second in the AL in games started ( 33 ) , fifth in strikeouts ( 140 ) and complete games ( 19 ) and sixth in wins ( 18 ) . In spite of 13 losses , a 4 @.@ 52 ERA , 130 walks ( the second highest in the AL ) and 15 wild pitches ( the most in MLB ) , this was considered one of his best seasons . However , his poor performance in 1935 — where he went 8 – 13 with a 4 @.@ 90 ERA — convinced the Indians to cut their losses with their once @-@ promising prospect . Pearson was traded at the end of the season to the New York Yankees with Steve <unk> in exchange for Johnny Allen . 
 = = = New York Yankees ( 1936 – 40 ) = = = 
 Pearson 's trade to the New York Yankees was initially unpopular among fans , with Joe McCarthy receiving heavy criticism for dealing Allen — who had a 13 – 6 record in 1935 — for Pearson . However , Pearson repaid his manager 's faith in him by churning out the best statistical year in his career . His <unk> winning percentage ( 19 – 7 record ) was third best in the AL ; he finished fifth in ERA ( 3 @.@ 71 ) and strikeouts ( 118 ) and sixth in wins , though he also recorded the third highest number of walks in the AL with 135 . His performance during the first half of the season resulted in him being selected for the 1936 All @-@ Star Game , though he did not pitch in it . In the postseason , the Yankees advanced to the World Series , where they defeated the New York Giants 4 – 2 . In Game 4 , Pearson — who insisted on being included in the rotation even after falling ill with pleurisy just before the Series — limited the Giants to just two runs while striking out seven in a complete game win . Offensively , he managed to get two hits , including a double . The 5 – 2 victory ended Carl Hubbell 's streak of 17 consecutive regular and postseason wins . 
 During spring training of 1937 , Pearson injured his right ankle after accidentally stepping onto a rolling ball . He was still able recover in time for the start the season and pitched solidly . In arguably his best start of the year , he threw a one @-@ hit shutout against the Chicago White Sox on May 10 ; he also recorded three hits and drove in two runs in the 7 – 0 win . However , other health problems and injuries — most notably a sore arm — began to affect him , limiting his season to just 144 2 ⁄ 3 innings pitched in 20 games started and 2 games finished in relief . Despite his many ailments , he still came up clutch in Game 3 of the 1937 World Series . Facing a familiar foe in the New York Giants , Pearson stymied them to a solitary run in 8 2 ⁄ 3 innings pitched and received the win as the Yankees cruised to a 5 – 1 victory , taking a commanding 3 – 0 lead in the Series . The Yankees eventually triumphed in 5 games , giving Pearson his second World Series ring in as many years with the team . 
 The 1938 season saw Pearson rebound in his regular season numbers . He had the fifth highest winning percentage ( <unk> ) , the sixth most wins ( 16 ) and the seventh most complete games ( 17 ) in the AL , but he struggled with his control , ending the season with 9 wild pitches ( second highest in the AL ) and 113 walks ( fifth most ) . During a June 26 road game at Briggs Stadium , he held the Detroit Tigers to three runs in a complete game , 10 – 3 Yankees win . By not giving up any home runs in the game , he halted the Tigers ' quest of breaking the MLB record for most consecutive games with a home run for a team . The highlight of his season came on August 27 , when he pitched a no @-@ hitter against the Cleveland Indians in the second game of a doubleheader . Facing his former team on only two days of rest , Pearson struck out seven , allowed just two baserunners through walks and retired the last 18 consecutive batters in a 13 – 0 victory , marking his 13th win of the season and 10th consecutive win . This was the first Yankee no @-@ hitter in fifteen years ( pitched by Sad Sam Jones ) , as well as first no @-@ hitter at Yankee Stadium . 
 In October , Pearson suffered from a dead arm . Doctors advised him to undergo surgery after X @-@ rays revealed a spur on his elbow . However , he was able to overcome injury once again and pitched in Game 3 of the 1938 World Series . Up against the Chicago Cubs , he kept them to two runs ( one earned ) while striking out nine in a complete game , 5 – 2 win . The Yankees completed their Series sweep over the Cubs in the next game , giving them their third straight championship . 
 During the 1938 – 39 offseason , Pearson became a contract holdout after he rejected the Yankees ' initial offer . Reportedly the same amount he had earned the season before ( $ 10 @,@ 000 ) , he described the contract offer as " not up to [ his ] expectations . " The two sides eventually agreed to a contract worth $ 13 @,@ 500 . He kept up his good pitching , garnering the seventh highest winning percentage ( <unk> ) in the AL that year , though his ERA ballooned to 4 @.@ 49 . Throughout the season , problems in his pitching arm flared up again , restricting him to just 146 1 ⁄ 3 innings pitched and 20 games started . As a result , his inclusion on the postseason roster was not guaranteed ; in late September , McCarthy appeared resigned to the fact that Pearson would not " be able to help [ him ] in this series . " However , he managed to shrug off his injury woes and was penciled into the starting rotation for Game 2 of the 1939 World Series . Facing the Cincinnati Reds , he held them hitless through 7 1 ⁄ 3 innings pitched — eventually giving up just two singles — while striking out eight and walking one in a complete game , 4 – 0 victory . Pearson 's sublime pitching performance is considered one of the greatest in World Series history ; with a game score of 90 , it is one of only eight Fall Classic starts to record a game score of 90 or above . The Yankees proceeded to sweep the Reds two games later , resulting in their fourth consecutive championship and giving Pearson the distinction of winning a World Series ring in every season of his Yankees tenure . 
 In 1940 , Pearson 's pitching during the first half of the season earned him his second All @-@ Star Game selection , but he was not called upon to pitch in it . About a week after the game , on July 17 , he tore his shoulder ligament which prematurely shortened his playing career . After pitching 13 innings against Bob Feller and his former team , Pearson eventually won the game but the injury — discovered after a full physical examination on his sore arm a few weeks after the game — ended his season ; he finished with a 7 – 5 record and 3 @.@ 69 ERA in only 109 2 ⁄ 3 innings pitched and 16 games started . He received treatment at the Union Memorial Hospital in Baltimore , and at the end of the season , he was placed on waivers and traded to the Cincinnati Reds in exchange for Don Lang and $ 20 @,@ 000 . 
 = = = Cincinnati Reds and back to the minors ( 1941 ) = = = 
 Pearson 's final major league team was ironically the one he pitched his World Series two @-@ hitter against . Due to his history of injuries , the Yankees refused to offer a guarantee and thus , no other team was willing sign him . However , Reds manager Bill McKechnie made the gamble , remarking how Pearson " showed [ the Reds ] more that day than any National League right @-@ hander showed [ them ] that season " when he threw the two @-@ hitter against them . Pearson expressed his delight at the trade and looked forward to working with McKechnie . However , he was unable to rediscover his pre @-@ injury form ; in his first start for the Reds , Pearson was battered by the opposing team , giving up six earned runs and five walks to the Chicago Cubs before being pulled out of the game after only 1 1 ⁄ 3 innings . In a total of 7 games pitched – 4 starts and 3 games finished — for the Reds , he pitched poorly , posting a 1 – 3 record with a 5 @.@ 18 ERA in just 24 1 ⁄ 3 innings pitched . This dismal showing convinced the Reds to cut ties with Pearson , and he was sold to the Hollywood Stars of the Pacific Coast League on August 21 . 
 Pearson 's sojourn in the minor leagues was brief , lasting just one game . In his only start for the Stars , he pitched a complete game , giving up six hits and three walks in five innings . He announced his retirement from baseball the following year on August 27 . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Pearson married Cleo <unk> in January 1931 . They had a son and a daughter . He remained with Cleo for thirty @-@ two years , before she filed for divorce in 1962 . He remarried to Nellie , with whom he had one son , Larry . Larry was signed by the Washington Senators in 1959 . 
 During the 1939 offseason , Pearson was nearly killed while hunting with William Rudolph , a 15 @-@ year @-@ old high school baseball player from Fresno . Rudolph accidentally fired his shotgun at the same time as Pearson . The shot penetrated Pearson 's cap and knocked it from his head . Pearson , who escaped uninjured , described the incident as " the thrill of [ his ] life . " In 1942 , during a leave of absence away from baseball to recover from injury , Pearson worked at the Fresno Air National Guard Base as a firefighter . After his Major League career ended , he planned on switching to a career in boxing , but returned to Fresno State College and graduated with a degree in chemistry . He became the chief <unk> of Madera County . He unsuccessfully ran for a seat on the Fresno County Board of Supervisors in 1952 . 
 On May 15 , 1962 , Pearson was arrested and charged with accepting bribes in exchange for approving shoddy septic tanks . In November of that year , he was found guilty of one count of bribery involving $ 200 . The court sentenced him to eight months imprisonment and placed him on probation for three years . After a long battle with cancer , Pearson died on January 27 , 1978 in Fresno , California at the age of 69 and was cremated . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Despite having mediocre statistics in the regular season , Pearson excelled in the postseason . He won all four of his World Series starts , finishing with a 4 – 0 win – loss record . His 0 @.@ 729 walks plus hits per inning pitched ( WHIP ) is the lowest of all @-@ time in the postseason , while he also has the second lowest hits per nine innings ( 4 @.@ 794 ) and seventh lowest ERA ( 1 @.@ 01 ) . Together with teammate Red Ruffing , they held a combined 8 – 1 record and a 1 @.@ 79 ERA spanning from the 1936 – 39 World Series , and the two are viewed as one of the most dominant postseason pitching duos of all @-@ time . 
 Pearson appeared on the Baseball Hall of Fame ballot in 1958 . He received just one vote — 0 @.@ 4 % of the vote — and was not included on any subsequent ballots . He was inducted into the Fresno Athletic Hall of Fame in 1967 . 
 = Charlie Haas = 
 Charles Doyle " Charlie " Haas II ( born March 27 , 1972 ) is an American semi @-@ retired professional and amateur wrestler . He is best known for his appearances with World Wrestling Entertainment ( WWE ) in the 2000s and Ring of Honor ( ROH ) in the 2010s . 
 Haas was an amateur wrestler in high school , and attended Seton Hall University on a wrestling scholarship , before becoming a stockbroker . He became a professional wrestler in 1996 , and teamed regularly with his brother , Russ , with the two winning numerous championships on the independent circuit , including the CZW World Tag Team Championship and the JAPW Tag Team Championship . After signing contracts with WWE , The Haas Brothers were assigned to WWE 's developmental territories , where they won the MCW Southern Tag Team Championship on three occasions . After Russ ' death in 2001 due to a heart attack , Haas began wrestling in singles competition , winning the HWA Heavyweight Championship once . 
 Haas formed a team with Shelton Benjamin and the two debuted on SmackDown in December 2002 . They won the WWE Tag Team Championship twice , and dubbed themselves The World 's Greatest Tag Team before they split in 2004 . Haas won the WWE Tag Team Championship once more with Rico , and gained Miss Jackie , whom he later married , as a valet . Haas then transferred into singles competition before being released from WWE in 2005 . After a short stint in Jersey All Pro Wrestling ( JAPW ) and other independent promotions , Haas was re @-@ signed to WWE in April 2006 . He formed a short @-@ lived team with Viscera , before reforming the World 's Greatest Tag Team with Benjamin . After Benjamin transferred to the ECW brand , Haas began wrestling with a comical luchador persona , before developing a character where he imitated other wrestlers and WWE Hall of Famers . In addition , Haas won the last ever match on WWE Heat when the show ended on May 30 , 2008 . 
 Haas was released from WWE in February 2010 . He soon returned to the independent circuit , including returning to JAPW and appearing for Ring of Honor . In September 2010 , he won the NWA Texas Heavyweight Championship . On April 1 , 2011 , Haas and Benjamin won the ROH World Tag Team Championship and held it until December 2011 . Haas announced his retirement from professional wrestling in March 2013 , but returned to competition in August that same year . Aside from wrestling , Haas and his wife Jackie run a nutritional store , Custom Muscle Nutrition and Smoothie Shop , in Frisco , Texas , which they opened in October 2008 . 
 = = Professional wrestling career = = 
 = = = Independent circuit ( 1996 – 2000 ) = = = 
 After debuting in 1996 as a professional wrestler , Haas regularly teamed with his brother Russ for numerous independent promotions . On July 22 , 1998 , The Haas Brothers won the Jersey All Pro Wrestling Tag Team Championship by defeating The Skin Head Express . They lost it to The Nation of Immigration just over a month later on August 25 . They won the championship for the second time on May 21 , 1999 , by defeating The Big Unit ( Rick Silver and Dave Desire ) , and held the championship until February 25 , 2000 when they were defeated by Da Hit Squad . During 2000 they also held the Pennsylvania Championship Wrestling Tag Team Championship and the ECWA Tag Team Championship in the East Coast Wrestling Association promotion , which they won by defeating The Backseat Boyz ( Trent Acid and Johnny Kashmere ) . 
 The Haas brothers began competing for Combat Zone Wrestling ( CZW ) in November 1999 , losing to The King <unk> at The War Begins on November 20 , 1999 . They competed regularly for CZW throughout early 2000 , and won the CZW World Tag Team Championship on February 12 at Climbing The Ladder by defeating The <unk> Brothers and The Thrill Kill Kult in a three @-@ way match . On July 10 , they lost the championship to The Backseat Boyz at Caged To The End , when Johnny Kashmere defeated Russ in a singles match and was awarded the championship . 
 = = = World Wrestling Federation / Entertainment ( 2000 – 2005 ) = = = 
 After a World Wrestling Federation ( WWF ) tryout match at Madison Square Garden on August 7 , 2000 , they signed a developmental contract with WWF . The two worked their way through the tag ranks in the WWF 's developmental territories , Memphis Championship Wrestling ( MCW ) and the Heartland Wrestling Association ( HWA ) . The brothers won the MCW Southern Tag Team Championship three times during early 2001 , defeating The <unk> the first time and The Island Boyz and Joey Matthews and Christian York in a three @-@ way match on both the second and third occasions . Russ died from a heart attack due to a pre @-@ existing heart condition , on December 15 , 2001 at age 27 . The brothers fought in house shows and dark matches in the WWF up until Russ died . After Russ ' death , Charlie continue to fight in dark matches . After Russ ' death as a tribute to him , Haas wrote Russ ' name on his wrist tape , and used the name " R.C. Haas " ( standing for Russ – Charlie ) before being called up to the main WWE roster . On January 2 , 2002 , Haas won the HWA Heavyweight Championship , his first singles championship , by defeating Val Venis . He was later stripped of the title on January 29 due to a scripted contract loophole . After World Wrestling Entertainment ( renamed from the WWF ) ended its affiliation with the HWA , Haas was moved to Ohio Valley Wrestling ( OVW ) where he competed until December 2002 . 
 Haas debuted on WWE 's main roster on the December 26 , 2002 episode of SmackDown ! as a heel ( villainous character ) along with Shelton Benjamin as Team Angle . The tag team was the " contingency plan " of Paul Heyman , and were intended to help WWE Champion Kurt Angle retain his title , attacking Chris Benoit and Brock Lesnar in an attempt to soften them up . They quickly won the WWE Tag Team Championship on February 6 , 2003 , by defeating Los Guerreros ( Eddie and Chavo Guerrero ) . They held the championship for three months , including a successful title defense at WrestleMania XIX against Los Guerreros and the team of Chris Benoit and Rhyno , before losing the championship to Eddie Guerrero and his new partner Tajiri in a ladder match on May 18 at Judgment Day . On the June 12 episode of SmackDown , Angle fired Haas and Benjamin after they blamed him for losing the Tag Team Championship and began to question his leadership . The duo then dubbed themselves The World 's Greatest Tag Team , although announcers made sure to add " Self Proclaimed " to the name . Haas and Benjamin regained the championship from Guerrero and Tajiri on the July 3 episode of SmackDown , but lost it to the reformed Los Guerreros on September 18 . The team was separated when Benjamin was moved to the Raw brand as part of the 2004 Draft Lottery . 
 After Benjamin 's draft , Haas turned into a fan favorite and gained Miss Jackie as a valet . He teamed with Rico to win the WWE Tag Team Championship on April 22 , 2004 . The pair lost the championship to the Dudley Boyz on June 17 , and shortly afterwards , Haas became a singles wrestler , although he retained Miss Jackie as his valet . Haas lost a match to Luther Reigns at the Great American Bash . 
 Haas was later involved in an angle in which he was in a love triangle with Miss Jackie , who was acknowledged on @-@ screen as his fiancée , and Dawn Marie . The storyline culminated when Haas served as the special @-@ guest referee in a match at Armageddon 2004 between the two women . After the match , Haas left both women in storyline , although he continued his relationship with Miss Jackie off @-@ screen . In early @-@ 2005 , he formed a tag team with Hardcore Holly . They were involved in a feud ( scripted rivalry ) with MNM for the WWE Tag Team Championship , but never won the championship . 
 On July 8 , 2005 , Haas was released by World Wrestling Entertainment along with his real @-@ life wife Jackie Gayda . 
 = = = Independent circuit ( 2005 ) = = = 
 He returned to JAPW later in July 2005 , and began a feud for the JAPW Heavyweight Championship with Jay Lethal . On September 10 at JAPW Haas of Pain , Lethal defeated Haas to retain his title . In JAPW , on October 27 , 2007 , Haas was inducted along with his late brother Russ into the first class of the Jersey All Pro Wrestling Hall of Fame . 
 He won the New Legacy Championship at Ballpark Brawl V on August 13 , 2005 , defeating then @-@ champion Christopher Daniels and Chris Sabin in a triple threat match . He successfully defended the title the next night at Ballpark Brawl VI against Harry Smith with Mick Foley as a referee . 
 During his time back in the independent circuit , Haas competed in the East Coast Wrestling Association 's ( ECWA ) Super 8 Tournament in 2006 , where he advanced all the way to the finals before losing to Davey Richards . 
 = = = Return to WWE = = = 
 = = = = Singles competition ( 2006 ) = = = = 
 Haas returned to WWE in 2006 , appearing on the April 17 , 2006 , episode of Raw as Rob Van Dam 's handpicked opponent for his former partner , Shelton Benjamin . Haas defeated Benjamin in the ensuing match . Haas continued to wrestle on the lower <unk> spot , becoming a regular fixture on Heat . 
 On the June 5 , 2006 episode of Raw , Haas inadvertently knocked Lilian Garcia off the ring apron as he was entering the ring . It was announced on WWE 's official website that as a result , Garcia suffered a sprained wrist . As a result of the legitimate accident , Haas began a feud with Garcia 's onetime storyline love interest Viscera . Haas made advances towards Garcia , at one point forcefully kissing her and then dropping her to the ground . Haas and Viscera continued to fight for Garcia 's affection in the ring , until she told them both that she wanted to be " just friends " . Haas gave Viscera an eye rake in anger , and a blinded Viscera accidentally gave Garcia a Samoan drop . Though it was unintentional , when both Haas and Viscera had seen what had happened to their now former love interest , they simply had a laugh about it , thus making Haas a villain . After that , Viscera and Haas became a tag team , competing on both Raw and Heat until splitting in December 2006 . 
 = = = = Return of The World 's Greatest Tag Team ( 2006 – 2007 ) = = = = 
 After Shelton Benjamin won a match against Super Crazy on the December 4 , 2006 , edition of Raw , Haas came out to celebrate his win with a bewildered Benjamin . Haas and Benjamin announced the return of The World 's Greatest Tag Team on the December 11 , 2006 edition of Raw , and they defeated The Highlanders in their return match . They then started a feud with Cryme Tyme . They continued to compete on Raw through the start of 2007 , facing teams including John Cena and Shawn Michaels and Ric Flair and Carlito . In mid @-@ 2007 , The World 's Greatest Tag Team feuded briefly with The Hardys in storyline ; at the One Night Stand pay @-@ per @-@ view on June 3 , 2007 , they challenged The Hardys for the WWE World Tag Team Championship in a ladder match but were unsuccessful . The team broke up once again when Benjamin moved to the ECW brand on November 20 , 2007 . 
 = = = = Various gimmicks and SmackDown return ( 2008 – 2010 ) = = = = 
 Early in 2008 , Haas developed a gimmick in which he would go under the ring in the middle of his matches and re @-@ emerge wearing a mask . In this " alter @-@ ego " , Haas would sometimes perform luchador @-@ esque maneuvers in a comical fashion ( such as attempting a diving splash , but instead landing on his feet and hitting a standing splash ) . The opponent would often unmask Haas mid @-@ match , returning him to his normal demeanor . During this persona , Haas usually competed in dark matches before the live broadcast of Raw or on Heat . 
 Beginning in late August , Haas turned into a face ( heroic character ) and began a storyline in which he began to impersonate other wrestlers , a concept created by John Laurinaitis , a WWE executive . His first match under this gimmick was a loss to Carlito 's real @-@ life brother Primo Colón , while Haas was parodying Carlito with the name " <unk> " . He has portrayed such superstars as John Cena , John " Bradshaw " Layfield , Jim Ross , The Great Khali , Montel Vontavious Porter , legends such as Stone Cold Steve Austin , Bret Hart , " Mr. Perfect " Curt Hennig , Jimmy " Superfly " Snuka , Rowdy Roddy Piper , Hulk Hogan and even WWE Diva Beth Phoenix for which he won a Slammy Award . 
 On April 15 , 2009 , Haas was drafted to the SmackDown brand as part of the 2009 Supplemental Draft . On the May 8 , 2009 episode of SmackDown , Haas made his in @-@ ring return to the brand as a heel , abandoning his persona of imitating other wrestlers , and losing to John Morrison in a match where he was accompanied by his former World 's Greatest Tag Team partner , Shelton Benjamin . The following week on the May 15 , 2009 episode of SmackDown , Benjamin and Haas unofficially reunited and competed against John Morrison and CM Punk in a losing effort , but Benjamin was traded to the ECW brand in June . 
 After an absence of several months , Haas made his return to television by teaming with Mike Knox in a losing effort against Cryme Tyme on the December 31 , 2009 episode of Superstars . On February 28 , 2010 , WWE announced that Haas had been released from his contract . 
 = = = Return to the independent circuit ( 2010 – present ) = = = 
 On March 20 , 2010 , Haas made a surprise return to Jersey All Pro Wrestling and defeated Devon Moore for the JAPW New Jersey State Championship . On May 22 Haas and JAPW Heavyweight Champion Dan Maff put their titles on the line in a tag team match against the Hillbilly Wrecking Crew ( Brodie Lee and Necro Butcher ) . In the end Maff turned on Haas and hit him with a chair , after which Lee pinned him to win the JAPW New Jersey State Championship . 
 On September 10 , 2010 , Haas won the NWA Texas Heavyweight Championship by defeating Michael Faith in Amarillo . In May 2011 , Haas took part in New Japan Pro Wrestling 's first tour of the United States , the Invasion Tour 2011 . In their opening show on May 13 in Rahway , New Jersey , Haas teamed with Rhyno in a tag team main event , where they defeated IWGP Heavyweight Champion Hiroshi Tanahashi and Togi Makabe . The following day in New York City , Haas unsuccessfully challenged Tanahashi for his title . On August 20 , 2011 , Haas became the inaugural Family Wrestling Entertainment ( FWE ) Heavyweight Champion by defeating Jay Lethal and Eric Young . He held the championship for four months before losing it to Young on December 17 . 
 After his retirement from pro wrestling , Haas made his return on August 17 , 2013 , where Haas defeated Jax Dane to win the NWA Branded Outlaw Wrestling championship . 
 At JAPW 18th Anniversary Show , Haas , Benjamin , and Angle reunited , as Team Angle , for the first time in 11 years . In the main event , Benjamin and Haas defeated Chris Sabin and Teddy Hart . 
 At NWA Parade Of Champions 2K16 Haas was defeated by the NWA World Heavyweight Champion Jax Dane 
 = = = Ring of Honor ( 2010 – 2013 ) = = = 
 On September 11 , 2010 , Haas and Shelton Benjamin made their debut as Wrestling 's Greatest Tag Team in Ring of Honor ( ROH ) losing to The Kings of Wrestling at the Glory By Honor IX pay @-@ per @-@ view . They returned to ROH at the Ring of Honor Wrestling television tapings on December 9 , where they defeated the Bravado Brothers ( Harlem and Lance ) . The following day , at the second set of television tapings , Haas and Benjamin defeated the All @-@ Night Xpress of Kenny King and Rhett Titus , and participated in an eight @-@ man tag team match , teaming with the Briscoe Brothers against the Kings of Wrestling and the All @-@ Night Xpress , which ended in a no contest . At the Final Battle 2010 pay @-@ per @-@ view on December 18 , Haas and Benjamin announced they would be wrestling regularly for ROH in 2011 . At the following pay @-@ per @-@ view , 9th Anniversary Show , on February 26 , 2011 , Haas and Benjamin defeated the Briscoe Brothers in the main event of the evening to earn another shot at the Kings of Wrestling and the ROH World Tag Team Championship . On April 1 , at the first night of the Honor Takes Center Stage pay @-@ per @-@ view , Haas and Benjamin defeated the Kings of Wrestling to win the ROH World Tag Team Championship . On June 26 at Best in the World 2011 , Haas and Benjamin successfully defended the ROH World Tag Team Championship in a four @-@ way match against the Briscoe Brothers , the Kings of Wrestling and the All @-@ Night Express . The following day ROH announced that both Haas and Benjamin had signed contracts with the promotion . At Final Battle 2011 , Haas and Benjamin lost the ROH World Tag Team Championship to the Briscoes despite severely attacking them before the match started , turning them into villainous characters . On May 12 , 2012 , at Border Wars , Haas and Benjamin regained the ROH World Tag Team Championship from the Briscoe Brothers . On June 24 at Best in the World 2012 , Haas and Benjamin lost the title to Kenny King and Rhett Titus . Shortly after their loss , Benjamin was suspended in storyline , to explain his absence while wrestling in Japan . Benjamin returned at the Death Before Dishonor X pay @-@ per @-@ view , accompanying Haas and Rhett Titus in a tag team championship match . Following Death Before Dishonor , Haas and Benjamin would continue to feud with Titus and his new tag team partner B.J. Whitmer defeating them at Glory By Honor XI . They defeated them again in a street fight at Final Battle , where Haas won the match after sent BJ against a table . On February 2 , 2013 , Haas turned on Benjamin during an ROH World Tag Team Championship match against the Briscoe Brothers . He continued his feud with BJ , fighting in the 11th Anniversary Show in a No Holds Barred Match . BJ won the match when the referee stopped the match . 
 On March 30 , 2013 , Haas announced his retirement from professional wrestling which coincided with him leaving Ring of Honor . However , Haas has continued to compete in various promotions in his home state of Texas . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Haas competed in amateur wrestling during high school , and for Seton Hall University , where he attended on a wrestling scholarship . He also has various other awards for wrestling from high school . Haas was a two @-@ time Big East Champion at Seton Hall and graduated with a degree in economics and business . He then became a stockbroker with Goldman Sachs . According to Haas via the Q & A section on his website , he is a devout Christian . Following the death of his brother , Haas has wrestled with Russ ( his brother 's name ) written on his wrist tape as a tribute . Since 2002 he has maintained a close friendship with his longtime tag team partner Shelton Benjamin , who he often refers to as his brother . Benjamin also served as Haas 's best man at his wedding to Jackie Gayda . 
 His grandfather , Hugh Devore , was an assistant with the Houston Oilers and a former Head Coach of the Notre Dame Fighting Irish . Haas ' brother Russ was also a professional wrestler , until his death in 2001 due to a heart attack . After getting engaged in September 2004 , Haas married fellow wrestler Jackie Gayda on June 10 , 2005 . Their first child , daughter Kayla Jacquelyn Haas , was born on December 14 , 2006 . The couple 's second daughter , Taylor Suzanne , was born on September 17 , 2008 . On June 1 , 2010 , the couple 's third child , son Thomas Russell Haas , was born . Haas and his wife opened " Custom Muscle Nutrition and Smoothie Shop " , a nutritional store in Frisco , Texas on October 1 , 2008 . On July 23 , 2012 , Haas announced the birth of his fourth child . 
 On August 30 , 2007 , an article on Sports Illustrated 's website named Haas as one of ten superstars found to have purchased illegal steroids not in compliance with WWE 's Talent Wellness program . He was allegedly prescribed anastrozole , somatropin , stanozolol , nandrolone , and chorionic gonadotropin between August 2006 and January 2007 . Haas later said that he thought it was legal , and he was doing it for " maintenance " after he had both his knees reconstructed . 
 = = In wrestling = = 
 Finishing moves 
 Diving crossbody – 2004 
 Haas of Pain – <unk> 
 <unk> Takeover / <unk> ( Scoop lift dropped into an inverted DDT ) – 2006 
 Inverted cloverleaf 
 Olympic Slam 
 Signature moves 
 Back body drop 
 Dropkick 
 Inverted atomic drop 
 Multiple arm drags 
 Multiple suplex variations 
 Exploder 
 German 
 Overhead belly to belly 
 Shoot kick to the back of a seated opponent 
 With Shelton Benjamin 
 Double team finishing moves 
 The World 's Greatest Finisher ( Double powerbomb ) 
 Inverted atomic drop ( Haas ) followed by a superkick ( Benjamin ) followed by a jackknife pin ( Haas ) 
 Double team signature moves 
 Broken Arrow ( Aided leapfrog body guillotine ) 
 Managers 
 Paul Heyman 
 Kurt Angle 
 Jackie Gayda 
 Nicknames 
 " The Outlaw " 
 Entrance themes 
 " Medal " by Jim Johnston ( WWE ; used while a part of Team Angle ) 
 " Heroes " by Jim Johnston ( WWE ; Used while a part of The World 's Greatest Tag Team ) 
 " You Look So Good To Me " by Jim Johnston ( WWE / Used while teaming with Rico ) 
 " Pay the Price " by Eric & The <unk> ( WWE / Independent circuit ) 
 " T.N.T. " by AC / DC ( ROH ; used while teaming with Shelton Benjamin ) 
 " Mess You Up " by Maurice Davis ( ROH ; used while teaming with Shelton Benjamin ) 
 " Hot Stakes " by Crushpile ( ROH ; used while teaming with Shelton Benjamin ) 
 " Road House " by The Wild ! ( ROH ) 
 = = Championships and accomplishments = = 
 Ballpark Brawl 
 Natural Heavyweight Championship ( 1 time ) 
 Combat Zone Wrestling 
 CZW World Tag Team Championship ( 1 time ) – with Russ Haas 
 East Coast Wrestling Association 
 ECWA Tag Team Championship ( 1 time ) – with Russ Haas 
 ECWA Hall of Fame ( Class of 2004 ) 
 Family Wrestling Entertainment 
 FWE Heavyweight Championship ( 1 time ) 
 Heartland Wrestling Association 
 HWA Heavyweight Championship ( 1 time ) 
 Insane Hardcore Wrestling Entertainment 
 IHWE California West Coast Heavyweight Championship ( 1 time ) 
 IHWE DFW Championship ( 2 times ) 
 IHWE Heavyweight Championship ( 1 time , current ) 
 Jersey All Pro Wrestling 
 JAPW New Jersey State Championship ( 1 time ) 
 JAPW Tag Team Championship ( 2 times ) – with Russ Haas 
 JAPW Hall of Fame ( Class of 2007 ) 
 Memphis Championship Wrestling 
 MCW Southern Tag Team Championship ( 3 times ) – with Russ Haas 
 NWA Branded Outlaw Wrestling 
 NWA BOW Heavyweight Championship ( 1 time ) 
 NWA Southwest 
 NWA Texas Heavyweight Championship ( 1 time ) 
 NWA Texoma 
 NWA Texoma Heavyweight Championship ( 1 time , current ) 
 NWA Texoma Tag Team Championship ( 1 time , current ) - with Dane Griffin 
 Ohio Valley Wrestling 
 Danny Davis Invitational Tag Team Tournament ( 2015 ) - with Shelton Benjamin 
 Pennsylvania Championship Wrestling 
 PCW Tag Team Championship ( 1 time ) – with Russ Haas 
 Phoenix Championship Wrestling 
 Russ Haas Memorial Tag Team Tournament ( 2002 ) – with Nova 
 Pro Wrestling Illustrated 
 PWI Tag Team of the Year ( 2003 ) with Shelton Benjamin 
 PWI ranked him # 25 of the top 500 singles wrestlers in the PWI 500 in 2003 
 Ring of Honor 
 ROH World Tag Team Championship ( 2 times ) – with Shelton Benjamin 
 Texas Outlaw Promotion 
 TOP Heavyweight Championship ( 1 time ) 
 World Wrestling Entertainment 
 WWE Tag Team Championship ( 3 times ) – with Shelton Benjamin ( 2 ) and Rico ( 1 ) 
 Slammy Award ( 1 time ) 
 Best <unk> ( 2008 ) The <unk> 
 Wrecking Ball Wrestling 
 Match of the Year ( 2011 ) vs. Low Ki 
 <unk> 
 <unk> World Heavyweight Championship ( 1 time ) 
 = Judge , Jury , Executioner = 
 " Judge , Jury , Executioner " is the eleventh episode of the second season of the post @-@ apocalyptic horror television series The Walking Dead . It originally aired on AMC in the United States on March 4 , 2012 . In this episode , Rick Grimes ( Andrew Lincoln ) and his group opt to execute Randall ( Michael Zegen ) , much to the frustration of Dale Horvath ( Jeffrey DeMunn ) . Dale fears that the group is losing their humanity , which prompts him to persuade some of the group members to protest against the consensus . Meanwhile , Carl Grimes ( Chandler Riggs ) behaves recklessly and carelessly , going as far as to steal Daryl Dixon ( Norman Reedus ) ' s gun and harass a walker , which will ultimately initiate grave consequences for the group . 
 " Judge , Jury , Executioner " was directed by Greg Nicotero and written by Angela Kang . It explores themes of declining morality and humanity during a catastrophic event . 
 The episode features the death of Dale , who was severely injured during an attack by a walker . It also marks changes in the character development of Carl , who evolves into a desensitized character who loses his naivete to the world around him . " Judge , Jury , Executioner " features recurring appearances from several actors and actresses including Lauren Cohan , Emily Kinney , Scott Wilson , Michael Zegen , and IronE Singleton . 
 Commentators praised the episode , citing its character development and concluding scene as episode highlights . Upon airing , " Judge , Jury , Executioner " attained 6 @.@ 771 million viewers and a 3 @.@ 5 rating in the 18 – 49 demographic , according to Nielsen ratings . It became the highest @-@ rated cable telecast of the day , as well as the highest @-@ rated cable program of the week . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Randall ( Michael Zegen ) is beaten and interrogated by Daryl ( Norman Reedus ) in the barn . He reveals that his former group , which is composed of some thirty heavily armed men , had once found and raped two female teenagers that were camping with their father , forcing him to watch the attack . This subsequently convinces the group that harboring Randall poses an imminent threat . 
 Rick Grimes ( Andrew Lincoln ) has concluded that Randall should be executed to protect the group , but leaves the act until sunset for a final decision . Dale ( Jeffrey DeMunn ) learns that the whole group has come to a consensus in favor of the decision to kill Randall . Dismayed , he unsuccessfully tries to convince Rick to abandon such plans , as it would set a poor example to his son Carl ( Chandler Riggs ) . Dale gains similar responses from Andrea ( Laurie Holden ) , but she agrees to guard the barn from Shane ( Jon Bernthal ) . Hershel ( Scott Wilson ) is indifferent on the matter when approached by Dale , but will follow the decision as he believes that Randall may pose a threat to his daughters Beth ( Emily Kinney ) and Maggie ( Lauren Cohan ) safety . Daryl avows to Dale that his opinion is meaningless , since Rick looks to Shane for validation . Dale later encounters Shane , who proposes that he will go along with Dale if he successfully convinces the group . 
 Carl becomes restless and careless , and ultimately sneaks into the barn . Randall sees him and attempts to persuade Carl to release him . Discovering the interaction , Shane angrily scolds Carl for going into the barn , warning him of manipulations by the prisoner . Carol ( Melissa McBride ) attempts to cheer Carl up by mentioning that Sophia is in heaven . Carl rudely lashes out , and insults her for believing in heaven . After being chastised by Rick for doing so , Carl ventures into Daryl 's campsite and takes a pistol from among his possessions . Armed , he wanders into the woods , where he encounters a walker stuck in the creek bed 's mire . Carl provokes it by throwing rocks at it and later moves within closer range to shoot it in the head . Suddenly , the walker manages to free one leg and tries to attack Carl . Carl loses the pistol but narrowly escapes , and upon returning to the campsite , does not report the entire incident . Meanwhile , Beth has since recovered from her earlier suicide attempt . When Glenn ( Steven Yeun ) comes to check on her condition , Hershel gives him a family heirloom representing his approval of Glenn 's relationship with Maggie . 
 Later , the group meets to discuss Randall 's fate . Dale 's arguments on humanity , civilization and morality fails to sway most of the members and he storms out . Rick , Shane , and Daryl then take Randall to the barn . As Rick prepares to shoot him , Carl enters and urges his father to do it . Horrified , Rick puts down his revolver , causing Shane to storm out in disappointment . Meanwhile , Dale walks alone across the fields . He encounters a dying cow , which he discovers has been gutted . Realizing the danger , Dale turns , but a walker ambushes him . Dale 's screams alert the group , but the walker manages to rip open Dale 's abdomen and mortally wounds him . Upon arrival , the walker is dispatched by Daryl , but the group is distraught over Dale 's condition . Carl is shocked to see that the walker that injured Dale was the same one he encountered earlier in the forest . Hershel informs Rick that Dale 's injuries are too severe and he will not survive . The group comes to a quick and grievous consensus , as Rick prepares to shoot Dale in the head but is unable . Daryl takes the revolver and delivers the final shot to end Dale 's suffering . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Judge , Jury , Executioner " was directed by Greg Nicotero and written by Angela Kang . The episode became Nicotero 's first directing credit for a full @-@ length television episode of the series ; he had previously conceived and directed the six @-@ part web series The Walking Dead : Torn Apart . As part of a promotional campaign , cast member Norman Reedus participated in a live chat on Entertainment Weekly coinciding with the airing of " Judge , Jury , Executioner " . 
 This episode addresses the death of Dale Horvath , who is attacked and ripped open by a walker . Since writer Robert Kirkman felt that Dale epitomized a character of morality and humanity , much of " Judge , Jury , Executioner " explores themes related to the declining morality of individuals during a catastrophic event . Kirkman proclaimed that Dale 's death was a momentous occasion , ultimately marking a turning point for future development of The Walking Dead . " Dale 's character has been the heart and soul of the show , " he iterated . " He 's definitely the moral compass . He ’ s the guy that , more so than anyone , has been warning people to be careful how you let this world change you and monitoring what lengths people are going to survive . His loss is going to mean a great deal for all the characters in the show and is definitely going to represent a turn to a darker space . His death means a lot . " Kirkman added that it was difficult to release DeMunn from the cast . He stated : " It ’ s heartbreaking to lose Jeffrey DeMunn . He 's really given us a lot , these last two seasons on the show . It 's been amazing to work with him and get to know him and he ’ s an awesome dude and we ’ re definitely going to miss him . " 
 In contrast to his role in the television series , Dale 's comic book counterpart is among the longest surviving characters in the series , and he enters into a sexual relationship with Andrea . Kirkman asserted that it was necessary for writers to distance the development of Dale 's television character from that in the comic : " I have talked many times how much I like the difference between the comics and the show . There are going to be big plot lines that we may not necessarily get to , like the romance between Dale and Andrea . If you think you really want to read that story line , that 's available in the comics , and I highly recommend you pick those up . The show is always going to be a different animal and the decision to kill Dale off was a big one and it wasn 't one that was made lightly . " 
 As a visibly distraught Rick hesitates to shoot Dale , Daryl takes the gun and inevitably shoots Dale in the head . Lesley Goldberg of The Hollywood Reporter suggested that producers were subtly building up prior to the moment . Kirkman felt this marked Daryl 's place in the group and was closure for the deceased Sophia Peletier , whose death caused Daryl to pull away from interacting with the group . Kirkman iterated that such actions were the testaments of his " putting everything on the line and opening himself up in a way he had never done before because his childhood was so messed up . " ; " So when he found out she was dead and in the barn all the time , that 's why he retreated and separated himself from the group . It was because he allowed himself to care and it just backfired on him in a big way . He didn 't want to be a part of the group and have those emotions and care about these people . So he 's been distancing himself from them up until this point , and now he 's seeing that these people need him and that he can fill a role and in being that harsh distant guy , you can do the things that no one else wants to do . He wants to step in and take that burden away from Rick for a moment . Rick is the one who stepped up and shot Sophia . Daryl saw that and because of his pain over the loss of Sophia he couldn 't do that . But when he sees Rick hesitate to do the same thing with Dale he knows : this is my moment , this is where I can prove my worth , and he steps in and does what he needs to do . " 
 In " Judge , Jury , Executioner " , Carl evolves into a desensitized character and ultimately relinquishes his naïveté to the world around him . Although Entertainment Weekly writer Clark Collis drew parallels to a serial killer , Kirkman suggested this was an initiative to give more screen time to the character . He avouched that Carl was " one of the most fun characters to tell stories about in this world . " He continued : " It 's true of the comic and it 's true of the show . Over time , we ’ re going to start to see more and more of this kid . What 's awesome about that is , think about what it would be like to grow up in this world . It 's one thing to have everything you know taken away from you and have to deal with this s — y world you now have to live in . But to have barely even really recognized what the world is and how it works and what to expect and then to be thrust into this apocalyptic threat and to grow up and mature with these kinds of situations . It 's going to make him grow up weird , is what I like to say . " 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 " Judge , Jury , Executioner " was originally broadcast on March 4 , 2012 in the United States on AMC . Upon airing , the episode garnered 6 @.@ 771 million viewers and a 3 @.@ 5 rating in the 18 – 49 demographic , according to Nielsen ratings . This indicates that 3 @.@ 5 % of people from the demographic viewed the episode . It became the highest @-@ rated cable telecast of the day , attaining significantly higher ratings than that of Storage Wars on A & E Television and Real Housewives of Atlanta on Bravo . Similarly , the episode outperformed all cable television programs during the week dated March 4 . Total viewership and ratings declined moderately from the previous installment , " 18 Miles Out " , which obtained 7 @.@ 04 million viewers and a 3 @.@ 8 rating in the 18 – 49 demographic . 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 " Judge , Jury , Executioner " was lauded by television critics . Mark A. Perigard of the Boston Herald called it an " incredible episode " ; " Walking Dead again proves it is one of the best dramas on TV and almost makes me feel good about paying my cable bill . " Writing for the San Antonio Express @-@ News , Rene Guzman opined that it " delivers all that messy drama in spades with a true gut @-@ wrenching end to one of the series ’ core characters " . Wetpaint 's Molly Friedman stated that in " Judge , Jury , Executioner " , the audience " finally had a reason to shed some tears and remember just how much we care about the original gang of apocalyptic misfits " . Kevin Yeoman of The Christian Science Monitor and E ! Online journalist Tierney Bricker concluded that the episode managed to effectively surprise the audience , while Cyriaque Lamar of io9 declared that " Judge , Jury , Executioner " was inferior to its predecessor by writing that it " served up a bunch of quasi @-@ entertaining scenes of people arguing and capped them off with one of the most accidentally funny closers ever committed to basic cable " . In his B + review , Zack Handlen of The A.V. Club said that the episode continued the series ' path of a more focused and central direction . Josh Jackson of Paste was intrigued with the series ' exploration of morality during an apocalyptic event in " Judge , Jury , Executioner " . Eric Goldman of IGN was much more pessimistic about the episode than the general consensus . In his 6 @.@ 5 out of 10 rating review , he called it " especially dull " when compared to the previous installment . 
 Dale 's death was adulated by commentators , who affirmed that it was a gruesome and emotional scene . Scott Meslow of The Atlantic suggested that because of his death , The Walking Dead embraced a more dark and sinister philosophy . He asserted , " Taken broadly , his death marks the death of a certain morality on the show , and the embrace of a philosophy that 's something crueler and darker . Dale , unlike any of the other survivors , maintained his humanity to the very end of his waking life — but even he couldn 't choose not to come back as something amoral and inhuman . In a world that seems utterly incapable of getting better , it 's a none @-@ too @-@ reassuring sign that things will almost certainly get worse . " Gina McIntyre of Los Angeles Times echoed synonymous thoughts : " It 's left to Daryl to shoot the man to end his suffering , which is profoundly too bad . Without Dale to raise all those nagging concerns about doing what 's right , zombie apocalypse or no zombie apocalypse , I fear for the future of this walker @-@ infested world . " Handlen and Calgary Herald 's Kimberly Potts thought that it was among the shocking moments in the series , while Friedman expressed that she was " riveted by the awesome attack [ ... ] and filled with sadness , as the original gang watched their friend die a slow and painful death " . Handlen remarked : " It ’ s a shocking scene , partially for its straight @-@ forward gore , and partially for the astonished , uncomprehending expression on Dale ’ s face . [ ... ] This , right here , is the kind of sequence the show needs . There ’ s too little sense of danger right now . " Verne Gay of Newsday described the sequence as " violent " , and ultimately summated that DeMunn 's absence will be felt as the show progresses . However , Lamar professed that the writers should have written off Dale in a more respectable way ; " That wasn 't the way to off the show 's most annoyingly sane character . Dale 's redeeming quality was his ability to guilt everybody into paying lip service to rule of law ; his weakness was his naïveté . Having an escaping Randall kill him would 've offered some poetic symmetry . I 'm not going to miss this character , but he deserved a better send @-@ off . " Time journalist Nate Rawlings drew allusions from Dale 's attack to the episode title , commenting that " when the lone zombie we see in this episode tears open Dale ’ s stomach , spilling the contents of his body onto the cold ground , we ’ re reminded that the walkers are the judges , they ’ re the jury , and this particular one was a most brutal executioner . " Although he was shocked by the sequence , Goldman assailed the earlier development of Dale in the episode , opining that he was obnoxious . 
 Handlen felt that the character development of Carl Grimes was more stable than similar developments in the episode ; " Using Carl to both resolve the episode ’ s plot , and making him semi @-@ responsible for Dale ’ s death , has a satisfying neatness , and serves as a reminder that for all their talk , Rick and the group have no idea what impact their choices will make . " Likewise , Jackson and Ryan <unk> of MTV noticed the darker transition of the character ; " Carl 's moral compass has greatly shifted since being shot and seeing the walking corpse of his friend , Sophia , " asserted <unk> . Jackson concluded that it was one of the episode highlights , writing , " He awakened from his coma talking about the beautiful doe , but ever since the dead body of Sophia limped its way out of that barn door , he 's become colder and harder . When Carol sees him at Sophia ’ s gravesite , she tries to comfort him with talk of heaven , and he calls her an idiot . He 's looking to emulate the men leading the group — the different kinds of toughness displayed by his father , Shane and Daryl . And he finds the chance to test his own bravery , playing near a zombie stuck in the mud by the creek , keeping the discovery to himself . " Jackson commented on Carl 's reaction to the death of Dale , saying that despite a gradual change to a dark nature , he " realizes [ ... ] that he 's still very much a kid " . 
 = 1983 Pacific hurricane season = 
 The 1983 Pacific hurricane season was the longest season ever recorded at that time . The 1983 Pacific hurricane season started on May 15 , 1983 in the eastern Pacific , and on June 1 , 1983 in the central Pacific , and lasted until November 30 , 1983 . These dates conventionally delimit the period of each year when most tropical cyclones form in the northeastern Pacific Ocean . During the 1983 season , there were 21 named storms , which was slightly less than the previous season . Furthermore , eight storms reached major hurricane status , or Category 3 or higher on the Saffir – Simpson hurricane wind scale ( SSHWS ) . The decaying 1982 @-@ 83 El Niño event likely contributed to this level of activity . That same El Niño influenced a very quiet Atlantic hurricane season . 
 The first storm of the season , Hurricane Adolph became the southernmost @-@ forming east Pacific tropical cyclone on record after forming at a latitude of 7 @.@ 1 ° N. After a slow start , activity picked up in July , when Hurricane Gil moved through the Hawaiian Islands , resulting in moderate damage . In early August , Hurricane Ismael was responsible for three deaths and $ 19 million ( 1983 USD ) in damage . During early September , Hurricanes Kiko and Lorena brought significant damage and seven deaths to southern Mexico . About a month later , Tropical Storm Octave became the worst tropical cyclone on record to affect Arizona . Octave killed 15 people , and caused $ 500 million in damage to Arizona and $ 12 @.@ 5 million to New Mexico . Later in October , Hurricane Tico was a very intense hurricane at the time of its landfall and thus left 25 @,@ 000 homeless . Damage throughout the country was estimated at $ 200 million while 135 deaths were reported in Mexico . Although most of its impact occurred in Mexico , Tico 's remnants brought significant flooding in the Central United States , resulting in six deaths and $ 42 million in damage . A few days later , Hurricane Raymond posed a threat to Hawaii , but did little actual damage . The final storm of the season , Hurricane Winnie , was a rare December cyclone . 
 = = Seasonal summary = = 
 During the 1983 season , a total of 21 named storms formed , which was well @-@ above the average of 15 . 
 However , this total was slightly less active than the 1982 Pacific hurricane season , which saw a then @-@ record 22 storms form . However , 1983 was at that time the most active season in the Eastern Pacific Hurricane Center ( EPHC ) warning zone , but this record itself was surpassed during the 1985 Pacific hurricane season , and again in the 1992 Pacific hurricane season . Additionally , 12 storms reached hurricane intensity , which was above the average of eight . Of the 12 hurricanes , eight attained Category 3 intensity or higher on the SSHWS . The season started on May 21 with the formation of Adolph and ended on December 9 , with the dissipation of Hurricane Winnie . Lasting 201 days , 1983 was the longest season on record . There were a total of 1 @,@ 238 storm hours , which was the most in four years . Despite the activity in the EPHC 's warning responsibility , only two storms formed in the Central Pacific Hurricane Center ( CPHC ) ' s area of responsibility , both of which stayed depressions . A moderate El Niño was present throughout the season , with water temperatures across the equatorial Central Pacific was nearly 5 ° F ( 0 @.@ 6 ° C ) above normal . The Pacific decadal oscillation ( PDO ) was in a warm phase during this time period . Both of these factors are known to enhance Pacific hurricane season activity . Furthermore , 1983 was in the middle of an era where all but the 1988 Pacific hurricane season was near or above average . Also despite a relatively active season , no storms developed within the Central Pacific basin . 
 One storm in 1983 formed in May , an event the occurs every other year on average . Another storm formed in June , which was below the average of 1 @.@ 7 storms per June . Despite a somewhat slow start , activity picked up in July , where 6 storms formed . This was twice the average , though only two of the storm thus far had exceeded hurricane intensity . Although August was less active , with only 3 storms developing , compared to the average of 4 , two of the storms that formed in July lasted into the early part of the month . However , activity picked back up again in September , with 5 storms forming , which was above the average of 3 . Three storms also formed in October , which was two storms above normal . One storm developed in November as well , a somewhat unusual occurrence . For the first time since 1947 , a hurricane developed in December . 
 Three storms during the season made landfall on Mexico . The first , Adolph did so in May . The second , Tico , hit near Mazatlán as a powerful hurricane , resulting in severe damage . Around this time , a weak tropical depression made landfall along the western portion of the nation as well . In addition , Tropical Depression Raymond made landfall on Hawaii in late October . Hurricane Hunters flew in to 2 storms within the EPHC zone ( Manuel and Ismael ) . Moreover , they flew into 3 storms in CPHC 's area of responsibility , Tropical Storms Gil and Narda , and Hurricane Raymond . 
 = = Storms = = 
 = = = Hurricane Adolph = = = 
 On May 21 , a tropical depression formed 500 mi ( 805 km ) southwest of Managua , at a latitude of 7 @.@ 1 ° N , becoming the southernmost @-@ forming tropical cyclone in the east Pacific basin . As the depression headed gradually west @-@ northwestward over extremely warm sea surface temperatures , it steadily intensified . Later that day , the depression intensified into Tropical Storm Adolph . Further intensification occurred as Adolph headed west @-@ northwestward ; by May 24 , the EPHC reported that Adolph had strengthened into a hurricane , setting a then @-@ record for the earliest known hurricane in the basin , though this was later surpassed by Hurricane Alma in May 1990 . Shortly thereafter , the storm turned northwestward and intensified into a Category 2 hurricane on the SSHWS . Around that time , Adolph attained its peak intensity with winds of 110 mph ( 175 km / h ) as the storm briefly developed a well @-@ defined eye . At that time , Adolph was the strongest May hurricane on record . However , this record was broken by a hurricane in 2001 that was also named Adolph . 
 Following peak intensity , Adolph gradually weakened to a Category 1 hurricane . By May 25 , Adolph curved sharply north @-@ northeastward , as a result of being steered by anticyclonic deep @-@ layer mean . Despite being situated over fairly warm waters , Adolph weakened considerably due to increased wind shear . Although the EPHC expected the storm to stay at sea , Adolph curved north @-@ northeastward . It was then downgraded to a tropical storm on May 25 . Rapidly weakening , Tropical Storm Adolph moved onshore near Puerto Vallarta early the next day . After briefly moving offshore , it again made landfall near Mazatlán at 0800 UTC that day . Adolph soon dissipated over land , becoming the first of two storms to strike the Pacific coast of Mexico during the season . Because Hurricane Adolph weakened significantly prior to landfall , no deaths or major damage occurred . However , the remnants of the storm brought heavy showers and gusty winds to Florida . Although a modern Pacific hurricane season begins May 15 , one newspaper considered Adolph a " pre @-@ season " storm . 
 = = = Hurricane Barbara = = = 
 A tropical disturbance was first observed in early June about 210 mi ( 340 km ) south of Guatemala , and headed westward . The tropical disturbance intensified , and became the second tropical depression of the season on June 9 . After staying a tropical depression for 24 hours , the system was subsequently upgraded to Tropical Storm Barbara . Initially , Barbara was expected to come very close to the Mexican coast ; however , this failed to happen . At first , Tropical Storm Barbara moved west @-@ northwest , though on June 11 , the cyclone turned west @-@ northwest while gradually gaining intensity . At 1800 UTC on June 12 , Barbara was estimated to have attained hurricane status while centered 175 mi ( 280 km ) north of Clipperton Island . Shortly after becoming a hurricane , rapid deepening commenced , and by early the next morning , the hurricane was a high @-@ end Category 1 . Six hours later , Barbara skipped Category 2 status , and became a major hurricane . At 1800 UTC on June 13 , Hurricane Barbara was upgraded into a category 4 hurricane on the SSHWS while its peak strength of 135 mph ( 215 km / h ) . At peak , Barbara had a " fantastic eye " . 
 Hurricane Barbara held on to peak intensity for a day . Thereafter , Barbara slowly weakened after peak intensity as it began to encounter cooler water temperatures , while moving slowly northward around the western edge of a high pressure area over central Mexico . By the early morning hours of June 16 , the hurricane was positioned 380 km ( 235 mi ) west @-@ southwest of Socorro Island and about 500 mi ( 805 km ) west of the coast of Mexico . Later that day , Barbara weakened into a tropical storm due to strong wind shear . Barbara was downgraded to a tropical depression early on June 17 . Further weakening persisted , and Barbara dissipated on June 18 . At the time of dissipation , the system was situated several hundred miles west @-@ southwest of the Baja California peninsula . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Cosme = = = 
 A westward @-@ moving low @-@ latitude tropical disturbance was declared a tropical depression early on July 2 . After making a turn northwest , the depression maintained its intensity for 42 hours . By 1200 UTC on July 4 , the system was finally upgraded into a tropical storm after convection increased in coverage . However , Cosme failed to intensify further , and after encountering cooler waters , the storm rapidly dissipated . The EPHC declared Cosme dissipated at 1800 UTC on July 5 . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Dalilia = = = 
 An intense area of thunderstorms developed 230 mi ( 370 km ) south of the Gulf of Tehuantepec on July 4 . The system was first classified as a tropical depression at 1800 UTC on July 5 roughly 345 mi ( 555 km ) south @-@ southeast of Acapulco . Turning west @-@ northwest and then northwest while accelerating , the EPHC upgraded the depression into Tropical Storm Dalilia at 1800 UTC on July 6 . Continuing to gain strength , Dalila reached its peak intensity as a strong tropical storm early on July 8 . After turning west the tropical storm started to lose strength while encountering colder water . At 0600 UTC on July 10 , Tropical Storm Dalilia had been downgraded into a tropical depression . Two days later , the EPHC reported that the tropical cyclone had dissipated . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Erick = = = 
 Tropical Storm Erick originated from a tropical wave that crossed Central America on July 9 and July 10 . At 0600 UTC on July 12 , the EPHC reported that it had upgraded the disturbance into a tropical depression . The depression moved steadily west @-@ northwest under the influence of an anticyclone over the Yucatán Peninsula . The system gradually intensified over waters as warm as 86 ° F ( 30 ° C ) and at 0000 UTC on July 13 , the agency upgraded the low into a tropical storm . Tropical Storm Erick reached its peak intensity on July 14 as a high @-@ end tropical storm . The storm maintained peak intensity for 24 hours , before encountering cooler water . Rapidly weakening , Erick dissipated on July 16 far from land . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Flossie = = = 
 A tropical disturbance developed 70 mi ( 115 km ) southwest of Manzanillo late on June 16 . Several hours later , the disturbance was classified as a tropical depression . Initially , the depression drifted southward , but at 1800 UTC on July 17 , the system suddenly turned west @-@ northwest and accelerated . The storm gradually intensified while passing northeast of Socorro Island . Midday on July 19 , the tropical depression was upgraded into Tropical Storm Flossie . Six hours later , Tropical Storm Flossie reached its peak wind speed of 60 mph ( 95 km / h ) . While the storm approached the Baja California peninsula , the storm ultimately turned west into an area of cool water and high amounts of wind shear . By 0000 UTC on July 21 , Flossie weakened into a tropical storm . Twelve hours later , Flossie ceased to exist as a tropical cyclone . 
 = = = Hurricane Gil = = = 
 The seventh tropical cyclone of the season developed during the afternoon hours of July 23 north of Clipperton Island . Thereafter , the EPHC upgraded the depression to Tropical Storm Gil on July 24 . Gil subsequently began to intensify ; on 0000 UTC July 26 , the storm was upgraded into a Category 1 hurricane . Early on July 27 , the storm attained its peak intensity of 90 mph ( 145 km / h ) . Despite turning west @-@ northwest , Hurricane Gil maintained hurricane intensity until July 29 when the storm began to encounter cooler waters . Two days later , Gil was downgraded a tropical depression . After entering CPHC 's warning zone on August 1 , the CPHC Gil was re @-@ upgraded into a tropical storm . Gil accelerated while approaching the Hawaiian Islands ; on August 3 , the tropical cyclone reached its secondary peak of 45 mph ( 70 km / h ) . After passing through the Hawaiian islands , Gil passed very close to French Frigate Shoals on August 4 as a marginal tropical storm . Early on August 5 , the system was downgraded into a tropical depression and degenerated into a trough about 300 mi ( 485 km ) west @-@ northwest of Tern Island later that day . 
 Prior to arrival of Gil , gale warnings were issued for much of the islands , but on August 2 , these warnings were discontinued for all islands except for Kauai . Jellyfish stung 50 tourists . On the northern part of the island , 70 mph ( 115 km / h ) winds were reported , resulting in extensive damage in some areas , but slight damage to others . A minor power outage on the island briefly left 2 @,@ 400 customers without electricity . In Maui , the outer rainbands of Gil led to minor flooding . Overall , damage from Gil was minimal and less than expected . Offshore , one person was presumed to have died when a 19 ft ( 5 m ) catamaran , named Hurricane , went missing . Additionally , the 30 @-@ foot ship Adad nearly sunk in the storm and all three people on board sustained injuries . 
 = = = Hurricane Henriette = = = 
 While Tropical Storm Gil was moving westward , a tropical disturbance began to develop about 180 mi ( 290 km ) south of the Guatemala coastline . After developing a circulation , the system was upgraded into a tropical depression on July 27 . Moving west @-@ northwest , the depression strengthened into Tropical Storm Henriette at 1800 UTC that day . Henriette continued to deepen , and by late on July 28 , the storm attained winds of 65 mph ( 105 km / h ) . Although initially expected to pose a threat to Hawaii , this did not occur . It rapidly intensified , and late on July 28 , the EPHC upgraded the storm into a hurricane . While turning west @-@ southwest on a track similar to Gil 's , it attained Category 2 intensity on July 29 . At 0000 UTC on July 30 , Henriette was upgraded into a Category 3 hurricane . After leveling off in intensity , the storm passed within 70 mi ( 115 km ) within Clipperton Island . Hurricane Henriette attained its peak intensity early on July 31 , with winds of 135 mph ( 215 km / h ) , a Category 4 system . At peak , Henriette displayed a well @-@ defined eye . 
 After continuing west @-@ northwest for 12 hours , it then veered northwest and began to encounter cooler ocean temperatures . Henriette was slow to weaken , and by August 2 , it was downgraded into a Category 2 hurricane . Two days later , Henriette was downgraded into a tropical storm . A strong trough of low pressure pulled Henriette northwest , and later north . On August 5 , the storm was downgraded into a tropical depression . The storm dissipated the next day at a high latitude , though the remnants of Henriette brought cloud cover to Oregon and Washington . 
 = = = Tropical Depression Nine @-@ E = = = 
 On July 30 and 31 , a tropical disturbance crossed Central America . At a low latitude , a tropical depression was declared on August 3 . At first , the storm was expected to turn west @-@ northwest , but it continued west instead . Nine failed to intensify despite being situated over warm water . The depression dissipated on August 7 later over somewhat cooler water . 
 = = = Hurricane Ismael = = = 
 The origins of Hurricane Ismael were from a northward bulge of the Intertropical Convergence Zone ( ITCZ ) in early August , which resulted in the formation of a tropical depression on August 8 . Six hours later , it was upgraded into Tropical storm Ismael . Continuing to intensity , Ismael was upgraded into a hurricane late on August 10 and subsequently developed an eye . The storm soon reached its peak of 100 mph ( 160 km / h ) . Late on August 11 , Hurricane Ismael began to weaken as it encountered cooler waters and the hurricane was soon downgraded to a Category 1 on the SSHWS . The following day , Ismael was downgraded into a tropical storm about 380 mi ( 610 km ) west of the Baja California peninsula . On August 14 , the storm was downgraded into a tropical depression while centered about 250 mi ( 400 km ) west of Point Ensenada . Manuel dissipated that day . 
 While still out at sea , Ismael brought 6 – 9 ft ( 1 @.@ 8 – 2 @.@ 7 m ) waves to much of Southern California , though waves from the storm were less than expected . One person was swept away at a beach . The remnants of the storm later moved over South California , resulting in moderate rainfall . The Yucca Valley was the worst hit by the storm , where nearly every road was washed out . Almost 50 @,@ 000 residents in Palm Springs were isolated due to rains . A tornado near Los Angeles led to minor damage . In San Bernardino , many buildings were destroyed , forcing numerous evacuations . Around 80 @,@ 000 homes were left without power across the Inland Empire . Moreover , three interstates were closed . In all , minor injures were reported and three people died in San Bernardino when their car swept into a channel . Damage from the storm totaled $ 19 million ( 1983 USD ) . After affecting California , the remnants of the hurricane moved into Nevada . Many parking lots in Laughlin were flooded . Two small towns were also isolated . Several major streets in the outskirts of Las Vegas were closed because of flooding . 
 = = = Tropical Depression Eleven @-@ E = = = 
 The eleventh cyclone of the 1983 season formed from an intense area of thunderstorms located over the Yucatán Peninsula on August 11 and 12 . After crossing the Mexican mainland , it emerged into the Pacific basin near Guadalajara early on August 13 . After turning northwest , it intensified into a depression two days later after showing sign of a circulation . The depression continued northwest with little change in wind speed , and on August 16 , about 24 hours after formation , the depression dissipated after its circulation ceased very close to landfall on the Baja California peninsula . 
 = = = Tropical Depression One @-@ C = = = 
 Tropical Depression One @-@ C formed on August 19 far from land , with winds of 35 mph ( 56 km / h ) . It moved steadily west . Despite being over warm waters , One @-@ C quickly weakened and lost deep convection . The depression dissipated on August 20 after briefly developing a closed circulation . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Juliette = = = 
 Tropical Storm Juliette originated from a tropical depression that first formed on August 24 130 mi ( 210 km ) east @-@ northeast of Clipperton Island . Moving west @-@ northwest and briefly west , the depression gradually intensified . The system then turned northwest around a ridge off the west coast of Baja California Sur . At 1800 UTC on August 26 , the EPHC announced that the depression had strengthened into a tropical storm . Moving toward a strong trough off the west coast of the peninsula , Juliette reached its peak intensity as a mid @-@ level tropical storm early on August 29 , with winds of 60 mph ( 95 km / h ) . Upon attaining peak intensity , Juliette developed an eye . However , Juliette began to weaken over cooler water . Meanwhile , the trough weakened and Tropical Storm Juliette headed west . On August 30 , the EPHC remarked that Juliette was downgraded into a depression . Two days later , Tropical Depression Juliette had dissipated over cold water . 
 = = = Tropical Depression Two @-@ C = = = 
 A disturbance in the ITCZ developed a circulation on August 29 and organized into a tropical depression two days later . Traveling west @-@ northwest , Two @-@ C was initially in a favorable environment , and was thus expected to become a tropical storm . However , it soon encountered a trough and dry air , which arrested development . It crossed the international dateline on September 1 and the Joint Typhoon Warning Center began issuing advisories on the system . The depression gradually weakened and dissipated on September 8 . Its remnants lingered near the Marshall Islands for a few more days . 
 = = = Hurricane Kiko = = = 
 Hurricane Kiko originated from a tropical disturbance that crossed Central America on August 26 and 27 . After emerging into the Pacific , the disturbance moved steadily westward . At 0600 UTC on August 31 , the EPHC classified the system as a tropical depression about 300 mi ( 485 km ) south of Salina Cruz . A well @-@ developed ridge was centered over New Mexico and was moving southward , causing light wind shear over the system . At 1800 UTC on August 31 , the depression intensified into Tropical Storm Kiko . Initially expected to turn west and head out to sea , the storm moved northwest while paralleling the Mexican coast . Early on September 1 , Kiko began to explosively deepen , and by 1800 UTC , it intensified into a Category 3 hurricane on the SSHWS , bypassing both Category 1 and 2 status . Six hours later , the EPHC reported that Kiko had intensified into a low @-@ end Category 4 . After remaining at this intensity for 30 hours , the hurricane resumed intensification , attaining its peak intensity of 145 mph ( 235 km / h ) late on September 3 about 400 mi ( 645 km ) west of Lázaro Cárdenas . 
 Shortly after its peak , a combination of cooler waters and increased wind shear associated with the subtropical jetstream resulted in rapid weakening . Hurricane Kiko was soon downgraded to Category 3 status on the SSHWS , before briefly re @-@ intensifying on September 4 . That day , Kiko resumed weakening and was downgraded to a Category 2 as the storm turned west @-@ northwest away from the Mexican coast . On September 5 , the storm was downgraded into a Category 1 system ; by this time , the EPHC revised their forecast and expected the storm to accelerate and approach Baja California . On September 7 , Kiko weakened into a tropical storm . Subsequently , the system turned north and was downgraded to a tropical depression the next day . Now devoid of convection , Kiko dissipated early on September 9 about 450 mi ( 725 km ) west @-@ southwest of Baja California . 
 The outer rainbands of Hurricane Kiko caused considerable damage to homes and hotels situated near the coast of Mexico , forcing the evacuation of hundreds . The resorts of Tecomán and Manzanillo were the worst hit by the storm . Outside of Colima , however , little damage was reported . Kiko brought high clouds to the extreme southwestern portion of the Baja California Peninsula for four days . While at sea , Hurricane Kiko was responsible for 12 ft ( 3 @.@ 7 m ) waves along Newport Beach , California , resulting in more than 100 lifeguard rescues . As a weakening tropical system , Kiko brought subtropical moisture and high clouds to California . 
 = = = Hurricane Lorena = = = 
 Towards the end of the first week of September , the next cyclone of the season was starting to form south of the Mexican coast . A disturbance moved westward and was classified as a tropical depression about 90 mi ( 145 km ) south of Acapulco early on September 6 . Like Kiko , the storm deepened rapidly , and was upgraded into a tropical storm at 1800 UTC that day . Initially moving very slowly , the storm made a sharp turn northwest , parallel to the coast of Mexico . Accelerating , a poorly defined eye first became visible on satellite imagery around 1500 UTC on September 7 . The EPHC upgraded Lorena into a hurricane three hours later . Early the next day , Lorena intensified into a Category 2 hurricane . At 1200 UTC on September 8 , Lorena attained winds of a Category 3 hurricane on the SSHWS ; simultaneously , the storm reached its peak intensity , with winds of 115 mph ( 185 km / h ) . 
 After maintaining peak intensity for six hours , Lorena began to weaken over cooler waters . Very early on September 9 , the EPHC downgraded Lorena weakened into a Category 1 hurricane ; the storm was expected to emerge into the southern Gulf of California in about 48 hours and thereafter meander . However , this did not occur . Meanwhile , Lorena was re @-@ upgraded into a Category 2 hurricane , an intensity of which it held on to for 12 hours . After briefly weakening back to a Category 1 hurricane , Lorena moved west @-@ northwest and into a low wind shear environment . Subsequently , Lorena attained its secondary peak with winds of 105 mph ( 170 km / h ) while passing about 150 mi ( 240 km ) south of Cabo San Lucas . However , cooler water began to take its toll on the storm and on September 12 , the storm was downgraded into a Category 1 . Later that day , Lorena weakened into a tropical storm due to a combination of strong shear and cold sea surface temperatures . Midday on September 13 , the EPHC downgraded the system into a tropical depression . Furthermore , the system dissipated 18 hours later . At the time of dissipation , Lorena was centered about 750 mi ( 1 @,@ 205 km ) west @-@ southwest of San Diego . 
 Hurricane Lorena brought rough surf and squally weather to much of the coast of Mexico , particularly Manzanillo . Furthermore , it was also responsible for $ 33 @,@ 000 in damage to Acapulco . Seven people died due to flooding . Four ships drowned in the storm ; as a result , many local ports were closed . In addition , a mudslide blocked a portion of the Pan @-@ American Highway . 
 = = = Hurricane Manuel = = = 
 A vigorous tropical disturbance was first noted on September 10 south of the Gulf of Tehuantepec . Despite the presence of wind shear , the EPHC upgraded system into a tropical depression at 0600 UTC on September 12 and a tropical storm at 1200 UTC that day while centered around 300 mi ( 485 km ) south of Puerto Escondido . Manuel reached hurricane strength early on September 14 . Several hours later , Manuel reached a secondary peak wind speed of 90 mph ( 145 km / h ) . However , this trend was short lived , and very early on September 15 , the storm 's wind diminished to 75 mph ( 120 km / h ) , only to reintensify again that evening . Early on September 16 , Manuel turned towards the north while developing a small eye . Hurricane Manuel maintained winds of 90 mph ( 145 km / h ) for a day before the EPHC upgraded Manuel into a Category 2 hurricane . On September 17 , however , Manuel developed a much larger and well @-@ defined eye ; that afternoon ; Manuel reaching its peak intensity of 115 mph ( 185 km / h ) as a major hurricane . 
 The storm held onto major hurricane winds for 12 hours before subsequently weakening . At 0000 UTC on September 18 , the eye collapsed as it began to encounter colder ocean temperatures . Manuel was intercepted by a Hurricane Hunter aircraft that day , which found no evidence of an eyewall , thus , Manuel was downgraded into a tropical storm about 600 mi ( 965 km ) south of San Diego . After turning north @-@ northeast , Hurricane Hunters penetrated the storm for the second time , noting that the storm was a swirl of clouds . On September 19 , the EPHC downgraded the system into a depression . The following day , Manuel made landfall along the eastern portion of Guadalupe Island before dissipating at 1200 UTC . 
 The remnants of Hurricane Manuel later brought rain to the southwestern United . The outer rainbands of Manuel began to produce moisture over the region on September 18 , and continued until September 21 . In the mountains and deserts of California , the storm brought heavy rains across . A laboratory near Palm Springs recorded a peak rainfall total of 2 @.@ 85 in ( 72 mm ) . A total 3 @,@ 000 customers lost electricity in Porterville because of high winds , heavy rains , which led to minor damage . Numerous fires occurred in Kern County , but none of these fires caused major damage . Further east , in Arizona , isolated rain showers were reported , peaking at 2 @.@ 56 in ( 65 mm ) at the Alamo Dam . Along the northern portion Baja California , Manuel brought showers and high waves . In all , impact from the storm was less than anticipated . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Narda = = = 
 Several hours after Manuel dissipated on September 20 , a tropical disturbance formed 200 mi ( 320 km ) south of Socorro Island . While situated south of a ridge , the disturbance started to deepen . After developing a circulation , the system was declared a tropical depression the morning of September 21 . Later that morning , the EPHC upgraded the disturbance into a tropical storm . Narda held on to marginal tropical storm intensity for 36 hours before quickly intensifying , and by September 23 , the storm had attained winds of 60 mph ( 95 km / h ) . Thereafter , the storm turned west @-@ northwest and weakened steadily after encountering cooler water . On September 26 , the EPHC downgraded Narda into a depression . After accelerating , the storm entered the CPHC zone the next day . 
 Tropical Storm Narda then began to encounter slightly warmer waters , and thus began to restrengthen . At 1800 UTC on September 27 , the CPHC announced that Narda had regained tropical storm strength . It quickly intensified and early on September 29 , a Hurricane Hunter aircraft reported winds of 70 mph ( 115 km / h ) and the formation of an eye . At this time , Narda was located about 300 mi ( 485 km ) southeast of Hilo . That evening , the storm start to show signs of weakening as it turned southwest away from the Hawaiian group . On September 30 , however , Narda , with winds of 50 mph ( 80 km / h ) , made its closest approach the Hawaii , passing 150 mi ( 240 km ) south of South Point . After briefly intensifying on October 1 , it suddenly dissipated hours later . 
 Because of data from tropical cyclone forecast models , which showed Narda passing very near the Hawaiian islands , and fears of a repeat of Hurricane Iwa , a hurricane watch was posted for all the Hawaiian Islands at 0700 UTC on September 28 . Gale warnings and high surf advisories were issued for the entire state . Officials urged many Hawaiians to complete preparations by the night of September 28 . Campers at coastal parks were also ordered by police to find shelter on higher ground . However , the hurricane watch was discontinued after Narda veered away on September 29 . Meanwhile , gale warnings and high surf advisories were dropped that day for all islands except for the Big Island . The outer rainbands of Narda brought locally heavy rain to the state . Flooding was reported of eastern areas of the Big Island . Nine families were evacuated to shelters . Higher than normal surf was also observed on southeast and east facing beaches . Overall , damage from Narda was minor . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Octave = = = 
 A tropical disturbance formed south of the Gulf of Tehuantepec on September 23 , which moved west for four days prior to attaining tropical depression status . Initially , the depression was situated over warm waters ; however , wind shear subsequently increased in the vicinity of the storm . However , on September 28 , the depression strengthened into Tropical Storm Octave . Six hours later , Octave attained its peak intensity of 45 mph ( 70 km / h ) and decreased in forward speed while turning to the northeast . On September 30 , began to weaken due to cooler waters and increasing vertical wind shear . At 1200 UTC on October 2 , the EPHC issued their last advisory on the storm , as the surface circulation had dissipated . 
 Due to the threat for flooding , local flood warnings were issued for much of Arizona . In the end , the highest rainfall associated with Octave was 12 @.@ 0 in ( 300 mm ) at Mount Graham . Throughout the state , excessive rainfall caused many rivers to overflow . The Santa Cruz , <unk> , and Gila rivers experienced their highest crests on record . Runoff from both the <unk> and Santa Cruz rivers flooded Marana . Major flooding was reported along the Gila River , and two of its tributaries , the San Francisco River and the San Pedro River . These rains devastated Clifton along the San Francisco River valley . Over 700 homes were destroyed in Clifton . Further south along the Gila River , major flooding was reported in extreme southeastern Arizona . Willcox was nearly flooded . Further west , in Phoenix , 150 people were evacuated from an apartment complex . Throughout the greater Phoenix area , eight fires were started via lighting . 
 Tropical Storm Octave was considered the worst flood in Pima County history . Octave is also regarded as the worst tropical system to affect Arizona . Around 3 @,@ 000 buildings were damaged due to Octave . A total of 853 structures were destroyed by Octave while 2 @,@ 052 others were damaged . About 10 @,@ 000 people were temporarily displaced . Damage in Arizona totaled $ 500 million . Fourteen people drowned and 975 persons were injured . Elsewhere , in New Mexico , a peak total of 5 @.@ 42 in ( 138 mm ) of rain was recorded , resulting in flooding . New Mexico governor Toney Anaya declared a state of emergency in Catron County . Damage in New Mexico was estimated at $ 12 @.@ 5 million . In Mexico , 12 in ( 300 mm ) of rain was reported in Altar . In Sonora , many roads were closed . On October 3 , Arizona Governor Bruce Babbitt declared a state of emergency . President Ronald Reagan declared eight Arizona counties a " major disaster area " on October 5 . 
 = = = Hurricane Priscilla = = = 
 While Tropical Storm Octave was still active , a tropical disturbance formed on September 29 near Clipperton Island . The disturbance moved northwest , and was upgraded into a depression at 1800 UTC . While moving beneath the southwest side of a ridge , Priscilla steadily intensified . Early on October 3 , Priscilla was upgraded into a hurricane . After remaining a Category 1 hurricane for most of the day , it was upgraded into a Category 2 hurricane that evening , and subsequently , began to rapidly intensify . At 0000 UTC on October 4 , about 24 hours after first becoming a hurricane , Priscilla was upgraded into a major hurricane , with winds of 115 mph ( 185 km / h ) . While at peak , which it held on for 12 hours , Priscilla displayed a well @-@ defined eye . Additionally , the hurricane began a sharp turn to the north @-@ northwest due to a strong trough off the Southern California coast and the storm was initially expected to move onshore Baja California and bring flooding rains to Arizona . 
 Shortly after its peak , Priscilla began to encounter cooler waters and thus it start to slowly lose strength . During the pre @-@ dawn hours of October 5 , Priscilla weakened into a Category 2 . Later that day , it was downgraded into a Category 1 system . By 0000 UTC on October 6 , the EPHC downgraded the system into a tropical storm . By this time , it was anticipated that the system would make landfall as a tropical system on California . Quickly weakening , Priscilla was downgraded into a depression that day . Early on October 7 , Priscilla dissipated about 150 mi ( 240 km ) southwest of Guadalupe Island . 
 Due to the storm 's threat to California , flash flood watches were issued for much of the southern portion of the state . In Arizona , heavy equipment was evacuated from flood @-@ prone areas . Along the central Baja California peninsula , showers were reported . While still a Category 2 hurricane , the outer rainbands of Priscilla brought rains to California , resulting in power outages , hail , and traffic accidents . In Los Angeles , a daily rainfall record was set . Some streets in Anaheim and Santa Ana were flooded . The roof of a church was also damaged . Consequently , flash flood warnings were posted for parts of Los Angeles , Riverside , and San Bernardino Counties . Offshore , rough seas were generated . Across northwestern Arizona and Nevada , heavy showers and thunderstorms occurred . The remnants of the storm moved over the area on October 7 . Rainfall totals were less than expected and most weather stations recorded less than .1 in ( 5 mm ) of precipitation . A peak total of <unk> in ( 8 @.@ 9 mm ) was measured in Ely . 
 = = = Hurricane Raymond = = = 
 A tropical wave crossed Nicaragua on October 5 , moving westward . A ridge center was over Mexico and a well @-@ developed ridge extended westward towards the Hawaiian Islands . Despite the presence of strong wind shear , it was upgraded to a tropical depression 764 mi ( 1 @,@ 230 km ) south @-@ southeast of Cabo San Lucas on October 8 . The depression moved over 84 to 86 ° F ( 29 to 30 ° C ) waters , intensifying into Tropical Storm Raymond on October 9 . Intensifying quickly , Raymond attained hurricane status on October 10 . Hurricane Raymond subsequently developed a small but distinct eye . Rapidly intensifying , the storm rapidly moved west . Raymond was upgraded into a major hurricane late on October 10 . Raymond reached its peak winds of 145 mph ( 235 km / h ) as a moderate Category 4 hurricane roughly 24 hours after becoming a hurricane . At the time of its peak , the hurricane was located about 800 mi ( 1 @,@ 285 km ) south of San Diego . Raymond is believed to have held on to peak intensity for almost two days . 
 The hurricane subsequently weakened and was only a Category 2 by October 13 , but it re @-@ intensified over the next few days . With continued warm waters , the system crossed into the CPHC warning zone , reaching a secondary peak of 140 mph ( 230 km / h ) on October 14 while becoming one of the strongest storms ever recorded in the region . By then , Raymond had begun a movement to the northwest . The eye later became poorly defined while the symmetric shape of the hurricane became elongated . The Hurricane Hunters confirmed the weakening trend , reporting a pressure of 968 mbar ( 28 @.@ 6 inHg ) . Hurricane Raymond weakened to a tropical storm on October 16 as wind shear took its toll on the storm . Meanwhile , the storm drifted northwest and underwent several loops . Two days later the storm resumed its westward motion as it weakened to a tropical depression . It became devoid of deep convection , and made landfall on Molokai on October 20 while still tropical depression . Shortly thereafter , Raymond dissipated inland . 
 Because meteorologists were predicting that the storm may pose a threat to the Hawaiian island group , the CPHC issued a hurricane watch for Hawaii . A high @-@ surf advisory also was issued . As Raymond approached Hawaii , the cyclone kicked up very high surfs that pounded the big island . On the east end of the Hawaiian Island chain was battered by 10 – 15 ft ( 3 @.@ 0 – 4 @.@ 6 m ) waves . In addition , Raymond brought beneficial rains and gusty winds on all islands . Precipitation ranged from 1 to 2 in ( 25 to 51 mm ) on Maui . There was one casualty when a sailor was lost overboard off the craft " <unk> " ; the boat was traveling from Tahiti to San Diego , but the course was altered to Hawaii because of the storm . While only minor damage was reported as a result of the hurricane , a fishing vessel did also issue a Mayday for help because of the storm . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Sonia = = = 
 Situated several hundred miles west of Hurricane Raymond , a tropical disturbance formed on October 8 . Moving west @-@ northwest , the disturbance was upgraded into a tropical depression on October 9 . After moving west @-@ northwest for 12 hours , it turned west . Despite warm waters , strong westerly wind shear prevented much further development . On October 10 , the EPHC upgraded Sonia into a tropical storm . That day , Sonia reached its peak intensity of 45 mph ( 75 km / h ) . However , this was short @-@ lived as the thunderstorm activity quickly became displaced from the center . At 0000 UTC on October 11 , Sonia weakened into a tropical depression . About 24 hours later , Sonia weakened into a tropical disturbance after it failed to maintain a closed circulation . Thereafter , the storm entered the CPHC 's warning zone , where it began to encounter warmer waters and lighter wind shear , and thus began to deepen . On October 13 , Sonia regained tropical storm intensity and briefly posed a threat to Hawaii . Despite remaining small and disorganized , Sonia reached its peak intensity of 45 mph ( 75 km / h ) for a second time that evening . However , outflow from Hurricane Raymond weakened the system and Sonia dissipated on October 14 over 1 @,@ 000 miles ( 1 @,@ 610 km ) south @-@ southeast of the Big Island . 
 = = = Hurricane Tico = = = 
 The origins of Hurricane Tico were from a weak tropical disturbance that crossed Costa Rica into the Pacific Ocean on October 7 . Over warm waters , the system was sufficiently organized to be declared Tropical Depression Twenty @-@ One on October 11 , about 575 mi ( 930 km ) south of Acapulco . On October 12 it turned sharply northward ; the depression was upgraded to Tropical Storm Tico on October 13 . Tropical Storm Tico continued to intensify . Two days after becoming a tropical storm , Tico strengthened further to attain hurricane status . By October 16 , Tico had reached major hurricane status . Early on October 19 , it reached peak winds of 130 mph ( 215 km / h ) . It weakened slightly as it approached the coast , and at about 1500 UTC that day Tico made landfall near Mazatlán with winds of 125 mph ( 205 km / h ) . It rapidly weakened over land and merged with a cold front . The remnants of Tico were last observed on October 24 over Ohio . 
 Moderate rainfall was reported around the landfall location , peaking at 8 @.@ 98 in ( 228 mm ) in Pueblo Nuevo , Durango ; lighter precipitation of 1 – 3 in ( 25 – 75 mm ) occurred further inland toward the Mexico / United States border . Two 328 ft ( 100 m ) anchored ships were washed aground by strong waves and swells , with a total of seven ships reported missing . Overall , the hurricane sank nine small ships , and nine fishermen were killed . Hurricane Tico was responsible severe flooding and heavy damage due to strong winds . Throughout the state of Sinaloa , the hurricane destroyed nearly 19 @,@ 000 acres ( 77 km ² ) of bean and corn , although most of the agricultural damage occurred south of Mazatlán . In addition , the hurricane disrupted the flow of drinking water . A total of 13 hotels received extensive damage and 14 people were hurt . Twenty @-@ five thousand people were left homeless and damage throughout the country was estimated at $ 200 million ( 1983 USD ) . Hurricane Tico caused a total of 135 deaths in Mexico . 
 Rain from Tico continued into the South @-@ Central United States ; serious flooding was reported along the lower Washita River . Across <unk> , 5 % of the town 's population , sought three emergency shelter due to 7 ft ( 2 @.@ 1 m ) deep water . Throughout Oklahoma and Texas , 200 people were displaced and six people were killed . A total of $ 77 million in crop damage occurred in Oklahoma . Total damage in the state was estimated at $ 84 million . Elsewhere , one person was killed in the Kansas . 
 = = = Tropical Depression Twenty @-@ Two @-@ E = = = 
 On October 18 , a tropical disturbance was noted about 300 mi ( 485 km ) south of the Gulf of Tehuantepec . Moving west @-@ northwest , the disturbance was upgraded into a depression . After turning northwest , the depression dissipated an hour before moving ashore . Lasting less than 24 hours , Twenty @-@ Two was the shortest @-@ lived storm of the season . Despite the lack of damage , 10 in ( 250 mm ) of rain was measured along portions of the Southern Mexico coast . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Velma = = = 
 A tropical disturbance developed within the ITCZ during October 31 . Despite unfavorable conditions , the system began to organize , and became Tropical Depression Twenty @-@ Three on November 1 . It quickly intensified , and was upgraded to Tropical Storm Velma six hours later . No further intensification occurred ; Velma peaked as a minimal tropical storm . The tropical storm began to weaken after 18 hours , and was downgraded to a tropical depression on November 2 . The following day , the EPHC issued the final advisory on Tropical Depression Velma . 
 = = = Hurricane Winnie = = = 
 Due to a combination of unusually warm sea surface temperatures and the displacement of the ITCZ to north , a small area of disturbed weather formed in early December . Situated south @-@ southwest of Acapulco , the disturbance organized into a tropical depression on December 4 . It slowly headed north , and intensified into a tropical storm . Winnie peaked in intensity on December 6 .. Initially expected to continue north , the storm stalled instead . Due to wind shear caused by a trough , Winnie began to rapidly deteriorate , and it was downgraded into a tropical storm that night . After weakening further into a depression , Winnie dissipated on December 7 . Its remnant disturbance then moved west . Winnie was an out of season storm , and is the only known December tropical cyclone in the east Pacific proper since the modern record began in 1949 . Winnie is the latest hurricane on record in the eastern North Pacific . 
 Although the tropical cyclone never made landfall , it caused rain in parts of Mexico . The highest total of 3 @.@ 6 in ( 91 mm ) was recorded in Caleta de Campos . Furthermore , the storm brought strong winds to the region , but damage was less than expected . 
 = = 1983 storm names = = 
 The following names were used for named storms that formed in the eastern Pacific in 1983 . All the names on the list were used this year . No names were retired , so it was used again in the 1989 season . No central Pacific names were used ; the first name used would have been Keli . 
 = Cultural depictions of spiders = 
 Throughout history , there have been many cultural depictions of spiders in popular culture , mythology and in symbolism . From Greek mythology to African folklore , the spider has been used in human culture to represent many varied things , and endures into the present day with characters such as Shelob from The Lord of the Rings and Spider @-@ Man from the eponymous comic series . The spider has symbolized patience and persistence due to its hunting technique of setting webs and waiting for its prey to become ensnared . It is also a symbol of mischief and malice for its toxic venom and the slow death it causes , which is often seen as a curse . In addition , the spider has inspired creations from an ancient <unk> to a modern steam @-@ punk spectacle . 
 Although not all spiders spin webs to hunt prey , numerous cultures attribute this ability with the origin of spinning , textile weaving , basketry , knotwork and net making . Web @-@ spinning has also associated the spider with creation myths because they seemingly can secrete their own artistic worlds . Spiders have been the focus of fears , stories and mythologies of various cultures for centuries . Philosophers often use the spider 's web as a metaphor or analogy ; and today , terms such as the Internet or World Wide Web evoke the inter @-@ connectivity of a spider web . 
 = = In folklore and mythology = = 
 The spider , along with its web , is featured in mythological fables , cosmology , artistic spiritual depictions , and in oral traditions throughout the world since ancient times . 
 In Ancient Egypt , the spider was associated with the goddess Neith in her aspect as spinner and weaver of destiny , this link continuing later through the Babylonian Ishtar and the Greek Athena , who was later equated as the Roman goddess Minerva . 
 The most notable ancient legend that explains the origin of the spider comes from the Greek story of the weaving competition between Athena the goddess , and Arachne , sometimes described as a princess . This story may have originated in Lydian mythology ; but the myth , briefly mentioned by Virgil in 29 BC , is known from the later Greek mythos after Ovid wrote the poem Metamorphoses between the years AD 2 and 8 . The Greek Arachne ( <unk> ) means " spider " , and is the origin of <unk> , the spiders ' Class in taxonomy . 
 This myth tells of Arachne , the daughter of a famous Tyrian purple wool dyer in <unk> of Lydia . Due to her father 's skill with cloth dyeing , Arachne became adept in the art of weaving . Eventually , she began to consider herself to be a greater weaver than the goddess Athena herself , and challenged the goddess to a weaving contest to prove her superior skill . Athena wove the scene of her victory over Poseidon that had earned her the patronage of Athens , while Arachne wove a tapestry featuring many episodes of infidelity among the Gods of Olympus , which angered Athena . The goddess conceded that Arachne 's weaving was flawless , but she was infuriated by the mortal 's pride . In a final moment of anger , Athena destroyed Arachne 's tapestry and loom with her shuttle and cursed Arachne to live with extreme guilt . Out of sadness , Arachne soon hanged herself . Taking pity on her , Athena brought her back to life transformed as a spider , using the poison <unk> ; " — and ever since , Arachne , as a spider , weaves her web . " 
 The scholar Robert Graves proposed Ovid 's tale may have its roots in the commercial rivalry between the Athenian citizenry of Greece and that of Miletus on the isle of Crete in Asia Minor , which flourished around 2000 BC . In Miletus , the spider may have been an important figure ; seals with spider emblems have been recovered there . 
 In African mythology , the spider is personified as a creation deity Anansi , and as a trickster character in African traditional folklore . There are many variations of the name including <unk> <unk> of the Ashanti in West Africa ( his original name ) and anglicized as Aunt Nancy ( or Sister Nancy ) in the West Indies and some other parts of the Americas . Stories of <unk> became such a prominent and familiar part of Ashanti oral culture that the word <unk> — " spider tales " — came to embrace all kinds of fables . This fed into the Anansi <unk> or " spider tales " ; stories that were brought over from Africa and told to children of Maroon people and other Africans in the diaspora . These tales are allegorical stories that teach a moral lesson . 
 North American cultures have traditionally depicted spiders . The Native American Lakota people 's oral tradition also includes a spider @-@ trickster figure , which is known by several names . As chronicled in the legend of The " <unk> " ( <unk> ) Man and the <unk> ( Spider ) , a man encounters a hungry spider family , and the hero Stone Boy is tricked out of his fancy clothes by <unk> , a trickster spider figure . The spider is also present as the deity <unk> , which is occasionally depicted in this form . In Native American mythology , the spider is also seen in the legend about the birth of the constellation Ursa Major . The constellation was seen as seven men transformed into stars and climbing to paradise by <unk> a spider 's web . The Hopi have the creation myth of Spider Grandmother . In this story , Spider Grandmother thought the world into existence through the conscious weaving of her webs . Spider Grandmother also plays an important role in the creation mythology of the Navajo , and there are stories relating to Spider Woman in the heritage of many Southwestern native cultures as a powerful helper and teacher . 
 The South American Moche people of ancient Peru worshiped nature ; they placed emphasis on animals and often depicted spiders in their art . The people of the Nazca culture created expansive <unk> , including a large depiction of a spider on the Nazca plain in southern Peru . The purpose or meaning of the so @-@ called " Nazca lines " is still uncertain . 
 Spiders are depicted in Indigenous Australian art , in rock and bark paintings , and for clan totems . Spiders in their webs are associated with a sacred rock in central Arnhem Land on the <unk> clan estate of the <unk> / <unk> people . Their totem design is connected with a major regional ceremony , providing a connection with neighboring clans also having spider totems in their rituals . <unk> , the Lord Spider , created the universe , according to the traditional Cosmology of Oceania 's Kiribati islanders of the <unk> archipelago ( Gilbert Islands ) ; similarly , <unk> @-@ <unk> ( " Old Spider " ) plays an important part in the creation myth of the traditional Nauru islanders of Micronesia . In the Philippines , there is a Visayan folk tale version of The Spider and the Fly which explains why the spider hates the fly . 
 The Tsuchigumo ( translated as " Earth spiders " ) of Japan , is a mythical , supernatural creature faced by the legendary Minamoto no <unk> . Depending on the version of the story , the Tsuchigumo was able to take the visage of either a boy or a woman . In one version , while on a search for a mythical giant skull , Minamoto is lured to a house and placed in an illusion created by a Tsuchigumo in the guise of a young boy . However , after suspecting foul play , Minamoto breaks this illusion by striking out at him with his sword . Minamoto then discovers himself as actually being covered in a spider 's web , and after tracking him down , learns that the boy is in reality , a giant spider Tsuchigumo . 
 Another Japanese mythological spider figure is the <unk> ( " prostitute spider " ) which is portrayed as being able to transform into a seductive woman . In some instances , the <unk> attempts to seduce and perhaps marry passing samurai . In other instances she is venerated as a goddess dwelling in the <unk> Falls who saves people from drowning . Her name also refers to a golden orb @-@ spider species Nephila clavata ( <unk> @-@ <unk> , or <unk> spider ) . 
 An Islamic oral tradition holds that during the Hijra , the journey from Mecca to Medina , Muhammad and his companion Abu Bakr were being pursued by Quraysh soldiers , and they decided to take refuge in the Cave of Thawr . The tale goes on to say that Allah commanded a spider to weave a web across the opening of the cave . After seeing the spider 's web , the Quraysh pass the cave by , since Muhammad 's entry to the cave would have broken the web . Since then , it has been held in many Muslim traditions that a spider is , if not holy , then it is at least to be respected . A similar story occurs in the Jewish tradition , where it is David who is being chased by King Saul . David hides in a cave , and Saul and his men do not bother to search the cave because while David was hiding inside , a spider had spun a web over the mouth of the cave . 
 The 10th Century Saint Conrad of Constance is sometimes represented as a bishop holding a chalice with a spider . According to this story , while he was celebrating Easter Mass , a spider fell into the chalice . Ignoring the commonly @-@ held belief of the time that all or most spiders were poisonous ; as a token of faith , Conrad nevertheless drank the wine with the spider in it . 
 For King Robert the Bruce of Scotland , the spider is depicted as an inspirational symbol , according to an early 14th century legend . The legend tells of Robert the Bruce 's encounter with a spider during the time of a series of military failures against the English . One version tells that while taking refuge in a cave on Rathlin Island , he witnesses a spider continuously failing to climb its silken thread to its web . However , due to perseverance the spider eventually succeeds , demonstrating that , " if at first you don 't succeed , try , try and try again " . Taking this as being symbolic of hope and perseverance , Bruce came out of hiding and eventually won Scotland 's independence . 
 = = In philosophy = = 
 In the Vedic philosophy of India , the spider is depicted as hiding the ultimate reality with the veils of illusion . The Vedic god Indra is referred to as <unk> in Buddhism , or with the title <unk> Indra . Indra 's net is used as a metaphor for the Buddhist concept of interpenetration , which holds that all phenomena are intimately connected . Indra 's net has a multifaceted jewel at each vertex , and each jewel is reflected in all of the other jewels . 
 As related in the book , Vermeer 's Hat by historian Timothy Brook : 
 When Indra fashioned the world , he made it as a web , and at every knot in the web is tied a pearl . Everything that exists , or has ever existed , every idea that can be thought about , every datum that is true — every dharma , in the language of Indian philosophy — is a pearl in Indra 's net . Not only is every pearl tied to every other pearl by virtue of the web on which they hang , but on the surface of every pearl is reflected every other jewel on the net . Everything that exists in Indra 's web implies all else that exists . 
 = = In literature = = 
 The epic poem Metamorphoses , written by Ovid two millennia ago , includes the metamorphosis of Arachne . This was retold in Dante Alighieri 's depiction as the half @-@ spider Arachne in the 2nd book of his Divine Comedy , Purgatorio . In the 16th @-@ century Chinese folk novel , Wu Cheng 'en 's Journey to the West , the <unk> monk <unk> 's odyssey includes being trapped in a spider 's cave and bound by beautiful women and many children , who are transformations of spiders . 
 In the 15th century , the French king Louis XI acquired the nickname " the universal spider " ( l <unk> <unk> ) , from Georges <unk> , a chronicler of the dukes of Burgundy , referring to the king 's tendency to implement schemes and plans during his contention with Burgundy and the following conflicts with Charles the Bold . 
 The spider gained an evil reputation from the 1842 Biedermeier novella by Jeremias Gotthelf , The Black Spider . In this allegorical tale which was adapted to various media , the spider symbolizes evil works and represents the moral consequences of making a pact with the devil . 
 Spiders recur in themes for works by J. R. R. Tolkien . Tolkien included giant spiders in his 1937 book The Hobbit where they roamed Mirkwood attacking and sometimes capturing the main characters . The character of <unk> is featured as a spider @-@ like entity , and as a personification of Night from his earliest writings . In The Lord of the Rings , the spider takes its form as the menacing giant spider Shelob , and was featured in the film adaption of the last book of the Lord of the Rings series . Although described as giant spiders , Tolkien gave them fictional attributes such as compound eyes , beaks and the spinning of black webs . He also resurrected the Old English words cob and lob for " spider " . 
 More recently , giant spiders have featured in books such as the 1998 fantasy novel Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets by J. K. Rowling . This book was later followed by a motion picture of the same name , using the giant spider Aragog from the novel as a supporting character and pet of grounds keeper , Hagrid . In Fantastic Beasts and Where to Find Them , a book about many of the creatures within the Harry Potter universe , these giant spiders are also known as <unk> . 
 The 1952 children 's novel Charlotte 's Web written by E. B. White , is notable in its portrayal of the spider in a positive manner as a heroine rather than an object of fear or horror . 
 Atlach @-@ Nacha is the creation of Clark Ashton Smith and first appeared in his short story " The Seven <unk> " ( 1934 ) . Atlach @-@ Nacha resembles a huge spider with an almost @-@ human face . In the story , Atlach @-@ Nacha is the reluctant recipient of a human sacrifice given to it by the toad @-@ god <unk> . 
 The spider is also found in modern children 's tales . The nursery rhymes Itsy Bitsy Spider and Little Miss Muffet have spiders as focal characters . The poem " The Spider and the Fly " ( 1829 ) by Mary Howitt is a cautionary tale of seduction and betrayal which later inspired a 1949 film and a 1965 Rolling Stones song , each sharing the same title , as well as a 1923 cartoon by Aesop Fables Studio . 
 The poet Walt Whitman describes a ballooning spider in his 1868 poem , A <unk> Patient Spider : 
 = = = In comics and manga = = = 
 In graphic novels , spiders are often adapted by superheroes or villains as their symbols or alter egos due to the arachnid 's strengths and weaknesses . One of the most notable characters in comic book history has taken his identity from the spider , the Marvel comic book hero Spider @-@ Man . Peter Parker was accidentally bitten by a radioactive spider and then , as Spider @-@ Man , was able to scale tall buildings and shoot web fluid from a device attached to his wrist . Along with these abilities , came super senses and instant reflexes . Writer Stan Lee and artist Steve Ditko originated this franchise . Due to the character 's popularity , Spider @-@ Man appeared in movies and various other media . In addition to Spider @-@ Man , the Marvel universe included several new characters using the spider as their patron ; including Spider @-@ Woman , Spider @-@ Girl , the Scarlet Spider , Venom , <unk> , Black Widow , and Tarantula . The DC Comics universe also include characters named Spider Girl and Tarantula . 
 Many other comic book , manga and anime characters have taken the guise of a spider , such as Black Spider from the Batman universe ; in the Pokémon franchise , <unk> and <unk> are similar to spiders in shape . In the Static Shock series , Anansi the Spider takes his name and techniques from the African trickster god . In the second season of the anime based on the manga <unk> , one main antagonist , the demon butler Claude Faustus , has spider @-@ like qualities and powers . He is also capable of transforming into a spider and making webs . 
 In the manga The Saga of Darren Shan , the titular character is fascinated by spiders . He kept them as pets until he killed one that he got when he was nine years old . He used to let them go into his mouth and he 'd imagine them eating him from the inside out . Normally , the spiders would stay with him for about a day or two , but some lasted longer . Later on , we find out that he can communicate with spiders . 
 = = In film and television = = 
 Spiders have been present for many decades both in film and on television , predominantly in the horror genre . Those who suffer from arachnophobia , an acute fear of spiders , become particularly horrified . The spider web is used as a motif to adorn dark passageways , depicting the recesses of the unknown . Many horror films have featured the spider , including 1955 's Tarantula , exploiting America 's fear of atomic radiation during the nuclear arms race , The 1967 Godzilla film Son of Godzilla featured a spider kaiju named <unk> ( also known occasionally as " <unk> " in English ) and another version of <unk> featured in 2004 's Godzilla : Final <unk> the 1975 low @-@ budget cult film The Giant Spider Invasion , and Kingdom of the Spiders , a 1977 film starring William Shatner , depicting the consequence of hungry spiders deprived of their natural food supply due to pesticides . The fear of spiders culminates in Arachnophobia , a 1990 movie in which spiders multiply in large numbers . 
 On the other hand , a person who admires spiders is referred to as an " <unk> " ; such as Virginia , an orphan who likes to play spider games in the black comedy horror B movie , Spider Baby . 
 The 1999 film Wild Wild West features a giant mechanical spider . Experiments with spiders in space tend to go horribly wrong , as with a DNA experiment on board a NASA space shuttle in the 2000 film Spiders , or mutant spiders from a derelict Soviet space station in the 2013 film Spiders 3D . Before there were Snakes on a Plane ( 2006 ) , there were spiders on a plane in Tarantulas : The Deadly Cargo ( 1977 ) . Radiation and spiders once again combine to wreak havoc in the 2002 film Eight Legged Freaks , this time due to nuclear waste . 
 Several books featuring spiders have been adapted to film , including The Lord of the Rings : The Return of the King featuring Shelob and Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets with Aragog the <unk> . Charlotte 's positive portrayal of a spider character can be seen in two full @-@ length feature versions of Charlotte 's Web . The first Charlotte 's Web was a Hanna @-@ Barbera musical animation released in 1973 , followed by a live @-@ action 2006 film version of the original story . Furthermore , spider characters have crawled out of the pages of comic books and onto the big screen , most notably the Spider @-@ Man film adaptations . 
 In Ingmar Bergman 's 1961 Swedish film adaptation Through a Glass Darkly , the psychotic Karin believes she has an encounter with God as a spider . Surreal spider imagery , symbolism and themes are featured prominently in the 2013 psychological thriller Enemy ; director Denis Villeneuve 's film adaptation of the novel The Double by José Saramago . 
 On television , the 1990 miniseries Stephen King 's It is based on his novel It , where the true form of Pennywise the Dancing Clown resembles a monstrous spider . The character Kamen Rider <unk> from the 2004 Japanese TV show Kamen Rider Blade has a motif based on the <unk> spider . 
 Spider themes are also featured in early film history . Fritz Lang 's 1919 and 1920 The Spiders series were considered lost films , until these two parts of the action @-@ adventure serial episodes were restored in 1978 from rediscovered original prints . In this adventure , a spider was the calling @-@ card for " The Spiders " criminal organization . Pan Si Dong ( 1927 ) , <unk> , ( The Cave of the Silken Web ) was a film adaptation of the classic tale of <unk> 's encounter from a chapter of the 16th century Great Classical Novel , Journey to the West , and was remade as a 1967 Hong Kong cinema production . 
 The Ghost in The Shell manga by Masamune Shirow prominently features spider @-@ like , AI @-@ equipped , multi @-@ legged combat vehicles called Fuchikoma ( evolving into the <unk> , <unk> and <unk> in subsequent anime versions of the series ) . These mobile weapons platforms are used by the members of Section 9 to aid in their various missions . In real life , Shirow is known to keep numerous spiders as pets . 
 = = In music = = 
 The Rolling Stones adapted themes from Mary Howitt 's poem in their 1965 song " The Spider and the Fly " . Released in 1966 , " Boris the Spider " was the first song written by John Entwistle for The Who , and became a staple of their live concerts . " Spiderwebs " became a hit for No Doubt in 1995 . Alice Cooper 's 2008 concept album , Along Came a Spider is about a fictitious serial killer known as ' Spider ' , who wraps his victims in silk and cuts off one of their legs in order to create his own eight @-@ legged arachnoid . The Spiders from Mars was a backing band with Mick Ronson , actually from Hull , for David Bowie . 
 = = Other depictions = = 
 Information technology terms such as the " web spider " ( or " web crawler " ) and the World Wide Web imply the spider @-@ like connection of information accessed on the Internet . 
 A dance , the tarantella , refers to the spider <unk> tarantula . 
 Giant spider sculptures ( 11 feet tall and 22 feet across ) described as " looming and powerful <unk> , yet are nurturing , delicate , and vulnerable " and a " favorite with children " have been found in Washington DC , Denver CO , and elsewhere . Even larger sculptures are found in places like Ottawa and Zürich . These sculptures , two series of six by Louise Bourgeois , can be seen at the National Gallery of Art , Denver Art Museum , London 's Tate Modern and in a few other select sculpture gardens . The larger series is titled Maman and the other simply titled Spider . One Spider sold at a Christie 's auction house for over $ 10 million . 
 A four @-@ day performance art spectacle in Liverpool ( September 2008 ) featured La Princesse by the French performance art company La Machine . This giant steam @-@ punk spider climbed walls , stalked the streets and sprayed unwary citizens while in search of a nest . 
 = = = Games and toys = = = 
 Giant spiders appear in several role @-@ playing video games , such as <unk> , the Spider Queen of Dungeons & Dragons , and the first edition of Warcraft , where spiders are described as being " of staggering size — perhaps 15 feet around — with great furred body . " In the Metroid series of video games , spider @-@ shaped foes are common , with the trilogy 's antagonist , Metroid Prime , having a spider @-@ like Metroid as her primary physical form . The trilogy also includes the Ing , antagonists of Echoes , whose warrior forms resemble spiders , albeit with five legs rather than eight . Atlach @-@ Nacha is an H @-@ game centered on a spider demon disguising herself as a human . In The Legend of Zelda series , giant spiders are a frequent foe . In particular , Ocarina of Time features large spiders named <unk> , and Twilight Princess has an enormous spider boss . A spider @-@ like creature named Muffet is featured in the 2015 video game Undertale . She will attack the player if they did not buy anything from her <unk> in <unk> , but will spare the player if they bought from a <unk> in the Ruins early in the game . 
 In the Lego toyline Bionicle series , the <unk> horde is a species consisting of six spider @-@ like breeds . They are created by the Brotherhood of Makuta to conquer islands ; they possess mutagenic venom and spin sticky green webs . In the Transformers franchise , Tarantulas and <unk> are both Predacons that turn into giant spiders . <unk> , being part biological , has venom that paralyzes other Transformers and she is capable of spinning webs . 
 = = = Sports = = = 
 Notable athletes with spider nicknames include Olympic skier " Spider " Sabich , so named by his father due to his long , thin arms and legs as a baby , and UFC Middleweight Champion Anderson " The Spider " Silva who was dubbed " Brazil 's Spiderman " by an announcer who thought he looked like a superhero in the ring . Spider mascots are associated with the Cleveland Spiders baseball team and the San Francisco Spiders hockey team . 
 = = = Modern myths and urban legends = = = 
 Huntsman spiders are large and swift , often eliciting <unk> reactions from susceptible people , and are the subject of many superstitions , exaggerations and myths . The banana spider myth claims that the Huntsman spider lays its eggs in banana flower blossoms , resulting in spiders inside the tip of bananas , waiting to terrorize an unsuspecting consumer . This is supposed to explain why monkeys allegedly peel bananas from the " wrong " end . Another example is the clock spider urban legend from around 2002 . A discussion was started on an Internet message board based on pictures of an allegedly " clock @-@ sized " <unk> ( Huntsman ) spider on a wall . That discussion , and its derivatives , lasted for several months . 
 According to another urban legend , daddy long legs ( <unk> ) have very potent venom , but their fangs are too short to deliver the poison . This myth might have arisen due to its similarity in appearance with the Brown recluse spider . In a 2004 episode of Discovery Channel 's Mythbusters , it was shown that host Adam Savage survived a bite from the spider . 
 A modern myth depicts a young woman who found out that her beehive hairdo was infested with Black widow spiders . 
 The Spider Bite legend emerged in Europe in the late 1970s . In most versions of this tale , a young vacationing female <unk> is bitten on the cheek by a spider . After seeking medical attention for the resultant swelling , hundreds of tiny spiders are discovered emerging from her lanced wound , which causes the victim to go insane . 
 An email hoax describes the attacks by the South American Blush Spider in public toilets . The alleged spider 's scientific name is <unk> gluteus , where " gluteus " is supposed to mean " buttocks " ( since there are muscles in the buttocks called gluteus maximus ) , and " <unk> " is a made @-@ up word intended to mean " spider " . The hoax spider shares some characteristics with the two @-@ striped <unk> ( <unk> <unk> ) , and there is an updated version of the hoax using that name for the spider 's species , with the rest of the text left unchanged . 
 = Lay You Down = 
 " Lay You Down " is a song by American R & B recording artist Usher . It was written by himself , Rico Love and Dwayne Nesmith , and produced by the latter two . It was released to urban radio on September 28 , 2010 in the United States , as the third and final single from Usher 's EP , Versus , which is an extension of his sixth studio album , Raymond v. Raymond . " Lay You Down " is an R & B song , that takes influence from pop musician Prince . The song received positive reviews from critics , who praised its production and Usher 's vocals , noting the track as a stand @-@ out from Versus . It entered the US Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs chart , and peaked at number fifty @-@ six . 
 = = Background and composition = = 
 " Lay You Down " was written by Usher , Rico Love and Dwayne Nesmith , and produced by the latter two . Additional vocals were contributed by Love , and keyboard and programming was done by Nesmith . The song was recorded by Ian Cross at Midnight Blue Studios in Miami , Florida and mixed by Rob Marks at Circle House Studios . " Lay You Down " is an R & B song with a length of four minutes and three seconds . In an interview with music video website Vevo , Usher explained that the song is a " classic R & B baby maker " . Sara Anderson of AOL wrote that it opens " with improvisational , high @-@ pitched ' <unk> ' and base @-@ driven synth beats . " The song was released as the third and final single from Versus , an extended play released as an extension of his sixth studio album , Raymond v. Raymond ( 2010 ) . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Describing " Lay You Down " as one of the more sensual songs on Versus , Mark Nero of About.com wrote " the best of which might be the piano @-@ laced ' Lay You Down , ' on which Usher sings : ' This ain 't bump ' n grind , I 'll show you what love is if you let me lay you down . ' " Sarah Rodman of The Boston Globe commended Usher 's use of falsetto , whilst writing that the song " is an urgent boudoir jam that draws a neat line " – she also commented on how it takes inspiration from both Prince and Marvin Gaye . Los Angeles Times 's Jeff Weiss also pointed out the influence from pop musician Prince , and how Usher is " <unk> cooing about wanting to be the : one who keeps your body warm . " " Lay You Down " entered the R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs chart on the week ending November 13 , 2010 , and peaked at number fifty @-@ six , due to strong radio play . 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Recording locations 
 Vocal recording – Midnight Blue Studios , Miami , FL . 
 Mixing – Circle House Studios , Miami , FL . 
 Personnel 
 Songwriting – Rico Love , Usher Raymond , Dwayne Nesmith 
 Production – Rico Love , Dwayne Nesmith 
 Vocal recording – Ian Cross 
 Mixing – Rob Marks 
 Additional vocals – Rico Love 
 Keyboard and programming – Dwayne Nesmith 
 Credits adapted from the liner notes of Versus . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = Final Fantasy X = 
 Final Fantasy X ( ファイナルファンタジーX , Fainaru Fantajī Ten ) is a role @-@ playing video game developed and published by Square ( now Square Enix ) as the tenth entry in the Final Fantasy series . Originally released in 2001 for Sony 's PlayStation 2 , the game was re @-@ released as Final Fantasy X / X @-@ 2 HD Remaster for PlayStation 3 and PlayStation Vita in 2014 , for PlayStation 4 in 2015 and for Microsoft Windows in 2016 . The game marks the Final Fantasy series transition from entirely pre @-@ rendered backdrops to fully three @-@ dimensional areas , and is also the first in the series to feature voice acting . Final Fantasy X replaces the Active Time Battle ( ATB ) system with the " Conditional Turn @-@ Based Battle " ( CTB ) system , and uses a new leveling system called the " Sphere Grid " . 
 Set in the fantasy world of Spira , the game 's story revolves around a group of adventurers and their quest to defeat a rampaging monster known as Sin . The player character is Tidus , an athlete star of the fictional sport known as blitzball , who finds himself in the world Spira after his home city of Zanarkand is destroyed by Sin . Shortly after arriving to Spira , Tidus joins the summoner Yuna on her pilgrimage to destroy Sin . 
 Development of Final Fantasy X began in 1999 , with a budget of more than US $ 32 @.@ 3 million and a team of more than 100 people . The game was the first in the main series not entirely scored by Nobuo Uematsu ; Masashi Hamauzu and Junya Nakano were signed as Uematsu 's fellow composers . Final Fantasy X was both a critical and commercial success , selling over 6 @.@ 6 million units worldwide . On March 3 , 2003 , it was followed by Final Fantasy X @-@ 2 , making it the first Final Fantasy game to have a direct game sequel . In October 2013 , Square Enix announced Final Fantasy X and its sequel Final Fantasy X @-@ 2 together sold over 14 million copies worldwide on PlayStation 2 . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Like previous games in the series , Final Fantasy X is presented in a third @-@ person perspective , with players directly navigating the main character , Tidus , around the world to interact with objects and people . Unlike previous games , however , the world and town maps have been fully integrated , with terrain outside of cities rendered to scale . When an enemy is encountered , the environment switches to a turn @-@ based battle area where characters and enemies await their turn to attack . 
 The gameplay of Final Fantasy X differs from that of previous Final Fantasy games in its lack of a top @-@ down perspective world map . Earlier games featured a miniature representation of the expansive areas between towns and other distinct locations , used for long @-@ distance traveling . In Final Fantasy X , almost all the locations are essentially continuous and never fade out to a world map . Regional connections are mostly linear , forming a single path through the game 's locations , though an airship becomes available late in the game , giving the player the ability to navigate Spira faster . Like previous games in the series , Final Fantasy X features numerous minigames , most notably the fictional underwater sport " blitzball " . 
 = = = Combat = = = 
 Final Fantasy X introduces the Conditional Turn @-@ Based Battle system in place of the series ' traditional Active Time Battle system first used in Final Fantasy IV . Whereas the ATB concept features real @-@ time elements , the CTB system is a turn @-@ based format that pauses the battle during each of the player 's turns . Thus , the CTB design allows the player to select an action without time pressure . A graphical timeline along the upper @-@ right side of the screen details who will be receiving turns next , and how various actions taken will affect the subsequent order of turns . The player can control up to three characters in battle , though a swapping system allows the player to replace them with a character outside the active party at any time . " Limit Breaks " , highly damaging special attacks , reappear in Final Fantasy X as " Overdrives " . In this new incarnation of the feature , most of the techniques are interactive , requiring button inputs to increase their effectiveness . While initially the Overdrives can be used when the character receives a significant amount of damage , the player is able to modify the requirements to unlock them . 
 Final Fantasy X introduces an overhaul of the summoning system employed in previous games of the series . Whereas in previous titles a summoned creature would arrive , perform one action , and then depart , the " Aeons " of Final Fantasy X arrive and entirely replace the battle party , fighting in their place until either the aeon wins the battle , is defeated itself , or is dismissed by the player . Aeons have their own statistics , commands , special attacks , spells , and Overdrives . The player acquires five aeons over the course of the game , but three additional aeons can be obtained by completing various side @-@ quests . 
 = = = Sphere Grid = = = 
 As with previous titles in the series , players have the opportunity to develop and improve their characters by defeating enemies and acquiring items , though the traditional experience point system is replaced by a new system called the " Sphere Grid " . Instead of characters gaining pre @-@ determined statistic bonuses for their attributes after leveling up , each character gains " Sphere Levels " after collecting enough Ability Points ( AP ) . Sphere Levels allow players to move around the Sphere Grid , a pre @-@ determined grid of interconnected nodes consisting of various statistic and ability bonuses . " Spheres " are applied to these nodes , unlocking its function for the selected character . 
 The Sphere Grid system also allows players to fully customize characters in contrast to their intended battle roles , such as turning the White Mage @-@ roled Yuna into a physical powerhouse and the swordsman Auron into a healer . The International and PAL versions of the game include an optional " Expert " version of the Sphere Grid ; in these versions , all of the characters start in the middle of the grid and may follow whichever path the player chooses . As a trade @-@ off , the Expert grid has fewer nodes in total , thus decreasing the total statistic upgrades available during the game . 
 = = Plot = = 
 = = = Setting and characters = = = 
 Final Fantasy X is set in the fictional world of Spira , consisting of one large landmass divided into three <unk> , surrounded by small tropical islands . It features diverse climates , ranging from the tropical Besaid and Kilika islands , to the temperate Mi 'ihen region , to the frigid Macalania and Mt . Gagazet areas . Although predominantly populated by humans , Spira features a variety of races . Among them are the Al Bhed , a technologically advanced but disenfranchised sub @-@ group of humans with distinctive green eyes and unique language . The Guado are less human in appearance , with elongated fingers and other arboreal features . Still less human are the lion @-@ like Ronso and the frog @-@ like Hypello . A subset of Spira 's sentient races are the " unsent " , the strong @-@ willed spirits of the dead that remain in corporeal form . In Spira , the dead who are not sent to the Farplane by a summoner come to envy the living and transform into " fiends " , the monsters that are encountered throughout the game ; however , unsent with strong attachments to the world of the living may retain their human form . Other fauna in Spira , aside from those drawn from real animals , such as cats , dogs , birds , and butterflies , include the gigantic , amphibious <unk> ( which are similar to elephants ) ; and the emu @-@ like chocobo , which appears in most Final Fantasy games . Spira is very different from the mainly European @-@ style worlds found in previous Final Fantasy games , being much more closely modeled on Southeast Asia , most notably with respect to vegetation , topography , architecture , and names . 
 There are seven main playable characters in Final Fantasy X , starting with Tidus , a cheerful young teenager and a star blitzball player from Zanarkand , who seeks a way home after an encounter with Sin transported him to Spira . To do so , he joins Yuna , a summoner on a journey to obtain the Final Aeon and defeat the enormous whale @-@ like " Sin " . Journeying with them are : Kimahri Ronso , a young warrior of the Ronso tribe who watched over Yuna during her childhood ; Wakka , a blitzball player whose younger brother was killed by Sin ; and Lulu , a stoic black mage close to Yuna and Wakka . During the journey , they are joined by Auron , a former warrior monk , who worked with both Tidus ' and Yuna 's fathers to defeat Sin 10 years prior ; and Rikku , Yuna 's cousin , a perky Al Bhed girl and the first friendly person Tidus meets upon arriving in Spira . 
 = = = Story = = = 
 The story begins with the main protagonist , Tidus , waiting with his allies outside the ruins of an ancient city . Tidus narrates the events that led to the present , spanning most of the game 's storyline . It begins in Tidus 's home city , the high @-@ tech metropolis of Zanarkand , where he is a renowned star of the underwater sport blitzball . During a blitzball tournament , the city is attacked by an immense creature which Auron , a man not originally from Zanarkand , calls " Sin " . Sin destroys Zanarkand , taking Tidus and Auron to the world of Spira . 
 Upon arriving in Spira , Tidus is rescued by Al Bhed salvagers in the area . Upon asking him where he is from , one of them , Rikku , tells him that Sin destroyed Zanarkand 1 @,@ 000 years ago . After Sin attacks again , Tidus is separated from the divers and drifts to the tropical island of Besaid , where he meets Wakka , captain of the local blitzball team . Wakka introduces Tidus to Yuna , a young summoner about to go on a pilgrimage to obtain the Final Aeon and defeat Sin with her guardians Lulu and Kimahri . Meanwhile , Tidus joins to help Wakka in the upcoming blitzball tournament to find a way back home . The party travels across Spira to gather aeons , defending against attacks by Sin and its " offspring " — fiends called <unk> . After the tournament , they are joined by Auron , who convinces Tidus to become Yuna 's guardian . He reveals to Tidus that Yuna 's father , Lord Braska ; Tidus 's father , Jecht ; and himself made the same pilgrimage to defeat Sin ten years ago . Tidus thought his father had died at sea ten years earlier . Following another attack from Sin , they are joined by Rikku , later revealed to be Yuna 's cousin . 
 When the party arrives in the city of Guadosalam , the leader of the Guado , Seymour Guado , proposes to Yuna , saying that it will ease Spira 's sorrow . At Macalania Temple , the group sees a message from Seymour 's father <unk> , who declares he was killed by his son , who now aims to destroy Spira . The group reunites with Yuna to engage Seymour in battle , killing him ; soon afterward , Sin attacks , separating Yuna from the others . While searching for her on Bikanel Island , the homeland of the Al Bhed where they had surfaced , Tidus has an emotional breakdown when he learns that summoners die after summoning the Final Aeon , leading to his desire to find a way to defeat Sin while keeping Yuna alive . The group finds Yuna in Bevelle , where she is being forced to marry the unsent Seymour . They crash the wedding and escape with Yuna . The group is captured at the Bevelle temple , and are ordered to stand trial . After escaping from their sentence , the group heads towards the ruins of Zanarkand , seen in the introduction of the game . 
 On the way there , Tidus learns that he , Jecht , and the Zanarkand they hail from are summoned entities akin to aeons based on the original Zanarkand and its people . Long ago , the original Zanarkand battled Bevelle in a machina war , in which the former was defeated . Zanarkand 's survivors became " fayth " so that they could use their memories of Zanarkand to create a new city in their image , removed from the reality of Spira . One thousand years after its creation , the fayth have become exhausted from " dreaming " their Zanarkand , but are unable to stop due to Sin 's influence . 
 Once they reach Zanarkand , Yunalesca — the first summoner to defeat Sin and unsent ever since — tells the group that the Final Aeon is created from the fayth of one close to the summoner . After defeating Sin , the Final Aeon kills the summoner and transforms into a new Sin , which has caused its cycle of rebirth to continue . Yuna decides against using the Final Aeon , due to the futile sacrifices it carries and the fact that Sin would still be reborn . Disappointed by their resolution , Yunalesca tries to kill Tidus ' group , but she is defeated and vanishes , ending hope of ever attaining the Final Aeon . After the fight , the group learns that Yu Yevon , a summoner who lost his humanity and mind , is behind Sin 's cycle of rebirth . This leads the group to infiltrate Sin 's body to battle Seymour , and Jecht 's imprisoned spirit . With Sin 's host defeated , Tidus ' group battles and defeats Yu Yevon . Sin 's cycle of rebirth ends , and the spirits of Spira 's fayth are freed from their imprisonment . Auron , who had earlier been revealed to be unsent , goes to the Farplane . Just then , Dream Zanarkand and Tidus disappear , now that the freed fayth stopped the summoning . Afterward , in a speech to the citizens of Spira , Yuna resolves to help rebuild their world now that it is free of Sin . In a post @-@ credits scene , Tidus awakens under water . He then swims towards the ocean surface , and the screen fades to white . 
 = = Development = = 
 Final Fantasy X 's development began in 1999 , costing approximately ¥ 4 billion ( approximately US $ 32 @.@ 3 million ) with a crew of over 100 people , most of whom worked on previous games in the series . Executive producer Hironobu Sakaguchi has stated that although he had concerns about the transition from 2D to 3D backgrounds , the voice acting , and the transition to real @-@ time story @-@ telling , the success of the Final Fantasy series can be attributed to constantly challenging the development team to try new things . Producer Yoshinori Kitase was also the chief director of Final Fantasy X , while the direction of events , maps and battles was split up between Motomu Toriyama , Takayoshi Nakazato and Toshiro Tsuchida , respectively . The development of the script for the game took three to four months , with the same amount of time dedicated to the voice recording afterwards . Kazushige Nojima collaborated with Daisuke Watanabe , Toriyama and Kitase on writing the scenario for Final Fantasy X. Nojima was particularly concerned with establishing a connection in the relationship between player and main character . Thus , he penned the story such that the player 's progress through the world and growing knowledge about it is reflected in Tidus ' own understanding and narration . 
