 = = = Influences = = = 
 Character designer Tetsuya Nomura has identified the South Pacific , Thailand and Japan as major influences on the cultural and geographic design of Spira , particularly concerning the geographic location of the southern Besaid and Kilika islands . He has also said that Spira deviates from the worlds of past Final Fantasy games in the level of detail incorporated , something he has expressed to have made a conscious effort to maintain during the design process . Kitase felt that if the setting went back to a medieval European fantasy , it would not seem to help the development team advance . While he was thinking of different world environments , Nojima suggested a fantasy world that incorporated Asian elements . Sub @-@ character chief designer Fumi Nakashima 's focus was to ensure that characters from different regions and cultures bore distinctive characteristics in their clothing styles , so that they could be quickly and easily identified as members of their respective sub @-@ groups . For example , she has said that the masks and goggles of the Al Bhed give the group a " strange and eccentric " appearance , while the attire of the Ronso lend to them being able to easily engage in battle . 
 = = = Design = = = 
 Final Fantasy X features innovations in the rendering of characters ' facial expressions , achieved through motion capture and skeletal animation technology . This technology allowed animators to create realistic lip movements , which were then programmed to match the speech of the game 's voice actors . Nojima has revealed that the inclusion of voice acting enabled him to express emotion more powerfully than before , and he was therefore able to keep the storyline simple . He also said that the presence of voice actors led him to make various changes to the script , in order to match the voice actors ' personalities with the characters they were portraying . The inclusion of voice , however , led to difficulties . With the game 's cutscenes already programmed around the Japanese voice work , the English localization team faced the difficulty of establishing English @-@ oriented dialogue and the obstacle of incorporating this modified wording with the rhythm and timing of the characters ' lip movements . Localization specialist Alexander O. Smith described the process of fitting natural @-@ sounding English speech into the game as " something akin to writing four or five movies ' worth of dialogue entirely in haiku form [ and ] of course the actors had to act , and act well , within those restraints . " 
 The game was initially going to feature online elements , offered through Square 's PlayOnline service . The features , however , were dropped during production , and online gaming would not become part of the Final Fantasy series until Final Fantasy XI . Map director Nakazato wanted to implement a world map concept with a more realistic approach than that of the traditional Final Fantasy game , in line with the realism of the game 's 3D backgrounds , as opposed to pre @-@ rendered backgrounds . As a player of the games in the Final Fantasy series , battle director Tsuchida wanted to recreate elements he found interesting or entertaining , which eventually led to the removal of the Active Time Battle system , and instead , incorporated the strategy @-@ focused Conditional Turn @-@ Based Battle system . Originally , Final Fantasy X was going to feature wandering enemies visible on the field map , seamless transitions into battles , and the option for players to move around the landscape during enemy encounters . Battle art director Shintaro Takai has explained that it was his intention that battles in Final Fantasy X come across as a natural part of the story and not an independent element . However , due to hardware limitations , this idea was not used . Instead , a compromise was made , whereby some transitions from the field map to the battle map were made relatively seamless with the implementation of a motion blur effect that would happen at the end of an event scene . The desire for seamless transitions also led to the implementation of the new summoning system seen in the game . Kitase has explained that the purpose behind the Sphere Grid is to give players an interactive means of increasing their characters ' attributes , such that they will be able to observe the development of those attributes firsthand . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 Final Fantasy X marks the first time regular series composer Nobuo Uematsu has had any assistance in composing the score for a game in the main series . His fellow composers for Final Fantasy X were Masashi Hamauzu and Junya Nakano . They were chosen for the soundtrack based on their ability to create music that was different from Uematsu 's style while still being able to work together . <unk> first revealed that the game 's theme song was completed in November 2000 . As Square still had not revealed who would sing the song , GameSpot personally asked Uematsu , who jokingly answered " It 's going to be Rod Stewart . " 
 The game features three songs with vocalized elements , including the J @-@ pop ballad " Suteki da ne " , which translates to " Isn 't it Wonderful ? " . The lyrics were written by Kazushige Nojima , and the music was written by Uematsu . The song is performed by Japanese folk singer Rikki , whom the music team contacted while searching for a singer whose music reflected an Okinawan atmosphere . " Suteki da ne " is also sung in Japanese in the English version of Final Fantasy X. Like " Eyes on Me " from Final Fantasy VIII and " Melodies of Life " from Final Fantasy IX , an orchestrated version of " Suteki da ne " is used as part of the ending theme . The other songs with lyrics are the heavy metal opening theme , " Otherworld " , sung in English by Bill Muir ; and " Hymn of the Fayth " , a recurring piece sung using Japanese syllabary . 
 The original soundtrack spanned 91 tracks on four discs . It was first released in Japan on August 1 , 2001 , by DigiCube , and was re @-@ released on May 10 , 2004 , by Square Enix . In 2002 , Tokyopop released a version of Final Fantasy X Original Soundtrack in North America entitled Final Fantasy X Official Soundtrack , which contained 17 tracks from the original album on a single disc . Other related CDs include feel / Go dream : Yuna & Tidus which , released in Japan by DigiCube on October 11 , 2001 , featured tracks based on Tidus ' and Yuna 's characters . Piano Collections Final Fantasy X , another collection of music from the game , and Final Fantasy X Vocal Collection , a compilations of exclusive character dialogues and songs were both in Japan in 2002 . 
 The Black Mages , a band led by Nobuo Uematsu that arranges music from Final Fantasy video games into a rock music style , have arranged three pieces from Final Fantasy X. These are " Fight With Seymour " from their self @-@ titled album , published in 2003 , and " Otherworld " and " The Skies Above " , both of which can be found on the album The Skies Above , published in 2004 . Uematsu continues to perform certain pieces in his Dear Friends : Music from Final Fantasy concert series . The music of Final Fantasy X has also appeared in various official concerts and live albums , such as 20020220 Music from Final Fantasy , a live recording of an orchestra performing music from the series including several pieces from the game . An odd note ; the unreleased / promo CD @-@ R ( Instrumental ) version of Madonna 's " What It Feels Like For A Girl " done by Tracy Young was used in the blitzball sequences . Additionally , " Swing de Chocobo " was performed by the Royal Stockholm Philharmonic Orchestra for the Distant Worlds – Music from Final Fantasy concert tour , while " Zanarkand " was performed by the New Japan Philharmonic Orchestra in the Tour de Japon : Music from Final Fantasy concert series . Independent but officially licensed releases of Final Fantasy X music have been composed by such groups as Project Majestic Mix , which focuses on arranging video game music . Selections also appear on Japanese remix albums , called dojin music , and on English remixing websites . 
 = = Versions and merchandise = = 
 The Japanese version of Final Fantasy X included an additional disc entitled " The Other Side of Final Fantasy " , which featured interviews , storyboards , and trailers for Blue Wing Blitz , Kingdom Hearts , and Final Fantasy : The Spirits Within , as well as the first footage of Final Fantasy XI . An international version of the game was released in Japan as Final Fantasy X International in January 2002 , and in PAL regions under its original title . It features content not available in the original NTSC releases , including battles with " Dark " versions of the game 's aeons and an airship fight with the <unk> " Penance " . The Japanese release of Final Fantasy X International also includes " Eternal Calm " , a 14 @-@ minute video clip bridging the story of Final Fantasy X with that of its sequel , Final Fantasy X @-@ 2 . The video clip was included in a bonus DVD for Unlimited Saga Collector 's Edition under the name Eternal Calm , Final Fantasy X @-@ 2 : Prologue . It was first released in Europe on October 31 , 2003 , and featured English voice @-@ overs . 
 The international and PAL versions include a bonus DVD called Beyond Final Fantasy , a disc including interviews with the game 's developers , and two of the game 's English voice actors , James Arnold Taylor ( Tidus ) and Hedy Burress ( Yuna ) . Also included are trailers for Final Fantasy X and Kingdom Hearts , a concept and promotional art gallery for the game , and a music video of " Suteki da ne " performed by Rikki . In 2005 , a compilation featuring Final Fantasy X and Final Fantasy X @-@ 2 was released in Japan as Final Fantasy X / X @-@ 2 Ultimate Box . 
 Square also produced various types of merchandise and several books , including The Art of Final Fantasy X and three Ultimania guides , a series of artbooks / strategy guides published by DigiCube in Japan . They feature original artwork from Final Fantasy X , offer gameplay walkthroughs , expand upon many aspects of the game 's storyline and feature several interviews with the game 's designers . There are three books in the series : Final Fantasy X Scenario Ultimania , Final Fantasy X Battle Ultimania , and Final Fantasy X Ultimania Ω . On December 18 , 2012 the game will be re @-@ released as part of the Final Fantasy 25th Anniversary Ultimate Box release . 
 = = = HD Remaster = = = 
 On September 13 , 2011 , Square Enix announced that Final Fantasy X would be re @-@ released in high @-@ definition for the PlayStation 3 and PlayStation Vita , in celebration of the game 's 10 @-@ year anniversary . In January 2012 , production of the game had started . Producer Yoshinori Kitase was once again involved in the production of the game , wishing to work on its quality . On February 18 , 2013 the first footage of the PlayStation Vita version of Final Fantasy X HD was released , showing off HD models of Tidus , Yuna , Bahamut and Yojimbo . On 19 March , it was confirmed that the PS3 version of the game would also include its sequel X @-@ 2 , and that it would be remastered in HD . The two HD remastered games for the PS3 were released under the title Final Fantasy X / X @-@ 2 HD Remaster on a single Blu @-@ ray disc game , and was sold separately on game cartridges on Vita in Japan and sold together in North America as a set , with FFX being on a cartridge and FFX @-@ 2 being included as a download voucher . Downloadable versions are available for both systems . Square Enix launched an official website for the two HD remastered titles in March 2013 . The games contain all the content found in the International version , including Last Mission . During the PlayStation China press conference that took place in Shanghai on December 11 , 2014 , Square Enix confirmed Final Fantasy X / X @-@ 2 HD Remaster would be available for the PlayStation 4 in Spring 2015 . It was released in North America on May 12 , 2015 . One year later on May 12 , 2016 , it was released for Microsoft Windows via Steam . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Sales = = = 
 Square expected the game to sell at least two million copies worldwide owing to the reduced PlayStation 2 's fanbase , making it smaller than the last three released titles . However , within four days of its release in Japan , the game had sold over 1 @.@ 4 million copies in pre @-@ orders , which set a record for the fastest @-@ selling console RPG . These figures exceeded the performances of Final Fantasy VII and IX in a comparable period , and Final Fantasy X became the first PlayStation 2 game to reach two million and four million sold copies . In October 2007 , the game was listed as the 8th best @-@ selling game for the PlayStation 2 . Final Fantasy X sold over 2 @.@ 26 million copies in Japan alone in 2001 , and has sold 6 @.@ 6 million copies worldwide as of January 2004 . The " Ultimate Hits " bargain reissue of the game in September 2005 sold over 131 @,@ 000 copies in Japan by the end of 2006 . In October 2013 , Square Enix announced Final Fantasy X and its sequel Final Fantasy X @-@ 2 have together sold over 14 million copies worldwide on PlayStation 2 . 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 Final Fantasy X received critical acclaim by the media . The Japanese video game magazine Famitsu and Famitsu PS2 awarded the game a near @-@ perfect 39 / 40 score . Another Japanese gaming magazine , The Play Station , gave the game a score of 29 / 30 . Famitsu , Famitsu PS2 , and The Play Station expressed particularly favorable responses toward the game 's storyline , graphics , and movies . The game maintains a 92 out of 100 on Metacritic . Producer Shinji Hashimoto stated that the overall reception to the game was " excellent " , having received praise and awards from the media . 
 IGN 's David Smith offered praise for the voice actors and the innovations in gameplay , particularly with the revised battle and summon systems , the option to change party members during battle , and the character development and inventory management systems . They also felt that the game 's graphics had improved on its predecessors in every way possible , and that the game as a whole was " the best @-@ looking game of the series [ and ] arguably the best @-@ playing as well " . Greg Kasavin of GameSpot praised the game 's storyline , calling it surprisingly complex , its ending satisfying , and its avoidance of role @-@ playing game clichés commendable with Tidus viewed as an appealing protagonist . He also lauded the music , feeling it was " diverse and well suited to the various scenes in the game " . Similarly , GamePro described its character building system and battle system as " two of the best innovations in the series " . The visuals of the game were commended by GameSpy 's Raymond Padilla , who referred to them as " top @-@ notch " , as well as giving praise to the character models , backgrounds , cutscenes , and animations . The voice casting was praised by Game Revolution who noted most of them were " above average " and called the music " rich " . 
 Edge rated the game considerably lower , criticizing many aspects of the game for being tedious and <unk> and describing the dialogue as " nauseating " , particularly panning Tidus . Andrew Reiner of Game Informer criticized the game 's linearity and that players were no longer able to travel the world by chocobo or control the airship . Eurogamer 's Tom Bramwell noted that the game 's puzzle segments were " depressing " and " superfluous " , and that although the Sphere Grid was " a nice touch " , it took up too much of the game . The linearity of the game was positively commented on by GamePro who stated that a player would not be required to participate in side @-@ quests or the mini @-@ game to reach the game 's conclusion , finding some of them unappealing . Game Revolution complained that cutscenes could not be skipped , some even being too long . 
 = = = Awards = = = 
 Final Fantasy X received the Best Game Award from the Japan Game Awards for 2001 – 2002 . In GameSpot 's " Best and Worst Awards " from 2001 , it came seventh in the category " Top 10 Video Games of the Year " . Readers of Famitsu magazine voted it the best game of all time in early 2006 . Final Fantasy X came in fifth on IGN 's " Top 25 PS2 Games of All Time " list in 2007 and sixth in " The Top 10 Best Looking PS2 Games of All Time " . In a similar list by GameSpy , the game took the 21st place . 1UP.com listed its revelation during the ending as the third @-@ biggest video game spoiler , while IGN ranked the ending as the fifth best pre @-@ rendered cutscene . In a Reader 's Choice made in 2006 by IGN , it ranked as the 60th @-@ best video game . It was also named one of the 20 essential Japanese role @-@ playing games by Gamasutra . It also placed 43rd in Game Informer 's list of " The Top 200 Games of All Time " . In 2004 , Final Fantasy X was listed as one of the best games by GameFAQs , while in November 2005 it was voted as the 12th " Best Game Ever " . In a general overview of the series , both GamesRadar and IGN listed Final Fantasy X as the fourth best game . At the sixth annual Interactive Achievement Awards in 2003 , it was nominated for " Outstanding Achievement in Animation " and " Console Role @-@ Playing Game of the Year " . At the end of 2007 , it was named the ninth best @-@ selling RPG by Guinness World Records . Readers from <unk> also voted it as Game of the Year during 2001 . In 2008 , readers of Dengeki magazine voted it the second best game ever made . It was voted first place in Famitsu 's and Dengeki 's polls of most tear @-@ inducing games of all time . Both Tidus and Yuna have been popular characters in games in general due to their personalities and their romantic relationship . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Due to its commercial and critical success , Square Enix released a direct sequel to Final Fantasy X in 2003 , titled Final Fantasy X @-@ 2 . The sequel is set two years after the conclusion of Final Fantasy X , establishing new conflicts and dilemmas and resolving loose ends left by the original game . Although the sequel did not sell as well as the original , 3 @.@ 96 million units versus 6 @.@ 6 million units , it can still be considered a commercial success . As a result of the title 's popularity , Yoshinori Kitase and Kazushige Nojima decided to establish a plot @-@ related connection between Final Fantasy X and Final Fantasy VII , another well @-@ received Final Fantasy game . In 2013 , after the release of the HD Remaster , Nojima stated that he would like to see a second sequel to X , and if there were demand for it , it could happen . 
 The advancements in portraying realistic emotions achieved with Final Fantasy X through voice @-@ overs and detailed facial expressions have since become a staple of the series , with Final Fantasy X @-@ 2 and other subsequent titles ( such as Dirge of Cerberus : Final Fantasy VII , Final Fantasy XII , XIII and its sequels , and XV ) also featuring this development . Traversing real @-@ time 3D environments instead of an overworld map has also become a standard of the series , as demonstrated in Final Fantasy XI , XII , XIII and its sequels , XIV and XV . Final Fantasy X can be considered a pioneer in 3 @-@ D RPG maps . 
 = Military history of Puerto Rico = 
 The recorded military history of Puerto Rico encompasses the period from the 16th century , when Spanish conquistadores battled native Taínos in the rebellion of 1511 , to the present employment of Puerto Ricans in the United States Armed Forces in the military campaigns in Afghanistan and Iraq . 
 Puerto Rico was part of the Spanish Empire for four centuries , when the Puerto Ricans defended themselves against invasions from the British , French , and Dutch . They fought alongside General Bernardo de Gálvez during the American Revolutionary War in the battles of Baton Rouge , Mobile , Pensacola and St. Louis . During the mid @-@ 19th century , Puerto Ricans residing in the United States fought in the American Civil War . 
 The quest for Latin American independence from Spain spread to Puerto Rico , in the short lived revolution known as the Grito de Lares and culminating with the Intentona de Yauco . The island was invaded by the United States during the Spanish – American War . After the war ended , Spain officially ceded the island to the United States under the terms established in the Treaty of Paris of 1898 . Puerto Rico became a United States territory and the " Porto Rico Regiment " ( Puerto Rico 's name was changed to Porto Rico ) was established on the island . 
 Upon the outbreak of World War I , the U.S. Congress approved the Jones – Shafroth Act , which extended United States citizenship ( the Puerto Rican House of Delegates rejected US citizenship ) with limitations upon Puerto Ricans and made them eligible for the military draft . As citizens of the United States , Puerto Ricans have participated in every major United States military engagement from World War I onward . During World War II , Puerto Ricans participated in the Pacific and Atlantic theaters , not only as combatants , but also as commanders . It was during this conflict that Puerto Rican nurses were allowed to participate as members of the WAACs . The members of Puerto Rico 's 65th Infantry Regiment distinguished themselves in combat during the Korean War and were honored with the Congressional Gold Medal . During the Vietnam War five Puerto Ricans were awarded the Medal of Honor , the highest military honor in the United States . Presently Puerto Ricans continue to serve in the military of the United States . The following is brief history of the military events in which Puerto Ricans have participated . 
 = = Taíno rebellion of 1511 = = 
 Christopher Columbus arrived in the island of Puerto Rico on November 19 , 1493 , during his second voyage to the so @-@ called " New World " . The island was inhabited by the Arawak group of indigenous peoples known as Tainos , who called the island " <unk> " or " Borinquen " . The Tainos were known as a peaceful people , however they were also warriors and often fought against the Caribs , who in more than one occasion attempt to invade the island . Columbus named the island San Juan Bautista in honor of Saint John the Baptist . The main port was named Puerto Rico ( Rich Port ) ( eventually the island was renamed Puerto Rico and the port which was to evolve into the capital of the island was renamed San Juan ) . The conquistador Juan Ponce de León accompanied Columbus on this trip . 
 When Ponce de León arrived in Puerto Rico , he was well received by the Cacique ( Tribal chief ) Agüeybaná ( The Great Sun ) , chieftain of the island Taino tribes . Besides the conquistadors , some of the first colonists were farmers and miners in search of gold . In 1508 , Ponce de León became the first appointed governor of Puerto Rico , founding the first settlement of <unk> between the modern @-@ day cities of Bayamón and San Juan . After being named Governor , de León and the conquistadors forced the Tainos to work in the mines and to build fortifications ; many Tainos died as a result of cruel treatment during their labor . In 1510 , upon Agüeybaná 's death , his brother <unk> , better known as Agüeybaná II ( The Brave ) , and a group of Tainos led Diego Salcedo , a Spaniard , to a river and drowned him , proving to his people that the white men were not gods . Upon realizing this , Agüeybaná II led his people in the Taino rebellion of 1511 , the first rebellion in the island against the better armed Spanish forces . <unk> , cacique of Utuado , attacked the village of Sotomayor ( present day Aguada ) and killed eighty of its inhabitants . Cacique <unk> died during the attack which was considered a Taino victory . 
 After the Taino victory the colonists formed a citizens ' militia to defend themselves against the attacks . Juan Ponce de León and one of his top commanders , Diego de Salazar led the Spaniards in a series of offensives which included a massacre of the Taino forces in the domain of Agüeybaná II . The Spanish offensive culminated in the Battle of <unk> against Cacique <unk> . Agüeybaná II was shot and killed , ending the first recorded military action in Puerto Rico . After the failed rebellion , the Tainos were forced to give up their customs and traditions by order of a Royal decree , approved by King Ferdinand II , which required that they adopt and practice the values , religion and language of their conquerors . 
 According to the " <unk> Florida Discovery Council Round Table " , on March 3 , 1513 , Juan Ponce de León , organized and commenced an expedition ( with a Crew of 200 @-@ including Women and Free Blacks ) departing from " Punta Aguada " Puerto Rico . Puerto Rico was the historic 1st gateway to the discovery of Florida which opened the doors to the advanced settlement of the USA . They introduced Christianity , Cattle , Horses , Sheep , the Spanish language and more to the land ( Florida ) that later became the United States of America , 107 years before the Pilgrims landed . 
 = = Europeans fight over Puerto Rico = = 
 = = = 16th Century = = = 
 Puerto Rico was considered the " Key to the Antilles " by the Spanish because of its location as a way station and port for Spanish vessels . In 1540 , with revenue from Mexican mines , the Spanish settlers began the construction of Fort San Felipe del Morro ( " the promontory " ) in San Juan . With the completion of the initial phase of the construction in 1589 El Morro became the island 's main military fortification , guarded by professional soldiers . The rest of Puerto Rico , which had been reorganized in 1580 as a captaincy general , had to rely on only a handful of soldiers and the local volunteer militia to defend the island against militant and pirate attacks . 
 The main enemies of Spain at the time were the English and the Dutch . They , however were not the only enemies that Spain faced in the Caribbean during this period . On October 11 , 1528 , the French sacked and burned the settlement of San Germán during an attempt to capture the island , destroying many of the island 's first settlements — including Guánica , Sotomayor , <unk> and Loiza — before the local militia forced them to retreat . The only settlement that remained was San Juan . 
 In 1585 , war broke out between England and Spain . The Anglo @-@ Spanish War was not limited to Europe — extending to Spanish and English territories in the Americas . In November 1595 , Sir Francis Drake , the vice @-@ admiral in command of the Royal Navy fleet that tackled the Spanish Armada , and Sir John Hawkins attempted an unsuccessful invasion of San Juan . Both Hawkins and Drake died of illness in the course of the campaign . On June 15 , 1598 , the English fleet , led by George Clifford , landed in Santurce and held the island for several months . He was forced to abandon the island upon an outbreak of bacillary dysentery among his troops . In 1599 , 400 additional soldiers and 46 cannons were sent to the island along with a new governor , Alonso de Mercado , to rebuild the city . 
 = = = 17th century = = = 
 The Netherlands was a world military and commercial power by 1625 , competing in the Caribbean with the English . The Dutch wanted to establish a military stronghold in the area , and dispatched Captain Boudewijn <unk> ( also <unk> Henrico or <unk> Enrico ) to capture Puerto Rico . On September 24 , 1625 , Enrico arrived at the coast of San Juan with 17 ships and 2 @,@ 000 men . Enrico sent a message to the governor of Puerto Rico , Juan de <unk> , ordering him to surrender the island . De <unk> refused ; he was an experienced military man and expected an attack in the section known as <unk> . He therefore had that area fortified . However , the Dutch took another route and landed in La Puntilla . 
 De Haro realized that an invasion was inevitable and ordered Captain Juan de Amezquita and 300 men to defend the island from El Morro Castle and then had the city of San Juan evacuated . He also had former governor Juan de Vargas organize an armed resistance in the interior of the island . On September 25 , Enrico attacked San Juan , besieging El Morro Castle and La Fortaleza ( the Governor 's Mansion ) . He invaded the capital city and set up his headquarters in La Fortaleza . The Dutch were counterattacked by the civilian militia on land and by the cannons of the Spanish troops in El Morro Castle . The land battle left 60 Dutch soldiers dead and Enrico with a sword wound to his neck which he received from the hands of Amezquita . The Dutch ships at sea were boarded by Puerto Ricans , who defeated those aboard . After a long battle , the Spanish soldiers and volunteers of the city 's militia were able to defend the city from the attack and save the island from an invasion . On October 21 , Enrico set La Fortaleza and the city ablaze . Captains Amezquita and Andre <unk> decided to put a stop to the destruction and led 200 men in an attack against the enemy 's front and rear guard . They drove Enrico and his men from their trenches and into the ocean in their haste to reach their ships . Enrico upon his retreat left behind him one of his largest ships , stranded , and over 400 dead . He then tried to invade the island by attacking the town of Aguada . He was again defeated by the local militia and abandoned the idea of invading Puerto Rico . 
 In 1693 , the <unk> <unk> de Puerto Rico were organized in almost every town . Every native male , ages 16 to 60 , was obliged to serve in these companies , unless he had an official exemption on account of physical disability or family hardship . 
 While Spain and England were in a power struggle in the New World , Puerto Rican privateering of English ships was encouraged by the Spanish Crown . Captain Miguel Enríquez and Captain Roberto Cofresí ( in the 19th century ) were two of the most famous . In the first half of the 18th century , Henriquez , a shoemaker by occupation , decided to try his luck as a privateer . He showed great valor in intercepting English merchant ships and other ships dedicated to contraband that were infesting the seas of Puerto Rico and the Atlantic Ocean in general . Henriquez organized an expeditionary force which fought and defeated the English in the island of Vieques . He was received as a national hero when he returned the island of Vieques to the Spanish Empire and to the governorship of Puerto Rico . In recognition of his service , the Spanish Crown awarded Henriquez the Medalla de Oro de la Real <unk> ( The Gold Medal of the Royal Effigy ) , named him " Captain of the Seas and War " , and gave him a letter of marque and reprisal , thus granting him the privileges of privateer . 
 = = = 18th century = = = 
 = = = = Armed conflicts with the British = = = = 
 The English continued their attacks against Spanish colonies in the Caribbean , taking minor islands including Vieques east of Puerto Rico . On August 5 , 1702 , the city of Arecibo , on Puerto Rico 's northern coast , was invaded by the British . Armed only with spears and machetes , under the command of Captain Antonio de los Reyes Correa , 30 militia members defended the city from the English , who were armed with muskets and swords . The British were defeated , suffering 22 losses on land and 8 at sea . Reyes Correa was declared a national hero and was awarded the Medalla de Oro de la Real <unk> ( " Gold Medal of the Royal Image " ) and the title of " Captain of Infantry " by King Philip V. 
 Native @-@ born Puerto Rican ( criollos ) had petitioned the Spanish Crown to serve in the regular Spanish army , resulting in the 1741 organization of the Regimiento Fijo de Puerto Rico . The Fijo served in the defense of Puerto Rico and other Spanish overseas possessions , performing in battles in Santo Domingo , other islands in the Caribbean , and South America , most notably in Venezuela . However , Puerto Rican complaints that the Fijo was being used to suppress the revolution in Venezuela caused the Crown to bring the Fijo home and in 1815 it was mustered out of service . 
 In 1765 , the Spanish Crown sent Field Marshal Alejandro O 'Reilly to Puerto Rico to form an organized militia . O 'Reilly , known as the " Father of the Puerto Rican Militia " , oversaw training to bring fame and glory to the militia in future military engagements , nicknaming the civilian militia the " <unk> Militia . " O 'Reilly was later appointed governor of colonial Louisiana in 1769 and became known as " Bloody O 'Reilly . " 
 = = = = The American Revolutionary War = = = = 
 During the American Revolutionary War , Spain lent the rebelling colonists the use of its ports in Puerto Rico , through which flowed financial aid and arms for their cause . An incident occurred in the coast of Mayagüez , in 1777 , between two Continental Navy ships , the <unk> and the Henry , and a Royal Navy warship , HMS Glasgow . Both American ships were chased by the larger and more powerful Glasgow . The American colonial ships were close to the coast of Mayagüez ; members of the Puerto Rican militia of that town , realizing that something was wrong , signaled for the ships to dock at the town 's bay . After the ships docked , the crews of both ships got off and some <unk> boarded and raised the Spanish flag on both ships . The commander of the Glasgow became aware of the situation and asked the island 's governor , Jose Dufresne to turn over the ships . Dufresne refused and ordered the British warship out of the Puerto Rican dock . 
 The governor of Louisiana , Bernardo de Gálvez , was named Field Marshal of the Spanish colonial army in North America . In 1779 , Galvez and his troops , composed of Puerto Ricans and people from other Spanish colonies , distracted the British from the revolution by capturing Pensacola , the capital of the British colony of West Florida and the cities of Baton Rouge , St. Louis and Mobile . The Puerto Rican troops , under the leadership of Brigadier General Ramón de Castro , helped defeat the British and Indian army of 2 @,@ 500 soldiers and British warships in Pensacola . Galvez and his multinational army also provided the Continental Army with guns , cloth , gunpowder and medicine shipped from Cuba up the Mississippi River . General Ramón de Castro , who was Galvez 's Aide @-@ de @-@ camp in the Mobile and Pensacola campaigns , became the appointed governor of Puerto Rico in 1795 . 
 = = = = Sir Ralph Abercromby attacks Puerto Rico = = = = 
 On February 17 , 1797 , the governor of Puerto Rico Brigadier General Ramón de Castro , received news that Great Britain had invaded the island of Trinidad . Believing that Puerto Rico would be the next British objective he decided to put the local militia on alert and to prepare the island 's forts against any military action . On April 17 , 1797 , British ships under the command of Sir Ralph Abercromby approached the coastal town of Loíza , to the east of San Juan . On April 18 , British soldiers and German mercenaries ( " Hessians " ) landed on Loíza 's beach . Under the command of de Castro , British ships were shot at by artillery from both El Morro and the San Gerónimo fortresses but were beyond reach . After the invaders disembarked practically all fighting was land based with many skirmishes , field artillery and mortar fire exchanges between the San Gerónimo and San Antonio Bridge fortress and British emplacements in Condado to the East and El <unk> hill in Miramar to the South . The British tried to take the San Antonio , a key passage to the San Juan islet , and repeatedly bombarded the nearby San Gerónimo to the tune of nearly one thousand shells and almost demolishing it . At the Martín Peña Bridge , they were met by the likes of Sergeants José and Francisco Díaz and Colonel Rafael Conti who together with Lieutenant Lucas de Fuentes attacked the enemy with two cannons . After fiercely fighting by the Spanish forces and local militia , they were defeated in all attempts to advance into San Juan . The invasion failed because Puerto Rican volunteers and Spanish troops fought back and defended the island in a manner described by a British lieutenant as of " astonishing bravery " . 
 = = = = " La Rogativa " folklore = = = = 
 The defense of San Juan served as the base for the legend of " La Rogativa " . According to the popular Puerto Rican legend , on the night of April 30 , 1797 , the <unk> , led by a bishop , formed a <unk> ( prayer procession ) and marched throughout the streets of the city singing hymns and carrying torches while at the same time praying for the deliverance of the city . Outside the walls , the invaders mistook the torch @-@ lit movement for the arrival of Spanish reinforcements . When morning came , the enemy was gone from the island and the city was saved from a possible invasion . Four statues , sculptured by Lindsay <unk> in the <unk> de la Rogativa ( Rogativa Plaza ) in Old San Juan , pay tribute to the bishop and <unk> who participated in La Rogativa . 
 = = = = Attack of Aguadilla = = = = 
 The British also attacked Aguadilla and Punta Salinas . They were defeated by Colonel Conti and the members of the militia in Aguadilla , and the British troops that had landed on the island were taken prisoner . The British retreated on April 30 to their ships and on May 2 set sail northward . Because of the defeat given to the British forces , governor Ramon de Castro petitioned Spanish King Charles IV for recognition for the victors ; he was promoted to Field Marshal and several others were promoted and given pay raises . The British persisted in invading Puerto Rico , after Abercromby 's defeat , with unsuccessful skirmishes on the coastal towns of Aguadilla ( December 1797 ) , Ponce , Cabo Rojo , and Mayagüez . This continued to occur until 1802 when the war finally came to an end . 
 = = = 19th century = = = 
 France had threatened to invade the Spanish colony of Santo Domingo . In 1808 , the Spanish Crown sent their Navy , under the command of Puerto Rican Captain Ramón Power y <unk> , to prevent the invasion of Santo Domingo by the French by enforcing a blockade . Col. Rafael Conti organized a military expedition with the intention of defending the Dominican Republic . They were successful and were proclaimed as heroes by the Spanish Government . 
 = = = American Civil War = = = 
 During the 1800s , commerce existed between the ports of the eastern coast of the United States and Puerto Rico . Ship records show that many Puerto Ricans traveled on ships that sailed to and from the U.S. and Puerto Rico . Many of them settled in places such as New York , Connecticut and Massachusetts . Upon the outbreak of the American Civil War , many Puerto Ricans joined the ranks of the United States military armed forces , however since Puerto Ricans were Spanish subjects they were inscribed as Spaniards . The 1860 census of New Haven , Connecticut , shows there were 10 Puerto Ricans living there . Among of them was Augusto Rodriguez who joined the 15th Connecticut Regiment ( a.k.a. Lyon Regiment ) in 1862 . During the Civil War , Rodriguez , who reached the rank of Lieutenant , served in the defenses of Washington , D.C .. He also led his men in the Battles of Fredericksburg and Wyse Fork . The regiment was mustered out on June 27 , 1865 and he was discharged in New Haven on July 12 , 1865 . 
 = = = Slave revolts = = = 
 Up until 1873 , when slavery was abolished in Puerto Rico , the wealth amassed by many landowners in Puerto Rico derived mainly from the exploitation of slaves . But slavery generated its antithesis — disobedience , uprisings and flights . 
 In Puerto Rico there were many minor slave revolts in which the slaves clashed with the military establishment . In July 1821 , Marcos Xiorro , a <unk> slave , planned and organized a conspiracy against the slave masters and the colonial government of Puerto Rico . According to his plot , which was to be carried out on July 27 , during the festival celebrations for Santiago ( St. James ) , several slaves were to escape from various plantations in Bayamón , which included the haciendas of Angus McBean , C. <unk> , Miguel Andino and Fernando Fernández . They were then to proceed to the sugarcane fields of Miguel Figueres , and retrieve cutlasses and swords which were hidden in those fields . Xiorro , together with a slave from the McBean plantation named Mario and another slave named Narciso , would lead the slaves of Bayamón and Toa Baja and capture the city of Bayamón . They would then burn the city and kill those who were not black . After this , they would all unite with slaves from the adjoining towns of Río Piedras , Guaynabo and Palo Seco . With this critical mass of slaves , all armed and emboldened from a series of quick victories , they would then invade the capital city of San Juan , where they would declare Xiorro as their king . Unfortunately for the slave conspirators , the plot was divulged by a fellow slave to the authorities . 
 The mayor of Bayamón mobilized 500 soldiers . The ringleaders and followers of the conspiracy were captured immediately . A total of 61 slaves were imprisoned in Bayamón and San Juan . The ringleaders were executed and the fate of Xiorro remains a mystery . There were other minor revolts up until the abolition of slavery in the island became official . 
 = = Revolt against Spain = = 
 = = = South America = = = 
 In 1822 , there was an attempt , known as the Ducoudray Holstein Expedition , conceived , carefully planned and organized by General Henri La Fayette <unk> Ducoudray Holstein to invade Puerto Rico and declare it a republic . 
 This invasion was different from all its precursors since none before had intended to make Puerto Rico an independent nation , and use the Taino name " Boricua " as the official name of the republic , it was also intended more as a mercantile venture than a patriotic endeavor . It was the first time an invasion intended to make the city of Mayagüez the capital of the island . However , plans of the invasion were soon disclosed to the Spanish authorities and the plot never materialized . 
 = = = = United Provinces of New Granada = = = = 
 In the early 19th century the Spanish colonies , in what is known as the Latin American wars of independence , began to revolt against Spanish rule . Antonio Valero de Bernabé was a Puerto Rican military leader known in Latin America as the " Liberator from Puerto Rico " . Valero was a recent graduate of the Spanish Military Academy when Napoleon Bonaparte convinced King Charles IV of Spain to permit him to pass through Spanish soil with the sole purpose of attacking Portugal . When Napoleon refused to leave , the Spanish government declared war . Valero joined the Spanish Army and helped defeat Napoleon 's army at the Siege of Saragossa . Valero became a hero ; he was promoted to the rank of colonel and was awarded many decorations . 
 When Ferdinand VII assumed the throne of Spain in 1813 , Valero became critical of the new king 's policies towards the Spanish colonies in Latin America . He developed a keen hatred of the monarchy , resigned his commission in the army , and headed for Mexico . There he joined the insurgent army headed by Agustín de Iturbide , in which Valero was named chief of staff . He fought for and helped achieve Mexico 's independence from Spain . After the Mexican victory , Iturbide proclaimed himself Emperor of Mexico . Since Valero had developed anti @-@ monarchist feelings following his experiences in Spain , he revolted against Iturbide . His revolt failed and he attempted to escape from Mexico by way of sea . 
 Valero was captured by a Spanish pirate , who turned him over to the Spanish authorities in Cuba . Valero was imprisoned but managed to escape with the help of a group of men that identified with Simón Bolívar 's ideals . Upon learning of Bolívar 's dream of creating a unified Latin America , including Puerto Rico and Cuba , Valero decided to join him . Valero stopped in St. Thomas , where he established contacts with the Puerto Rican independence movement . 
 He then traveled to Venezuela , where he was met by General Francisco de Paula Santander . He next joined Bolívar and fought alongside " The Liberator " against Spain , gaining his confidence and admiration . Valero was named Military Chief of the Department of Panama , Governor of Puerto Cabello , Chief of Staff of Colombia , Minister of War and Maritime of Venezuela , and in 1849 was promoted to the rank of Brigadier General . 
 The meetings of the Puerto Rican Independence movement which met in St. Thomas were discovered by the Spanish authorities and the members of the movement were either imprisoned or exiled . In a letter dated October 1 , 1824 , which Venezuelan rebel leader José María Rojas sent to María de las Mercedes Barbudo , Rojas stated that the Venezuelan rebels had lost their principal contact with the Puerto Rican Independence movement in the Danish island of Saint Thomas and therefore the secret communication which existed between the Venezuelan rebels and the leaders of the Puerto Rican independence movements was in danger of being discovered . 
 Mercedes Barbudo , also known as the " first Puerto Rican female freedom fighter " , was a businesswoman who became a follower of the independence ideal for Puerto Rico upon learning that Bolivar dreamed of eventually engendering an American Revolution @-@ style federation , that would be known as the United Provinces of New Granada , between all the newly independent republics , with a government ideally set @-@ up solely to recognize and uphold individual rights . She was involved with the Puerto Rican Independence Movement which had ties with the Venezuelan rebels led by Simón Bolívar and who were against Spanish colonial rule in Puerto Rico . 
 Unknown to Mercedes Barbudo , the Spanish authorities in Puerto Rico under Governor Miguel de la Torre , were suspicious of the correspondence between her and the rebel factions of Venezuela . Secret agents of the Spanish Government had retained some of her mail and delivered it to Governor de la Torre . He ordered an investigation and had her mail confiscated . The Government believed that the correspondence served as propaganda of the Bolivian ideals and that it would also serve to motivate Puerto Ricans to seek their independence . Governor Miguel de la Torre ordered her arrest on the charge that she planned to overthrow the Spanish Government in Puerto Rico . Since Puerto Rico did not have a women 's prison she was held without bail at the Castillo San Cristóbal . Among the evidence which the Spanish authorities presented against her was Rojas letter . She was exiled to Cuba where she was able to escape and make her way to Venezuela where she spent her final days . 
 = = = Puerto Rico = = = 
 The Spanish government had received many complaints from the nations whose ships were attacked by Puerto Rican pirate Captain Roberto Cofresí . Cofresí and his men had attacked eight ships , amongst them an American ship . The Spanish government , which routinely encouraged piracy against other nations , was pressured and felt obliged to pursue and capture the famous pirate . In 1824 , Captain John <unk> of the U.S. Naval Forces and his schooner USS Grampus engaged Cofresí in a fierce battle . The pirate Cofresí was captured , along with eleven of his crew members , and turned over to the Spanish Government . He was imprisoned in El Castillo del Morro in San Juan . <unk> was judged by a Spanish Council of War , found guilty , and executed by firing squad on March 29 , 1825 . 
 On April 13 , 1855 , a mutiny broke out among the artillerymen at Fort San Cristóbal . They were protesting an extended two years of military service imposed by the island 's Spanish governor , Garcia <unk> . The mutineers pointed their cannons towards San Juan , creating a state of panic among the population . Upon their surrender , the governor had the eight men arrested and sentenced to death by firing squad . 
 = = = = Grito de Lares = = = = 
 Many Spanish colonies had gained their independence by the mid @-@ 1850s . In Puerto Rico , there were two groups : the loyalists , who were loyal to Spain , and the <unk> , who advocated independence . In 1866 , Dr. Ramón Emeterio Betances , Segundo Ruiz Belvis , and other independence advocates met in New York City where they founded the Revolutionary Committee of Puerto Rico . An outcome of this venture was a plan to send an armed expedition from the Dominican Republic to invade the island . Several revolutionary cells were formed in the western towns and cities of Puerto Rico . Two of the most important cells were at Mayagüez , led by Mathias Brugman and code named " Capa Prieto " and at Lares , code @-@ named " Centro Bravo " and headed by Manuel Rojas . " Centro Bravo " was the main center of operations and was located in the Rojas plantation of El Triunfo . Manuel Rojas was named " Commander of the Liberation Army " by Betances . Mariana Bracetti ( sister @-@ in @-@ law of Manuel ) was named " Leader of the Lares Revolutionary Council . " Upon the request of Betances , Bracetti knitted the first flag of Puerto Rico also known as the revolutionary Flag of Lares ( Bandera de Lares ) . 
 The Spanish authorities discovered the plot and were able to confiscate Betances 's armed ship before it arrived in Puerto Rico . The Mayor of the town of Camuy , Manuel González ( leader of that town 's revolutionary cell ) , was arrested and charged with treason . He learned that the Spanish Army was aware of the independence plot , and escaped to warn Manuel Rojas . Alerted , the revolutionists decided to start the revolution as soon as possible , and set the date for September 28 , 1868 . Mathias Brugman and his men joined with Manuel Rojas 's men and with about 800 men and women , marched on and took the town of Lares . This was to be known as " Grito de Lares " ( The Cry of Lares ) The revolutionists entered the town 's church and placed Mariana Bracetti 's revolutionary flag on the High Altar as a sign that the revolution had begun . They declared Puerto Rico to be the " Republic of Puerto Rico " and named Francisco Ramírez its President . Manuel and his poorly armed followers proceeded to march on to the town of San Sebastián , armed only with clubs and machetes . The Spanish Army had been forewarned , and awaited with superior firepower . The revolutionists were met with deadly fire . The revolt failed , many revolutionists were killed , and at least 475 , including Manuel Rojas and Mariana Bracetti , were imprisoned in the jail of Arecibo and sentenced to death . 
 Others fled and went into hiding . Mathias Brugman was hiding in a local farm where he was betrayed by a farmer named Francisco Quiñones ; he was captured and executed on the spot . In 1869 , fearing another revolt , the Spanish Crown disbanded the Puerto Rican Militia , which had been composed almost entirely of native @-@ born Puerto Ricans , and also the Compañia de <unk> Morenos de <unk> , a separate company of black Puerto Ricans . They then organized the Volunteer Institute , composed entirely of Spaniards and their sons . 
 = = = = Intentona de Yauco = = = = 
 Leaders of El Grito de Lares who were in exile in New York City joined the Puerto Rican Revolutionary Committee , founded on December 8 , 1895 to continue the quest for independence . In 1897 , with the aid of Antonio Mattei <unk> and Fidel Velez , the local leaders of the independence movement of the town of Yauco , they organized another uprising , which became known as the Intentona de Yauco . On March 26 , 1897 , there was a second and last major attempt to overthrow the Spanish government . The local conservative political factions , which believed that such an attempt would be a threat to their struggle for autonomy , opposed such an action . Rumors of the planned event spread to the local Spanish authorities , who acted swiftly and put an end to what would be the last major uprising in the island to Spanish colonial rule . 
 = = = Cuba = = = 
 In 1869 , the incoming governor of Puerto Rico , Jose Laureano Sanz , in an effort to ease tensions in the island , dictated a general amnesty and released all who were involved with the Grito de Lares revolt from prison . Both Mariana Bracetti and Manuel Rojas were released . Bracetti lived her <unk> years in the town of Añasco , while Rojas was deported to Venezuela . Many of the former prisoners joined the Cuban Liberation Army and fought against Spain . Among the many Puerto Ricans who volunteered to fight for Cuba 's independence were Juan Ríus Rivera , Francisco Gonzalo Marín , also known as " <unk> Marín " and José Semidei Rodríguez . 
 Juan Ríus Rivera as a young man met and befriended Betances , and was joined the pro @-@ independence movement in the island . He became a member of the Mayagüez revolutionary cell " <unk> Prieto " under the command of Brugman . Ríus , did not participated directly in the revolt because at the time he was studying law in Spain , however he was an avid reader about information pertaining to the Antilles and learned about the failed revolt . He interrupted his studies and traveled to the United States where he went to the Cuba Revolutionary " Junta " and offered his services . He joined the Cuban Liberation Army and was given the rank of General . He fought alongside Gen. Máximo Gómez in Cuba 's Ten Years ' War . He later fought alongside Gen. Antonio Maceo <unk> and upon Maceo 's death was named Commander @-@ in @-@ Chief of the Cuban Liberation Army . After Cuba gained its independence , Gen. Juan Ríus Rivera became an active political figure in the new nation . 
 Francisco Gonzalo Marín was a poet and journalist in Puerto Rico who joined the Cuban Liberation Army upon learning of the death of his brother <unk> in the battlefields of Cuba . Marin , who was given the rank of Lieutenant , befriended and fought alongside José Martí . In November 1897 Lt. Marin died from the wounds he received in a skirmish against the Spanish Army . 
 José Semidei Rodríguez from Yauco , Puerto Rico , fought in various battles in the Cuban War of Independence ( 1895 – 98 ) . After Cuba gained its independence he joined the Cuban National Army with the rank of Brigadier General . Semidei Rodríguez continued to serve in Cuba as a diplomat upon his retirement from the military . 
 = = Spanish – American War = = 
 In 1890 , Captain Alfred <unk> Mahan , a member of the Navy War Board and leading U.S. strategic thinker , wrote a book titled The Influence of Sea Power upon History in which he argued for the creation of a large and powerful navy modeled after the British Royal Navy . Part of his strategy called for the acquisition of colonies in the Caribbean Sea which would serve as coaling and naval stations and which would serve as strategical points of defense upon the construction of a canal in the Isthmus . 
 This was not new , since William H. Stewart , the former Secretary of State under the administrations of various presidents , among them Abraham Lincoln and Ulysses Grant , had stressed that a canal be built either in Honduras , Nicaragua or Panama and that the United States annex the Dominican Republic and purchase Puerto Rico and Cuba . The idea of annexing the Dominican Republic failed to receive the approval of the U.S. Senate and Spain did not accept the 160 million dollars which the U.S. offered for Puerto Rico and Cuba . 
 Captain Mahan made the following statement to the War Department : 
 Since 1894 , the Naval War College had been formulating plans for war with Spain . By 1896 , the Office of Naval Intelligence had prepared a plan which including military operations in Puerto Rican waters . Not only was Puerto Rico considered a valuable as a naval station , Puerto Rico and Cuba were also abundant in valuable commercial commodity which the United States lacked , that commodity was sugar . 
 The United States declared war on Spain in 1898 following the sinking of the battleship USS Maine in Havana harbor , Cuba . One of the United States ' principal objectives in the Spanish – American War was to take control of Spanish possessions Puerto Rico and Cuba in the Atlantic , and the Philippines and Guam in the Pacific . 
 The Spanish Crown sent the 1st , 2nd and 3rd Puerto Rican Provisional Battalions to defend Cuba against the American invaders . The 1st Puerto Rican Provisional Battalion , composed of the Talavera Cavalry and Krupp artillery , was sent to Santiago de Cuba where they battled the American forces in the Battle of San Juan Hill . After the battle , the Puerto Rican Battalion suffered a total of 70 % casualties which included their dead , wounded , MIA 's and prisoners . 
 The invasion of Puerto Rico by the American military forces was known as the Puerto Rican Campaign . On May 10 , 1898 , Spanish forces , under the command of Captain Ángel Rivero Méndez in the fortress of San Cristóbal in San Juan , exchanged fire with the USS Yale , and on May 12 a fleet of 12 American ships bombarded San Juan . On June 25 , the USS Yosemite arrived in San Juan and blockaded the port . Captains Ramón Acha Caamaño and José Antonio Iriarte , both natives of Puerto Rico , were among those who defended the city form Fort San Felipe del Morro . They had 3 Batteries under their command , which were armed with at least three 15 cm Ordóñez cannons . The battle lasted 3 hours and resulted in the death of Justo <unk> , the first Puerto Rican soldier to die in the Puerto Rican Campaign . 
 On July 25 , General Nelson A. Miles entered the southern town of Guánica with 3 @,@ 300 troops and faced a minor skirmish in their landing . 
 One of the most notable battles during the Puerto Rico Campaign occurred between the Spanish forces and Puerto Rican volunteers , led by Captain Salvador Meca and Lieutenant Colonel Francisco Puig against the American forces led by Brigadier General George A. Garretson on July 26 , 1898 . The Spanish forces engaged the 6th Massachusetts in a firefight in what became known as the Battle of Yauco . Puig and his forces suffered 2 officers and 3 soldiers wounded and 2 soldiers dead . The Spanish forces were ordered to retreat . 
 The Puerto Rican Campaign was short compared to the other campaigns because the Puerto Ricans who resided in the southern and western towns and villages resented Spanish rule and tended to view the Americans as their liberators , thereby making the invasion much easier and because , as stated before , the 1st , 2nd and 3rd Puerto Rican Provisional Battalions where in Cuba defending that island . However , the Americans met resistance from the Spanish forces and Puerto Rican Volunteers and were engaged in the following battles : Battle of Fajardo , Battle of Guayama , Battle of the <unk> River Bridge , Battle of Coamo , Battle of Silva Heights and Battle of Asomante . On August 13 , 1898 , the Spanish – American War ended and the Spanish surrendered without other major incidents . Some Puerto Rican leaders such as José de Diego and Eugenio María de Hostos expected the United States to grant the island its independence . Believing that Puerto Rico would gain its independence , a group of men staged an uprising in Ciales which became known as " El <unk> de Ciales " or the " Ciales Uprising of 1898 " and proclaimed Puerto Rico to be a republic . The Spanish authorities who were unaware that the cease fire had been signed brutally suppressed the uprising The total casualties of the Puerto Rican Campaign were 450 dead or wounded Spanish and Puerto Ricans , and 4 dead and 39 wounded Americans . 
 Upon the signing of the Treaty of Paris on December 10 , Puerto Rico became a territory of the United States . The Spanish troops had already left by October 18 , and the United States named General Nelson A. Miles military governor of the island . On July 1 , 1899 , " The Porto Rico Regiment of Infantry , United States Army " was created , and approved by the U.S. Congress on May 27 , 1908 . The regiment was a segregated , all @-@ volunteer unit made up of 1 @,@ 969 Puerto Ricans . 
 = = = Puerto Rican commander in the Philippines = = = 
 In 1897 , before the onset of fighting in Puerto Rico , Juan Alonso Zayas , born in San Juan , was a Second Lieutenant in the Spanish Army when he received orders to head for the Philippines to take command of the 2nd Expeditionary Battalion stationed in Baler . He arrived in Manila , the capital , in May 1897 . There he took a vessel and headed for Baler , on the island of Luzon . The distance between Manila and Baler is 62 miles ( 100 km ) ; if traveled through the jungles and badly built roads , the actual distance was 144 miles ( 230 km ) . At that time a system of communication between Manila and Baler was almost non @-@ existent . The only way Baler received news from Manila was by way of vessels . The Spanish colonial government was under constant attack from local Filipino groups who wanted independence . Zayas 's mission was to fortify Baler against any possible attack . Among his plans for the defense of Baler was to convert the local church of San Luis de Tolosa into a fort . 
 The independence advocates , under the leadership of Colonel Calixto <unk> , were called " insurgents " ( <unk> ) by the Spanish crown . On June 28 , 1898 , they demanded the surrender of the Spanish army . The Spanish governor of the region , Enrique de las Morena y <unk> , refused ; the Filipinos immediately attacked Baler in a battle that was to last for seven months . Despite being outnumbered and suffering hunger and disease , the battalion did not capitulate . In the meantime , Zayas and the rest of the battalion were totally unaware of the Spanish – American War that was going on . In August 1898 , the hostilities between the United States and Spain came to an end . The Philippines became a U.S. possession under the accordance of the Treaty of Paris . In May 1899 , the Battalion at Baler found out about the Spanish – American War and its aftermath . They had been unaware that they had been fighting for a possession which was no longer theirs to fight for . On June 2 , 1899 the Battalion 's commander , Lieutenant Martín Cerezo surrendered to the <unk> only after some conditions were met . Among the conditions were the following : 
 1 . That the Spaniards not be treated as prisoners of war and 
 2 @.@ that they would not be harmed in their quest of reaching a Spanish ship which would take them back to Spain . 
 The 32 survivors of Zayas Battalion were sent to Manila , where they boarded a ship for Spain . In Spain , they were given a hero 's welcome and became known as los <unk> de Baler — " the Last of Baler . " 
 = = Porto Rico Provisional Regiment of Infantry = = 
 On March 2 , 1898 , Congress authorized the creation of the first body of native troops in Puerto Rico . On June 30 , 1901 , the " Porto Rico Provisional Regiment of Infantry came into being . An Act of Congress , approved on May 27 , 1908 , reorganized the regiment as part of the " regular " Army . Since the native Puerto Rican officers where Puerto Rican citizens and not citizens of the United States , they were required to undergo a new physical examination to determine their fitness for commissions in the Regular Army and to take an oath of U.S. citizenship with their new officers oath . 
 = = Puerto Rican National Guard = = 
 In 1906 , a group of Puerto Ricans met with the appointed Governor Winthrop , and suggested the organization of a Puerto Rican National Guard . The petition failed because the U.S. Constitution prohibits the formation of any armed force within the United States and its territories without the authorization of Congress . 
 On June 19 , 1915 , Major General Luis R. Esteves of the U.S. Army became the first Puerto Rican and the first Hispanic to graduate from the United States Military Academy at West Point , New York . While he attended West Point , he tutored classmate Dwight D. Eisenhower in Spanish ; a second language was required in order to graduate . He was a Second Lieutenant in the 8th Infantry Brigade of the army under the command of John J. Pershing when he was sent to El Paso , Texas in the Pancho Villa Expedition . From El Paso , he was sent to the town of <unk> , where he was appointed mayor and judge by its citizens . Esteves helped organize the 23rd Battalion , which would be composed of Puerto Ricans and be stationed in Panama during World War I. He would also play a key role in the formation of the Puerto Rico National Guard . 
 = = World Wars = = 
 = = = World War I = = = 
 In 1904 , Camp Las Casas was established in Santurce under the command of Lt. Colonel Orval P. Townshend . The Porto Rico Regiment was assigned to the camp . The regiment consisted of two battalions of the former Porto Rico Provisional Regiment of Infantry . 
 = = = = U.S. first shot of World War I fired in Puerto Rico = = = = 
 Lieutenant Teófilo Marxuach was the officer of the day at El Morro Castle on March 21 , 1915 . The Odenwald , built in 1903 ( not to be confused with the German World War II war ship which carried the same name ) , was an armed German supply ship which tried to force its way out of the San Juan Bay and deliver supplies to the German submarines waiting in the Atlantic Ocean . Lt. Marxuach gave the order to open fire on the ship from the walls of the fort . Sergeant Encarnacion Correa then manned a machine gun and fired <unk> shots with little effect . Marxuach fired a shot from a cannon located at the Santa Rosa battery of " El Morro " fort , in what is considered to be the first shot of World War I fired by the regular armed forces of the United States against any ship flying the colors of the Central Powers , forcing the Odenwald to stop and to return to port where its supplies were confiscated . The shots ordered by Lt. Marxuach were the first fired by the United States in World War I. The Odenwald was confiscated by the United States and renamed SS Newport . It was assigned to the U.S. Shipping Board , where it served until 1924 when it was retired . 
 As more countries became involved in what became known as World War I , the U.S. Congress approved the Jones – Shafroth Act , which imposed United States citizenship upon Puerto Ricans . Those who were eligible , with the exception of women , were expected to serve in the military . About 20 @,@ 000 Puerto Ricans were drafted during World War I. On May 3 , 1917 , the Regiment recruited 1 @,@ 969 men . The 295th and 296 Infantry Regiments were created in Puerto Rico . On November 1917 , the first military draft ( conscription ) lottery in Puerto Rico was held in the island 's capital , San Juan . The first draft number was picked by Diana Yaeger , the daughter of the U.S. appointed governor of Puerto Rico Arthur Yager . The number she picked was 1435 and it belonged to San Juan native Eustaquio Correa . Thus , Correa became the first Puerto Rican to be " drafted " into the Armed Forces of the United States . 
 On May 17 , 1917 , the Porto Rico Regiment of Infantry was sent to guard the Panama Canal in defense of the Panama Canal Zone One of the Puerto Ricans who distinguished himself during World War I was Lieutenant Frederick Lois Riefkohl of the US Navy , who on August 2 , 1917 , became the first known Puerto Rican to be awarded the Navy Cross . The Navy Cross , which is the second highest medal after the Medal of Honor , that can be awarded by the U.S. Navy , was awarded to Lt. Riefkohl for his actions in an engagement with an enemy submarine . Lt. Riefkohl , who was also the first Puerto Rican to graduate from the United States Naval Academy , served as a Rear Admiral in World War II . 
 Frederick L. Riefkohl 's brother , Rudolph William Riefkohl also served . Riefkohl was commissioned a Second Lieutenant and assigned to the 63rd Heavy Artillery Regiment in France where he actively participated in the Meuse @-@ Argonne Offensive . According to the United States War Department , after the war he served as Captain of Coastal Artillery at the Letterman Army Medical Center in Presidio of San Francisco , in California ( 1918 ) . He played an instrumental role in helping the people of Poland overcome the 1919 typhus epidemic . 
 By 1918 , the Army realized that there was a shortage of physicians specializing in anesthesia , a low salary specialty required in the military operating rooms . Therefore , the Army reluctantly began hiring women physicians as civilian contract employees . The first Puerto Rican woman doctor to serve in the Army under contract was Dr. Dolores Piñero from San Juan . She was assigned to the San Juan base hospital where she worked as an anesthesiologist during the mornings and in the laboratory during the afternoons . 
 In New York , many Puerto Ricans joined the 369th Infantry Regiment which was mostly composed of Afro @-@ Americans . They were not allowed to fight alongside their white counterparts ; however , they were permitted to fight as members of a French unit in French uniforms . They fought along the Western Front in France , and their reputation earned them the nickname of " the Harlem Hell Fighters " by the Germans . Among them was Rafael Hernández Marín , considered by many as Puerto Rico 's greatest composer . The 369th was awarded French Croix de guerre for battlefield gallantry by the French President . 
 Marine aviation was fairly new , it came into existence on May 22 , 1912 , and the first major expansion of the Marine Corps ' air component , of which Puerto Rico played a major rule , came with America 's entrance into World War I. On January 6 , 1914 , First Lieutenant Bernard L. Smith established the Marine Section of the Navy Flying School in the island municipal Culebra . As the number of Marine Aviators grew so did the avid desire to separate from Naval Aviation . By doing so , the Marine Aviation was designated as separate from the United States Naval Aviation . The creation of a " Marine Corps Aviation Company in Puerto Rico consisted of 10 officers and 40 enlisted men . 
 The Porto Rico Regiment returned to Puerto Rico in March 1919 and was renamed the 65th Infantry Regiment under the Reorganization Act of June 4 , 1920 . It is estimated that 18 @,@ 000 Puerto Ricans from the Porto Rico Regiment served in the war and that 335 were wounded by the chemical gas experimentation which the United States conducted as part of its active chemical weapons program in Panama , however neither the military nor the War Department of the United States kept statistics in regard to the total number of Puerto Ricans who served in the regular units of the Armed Forces ( United States mainland forces ) , therefore , even though it is known that four Puerto Ricans died in combat , it is impossible to determine the exact number of Puerto Ricans who served and perished in World War I. 
 The need for a Puerto Rican National Guard unit became apparent to Major General Luis R. Esteves , who had served as instructor of Puerto Rican Officers for the Porto Rico Regiment of Infantry at Camp Las Casas in Puerto Rico . His request was met with the approval of the government and Puerto Rican Legislature . In 1919 , the first regiment of the Puerto Rican National Guard was formed , and General Luis R. Esteves became the first official Commandant of the Puerto Rican National Guard . 
 = = = Second Nicaraguan Campaign ( 1926 – 33 ) = = = 
 After World War I , Puerto Ricans fought on foreign shores as members of the United States Marine Corps . Civil war broke out in Nicaragua during the first months of 1926 , and upon the request of the Nicaraguan government , 3 @,@ 000 U.S. Marines were sent ashore to establish a neutral zone for the protection of American citizens . The American intervention was also known as the Banana Wars . Both Captain Pedro del Valle and Private Rafel Toro from Puerto Rico , participated in the Second Nicaraguan Campaign . 
 In 1926 , Captain del Valle served with the Gendarmerie of Haiti for three years and during that time , he also became active in the war against Augusto Sandino in Nicaragua . In 1927 , Lieutenant Jaime Sabater , from San Juan , Puerto Rico graduated from United States Naval Academy . 
 Private Rafel Toro , from Humacao , Puerto Rico , was part of the U.S. Marine Corps occupation force in Nicaragua , serving with the Guardia Nacional de Nicaragua . On July 25 , 1927 , Private Toro was assigned to advance guard duty in Nueva Segovia . As he rode into town , he was attacked ; returning fire , he was able to hold back the enemy until reinforcements arrived . He was mortally wounded in this action for which he was posthumously awarded the Navy Cross . 
 Puerto Rico suffered greatly during the Great Depression of the 1930s , and many Puerto Ricans moved to the East Coast of the United States looking for jobs and a better way of life . On the island , the unemployment rate continued to rise and many Puerto Ricans who were unable to find a job looked to the Armed Forces of the United States as a source of employment . Not only were they paid better than at the few other available jobs , but they were also guaranteed three meals a day , clothing , and shelter . 
 = = = The Rif War ( 1920 ) = = = 
 After the Spanish – American War , members of the Spanish forces and civilians who were loyal to the Spanish Crown were allowed to return to Spain . Those who returned to their motherland took with them their Puerto Rican spouses and children . Among those who were born in Puerto Rico and who would go on to serve in the Rif War as members of the Spanish <unk> were General Manuel Goded Llopis and Captain Felix Arenas Gaspar . The Rif War is a rebellion against Spanish colonial rule took place in Spanish Morocco , a Spanish protectorate in 1919 . During the Rif War Captain Félix Arenas Gaspar , who was born in San Juan , distinguished himself in combat . He was posthumously awarded the Cruz <unk> de San Fernando " Laureate Cross of Saint Ferdinand " ( Spain 's version of the United States Medal of Honor ) for his actions in the defense of his company . 
 = = = Spanish Civil War ( 1936 – 39 ) = = = 
 Before the United States entered World War II , Puerto Ricans were already fighting on European soil , not only in the Rif War , but also on both sides of the Spanish Civil War . 
 The Spanish Civil War was a major conflict in Spain that started after an attempted coup d 'état committed by parts of the army , led by the Fascist General Francisco Franco , against the government of the Second Spanish Republic . Puerto Ricans fought on behalf of both of the factions involved , the " Nationalists " as members of the Spanish Army and the " Loyalists " ( Republicans ) as members of the Abraham Lincoln International Brigade . 
 Among the Puerto Ricans who fought alongside General Franco on behalf of the Nationalists was General Manuel Goded Llopis ( 1882 – 1936 ) , a high @-@ ranking officer in the Spanish Army . Llopis , who was born in San Juan , was named Chief of Staff of the Spanish Army of Africa , after his victories in the Rif War , took the Balearic Islands and by order of Franco , suppressed the rebellion of Asturias . Llopis was sent to lead the fight against the Anarchists in Catalonia , but his troops were outnumbered . He was captured and was sentenced to die by firing squad . 
 Among the many Puerto Ricans who fought on behalf of the Second Spanish Republic as members of the Abraham Lincoln Brigade , was Lieutenant Carmelo Delgado Delgado ( 1913 – 1937 ) , a leader of the Puerto Rican Nationalist Party from Guayama who upon the outbreak of the Spanish Civil War was in Spain in pursuit of his law degree . Delgado was an anti @-@ fascist who believed that the Spanish Nationalists were traitors . He fought in the Battle of Madrid , but was captured and was sentenced to die by firing squad on April 29 , 1937 . 
 = = = World War II = = = 
 = = = = The Pearl Harbor of the Atlantic = = = = 
 In 1940 , when Germany attacked Great Britain , the United States feared that if Germany controlled Great Britain , Mexico and the U.S. would be next . In the same year , President Franklin Delano Roosevelt ordered the construction of a naval base in the Atlantic similar to Pearl Harbor in Hawaii . The site was meant to provide anchorage , docking , repair facilities , fuel , and supplies for 60 % of the Atlantic Fleet . The naval base , which was named U.S. Naval Station Roosevelt Roads , became the largest naval installation in the world in landmass and was meant to be the Pearl Harbor of the Atlantic . However , with the defeat of Germany in 1945 , the United States concentrated all of their efforts to the war in the Pacific . In May 2003 , after six decades of existence , the base was officially shut down by the U.S. Navy . 
 In 1939 , a survey was conducted of possible air base sites . It was determined that Punta Borinquen was the best site for a major air base . Later that year , Major Karl S. <unk> assumed command of what was to become " Borinquen Army Air Field " ( Later renamed Ramey Air Force Base ) . The first squadron based at Borinquen Field was the 27th Bombardment Squadron , consisting of nine B @-@ 18A Bolo medium bombers . In 1940 , the air echelon of the 25th Bombardment Group ( 14 B @-@ 18A aircraft and two A @-@ 17 aircraft ) arrived at the base from Langley Field . 
 During World War II , the following squadrons were assigned to the airfield : 
 27th Engineer Battalion ( Combat ) , 9 Oct 1939 ( formed at Fort Dupont , Delaware ) – 20 Oct 1939 ( arrives in Puerto Rico ) 
 Headquarters , 13th Composite Wing , 1 Nov 1940 – 6 Jan 1941 ; 1 May – 25 Oct 1941 
 Headquarters , 25th Bombardment Group , 1 Nov 1940 – 1 Nov 1942 ; 5 Oct 1943 – 24 Mar 1944 
 417th Bombardment Squadron , 21 Nov 1939 – 13 Apr 1942 ( B @-@ 18 Bolo ) 
 10th Bombardment Squadron , 1 Nov 1940 – 1 Nov 1942 ( B @-@ 18 Bolo ) 
 12th Bombardment Squadron , 1 Nov 1940 – 8 Nov 1941 ( B @-@ 18 Bolo ) 
 35th Bombardment Squadron , 31 Oct – 11 Nov 1941 ( B @-@ 18 Bolo ) 
 44th Bombardment Squadron ( 40th Bombardment Group ) 1 Apr 1941 – 16 Jun 1942 ( B @-@ 18 Bolo ) 
 20th Troop Carrier Squadron ( Panama Air Depot ) Jun 1942 @-@ Jul 1943 ( C @-@ 47 Skytrain ) 
 4th Tactical Reconnaissance Squadron ( 72d Reconnaissance Group ) 27 Oct 1943 – 21 May 1945 ; 5 Oct 1945 – 20 Aug 1946 
 123d AAA Battalion – Fort Brooke 
 501st Military Police Battalion ( Combat ) – Fort Brooke 
 Detached Enlisted Mens List – Fort Brooke 
 <unk> Military Police Battalion – Fort Brooke 
 Battery D of the 123d Antiaircraft Artillery Gun Battalion – Cataño 
 Battery B of the <unk> Coast Artillery Regiment – Goat Island ( Isla de Cabras ) 
 Battery B of the 123d AAA Battalion – Fort Brooke 
 Battery C of the <unk> Coast Artillery – Fort Brooke 
 Battery C of the 123d AAA Battalion – far end of the harbor on the Rio Piedras 
 123d AAA Battalion Headquarters – Fort Buchanan 
 Battery A of the 123d AAA Battalion – Fort Buchanan 
 Antilles Air Command , 1 Mar – 25 Aug 1946 
 As : Antilles Air Division , 12 Jan 1948 – 22 Jan 1949 
 24th Composite Wing , 25 Aug 1946 – 28 Jun 1948 
 Navy Patrol Plane Squadron VP @-@ 31 – Borinquen Field 
 = = = = Puerto Ricans in the military = = = = 
 In October 1940 , the 295th and 296th Infantry Regiments of the Puerto Rican National Guard , founded by Major General Luis R. Esteves , were called into Federal Active Service and assigned to the Puerto Rican Department in accordance with the existing War Plan Orange . 
 There weren no Puerto Rican military @-@ related fatalities in the Japanese attack of Pearl Harbor . However , there was one civilian Puerto Rican fatality . Daniel LaVerne was a Puerto Rican armature boxer who was working at Pearl Harbor 's Red Hill underground fuel tank construction project when the Japanese attacked Pearl Harbor . He died as a result of the injuries which he received during the attack . His name is listed among the 2 @,@ 338 Americans killed or mortally wounded on December 7 , 1941 , in the Remembrance Exhibit in the back lawn of the USS Arizona Memorial Visitor Center at Pearl Harbor . 
 It is estimated by the Department of Defense that 65 @,@ 034 Puerto Ricans served in the U.S. military during World War II . Soldiers from the island , serving in the 65th Infantry Regiment , participated in combat in the European Theater — in Germany and Central Europe . Those who resided in the mainland of the United States were assigned to regular units of the military and served either in the European or Pacific theaters of the war . Some families had multiple members join the Armed Forces . Seven brothers of the Medina family known as " The Fighting <unk> " , fought in the war . They came from Río Grande , Puerto Rico and Brooklyn , New York . In some cases Puerto Ricans were subject to the racial discrimination which at that time was widespread in the United States . 
 World War II was also the first conflict in which women , other than nurses , were allowed to serve in the U.S. Armed Forces . However , when the United States entered World War II , Puerto Rican nurses volunteered for service but were not accepted into the Army or Navy Nurse Corps . As a result , many of the island 's women work force migrated to the mainland U.S. to work in the factories which produced military equipment . In 1944 , the Army Nurse Corps decided to actively recruit Puerto Rican nurses so that Army hospitals would not have to deal with the language barriers . Among them was Second Lieutenant Carmen Lozano Dumler , who became one of the first Puerto Rican female military officers . 
 In 1944 , the Army sent recruiters to the island to recruit no more than 200 women for the Women 's Army Corps ( WAC ) . Over 1 @,@ 000 applications were received for the unit which was to be composed of only 200 women . The Puerto Rican WAC unit , Company 6 , 2nd Battalion , 21st Regiment of the Women 's Army Auxiliary Corps , a segregated Hispanic unit , was assigned to the New York Port of Embarkation , after their basic training at Fort Oglethorpe , Georgia . They were assigned to work in military offices which planned the shipment of troops around the world . Among them was PFC Carmen García Rosado , who in 2006 , authored and published a book titled " LAS <unk> @-@ <unk> de la Mujer Boricua en la Segunda Guerra Mundial " ( The WACs @-@ The participation of the Puerto Rican women in the Second World War ) , the first book to document the experiences of the first 200 Puerto Rican women who participated in said conflict . According to García Rosado , one of the hardships which Puerto Rican women in the military were subject to was the social and racial discrimination , which at the time was rampant in the United States against the Latino community . 
 The 149th Women 's Army Auxiliary Corps ( WAAC ) Post Headquarters Company was the first WAAC Company to go overseas , setting sail from New York Harbor for Europe on January 1943 . The unit arrived in Northern Africa on January 27 , 1943 , and rendered overseas duties in Algiers within General Dwight D. Eisenhower 's theatre headquarters . <unk> Carmen Contreras @-@ <unk> , a member of this unit , was the first Hispanic to serve in the Women 's Army Corps as an interpreter and in numerous administrative positions . 
 The 65th Infantry , after an extensive training program in 1942 , was sent to Panama to protect the Pacific and the Atlantic sides of the isthmus in 1943 . On November 25 , 1943 , Colonel <unk> Segarra , proceeded Col. John R. <unk> as Commander of the 65th Infantry , thus becoming the first Puerto Rican Regular Army officer to command a Regular Army regiment . 
 On January 12 , 1944 , the 296th Infantry Regiment departed from Puerto Rico to the Panama Canal Zone . In April 1945 , the unit returned to Puerto Rico and soon after was sent to Honolulu , Hawaii . The 296th arrived on June 25 , 1945 and was attached to the Central Pacific Base Command at Kahuku Air Base . Lieutenant Colonel Gilberto José Marxuach , " The Father of the San Juan Civil Defense " , was the commander of both the <unk> Artillery Co. and the <unk> Engineers Co . 
 Also on January 1944 , the 65th Infantry Regiment was embarked for Jackson Barracks in New Orleans and later sent to Fort Eustis in Newport News , Virginia in preparation for overseas deployment to North Africa . After they arrived at Casablanca , they underwent further training . By April 29 , 1944 , the 65th Infantry regiment was sent to North Africa , arriving at Casablanca , where they underwent further training . For some Puerto Ricans , this would be the first time that they were away from their homeland . Being away from their homeland for the first time would serve as an inspiration for compositions of two Bolero 's ; " En mi viejo San Juan " by Noel Estrada and " Despedida " ( My Good @-@ bye ) , a farewell song written by Pedro Flores and interpreted by Daniel Santos . By April 29 , 1944 , the Regiment had landed in Italy and moved on to Corsica . On September 22 , 1944 , the 65th Infantry landed in France and was committed to action on the Maritime Alps at Peira Cava . On December 13 , 1944 , the 65th Infantry , under the command of Lieutenant Colonel Juan César Cordero Dávila , relieved the 2nd Battalion of the 442nd Infantry Regiment , a Regiment which was made up of Japanese Americans under the command of Col. Virgil R. Miller , a native of Puerto Rico . The 3rd Battalion fought against and defeated Germany 's 34th Infantry Division 's 107th Infantry Regiment . There were 47 battle casualties including Pvt. Sergio Sanchez @-@ Sanchez and Sergeant Angel Martinez , from the town of Sabana Grande , who were the first two Puerto Ricans to be killed in combat action from the 65th Infantry . On March 18 , 1945 , the regiment was sent to the District of Mannheim and assigned to military occupation duties . In all , the 65th Infantry participated in the battles of Naples @-@ <unk> , Rome @-@ Arno , central Europe and of the Rhineland . 
 It was during this conflict that <unk> Joseph B. Aviles , Sr. , a member of the United States Coast Guard and the first Hispanic @-@ American to be promoted to Chief Petty Officer , received a war @-@ time promotion to Chief Warrant Officer ( November 27 , 1944 ) , thus becoming the first Hispanic American to reach that level as well . Aviles , who served in the United States Navy as Chief Gunner 's Mate in World War I , spent most of the war at St. Augustine , Florida training recruits . 
 = = = = Commanders = = = = 
 This was also the first time that Puerto Ricans played important roles as commanders in the Armed Forces of the United States . Besides Lieutenant Colonel Juan César Cordero Dávila who served with the 65th Infantry and Colonel Virgil R. Miller , a West Point graduate , born in San Germán , Puerto Rico , who was the Regimental Commander of the 442d Regimental Combat Team , a unit which was composed of " Nisei " ( second generation Americans of Japanese descent ) , that rescued Lost Texas Battalion of the 36th Infantry Division , in the forests of the Vosges Mountains in northeastern France . Colonel Virgilio N. Cordero , Jr . ( 1893 – 1980 ) was the Battalion Commander of the 31st Infantry Regiment on December 8 , 1941 , when Japanese planes attacked the U.S. military installations in the Philippines . Cordero and his men underwent brutal torture and humiliation during the Bataan Death March and nearly four years of captivity . He was one of nearly 1 @,@ 600 members of the 31st Infantry who were taken as prisoners . Half of these men perished while prisoners of the Japanese forces . After Cordero gained his freedom , when the Allied troops defeated the Japanese , he was sent to Italy and in 1946 , returned to the United States . Cordero , who retired with the rank of Brigadier General , wrote about his experiences as a prisoner of war and what he went through during the Bataan Death March . He authored My Experiences during the War with Japan , which was published in 1950 . In 1957 , he authored a revised Spanish version titled Bataan y la Marcha de la Muerte ; Volume 7 of Colección Vida e Historia . 
 The following seven Puerto Ricans , who graduated from the United States Naval Academy , served in command positions in the Navy and the Marine Corps . Lieutenant General Pedro Augusto del Valle , was the first Hispanic Marine Corps general . He played a key role in the Guadalcanal Campaign and the Battle of Guam and became the Commanding General of the First Marine Division . Del Valle played an instrumental role in the defeat of the Japanese forces in Okinawa and was in charge of the reorganization of Okinawa . Admiral Horacio Rivero , Jr . , USN , who later became the first Puerto Rican to become a four @-@ star Admiral ; Captain Marion Frederic Ramírez de Arellano , USN , the first Hispanic submarine commanding officer . As submarine commander of the USS Balao ( SS @-@ 285 ) , he is credited with sinking two Japanese ships ; Rear Admiral Rafael Celestino Benítez , USN , a highly decorated submarine commander who was the recipient of two Silver Star Medals ; Rear Admiral José M. Cabanillas , USN , who was the Executive Officer of the USS Texas which participated in the invasions of North Africa and Normandy ( D @-@ Day ) ; Rear Admiral Edmund Ernest García , USN , commander of the destroyer USS Sloat who saw action in the invasions of Africa , Sicily , and France ; Rear Admiral Frederick Lois Riefkohl , USN , the first Puerto Rican to graduate from the Naval Academy and recipient of the Navy Cross and Colonel Jaime Sabater , Sr. , USMC , who commanded the 1st Battalion , 9th Marines during the Bougainville amphibious operations . Sabater also participated in the Battle of Guam ( July 21 – August 10 , 1944 ) as Executive officer of the 9th Marines . He was wounded in action on July 21 , 1944 and awarded the Purple Heart . 
 = = = = Notable combatants = = = = 
 Among the many Puerto Ricans who distinguished themselves in combat were Sergeant First Class Agustín Ramos Calero and the first three Puerto Ricans to be awarded the Distinguished Service Cross : PFC . Luis F. Castro , Private Anibal <unk> and PFC Joseph R. Martinez . 
 PFC Joseph ( José ) R. Martinez , born in San Germán , destroyed a German Infantry unit and tank in Tunis by providing heavy artillery fire , saving his platoon from being attacked in the process . He received the Distinguished Service Cross from General George S. Patton , thus becoming the first Puerto Rican recipient of said military decoration . His citation reads as follow : 
 Sergeant First Class Agustín Ramos Calero was awarded a total of 22 decorations and medals his actions in Europe during World War II , thus becoming most decorated soldier in the United States Military during that war . 
 = = = = Aviators = = = = 
 Puerto Ricans also served in the United States Army Air Forces . In 1944 , Puerto Rican aviators were sent to the Tuskegee Army Air Field in Tuskegee , Alabama to train the famed 99th Fighter Squadron of the Tuskegee Airmen . The Tuskegee Airmen were the first African @-@ American military aviators in the United States armed forces . Puerto Ricans were also involved in clerical positions with the Tuskegee unit . Among the Puerto Ricans who helped make the Tuskegee experiment a successful one were T / Sgt. Pablo Diaz <unk> , an NCO ( Non Commissioned Officer ) in charge of the Special Service Office , and Eugene Calderon , who was assigned to the " Red Tail " unit , as the Company Clerk . By the end of the war , the Tuskegee Airmen were credited with 109 Luftwaffe aircraft shot down , a patrol boat run aground by machine @-@ gun fire , and destruction of numerous fuel dumps , trucks and trains . 
 Among the Puerto Ricans who served in either the Royal Canadian Air Force , the British Royal Air Force or the United States Army Air Forces during the war and distinguished themselves as fighter pilots and bombardiers were Captains Mihiel " Mike " Gilormini and Alberto A. Nido , Lieutenants José Antonio Muñiz and César Luis González , and T / Sgt. Clement Resto . 
 Captain Mihiel " Mike " Gilormini served in the Royal Air Force and in United States Army Air Forces as a fighter pilot during World War II . He was the recipient of the Silver Star Medal , the Air Medal with four clusters and the Distinguished Flying Cross 5 times . Gilormini later became a co @-@ founder of the Puerto Rico Air National Guard and retired as Brigadier General . 
 Captain Alberto A. Nido served in the Royal Canadian Air Force , the Royal Air Force and in the United States Army Air Forces during the war . He flew missions as a bomber pilot for the RCAF and as a Supermarine Spitfire fighter pilot for the RAF . As member of the RAF , he belonged to 67th Reconnaissance Squadron who participated in 275 combat missions . Nido later transferred to the USAAF 's 67th Fighter Group as a P @-@ 51 Mustang fighter pilot . He was awarded the Distinguished Flying Cross with four oak leaf clusters and the Air Medal with four oak leaf clusters . Nido co @-@ founded the Puerto Rico Air National Guard and , as Gilormini , retired a Brigadier General . 
 Lieutenant José Antonio Muñiz served with distinction in the China Burma India Theater . During his tour of duty he flew 20 combat missions against the Imperial Japanese Army Air Force and shot down a Mitsubishi A6M Zero . Muñiz was also a co @-@ founder of the Puerto Rico Air National Guard . 
 2nd Lieutenant César Luis González , a co @-@ pilot of a C @-@ 47 , was the first Puerto Rican pilot in the United States Army Air Forces . He was one of the initial participants of the invasion of Sicily on July 10 , 1943 also known as Operation Husky . During the invasion of Sicily , he flew on two night missions , the first on July 9 , where his mission was to release paratroops of 82nd Airborne Division on the area of Gela and the second on July 11 , when he dropped reinforcements in the area . His unit was awarded a " <unk> " for carrying out this second mission in spite of bad weather and heavy attack by enemy ground and naval forces . González died on November 22 , 1943 , when his plane crashed during training off the end of the runway at Castelvetrano . He was posthumously promoted to First Lieutenant . 
 T / Sgt. Clement Resto served with the 303rd Bomb Group and participated in numerous bombing raids over Germany . During a bombing mission over Düren , Germany , Resto 's plane , a B @-@ 17 Flying Fortress , was shot down . He was captured by the Gestapo and sent to Stalag XVII @-@ B where he spent the rest of the war as a prisoner of war . Resto , who lost an eye during his last mission , was awarded a Purple Heart , a POW Medal , and an Air Medal with one battle star after he was liberated from captivity . 
 = = Human experimentation = = 
 Puerto Rican soldiers were also subject to human experimentation by the United States Armed Forces . On Panama 's San Jose Island , Puerto Rican soldiers were exposed to mustard gas to see if they reacted differently than their " white " counterparts . According to Susan L. Smith of the University of Alberta , the researchers were searching for evidence of race @-@ based differences in the responses of the human body to mustard gas exposure . 
 = = Post World War II = = 
 The American participation in the Second World War came to an end in Europe on May 8 , 1945 when the western Allies celebrated " V @-@ E Day " ( Victory in Europe Day ) upon Germany 's surrender , and in the Asian theater on August 14 , 1945 " V @-@ J Day " ( Victory over Japan Day ) when the Japanese surrendered by signing the Japanese Instrument of Surrender . Lieutenant Junior Grade Maria Rodriguez Denton ( U.S. Navy ) , born in Guanica , Puerto Rico , was the first woman from Puerto Rico who became an officer in the United States Navy as member of the WAVES . It was LTJG Denton who forwarded the news ( through channels ) to President Harry S. Truman that the war had ended . 
 On October 27 , 1945 , the 65th Infantry sailed home from France . Arriving at Puerto Rico on November 9 , 1945 , they were received by the local population as national heroes and given a victorious reception at the Military Terminal of Camp Buchanan . 
 According to the book " Historia Militar De Puerto Rico " ( Military history of Puerto Rico ) , by historian Col. Héctor Andrés Negroni , the men of the 65th Infantry were awarded the following military decorations : 
 65th Infantry Regiment Individual Awards in World War II 
 The 295th Regiment returned on February 20 , 1946 from the Panama Canal Zone , and the 296th Regiment on March 6 . Both regiments were awarded the American Theatre streamer and the Pacific Theatre streamer . They were inactivated that same year . 
 According to the 4th Report of the Director of Selective Service of 1948 , a total of 51 @,@ 438 Puerto Ricans served in the Armed Forces during World War II , however the Department of Defense in its report titled " Number of Puerto Ricans serving in the U.S. Armed Forces during National Emergencies " stated that the total of Puerto Ricans who served was 65 @,@ 034 and from that total 2 @,@ 560 were listed as wounded . Unfortunately , the exact total amount of Puerto Ricans who served in World War II in other units , besides those of Puerto Rico , cannot be determined because the military categorized Hispanics under the same heading as whites . The only racial groups to have separate stats kept were African @-@ Americans and Asian Americans . 
 = = Revolt against the United States = = 
 During the mid @-@ 1940s , various pro @-@ independence groups , such as the Puerto Rican Independence Party , which believed in gaining the island 's independence through the electoral process , and the Puerto Rican Nationalist Party , which believed in the concept of armed revolution , existed in Puerto Rico . On October 30 , 1950 , the nationalists , under the leadership of Dr. Pedro Albizu Campos staged uprisings in the towns of Ponce , Mayagüez , Naranjito , Arecibo , Utuado ( Utuado Uprising ) , San Juan ( San Juan Nationalist revolt ) and Jayuya . 
 The most notable of these occurred in Jayuya in what became known as El Grito de Jayuya ( Jayuya Uprising ) . Nationalist leader Blanca Canales led the armed nationalists into the town and attacked the police station . A small battle with the police occurred ; one officer was killed and three others were wounded before the rest dropped their weapons and surrendered . The nationalists cut the telephone lines and burned the post office . Canales led the group into the town square where the illegal light blue version of the Puerto Rican Flag was raised ( it was against the law to carry a Puerto Rican Flag from 1898 to 1952 . ) In the town square , Canales gave a speech and declared Puerto Rico a free Republic . The town was held by the nationalists for three days . 
 The United States declared martial law in Puerto Rico and sent the Puerto Rico National Guard to attack Jayuya . The town was attacked by U.S. bomber planes and ground artillery . Even though part of the town was destroyed , news of this military action was prevented from spreading outside of Puerto Rico . It was called an incident between Puerto Ricans . The top leaders of the nationalist party , including Albizu Campos and Blanca Canales , were arrested and sent to jail to serve long prison terms . 
 Griselio Torresola , Albizu Campos 's bodyguard , was in the United States at the time of the Jayuya Uprising . Torresola and fellow nationalist Oscar Collazo , were to assassinate President Harry S. Truman . On November 1 , 1950 , they attacked the Blair House where Torresola and a policeman , Leslie Coffelt , lost their lives . Oscar Collazo was arrested and sentenced to death . His sentence was later commuted to life imprisonment by President Truman and he eventually received a presidential pardon . 
 = = Cold War ( 1947 – 91 ) = = 
 After World War II a geopolitical , ideological , and economic struggle emerged between the United States and the Soviet Union which included their respective allies . This struggle was popularly named the Cold War because open hostilities never occurred between the main parties involved . The so @-@ called " war " involved a nuclear and conventional weapons arms race , networks of military alliances , economic warfare and trade embargoes , propaganda , espionage , and proxy wars . The Cuban Missile Crisis of 1962 was the most important direct confrontation . The Korean and Vietnam War were among the major civil wars polarized along Cold War lines . 
 = = = Puerto Rico Air National Guard = = = 
 Colonel Mihiel Gilormini , was named base commander to the 198th Fighter Squadron in Puerto Rico . Gilormini and Colonel Alberto A. Nido , together with Lieutenant Colonel Jose Antonio Muñiz , played an instrumental role in the creation of the Puerto Rico Air National Guard on November 23 , 1947 . The Puerto Rico Air National Guard is a part of the Air Reserve Component ( ARC ) of the United States Air Force . Both Gilormini and Nido were eventually promoted to Brigadier General and served as commanders of <unk> . In 1963 , the Air National Guard Base , at the San Juan International airport in Puerto Rico , was renamed " Muñiz Air National Guard Base " in honor of Lt. Col. Jose Antonio Muñiz who perished in July 4 , 1960 when his F @-@ 86 crashed during take off during the 4th of July festivities in Puerto Rico . 
 = = = The USS Cochino incident = = = 
 The USS Cochino ( SS @-@ 345 ) was a Gato @-@ class submarine under the command of Rafael Celestino Benítez . On August 12 , 1949 , the Cochino , along with the USS Tusk ( SS @-@ 426 ) , departed from the harbor of Portsmouth , England . Both diesel submarines were supposed to be on a cold @-@ water training mission , however , according to Blind Man 's Bluff : The Untold Story of American Submarine Espionage , the submarines were part of an American intelligence operation . They had snorkels that allowed them to spend long periods underwater , largely invisible to an enemy , and they carried electronic gear designed to detect far @-@ off radio signals . The mission of the Cochino and the Tusk was to eavesdrop on communications that revealed the testing of submarine @-@ launched Soviet missiles that might soon carry nuclear warheads . Thus , making this the first American undersea spy missions of the cold war . 
 The mission was cut short when one the Cochino 's 4 @,@ 000 @-@ pound batteries caught fire . Commander Benitez directed the firefighting , trying both to save the ship and his crew from the toxic gases . The crew members of the Tusk rescued all except one Cochino crew member and convinced Commander Benitez , who was the last man on the Cochino , to board the Tusk . The Cochino sank off the coast of Norway two minutes after Benitez 's departure . Benitez retired as a Rear Admiral from the Navy in 1957 . 
 = = = The Korean War = = = 
 Sixty @-@ one thousand Puerto Ricans served in the Korean War , including 18 @,@ 000 Puerto Ricans who enlisted in the continental United States . Puerto Ricans distinguished themselves as part of the 65th Infantry Regiment receiving many awards and recognitions ; however , they were also involved in the largest court martial of the Korean War . 
 On August 26 , 1950 , the 65th Infantry departed from Puerto Rico and arrived in Pusan , Korea on September 23 , 1950 . It was during the long sea voyage that the 65th Infantry was nicknamed the " Borinqueneers " . The name is a combination of the words " Borinquen " ( the Taíno name for Puerto Rico ) and " Buccaneers " . The men of the 65th were the first infantrymen to meet the enemy on the battle fields of Korea . Among the hardships suffered by the Puerto Ricans was the lack of warm clothing during the cold , harsh winters . The enemy made many attempts to encircle the Regiment , but each time they failed because of the many casualties inflicted by the 65th . On December 1950 , U.S. Marines found themselves at the Chosin Reservoir area . In June 1951 , The 65th was part of a task force which enabled the Marines to withdraw from the <unk> @-@ on Reservoir . When the Marines were encircled by the Chinese Communist troops close to the Sino @-@ Korean border , the 65th rushed to their defense . As a consequence , the Marines were able to return safely to their ships . 
 Among the battles and operations in which the 65th participated was the Operation " Killer " of January 1951 , becoming the first Regiment to cross the Han River . On April 1951 , the Regiment participated in the <unk> Corridor drives and on June 1951 , the 65th was the third Regiment to cross the Han Ton River . Master Sergeant Juan E. Negrón will receive the Medal of Honor posthumously on March 18 , 2014 , for his courageous actions while serving as a member of Company L , 65th Infantry Regiment , 3d Infantry Division during combat operations against an armed enemy in Kalma @-@ Eri , Korea on April 28 , 1951 . The 65th was the Regiment that took and held <unk> and they were also instrumental in breaking the Iron Triangle of Hill 717 on July 1951 . On November 1951 , the Regiment fought off an attack by two Regimental size enemy units , with success . Colonel Juan César Cordero Dávila was named commander of 65th Infantry on February 8 , 1952 , thus becoming one of the highest @-@ ranking ethnic officers in the Army . On July 3 , 1952 , the Regiment defended the MLR for 47 days and saw action at Cognac , King and Queen with successful attacks on Chinese positions . On October the Regiment also saw action in the <unk> Sector and on Iron Horse , Hill 391 , whose lower part was called " Jackson Heights " . On September 1952 , the 65th Infantry was holding on to a hill known as " Outpost Kelly " . Chinese Communist forces that had joined the North Koreans overran the hill in what became known as the Battle for Outpost Kelly . Twice the 65th Regiment was overwhelmed by Chinese artillery and driven off . 
 In June 1953 , the 2nd Battalion conducted a series of successful raids on Hill 412 and in November , the Regiment successfully counterattacked enemy units in the <unk> Valley and held their positions until the truce signing between all parts involved . 
 = = = = Mass court @-@ martial = = = = 
 Col. Cordero Dávila was relieved of his command by Col. Chester B. DeGavre , a West Point graduate and a " continental " officer from the mainland United States and the officer staff of the 65th was replaced with non @-@ Hispanic officers . DeGavre ordered that the unit stop calling itself the Borinqueneers , cut their special rations of rice and beans , ordered the men to shave off their mustaches and had one of them wear signs that read " I am a coward " . It is believed that as a result of this humiliation , combat exhaustion , and the language barrier where factors that influenced some of the men of Company L of the 65th in their refusal to continue to fight . 
 In December 1954 , 162 Puerto Ricans of the 65th Infantry were arrested , 95 were court martialed , and 91 were found guilty and sentenced to prison terms ranging from 1 to 18 years of hard labor . It was the largest mass court martial of the Korean War . The Secretary of the Army Robert T. Stevens moved quickly to remit the sentences and granted clemency and pardons to all those involved . Though the men who were court martialed were pardoned , there is currently a campaign for a formal exoneration . 
 An Army report released in 2001 blamed the breakdown of the 65th on the following factors : a shortage of officers and noncommissioned officers , a rotation policy that removed combat @-@ experienced leaders and soldiers , tactics that led to high casualties , an ammunition shortage , communication problems between largely white , English @-@ speaking officers and Spanish @-@ speaking Puerto Rican enlisted men , and declining morale . The report also found bias in the prosecution of the Puerto Ricans , citing instances of continental soldiers who were not charged after refusing to fight in similar circumstances , before and after Jackson Heights . 
 = = = Post Korean War = = = 
 The 65th Infantry was credited with battle participation in nine campaigns . Among the distinctions awarded to the members of the 65th were a Medal of Honor , 10 Distinguished Service Crosses , 256 Silver Stars and 595 Bronze Stars . According to El Nuevo Día newspaper , May 30 , 2004 , a total of 756 Puerto Ricans lost their lives in Korea and a total of 3 @,@ 630 men were wounded , from all four branches of the U.S. Armed Forces . More than half of these were from the 65th Infantry ( This is without including non @-@ Puerto Ricans ) . The 65th Infantry returned to Puerto Rico and was deactivated in 1956 . However , Major General Juan César Cordero Dávila , Puerto Rico 's Adjutant General ( 1958 – 65 ) , persuaded the Department of the Army to transfer the 65th Infantry from the regular Army to the Puerto Rican National Guard . This was the only unit ever transferred from active component Army to the Army Guard . 
 65th Infantry Regiment 
 Individual Awards in the Korean War 
 Among the Puerto Ricans from the regiment who distinguished themselves are : Brigadier General Antonio Rodríguez <unk> ( awarded two Silver Stars ) , Colonel Carlos Betances Ramírez ( only Puerto Rican officer to command an infantry battalion ) , Master Sergeant Pedro Rodríguez ( awarded two Silver Stars ) , and Staff Sergeant Modesto Cartagena ( the most decorated Hispanic in history ) . Other Puerto Ricans who distinguished themselves were United States Marines Private First Class Fernando Luis García , who became the first Puerto Rican recipient of the Medal of Honor when he covered a grenade with his body , saving the lives of his fellow Marines and PFC . Ramón Núñez @-@ Juárez and PFC Enrique Romero @-@ Nieves , who were awarded the Navy Cross . On February 21 , 2014 , President Barack Obama announced that three Puerto Ricans who fought in the Korean War will posthumously be awarded the Medal of Honor . They are Master Sergeant Juan E. Negrón of the 65th Infantry Regiment , Private <unk> Rivera of the 7th Infantry Regiment , 3d Infantry Division and Private Miguel A. Vera of the 38th Infantry Regiment , 2d Infantry Division . Master Sergeant Juan E. Negron of the 65th Infantry Regiment , Private <unk> Rivera pf the 7th Infantry Regiment , 3d Infantry Division and Private Miguel A. Vera of the 38th Infantry Regiment , 2d Infantry Division . 
 Puerto Rican women continued to volunteer for military service during and after the war . <unk> Rose Franco was the first Puerto Rican woman to become a Chief Warrant Officer in the U.S. Marine Corps . With the outbreak of the Korean War , Rose surprised her family by announcing that she was leaving college to join the United States Marine Corps . In 1965 , Rose was named Administrative Assistant to the Secretary of the Navy Paul Henry Nitze by the administration of President Lyndon B. Johnson . 1st Lieutenant Gloria <unk> Petersen was an Army nurse at Walter Reed Army Hospital in Washington , D.C. , during the War . Captain Julia Benitez Aviles was the first Puerto Rican servicewoman to obtain the rank of captain . She joined the Army Nurse Corps in 1950 and served in Occupation Germany ; Washington , D.C. ; Texas ; and Puerto Rico as a nurse anesthetist , retiring in 1964 . Lieutenant <unk> <unk> <unk> Fuertes joined the Army Nurse Corps in 1953 , serving on active duty until 1964 . She then joined the Reserves , where she served until 1990 . Among her assignments in the military was teaching the latest modern nursing techniques to Nicaraguan Army nurses while <unk> ( on temporary duty ) in Nicaragua for six months . 
 = = = Cuban Missile Crisis = = = 
 The Cuban Missile Crisis was a tense confrontation between the Soviet Union and the United States over the Soviet deployment of nuclear missiles in Cuba . On October 22 , 1962 , Admiral Horacio Rivero , Jr. was the commander of the American fleet sent by President John F. Kennedy to set up a quarantine ( blockade ) of the Soviet ships . On October 28 , Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev ordered the removal of the Soviet missiles in Cuba , and Kennedy ordered an end of the quarantine of Cuba on November 20 , bringing an end to the crisis . Admiral Rivero later served as U.S. Ambassador to Spain ( 1972 – 75 ) . 
 = = = Vietnam War = = = 
 During the Vietnam War , an estimated 48 @,@ 000 Puerto Ricans served in the four branches of the armed forces . Some sources state that a total of 345 Puerto Ricans who resided in the island died in combat , however according to a report by the Department of Defense , titled " Number of Puerto Ricans serving in the U.S. Armed Forces during National Emergencies " the total number of Puerto Ricans who died was 455 and that were wounded was 3 @,@ 775 . A total of 17 men were listed as Missing in Action ( MIA ) , and of these , PFC . Humberto Acosta @-@ Rosario is the only one whose body has never been recovered and is currently still listed as MIA . Five Puerto Ricans — Staff Sergeant Felix M. Conde @-@ Falcon , <unk> Héctor Santiago Colón , Captain <unk> Rubio , PFC Carlos Lozada and Captain Humbert Roque Versace — were awarded the Medal of Honor , the highest United States military decoration . Lance Corporal Jose L. Rivera , Corporal Miguel Rivera @-@ Sotomayor , and Sergeant Angel Mendez , members of the United States Marine Corps , were awarded the Navy Cross for their heroic actions . Mendez was posthumously awarded the Navy Cross for his actions on March 16 , 1967 , for saving the life of his platoon commander , Lieutenant Ronald D. Castille , ( one of the seven justices of the Supreme Court of Pennsylvania ) . U.S. Senator Charles Schumer has recommended that Mendez ' award be upgraded to Medal of Honor . The most decorated Hispanic American soldier in the Vietnam War was Sergeant First Class Jorge Otero Barreto from the town of Vega Baja , Puerto Rico . Otero @-@ Barreto , has also been called by the media , the most decorated U.S. soldier of the Vietnam War . Sgt. Otero @-@ Barreto was a member of the U.S. Army . From 1961 to 1970 , Otero Barreto served five tours in Southeast Asia , starting as an advisor who helped train Vietnamese troops . He was awarded 38 decorations , among them 3 Silver Star Medals , 5 Bronze Star Medals with Valor , 4 Army Commendation Medals , 5 Purple Heart Medals and 5 Air Medals . 
 Other Puerto Ricans who served in Vietnam and had distinguished military careers include : Major General Salvador E. <unk> , Rear Admiral Diego E. Hernández , Colonel Héctor Andrés Negroni and Brigadier General Ruben A. Cubero who in 1991 became the first person of Hispanic heritage to be named Dean of Faculty of the United States Air Force Academy . 
 Two Puerto Ricans who served in Vietnam held positions in the Administration of President George W. Bush . They are Dr. Richard Carmona , a former Green Beret who was awarded two Purple Hearts and was appointed Surgeon General in March 2002 , and Major General William A. Navas Jr . , who was awarded the Bronze Star Medal and was named Assistant Secretary of the Navy on June 6 , 2001 . In September 22 , 2015 , the documentary “ On Two Fronts : Latinos & Vietnam ” examined the Latino experience during the Vietnam War . 
 = = = Operation El Dorado Canyon = = = 
 On April 14 , 1986 , in response to acts of terrorism sponsored by Libyan leader Muammar al @-@ Gaddafi — in particular , the Berlin disco bombing of April 6 — and against the backdrop of heightened tension and clashes between the Libyan and U.S. Navies over Libya 's disputed territorial water claims in the Gulf of Sidra , the United States launched a surprise attack on key facilities in Tripoli and other parts of Libya . The attack was code @-@ named Operation El Dorado Canyon . 
 With the acquiescence of the British government , 24 U.S. Air Force F @-@ 111F fighter @-@ bombers took off from U.S. air bases in England . Attacking in the pre @-@ dawn hours of April 15 , their main objectives were 22 airfields , terrorist training camps , and other military installations . Captain Fernando L. Ribas @-@ <unk> was one of the pilots who participated in the Libyan air raid . His F @-@ 111 was shot down over the disputed Gulf of Sidra off the Libyan coast . Ribas @-@ <unk> and his weapons systems officer , Captain Paul F. <unk> , were the only U.S. casualties . Al @-@ <unk> , who was also personally targeted , escaped harm , but his daughter was killed . 
 = = Post Cold War campaigns = = 
 On October 7 , 1975 , President Gerald R. Ford signed legislation permitting women to enter the United States service academies . As a consequence Puerto Rican women who graduated from the academies would be allowed to serve in sensitive leadership positions during their military careers . 
 In 1980 , Captain Linda Garcia Cubero became the first Hispanic woman to graduate from a military academy . Garcia Cubero was a member of the first class of women to graduate from the United States Air Force Academy . 
 That same year then Lieutenant Olga E. <unk> became the first female Hispanic U.S. military pilot . <unk> studied at the University of Puerto Rico and joined that institutions ROTC program . She graduated from the Officer Training School in January 1980 , and was commissioned a Second Lieutenant . She holds the distinction of being first Latina to complete U.S. Air Force military pilot training . One of her assignments in the military was that of instructor pilot where she was the first female Northrop T @-@ 38 Talon ( T @-@ 38 ) UPT flight instructor at Laughlin AFB . After retiring in 2003 , with the rank Lieutenant Colonel , she became the first Latina to become a commercial airline captain . 
 In 1984 , Michelle Fraley became the first Puerto Rican women to graduate from West Point . Fraley ( née Hernández ) graduated from West Point Military Academy and eventually served as chief of staff of the Army Network Enterprise Technology Command . She retired in 2014 with the rank of Colonel . 
 = = = Gulf War and Operation Restore Hope = = = 
 In 1990 , 1 @,@ 700 Puerto Rican National Guardsmen were among the 20 @,@ 000 Hispanics deployed to the Persian Gulf in Operations Desert Shield and Desert Storm as part of the Gulf War . Four Puerto Ricans lost their lives , including Captain Manuel Rivera , Jr. of the Marine Corps , a Puerto Rican from the South Bronx , who on January 22 , 1991 became the first soldier to be killed in Operation Desert Shield . Rivera was killed during a support mission over the Persian Gulf . On January 30 , 1991 , the U.S. House of Representatives paid tribute to Rivera . 
 During this era <unk> Javier Kimmich , from Cabo Rojo , Puerto Rico , was the highest @-@ ranking Hispanic female in the Navy when she was promoted to the rank of <unk> . The naval rank of Captain is the equivalent of Colonel in the other US armed forces . Kimmich was assigned as the Chief of <unk> at the Navy Medical Center in Bethesda and reorganized their Reservist Department during Operation Desert Storm . In 1998 , she was selected as the woman of the year in Puerto Rico . 
 Operation Restore Hope was an American military operation with the support of the United Nations that was formed to deliver humanitarian aid and restore order to the African nation of Somalia , which was suffering from a severe famine , anarchy , and domination by a number of warlords following the collapse of Siad Barre 's Marxist government and the outbreak of the Somalian Civil War . On January 30 , 1993 , Private First Class Domingo Arroyo , Jr . , a Marine from Puerto Rico , became the first of the 44 American soldiers killed during the operation . He was ambushed in Mogadishu , the capital of Somalia , by Somali warlords . 
 = = September 11 attacks = = 
 On September 11 , 2001 , United Airlines Flight 93 was hijacked by four members of al @-@ Qaeda as part of the September 11 attacks . The hijackers ' specific target was the United States Capitol . Among the pilots available that day of the 113th Wing of the DC Air National Guard were Lieutenant Colonel Marc H. <unk> and Lieutenant Heather Penney Garcia . They were given the mission of finding the United Airlines Flight 93 and destroying it however they could . Since the fighter jets were absent of missiles and packed only with dummy ammunition from a recent training mission , there was only one way to do it and that was by ramming the aircraft . The fighter jets passed over the ravaged Pentagon building , however it was not until hours later that they would find out that United 93 had already gone down in a field outside Shanksville , Pennsylvania , killing all 44 people aboard including the 4 hijackers . 
 = = = 21st century campaigns = = = 
 In the 21st century , Puerto Ricans have participated in the military campaigns of Afghanistan and Iraq , in what the United States and its allies refer to as the War on Terror . Among those that have perished during the <unk> Operation are the first three Puerto Rican women to die in a foreign combat zone . They are Specialist Frances M. Vega , Specialist <unk> Robles and Specialist <unk> Ramirez Gonzalez . On November 2 , 2003 , Specialist Frances M. Vega became the first female Puerto Rican soldier born in the United States to die in a war zone . A ground @-@ to @-@ air missile fired by insurgents in Fallujah hit the Chinook transport helicopter Vega was in ; she was one of 16 soldiers who lost their lives in the crash that followed . On March 1 , 2005 , Specialist <unk> Robles became the first female Puerto Rican soldier born on the island to die in Iraq when her Humvee was involved in an accident . On July 10 , 2007 , Captain María Inés Ortiz , who was assigned to a hospital in an area known as the " Green Zone " in Baghdad , Iraq , became the first Puerto Rican nurse to die in combat and the first Army nurse to die in the Iraq War after the area came under a heavy mortar attack . 
 Brigadier General Hector E. Pagan graduated from the U.S. Army War College in 2003 . Pagan took command of the 5th SF Group ( Airborne ) in Baghdad , Iraq , Operation Iraqi Freedom . He led the 5th SF Group ( Airborne ) in combat as the commander of the Combined Joint Special Operations Task Force in the Arabian Peninsula for two combat tours in 2003 and 2004 . Later Pagan became the first Hispanic of Puerto Rican descent to become Deputy Commanding General of the <unk> John F. Kennedy Special Warfare Center and School at Fort Bragg , North Carolina . 
 That same year , Colonel Maritza Sáenz Ryan , who had participated in both Operations Desert Shield and Desert Storm , became the first woman and first Hispanic West Point graduate to serve as an academic department head . She also has the distinction of being the most senior ranking Hispanic Judge Advocate and has been instrumental in raising awareness of the inequity and impracticality of the Combat Exclusion Policy , which restricts women 's roles and opportunities in the military regardless of talent or ability . 
 Colonel <unk> Otero , Jr. helped establish the U.S. Central Command Headquarters at Qatar . When the United States military began Operations Enduring Freedom and Iraqi Freedom , Otero was called upon to establish the Intelligence Division which supported the military operations . The first Sensitive Site Exploitation of the Ba 'ath Party Headquarters in Baghdad was led by Otero . He was promoted to Colonel in 2004 and as Chief Coalition Intelligence Center in the Central Command at MacDill Air Force Base . His assignment included multiple trips to the Coalition Intelligence Center in Iraq where he worked on Detainee Interrogation Release Parameters . 
 In 2006 , Capt. Iván Castro ( then a First Lieutenant ) was providing support by fire during a battle with insurgents in Iraq when a mortar round exploded close to him leaving him totally blind . He continued serving on active duty in the Special Forces despite losing his eyesight becoming the only blind officer serving in the United States Army Special Forces . 
 As of May 2004 , there were 1 @,@ 800 Puerto Rican soldiers stationed in Iraq , Kuwait , Afghanistan and Bosnia and Herzegovina . 
 = = Adjutant General of the Puerto Rican National Guard = = 
 In July 2015 , Puerto Rico Governor Alejandro Garcia Padilla nominated Colonel Martha <unk> for the position of Adjutant General of the Puerto Rican National Guard , a position which she unofficially held since 2014 . On September 4 , 2015 , she was confirmed as the first Puerto Rican woman to lead the Puerto Rican National Guard . 
 = = Monument of Remembrance = = 
 General William W. Harris was quoted in the Puerto Rico Herald as saying , 
 Over 1 @,@ 225 Puerto Ricans have died while serving the United States . The names of those who perished in combat are inscribed in " El Monumento de la Recordación " ( Monument of Remembrance ) , which was unveiled on May 19 , 1996 , and is situated in front of the Capitol Building in San Juan , Puerto Rico . 
 On Veterans Day , November 11 , 2013 , a group representing the Puerto Rican community in Connecticut placed a floral arrangement on the tomb of Augusto Rodrigues , who fought in the American Civil War , recognizing him as Puerto Rico ’ s first known U.S. Armed Forces veteran . 
 = = Congressional Gold Medal = = 
 On June 10 , 2014 , President Barack Obama , signed the legislation known as " The Borinqueneers CGM Bill " at an official ceremony . The Bill honors the 65th Infantry Regiment with the Congressional Gold Medal . 
 A Congressional Gold Medal is an award bestowed by the United States Congress and is , along with the Presidential Medal of Freedom , the highest civilian award in the United States . It is awarded to persons or military units " who have performed an achievement that has an impact on American history and culture that is likely to be recognized as a major achievement in the recipient 's field long after the achievement . " 
 They join the four military units that had been awarded the Congressional Gold Medal prior to them . These were the Navaho Wind Talkers – Native American Marines whose primary job was the transmission of secret tactical messages with the use of their Native language ; the Nisei Soldiers , Japanese American intelligence soldiers during WWII in the Pacific , Africa , Italy and France ; the Tuskegee Airmen , the first African @-@ American military aviators ; and the Montford Point Marines , the first African @-@ Americans to break the race barrier in the Marines . 
 A decision on designs for a congressional gold medal being awarded in 2015 to the Borinqueneers of the 65th Infantry Regiment was selected by the Citizens Coinage Advisory Committee on June 16 , 2015 . In August 2015 , the Borinqueneers CGM design was finally approved by the Secretary of the Treasury . 
 = Mr. Monk Takes Manhattan = 
 " Mr. Monk Takes Manhattan " is the first episode of the third season of the American comedy @-@ drama detective television series Monk , and the show 's 30th episode overall . The series follows Adrian Monk ( Tony Shalhoub ) , a private detective with obsessive – compulsive disorder and multiple phobias , and his assistant Sharona Flemming ( Bitty Schram ) . In this episode , Monk travels to New York City in an attempt to discover his wife 's killer , but may solve the case of the death of the Latvian ambassador . 
 Written by Andy Breckman and directed by Randall Zisk , " Mr. Monk Takes Manhattan " was shot in New York . When the episode first aired in the United States on USA Network on June 18 , 2004 , it was watched by 5 @.@ 5 million viewers . The episode garnered a mixed reaction from critics , praising the comedy obtained through putting Monk in a scenario that would arouse his fears while criticizing Monk 's exaggerated reactions to the setting . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Detective Adrian Monk ( Tony Shalhoub ) flies to New York City to find criminal Warrick Tennyson ( Frank Collison ) . In the preceding episode , criminal Dale " The Whale " <unk> ( Tim Curry ) told Monk that Tennyson was involved in the murder of Monk 's wife , Trudy . On the trip , Monk is accompanied by his nurse Sharona Fleming ( Bitty Schram ) , and police officers Captain Stottlemeyer ( Ted Levine ) and Lieutenant Disher ( Jason Gray @-@ Stanford ) . They stay at the same hotel as the Latvian ambassador , who is subsequently discovered shot to death along with his two bodyguards . Police Captain Walter Cage ( Mykelti Williamson ) asks for Monk 's help in solving the murder . Monk notices the ambassador 's coat is damp , even though it had been dry minutes before the murder . 
 The four retrace the ambassador 's movements that day , discovering that he had stopped at a bar before arriving at the hotel . Then , Stottlemeyer and Disher go back to the precinct to try to get a bead on Tennyson 's location while Monk and Sharona discover that the ambassador 's final words meant " This is not my coat " . Stottlemeyer breaks into Cage 's office to discover that Tennyson is dying in a hospital and has days left to live . Stottlemeyer confronts Cage , who says the only way he will allow access to Tennyson is if Monk solves the ambassador 's murder . 
 Monk is briefly separated from the group after accidentally boarding the wrong train . While reuniting with his partners he notices Steven Leight ( Jeffrey Dean Morgan ) being interviewed on a TV screen about the recent murder of his wife . Noticing Leight eating a mint from the same bar the ambassador had last been seen , Monk insists Steven Leight is the ambassador 's murderer , despite the lack of supporting evidence . To support his theory , Monk proposes that Leight stole his wife 's jewelry to stage a robbery , then proceeded to the bar before calling the police . He asserts Leight and the ambassador were wearing essentially identical coats , and that they must have been switched accidentally at the bar . As rain falls , Leight locates the ambassador 's hotel room , and subsequently kills both him and his bodyguards , and switches the newly wet coat with his own . 
 Subsequently , a ballistics report confirms that Leight 's wife and the ambassador were killed with the same gun and Leight is arrested . Having solved the case , Monk is allowed to visit Tennyson who remembers being hired by a man who had six fingers on his right hand . Tennyson asks for forgiveness , but Monk cannot bring himself to give it . He turns off Tennyson 's morphine drip saying , " This is me , turning off your morphine ; " but a few moments later , he says , " This is Trudy , the woman you killed , turning it back on , " and does . 
 The foursome prepares to leave New York , having gotten a step further in solving Monk 's most important case . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Mr. Monk Takes Manhattan " was written by Andy Breckman and directed by Randall Zisk . Series creator and executive producer Breckman was credited for the script for the fifth time in the series , while it was the sixth time Zisk worked on a Monk episode . While Monk 's second season was entirely filmed and produced in Los Angeles , " Mr. Monk Takes Manhattan " was shot in New York City in March 2004 . 
 In the series ' plot , Trudy was killed years prior its first episode , which led Monk to develop obsessive – compulsive disorder and to be discharged from the San Francisco Police Department . At the beginning of the third season , executive producer and co @-@ creator David Hoberman said the staff felt it was a good idea to explore Trudy 's death . They were , however , careful about the manner in which they mentioned her death and Monk 's desire to find the culprit . This was out of concern that they would " burden " the series with it . 
 = = Reception = = 
 " Mr. Monk Takes Manhattan " was first broadcast in the United States on the USA Network at 9 pm EST on June 18 , 2004 . According to Nielsen Media Research , the episode was viewed by an estimated number of 5 @.@ 9 million viewers . It was the third most watched program on cable television that week with a 3 @.@ 6 percent household rating and a household audience of 3 @.@ 9 million . 
 <unk> and <unk> 's Dennis Landmann qualified it as one of the best episodes of the season . Seattle Post @-@ Intelligencer 's Melanie McFarland said although it is " a fecund opportunity for cheap laughs " , Shalhoub was able to keep the " balance between Monk 's power and helplessness without caving into lower comedic impulses . " McFarland praised its writing and Shalhoub , saying " It would begin to look like shoddy choreography " if they were not good . " A welcome return " was how it was described by Robert Lloyd from the Los Angeles Times who asserted its " pleasures are all in the predictable eccentricities of its characters , and the fact that it 's clearly being staged for our benefit . " Ted Cox of the Chicago @-@ area Daily Herald praised the scene when Monk forgives Tennyson dubbing it " great TV . " Chris Hicks of Deseret News deemed it as " a terrific example of how the writers come up with simple situations that throw Monk into turmoil but also allow us to identify with him : Monk in Manhattan . The crowds , the noise , the confusion . Perfect . " 
 Not all reviews were positive . David Bianculli , writing in the New York Daily News , stated that the idea of putting Monk in New York " sound [ ed ] great " on paper but it did not take advantage of what could be " a delightful study in contrasts . " Bianculli called it a " misstep " , criticizing its premise and how it was not able to keep the balance between comedy and drama that made it " too outrageous . " A review for the The Beaver County Times considered it a " stunt episode " and its humor " uncharacteristically forced " , saying it " really doesn 't do justice to the show 's considerable charms . " Steve Johnson of Chicago Tribune affirmed that while the premise is funny , " the writers go out of their way to play the city against his condition . " He continued by saying it " wouldn 't be so bad " if he went to solve crimes " but Friday 's first case is a real stretch . " Although excited for the episode 's premise prior its broadcast , Austin Smith of the New York Post was very critical of it . Smith said in this episode " the producers have him [ Monk ] crossing that fine line between genius and insanity , transforming our hero into a full @-@ blown mental patient . " He also criticized the " Mr. Monk vs. the City of New York " scenes as they do not further the episode 's plot . Smith co @-@ worker , Linda Stasi also panned the episode , considering Monk 's reactions " caricature [ d ] " . Stasi wrote , " It 's one thing to be an obsessive / compulsive ex @-@ detective who lines up the pins on the murder map and it 's another to act like you 've got a pin in your brain . " As Smith , Kay McFadden of The Seattle Times called the jokes " predictable " and said " If you aren 't a Monk fan , these devices may strike you as altogether <unk> . " 
 = Guy Bradley = 
 Guy Morrell Bradley ( April 25 , 1870 – July 8 , 1905 ) was an American game warden and deputy sheriff for Monroe County , Florida . Born in Chicago , Illinois , he relocated to Florida with his family when he was young . As a boy , he often served as guide to visiting fishermen and plume hunters , although he later denounced poaching after legislation was passed to protect the dwindling number of birds . In 1902 , Bradley was hired by the American Ornithologists ' Union , at the request of the Florida Audubon Society , to become one of the country 's first game wardens . 
 Tasked with protecting the area 's wading birds from hunters , he patrolled the area stretching from Florida 's west coast , through the Everglades , to Key West , single @-@ handedly enforcing the ban on bird hunting . Bradley was shot and killed in the line of duty , after confronting a man and his two sons who were hunting egrets in the Everglades . His much @-@ publicized death at the age of 35 galvanized conservationists , and served as inspiration for future legislation to protect Florida 's bird populations . Several national awards and places have been named in his honor . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Guy Bradley was born in Chicago , Illinois , in 1870 . His family had strong ties to the city ; his father , Edwin Ruthven Bradley , was born there in 1840 , and two members of the family held high positions in Chicago 's law enforcement . Six years after Guy 's birth , the family relocated to Florida . After making their home in smaller towns , the family eventually settled in Fort Lauderdale , where Edwin became keeper of the Fort Lauderdale House of Refuge . Shortly after the death of Bradley 's sister Flora from an unknown illness — which also affected Guy , leaving him ill for several years — the family moved to Lake Worth . Edwin became a postman , earning an annual wage of six hundred dollars . He , with the help of his oldest son , later received national attention for being one of several barefoot <unk> , who operated until a road was constructed in 1892 . 
 The family then relocated to Miami , where Edwin served as superintendent of the Dade County school district . In 1885 , fifteen @-@ year @-@ old Guy and his older brother Louis served as scouts for noted French plume hunter Jean Chevalier on his trip to the Everglades . Accompanied by their friend Charlie Pierce , the men set sail on Pierce 's craft , the <unk> , ending their journey in Key West . At the time , plume feathers — selling for more than $ 20 an ounce ( $ 501 in 2011 ) — were reportedly more valuable than gold . On their expedition , which lasted several weeks , the young men and Chevalier 's party killed 1 @,@ 397 individual birds of thirty @-@ six different species . 
 = = Hunt for plumes = = 
 At the turn of the 20th century , vast numbers of birds were being killed in order to provide feathers to decorate women 's hats . The fashion craze , which began in the 1870s , became so prominent that by 1886 birds were being killed for the millinery trade at a rate of five million a year ; many species faced extinction as a result . In Florida , plume birds were first driven away from the most populated areas in the northern part of the state , and forced to nest further south . <unk> concentrated in and around the Everglades area , which had abundant food and seasonal dry periods , ideal for nesting birds . By the late 1880s , there were no longer any large numbers of plume birds within reach of Florida 's most settled cities . 
 The most popular plumes came from various species of wading birds , known as " little <unk> " for their snowy @-@ white feathers ; even more prized were the " nuptial plumes " , grown during mating season and displayed by birds during courtship . Poachers often stole into the densely populated rookeries , where they would shoot and then pluck the roosting birds clean , leaving their carcasses to rot . Unprotected eggs became easy prey for predators , as were newly hatched birds , who also starved or died from exposure . One ex @-@ poacher would later write of the practice , " The heads and necks of the young birds were hanging out of the nests by the hundreds . I am done with bird hunting forever ! " 
 In the mid @-@ 1890s , Edwin became head of the Florida Coast Line Canal and Transportation Company and then the Model Land Company , both of which sold land for the railroads . In 1900 , after twenty years living in Lake Worth , the family moved to Flamingo in Monroe County , near the Everglades . Edwin had heard that railroad tycoon Henry Flagler planned to build his railroad through the area , and that the then primitive city of Flamingo would flourish as a result ; Flagler later changed his mind , deciding to build to Key West instead . Guy and his brother , who continued working as guides and hunters , each received a quarter of a mile of land on Florida Bay as part of their father 's deal with the Model Land Company . While working variously as a postman , farmer and boatman during his 20s , Guy continued to augment his income with an occasional plume hunt . In 1899 , he married the young widow <unk> ( " <unk> " ) Vickers <unk> from Key West . Their first child , Morrell , was born a year later . 
 = = Game warden = = 
 When the Florida legislature passed the American Ornithologists ' Union ( AOU ) model law to outlaw the killing of plume birds , this created a need for qualified and competent wardens to enforce it . Kirk Munroe , a friend of the Bradley family and a founding vice president of the Florida Audubon Society , recommended Guy for the position . Seen as different from the other " wild " young men in Flamingo , Bradley was described as " pleasant , quiet … fair , with blue eyes , always whistling and a pretty good violinist … [ a ] social asset to the isolated , frontier community , clean @-@ cut , reliable , courageous , energetic and conscientious " . 
 Bradley was at this time a reformed plume hunter , who had given up the profession after the passage of the Lacey Act of 1900 . In a letter to William Dutcher , president of the Florida Audubon Society , Bradley wrote " I used to hunt plume birds , but since the game laws were passed , I have not killed a plume bird . For it is a cruel and hard calling not withstanding being unlawful . I make this statement upon honor . " Soon after being accepted for the position , Bradley traveled to Key West to secure his appointment as both game warden and deputy sheriff , which gave him the authority to arrest those hunting illegally . 
 As one of the first game wardens , Bradley was responsible for reporting suspected poachers and the businesses with which they worked . He was paid a monthly stipend of $ 35 ( $ 917 in 2010 ) to single @-@ handedly patrol the enormous area stretching from the Ten Thousand Islands on Florida 's west coast , through the Everglades , to Key West , which served as nesting areas for popular plume birds such as egrets , herons , spoonbills and ibis . Bradley took his job seriously ; he educated locals about the newly implemented laws which made plume hunting a punishable offense , spoke to hunters directly , and posted warning signs throughout his territory . He also set up a network of spies who watched for suspicious behavior , and employed his brother Louis and others close to him to work as assistant wardens during the height of the plume season . 
 = = Difficulties = = 
 In 1903 , President Theodore Roosevelt created the first wildlife refuge in the United States , Pelican Island . Its first warden , Paul Kroegel , joined forces with Bradley to enforce the illegality of bird @-@ hunting in Florida . By 1904 , the various Audubon organizations had 34 wardens employed in ten states . Conservationist publications were optimistic that Bradley and other wardens would be successful in their enforcement ; in AOU 's January 1904 issue of The Auk , an editor wrote : " The natives are beginning to realize that the birds are to be protected and that the wardens are fearless men who are not to be trifled with . The Bradleys have the reputation of being the best rifle shots in that vicinity and they would not hesitate to shoot when necessary . " 
 After accepting the position as game warden , however , Bradley became a vilified figure in southern Florida ; working alone , with no reinforcements , he had been shot at more than once . In 1904 , Bradley alerted visiting ornithologist and author Frank Chapman that one of the more isolated rookeries , called Cuthbert , had been " shot out " despite previously having been found to be in good condition . He reportedly said , " You could 've walked right around the Rookery on those bird 's bodies — between four and five hundred of them . " 
 Bradley took the slaughter to mean that he was being watched by local hunters , who only could have discovered the rookery by tracking his movements . Chapman later wrote , " Under his guardianship the ' white birds ' had increased in numbers , which , with <unk> selling at $ 32 an ounce , made the venture worth the risk ( for there was a risk ; as the man who attempted to ' shoot out ' a rookery while Bradley was on guard would probably have lost his own ' plume ' ) ; the warden watched and in his absence his charges were slaughtered . " 
 = = Death = = 
 On July 8 , 1905 , Bradley heard gunshots close to his waterfront home in Flamingo . He set sail in his small skiff , and encountered a father and his two sons by the name of Smith , who were shooting up a rookery . The families had known each other for years , but Civil War veteran Walter Smith had a reputation for being troublesome , and Bradley had previously had altercations with him . He had arrested Smith on one occasion and Smith 's oldest son , Tom , twice for poaching . Smith threatened to retaliate against Bradley if he tried again , reportedly telling the warden , " You ever arrest one of my boys again , I 'll kill you . " 
 According to Walter Smith 's account , Bradley encountered the three men as they were loading dead plume birds onto their boat . An argument ensued , and as the warden attempted to arrest one of the young men , Smith opened fire with his hunting rifle , fatally wounding Bradley . His body was found the next day by his brother 's search party , after drifting 10 miles ( 16 km ) from the scene of the crime . He had bled to death . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Smith set sail to Key West and turned himself in to the authorities the next day . Despite evidence found by the prosecution — paid for by the Florida Audubon Society — that Bradley had not fired his weapon , Smith claimed self @-@ defense . He maintained that the warden had fired first , but missed , hitting Smith 's boat . Those who knew Bradley , however , insisted that he had been an excellent shot , and would not have missed his target had he , in fact , shot first . Smith later was found not guilty of murder , when the jury decided there was insufficient evidence to convict ; he served only five months in jail , unable to pay $ 5 @,@ 000 for bail . While he was incarcerated , Bradley 's two brothers @-@ in @-@ law burned down Smith 's Flamingo home . 
 Bradley 's death and Smith 's acquittal made national headlines ; detailed stories ran in the New York Times , the New York Herald , the Philadelphia North American , and Forest and Stream . The warden 's wife and two young children were given a home in Key West , paid for by donations secured by the Florida Audubon Society . The Society , however , made no effort to replace Bradley , and his job as warden went unfilled . Bradley 's obituary , written by William Dutcher and published in August 1905 's edition of Bird Lore , characterized him as " fearless and brave . " Dutcher eulogized Bradley by saying , " A faithful and devoted warden , who was a young and sturdy man , cut off in a moment , for what ? That a few more plume birds might be secured to adorn heartless women 's bonnets . Heretofore the price has been the life of the birds , now is added human blood . Every great movement must have its martyrs , and Guy M. Bradley is the first martyr in bird protection . " 
 With no one to replace Bradley , lawlessness continued in the Everglades and rookeries were devastated for several more years . Frank Chapman remarked that " There is no community sufficiently law @-@ abiding to leave a bank vault unmolested if it were left unprotected . We have given up . We can 't protect it , and the rookery will have to go . " In November 1908 , game warden and deputy sheriff of DeSoto County , Columbus G. McLeod , went missing near Charlotte Harbor . A month later , his boat was found weighted down and sunk ; inside , police found the warden 's bloodstained hat , long gashes cut into the crown with what appeared to be an axe . It was suspected that he was killed by poachers . His body was never found and the perpetrators were not caught . Later that year , an employee of the South Carolina Audubon Society , Pressly Reeves , was shot and killed during an ambush by unknown assailants . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 These three deaths within as many years helped end the commercial trade of feathers from Florida . In 1910 , the New York legislature passed the Audubon Plumage Act , outlawing the plume trade ; other states followed , and Congress soon banned the import of hats decorated with bird feathers . In time , the fashion craze for bird feathers faded . As the demand for plumage dwindled , thousands of birds returned to the Everglades rookeries ; adventure writer Zane Grey wrote after visiting a creek near Cape Sable : 
 Though we saw birds everywhere , in the air and on the foliage , we were not in the least prepared for what a bend in the stream disclosed . Banks of foliage as white with curlew as if with heavy snow ! With tremendous flapping of wings that merged into a roar , thousands of curlew took wing , out over the water . … It was a most wonderful experience . 
 Bradley was buried on a shell ridge at Cape Sable , overlooking Florida Bay . A nearby monument was erected by the Florida Audubon Society , reading : " Guy M. Bradley , 1870 – 1905 , Faithful Unto Death , As Game Warden of Monroe County He Gave his Life for the Cause to Which He Was <unk> " . The grave and monument , however , were later washed away in 1960 's Hurricane Donna . The original gravestone was recovered , and is now on display at the Flamingo Visitor Center . A nearby plaque was also dedicated to Bradley 's memory , and reads : " Audubon warden was shot and killed off this shore by outlaw feather hunters , July 8 , 1905 . His martyrdom created nationwide indignation , strengthened bird protection laws and helped bring Everglades National Park into being . " 
 The story of Bradley 's defense of the Everglades ' birds , and the manner of his death , has been depicted in both literature and film . Author Marjory Stoneman Douglas , who would later become famous for publicizing the need for conserving and restoring the Everglades , based the hero of her 1930 short story " Plumes " on Bradley . The 1958 film Wind Across the Everglades , starring Christopher Plummer and Burl Ives , was loosely based upon Bradley 's life and death . 
 In 1988 , the National Fish and Wildlife Foundation established the Guy Bradley Award to recognize achievements in wildlife law enforcement . The award is presented annually to two recipients , one state and one federal officer . Another honor , the Guy Bradley Lifetime Conservation Award , was established in 1997 by the Audubon Society Everglades Ecosystem Restoration Campaign to those who promote conservation and offer workable conservation solutions . A trail in the Everglades , leading from the Flamingo Visitor Center to the Flamingo Campground , also was named in Bradley 's honor . 
 = Batman Forever = 
 Batman Forever is a 1995 American superhero film directed by Joel Schumacher and produced by Tim Burton , based on the DC Comics character Batman . It is the third installment of the initial Batman film series , with Val Kilmer replacing Michael Keaton as Bruce Wayne / Batman . The film stars Chris O 'Donnell , Nicole Kidman , Tommy Lee Jones and Jim Carrey . The plot focuses on Batman trying to stop Two @-@ Face ( Jones ) and the Riddler ( Carrey ) in their villainous scheme to extract confidential information from all the minds in Gotham City and use it to learn Batman 's identity and bring the city under their control . He gains allegiance from a love interest — psychiatrist Dr. Chase Meridian ( Kidman ) and a young , orphaned circus acrobat named Dick Grayson ( O 'Donnell ) , who becomes his sidekick Robin . 
 Batman Forever 's tone is significantly different from the previous installments , becoming more family @-@ friendly since Warner Bros. believed that the previous Batman film , Batman Returns ( 1992 ) , failed to outgross its predecessor due to parent complaints about the film 's violence and dark overtones . Schumacher eschewed the dark , dystopian atmosphere of Burton 's films by drawing inspiration from the Batman comic book of the Dick Sprang era , as well as the 1960s television series . Keaton chose not to reprise the role due to Burton stepping down as director . William Baldwin and Ethan Hawke were initially considered for Keaton 's replacement , before Kilmer joined the cast . The film was released on June 16 , 1995 , receiving mixed reviews , but was a financial success . Batman Forever grossed over $ 336 million worldwide and became the sixth @-@ highest grossing film worldwide of 1995 . 
 = = Plot = = 
 In Gotham City , the crime fighter Batman stops a hostage situation caused by a criminal known as Two @-@ Face , the alter ego of the former district attorney Harvey Dent , but Two @-@ Face escapes and remains at large . Edward Nygma , a researcher at Wayne Enterprises who idolizes Bruce Wayne , has developed a device that can beam television into a person 's brain . However , Bruce rejects the invention , believing it to be too close to mind manipulation . After killing his secretary Fred Stickley , Nygma resigns and seeks retaliation against Bruce for rejecting his invention and begins to send him riddles . A news report reveals how Harvey Dent became Two @-@ Face : when he was prosecuting a mob boss named Sal Maroni , Maroni threw acid on Dent 's face , disfiguring half of it . Batman tried to save him , but failed . After the incident , Dent seeks to kill Batman for failing to save him . Bruce meets Chase Meridian , a psychiatrist who is obsessed with Batman , and invites her to come with him to a circus event . After a performance from the circus performers , The Flying Graysons , Two @-@ Face arrives and threatens to blow up the circus unless Batman comes forward and surrenders his life to him . The Flying Graysons attempt to stop Two @-@ Face , but they get killed by as a result . However , Dick Grayson , the youngest member , survives as he throws Two @-@ Face 's bomb into a river . 
 Bruce invites the orphaned Dick to stay at Wayne Manor . Dick , still troubled by the murder of his family , intends to kill Two @-@ Face and avenge his family . When he discovers that Bruce is Batman , he asks Bruce to help him find Two @-@ Face so that he can kill him , but Bruce refuses . Meanwhile , Nygma becomes a criminal called the Riddler and forms an alliance with Two @-@ Face . The two steal capital in order to mass produce Nygma 's brainwave device . At Nygma 's business party , Nygma discovers Bruce 's alter ego using the brainwave device . Two @-@ Face arrives and crashes the party . He nearly kills Batman , but Dick manages to save his life . Meanwhile , Chase has fallen in love with Bruce , which surpasses her obsession with Batman , but she soon discovers that they are one and the same . Bruce decides to stop being Batman in order to have a normal life with Chase and to prevent Dick from finding Two @-@ Face and kill him . Dick runs away while Bruce and Chase have dinner together in the manor . The Riddler and Two @-@ Face arrive and attack Wayne Manor . The Riddler destroys the Batcave and kidnaps Chase , while leaving an injured Bruce another riddle . 
 Using the riddles , Bruce and his butler , Alfred , find out the Riddler 's secret identity . Dick returns and becomes Batman 's sidekick , Robin . Batman and Robin head to Riddler and Two @-@ Face 's lair , Claw Island , where they are separated . Robin encounters Two @-@ Face and nearly kills him . Realizing that he does not have it in him to murder , Robin spares him . Two @-@ Face gets the upper hand and captures Robin . Batman arrives at the lair , where Robin and Chase are held as hostages . The Riddler gives Batman a chance to save only one hostage . But instead , Batman destroys the Riddler 's brainwave collecting device , causing the Riddler to suffer a mental breakdown . Batman manages to save Robin and Chase . Two @-@ Face corners the trio and determines their fate with the flip of a coin , but Batman throws a handful of identical coins in the air , causing Two @-@ Face to stumble and fall to his death . The Riddler is taken to Arkham Asylum and imprisoned , but he claims he knows who Batman is . Chase is asked to consult on the case , but Nygma says that he himself is Batman , due to his damaged memories . Chase meets Bruce outside and tells him that his secret is safe before leaving . Bruce decides to become Batman again and he and Robin continue to protect Gotham from crime . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Val Kilmer as Bruce Wayne / Batman 
 After coming across the journal of his father , he starts questioning his act of vengeance . Bruce struggles with his dual identity as a crime fighter , becoming romantically involved with Dr. Chase Meridian . 
 Chris O 'Donnell as Dick Grayson / Robin 
 Once a circus acrobat , Dick is taken in by Bruce after Two @-@ Face murders his parents and brother at a circus event . Bruce is reminded of when his parents were murdered when he sees the same vengeance in Dick , and decides to take him in as his ward . He eventually discovers the Batcave and learns Bruce 's secret identity . In his wake , he becomes the crime fighting partner , Robin . 
 Nicole Kidman as Dr. Chase Meridian 
 A psychologist and love interest of Bruce Wayne . Chase is fascinated by the dual nature of Batman . She is held as a damsel in distress in the climax . 
 Tommy Lee Jones as Harvey Dent / Harvey Two @-@ Face 
 Formerly the good district attorney of Gotham City , half of Harvey 's face is scarred with acid during the conviction of a crime boss . Driven insane , he becomes the criminal Harvey Two @-@ Face obsessed with killing Batman . He flips a coin to determine if he kills ( tails ) or not ( heads ) . 
 Jim Carrey as Edward Nygma / The Riddler 
 A former Wayne Enterprises employee , Edward resigns after his newest invention is personally rejected by Bruce Wayne , with whom he is obsessed . He becomes the villainous Riddler , leaving riddles and puzzles at crime scenes . 
 Michael Gough as Alfred Pennyworth 
 The Wayne family 's faithful butler and Bruce 's confidant . Alfred also befriends the young Dick Grayson . 
 Pat Hingle as James Gordon 
 The police commissioner of Gotham City . 
 Drew Barrymore as Sugar 
 Two @-@ Face 's " good " assistant . 
 Debi Mazar as Spice 
 Two @-@ Face 's " bad " assistant . 
 Elizabeth Sanders as Gossip Gerty 
 Gotham 's top gossip columnist . 
 René Auberjonois as Dr. Burton 
 The head Doctor of Arkham Asylum . 
 Joe <unk> as Hawkins , the Bank Guard 
 Two @-@ Face 's hostage during the opening scene . 
 Ofer Samra as Two @-@ Face 's thug 
 Ed Begley , Jr. as Fred Stickley 
 Edward Nygma 's ill @-@ tempered supervisor at Wayne Enterprises . After Stickley discovers the side effect of Edward 's invention , Edward kills him and makes it look like suicide . Begley was uncredited for this role . 
 Don " The Dragon " Wilson as the leader of the Neon Gang . 
 Patrick Leahy in an uncredited cameo 
 This is the first of five cameo appearances in Batman films by Leahy , a United States Senator and DC Comics fan . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 Even though Batman Returns was a financial success , Warner Bros. felt the film should have made more money and decided to make the film series more mainstream . Tim Burton , who had directed the two previous installments , was asked to restrict himself to the role of producer and signed Joel Schumacher as director . After approving Schumacher as director , Burton met with Lee and Janet Scott @-@ <unk> , who agreed with him that " the key element to Batman is his duality . And it 's not just that Batman is Bruce Wayne " . Burton along with Schumacher hired the <unk> to write the script which introduced a psychotic Riddler with a pet rat accompanying him . The story elements and much of the dialogue still remained in the finished film , though Schumacher felt it could be " <unk> [ ne ] d down " . Schumacher claims he originally had in mind an adaptation of Frank Miller 's Batman : Year One . The studio rejected the idea as they wanted a sequel , not a prequel , though Schumacher was able to include very brief events in Bruce Wayne 's past . He hired Akiva Goldsman — with whom he previously had worked with on The Client — to write the second draft of the script . 
 Production went on fast track with Rene Russo cast as Dr. Chase Meridian but Michael Keaton decided not to reprise Batman because he did not like the new direction the film series was heading in . Keaton also wanted to pursue " more interesting roles " , turning down $ 15 million to appear in Batman Forever . Val Kilmer was cast days later , and the filmmakers decided that Russo was too old for Kilmer , replacing her with a different actress . Schumacher became interested in Kilmer for Batman after seeing him in Tombstone , and the actor accepted the role without even reading the script or knowing who the new director was . Before Val Kilmer was cast , Daniel Day @-@ Lewis , Ralph Fiennes , William Baldwin and Johnny Depp were all under consideration to replace Michael Keaton . Ethan Hawke turned down the role over fear of typecasting , but later regretted the decision . 
 Robin Wright , Jeanne Tripplehorn and Linda Hamilton were in competition for Dr. Chase Meridian , with Wright appearing as the favorable choice . Nicole Kidman was eventually cast . Billy Dee Williams took on the role of Harvey Dent in Batman on the possibility of portraying Two @-@ Face in a sequel , but Schumacher cast Tommy Lee Jones in the role . Jones was always Schumacher 's first choice , after having worked with him on The Client . Jones claims he was sent the script and was very cautious to accept , but did so after his son 's insistence . Robin Williams was in discussions to be the Riddler at one point . In a 2003 interview , Schumacher stated Michael Jackson lobbied hard for the role , but was turned down before Jim Carrey was cast . Robin appeared in the shooting script of Batman Returns but was deleted due to too many characters . Marlon Wayans had been cast in the role , and signed for Batman Forever . It was decided to replace Wayans with a white actor . Leonardo DiCaprio was considered , but decided not to go the role after a meeting with Schumacher . Chris O 'Donnell was cast and Mitchell Gaylord served as his stunt double . Schumacher attempted to create a cameo role for Bono as his MacPhisto character , but both came to agree it was not suitable for the film . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 Filming started in September 1994 . Schumacher hired Barbara Ling for production design , claiming that the film needed a " force " and felt Ling could " advance on it " . Schumacher wanted a design that was not to be in any way connected to the previous films , and instead was to be inspired by the images from the Batman comic books seen in the 1940s / early 1950s and taken from that of New York City architecture in the 1930s , with a combination of modern Tokyo . He also wanted a " city with personality " , with more statues , as well as various amounts of neon . 
 Schumacher had problems filming with Kilmer , whom he described as " childish and impossible " , reporting that he fought with various crewmen , and refused to speak to Schumacher during two weeks after the director told him to stop behaving in a rude way . Schumacher also mentioned Tommy Lee Jones as a source of trouble : " Jim Carrey was a gentleman , and Tommy Lee was threatened by him . I 'm tired of defending overpaid , <unk> actors . I pray I don 't work with them again . " Carrey later acknowledged Jones was not friendly to him , telling him once off @-@ set during the production , " I hate you . I really don 't like you ... I cannot sanction your buffoonery . " 
 = = = Design and effects = = = 
 Rick Baker designed the prosthetic makeup . John Dykstra , Andrew Adamson and Jim Rygiel served as visual effects supervisors , with Pacific Data Images also contributing to visual effects work . PDI provided a computer @-@ generated Batman for complicated stunts . For the costume design , producer Peter MacGregor @-@ Scott claimed that 146 workers were at one point working together . Batman 's costume was redesigned along the lines of a more " MTV organic , and edgier feel " to the suit . Sound editing and mixing was co @-@ supervised by Bruce Stambler and John Levesque , which included trips to caves to record bat sounds . A new Batmobile was designed for Batman Forever , with two cars being constructed , one for stunt purposes and one for close @-@ ups with both showcasing a V8 engine . Swiss surrealist painter H.R. Giger provided his version for the Batmobile but it was considered too sinister for the film . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 Elliot Goldenthal was hired by Schumacher to compose the film score before the screenplay was written , whereas most composers are hired during production . In discussions with Schumacher , the director wanted Goldenthal to avoid taking inspiration from Danny Elfman , and requested an original composition . The film 's promotional teaser trailer used the main title theme from Elfman 's score of 1989 's Batman . 
 The soundtrack was commercially successful , selling almost as many copies as Prince 's soundtrack to the 1989 Batman film . Only five of the songs on the soundtrack are actually featured in the movie ' . Hit singles from the soundtrack include " Hold Me , Thrill Me , Kiss Me , Kill Me " by U2 and " Kiss from a Rose " by Seal , both of which were nominated for MTV Movie Awards . " Kiss from a Rose " ( whose video was also directed by Joel Schumacher ) reached No. 1 in the U.S. charts as well . The soundtrack itself , featuring additional songs by The Flaming Lips , Brandy ( both songs also included in the film ) , Method Man , Nick Cave , Michael Hutchence ( of INXS ) , PJ Harvey , and Massive Attack , was an attempt to ( in producer Peter MacGregor @-@ Scott 's words ) make the film more " pop " . 
 = = Deleted scenes = = 
 Batman Forever went through a few major edits before its release . Originally darker than the final product , the movie 's original length was closer to 2 hours and 40 minutes according to director Joel Schumacher . There was talk of an extended cut being released to DVD for the film 's 10th anniversary in 2005 . While all four previous Batman films were given special edition DVD releases on the same day as the Batman Begins DVD release , none of them were given extended cuts , although some of the following scenes were in a deleted scenes section in the special features . 
 There was an undercurrent theme involving Bruce having repressed memories of an aspect of his parents death that he hadn 't faced which was finding his father 's diary on the night of his parents wake and reading that Bruce insisted his parents go to the theater so he could watch one of the shows , meaning the reason he became Batman was out of the guilt that he killed them . 
 Many scenes were filmed but deleted from the film , other scenes had footage removed . These included : 
 The escape of Two @-@ Face from Arkham Asylum . René Auberjonois had another scene filmed here in the role of Doctor Burton , but his role was reduced in the final film . He discovers Two @-@ Face 's escape , encountering his psychologist hanged in Two @-@ Face 's cell with " The Bat Must Die " written in blood on the wall . This was supposed to be the film 's opening scene , but producers decided this was far too dark for a family audience . 
 When Two @-@ Face addresses the crowd from the helicopter in the opening action scene , the speech was truncated and several lines that appeared in the Theatrical Trailer were removed , including the line " If the Bat wants to play , we 'll play ! " 
 There was a sequence that contained an extended fight scene between Two @-@ Face and Batman , where they both struggle for control of the helicopter . In this scene , Two @-@ Face accuses Batman of being " a killer too " , a direct continuity reference to the first two Batman films in which Batman killed the Joker , the Penguin and several of their respective goons . Two @-@ face then manages to escape by the parachute , after Batman realizes he has locked the steering wheel into position . This sequence is included in rough form on the special edition DVD . 
 A scene right before Edward Nygma arrived at Wayne Manor . It featured Bruce Wayne watching a local Gotham talk show with Chase Meridian as a guest , talking about Batman . 
 One scene right before Riddler and Two @-@ face team up featured a little conversation with Dick and Bruce in the gym of the manor . This would explain why Dick suddenly has martial arts training . This scene appears in a rough edit on the Special Edition DVD . 
 The scene where the Riddler fails to punch a security guard out . The guard is then brutally beaten by the Riddler using his cane . 
 One sequence came directly after the casino robbery , where Batman follows a robbery signal on a tracking device in the Batmobile . He shows up at the crime scene and finds he is at the wrong place ( a beauty salon ) , in which a room full of girls laugh at him . The Riddler had been throwing Batman off the track by messing with the Batmobile 's tracking device . This would explain why in the theatrical version Batman seems to give Riddler and Two @-@ Face moments of free rein over the city . This scene appears in a rough edit on the Special Edition DVD . 
 The construction of <unk> was after Batman solves the third riddle and was more in @-@ depth . There were scenes shot that appear in publicity stills of Edward Nygma with a hard hat helping with the construction of his headquarters on Claw Island . 
 Sugar and Spice , played by Drew Barrymore and Debi Mazar , try out the Riddler 's device during the montage when it goes on sale . They are seated with the Riddler and Two @-@ Face on the couch where Chase is handcuffed later in the film . This scene appears in the comic adaptation but not in the final film . 
 There was originally a scene after the montage of Alfred and Bruce examining the <unk> " Box " . 
 An extended scene established Bruce in the Batcave shortly after having discussed with Dick then that this would have saved his life after the battle with Two @-@ Face in the subway system under construction . In this scene he is appreciated as the <unk> news ( Bruce watching in the <unk> ) attacking Batman and Two @-@ Face after the battle in the Subway and after that Bruce talking to Alfred turns into the dilemma of continuing to be Batman and try a normal life with Chase . Like the deleted Helicopter fight sequence , this scene also makes reference to Batman himself being " a killer " , and in the original production screenplay , this scene was to contain footage from Batman Returns , specifically taken from the rooftop fight scene with Catwoman . This would explain why in the theatrical version Bruce turns off all the systems in the Batcave telling Dick he gives up being Batman . This scene appears in a rough form on the Special Edition DVD . 
 Another scene in the Wayne Manor raid sequence was longer , featuring Bruce and Chase fighting Two @-@ Face and his thugs . 
 The scene involving Chase Meridian on the couch originally included a longer ending where the Riddler injects her with a green sleeping agent so he can easily place her in the small tube with the trap door . 
 The most well @-@ known deleted scene involved further backstory to the film . It involved Bruce waking up after being shot in the head by Two @-@ Face , temporarily wiping a part of his memory ; he has forgotten his origin and life as the Dark Knight . Alfred takes him to the Batcave , which has been destroyed by the Riddler . They stand on the platform where the Batmobile was , and Alfred says , " Funny they did not know about the cave beneath the cave . " The platform then rotates downward to another level where the sonar @-@ modification equipment is kept , from the special Batsuit to the hi @-@ tech weaponry . Bruce then discovers the cavern where he first saw the image that inspired him to become Batman – a giant bat . Inside he finds his father 's red diary which he had dropped when he first fell into the Batcave after his parents death . He reads the entry that his memories had repressed , about him insisting his parents take him to the theater to see a show the same night they were killed and discovers that he had misread it all those years ago , his father writing ' even though Bruce insists , we wanted to see Zorro so his show will have to wait until next week ' . Bruce realizes his parents death was not his fault after all . The giant bat then appears and Bruce raises his arms to match the wing anatomy of the bat and the shot shows that they are one . Bruce now remembers who he is and goes with Alfred to solve the riddles left throughout the film . This scene makes what Batman tells the Riddler at the end of the theatrical version that he 's Batman now because he chooses to be a little more meaningful . Screenwriter Akiva Goldsman admitted the scene was very theatrical on the special edition DVD and felt it would have made a difference to the final cut . The bat was designed and created by Rick Baker , who was in charge of the make @-@ up of Two @-@ Face . This scene appears in a rough form on the special edition DVD and is briefly mentioned in the comic adaptation . 
 The fight scene between Two @-@ Face and Robin on Claw Island was originally longer . 
 The original ending was similar in style to the previous Batman films , which had involved a scene with Alfred in the limousine , the camera tracking upward through the Gotham cityscape , followed by a rooftop shot involving a silhouetted hero ( Batman in the original , Catwoman in Batman Returns ) facing the Bat Signal . When Alfred drives Doctor Chase Meridian back to Gotham she asks him " Does it ever end , Alfred ? " Alfred replies , " No , Doctor Meridian , not in this lifetime ... " The Bat @-@ Signal shines on the night sky and Batman is standing on a pillar looking ahead . Robin then comes into shot and joins his new partner . They both leap off the pillar , towards the camera . A rough edit of the first half of the scene appears on the special edition DVD , but not in its entirety . The sequence with Batman and Robin at the end of this scene is not to be confused with a commercial for the video game , whose appears in a teaser trailer for the video game , which is on the VHS release of this film , released in the UK on December 3 , 1995 . 
 = = Release = = 
 = = = Box office = = = 
 Batman Forever opened in 2 @,@ 842 theaters in the United States on June 16 , 1995 , making $ 52 @.@ 8 million in its opening weekend , breaking Jurassic Park 's record for highest opening weekend gross of all @-@ time ( it was surpassed two years later by The Lost World : Jurassic Park 's $ 72 @.@ 1 million ) . The film went on to gross $ 184 million in North America , and $ 152 @.@ 5 million in other countries , totaling $ 336 @.@ 53 million . The film earned more money than its predecessor Batman Returns , and was the second @-@ highest ( behind Toy Story ) grossing film of 1995 , in the U.S. 
 = = = Critical reaction = = = 
 On Rotten Tomatoes , the film received a rating of 41 % , based on 58 reviews , with the site 's critical consensus reading , " Loud , excessively busy , and often boring , Batman Forever nonetheless has the charisma of Jim Carrey and Tommy Lee Jones to offer mild relief . " On Metacritic , the film has a score of 51 out of 100 , based on 23 critics , indicating " mixed or average reviews " . 
 Peter Travers said " Batman Forever still gets in its licks . There 's no fun machine this summer that packs more surprises . " However , he criticized the film 's excessive commercialism and felt that " the script misses the pain Tim Burton caught in a man tormented by the long @-@ ago murder of his parents . " Brian Lowry of Variety believed " One does have to question the logic behind adding nipples to the hard @-@ rubber batsuit . Whose idea was that supposed to be anyway , Alfred 's ? Some of the computer @-@ generated Gotham cityscapes appear too obviously fake . Elliot Goldenthal 's score , while serviceable , also isn 't as stirring as Danny Elfman 's work in the first two films . " 
 James Berardinelli enjoyed the film . " It 's lighter , brighter , funnier , faster @-@ paced , and a whole lot more colorful than before . " Scott Beatty felt " Tommy Lee Jones played Harvey Dent as a Joker knock @-@ off rather than a multi @-@ layered rogue . " Lee Bermejo called Batman Forever " unbearable " . Gene Siskel and Roger Ebert both gave the film mixed reviews , but with the former giving it a thumbs up and the latter a thumbs down . In his written review , Ebert wrote : " Is the movie better entertainment ? Well , it 's great bubblegum for the eyes . Younger children will be able to process it more easily ; some kids were led bawling from Batman Returns where the PG @-@ 13 rating was a joke . " Mick LaSalle had a mixed reaction , concluding " a shot of Kilmer 's rubber buns at one point is guaranteed to bring squeals from the audience . " 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 At the 68th Academy Awards , Batman Forever was nominated for Cinematography ( lost to Braveheart ) , Sound ( Donald O. Mitchell , Frank A. Montaño , Michael <unk> and <unk> <unk> ; lost to Apollo 13 ) and Sound Editing ( John Leveque and Bruce Stambler ) ( also lost to Braveheart ) . " Hold Me , Thrill Me , Kiss Me , Kill Me " by U2 was nominated for the Golden Globe Award for Best Original Song ( lost to " Colors of the Wind " from Pocahontas ) , but was also nominated for the Worst Original Song Golden Raspberry Award ( lost to " Walk Into the Wind " from Showgirls ) . At the Saturn Awards , the film was nominated for Best Fantasy Film ( lost to Babe ) , Make @-@ up ( lost to Seven ) , Special Effects ( lost to Jumanji ) and Costume Design ( lost to 12 Monkeys ) . Composer Elliot Goldenthal was given a Grammy Award nomination . Batman Forever received six nominations at the 1996 MTV Movie Awards , four of which were divided between two categories ( Carrey and Lee Jones for Best Villain ; and Seal 's " Kiss from a Rose " and U2 's " Hold Me " in Best Song from a Movie ) . However , it won in just one category — Best Song from a Movie for Seal 's " Kiss from a Rose " . 
 = = = Merchandising = = = 
 In addition to a large line of toys and action figures from Kenner , the McDonald 's food chain released several collectibles and mugs to coincide with the release of the film . Peter David and Alan Grant wrote separate novelizations of the film . Dennis O 'Neil authored a comic book adaptation , with art by Michal Dutkiewicz . 
 Six Flags Great Adventure theme park re @-@ themed their " Axis Chemical " arena , home of the Batman stunt show , to resemble " Batman Forever " , and the new show featured props from the film . Because of the mostly negative critical reaction however , the stunt arena was changed back to its original version after the season . Six Flags Over Texas featured a one @-@ time fireworks show to promote the movie , and replica busts of Batman , Robin , Two @-@ Face , and the Riddler can still be found in the Justice League store in the Looney Tunes U.S.A. section . 
 = 1954 Orange Bowl = 
 The 1954 Orange Bowl was a postseason American college football bowl game between the first @-@ ranked Maryland Terrapins and the fourth @-@ ranked Oklahoma Sooners . It was the twentieth edition of the Orange Bowl and took place at the Orange Bowl stadium in Miami , Florida on January 1 , 1954 . 
 The game was the first Orange Bowl to feature tie @-@ ins between the Big Seven Conference and the Atlantic Coast Conference ( ACC ) champions . It was the first @-@ ever meeting of the two teams . Maryland and Oklahoma were head coached by former colleagues Jim Tatum and Bud Wilkinson , respectively , who had previously coached together at the United States Navy 's Iowa Pre @-@ Flight School and the University of Oklahoma . 
 = = Pre @-@ game buildup = = 
 The game was the first postseason bowl game in which the players were required to play on both the offense and defense . This was a result of the NCAA 's newly instituted " one @-@ platoon " rules that limited player substitutions . It also featured the Orange Bowl 's first conference tie @-@ in between the Big Seven and the ACC . 
 = = = Maryland = = = 
 Maryland was helmed by seventh @-@ year head coach Jim Tatum . To that point , he had compiled a record of 56 – 11 – 3 . Before that , he spent one year as the Oklahoma head coach in 1946 , where Bud Wilkinson had served as his assistant coach . The team was ranked first in the nation in the final rankings of both the Associated Press ( AP ) Poll and the United Press Coaches ' Poll . Maryland had finished the regular season with a perfect 10 – 0 record with the narrowest win being a 20 – 6 victory over Don Faurot 's Missouri . They also recorded wins over 11th @-@ ranked Mississippi , 38 – 0 , and 11th @-@ ranked Alabama , 21 – 0 . Tatum said , " this is the greatest team I ever coached . " 
 During the regular season , the Maryland defense had allowed opponents to score 31 points in ten games and recorded six defensive shut @-@ outs . Only Georgia had been able to score more than seven points . No ACC team has since held opponents to an equal or lesser amount of points . Maryland 's rushing defense ( 83 @.@ 9 yards allowed per game ) and scoring defense ( 3 @.@ 1 points allowed per game ) ranked first in the nation . Maryland had outscored its opponents 298 – 31 . No ACC team scored more total points until 1967 . Maryland 's star quarterback , Bernie <unk> , had been injured midseason and saw limited game action for the remainder of the year . Back @-@ up quarterback Charlie Boxold filled in for the majority of the Orange Bowl . 
 = = = Oklahoma = = = 
 Oklahoma was led by seventh @-@ year head coach Bud Wilkinson . He had assumed the position himself after Tatum resigned to leave for Maryland . The two had also both served as assistant coaches in the U.S. Navy for the Iowa Pre @-@ Flight football team under Don Faurot . Faurot had pioneered the split @-@ T offense that both Tatum and Wilkinsons ' teams employed . Since taking over at Oklahoma , Wilkinson had achieved a 62 – 8 – 3 record . Oklahoma entered the game on an eight @-@ game winning streak with a single loss in the season @-@ opener to Notre Dame and a tie in Week 2 against Pittsburgh . Oklahoma also had an injured quarterback , second @-@ stringer Pat O 'Neal had separated his sternum at Miami and would miss the game . 
 Wilkinson reportedly compiled fake playbooks and had them distributed where they would be discovered by Maryland personnel . Wilkinson later admitted that he had indeed used the ruse on occasion , without specifically stating it was employed before the 1954 Orange Bowl . 
 = = Game summary = = 
 In the first quarter , Maryland started with the wind to their backs . Bill Walker kicked a punt that pinned Oklahoma on their own one @-@ foot line . Oklahoma quarterback Gene Calame rushed twice to gain some breathing room before the Sooners punted it away . Maryland took over on the Oklahoma 37 @-@ yard line . Quarterback Charlie Boxold completed a nine @-@ yard pass to Dick Nolan . Halfback Chet Hanulak then connected with Nolan again . That was followed by a first down by fullback Ralph Felton on the Oklahoma four @-@ yard line . Hanulak rushed to pick up two yards . Nolan then ran to the left but was stopped by Oklahoma back Larry Grigg for no gain . Hanulak rushed again to pick up one more yard . Felton rushed from the one @-@ yard line , but was stopped six inches shy of the end zone , and Maryland turned over on downs . Maryland again drove inside the Oklahoma 10 @-@ yard line . Wilkinson sent in the alternate line @-@ up and Oklahoma again stopped Maryland short . The Sooners fumbled at their own 20 @-@ yard line , but the Terrapins again failed to capitalize . 
 In the second quarter , Maryland advanced to the Oklahoma 20 @-@ yard line , and Tatum elected for a field goal attempt . Now against the wind , the kick failed , with the ball going wide right . The Sooners took over on downs and halfback Jack Ging completed a pass to end Max <unk> for a five @-@ yard gain . Ging then rushed for three yards . On the next play , Calame pitched to Grigg who ran to the left and picked up 12 yards for a first down . Calame then completed a pass to back Bob Burris for six yards . Grigg faked a pass and ran to the right for a gain of 12 yards and a first down on the Maryland 39 @-@ yard line . The Terrapins stopped two Sooner rushing attempts before Calame connected with Burris again for an 11 @-@ yard gain . Burris then rushed for three more yards to advance to the Maryland 25 . Tatum called a time @-@ out . On third down with one yard to go , Calame faked a handoff to Ging and executed an option run to the left . He pitched to Grigg and threw a block . Grigg was tackled at the goal @-@ line but managed to extend his body into the endzone . Buddy Leake made the extra point . Shortly before halftime , Calame suffered a separated collarbone . With back @-@ up Pat O 'Neal also injured , only third @-@ string quarterback Jack Van Pool remained , and he had little game experience . 
 In the third quarter , Walker attempted to punt for Maryland . Oklahoma tackle Don Brown escaped a block from Stan Jones and closed in on Walker . The punter held onto the ball and attempted to run , but Brown tackled him for a 12 @-@ yard loss . Later , Leake punted and Hanulak returned and threatened to score . Leake , the last man between Hanulak and the endzone , made the tackle . 
 In the fourth quarter , Boxold threw a long pass into the endzone , but it was intercepted by Grigg for a touchback with four minutes remaining . Van Pool led a 41 @-@ yard drive to the Maryland 39 @-@ yard line before time expired . 
 = = Statistical summary = = 
 Oklahoma back Larry Grigg managed to score the only touchdown of the game and Buddy Leake made the extra point . Grigg led the Sooners in rushing with 89 yards on 13 carries . Maryland was led by Felton who gained 51 yards on ten carries . 
 Quarterback Charlie Boxold led Maryland in passing with three completions on nine attempts for 42 yards . Dick Nolan led in receiving with two receptions for 31 yards . Oklahoma 's passing was led by quarterback Gene Calame before he was put out of the game by injury . He completed four of four pass attempts for 22 yards . Bob Burris was the Sooners ' leading receiver with three receptions for 17 yards . 
 = = Post @-@ game effects = = 
 At the time , the final rankings were declared before postseason games . Therefore , Maryland had been declared the national championship team by the Associated Press , United Press , and International News Service , and remained the consensus national champions despite the loss . Some selectors have retroactively named Notre Dame and Oklahoma the national champions . With a 10 – 1 finish , Maryland possessed the best record in the nation . It was the first time Maryland had suffered a shutout in 51 games , the last being in 1948 at the hands of Vanderbilt . 
 For Oklahoma , it was their ninth @-@ straight win , and the team finished the 1953 season with a 9 – 1 – 1 record . The game was part of a streak that , under head coach Wilkinson , would last 47 games . To date , that winning streak is the longest compiled by any NCAA major college football team . 
 Oklahoma head coach Wilkinson declined to declare his team the national champions . He addressed his team in the locker room , saying , " It was a helluva ball game . Desire , spirit , effort — anything you want to call it — won for us today . " Maryland head coach Tatum said at the post @-@ game party , " Bud <unk> me . " 
 = Hurricane Danielle ( 2010 ) = 
 Hurricane Danielle was the first of four Category 4 hurricanes during the 2010 Atlantic hurricane season . The sixth tropical depression , fourth named storm , second hurricane , and first major hurricane of the season , Danielle developed as a typical Cape Verde @-@ type hurricane from a tropical wave on August 21 . Quickly intensifying , the new tropical depression became a tropical storm eighteen hours after formation on August 22 , and it reached category 2 on August 24 . Also on August 24 , Hurricane Danielle weakened back to a category 1 hurricane , but it returned to category 2 strength on August 25 . Further intensification occurred and Danielle became a Category 4 hurricane with peak winds of 135 miles per hour ( 217 km / h ) on August 27 . It then weakened , and finally dissipated on August 30 . The hurricane was the first in a rapid succession of eleven named storms , which ended in late September . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 On August 20 , a tropical wave that had formed two days earlier off Africa 's western coast interacted with a large tropical disturbance in the Intertropical Convergence Zone . This disorganized disturbance covered an area from the southwest of Senegal to the south of the Cape Verde Islands while slowly moving west . The National Hurricane Center ( NHC ) began monitoring the system , initially giving this area of disturbed weather a 20 % chance of development . As it moved through favorable conditions , the system became more organized and began circulating at a low level . On August 20 , 8 : 00 am EDT , the National Hurricane Center gave the disturbance a 40 % chance of becoming a tropical cyclone during the following 48 hours . The NHC stated that a broad area of low pressure had formed , and conditions were favorable for further development . The system continued to organize , and the chance was raised to the " high " category on August 21 at 2 : 00 pm EDT , indicating at least 60 % probability of development into a tropical cyclone within the following 48 hours . The tropical disturbance became banded and the convection became even more organized . 
 Late that afternoon , the system was designated as Tropical Depression Six . As the depression tracked slowly westward , it quickly intensified . The following day , it was upgraded to Tropical Storm Danielle , the fourth tropical storm of the season . Slow intensification ensued as Danielle headed generally westward and eventually became the second hurricane of the season on August 23 , with hurricane @-@ force winds extending outward for a 10 @-@ mile ( 16 km ) radius . Hurricane Danielle reached an initial peak intensity on August 24 at category 2 with a maximum wind speed of 100 mph ( 160 km / h ; 87 kn ) and hurricane @-@ force winds extending out for 30 miles ( 48 km ) , However , later that day , Danielle began to rapidly weaken as it encountered an area of high wind shear and dry air . Danielle weakened to a category 1 hurricane with 75 mph ( 121 km / h ; 65 kn ) winds late on August 24 . Danielle quickly re @-@ intensified early on the night of August 24 – 25 , and it had hurricane @-@ force winds in a 30 miles ( 48 km ) radius from the center . Further intensification was gradual , and Danielle again reached category 2 strength late on August 25 , and an eye was present on satellite images . It had hurricane @-@ force winds extending outwards 40 miles ( 64 km ) from the center . After a few days of gradual strengthening , Danielle began to rapidly intensify on August 27 , and became the first major hurricane of the season with winds of 120 mph ( 190 km / h ; 100 kn ) . Hurricane @-@ force winds extended out for 50 miles ( 80 km ) , and tropical storm @-@ force winds extended out for 205 miles ( 330 km ) . Continuing the rapid intensification , Hurricane Danielle briefly became a category 4 hurricane on August 27 , when it was situated 545 miles ( 877 km ) southeast of Bermuda , attaining its peak intensity with winds of 135 mph ( 217 km / h ; 117 kn ) and a minimum barometric pressure of 94 @.@ 2 kPa ( 27 @.@ 82 inHg ) . The hurricane @-@ force winds were in a radius of 60 miles ( 97 km ) , and the tropical storm @-@ force winds extended out for 205 miles ( 330 km ) from the center . 
 However , on August 28 , Danielle encountered a large middle @-@ level to upper @-@ level weather trough moving off the coast of the eastern United States into the Atlantic Ocean . This pushed Danielle north @-@ northeast . The inner of Danielle 's two eye walls eroded as the hurricane weakened . During this time , Hurricane Danielle 's outflow exposed the core of the more southerly Hurricane Earl . However , Hurricane Earl ( then a tropical storm ) retained strong circulation , and the center eventually moved back into the convection flow . The outflow from Danielle kept Earl a tropical storm before Danielle accelerated north and northeastward . As Danielle moved into a region with cooler sea surface temperatures and higher wind shear , it began to weaken at a steady pace and slowly began its extratropical transition . Danielle weakened to a category 1 hurricane on August 29 , and became a tropical storm on the afternoon of August 30 . Accelerating northeastward , Danielle completed the extratropical transition later that day . During the next few days , the extratropical remnants of Hurricane Danielle moved across the northern Atlantic Ocean , and were forecast to move into the area of Greenland and Iceland over the next five days . However , on September 3 , Danielle 's remnants dissipated after 72 hours in the cold waters of the northern Atlantic Ocean . 
 = = Preparations and impact = = 
 On August 27 , a tropical storm watch was issued on Bermuda before being canceled during the afternoon of August 28 because Danielle turned sharply east . However , it still triggered an advisory concerning high surf and large waves on Bermuda . 
 Hurricane Danielle and Hurricane Earl caused strong ocean swells and rip currents on the coasts of New Jersey , Delaware , and <unk> which swept people out to sea . In Florida , around 250 people from Ocean City were swept out to sea , and at least one person was drowned by the riptides . At least 70 more people had to be rescued off the remaining coast of eastern central Florida . On August 31 , despite being more than 475 miles ( 764 km ) from Newfoundland , Tropical Storm Danielle still caused 10 feet ( 3 @.@ 0 m ) waves on its shores . 
 Researchers exploring the sunken remnants of the RMS Titanic were forced to leave the area when Danielle approached on August 29 . 
 = Hong Kong = 
 Hong Kong ( Chinese : <unk> ; literally : " Fragrant Harbour " or " Incense Harbour " ) , officially the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region of the People 's Republic of China , is an autonomous territory south of Mainland China at the Pearl River Estuary of the Asia Pacific . With 7 @.@ 2 million residents of various nationalities in a total land and sea area of 2 @,@ 754 km2 , Hong Kong is the world 's fourth most densely populated sovereign state or territory . 
 After the First Opium War ( 1839 – 42 ) , Hong Kong became a British colony with the perpetual cession of Hong Kong Island , followed by the Kowloon Peninsula in 1860 and a 99 @-@ year lease of the New Territories from 1898 . Hong Kong was later occupied by Japan during the Second World War until British control resumed in 1945 . In the early 1980s , negotiations between the United Kingdom and China resulted in the 1984 Sino @-@ British Joint Declaration , which paved way for the transfer of sovereignty of Hong Kong in 1997 , when it became a Special Administrative Region with a high degree of autonomy . 
 Under the principle of " one country , two systems " , Hong Kong maintains its own executive , legislative and judiciary powers , including an independent legal system , public security force , monetary system , customs policy , and immigration policy while the State Council of China is responsible for military defence and foreign affairs . In addition , Hong Kong develops relations directly with foreign states and international organisations in a broad range of appropriate fields . 
 Hong Kong is one of the world 's most significant financial centres , having the highest Financial Development Index score and ranked as the world 's most competitive economy in the World Competitiveness Yearbook . It is also the world 's most visited city . Its service sector dominated economy is characterised by free trade and low taxation , and has consistently been listed as the freest market economy in the world . While Hong Kong ranks within the top 10 in GDP ( PPP ) per capita , it also suffers from the most severe income inequality among developed economies and has the world 's most unaffordable housing . As the 44th @-@ largest economy ( in purchasing power parity terms ) in the world , Hong Kong issues the world 's 13th most traded currency , the Hong Kong dollar . 
 Hong Kong is known for its skyline and deep natural harbour . The territory has the second largest number of high @-@ rises than any other urban agglomeration in the world . Its highly developed public transportation network covers 90 % of the population , the widest in the world . Air pollution largely from nearby industries in Mainland China , which has loose emissions standards , has resulted in a high level of atmospheric particulates . Furthermore , the territory has also been affected by political issues centred on achieving full democratic suffrage and tensions with the central Chinese government . Nevertheless , Hong Kong people enjoy one of the world 's highest quality of life , with the longest life expectancy , and the highest national IQ estimate . 
 = = Etymology = = 
 It is not known who was responsible for the Romanisation of the name " Hong Kong " but it is generally believed to be an early imprecise phonetic rendering of the pronunciation of the spoken Cantonese or Hakka name <unk> , meaning " Fragrant Harbour " or " Incense Harbour . Before 1842 , the name referred to a small inlet — now Aberdeen Harbour ( <unk> , Sidney Lau : <unk> <unk> , Jyutping : <unk> <unk> , or <unk> <unk> in a form of Hakka , literally means " Little Hong Kong " ) — between Aberdeen Island and the south side of Hong Kong Island , which was one of the first points of contact between British sailors and local fishermen . As those early contacts are likely to have been with Hong Kong 's early inhabitants , the <unk> ( <unk> ) , it is equally probable that the early Romanisation was a faithful execution of their speech , i.e. <unk> , not <unk> . Detailed and accurate Romanisation systems for Cantonese were available and in use at the time . 
 The reference to fragrance may refer to the sweet taste of the harbour 's fresh water estuarine influx of the Pearl River , or to the incense from factories , lining the coast to the north of Kowloon , which was stored near Aberdeen Harbour for export before the development of the Victoria Harbour . 
 In 1842 , the Treaty of Nanking was signed and the name , Hong Kong , was first recorded on official documents to encompass the entirety of the island . 
 The name had often been written as the single word Hongkong until the government adopted the current form in 1926 . Nevertheless , a number of century @-@ old institutions still retain the single @-@ word form , such as the Hongkong Post , Hongkong Electric and the Hongkong and Shanghai Banking Corporation . 
 The full official name , after 1997 , is " Hong Kong Special Administrative Region of the People 's Republic of China " . This is the official title as mentioned in the Hong Kong Basic Law and the Hong Kong Government 's website ; however , " Hong Kong Special Administrative Region " and " Hong Kong " are widely accepted . 
 Hong Kong has carried many nicknames : the most famous among those is the " Pearl of the Orient " , which reflected the impressive night @-@ view of the city 's light decorations on the skyscrapers along both sides of the Victoria Harbour . The territory is also known as " Asia 's World City " . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Pre @-@ colonial = = = 
 Archaeological studies support human presence in the <unk> Lap Kok area ( now Hong Kong International Airport ) from 35 @,@ 000 to 39 @,@ 000 years ago and on Sai Kung Peninsula from 6 @,@ 000 years ago . 
 Wong Tei Tung and Three Fathoms Cove are the earliest sites of human habitation in Hong Kong during the Paleolithic Period . It is believed that the Three Fathom Cove was a river @-@ valley settlement and Wong Tei Tung was a lithic manufacturing site . Excavated Neolithic artefacts suggested cultural differences from the Longshan culture of northern China and settlement by the Che people , prior to the migration of the Baiyue ( Viets ) to Hong Kong . Eight petroglyphs , which dated to the Shang dynasty in China , were discovered on the surrounding islands . 
 = = = = Ancient China = = = = 
 In 214 BC , Qin Shi Huang , the first emperor of China , conquered the Baiyue tribes in Jiaozhi ( modern <unk> region and Vietnam ) and incorporated the territory into imperial China for the first time . Modern Hong Kong was assigned to the Nanhai commandery ( modern Nanhai District ) , near the commandery 's capital city Panyu . In Qin dynasty , the territory was ruled by Panyu County ( <unk> ) up till Jin Dynasty . 
 The area of Hong Kong was consolidated under the kingdom of Nanyue ( Southern Viet ) , founded by general Zhao Tuo in 204 BC after the collapse of the short @-@ lived Qin dynasty . When the kingdom of Nanyue was conquered by the Han Dynasty in 111 BC , Hong Kong was assigned to the Jiaozhi commandery . Archaeological evidence indicates that the population increased and early salt production flourished in this time period . Lei Cheng Uk Han Tomb on the Kowloon Peninsula is believed to have been built during the Han dynasty . 
 = = = = Imperial China = = = = 
 From the Jin dynasty to the early period of Tang dynasty , the territory that now comprises Hong Kong was governed by Bao 'an County ( <unk> ) . In the Tang dynasty , the Guangdong region flourished as an international trading center . The Tuen Mun region in what is now Hong Kong 's New Territories served as a port , naval base , salt production centre and , later , as base for the exploitation of pearls . Lantau Island was also a salt production centre , where the salt smugglers riots broke out against the government . 
 Under the Tang dynasty , the Guangdong ( Canton ) region flourished as a regional trading centre . In 736 AD , the first Emperor of Tang established a military stronghold in Tuen Mun in western Hong Kong to defend the coastal area of the region . The first village school , Li Ying College , was established around 1075 AD in the modern @-@ day New Territories under the Northern Song dynasty . After their defeat by the Mongols , the Southern Song court briefly moved to modern @-@ day Kowloon City ( the Sung Wong Toi site ) , before its final defeat at the Battle of Yamen . 
 From the mid @-@ Tang dynasty to early Ming dynasty , the territory that now comprises Hong Kong was governed by Dongguan County ( <unk> / <unk> ) . In Ming dynasty , the area was governed by Xin 'an County ( <unk> ) before it was colonised by the British government . The indigenous inhabitants of what is now Hong Kong are identified with several ethnicities , including <unk> , Hakka , Tanka ) and Hoklo . 
 The earliest European visitor on record was Jorge Álvares , a Portuguese explorer who arrived in 1513 . Having founded an establishment in Macau by 1557 , Portuguese merchants began trading in southern China . However , subsequent military clashes between China and Portugal led to the expulsion of all Portuguese merchants from the rest of China . 
 In the mid @-@ 16th century , the Haijin order ( closed @-@ door , isolation policy ) was enforced and it strictly forbade all maritime activities in order to prevent contact from foreigners by sea . From 1661 to 1669 , Hong Kong was directly affected by the Great Clearance of the Kangxi Emperor , who required the evacuation of coastal areas of Guangdong . About 16 @,@ 000 people from Hong Kong and Bao 'an County were forced to emigrate inland ; 1 @,@ 648 of those who evacuated were said to have returned after the evacuation was rescinded in 1669 . 
 = = = British Crown Colony : 1842 – 1941 = = = 
 In 1839 , the refusal of Qing authorities to support opium imports caused the outbreak of the First Opium War between the British Empire and the Qing Empire . Qing 's defeat resulted in the occupation of Hong Kong Island by British forces on 20 January 1841 . It was initially ceded under the Convention of <unk> , as part of a ceasefire agreement between Captain Charles Elliot and Governor Qishan . While a dispute between high @-@ ranking officials of both countries led to the failure of the treaty 's ratification , on 29 August 1842 , Hong Kong Island was formally ceded in perpetuity to the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland under the Treaty of Nanking . The British officially established a Crown colony and founded the City of Victoria in the following year . 
 The population of Hong Kong Island was 7 @,@ 450 when the Union Flag raised over Possession Point on 26 January 1841 . It mostly consisted of Tanka fishermen and Hakka charcoal burners , whose settlements scattered along several coastal hamlets . In the 1850s , a large number of Chinese immigrants crossed the then @-@ free border to escape from the Taiping Rebellion . Other natural disasters , such as flooding , typhoons and famine in mainland China would play a role in establishing Hong Kong as a place for safe shelter . 
 Further conflicts over the opium trade between Britain and Qing quickly escalated into the Second Opium War . Following the Anglo @-@ French victory , the Crown Colony was expanded to include Kowloon Peninsula ( south of Boundary Street ) and Stonecutter 's Island , both of which were ceded to the British in perpetuity under the Convention of Beijing in 1860 . 
 In 1898 , Britain obtained a 99 @-@ year lease from Qing under the Convention for the Extension of Hong Kong Territory , in which Hong Kong obtained a 99 @-@ year lease of the Lantau Island , the area north of Boundary Street in Kowloon up to Shenzhen River and over 200 other outlying islands . 
 Hong Kong soon became a major entrepôt thanks to its free port status , attracting new immigrants to settle from both China and Europe alike . The society , however , remained racially segregated and polarised under British colonial policies . Despite the rise of a British @-@ educated Chinese upper @-@ class by the late @-@ 19th century , race laws such as the Peak Reservation Ordinance prevented ethnic Chinese in Hong Kong from acquiring houses in reserved areas , such as the Victoria Peak . At this time , the majority of the Chinese population in Hong Kong had no political representation in the British colonial government . There were , however , a small number of Chinese elites whom the British governors relied on , such as Sir Kai Ho and Robert <unk> , who served as communicators and mediators between the government and local population . 
 Hong Kong continued to experience modest growth during the first half of the 20th century . The University of Hong Kong was established in 1911 as the territory 's oldest higher education institute . While there was an exodus of 60 @,@ 000 residents for fear of a German attack on the British colony during the First World War , Hong Kong remained peaceful . Its population increased from 530 @,@ 000 in 1916 to 725 @,@ 000 in 1925 and reached 1 @.@ 6 million by 1941 . 
 In 1925 , Cecil Clementi became the 17th Governor of Hong Kong . Fluent in Cantonese and without a need for translator , Clementi introduced the first ethnic Chinese , <unk> Chow , into the Executive Council as an unofficial member . Under his tenure , Kai Tak Airport entered operation as RAF Kai Tak and several aviation clubs . In 1937 , the Second Sino @-@ Japanese War broke out when the Japanese Empire expanded its territories from northeastern China into the mainland proper . To safeguard Hong Kong as a <unk> , Governor <unk> Northcote declared the Crown Colony as a neutral zone . 
 = = = Japanese occupation : 1941 – 45 = = = 
 As part of its military campaign in Southeast Asia during Second World War , the Japanese army moved south from Guangzhou of mainland China and attacked Hong Kong on 8 December 1941 . The Battle of Hong Kong ended with the British and Canadian defenders surrendering control of Hong Kong to Japan on 25 December 1941 in what was regarded by locals as Black Christmas . 
 During the Japanese occupation of Hong Kong , the Japanese army committed atrocities against civilians and POWs , such as the St. Stephen 's College massacre . Local residents also suffered widespread food shortages , limited rationing and hyper @-@ inflation arising from the forced exchange of currency from Hong Kong Dollars to Japanese military banknotes . The initial ratio of 2 : 1 was gradually devalued to 4 : 1 and ownership of Hong Kong Dollars was declared illegal and punishable by harsh torture . Due to starvation and forced deportation for slave labour to mainland China , the population of Hong Kong had dwindled from 1 @.@ 6 million in 1941 to 600 @,@ 000 in 1945 , when Britain resumed control of the colony on 30 August 1945 . 
 = = = Resumption of British rule and industrialisation : 1945 – 97 = = = 
 Hong Kong 's population recovered quickly after the war , as a wave of skilled migrants from China flooded in for refuge from the Chinese Civil War . When the Communists gained control of mainland China in 1949 , even more skilled migrants fled across the open border for fear of persecution . Many newcomers , especially those who had been based in the major port cities of Shanghai and Guangzhou , established corporations and small- to medium @-@ sized businesses and shifted their base operations to British Hong Kong . The Chinese Communist Party 's establishment of a socialist state in China on 1 October 1949 caused the British colonial government to reconsider Hong Kong 's open border to mainland China . In 1951 , a boundary zone was <unk> as a buffer zone against potential military attacks from communist China . Border posts in the north of Hong Kong began operation in 1953 to regulate the movement of people and goods into and out of British Hong Kong . 
 In the 1950s , Hong Kong became the first of the Four Asian Tiger economies under rapid industrialisation driven by textile exports , manufacturing industries and re @-@ exports of goods to China . As the population grew , with labour costs remaining low , living standards began to rise steadily . The construction of the Shek Kip Mei Estate in 1953 marked the beginning of the public housing estate programme to provide shelter for the less privileged and to cope with the influx of immigrants . 
 Under Sir Murray MacLehose , 25th Governor of Hong Kong ( 1971 – 82 ) , a series of reforms improved the public services , environment , housing , welfare , education and infrastructure of Hong Kong . MacLehose was British Hong Kong 's longest @-@ serving governor and , by the end of his tenure , had become one of the most popular and well @-@ known figures in the Crown Colony . MacLehose laid the foundation for Hong Kong to establish itself as a key global city in the 1980s and early 1990s . 
 To resolve traffic congestion and to provide a more reliable means of crossing the Victoria Harbour , a rapid transit railway system ( metro ) , the MTR , was planned from the 1970s onwards . The Island Line ( Hong Kong Island ) , Kwun Tong Line ( Kowloon Peninsula and East Kowloon ) and Tsuen Wan Line ( Kowloon and urban New Territories ) opened in the early 1980s . 
 Hong Kong 's competitiveness in manufacturing gradually declined due to rising labour and property costs , as well as new development in southern China under the Open Door Policy introduced in 1978 which opened up China to foreign business . Nevertheless , towards the early 1990s , Hong Kong had established itself as a global financial centre along with London and New York , a regional hub for logistics and freight , one of the fastest @-@ growing economies in Asia and the world 's exemplar of <unk> @-@ faire market policy . 
 = = = = The Hong Kong question = = = = 
 Facing the uncertain future of Hong Kong , Governor MacLehose raised the question in the late 1970s . In 1983 , the United Kingdom <unk> Hong Kong as a British Dependent Territory ( now British Overseas Territory ) when reorganising global territories of the British Empire . Talks and negotiations began with China and concluded with the 1984 Sino @-@ British Joint Declaration . Both countries agreed to transfer Hong Kong 's sovereignty to the China on 1 July 1997 , when Hong Kong would remain autonomous as a Special Administrative Region and be able to retain its free @-@ market economy , British common law through the Hong Kong Basic Law , independent representation in international organisations ( e.g. WTO and WHO ) , treaty arrangements and policy @-@ making except foreign diplomacy and military defence . It stipulated that Hong Kong would retain its laws and be guaranteed a high degree of autonomy for at least 50 years after the transfer . The Hong Kong Basic Law , based on English law , would serve as the constitutional document after the transfer . It was ratified in 1990 . Nevertheless , the expiry of the 1898 lease on the New Territories in 1997 created problems for business contracts , property leases and confidence among foreign investors . 
 = = = Handover and Special Administrative Region status = = = 
 = = = = Transfer of sovereignty = = = = 
 On 1 July 1997 , the transfer of sovereignty of Hong Kong from the United Kingdom to the People 's Republic of China took place , officially marking the end of Hong Kong 's 156 years under British colonial governance . As what was by far the largest remaining colony of the United Kingdom , the loss of Hong Kong also effectively represented the end of the British Empire . At the same time , Hong Kong switched its country of administration overnight to become China 's first Special Administrative Region . Tung Chee @-@ Hwa , a pro @-@ Beijing business tycoon , was elected Hong Kong 's first Chief Executive by a selected electorate of 800 in a televised ceremony . 
 = = = = Transition to Chinese rule = = = = 
 Soon after Hong Kong 's reversion to China , the city suffered an economic double @-@ blow from the Asian financial crisis and the pandemic of H5N1 bird flu ; in December 1997 , officials had to destroy 1 @.@ 4 million chickens and ducks to contain the virus from spreading . Subsequently , mismanagement of Tung 's housing policy disrupted the market supply , sent properties prices in Hong Kong tumbling and caused many homeowners to become bankrupt due to negative equity . 
 In 2003 , Hong Kong was gravely affected by the outbreak of severe acute respiratory syndrome ( SARS ) . The World Health Organization reported 1 @,@ 755 infected and 299 deaths in Hong Kong . An estimated 380 million Hong Kong dollars ( US $ 48 @.@ 9 million ) in contracts were lost as a result of the epidemic . 
 Distrust of the Communist Party of China remained strong in the initial years of Chinese rule . A legacy of the democratic reforms by Chris Patten , China refused to recognise the legitimacy of the Legislative Council of Hong Kong after its 1994 direct election . The " Provisional " Legislative Council of Hong Kong ( 1997 – 99 ) , which was unable to draft any new bills or authorise new legislation , completed its five @-@ year term in 1999 . The Legislative Council of Hong Kong ( LegCo ) resumed its full function after the 1999 LegCo election . 
 Despite the unopposed re @-@ election of Tung in July 2002 , the government 's attempt to complete legislation of the Basic Law 's Article 23 ( National Security ) aroused strong suspicion among Hong Kong citizens . This was due to the Article granting the police force right of access to private property , under the reason of ' safeguarding national security ' , without court warrants . Coupled with years of economic hardships and deflation following the Asian Financial Crisis , a mass demonstration broke out on 1 July 2003 . This hastened the resignations of two government ministers and , eventually , that of Tung on 10 March 2005 . 
 Sir Donald Tsang , the then @-@ Chief Secretary for Administration and ex @-@ official of the British Hong Kong government , entered the 2005 election uncontested and was appointed by Beijing as the second Chief Executive of Hong Kong on 21 June 2005 . Tsang also won a second term in office following the 2007 Chief Executive election under managed voting . In 2009 , Hong Kong hosted the 5th East Asian Games , in which nine national teams competed . The Games were the first and largest international multi @-@ sport event ever organised and hosted by the city . Major infrastructure and tourist projects also began under Sir Tsang 's second term , including Hong Kong Disneyland , Ngong Ping 360 ( for Tian Tan Buddha and Tseung Kwan O Line ( new metro line ) had their inaugurations and a new cultural complex , the West Kowloon Cultural District . 
 = = = = Tensions with mainland China = = = = 
 Since Hong Kong 's reunification with China , there has been increasing social tension between Hong Kong residents and mainland Chinese due to cultural and linguistic differences , as well as accusations of unruly behaviour and spending habits of mainland Chinese visitors to the territory . A 2011 survey ( with a sample base of 541 ) in Hong Kong shows that 17 % respondents considered themselves as " Chinese citizens " , while 38 % considered themselves just " Hong Kong citizens " . 
 In 2012 Chief Executive elections saw the Beijing backed candidate Leung Chun @-@ Ying elected with 689 votes from a committee panel of 1 @,@ 200 selected representatives , and assumed office on 1 July 2012 . 
 Social conflicts also influenced the mass protests in 2014 , primarily caused by the Chinese government 's proposal on electoral reform . The debates over China 's vision of granting Hong Kong full democracy have escalated into diplomatic rows between China and the United Kingdom . 
 = = Governance = = 
 Hong Kong enjoys a high degree of autonomy , as its political and judicial systems operate independently from those of mainland China . In accordance with the Sino @-@ British Joint Declaration , and the underlying principle of one country , two systems , Hong Kong has a " high degree of autonomy as a special administrative region in all areas except defence and foreign affairs " . The declaration stipulates that the region maintain its capitalist economic system and guarantees the rights and freedoms of its people for at least 50 years after the 1997 handover . The guarantees over the territory 's autonomy and the individual rights and freedoms are enshrined in the Hong Kong Basic Law , the territory 's constitutional document , which outlines the system of governance of the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region , but which is subject to the interpretation of the Standing Committee of the National People 's Congress ( <unk> ) . 
 The primary pillars of government are the Executive Council , the civil service , the Legislative Council , and the Judiciary . The Executive Council is headed by the Chief Executive who is elected by the Election Committee and then appointed by the Central People 's Government . The civil service is a politically neutral body that implements policies and provides government services , where public servants are appointed based on meritocracy . The Legislative Council has 70 members , 40 seats are directly elected by universal suffrage by permanent residents of Hong Kong according to five geographical constituencies and a District Council functional constituency . 30 seats from functional constituencies are directly elected by a smaller electorate , which consists of corporate bodies and persons from various stipulated functional sectors . The entire council is headed by the President of the Legislative Council who serves as the speaker . Judges are appointed by the Chief Executive on the recommendation of an independent commission . 
 The implementation of the Basic Law , including how and when the universal suffrage promised therein is to be achieved , has been a major issue of political debate since the transfer of sovereignty . In 2002 , the government 's proposed anti @-@ subversion bill pursuant to Article 23 of the Basic Law , which required the enactment of laws prohibiting acts of treason and subversion against the Chinese government , was met with fierce opposition , and eventually shelved . Debate between pro @-@ Beijing groups , which tend to support the Executive branch , and the Pan @-@ democracy camp characterises Hong Kong 's political scene , with the latter supporting a faster pace of democratisation , and the principle of one man , one vote . 
 In 2004 the government failed to gain pan @-@ democrat support to pass its so @-@ called " district council model " for political reform . In 2009 , the government reissued the proposals as the " Consultation Document on the Methods for Selecting the Chief Executive and for Forming the LegCo in 2012 " . The document proposed the enlargement of the Election Committee , Hong Kong 's electoral college , from 800 members to 1 @,@ 200 in 2012 and expansion of the legislature from 60 to 70 seats . The ten new legislative seats would consist of five geographical constituency seats and five functional constituency seats , to be voted in by elected district council members from among themselves . The proposals were destined for rejection by pan @-@ democrats once again , but a significant breakthrough occurred after the Central Government in Beijing accepted a counter @-@ proposal by the Democratic Party . In particular , the Pan @-@ democracy camp was split when the proposal to directly elect five newly created functional seats was not acceptable to two constituent parties . The Democratic Party sided with the government for the first time since the handover and passed the proposals with a vote of 46 – 12 . 
 On 31 August 2014 , China disapproved a full democracy in Hong Kong by ruling that three candidates could run for elections as leader in 2017 , and they would be chosen by a nomination committee . 
 = = = Legal system and judiciary = = = 
 Hong Kong 's legal system is completely independent from the legal system of mainland China . In contrast to mainland China 's civil law system , Hong Kong continues to follow the English common law tradition established under British rule . The essence of English common law is that it is made by judges sitting in courts , applying legal precedent ( stare decisis ) to the facts before them . For example , murder is a common law crime rather than one established by an Act of Parliament . Common law can be amended or repealed by Parliament ; murder , for example , now carries a mandatory life sentence rather than the death penalty . According to Article 92 of the Basic Law , Hong Kong 's courts may refer to decisions rendered by courts of other common law jurisdictions as precedents , and judges from other common law jurisdictions , most commonly England , Canada and Australia , are allowed to sit as non @-@ permanent judges of the Court of Final Appeal . 
 Structurally , the court system consists of the Court of Final Appeal , the High Court , which is made up of the Court of Appeal and the Court of First Instance , and the District Court , which includes the Family Court . Other <unk> bodies include the Lands Tribunal , the Magistrates ' Courts , the Juvenile Court , the Coroner 's Court , the Labour Tribunal , the Small Claims Tribunal , and the Obscene Articles Tribunal . Justices of the Court of Final Appeal are appointed by Hong Kong 's Chief Executive . The Court of Final Appeal has the power of final adjudication with respect to the law of Hong Kong as well as the power of final interpretation over local laws including the power to strike down local ordinances on the grounds of inconsistency with the Basic Law . 
 The Department of Justice is responsible for handling legal matters for the government . Its responsibilities include providing legal advice , criminal prosecution , civil representation , legal and policy drafting and reform , and international legal co @-@ operation between different jurisdictions . Apart from prosecuting criminal cases , lawyers of the Department of Justice act on behalf of the government in all civil and administrative lawsuits against the government . As protector of the public interest , the department may apply for judicial reviews and may intervene in any cases involving the greater public interest . The Basic Law protects the Department of Justice from any interference by the government when exercising its control over criminal prosecution . 
 = = = Foreign relations = = = 
 Hong Kong continues to play an active role in the international arena and maintains close contact with its international partners . Under the Basic Law , Hong Kong is exclusively in charge of its external relations , whilst the Government of the China is responsible for its foreign affairs . According to the Basic Law , Hong Kong may on its own , using the name " Hong Kong , China " , maintain and develop relations and conclude and implement agreements with foreign states and regions and relevant international organisations in the appropriate fields , including the economic , trade , financial and monetary , shipping , communications , tourism , cultural and sports fields . 
 As a separate customs territory , Hong Kong maintains and develops relations with foreign states and regions , and plays an active role in such international organisations as the World Trade Organization ( WTO ) , the Asia @-@ Pacific Economic Cooperation ( APEC ) , the International Olympic Committee ( IOC ) , the International Federation of Association Football ( FIFA ) , and the International Basketball Federation ( FIBA ) in its own right under the name of Hong Kong , China . Under such special conditions , Hong Kong 's international partners usually exercise particular policies to maintain relations with Hong Kong , such as the United States @-@ Hong Kong Policy Act . 
 There is a large foreign representation in Hong Kong , including 59 Consulates @-@ General , 62 Consulates and 5 officially recognised international bodies , such as the Office of the European Union . Due to Hong Kong 's special status , some countries ' Consulates @-@ General operate independently of their Embassies in Beijing . For example , the US Consulate General to Hong Kong is not under the jurisdiction of the Embassy in Beijing , and reports directly to the US Department of State . Similarly , the British Consulate @-@ General reports directly to the Foreign and Commonwealth Office , instead of the British Ambassador in Beijing . 
 = = = Human rights = = = 
 The Hong Kong government generally respects the human rights of its citizens , and members of the Legislative Council of Hong Kong and the District Council of Hong Kong are elected into office by Hong Kong citizens . However , there are 27 ex officio members of the district council ( the Rural Committee Chairmen in the New Territories ) as of the fifth District Council Assembly , and roughly half of the legislative council seats are elected by 3 % of the people in Hong Kong through the functional constituency . The imbalance of voting power in the LegCo has led to widespread criticism of its inability to represent Hongkongers ' socio @-@ economic needs . In addition , the Chief Executive of Hong Kong is elected by 1 @,@ 200 members based on their contributions to four different sectors of Hong Kong 's society . This policy has received criticism from various political figures in Hong Kong , and led to the Umbrella Revolution . Plans to expand the voting population had begun to appear in the 2000s , and political figures liaised with the government to provide universal suffrage . 
 There are restrictions on freedom of the press and freedom of assembly . 200 @,@ 000 migrant workers cannot make complaints against their employers since they face deportation if dismissed from their jobs . A 2008 law against racial discrimination does not cover mainlanders , immigrants or migrant workers . The police have been accused of using heavy @-@ handed tactics toward protesters in public rallies , and there is controversy regarding the extensive powers of the police . Covert surveillance is another major concern . 
 Hong Kong has a higher age @-@ of @-@ consent and harsher punishments for illegal homosexual acts . 
 Internet censorship in Hong Kong operates under different principles and regulations from those of mainland China . In November 2015 , the newly established Innovation and Technology Bureau pushed for the legislation of the Copyright ( Amendment ) Bill 2014 , more popularly known as the Internet Article 23 , which would severely limit the legality of derivative works and other activities previously permitted on the Internet . Supporters of the bill point to the fact that Hong Kong is lagging behind in the protection of intellectual property rights , but detractors state that creative work on the Internet should be exempt from legislation , and the ordinance would severely violate human rights . 
 = = = Regions and Districts = = = 
 Hong Kong consists of three regions : Hong Kong Island , Kowloon , and the New Territories . The regions are subdivided into 18 geographic districts , each represented by a district council which advises the government on local matters such as public facilities , community programmes , cultural activities , and environmental improvements . 
 There are a total of 541 district council seats , 412 of which are elected ; the rest are appointed by the Chief Executive and 27 ex officio chairmen of rural committees . The Home Affairs Department communicates government policies and plans to the public through the district offices . Hong Kong has a unitary system of government ; no local government has existed since the two municipal councils were abolished in 2000 . As such there is no formal definition for its cities and towns . 
 = = = Military = = = 
 When Hong Kong 's sovereignty transferred to People 's Republic of China on 1 July 1997 , the British barracks were replaced by a garrison of the People 's Liberation Army , comprising ground , naval , and air forces , who come under the command of the Chinese Central Military Commission . 
 The Basic Law of Hong Kong protects local civil affairs against any interference by the garrison ; members of the garrison are subject to Hong Kong laws . The Hong Kong Government remains responsible for the maintenance of public order ; however , it may ask the PRC government for assistance from the garrison in maintaining public order and in disaster relief . The PRC government is now responsible for the costs of maintaining the garrison . 
 In January 2015 , Hong Kong Army Cadets Association was formed for Hong Kong children over 6 years old . The inauguration ceremony was held at a PLA naval base in Hong Kong ; only pro @-@ Beijing press was invited into the venue . 
 = = Geography and climate = = 
 Hong Kong is located on China 's south coast , 60 km ( 37 mi ) east of Macau on the opposite side of the Pearl River Delta . It is surrounded by the South China Sea on the east , south , and west , and borders the Guangdong city of Shenzhen to the north over the Shenzhen River . The territory 's 2 @,@ 755 km2 ( 1 @,@ 064 sq mi ) area consists of Hong Kong Island , the Kowloon Peninsula , the New Territories , and over 200 offshore islands , of which the largest is Lantau Island . Of the total area , 1 @,@ 106 km2 ( 427 sq mi ) is land and 1 @,@ 649 km2 ( 637 sq mi ) is water . Hong Kong claims territorial waters to a distance of 3 nautical miles ( 5 @.@ 6 km ) . Its land area makes Hong Kong the 167th largest inhabited territory in the world . 
 As much of Hong Kong 's terrain is hilly to mountainous with steep slopes , less than 25 % of the territory 's landmass is developed , and about 40 % of the remaining land area is reserved as country parks and nature reserves . Low altitude vegetation in Hong Kong is dominated by secondary rainforests , as the primary forest was mostly cleared during the Second World War , and higher altitudes are dominated by grasslands . Most of the territory 's urban development exists on Kowloon peninsula , along the northern edge of Hong Kong Island , and in scattered settlements throughout the New Territories . The highest elevation in the territory is at Tai Mo Shan , 957 metres ( 3 @,@ 140 ft ) above sea level . Hong Kong 's long and irregular coast provides it with many bays , rivers and beaches . On 18 September 2011 , UNESCO listed the Hong Kong National Geopark as part of its Global Geoparks Network . Hong Kong Geopark is made up of eight Geo @-@ Areas distributed across the Sai Kung Volcanic Rock Region and Northeast New Territories Sedimentary Rock Region . 
 Despite Hong Kong 's reputation of being intensely urbanised , the territory has tried to promote a green environment , and recent growing public concern has prompted the severe restriction of further land reclamation from Victoria Harbour . Awareness of the environment is growing as Hong Kong suffers from increasing pollution compounded by its geography and tall buildings . Approximately 80 % of the city 's smog originates from other parts of the Pearl River Delta . 
 Though it is situated just south of the Tropic of Cancer , Hong Kong has a humid subtropical climate ( Köppen Cwa ) . Summer is hot and humid with occasional showers and thunderstorms , and warm air coming from the southwest . Typhoons most often occur in summer . They sometimes result in flooding or landslides . Winters are mild and usually start sunny , becoming cloudier towards February ; the occasional cold front brings strong , cooling winds from the north . The most temperate seasons are spring , which can be changeable , and autumn , which is generally sunny and dry . Snowfall is extremely rare , and usually occurs in areas of high elevation . Hong Kong averages 1 @,@ 948 hours of sunshine per year , while the highest and lowest ever recorded temperatures at the Hong Kong Observatory are 36 @.@ 3 ° C ( 97 @.@ 3 ° F ) on 8 August 2015 and 0 @.@ 0 ° C ( 32 @.@ 0 ° F ) on 18 January 1893 , respectively . The highest and lowest ever recorded temperatures across all of Hong Kong , on the other hand , are 37 @.@ 9 ° C ( 100 @.@ 2 ° F ) at Happy Valley on 8 August 2015 and − 6 @.@ 0 ° C ( 21 @.@ 2 ° F ) at Tai Mo Shan on 24 January 2016 , respectively . With data beginning in 1998 , the highest and lowest temperatures ever recorded at the Hong Kong International Airport are 37 @.@ 7 ° C ( 99 @.@ 9 ° F ) on 9 August 2015 and 2 @.@ 9 ° C ( 37 @.@ 2 ° F ) on 24 January 2016 , respectively . 
 = = Economy = = 
 As one of the world 's leading international financial centres , Hong Kong has a major capitalist service economy characterised by low taxation and free trade . The currency , Hong Kong dollar , is the eighth most traded currency in the world as of 2010 . Hong Kong was once described by Milton Friedman as the world 's greatest experiment in laissez @-@ faire capitalism , but has since instituted a regime of regulations including a minimum wage . It maintains a highly developed capitalist economy , ranked the freest in the world by the Index of Economic Freedom every year since 1995 . It is an important centre for international finance and trade , with one of the greatest concentrations of corporate headquarters in the Asia @-@ Pacific region , and is known as one of the Four Asian Tigers for its high growth rates and rapid development from the 1960s to the 1990s . Between 1961 and 1997 Hong Kong 's gross domestic product grew 180 times while per @-@ capita GDP increased 87 times over . 
 The Hong Kong Stock Exchange is the seventh largest in the world and has a market capitalisation of US $ 2 @.@ 3 trillion as of December 2009 . In that year , Hong Kong raised 22 percent of worldwide initial public offering ( IPO ) capital , making it the largest centre of IPOs in the world and the easiest place to raise capital . The Hong Kong dollar has been pegged to the US dollar since 1983 . 
 The Hong Kong Government has traditionally played a mostly passive role in the economy , with little by way of industrial policy and almost no import or export controls . Market forces and the private sector were allowed to determine practical development . Under the official policy of " positive non @-@ interventionism " , Hong Kong is often cited as an example of laissez @-@ faire capitalism . Following the Second World War , Hong Kong industrialised rapidly as a manufacturing centre driven by exports , and then underwent a rapid transition to a service @-@ based economy in the 1980s . Since then , it has grown to become a leading centre for management , financial , IT , business consultation and professional services . 
 Hong Kong matured to become a financial centre in the 1990s , but was greatly affected by the Asian financial crisis in 1998 , and again in 2003 by the SARS outbreak . A revival of external and domestic demand has led to a strong recovery , as cost decreases strengthened the competitiveness of Hong Kong exports and a long deflationary period ended . Government intervention , initiated by the later colonial governments and continued since 1997 , has steadily increased , with the introduction of export credit guarantees , a compulsory pension scheme , a minimum wage , anti @-@ discrimination laws , and a state mortgage backer . 
 The territory has little arable land and few natural resources , so it imports most of its food and raw materials . Imports account for more than 90 % of Hong Kong 's food supply , including nearly all of the meat and rice available there . Agricultural activity — relatively unimportant to Hong Kong 's economy and contributing just 0 @.@ 1 % of its GDP — primarily consists of growing premium food and flower varieties . Hong Kong is the world 's eleventh largest trading entity , with the total value of imports and exports exceeding its gross domestic product . It is the world 's largest re @-@ export centre . Much of Hong Kong 's exports consist of re @-@ exports , which are products made outside of the territory , especially in mainland China , and distributed via Hong Kong . Its physical location has allowed the city to establish a transportation and logistics infrastructure that includes the world 's second busiest container port and the world 's busiest airport for international cargo . Even before the transfer of sovereignty , Hong Kong had established extensive trade and investment ties with the mainland , which now enable it to serve as a point of entry for investment flowing into the mainland . At the end of 2007 , there were 3 @.@ 46 million people employed full @-@ time , with the unemployment rate averaging 4 @.@ 1 % for the fourth straight year of decline . Hong Kong 's economy is dominated by the service sector , which accounts for over 90 % of its GDP , while industry constitutes 9 % . Inflation was at 2 @.@ 5 % in 2007 . Hong Kong 's largest export markets are mainland China , the United States , and Japan . 
 As of 2010 Hong Kong is the eighth most expensive city for expatriates , falling from fifth position in the previous year . Hong Kong is ranked fourth in terms of the highest percentage of millionaire households , behind Switzerland , Qatar , and Singapore with 8 @.@ 5 percent of all households owning at least one million US dollars . Hong Kong is also ranked second in the world by the most billionaires per capita ( one per 132 @,@ 075 people ) , behind Monaco . In 2011 , Hong Kong was ranked second in the Ease of Doing Business Index , behind Singapore . 
 Hong Kong is ranked No. 1 in the world in the <unk> Capitalism Index by the Economist . 
 In 2014 , Hong Kong was the eleventh most popular destination for international tourists among countries and territories worldwide , with a total of 27 @.@ 8 million visitors contributing a total of US $ 38 @,@ 376 million in international tourism receipts . Hong Kong is also the most popular city for tourists , nearly two times of its nearest competitor Macau . 
 = = = Infrastructure = = = 
 Hong Kong 's transportation network is highly developed . Over 90 % of daily travels ( 11 million ) are on public transport , the highest such percentage in the world . Payment can be made using the Octopus card , a stored value system introduced by the MTR ( Mass Transit Railway ) , which is widely accepted on railways , buses and ferries , and accepted like cash at other outlets . 
 The city 's main railway company ( KCRC ) was merged with MTR in 2007 , creating a comprehensive rail network for the whole territory ( also called MTR ) . The MTR rapid transit system has 152 stations which serve 3 @.@ 4 million people a day . Hong Kong Tramways , which has served the territory since 1904 , covers the northern parts of Hong Kong Island . 
 Hong Kong 's bus service is franchised and run by private operators . Five privately owned companies provide franchised bus service across the territory , together operating more than 700 routes as of 2014 . The largest are Kowloon Motor Bus , providing 402 routes in Kowloon and New Territories , and Citybus , operating 154 routes on Hong Kong Island ; both run cross @-@ harbour services . Double @-@ decker buses were introduced to Hong Kong in 1949 , and are now almost exclusively used ; single @-@ decker buses remain in use for routes with lower demand or roads with lower load capacity . Public light buses serve most parts of Hong Kong , particularly areas where standard bus lines cannot reach or do not reach as frequently , quickly , or directly . 
 The Star Ferry service , founded in 1888 , operates two lines across Victoria Harbour and provides scenic views of Hong Kong 's skyline for its 53 @,@ 000 daily passengers . It acquired iconic status following its use as a setting on The World of Suzie Wong . Travel writer Ryan Levitt considered the main Tsim Sha Tsui to Central route one of the most picturesque in the world . Other ferry services are provided by operators serving outlying islands , new towns , Macau , and cities in mainland China . Hong Kong is famous for its junks traversing the harbour , and small kai @-@ to ferries that serve remote coastal settlements . The Port of Hong Kong is a busy deepwater port , specialising in container shipping . 
 Hong Kong Island 's steep , hilly terrain was initially served by sedan chairs . The Peak Tram , the first public transport system in Hong Kong , has provided vertical rail transport between Central and Victoria Peak since 1888 . In Central and Western district , there is an extensive system of escalators and moving pavements , including the longest outdoor covered escalator system in the world , the Mid @-@ Levels escalator . 
 Hong Kong International Airport is a leading air passenger gateway and logistics hub in Asia and one of the world 's busiest airports in terms of international passenger and cargo movement , serving more than 47 million passengers and handling 3 @.@ 74 million tonnes ( 4 @.@ 12 million tons ) of cargo in 2007 . It replaced the overcrowded Kai Tak Airport in Kowloon in 1998 , and has been rated as the world 's best airport in a number of surveys . Over 85 airlines operate at the two @-@ terminal airport and it is the primary hub of Cathay Pacific , Dragonair , Air Hong Kong , Hong Kong Airlines , and Hong Kong Express . 
 Providing an adequate water supply for Hong Kong has always been difficult because the region has few natural lakes and rivers , inadequate groundwater sources ( inaccessible in most cases due to the hard granite bedrock found in most areas in the territory ) , a high population density , and extreme seasonable variations in rainfall . Thus about 70 percent of water demand is met by importing water from the <unk> River in neighbouring Guangdong province . In addition , freshwater demand is curtailed by the use of seawater for toilet flushing , using a separate distribution system . 
 = = Demographics = = 
 The territory 's population in mid @-@ 2015 is 7 @.@ 30 million , with an average annual growth rate of 0 @.@ 8 % over the previous 5 years . The current population of Hong Kong comprises 91 % ethnic Chinese . A major part of Hong Kong 's Cantonese @-@ speaking majority originated from the neighbouring Guangdong province , from where many fled during the Second Sino @-@ Japanese War , the Chinese Civil War , and the communist rule in China . 
 Residents of the Mainland do not automatically receive the Right of Abode , and many may not enter the territory freely . Like other non @-@ natives , they may apply for the Right of Abode after seven years of continuous residency . Some of the rights may also be acquired by marriage ( e.g. , the right to work ) , but these do not include the right to vote or stand for office . However , the influx of immigrants from mainland China , approximating 45 @,@ 000 per year , is a significant contributor to its population growth – a daily quota of 150 Mainland Chinese with family ties in Hong Kong are granted a " one way permit " . Life expectancy in Hong Kong is 81 @.@ 2 years for males and 86 @.@ 9 years for females as of 2014 , making it the highest life expectancy in the world . 
 About 91 % of the people of Hong Kong are of Chinese descent , the majority of whom are Taishanese , Chiu Chow , other Cantonese people , and Hakka . Hong Kong 's Han majority originate mainly from the Guangzhou and Taishan regions in Guangdong province . The remaining 6 @.@ 9 % of the population is composed of non @-@ ethnic Chinese . There is a South Asian population of Indians , Pakistanis and Nepalese ; some Vietnamese refugees have become permanent residents of Hong Kong . There are also Britons , Americans , Canadians , Japanese , and Koreans working in the city 's commercial and financial sector . In 2011 , 133 @,@ 377 foreign domestic helpers from Indonesia and 132 @,@ 935 from the Philippines were working in Hong Kong . 
 Hong Kong 's de facto official language is Cantonese , a variety of Chinese originating from Guangdong province to the north of Hong Kong . English is also an official language , and according to a 1996 by @-@ census is spoken by 3 @.@ 1 percent of the population as an everyday language and by 34 @.@ 9 percent of the population as a second language . Signs displaying both Chinese and English are common throughout the territory . Since the 1997 Handover , an increase in immigrants from mainland China and greater interaction with the mainland 's economy have brought an increasing number of Mandarin speakers to Hong Kong . 
 = = = Religion = = = 
 A majority of residents of Hong Kong have no religious affiliation , professing a form of agnosticism or atheism . According to the US Department of State 43 percent of the population practices some form of religion . Some figures put it higher , according to a Gallup poll , 64 % of Hong Kong residents do not believe in any religion , and possibly 80 % of Hong Kong claim no religion . In Hong Kong teaching evolution won out in curriculum dispute about whether to teach other explanations , and that creationism and intelligent design will form no part of the senior secondary biology curriculum . 
 Hong Kong enjoys a high degree of religious freedom , guaranteed by the Basic Law . Hong Kong 's main religions are Buddhism , Taoism and Confucianism ; a local religious scholar in contact with major denominations estimates there are approximately 1 @.@ 5 million Buddhists and Taoists . A Christian community of around 833 @,@ 000 forms about 11 @.@ 7 % of the total population ; Protestants forms a larger number than Roman Catholics at a rate of 4 : 3 , although smaller Christian communities exist , including the Latter @-@ day Saints and Jehovah 's Witnesses . The Anglican and Roman Catholic churches each freely appoint their own bishops , unlike in mainland China . There are also Sikh , Muslim , Jewish , Hindu and Bahá 'í communities . The practice of Falun Gong is tolerated . 
 = = = Personal income = = = 
 Statistically Hong Kong 's income gap is the largest in Asia Pacific . According to a report by the United Nations Human Settlements Programme in 2008 , Hong Kong 's Gini coefficient , at 0 @.@ 53 , was the highest in Asia and " relatively high by international standards " . However , the government has stressed that income disparity does not equate to worsening of the poverty situation , and that the Gini coefficient is not strictly comparable between regions . The government has named economic restructuring , changes in household sizes , and the increase of high @-@ income jobs as factors that have skewed the Gini coefficient . 
 = = = Education = = = 
 Hong Kong 's education system used to roughly follow the system in England , although international systems exist . The government maintains a policy of " mother tongue instruction " ( Chinese : <unk> ) in which the medium of instruction is Cantonese , with written Chinese and English , while some of the schools are using English as the teaching language . In secondary schools , ' <unk> and trilingual ' proficiency is emphasised , and Mandarin @-@ language education has been increasing . The Programme for International Student Assessment ranked Hong Kong 's education system as the second best in the world . 
 Hong Kong 's public schools are operated by the Education Bureau . The system features a non @-@ compulsory three @-@ year kindergarten , followed by a compulsory six @-@ year primary education , a compulsory three @-@ year junior secondary education , a non @-@ compulsory two @-@ year senior secondary education leading to the Hong Kong Certificate of Education Examinations and a two @-@ year matriculation course leading to the Hong Kong Advanced Level Examinations . The New Senior Secondary academic structure and curriculum was implemented in September 2009 , which provides for all students to receive three years of compulsory junior and three years of compulsory senior secondary education . Under the new curriculum , there is only one public examination , namely the Hong Kong Diploma of Secondary Education . 
 Most comprehensive schools in Hong Kong fall under three categories : the rarer public schools ; the more common subsidised schools , including government aids @-@ and @-@ grant schools ; and private schools , often run by Christian organisations and having admissions based on academic merit rather than on financial resources . Outside this system are the schools under the Direct Subsidy Scheme and private international schools . 
 There are eight public and one private universities in Hong Kong , the oldest being the University of Hong Kong ( HKU ) , established in 1910 – 1912 . The Chinese University of Hong Kong was founded in 1963 to fulfill the need for a university with a medium of instruction of Chinese . Competition among students to receive an offer for an undergraduate programme is fierce as the annual number of intakes is limited , especially when some disciplines are offered by select tertiary institutions , like medicine which is provided by merely two medical schools in the territory , the Li Ka Shing Faculty of Medicine at the University of Hong Kong and the Faculty of Medicine of the Chinese University of Hong Kong . In addition to the public post @-@ secondary institutions there are also a number of private higher institutions which offer higher diplomas and associate degree courses for those who fail to enter a college for a degree study so as to boost their qualification of education , some of whom can have a second chance of getting into a university if they have a good performance in these sub @-@ degree courses . 
 = = = Health = = = 
 There are 13 private hospitals and more than 40 public hospitals in Hong Kong . There is little interaction between public and private healthcare . The hospitals offer a wide range of healthcare services , and some of the territory 's private hospitals are considered to be world class . According to UN estimates , Hong Kong has one of the longest life expectancies of any country or territory in the world . As of 2012 , Hong Kong women are the longest living demographic group in the world . 
 There are two medical schools in the territory , one based at the Chinese University of Hong Kong and the other at the University of Hong Kong . Both have links with public sector hospitals . With respect to postgraduate education , traditionally many doctors in Hong Kong have looked overseas for further training , and many took British Royal College exams such as the MRCP ( UK ) and the <unk> ( UK ) . However , Hong Kong has been developing its own postgraduate medical institutions , in particular the Hong Kong Academy of Medicine , and this is gradually taking over the responsibility for all postgraduate medical training in the territory . 
 Since 2011 , there have been growing concerns that mothers @-@ to @-@ be from mainland China , in a bid to obtain the right of abode in Hong Kong and the benefits that come with it , have saturated the neonatal wards of the city 's hospitals both public and private . This has led to protest from local pregnant women for the government to remedy the issue , as they have found difficulty in securing a bed space for giving birth and routine check @-@ ups . Other concerns in the decade of 2001 – 2010 relate to the workload medical staff experience ; and medical errors and mishaps , which are frequently highlighted in local news . 
 = = Culture = = 
 Hong Kong is frequently described as a place where " East meets West " , reflecting the culture 's mix of the territory 's Chinese roots with influences from its time as a British colony . Concepts like feng shui are taken very seriously , with expensive construction projects often hiring expert consultants , and are often believed to make or break a business . Other objects like Ba <unk> mirrors are still regularly used to deflect evil spirits , and buildings often lack any floor number that has a 4 in it , due to its similarity to the word for " die " in Cantonese . The fusion of east and west also characterises Hong Kong 's cuisine , where dim sum , hot pot , and fast food restaurants coexist with haute cuisine . 
 Hong Kong is a recognised global centre of trade and calls itself an " entertainment hub " . Its martial arts film genre gained a high level of popularity in the late 1960s and 1970s . Several Hollywood performers , notable actors and martial artists have originated from Hong Kong cinema , notably Bruce Lee , Jackie Chan , Chow Yun @-@ fat , Michelle Yeoh , Maggie Cheung and Jet Li . A number of Hong Kong film @-@ makers have achieved widespread fame in Hollywood , such as John Woo , Wong Kar @-@ wai , and Stephen Chow . Homegrown films such as Chungking Express , Infernal Affairs , Shaolin Soccer , Rumble in the Bronx , In the Mood for Love and Echoes of the Rainbow have gained international recognition . Hong Kong is the centre for Cantopop music , which draws its influence from other forms of Chinese music and Western genres , and has a multinational fanbase . 
 The Hong Kong government supports cultural institutions such as the Hong Kong Heritage Museum , the Hong Kong Museum of Art , the Hong Kong Academy for Performing Arts , and the Hong Kong Philharmonic Orchestra . The government 's Leisure and Cultural Services Department <unk> and sponsors international performers brought to Hong Kong . Many international cultural activities are organised by the government , consulates , and privately . 
 Hong Kong has two licensed terrestrial broadcasters – ATV and TVB . There are three local and a number of foreign suppliers of cable and satellite services . The production of Hong Kong 's soap dramas , comedy series , and variety shows reach audiences throughout the Chinese @-@ speaking world . Magazine and newspaper publishers in Hong Kong distribute and print in both Chinese and English , with a focus on sensationalism and celebrity gossip . The media in Hong Kong is relatively free from official interference compared to Mainland China , although the Far Eastern Economic Review points to signs of self @-@ censorship by media whose owners have close ties to or business interests in the People 's Republic of China and states that even Western media outlets are not immune to growing Chinese economic power . 
 Hong Kong offers wide recreational and competitive sport opportunities despite its limited land area . It sends delegates to international competitions such as the Olympic Games and Asian Games , and played host to the equestrian events during the 2008 Summer Olympics . There are major multipurpose venues like Hong Kong Coliseum and MacPherson Stadium . Hong Kong 's steep terrain and extensive trail network with expansive views attracts hikers , and its rugged coastline provides many beaches for swimming . 
 = = = Sport = = = 
 Sports in Hong Kong are a significant part of its culture . Due mainly to British influence going as far back as the late 19th century , Hong Kong had an earlier introduction to Western athletics compared to other Asia regions . Football , cricket , basketball , swimming , badminton , table tennis , cycling and running have the most participants and spectators . In 2009 , Hong Kong successfully organised the V East Asian Games . Other major international sporting events including the Equestrian at the 2008 Summer Olympics , Hong Kong Sevens , Hong Kong Marathon , AFC Asian Cup , <unk> East Asian Cup , Hong Kong Tennis Classic , Premier League Asia Trophy , and Lunar New Year Cup are also held in the territory . As of 2010 , there were 32 Hong Kong athletes from seven sports ranking in world 's Top 20 , 29 athletes in six sports in Asia top 10 ranking . Moreover , Hong Kong athletes with disabilities are equally impressive in their performance as of 2009 , having won four world championships and two Asian Championships . 
 = = = Architecture = = = 
 According to <unk> , there are 1 @,@ 223 skyscrapers in Hong Kong , which puts the city at the top of world rankings . It has more buildings taller than 500 feet ( 150 m ) than any other city . The high density and tall skyline of Hong Kong 's urban area is due to a lack of available sprawl space , with the average distance from the harbour front to the steep hills of Hong Kong Island at 1 @.@ 3 km ( 0 @.@ 81 mi ) , much of it reclaimed land . This lack of space causes demand for dense , high @-@ rise offices and housing . Thirty @-@ six of the world 's 100 tallest residential buildings are in Hong Kong . More people in Hong Kong live or work above the 14th floor than anywhere else on Earth , making it the world 's most vertical city . 
 As a result of the lack of space and demand for construction , few older buildings remain , and the city is becoming a centre for modern architecture . The International Commerce Centre ( ICC ) , at 484 m ( 1 @,@ 588 ft ) high , is the tallest building in Hong Kong and the third tallest in the world , by height to roof measurement . The tallest building prior to the ICC is Two International Finance Centre , at 415 m ( 1 @,@ 362 ft ) high . Other recognisable skyline features include the HSBC Headquarters Building , the triangular @-@ topped Central Plaza with its pyramid @-@ shaped spire , The Center with its night @-@ time multi @-@ coloured neon light show ; A Symphony of Lights and I. M. Pei 's Bank of China Tower with its sharp , angular façade . According to the <unk> website , the city skyline has the biggest visual impact of all world cities . Also , Hong Kong 's skyline is often regarded to be the best in the world , with the surrounding mountains and Victoria Harbour complementing the skyscrapers . Most of the oldest remaining historic structures , including the Tsim Sha Tsui Clock Tower , the Central Police Station , and the remains of Kowloon Walled City were constructed during the 19th and early 20th centuries . 
 There are many development plans in place , including the construction of new government buildings , waterfront redevelopment in Central , and a series of projects in West Kowloon . More high @-@ rise development is set to take place on the other side of Victoria Harbour in Kowloon , as the 1998 closure of the nearby Kai Tak Airport lifted strict height restrictions . The Urban Renewal Authority is highly active in demolishing older areas , including the razing and redevelopment of Kwun Tong town centre , an approach which has been criticised for its impact on the cultural identity of the city and on lower @-@ income residents . 
 = = = Cityscape = = = 
 = Small Victories = 
 " Small Victories " is the first episode from season four of the science fiction television series Stargate SG @-@ 1 . Penned by Robert C. Cooper and directed by Martin Wood , the episode first aired on the American subscription channel Showtime on June 30 , 2000 . " Small Victories " resumes the story of the season 3 finale , " Nemesis " , in which the SG @-@ 1 team encountered the Replicators for the first time . As the Replicators threaten Earth and the Asgard home galaxy , the team must split to master their job . 
 " Small Victories " was another visual effects milestone for the series . The Replicators and the Asgard character Thor were computer @-@ animated for parts of the episode . Some scenes were filmed in and outside of a Russian Foxtrot class submarine . " Small Victories " was nominated for Best Special Effects in 2001 for an Emmy , a Gemini Award and a Leo Award . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Confident that the destruction of Thor 's starship has ended the Replicator threat to Earth ( " Nemesis " ) , the SG @-@ 1 team returns home through the second Stargate that has been put up at Stargate Command . Shortly after they learn that a Russian Foxtrot class submarine has been hijacked by creatures whose descriptions match the Replicators , Thor arrives at Stargate Command and asks SG @-@ 1 for help against the Replicators in the Asgard galaxy . As Colonel O 'Neill ( Richard Dean Anderson ) , Daniel Jackson ( Michael Shanks ) and Teal 'c ( Christopher Judge ) go to deal with the hijacked submarine , Major Carter ( Amanda Tapping ) goes with Thor . 
 O 'Neill , Daniel , and Teal 'c try to obtain intelligence on the little self @-@ replicating robotic invaders in the submarine , but they are forced to fall back . With Daniel 's new theory that the Replicators are made up of the same materials they consume , the Replicators may be eliminated through sinking the iron submarine as long as the surviving Replicator from Thor 's advanced ship is destroyed beforehand . Meanwhile , Carter witnesses a short battle against the Replicators in the Asgard galaxy during which five Asgard ships are lost . Carter notices the Replicators ' attraction to new technology and proposes to use the O 'Neill , an incomplete Asgard ship originally designed to fight the Replicators , as a lure to draw the Replicators into hyperspace and destroy them in the O 'Neill 's self @-@ destruct . Thor eventually accepts the plan , the Replicators take the bait and are destroyed . 
 Back on Earth , O 'Neill and Teal 'c penetrate the submarine and find and destroy the original Replicator . When the other Replicators take full control of the submarine , O 'Neill orders the forces outside to destroy the submarine and prepares for the end , but Thor beams the team onto his ship before the explosion occurs . With the imminent Replicator threat over , Thor promises that when the Asgard defeat the Replicators , he will come to assist Earth in the war against the Goa 'uld . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Writing and pre @-@ production = = = 
 Visual effects supervisor James Tichenor approached producer Robert C. Cooper after the completion of the season 3 finale , " Nemesis " , and stated his confidence in his team 's ability to create effects for a water @-@ based episode . By that time , Cooper had already written the outline of " Small Victories " as the season 4 opener . " Small Victories " resumes the cliffhanger ending of " Nemesis " and alludes to events of that episode several times . The episode begins aboard a Russian submarine where one Russian says in his mother tongue that the noise in the torpedo tube might be caused by " one of the bugs from the other episode " , an in @-@ joke that the producers intentionally left without subtitles . Daniel Jackson 's appendicitis attack from " Nemesis " is picked up , which was originally based on Michael Shanks ' real @-@ life appendicitis attack during the filming of the penultimate season 3 episode . " Small Victories " also continues building the relationship of O 'Neill and Carter in mirroring a similar scene from " Nemesis " . However , Christopher Judge , who in previous seasons sported a bald @-@ shaven head as the alien Teal 'c , returned to the set with a small blond chin beard after the hiatus , as the producers had not allowed his character to have scalp hair ( until season 8 ) . Judge shaved off the beard several episodes later after acknowledging its look as silly . The official Showtime website initially caused some confusion by listing Jay Acovone ( <unk> ) as a guest @-@ star in this episode , which later turned out to be untrue . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 " Small Victories " was filmed over the course of seven days like most SG @-@ 1 episodes . After the first three seasons of Stargate SG @-@ 1 had been filmed on 16 mm film ( except for shots incorporating visual effects , where experience had shown 35 mm to work better ) , " Nemesis " was filmed entirely on 35 mm film as a test run , and season 4 switched to the new gauge for all filming purposes . 
 Martin Wood directed " Small Victories " and made a short cameo appearance with Sergeant Siler ( stunt coordinator Dan Shea ) in an SGC corridor . Andy Mikita served as the second unit director and filmed the coverage of the practical Thor puppet after Amanda Tapping 's coverage had been shot . Michael Shanks , who provided the voice of Thor in post @-@ production ADR , read some of Thor 's lines for Tapping on @-@ set . The top lip of the Thor puppet , which was visibly broken during the filming , proved a challenge . One anecdotal blooper moment that Amanda Tapping often tells at conventions and which producer Joseph Mallozzi named one of his favorites in the first five years of Stargate SG @-@ 1 , is that of the puppeteers raising Thor 's hand to touch Tapping 's behind during filming . Tapping instinctively slapped the expensive prop , then she kneeled down and apologized to the puppet in all seriousness before realizing the silliness of her reaction . 
 " Small Victories " is split into two parallel storylines , and several space shots of the B story onboard Thor 's spaceship were cut at the script stage to allot more money to the A story submarine scenes . " Small Victories " was originally written to set on a fishing trawler until the producers got access to a real Russian Foxtrot class submarine , which was brought from Vladivostok to Vancouver , Canada , where Stargate SG @-@ 1 was filmed . Several scenes were filmed in and outside of the submarine for two days . A matching set with removable walls was built later on because only three film crew members could fit into the real 25 @-@ feet @-@ wide submarine . To enhance the submarine 's narrowness , Martin Wood lit the ship with the actors ' helmet lights and chose an agitated shooting style , holding the shots tight and handholding some of the cameras himself . The logistics of the submarine filming proved difficult and time @-@ consuming , since the computer @-@ generated Replicators needed to appear on Daniel 's playback monitors in advance of filming . One scripted scene in which a Replicator piece is removed from Teal 'c's shoulder was trimmed on @-@ set because the actors felt it to be redundant . 
 = = = Effects = = = 
 " Small Victories " surpassed " Nemesis " as the biggest visual @-@ effects @-@ heavy Stargate SG @-@ 1 episode and remained one of biggest visual effects works of the season . Nevertheless , the limited budget required the major Computer @-@ generated imagery ( CGI ) moments to be chosen well . The opening sequence of the Asgard ship flying over the ocean until its crash into the water was completely computer @-@ generated , as was the Asgard homeworld at a later point in the episode . The finetuning of the lighting of the Asgard homeworld , which was blended with a matte painting of Asgard space ships in the sky , was the most difficult job . To save costs , the moments before Thor 's entry to the SGC were <unk> of the Stargate , and the illusion of a Stargate event horizon behind Thor in the following scenes was created with an LCD projection . Although a computer @-@ generated version of Thor was built around the puppet for independent movements , the CGI version 's walking down the Stargate ramp was intercut with filmed shots of the puppet put on a trike . 
 Visual effects producer James Tichenor claimed that visual effects work better when not highlighted , and that a major part of effective visual effects are the actors ' reactions to nonexistent things . Replicator models were used to give the actors an idea at what they were looking and to match their eyelines . One model was mounted on a plexiglass rod and shown on @-@ screen , giving the impression of an organic Replicator hologram . The computer @-@ generated Replicators on board the submarine were tracked with small lights , some of which post @-@ production left in for good looks . The reflections of the green screen on the floor aboard Thor 's ship ( " green spill " , usually an undesired side effect ) were used to key selective patches for the reflection of the big spaceship screen . 
 = = Reception = = 
 " Small Victories " was first broadcast on June 30 , 2000 on Showtime . SG @-@ 1 visual effects producer James Tichenor considered the few episodes with big visual effects budgets the most likely works to contain visual cues that impress Academy of Television Arts & Sciences ( Emmy Awards ) voters , but he feared that the 2000 submarine feature film U @-@ 571 might spoil expectations . " Small Victories " and the SG @-@ 1 season 4 finale " Exodus " were nominated for a 2001 Emmy in the category " Outstanding Special Visual Effects for a Series " , but they lost to Star Trek : Voyager 's " Endgame " . " Small Victories " was also nominated for a Gemini Award and a Leo Award in the respective " Best Visual Effects " categories , but failed to win either . 
 In his book Approaching the Possible , Jo Storm considered " Small Victories " " one of the most enthralling episodes " that makes the audience forget that it used nearly the same premise that was used in " Nemesis " . He thought the episode was " especially big on the Sam / Jack dynamic " as the characters " toe the line between fraternal teasing and downright chemistry " . He saluted Amanda Tapping 's comedic opportunities and called her character 's reaction to Asgard food " priceless " . He also noted the character development of Daniel Jackson in a military environment , contrasting it with the character 's attitude in the season 1 episode " Thor 's Hammer " where his military mind was less developed . 
 = Magnavox Odyssey = 
 The Magnavox Odyssey is the first commercial home video game console . It was developed by a small team led by Ralph H. Baer at Sanders Associates and released by Magnavox in the United States in September 1972 and overseas the following year . The Odyssey consists of a white , black , and brown box which connects to a television set and two rectangular controllers attached by wires . It is capable of displaying three square dots on the screen in monochrome black and white , with different behavior of the dots depending on the game played , and has no sound capabilities . Players place plastic overlays on the screen to create visuals , and the one or two players for each game control their dots with the three knobs and one button on the controller in accordance with the rules given for the game . The Odyssey console came packaged with dice , paper money , and other board game paraphernalia to go along with the games , and a peripheral controller — the first video game light gun — was sold separately . 
 The idea for a video game console was thought up by Baer in August 1966 , and over the next three years he , along with Bill Harrison and Bill Rusch , created seven successive prototype consoles . The seventh , known as the Brown Box , was shown to several manufacturers before Magnavox agreed to produce it in January 1971 . After releasing the console in September 1972 through their dealerships , Magnavox sold between 69 @,@ 000 and 100 @,@ 000 units by the end of the year , and 350 @,@ 000 by the time the console was discontinued in 1975 . The console spawned the Magnavox Odyssey series of dedicated consoles , as well as the 1978 Magnavox Odyssey ² . One of the 28 games made for the system , a ping pong game , was an inspiration for Atari 's successful Pong arcade game , in turn driving sales of the console . Baer 's patents for the console and the games , including what was termed by a judge as " the pioneering patent of the video game art " , formed the basis of a series of lawsuits over 20 years , earning Sanders and Magnavox over US $ 100 million . The release of the Odyssey marked the end of the early history of video games , and the rise of the commercial video game industry along with the start of the first generation of video game consoles . 
 = = Design = = 
 The Odyssey consists of a black , white , and brown oblong box connected by wires to two rectangular controllers . The primary console box connects to the television set through an included <unk> , which allows the player to switch the television input between the Odyssey and the regular television input cable , and presents itself like a television channel . The controllers , which are designed to sit on a flat surface , contain one button marked Reset on the top of the controller and three knobs : one on the right side of the controller , and two on the left with one extending from the other . The reset button does not reset the game , but instead is used by different games to reset individual elements , such as making a player 's dot visible after it is turned off during a game . The system can be powered by six C batteries , which were included . An optional AC power supply was sold separately . The Odyssey lacks sound capability and can only display monochrome white shapes on a blank black screen . 
 Internally , the Odyssey architecture is composed of digital computing parts . The circuitry is implemented in diode – transistor logic using discrete transistors and diodes , rather than the newly emerging transistor – transistor logic integrated circuits , due to cost concerns . The games themselves do not use cartridges like later consoles , but instead use " game cards " composed of printed circuit boards that plug into the console . These cards modify the internal circuitry like a set of switches or jumpers , causing the Odyssey to display different components and react to inputs differently . Multiple games use the same cards , with different instructions given to the player to change the style of game . 
 The Odyssey is capable of displaying three square dots and a vertical line on the screen . Two of the dots are controlled by the two players , and the third by the console . The main console has two dials , one of which moves the vertical line across the screen , and one which adjusts the speed of the computer @-@ controlled dot . Different games directed the player to adjust the dials to different positions , for example to change the center line of a tennis game into the side wall of a handball game . The games include plastic overlays which would stick to the television via static cling , to create visuals for the game . Different games that use the same game card can have different overlays , which could change a game with the same controls from , for example , a mountain ski path to a movement @-@ based Simon Says game . 
 In addition to the overlays , the Odyssey came with dice , poker chips , score sheets , play money , and game boards much like a traditional board game . One peripheral controller was released for the Odyssey , the first video game light gun . Named the Shooting Gallery , the rifle @-@ shaped device registered a hit when pointed at a light source such as a dot on the television screen . Four shooting @-@ based games were included with the light gun . 
 = = Development = = 
 In 1951 , while working for military contractor <unk> Electronics , engineer Ralph H. Baer was assigned to build a television set ; while doing so , he had the idea to build something into a television set that the owner could control , rather than only hooking it up to a remote television station . Baer did not pursue the idea , but it returned to him in August 1966 while waiting for a bus . Baer , then the head of the Equipment Design Division at military contractor Sanders Associates , came up with the concept of using a television to play games , and the next morning wrote up a four @-@ page proposal for a US $ 20 " game box " that would plug into a television screen and play games on it . While the commercial video game industry did not yet exist at that point , the very first electronic computer games had been developed at the start of the 1950s , and by 1966 several early mainframe games had been developed for mainframe computers , which were typically only found in large academic or research institutions . In the proposal , Baer began by referring to the project using military terminology , but by the time he finished it he was referring to it as Channel LP , short for " let 's play " . The proposed device would transmit a signal that the television set could tune into as if it were a television channel , and Baer described several games that could be played on it . 
 As Channel LP had little to do with the typical military contracts Sanders worked on , rather than bring the idea to his bosses Baer instead commandeered an empty room and assigned one of his technicians , Bob Tremblay , to work on it with him . By December 1966 an initial prototype later christened " TV Game # 1 " was completed , which could display and move a vertical line on a television screen . Baer demonstrated the prototype to the Sanders director of research and development , Herbert Campman , who hesitantly agreed to fund it for US $ 2 @,@ 000 of labor and US $ 500 for materials , making it an official project . 
 Baer spent the next few months designing further prototypes , and in February 1967 assigned technician Bill Harrison to begin building the project . Harrison spent the next few months in between other projects building out successive modifications to the prototype . Baer , meanwhile , collaborated with engineer Bill Rusch on the design of the console , including developing the basis of many games for the system . The first game was developed by May , a two @-@ player gamer where the players repeatedly press a button in competition to fill or empty a bucket of water , and by June multiple games were completed for what was then a second prototype box . These included a game where players controlled dots chasing each other and a light gun shooter game with a plastic rifle . Baer demonstrated the new prototype to Campman , who enjoyed the shooting game , increased funding , and recommended Baer demonstrate the project to senior management . Baer demonstrated the console to the board , who were largely uninterested , though a couple members were enthusiastic ; nevertheless , CEO Royden Sanders authorized the project to be continued with the aim of selling or licensing the console as a commercial product . 
 By August 1967 , Baer and Harrison had completed a third prototype machine , but had found that to even come near to Baer 's initial aim of a US $ 20 or $ 25 console would require so much to be excluded that the resulting console would not be very enjoyable . Baer additionally felt that he was not proving successful at designing fun games for the system ; to make up for this he formally added Bill Rusch , who had helped him come up with the initial games for the system , to the project . Though the pair found Rusch difficult to work with , he soon proved his value to the team by coming up with a way to display three spots on the screen at once rather than the previous two , and proposing the development of a ping pong game . By November the team , now on their fourth prototype machine , had a ping pong game , a chasing game , a light gun game , and three types of controllers : joysticks for the chase game , a rifle for the light gun game , and a three dial controller for the ping pong game . Campman felt that the system was advanced enough to begin trying to find a manufacturer to buy it ; they had decided to aim for selling the rights to produce the console , as Sanders was not in the business of making and selling commercial electronics . 
 The team first approached the cable television industry , and the prototype attracted the attention of TelePrompter Corporation , who had seen it during a visit . After a few months of talks , cash @-@ flow problems forced TelePrompter to back out in April 1968 . The same economic downturn that caused TelePrompter 's problems caused financial difficulties at Sanders as well , which put the project on hold after the fifth prototype was developed while simultaneously undergoing large @-@ scale layoffs . It was picked up again in September , this time without Rusch , and went through two more iterations resulting in January 1969 in the seventh prototype , known as the " Brown Box " due to the wood @-@ grain stickers on the casing . With the system now largely complete , Baer and Harrison were unsure who to approach to sell it until a Sanders patent attorney recommended contacting television manufacturers . Baer demonstrated the system to several companies , who all expressed enthusiasm ; only RCA was willing to purchase the device , however , and an agreement could not be reached . Soon afterwards , though , RCA executive Bill Enders left RCA for Magnavox and convinced them to look at the console again . The three creators of the Brown Box again demonstrated the device to Magnavox in July 1969 ; they received a tepid reaction from most of the executives , but Vice President of Marketing Gerry Martin was in favor and Magnavox agreed to produce the console . After a long period of negotiations the two companies finally signed an agreement in January 1971 . 
 Magnavox designed the exterior of the machine , and re @-@ engineered the internals with some consultation from Baer and Harrison ; they removed the ability to display color , used only the three dial controller , and changed the system of selecting games from a dial to separate game cards that modified the console 's circuitry when plugged into the console . At the time , color televisions were still seen as a luxury item , and the ability to show color would have added additional expense and time spent dealing with FCC testing and regulations . The internal circuitry had been designed with discrete components rather than integrated circuits due to cost concerns ; these concerns were no longer valid by 1971 , but Magnavox did not have enough time to redesign every internal component of the machine prior to the planned production start date . Magnavox named the console first as the Skill @-@ O @-@ Vision while testing , and then released it as the Odyssey . The rifle game was turned into a separately sold add @-@ on game , Shooting Gallery , and Magnavox added paper money , playing cards , and poker chips to the console , to go along with the plastic overlays for the games that enhanced the primitive visuals . The new additions helped raise the price of the console to US $ 99 @.@ 95 . Baer was upset with the board game additions , which he felt were pointless add @-@ ons that would go unused by players . Magnavox announced the game for a launch date of September 1972 , and demonstrated it for months prior to Magnavox dealerships and media . 
 = = Reception and legacy = = 
 The Odyssey was released by Magnavox in September 1972 . After initially ordering a production run of 50 @,@ 000 units , prior to release Magnavox increased its production capabilities and built up a large stock of the systems , as market testing had shown an enthusiastic response to the console . The Odyssey was sold only through Magnavox dealers and not through general retailers ; Magnavox felt that as the first video game console it would draw consumers into its stores . The device retailed for US $ 99 @.@ 99 , or US $ 50 when purchased along with a Magnavox television . There are conflicting reports between Baer and Magnavox employees as to whether Magnavox produced 120 @,@ 000 or 140 @,@ 000 consoles in 1972 ; additionally , Odyssey product manager Bob Fritsche recalls selling 69 @,@ 000 units that year , while Baer recalls sales being closer to 100 @,@ 000 . Baer has stated that he felt the low initial sales were due to the high price — US $ 100 being the equivalent of US $ 569 in 2015 — and because of Magnavox restricting sales to their dealerships and implying that the device only worked with Magnavox televisions . Other sources have stated that dealership salespeople would try to mislead customers to that effect in order to try to sell more television sets . Magnavox assistant product planner Don Emry has noted that the sales were in line with the original projections , if not with the production run . 
 According to Baer , after the initial holiday season Magnavox considered dropping the console , but the modest continuing demand the following year convinced them to manufacture an additional 27 @,@ 000 units for the 1973 holiday season , selling 20 @,@ 000 of them . The console was also released in 12 other countries : Australia , Belgium , France , Germany , Greece , Israel , Italy , the Soviet Union , Spain , Switzerland , the United Kingdom , and Venezuela , with different games . The international release was focused in the United Kingdom , with some non @-@ English versions not released until 1974 . Late in 1973 , Magnavox ran a large advertising campaign for all of their 1974 products , with the result that they sold 129 @,@ 000 Odyssey units in 1974 , or 150 @,@ 000 according to Baer . Magnavox discontinued the console after 1975 ; according to Baer it sold 350 @,@ 000 units in total worldwide , though statements by Fritsche indicate it may have been higher . The light gun peripheral sold 20 @,@ 000 units . As the Odyssey was discontinued Magnavox released the first successive dedicated consoles — consoles that could only play games built into the system — in the Magnavox Odyssey series , the Odyssey 100 and Odyssey 200 , as part of the first generation of video game consoles ; the Odyssey 100 was only capable of playing the ping pong and hockey games from the original Odyssey . Eleven dedicated Odyssey consoles were produced before a true follow @-@ up console in 1978 , the Magnavox Odyssey ² . 
 While it showed the potential of video game consoles and marked the end of the early history of video games and the beginning of the commercial video game industry , the Odyssey is not generally considered a major commercial success . Magnavox produced no more games for the console after 1973 and rejected Baer 's proposals for an add @-@ on that would add sound to games , a putting controller and associated golf game , and console variants that would have been cheaper or supported up to four players . While a few clone systems were produced in limited quantities , and multiple dedicated consoles — generally focused on ping pong game variants — were created by several companies , no other true home video video consoles were produced until the 1976 Fairchild Semiconductor Channel F. 
 In 2004 Ralph Baer was awarded the National Medal of Technology for " his groundbreaking and pioneering creation , development and commercialization of interactive video games , which spawned related uses , applications , and mega @-@ industries in both the entertainment and education realms " . In June 2013 , the Museum of Modern Art ( MoMA ) added the Magnavox Odyssey to its permanent collection of video games . MoMA 's Paul Galloway described the console as " a masterpiece of engineering and industrial design " and stated that it was " hard to overstate the importance of [ Ralph Baer 's ] place in the birth of the industry " . The Brown Box prototype and the TV Game # 1 prototype are located at the Smithsonian Institution 's National Museum of American History in Washington , D.C .. 
 = = = Lawsuits = = = 
 In May 1972 , Nutting Associates chief engineer Nolan Bushnell , designer of the first commercial arcade video game , Computer Space , saw a demonstration of the Odyssey at a dealership . Inspired , when he quit Nutting to start his own company , Atari , he assigned Allan Alcorn to create a cheap ping pong arcade game as a training exercise , though he did not tell Alcorn that it was for training nor that the idea was based on the Odyssey Table Tennis game . Alcorn soon developed Pong , which Bushnell recognized as a potential hit , and it became the company 's first game . Pong was very successful , and in turn helped drive sales of the Odyssey ; Baer once noted that customers bought the console because of Table Tennis , in turn because of Pong , and joked that they may as well have stopped designing games after that game card . In 1974 , however , Magnavox sued Atari along with several competitors including Nutting , Allied Leisure , Bally Midway , and Williams Electronics for infringing on Baer 's patents for video games played on a television screen . Baer has stated that the lawsuits were not filed right away because Magnavox and Sanders needed to wait until they could expect to be awarded more money than it would cost to pursue the suits . The root of the conflict was a pair of patents by Baer — one which described how the Odyssey showed player @-@ controlled objects , or dots , on a video monitor and described a number of games that could be played with the system , and an earlier one that went into detail about how the Odyssey used that system to have two dots collide with each other and have one bounce off , specifically using a game of ping pong as an example . 
 The judge ruled that Baer 's more general patent for the Odyssey constituted " the pioneering patent of the video game art " , and held the defendants ' games as infringing the patents . Atari settled early on in the court case with Magnavox , and in return were granted a license in exchange for US $ 1 @.@ 5 million and access granted to Magnavox to all technology produced by Atari from June 1976 to June 1977 , while the other defendants paid higher penalties . Over the next twenty years Sanders and Magnavox sued several other companies over the issue , focusing on " paddle @-@ and @-@ ball " type games like Pong and Table Tennis that were more clearly related to the ping pong game patent ; the final lawsuits ended in the mid 1990s . Defendants included Coleco , Mattel , Seeburg , and Activision ; Sanders and Magnavox won or settled every lawsuit . Many of the defendants unsuccessfully attempted to claim that the patents only applied to the specific hardware implementations that Baer had used , or that they were invalidated by prior computer or electronic games . In 1985 , Nintendo sued and tried to invalidate Baer 's patents , claiming as prior art the 1958 Tennis for Two game built by William Higinbotham . The court , however , ruled that the oscilloscope @-@ based game did not use video signals and therefore did not qualify as a video game , and ruled again in favor of Magnavox and Sanders . Magnavox won more than US $ 100 million in the various patent lawsuits and settlements involving the Odyssey related patents . In addition , they had a large number of licensees of their patents , with over one hundred already by the mid 1970s . 
 = = List of games = = 
 A total of 28 games distributed on 11 different game cards were released for the Magnavox Odyssey . 13 games were included with the console — a set of 12 in America and a different set of 10 in other countries — with 6 others available for purchase either individually for US $ 5 @.@ 49 or in a pack for US $ 24 @.@ 99 ; the additional games primarily used the same game cards with different screen overlays and instructions . Another game , <unk> , was available for free to players that sent in a survey card . A light gun accessory , Shooting Gallery , was available for purchase , and included four games on two cards that used the rifle . A final four games were released for sale in 1973 , designed wholly or in part by Don Emry . The games do not enforce game rules or keep track of score ; that is left up to the players . 
 = Nethermost Pike = 
 Nethermost Pike is a fell in Cumbria , England , and a part of the Lake District . At 891 metres ( 2 @,@ 923 ft ) it is the second highest Wainwright in the Helvellyn range , the highest of which is Helvellyn itself . It is located close to the southern end of the ridge , with Helvellyn to the north , and High Crag and Dollywaggon Pike to the south . Nethermost Pike , along with many of the Eastern Fells , lies between Thirlmere in the west and the Ullswater catchment in the east . The closest villages are Glenridding and Patterdale on the shores of Ullswater , over 8 kilometres ( 5 mi ) away . 
 Like most fells in the Helvellyn range , Nethermost Pike has grassy western slopes and rocky outcrops on the eastern side . Geologically , Nethermost Pike belongs to the Borrowdale Volcanic Group . Lead was once mined on its eastern slopes , resulting in open workings and underground mines . The eastern slopes are protected as part of a Site of Special Scientific Interest because of the Pike 's geological and biological features , which include some of England 's best arctic @-@ alpine and tall @-@ herb vegetation . 
 = = Classification = = 
 Mountains are often classified according to their heights . At 891 m ( 2 @,@ 922 ft ) Nethermost Pike is listed as a Nuttall , which requires an elevation of 610 m ( 2 @,@ 000 ft ) . However with a prominence of 22 metres ( 72 ft ) it is not counted as a Hewitt or Marilyn which require prominences of 30 metres ( 98 ft ) and 150 metres ( 492 ft ) respectively . Nethermost Pike is also counted as a Wainwright because it was given a chapter in Alfred Wainwright 's Pictorial Guide to the Lakeland Fells . It is the second highest of the Eastern Fells , and the ninth highest of all the <unk> . South of Nethermost Pike is High Crag 884 metres ( 2 @,@ 900 ft ) , which is separated from Nethermost Pike by a very limited depression . Most guidebooks follow Alfred Wainwright in considering High Crag to be a part of Nethermost Pike . This convention is not universally followed however , with author Bill Birkett preferring to differentiate between the two fells . 
 = = Topography = = 
 The Helvellyn range runs broadly north @-@ south for about 11 kilometres ( 7 mi ) , remaining above 600 m ( 1 @,@ 970 ft ) throughout its length . Nethermost Pike is toward the southern end of this ridge , with Helvellyn itself to the north and Dollywaggon Pike to the south . In common with much of the Helvellyn range there is a marked contrast between the western and eastern slopes of Nethermost Pike . In Wainwright 's words : " The grassy western slope trodden by the multitudes is of little interest , but the fell should not be judged accordingly : it is made of sterner stuff . From the east , Nethermost Pike is magnificent , hardly less so than Helvellyn . " 
 The western slopes fall smoothly to the head of Thirlmere reservoir , and the tiny church at Wythburn . There are rougher areas , High and Comb Crags in particular , but these do little to change the overall impression of high moorland . The lower slopes have been planted with conifers as part of the Thirlmere Forest , but above this is a sense of wide open space . Nethermost Pike 's toehold on the valley is shifted a little to the south , relative to its position on the ridge . This is because Whelpside and <unk> Gills , its boundary streams , both run south @-@ west , rather than flowing straight down the slope . 
 On the east , the first impression is all of rock . The long <unk> of Grisedale runs north eastward to Ullswater , cutting off a series of hanging valleys which fall from the Helvellyn range . To the south east of Nethermost Pike , below the summit of High Crag , is Ruthwaite Cove . Surrounded by crag on three sides , this corrie contains Hard Tarn , a small pool on a rock shelf . This is one of the most difficult mountain tarns to locate , and its black algal bed and clear water combine to give the false impression of great depth . Ruthwaite Cove is now the site of Ruthwaite Lodge , a climbing hut . It was formerly the setting for more industrial activity , with the remains of several underground mines and some shallow open workings visible near the Lodge . 
 Between Ruthwaite and Nethermost Coves , Nethermost Pike sends out a fine rocky ridge . This arête , although not as imposing as Striding Edge across Nethermost Cove , ascends by a series of rocky steps for three quarters of a mile , making straight for the summit . It is from this angle , rather than from the west , that the fell earns the sobriquet of " Pike " , meaning peaked mountain . At the bottom of the ridge is Eagle Crag , standing above Grisedale Beck and forcing walkers to take a detour from the ridgeline . 
 North from Nethermost Pike is the depression of Swallow Scarth , above the head of Nethermost Cove . From here the ridge climbs again , turning to the west as the long plateau of Helvellyn top is reached . Southwards the ridge steps down over High Crag , and narrows as it swings east around Ruthwaite Cove to Dollywaggon Pike . A heavily eroded path runs along the ridge , but actually bypasses the top of Nethermost Pike to the west , as it leads to Helvellyn . 
 The summit area is triangular in plan with ridges running to the north , south and east . The actual top is toward the northern corner and set back a little from the drop to Nethermost Cove . There is a rash of stones on the summit although the surroundings are mostly covered in rough grass , and several small cairns have been built . Other than northward , where the bulk of Helvellyn intervenes , the view is extensive , with much of the Lake District visible . Further ground is brought into view from the summit of High Crag . 
 = = Ascents = = 
 The Lake District receives over 12 million visitors a year , many of whom come to climb the mountains . The closest villages to Nethermost pike are Glenridding and Patterdale , 8 kilometres ( 5 mi ) to the east , close to the shores of Ullswater . Both are common starting points for climbing Nethermost Pike or other fells in the Helvellyn range . The best ascents from the east is the east ridge , reached either from the path to Eagle Crag Mine , or via Ruthwaite Lodge and Hard Tarn . There are no settlements of note close to Nethermost Pike to the west , and many walkers start from a car park at Wythburn , close to Wythburn Church . This is a popular route which follows a wide track to Helvellyn before branching off right at Swallow Scarth . Alternatives are possible on the smooth flanks of the fell , but all are pathless . 
 Because of its close proximity to the higher Helvellyn , Nethermost Pike receives fewer visitors . When climbing from the west many people traverse the western slopes on their way to Helvellyn . Despite this the summit does still receive a large number of walkers , who use a large number of footpaths . The large number of footpaths causes significant disturbance to the summit vegetation , which could be greatly reduced by using fewer footpaths . 
 = = Geology = = 
 Geologically the summit of the fell forms part of the Deepdale Formation , ( principally volcaniclastic sandstone ) underlain by the dacitic lapilli @-@ tuff of the Helvellyn Formation . The geology of much of the Lake District is the Borrowdale Volcanic Group , of which Nethermost Pike is part , and is late Ordovician in age . The eastern cliffs of the range , including those of Nethermost Pike , are rich in base minerals . When these rocks weather they form areas of fertile soil , which together with the area 's inaccessibility and climate provide suitable conditions for plants of biological importance . 
 Mining was carried out in Ruthwaite Cove , and the remains of several levels and some shallow open workings are visible near Ruthwaite Lodge . These excavations were made in a search for lead @-@ bearing galena , and are believed to have been worked in the 16th century . Further leases were taken out in 1784 and 1862 ; the last known operation was in 1880 . 
 North east of the summit the scene is repeated in Nethermost Cove , where the Eagle Crag Mine was mined for its lead and zinc . The vein which was exploited forms a visible gully on Eagle Crag , and was worked both above and below ground over an altitude of 300 metres ( 980 ft ) . The vein is surrounded by rocks from the Borrowdale Volcanic Group , which dates from the Ordovician . Large dumps of <unk> are found in the area as a result of the mining . They contain , among other minerals , crystallised tetrahedrite , which is not believed to be able to be seen or collected anywhere else in Britain . Eagle Crag Mine has a history of working similar to that of Ruthwaite Lodge . 
 = = Biological interest = = 
 The summit and surrounding areas of Nethermost Pike contain many species and communities which are of biological interest . North east of the summit is Nethermost Cove which contains some of England 's best arctic @-@ alpine and tall @-@ herb vegetation , including one third of the English population of Downy Willow ( Salix <unk> ) . Similarly Ruthwaite Cove contains Arctic @-@ alpine and tall @-@ herb communities , and it is believed that the cove may contain very rare species of plants in very small , and therefore precarious , populations . The lower eastern slopes form Grisedale Common , a large expanse of dwarf shrub heath . The lower slopes are grazed by sheep , which has a significant effect on the type of vegetation which grows . Certain areas , such as Eagle Crag , are inaccessible to sheep due to their steep slopes . 
 The summit and eastern slopes of Nethermost Pike are part of the Helvellyn and Fairfield Site of Special Scientific Interest ( SSSI ) . This SSSI covers 2 @,@ 418 @.@ 8 hectares ( 5 @,@ 977 acres ) centred on the Helvellyn range and Fairfield , and was designated in 1975 because of the area 's geological and biological features . Natural England , which is responsible for choosing SSSIs , tries to ensure that the management and use of the area is sustainable . 
 Overgrazing by sheep in Grisedale Common has damaged the vegetation to the extent that it has needed careful management . Since 2003 grazing has been limited to one ewe per hectare ( 2 @.@ 5 acres ) in summer and 0 @.@ 6 ewe in winter . In summer sheep are also flushed from the coves , ( Nethermost and Ruthwaite ) as they contain vegetation which is susceptible to damage from summer grazing . The vegetation structure has started to improve , however recovery is slowest on the higher land and the summit is still heavily grazed . The summit suffers erosion from the large number of walkers who climb Nethermost Pike . The use of fewer footpaths would help reduce the disturbance to the summit species . 
 = Final Fantasy VII ( NES video game ) = 
 Final Fantasy VII ( simplified Chinese : <unk> ; traditional Chinese : <unk> ; pinyin : <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> ) , also called Core Crisis ( Chinese : <unk> ; pinyin : <unk> Wēijī ) , is a Chinese unofficial , unlicensed " <unk> " <unk> of the 1997 role @-@ playing video game Final Fantasy VII , originally developed by Square for the PlayStation . The two @-@ dimensional " port " was developed and published by the Chinese company <unk> Nanjing Technology for the <unk> entertainment system , a clone of Nintendo 's Family Computer console ( known internationally as the Nintendo Entertainment System ) . The cartridge itself is unique , as it is structurally different from licensed Famicom cartridges in terms of hardware and programming . 
 The game features many gameplay elements of the original Final Fantasy VII , including a three @-@ member party structure and adaptations of the game 's subsystems . The items , spells and equipment available to the player are based upon those in the original game , and although a large number have been omitted along with optional characters and some side quests , the original story was reproduced in very minute detail . The game was received with mixed reception , cited as an impressive achievement but at the same time criticized for its difficulty and choice of a target console . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 In Final Fantasy VII , the player directs the protagonist throughout the game world with a group of three interchangeable party members , exploring areas and interacting with non @-@ player characters . Most of Final Fantasy VII occurs within the city of Midgar for the first act , later expanding to towns , dungeons , caves , and similar areas for the rest of the game . Players can save their game at any time when not in combat to the game 's single save slot for later playing . 
 Starting from the second act , players can journey between field screen locations via the world map , a downsized representation of Final Fantasy VII 's world . Players can freely navigate the world map screen unless restricted by geographical obstacles , such as water or mountains . To overcome this , players can ride emu @-@ like chocobos and various vehicles available to them , though usage is limited . As in other Final Fantasy @-@ related games , travel across the world map screen and hostile areas is frequently interrupted by random enemy encounters . 
 = = = Combat = = = 
 Whenever the protagonist encounters an enemy , the map changes to the " battle screen " . On this , the enemy appears opposite to the three characters in the party ; each battle uses a turn @-@ based battle system similar to that featured in Final Fantasy III . All characters can physically attack the enemy , use spells from equipped materia , or use an item in one turn . Combat ends when the player either defeats all enemies and the game returns to the area map , or all party members are defeated in which case the game ends and returns to the title screen . If one of the party members successfully flees , the battle also ends . 
 A character 's performance in battle is determined by numerical values for categories such as speed , strength , and magical power . Character statistics are driven by experience — players are awarded " experience points " for winning battles , which accumulate until characters gain " experience levels " . When characters " level up " , the statistics for their attributes increase permanently , which can also be amplified by the types of equipment the character is wearing . Winning battles may reward the player money ( Gil ) and items . 
 = = = Equipment and abilities = = = 
 Each character brings one materia into the party when they join , carrying one spell that can be used in combat . Materia have a limited number of uses before they must be recharged at one of the game 's magic shops . Like party members , materia gain experience when used , and can be leveled up to a maximum level of nine . Characters can swap materia among themselves , with unequipped materia being used mid @-@ battle for such things as healing party members , compensating for the limited amount of healing items . 
 Weapons follow the same principle as materia in terms of attack power , gaining experience and levelling up . Unlike materia , they cannot be swapped or replaced , and have unlimited usage . In addition to weapons , each has four types of armor that can be equipped for defense , which can be purchased at armor shops or found in chests scattered throughout the game . Armor directly affects the vitality statistic , which will in turn affect the amount of health gained when leveling up . Also available in the game are curative items , which can be purchased at designated shops or found in chests . These items can be used in or out of combat to restore health ( HP ) , materia usage ( CP ) , or revive fallen party members . 
 = = Development = = 
 The official and authorized Final Fantasy VII game was developed by Square and released worldwide in 1997 for the PlayStation . At an unknown date , <unk> Nanjing Technology developed an unauthorized remake of the game , for the Famicom . The game was released in 2005 , and both the box and manual make reference to Final Fantasy VII Advent Children as the game 's full title , a statement supported by the game 's manual . Despite the name on the box and cartridge , the title screen simply states " Final Fantasy VII , " and the game itself includes no content or plot elements from the film . The game was developed for the <unk> entertainment system , a clone of the Famicom , though can also be played on Famicom and NES consoles through the use of an adapter . 
 Due to the Famicom 's restricted hardware capabilities , the remake is entirely two @-@ dimensional . Special compensation was made for some of the in @-@ battle sprites such as Cloud Strife 's , combining two <unk> pixel sprites side @-@ by @-@ side instead of the usual single sprite to account for weapons such as Cloud 's sword or Barret 's gun . While most Japanese games use only 8x8 @-@ pixel hiragana or katakana fonts , and most Chinese games use 4 @-@ color 16x16 @-@ pixel tiles stored in dedicated CHR ROM pages , this game uses its own several @-@ hundred 16x16 @-@ pixel monochrome font instead . The script itself is strewn in chunks across the code ; at the beginning of each piece of text for dialog boxes is a three digit number preceded by an @ <unk> , signifying which character portrait to display . 
 The cartridge 's circuit board layout is unique compared to most Famicom games , using a single two megabyte PRG ( program ) ROM chips . A RAM chip is used instead of a ROM for the character graphics data , similar to the " <unk> " method used in some Nintendo games . As a result , the data is strewn across the PRG ROM in various banks . The cartridge features one 8 @-@ kilobyte battery @-@ backed RAM chip , used for the game 's single save slot . Many of the game 's graphics are borrowed from other games , mostly other Final Fantasy titles and including Super NES graphics converted to four @-@ color palettes used by the Famicom 's hardware . Much of the game 's music is borrowed from other games as well , in many cases shortened significantly to a few repeating notes . 
 = = Reception = = 
 While the game has received praise for covering the entire story within the game , it has been described as extremely difficult , with an inconsistent battle rate and fights that take a long time to complete . The game 's limited healing options and slow growth rate for abilities and weapons compound this , with one reviewer recommending " play it — but cheat " . Despite these issues , interest has been shown regarding the release of a patch to translate the game into English . Final Fantasy VII has additionally gained mention on several major gaming websites , including Gameworld Network , and Japan @-@ based <unk> 
 Another project , which aims to overhaul the game and improve upon the gameplay and graphics to better resemble the original PlayStation version , was released in 2013 by members of the <unk> community . The patch , which took four years to develop , first started off as a graphics hack , but has since evolved into an extensive revamp . 
 The game has received praise from various sources . Journalist Derrick <unk> stated that while the game would not be an entirely new experience for those that played the original Final Fantasy VII , he added that " ... this title can hold its own against the other NES Final Fantasy games " , further calling the effort " surprisingly professional " . Kotaku editor Luke Plunkett cited the Famicom game as " ... an achievement I have no hesitation in labeling Herculean " , further calling it " ... a triumph of the human spirit " . Boing Boing Gadgets and Wired News writer Joel Johnson described the game as " more than just a knock @-@ off — it 's an act of true skill and commitment by an unknown team of Chinese coders " . GamePro named it one of the thirteen best fan @-@ made video game remakes , placing first on their list and described as " the video game equivalent of the Human Genome Project " , despite its flaws . 
 = Holly Holliday = 
 Holly Holliday is a recurring fictional character from the Fox musical comedy @-@ drama series Glee . Portrayed by actress Gwyneth Paltrow , the character appeared in three episodes during the show 's second season , and two episodes during the fifth season , and was Paltrow 's first @-@ ever role in a scripted television show . Holly was developed by Glee co @-@ creator Ryan Murphy , a personal friend of Paltrow 's , who suggested that she showcase her vocal and dancing abilities ahead of the release of her film Country Strong , in which she played a country singer . Introduced as a substitute teacher who takes the place of glee club director Will Schuester ( Matthew Morrison ) while he is ill , she forms a romantic bond with Will , but decides to break up with him and takes a teaching job in another town after realizing that he is still in love with Emma Pillsbury ( Jayma Mays ) . 
 Paltrow 's debut performance attracted positive commentary and earned her the 2011 Emmy Award for Outstanding Guest Actress in a Comedy Series . Many reviewers praised her subsequent portrayal of Holly in the " Sexy " episode , preferring it to her first appearance in " The Substitute " installment , though they disagreed over how Paltrow was used . Her final appearance in the " A Night of Neglect " episode was met with divergent reactions . She performed several musical numbers during her appearances , which include critically acclaimed renditions of " Forget You " by Cee Lo Green and " Landslide " by Fleetwood Mac . Paltrow was additionally featured in the 2011 concert film Glee : The 3D Concert Movie . 
 = = Storylines = = 
