 Chamberlain returned to London in triumph . Large crowds mobbed Heston where he was met by the Lord Chamberlain , the Earl of Clarendon , who gave him a letter from King George VI assuring him of the Empire 's lasting gratitude and urging him to come straight to Buckingham Palace to report . The streets were so packed with cheering people that it took Chamberlain an hour and a half to journey the nine miles from Heston to the Palace . After reporting to the King , Chamberlain and his wife appeared on the Palace balcony with the King and his wife , Queen Elizabeth . He then went to Downing Street where both the street and the front hall of Number 10 were packed . As he headed upstairs to address the crowd from a first @-@ floor window someone called to him , " Neville , go up to the window and say ' peace for our time ' . " Chamberlain turned around and responded , " No , I don 't do that sort of thing . " Nevertheless , Chamberlain recalled the words of his predecessor , Benjamin Disraeli and his return from the Congress of Berlin in his statement to the crowd : 
 My good friends , this is the second time there has come back from Germany to Downing Street peace with honour . I believe it is peace for our time . We thank you from the bottom of our hearts . Now I recommend you go home , and sleep quietly in your beds . 
 King George issued a statement to his people , " After the magnificent efforts of the Prime Minister in the cause of peace it is my fervent hope that a new era of friendship and prosperity may be dawning among the peoples of the world . " When the King met with Duff Cooper , who resigned as First Lord of the Admiralty over the Munich Agreement , he told Cooper that he respected people who had the courage of their convictions , but could not agree with him . He wrote to his mother , Queen Mary , that " the Prime Minister was delighted with the results of his mission , as are we all " . The dowager queen responded to her son with anger against those who spoke against the Prime Minister : " He brought home peace , why can 't they be grateful ? " Most newspapers supported Chamberlain uncritically , and he received thousands of gifts , from a silver dinner service to many of his trademark umbrellas . 
 The Commons discussed the Munich Agreement on 3 October . Though Cooper opened by setting forth the reasons for his resignation and Churchill spoke harshly against the pact , no Conservative voted against the government . Only between 20 and 30 abstained , including Churchill , Eden , Cooper and Harold Macmillan . 
 = = = Path to war ( October 1938 – August 1939 ) = = = 
 In the aftermath of Munich , Chamberlain continued to pursue a course of cautious rearmament . He told the Cabinet in early October 1938 , " [ I ] t would be madness for the country to stop rearming until we were convinced that other countries would act in the same way . For the time being , therefore , we should relax no particle of effort until our deficiencies had been made good . " However , later in October , he resisted calls to put industry on a war footing , convinced that such an action would show Hitler that the Prime Minister had decided to abandon Munich . Chamberlain hoped that the understanding he had signed with Hitler at Munich would lead toward a general settlement of European disputes . However , Hitler expressed no public interest in following up on the accord . Having considered a general election immediately following Munich Chamberlain instead reshuffled his Cabinet . By the end of the year , however , public concerns caused Chamberlain to conclude that " to get rid of this uneasy and disgruntled House of Commons by a General Election " would be " suicidal " . 
 Despite Hitler 's relative quietness as the " Reich " absorbed the Sudetenland , foreign policy concerns continued to preoccupy Chamberlain . He made trips to Paris and Rome hoping to persuade the French to hasten their rearmament and to persuade Mussolini to be a positive influence on Hitler . However , several of his Cabinet members , led by the Foreign Secretary Lord Halifax , began to draw away from the appeasement policy . Halifax was now convinced that Munich , though " better than a European war " , had been " a horrid business and humiliating " . Public revulsion over the pogrom of Kristallnacht on 9 November 1938 made any attempt at a " rapprochement " with Hitler unacceptable , though Chamberlain did not abandon his hopes . 
 Still hoping for reconciliation with Germany , Chamberlain made a major speech at Birmingham on 28 January 1939 in which he expressed his desire for international peace , and had an advance copy sent to Hitler at Berchtesgaden . Hitler seemed to respond ; in his " Reichstag " speech on 30 January 1939 , he stated that he wanted a " long peace " . Chamberlain was confident that improvements in British defence since Munich would bring the dictator to the bargaining table . This belief was reinforced by a German official 's conciliatory speech welcoming Ambassador Henderson back to Berlin after an absence for medical treatment in Britain . Chamberlain responded with a speech in Blackburn on 22 February hoping that the nations would resolve their differences through trade , and was gratified when his comments were printed in German newspapers . With matters appearing to improve Chamberlain 's rule over the House of Commons was firm and he was convinced the government would " romp home " in a late @-@ 1939 election . 
 On 15 March 1939 , Germany invaded the Czech provinces of Bohemia and Moravia , including Prague . Though Chamberlain 's initial parliamentary response was , according to biographer Nick Smart , " feeble " , within 48 hours he had spoken more forcefully against the German aggression . In 17 March speech given at Birmingham , Chamberlain warned that " no greater mistake could be made than to suppose that because it believes war to be a senseless and cruel thing the nation has so lost its fibre that it will not take part to the utmost of its power in resisting such a challenge if it were ever made " . The Prime Minister questioned whether the invasion of Czechoslovakia was " the end of an old adventure , or the beginning of a new " and whether it was " a step in the direction of an attempt to dominate the world by force " . The Colonial Secretary , Malcolm MacDonald stated , " whereas the Prime Minister was once a strong advocate of peace , he has now definitely swung around to the war point of view " . This speech was met with widespread approval in Britain and recruitment for the armed services increased considerably . 
 Chamberlain sought to build an interlocking series of defence pacts among the remaining European countries as a means of deterring Hitler from war . He sought an agreement among Britain , France , the USSR and Poland whereby the first three would go to the assistance of Poland if her independence were threatened , but Polish mistrust of the Soviet Union caused those negotiations to fail . Instead , on 31 March 1939 , Chamberlain informed an approving House of Commons of British and French guarantees that they would lend Poland all possible aid in the event of any action which threatened Polish independence . In the ensuing debate Eden stated that the nation was now united behind the government . Even Churchill and Lloyd George praised Chamberlain 's government for issuing the guarantee to Poland . 
 The Prime Minister took other steps to deter Hitler from aggression . He doubled the size of the Territorial Army , created a Ministry of Supply to expedite the provision of equipment to the armed forces , and instituted peacetime conscription . The Italian invasion of Albania on 7 April 1939 led to guarantees being given to Greece and Romania . On 17 June 1939 , Handley Page received an order for 200 Hampden twin @-@ engined medium bombers , and by 3 September 1939 , the chain of radar stations girdling the British coast was fully operational . 
 Chamberlain was reluctant to seek military alliance with the Soviet Union , distrusting Joseph Stalin ideologically and feeling that there was little to gain given the massive purges that recently had taken place in the Red Army . However , much of his Cabinet favoured such an alliance , and when Poland withdrew her objection to Anglo – Soviet alliance Chamberlain had little choice but to proceed . The talks with Soviet Foreign Minister Vyacheslav Molotov , to which Britain sent only a low @-@ level delegation , dragged on over several months and eventually foundered on 14 August 1939 when Poland and Romania refused to allow Soviet troops to be stationed on their territories . A week after the failure of these talks the Soviet Union and Germany signed the Molotov @-@ Ribbentrop Pact which committed the countries to non @-@ aggression toward each other . A secret agreement divided up Poland in the event of war . Chamberlain had disregarded rumours of a Soviet @-@ German " rapprochement " , and was dismissive of the publicly announced pact stating that it in no way affected British obligations toward Poland . Nevertheless , on 23 August 1939 , Chamberlain had Henderson deliver a letter to Hitler telling him that Britain was fully prepared to live up to its obligations to Poland . Hitler instructed his generals to prepare for an invasion of Poland , telling them , " Our enemies are small worms . I saw them at Munich . " 
 = = = War leader ( 1939 – 40 ) = = = 
 = = = = Declaration of war = = = = 
 Germany invaded Poland in the early morning hours of 1 September 1939 . The British Cabinet met late that morning and issued a warning to Germany that unless it withdrew from Polish territory Britain would carry out its obligations to Poland . When the House of Commons met at 6 : 00 p.m. , Chamberlain and Labour deputy leader Arthur Greenwood ( deputising for the sick Clement Attlee ) entered the chamber to loud cheers . Chamberlain spoke emotionally , laying the blame for the conflict on Hitler . 
 No formal declaration of war was immediately made . French Foreign Minister Georges Bonnet stated that France could do nothing until its parliament met on the evening of 2 September . In fact , Bonnet was trying to rally support for a Munich @-@ style summit proposed by the Italians to be held on 5 September . The British Cabinet , however , demanded that Hitler be given an ultimatum at once , and if troops were not withdrawn by the end of 2 September , that war be declared forthwith . Chamberlain and Halifax were convinced by Bonnet 's pleas from Paris that France needed more time for mobilisation and evacuation , and postponed the expiration of the ultimatum ( which had in fact not yet been served ) . The House of Commons received Chamberlain 's lengthy statement , which made no mention of an ultimatum , badly . Greenwood rose to " speak for the working classes " . Conservative backbencher Leo Amery urged Greenwood to " Speak for England , Arthur " , implying that the Prime Minister was not so speaking . Chamberlain replied that telephone difficulties were making it hard to communicate with Paris and tried to dispel fears that the French were weakening . He had little success ; too many members knew of Bonnet 's efforts . National Labour MP and diarist Harold Nicolson later wrote , " In those few minutes he flung away his reputation . " The seeming delay gave rise to fears Chamberlain would again seek a settlement with Hitler . Chamberlain 's last peacetime Cabinet met at 11 : 30 that night , with a thunderstorm raging outside , and determined that the ultimatum would be presented in Berlin at nine o 'clock the following morning — to expire two hours later prior to the House of Commons convening at noon . At 11 : 15 a.m. , Chamberlain addressed the nation by radio stating that the United Kingdom was at war with Germany : 
 This morning , the British ambassador in Berlin , handed the German government , the final note , stating that unless we heard from them , by 11 o 'clock , that they were prepared at once , to withdraw their troops from Poland , a state of war would exist between us . I have to tell you now , that no such undertaking has been received , and that consequently , this country is now at war with Germany . ... We have a clear conscience ; we have done all that any country could do to establish peace . The situation in which no word given by Germany 's ruler could be trusted , and no people or country could feel itself safe had become intolerable ... Now may God bless you all . May He defend the right . It is the evil things we shall be fighting against — brute force , bad faith , injustice , oppression , and persecution — and against them I am certain that the right will prevail . 
 That afternoon Chamberlain addressed the House of Commons ' first Sunday session in over 120 years . He spoke to a quiet House in a statement which even opponents termed " restrained and therefore effective " : 
 Everything that I have worked for , everything that I have hoped for , everything that I have believed in during my public life has crashed into ruins . There is only one thing left for me to do : that is devote what strength and power I have to forwarding the victory of the cause for which we have sacrificed so much . 
 = = = = " Phoney War " = = = = 
 Chamberlain instituted a War Cabinet and invited the Labour and Liberal parties to join his government which they declined . He restored Churchill to the Cabinet as First Lord of the Admiralty with a seat in the War Cabinet . Chamberlain also gave Eden a government post ( Dominions Secretary ) but not a seat in the small War Cabinet . The new First Lord proved to be a difficult Cabinet colleague , <unk> the Prime Minister with a sea of lengthy memos . Chamberlain castigated Churchill for sending so many memos as unnecessary when the two met in War Cabinet every day . Chamberlain suspected , correctly as it proved after the war , that " these letters are for the purpose of quotation in the Book that he will write hereafter " . Chamberlain was also able to deter some of Churchill 's more extreme plans , such as Operation Catherine , which would have sent several heavily armoured ships into the Baltic Sea with little support and no air cover as a means of stopping shipments of iron ore to Germany . With the naval war the only significant front involving the British in the early months of the war , the First Lord 's obvious desire to wage a ruthless , victorious war established him as a leader @-@ in @-@ waiting in the public consciousness and among parliamentary colleagues . 
 With little land action in the west , the initial months of the war were dubbed the " Bore War " , later renamed the " Phoney War " by journalists . Chamberlain , in common with most Allied officials and generals , felt the war could be won relatively quickly by keeping economic pressure on Germany through a blockade while continuing rearmament . Chamberlain was reluctant to go too far in altering the British economy . The government submitted an emergency war budget about which Chamberlain stated , " the only thing that matters is to win the war , though we may go bankrupt in the process " . However , actual government expenditures rose by little more than the rate of inflation between September 1939 and March 1940 . Despite these difficulties , Chamberlain still enjoyed approval ratings as high as 68 % and almost 60 % in April 1940 . 
 = = = = Downfall = = = = 
 In early 1940 the Allies approved a naval campaign that was devised to seize the northern part of Norway , a neutral country , including the key port of Narvik , and possibly also to seize the iron mines at Gällivare in northern Sweden from which Germany obtained much of its iron ore . Since the Baltic freezes in winters the iron ore was sent by ship south from Narvik during warmer times of the year . The Allies planned to begin by mining Norwegian waters , thus provoking a German reaction in Norway , and then the Allies planned to occupy much of the country . <unk> by the Allies , however , Germany had itself planned to occupy Norway , and on 9 April German troops occupied Denmark and began an invasion of Norway . German troops quickly overran much of the country . The Allies sent troops to Norway who met with little success , and on 26 April the War Cabinet ordered a withdrawal . The Prime Minister 's opponents decided to turn the adjournment debate for the Whitsun recess into a challenge to Chamberlain who soon heard about the plan . After initial anger , Chamberlain determined to fight . 
 What became known as the " Norway debate " opened on 7 May , and lasted for two days . The initial speeches , including Chamberlain 's , were nondescript , but Admiral of the Fleet Sir Roger Keyes , member for Portsmouth North , in full uniform , delivered a withering attack on the conduct of the Norway campaign , though he excluded Churchill from criticism . Leo Amery then delivered a speech which he concluded by echoing Oliver Cromwell 's words on dissolving the Long Parliament : " You have sat here too long for any good you are doing . Depart , I say , and let us have done with you . In the name of God , go ! " When Labour announced that they would call for a division of the House of Commons , Chamberlain called upon his " friends — and I still have some friends in this House — to support the Government tonight " . Though the use of the word " friends " was a conventional term to refer to party colleagues , and , according to biographer Robert Self , many MPs took it that way , it was an " error of judgment " for Chamberlain to refer to party loyalty " when the gravity of the war situation required national unity " . Lloyd George joined the attackers and Churchill concluded the debate with a vigorous speech in support of the government . When the division took place , the government , which had a normal majority of over 200 , prevailed by only 81 , with 38 MPs in receipt of the government whip voting against it , with between 20 and 25 abstaining . 
 Chamberlain spent much of 9 May in meetings with his Cabinet colleagues . Many Conservative MPs , even those who had voted against the government , indicated on 9 May and in the days following that they did not wish Chamberlain to depart but rather would seek to reconstruct his government . However , Chamberlain decided that he would resign unless the Labour Party was willing to join his government , and so he met with Attlee later that day . Attlee was unwilling but did agree to consult his National Executive then meeting in Bournemouth . Chamberlain favoured Halifax as the next Prime Minister , but Halifax proved reluctant to press his own claims , and Churchill emerged as the choice . The following day Germany invaded the Low Countries and Chamberlain considered remaining in office . However , Attlee confirmed that Labour would not serve under Chamberlain though it was willing to serve under someone else . Chamberlain went to Buckingham Palace to resign and advise the King to send for Churchill . Churchill later expressed gratitude to Chamberlain for not advising the King to send for Halifax who would have commanded the support of most government MPs . In a resignation broadcast that evening , Chamberlain told the nation , 
 For the hour has now come when we are to be put to the test , as the innocent people of Holland , Belgium , and France are being tested already . And you and I must rally behind our new leader , and with our united strength , and with unshakable courage fight , and work until this wild beast , which has sprung out of his lair upon us , has been finally disarmed and overthrown . 
 Queen Elizabeth told Chamberlain that her daughter , Princess Elizabeth wept as she heard the broadcast . Churchill wrote to express his gratitude for Chamberlain 's willingness to stand by him in the nation 's hour of need , and Lord Baldwin , the only living former Prime Minister besides Chamberlain and Lloyd George , wrote , " You have passed through fire since we were talking together only a fortnight ago , and you have come out pure gold . " 
 = = Lord President of the Council and death = = 
 In a departure from usual practice , Chamberlain did not issue any resignation Honours list . With Chamberlain remaining leader of the Conservative Party , and with many MPs still supporting him and distrusting the new Prime Minister , Churchill refrained from any purge of Chamberlain loyalists . Churchill wished Chamberlain to return to the Exchequer , which he declined , convinced that accepting would lead to difficulties with the Labour Party . Instead , he accepted the post of Lord President of the Council with a seat in the shrunken five @-@ member War Cabinet . When Chamberlain entered the House of Commons on 13 May 1940 , for the first time since his resignation , " MPs lost their heads , they shouted , they cheered , they waved their order papers , and his reception was a regular ovation . " However , Churchill was received coolly by the House . Some of Churchill 's great speeches to the House , such as " We shall fight on the beaches " , met with only half @-@ hearted enthusiasm there . 
 His fall from power left Chamberlain deeply depressed , writing , " Few men can have known such a reversal of fortune in so short a time . " He especially regretted the loss of Chequers as " a place where I have been so happy " , though after a farewell visit there by the <unk> on 19 June , he wrote " I am content now that I have done that , and shall put Chequers out of my mind . " As Lord President he assumed vast responsibilities over domestic issues and chaired the War Cabinet during Churchill 's many absences . Attlee later remembered him as " free from any of the rancour he might have felt against us . He worked very hard and well : a good chairman , a good committeeman , always very businesslike " . As chairman of the Lord President 's Committee , he exerted great influence over the wartime economy . When Axis feelers for peace reached the War Cabinet on 26 May 1940 , with the Low Countries conquered and France tottering , Halifax urged following up and seeing if the actual offer was worthwhile . The battle over the course of action within the War Cabinet lasted three days , and Chamberlain 's statement on the final day that there was unlikely to be an acceptable offer and that the feelers should not be pursued at that time helped persuade the War Cabinet to reject negotiations . 
 Twice in May 1940 Churchill broached the subject of bringing Lloyd George into the government . Each time Chamberlain indicated that due to their longtime antipathy he would immediately retire if Lloyd George were appointed a minister . Churchill did not appoint Lloyd George but brought up the subject with Chamberlain again early in June . This time , Chamberlain agreed to Lloyd George 's appointment provided Lloyd George gave a personal assurance to put aside the feud . However , Lloyd George declined to serve in Churchill 's government . 
 Chamberlain worked to bring his Conservative Party in line behind Churchill , working with the Chief Whip , David <unk> , to overcome members ' suspicions and dislikes of the Prime Minister . On 4 July , after the British attack on the French fleet , Churchill entered the Chamber to a great cheer from Conservative MPs orchestrated by the two , and the Prime Minister was almost overcome with emotion at the first cheer he had received from his own party 's benches since May . Churchill returned the loyalty refusing to consider Labour and Liberal attempts to expel Chamberlain from the government . When criticisms of Chamberlain appeared in the press , and when the former Prime Minister learned that Labour intended to use an upcoming secret session of Parliament as a platform to attack him , Chamberlain told Churchill that he could only defend himself by attacking Labour . The Prime Minister intervened with the Labour Party and the press , and the criticism ceased , according to Chamberlain , " like turning off a tap " . 
 In July 1940 , a polemic entitled Guilty Men was released by " Cato " — a pseudonym for three journalists ( including future Labour leader Michael Foot ) . It attacked the record of the National Government , alleging that it had failed to prepare adequately for war . It called for the removal of Chamberlain and other ministers who had allegedly contributed to the British disasters of the early part of the war . The short book sold more than 200 @,@ 000 copies , many of which were passed from hand to hand , and went into twenty @-@ seven editions in the first few months despite not being carried by several major bookshops . According to historian David Dutton , " its impact upon Chamberlain 's reputation , both among the general public and within the academic world , was profound indeed " . 
 Chamberlain had long enjoyed excellent health , except for occasional attacks of gout , but by July 1940 , he was in almost constant pain . He sought treatment , and later that month entered hospital for surgery . Surgeons discovered that he was suffering from terminal bowel cancer , but they concealed it from him , instead telling him that he would not require further surgery . Chamberlain resumed work in mid @-@ August . He returned to his office on 9 September . However , renewed pain , compounded by the night @-@ time bombing of London which forced him to go to an air raid shelter and denied him rest , sapped his energy , and he left London for the last time on 19 September returning to Highfield Park in <unk> . He offered his resignation to Churchill on 22 September , which the Prime Minister initially was reluctant to accept . However , as both men realised that Chamberlain would never return to work , Churchill finally allowed him to resign . The Prime Minister asked if Chamberlain would accept the highest order of British chivalry , the Order of the Garter , of which his brother had been a member . Chamberlain refused stating that he would " prefer to die plain ' Mr. Chamberlain ' like my father before me , unadorned by any title " . 
 In the short time remaining to him , Chamberlain was angered by the " short , cold and for the most part <unk> " press comments on his retirement , according to him written " without the slightest sign of sympathy for the man or even any comprehension that there may be a human tragedy in the background " . However , the King and Queen drove down from Windsor to visit the dying man on 14 October . He received hundreds of sympathetic letters from friends and supporters . He wrote to John Simon , who had served as Chancellor of the Exchequer in Chamberlain 's government : 
 [ I ] t was the hope of doing something to improve the conditions of life for the poorer people that brought me at past middle life into politics , and it is some satisfaction to me that I was able to carry out some part of my ambition even though its permanency may be challenged by the destruction of war . For the rest I regret nothing that I have done & I can see nothing undone that I ought to have done . I am therefore content to accept the fate that has so suddenly overtaken me . 
 Chamberlain died of bowel cancer on 9 November 1940 at the age of 71 . His funeral service took place at Westminster Abbey ( due to wartime security concerns , the date and time were not widely publicised ) , and his ashes were interred there next to those of Andrew Bonar Law . Churchill eulogised Chamberlain in the House of Commons three days after his death : 
 Whatever else history may or may not say about these terrible , tremendous years , we can be sure that Neville Chamberlain acted with perfect sincerity according to his lights and strove to the utmost of his capacity and authority , which were powerful , to save the world from the awful , devastating struggle in which we are now engaged . This alone will stand him in good stead as far as what is called the verdict of history is concerned . 
 Though some Chamberlain supporters found Churchill 's oratory to be faint praise of the late Prime Minister , Churchill added less publicly , " Whatever shall I do without poor Neville ? I was relying on him to look after the Home Front for me . " Amongst the others who paid tribute to Chamberlain in the Commons and in the House of Lords on 12 November were Lord Halifax , Attlee , and the Liberal Party leader and Air Minister , Sir Archibald Sinclair . Lloyd George , the only former Prime Minister remaining in the Commons , had been expected to speak , but absented himself from the proceedings . Ever close to his family , the executors of Chamberlain 's will were his cousins , Wilfred Byng Kenrick and Sir Wilfrid Martineau ; both of whom , like Chamberlain , were Lord Mayor of Birmingham . 
 = = Legacy and reputation = = 
 A few days before his death , Neville Chamberlain wrote , 
 So far as my personal reputation is concerned , I am not in the least disturbed about it . The letters which I am still receiving in such vast quantities so unanimously dwell on the same point , namely without Munich the war would have been lost and the Empire destroyed in 1938 ... I do not feel the opposite view ... has a chance of survival . Even if nothing further were to be published giving the true inside story of the past two years I should not fear the historian 's verdict . 
 Guilty Men was not the only Second World War tract that damaged Chamberlain 's reputation . We Were Not All Wrong , published in 1941 , took a similar tack to Guilty Men , arguing that Liberal and Labour MPs , and a small number of Conservatives , had fought against Chamberlain 's appeasement policies . The author , Liberal MP Geoffrey Mander , had voted against conscription in 1939 . Another polemic against Conservative policies was Why Not Trust the Tories ( 1944 , written by " Gracchus " , who later proved to be future Labour minister Aneurin Bevan ) , which castigated the Conservatives for the foreign policy decisions of Baldwin and Chamberlain . Though a few Conservatives offered their own versions of events , most notably MP Quintin Hogg in his 1945 The Left was Never Right , by the end of the war , there was a very strong public belief that Chamberlain was culpable for serious diplomatic and military <unk> that had nearly caused Britain 's defeat . 
 Chamberlain 's reputation was devastated by these attacks from the left . In 1948 , with the publication of The Gathering Storm , the first volume of Churchill 's six @-@ volume set , The Second World War , Chamberlain sustained an even more serious assault from the right . While Churchill stated privately , " this is not history , this is my case " , his series was still hugely influential . Churchill depicted Chamberlain as well @-@ meaning but weak , blind to the threat posed by Hitler , and oblivious to the fact that ( according to Churchill ) Hitler could have been removed from power by a grand coalition of European states . Churchill suggested that the year 's delay between Munich and war worsened Britain 's position , and criticised Chamberlain for both peacetime and wartime decisions . In the years following the publication of Churchill 's books , few historians questioned his judgment . 
 Anne Chamberlain , the former premier 's widow , suggested that Churchill 's work was filled with matters that " are not real misstatements that could easily be corrected , but wholesale omissions and assumptions that certain things are now recognised as facts which actually have no such position " . 
 Many of Chamberlain 's family letters and his extensive personal papers were bequeathed by his family in 1974 to the Birmingham University Archives . During the war , the Chamberlain family had commissioned historian Keith Feiling to produce an official biography , and gave him access to Chamberlain 's private diaries and papers . While Feiling had the right of access to official papers as the official biographer of a recently deceased person , he may not have been aware of the provision , and the Cabinet Secretary denied his requests for access . 
 Though Feiling produced what historian David Dutton described in 2001 as " the most impressive and persuasive single @-@ volume biography " of Chamberlain ( completed during the war and published in 1946 ) , he could not repair the damage already done to Chamberlain 's reputation . 
 Conservative MP Iain Macleod 's 1961 biography of Chamberlain was the first major biography of a revisionist school of thought on Chamberlain . The same year , A. J. P. Taylor , in his The Origins of the Second World War , found that Chamberlain had adequately rearmed Britain for defence ( though a rearmament designed to defeat Germany would have taken massive additional resources ) and described Munich as " a triumph for all that was best and most enlightened in British life ... [ and ] for those who had courageously denounced the harshness and short @-@ sightedness of Versailles " . 
 The adoption of the " thirty @-@ year rule " in 1967 made available many of the papers of the Chamberlain government over the subsequent three years , helping to explain why Chamberlain acted as he did . The resultant works greatly fuelled the revisionist school , although they also included books that strongly criticised Chamberlain , such as Keith <unk> 's 1972 Diplomacy of Illusion ( which portrayed Chamberlain as a seasoned politician with strategic blindness when it came to Germany ) . Released papers indicated that , contrary to claims made in Guilty Men , Chamberlain had neither ignored the advice of the Foreign Office nor had he disregarded and run roughshod over his Cabinet . Other released papers showed that Chamberlain had considered seeking a grand coalition amongst European governments like that later advocated by Churchill , but had rejected it on the ground that the division of Europe into two camps would make war more , not less likely . They also showed that Chamberlain had been advised that the Dominions , pursuing independent foreign policies under the Statute of Westminster , had indicated that Chamberlain could not depend on their help in the event of a Continental war . The Chiefs of Staff report , which indicated that Britain could not forcibly prevent Germany from conquering Czechoslovakia , was first publicly known at this time . 
 In reaction against the revisionist school of thought regarding Chamberlain a post @-@ revisionist school emerged beginning in the 1990s , using the released papers to justify the initial conclusions of Guilty Men . Oxford historian R. A. C. Parker argued that Chamberlain could have forged a close alliance with France after the Anschluß , in early 1938 , and begun a policy of containment of Germany under the auspices of the League of Nations . While many revisionist writers had suggested that Chamberlain had had few or no choices in his actions , Parker argued that Chamberlain and his colleagues had chosen appeasement over other viable policies . In his two volumes , Chamberlain and Appeasement ( 1993 ) and Churchill and Appeasement ( 2000 ) , Parker stated that Chamberlain , due to his " powerful , obstinate personality " and his skill in debate , caused Britain to embrace appeasement instead of effective deterrence . Parker also suggested that had Churchill held high office in the second half of the 1930s Churchill would have built a series of alliances which would have deterred Hitler , and perhaps would have caused Hitler 's domestic opponents to procure his removal . 
 Dutton observes that Chamberlain 's reputation , for good or ill , will probably always be closely tied to evaluation of his policy toward Germany : 
 Whatever else may be said of Chamberlain 's public life his reputation will in the last resort depend upon assessments of this moment [ Munich ] and this policy [ appeasement ] . This was the case when he left office in 1940 and it remains so sixty years later . To expect otherwise is rather like hoping that Pontius Pilate will one day be judged as a successful provincial administrator of the Roman Empire . 
 = = Honours and styles of address = = 
 = = = Styles of address = = = 
 1869 @-@ 1918 : Arthur Neville Chamberlain Esq 
 1918 @-@ 1922 : The Hon Arthur Neville Chamberlain MP 
 1922 @-@ 1938 : The Rt Hon Arthur Neville Chamberlain MP 
 1938 @-@ 1940 : The Rt Hon Arthur Neville Chamberlain MP FRS 
 = = = Academic = = = 
 Fellow of the Royal Society ( FRS ) – 1938 
 Oxford University – DCL 
 Cambridge University – LLD 
 Birmingham University – LLD 
 Bristol University – LLD 
 Leeds University – LLD 
 Reading University – DLitt 
 = = = Freedoms = = = 
 Honorary Freedom City of Birmingham 
 Honorary Freedom City of London – conferred 1940 but died before acceptance , the scroll being presented to his widow in 1941 
 = = = Others = = = 
 Honorary Air Commodore , No 916 ( County of Warwick ) Balloon Squadron , Auxiliary Air Force – 1939 
 = = Parliamentary election results = = 
 = Death of Jimi Hendrix = 
 On September 18 , 1970 , the American musician Jimi Hendrix died in London , aged 27 years . One of the most influential guitarists of the 1960s , he was described by the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame as " arguably the greatest instrumentalist in the history of rock music . " 
 In the days before his death , Hendrix had been in poor health , due in part to fatigue caused by overworking , a chronic lack of sleep , and an illness assumed to be influenza @-@ related . <unk> about his personal relationships and disillusionment with the music industry had also contributed to his frustration . Although the details of his final hours and death are disputed , Hendrix spent much of his last day with Monika Dannemann . During the morning of September 18 , she found him unresponsive in her apartment at the Samarkand Hotel , 22 Lansdowne Crescent , Notting Hill . She called for an ambulance at 11 : 18 a.m. , and he was taken to St Mary Abbot 's Hospital where an attempt was made to resuscitate him . He was pronounced dead at 12 : 45 p.m. 
 The post @-@ mortem examination concluded that Hendrix aspirated his own vomit and died of asphyxia while intoxicated with barbiturates . At the inquest , the coroner , finding no evidence of suicide and lacking sufficient evidence of the circumstances , recorded an open verdict . Dannemann stated that Hendrix had taken nine of her prescribed Vesparax sleeping tablets , 18 times the recommended dosage . 
 On October 1 , 1970 , Hendrix was interred at Greenwood Cemetery in Renton , Washington . In 1992 , his former girlfriend Kathy Etchingham asked British authorities to reopen the investigation into his death . A subsequent inquiry by Scotland Yard proved inconclusive , and in 1993 , they decided against proceeding with the investigation . 
 = = Background = = 
 The American musician Jimi Hendrix ( born November 27 , 1942 ) was one of the most influential guitarists of the 1960s . His Rock and Roll Hall of Fame biography says he " was arguably the greatest instrumentalist in the history of rock music . Hendrix expanded the range and vocabulary of the electric guitar into areas no musician had ever ventured before . His boundless drive , technical ability and creative application of such effects as wah @-@ wah and distortion forever transformed the sound of rock and roll . " 
 During the week before his death , he was dealing with two pending lawsuits , one a paternity case and the other a recording contract dispute that was due to be heard by a UK High Court the following week . He was also troubled with wanting to leave his manager , Michael Jeffery . Hendrix was fatigued and suffering from poor health , due in part to severe exhaustion caused by overworking , a chronic lack of sleep , and a persistent illness assumed to be influenza @-@ related . Lacking trusting personal relationships , his insecurities about the future and disillusionment with the music industry contributed to his frustration . 
 On September 11 , 1970 , Hendrix gave his final interview in his suite at the Cumberland Hotel in London , where he talked with Keith Altham , a journalist for Record Mirror . During the interview , Hendrix confirmed reports that Billy Cox , the bass player in his band , The Jimi Hendrix Experience , was leaving . Cox , who had been suffering from severe exhaustion and was exhibiting symptoms of paranoia , mutually agreed with Hendrix that they should suspend their plans to collaborate musically . When Altham asked Hendrix : " Do you feel any kind of compulsion to prove yourself as King Guitar " , Hendrix replied : " No , I don 't even let that bother me . Because they say a lot of things about people that , if they let it bother them , they wouldn 't even be around today ... King Guitar now ? Wow , that 's a bit heavy . " Altham also suggested that Hendrix invented psychedelic music , to which he laughed and replied : " A mad scientist approach ... I don 't consider [ my music ] the invention of psychedelic , it 's just asking a lot of questions . " 
 The following day , Hendrix received a phone call from one of his girlfriends , Devon Wilson , who had become jealous after hearing rumors that he was dating another woman , Kirsten Nefer . Nefer recalled : " I heard Jimi talk to Devon ... she was mad ... she went into fits ... Jimi said ' Devon , get off my back ' " . Hendrix was scheduled to perform in Rotterdam on September 13 , but the show , along with three others , was cancelled due to Cox 's incapacitation . During the evening of September 13 , Nefer visited Hendrix at the Cumberland . After informing him that she would have to go back to work that evening , he convinced her to phone her boss , actor George Lazenby , and ask for the night off . Lazenby became angry and shouted over the phone to Nefer : " You 're nothing but a fucking groupie " , which Hendrix overheard . The exchange upset him , and he told Nefer : " Don 't you ever go out to that guy again " . Nefer explained to him that she had spent six months working on a film with Lazenby and that she did not want to quit her job ; Hendrix eventually agreed . Nefer spent the night with him and left in the morning . 
 Hendrix spent most of the early afternoon and evening of September 14 discussing his career plans with the record producer Alan Douglas . In the early morning hours of September 15 , he went to London 's Heathrow Airport with Douglas , who was returning to New York . Hendrix 's confidante Sharon Lawrence was in London , and spoke with him that day . Lawrence commented : " Jimi tracked me down , detailing his pressures and discussing the ' so @-@ called friends ' . He was jittery and angry . " According to Lawrence , Hendrix told her : " I can 't sleep . I can 't focus to write any songs . " Later that afternoon , his girlfriend Monika Dannemann arrived at the Cumberland . She and Hendrix then drove to her apartment in the Samarkand Hotel , 22 Lansdowne Crescent , Notting Hill . 
 During the afternoon of September 15 , Hendrix was asked by his friend Eric Burdon , formerly of the Animals , if he wanted to participate in a jam session at Ronnie Scott 's Jazz Club with Burdon 's newly formed band , War . Hendrix accepted , but when he arrived at the club that evening , he was not allowed to play due to his apparently drug @-@ related disorientation . Burdon commented : " Jimi came down and was well out of it . He ... was wobbling too much to play , so I told him to come back the following night . " Hendrix returned the next night and presented a healthier appearance . The crowd was enthusiastic and impressed by his performance despite his uncharacteristically subdued guitar playing when he sat in with War on " Tobacco Road " and " Mother Earth " . This was the last time Hendrix played guitar in public . 
 = = Final hours = = 
 = = = Late morning and early afternoon = = = 
 Although the details of Hendrix 's last day and death are unclear and widely disputed , he had spent much of September 17 in London with Monika Dannemann . He awoke late that morning at Dannemann 's apartment in the Samarkand Hotel . By around 2 p.m. , he was sitting in a garden area outside the apartment enjoying some tea while she took photographs of him holding his favorite Fender Stratocaster guitar that he called the " black beauty " . In the opinion of author Tony Brown , " Jimi doesn 't look particularly healthy in these photographs : his face seems a little puffy and on only a few of the pictures does he attempt to smile . " 
 According to Dannemann , by 3 p.m. they had left the apartment to use a bank . They continued on to Kensington Market , where Hendrix signed an autograph for a young boy , purchased a leather jacket , and ordered some shoes . He also briefly spoke with his ex @-@ girlfriend Kathy Etchingham , inviting her to visit him at his hotel that evening at 8 p.m. ; she declined the invitation due to prior engagements and later admitted that she had " regretted it ever since " . Hendrix and Dannemann then went to a Chelsea antiques market , where Hendrix purchased more clothing . After another stop to buy writing paper , which he used to compose his final lyrics , Dannemann and Hendrix drove to his suite at the Cumberland Hotel , meeting Devon Wilson as she walked down King 's Road . Hendrix asked Dannemann to stop the car so that he could get out and talk with Wilson , who invited Hendrix to a party that evening . Dannemann became jealous , giving Wilson a cold stare during the brief meeting . Later , Phillip Harvey invited Dannemann and Hendrix to tea ; they accepted . Prior to their arrival at Harvey 's , they briefly stopped by the Cumberland . 
 While at the hotel , Hendrix made several telephone calls . Dannemann said he phoned his lawyer Henry <unk> , asking him to find a way out of his contract with his manager Mike Jeffery , and producer Eddie Kramer , for whom Hendrix left a voice message . Mitch Mitchell said that he called Hendrix at the Cumberland on September 17 , after having been asked to do so by tour manager Gerry Stickells , who had spoken to Hendrix just minutes earlier . Mitchell said that during the phone conversation Hendrix agreed to join him around midnight at the Speakeasy Club for a previously arranged jam session , which included Sly Stone . 
 = = = Late afternoon and evening = = = 
 After stopping at the Cumberland , Hendrix and Dannemann accompanied Harvey to his apartment , arriving around 5 : 30 p.m. Hendrix and Dannemann smoked hashish and drank tea and wine with Harvey and two of his female companions while discussing their individual careers . Sometime around 10 p.m. , Dannemann , apparently feeling left out of the conversation and jealous of the attention Hendrix was giving Harvey 's female friends , became visibly upset and stormed out of the flat . Hendrix followed her , and an argument ensued between them during which Dannemann reportedly shouted : " you fucking pig " . Harvey , concerned that their yelling would draw unwanted attention from the police , asked them to quiet down . 
 Harvey , who had remained silent about the incident out of respect for his English nobleman father , Arthur Vere Harvey , gave an affidavit after his father 's death in 1994 . In his statement , he claims to have been mildly concerned for Hendrix 's safety , worried that Dannemann might " resort to serious physical violence " . According to Harvey , Dannemann " verbally assaulted [ Hendrix ] in the most offensive possible way " . Approximately 30 minutes later , Hendrix re @-@ entered the flat and apologized for the outburst before leaving with Dannemann at 10 : 40 p.m. Dannemann said she then prepared a meal for them at her apartment around 11 p.m. and shared a bottle of wine with Hendrix . Sometime after returning to the apartment , Hendrix took a bath , then wrote a poem titled " The Story of Life " . 
 = = = Early morning = = = 
 At approximately 1 : 45 a.m. on Friday , September 18 , Dannemann drove Hendrix to the party Wilson had invited him to earlier that day , which was hosted by Hendrix 's acquaintance and business associate , Pete Cameron . At the party , Hendrix complained to Cameron about business problems , ate some food , and took at least one amphetamine tablet . Approximately 30 minutes later , Dannemann rang the flat 's intercom asking for Hendrix . Another guest , Stella Douglas , asked her to return later . According to guest Angie Burdon , the estranged wife of Eric Burdon of the Animals , when Dannemann came back around 15 minutes later , Douglas used an assertive approach with her to the point of being impolite . Undeterred , Dannemann demanded to speak with Hendrix . Burdon recalled : " [ Hendrix ] got angry because [ Dannemann ] wouldn 't leave him alone . " According to Burdon , other guests at the party shouted out the windows at Dannemann , asking her to leave . Hendrix eventually yielded and spoke with Dannemann before unexpectedly leaving the party around 3 a.m. 
 Dannemann , the only eyewitness to Hendrix 's final hours , said that sometime after 3 a.m. , she prepared two tuna fish sandwiches for them after arriving back at her basement apartment . Around 4 a.m. , Hendrix , struggling with insomnia after having consumed amphetamines hours earlier , asked her for sleeping tablets . She later said she refused his request hoping he would fall asleep naturally . Dannemann said she surreptitiously took a sleeping tablet sometime around 6 a.m. , with Hendrix still awake . She awoke sometime between 10 and 10 : 20 a.m. to find him sleeping normally in bed next to her . She said she then left to purchase cigarettes , and when she returned around 11 a.m. , found him in bed breathing , although unconscious and unresponsive . She telephoned for an ambulance at 11 : 18 a.m. and one arrived at 11 : 27 a.m. 
 When ambulance crew members Reg Jones and John Saua arrived at the Samarkand , the door to the flat was wide open , the gas fire was on , the curtains were drawn , and the apartment was dark . The crew called out several times , but after receiving no response , they entered and found Hendrix alone in bed . Dannemann was nowhere to be found . According to Jones : " Well , we had to get the police , we only had [ Hendrix ] and an empty flat , so John ran up and radioed , and got the <unk> ... It was horrific . He was covered in vomit . There was tons of it all over the pillow — black and brown it was . His airway was completely blocked all the way down ... We felt his pulse ... showed a light in his eyes . But there was no response at all . " At 11 : 30 a.m. , police officers Ian Smith and Tom Keene responded to a call for police assistance from the ambulance control centre . Jones commented : " Once the police arrived , which seemed like no time at all , we got [ Hendrix ] off to hospital as quick as we could . " 
 The ambulance crew left the hotel at approximately 11 : 35 a.m. to take Hendrix to St Mary Abbot 's Hospital and they arrived at 11 : 45 a.m. Medical registrar Dr. Martin Seifert stated : " Jimi was rushed into the [ resuscitation ] room . He was put on a monitor , but it [ ECG trace ] was flat . I pounded his heart [ CPR ] a couple of times , but there was no point , he was dead " . According to Seifert , the attempt to resuscitate Hendrix lasted " just a few minutes " . The surgical registrar , Dr. John Bannister , commented : " He was cold and he was blue . He had all the parameters of someone who had been dead for some time . We worked on him for about half an hour without any response at all . " Bannister pronounced Hendrix dead at 12 : 45 p.m. , on Friday , September 18 , 1970 ; he was 27 years old . He later stated : " On admission he was obviously dead . He had no pulse , no heartbeat , and the attempt to resuscitate him was merely a formality . " 
 = = Media response = = 
 During the morning of September 18 , Eric Burdon arrived at the Samarkand sometime before the ambulance crew and found that Hendrix was already dead . Burdon immediately became concerned that police would find drugs at the apartment , and as he was collecting incriminating evidence , he found the poem that Hendrix had written hours earlier , " The Story of Life " . Burdon , who said he had previously discussed suicide and death with Hendrix , assumed the poem was a suicide note . Under this assumption , he made comments to the press regarding his belief that Hendrix had committed suicide that he has since recanted : " I made false statements ... I simply didn 't understand what the situation was . I misread the note ... I thought it was a goodbye " . Dannemann said Hendrix told her : " I want you to keep this [ poem ] forever [ and ] I don 't want you to forget anything that is written . It 's a story about you and me " . 
 Soon after Bannister pronounced Hendrix dead , a hospital spokesperson told the press : " We don 't know where , how , or why he died , but he died of an overdose . " By that evening , many newspapers in London and New York had printed sensationalized headlines that exploited the death @-@ from @-@ overdose account . Hendrix 's public relations manager , Les Perrin , granted an interview on Dutch radio soon after the hospital announcement . He commented : " Well , all I know is that Mr. Hendrix 's body was taken to St. Mary Abbots Hospital in Kensington , London , at 11 : 45 this morning , and he was certified to be dead on arrival . " At 2 p.m. , BBC Radio 1 reported : " Jimi Hendrix , regarded by millions as one of the most talented and original performers in modern rock music , is dead . " That evening , The New York Times described him as " a genius black musician , a guitarist , singer and composer of brilliantly dramatic power . He spoke in gestures and big as he could imagine and create . " 
 On September 19 , Dannemann spoke with a journalist for the German tabloid Bild . During the interview , published on September 24 , Dannemann stated : " I loved him , and Jimi loved me ... We were already engaged ... I would then have designed the sleeves for his records ... He could not sleep . So I gave him the tablets . " On September 20 , a reporter from The Daily Telegraph interviewed Dannemann 's brother , Klaus @-@ Peter Dannemann , who stated : " [ Monika ] telephoned me on [ September 19 ] and told me that [ Hendrix ] took nine sleeping tablets . She said that Jimi had told her that he wanted to sleep for a day and a half before he went to America . She told me that he did not intend to kill himself . " 
 = = Post @-@ mortem = = 
 To determine the cause of death , the coroner , Gavin Thurston , ordered a post @-@ mortem examination on Hendrix 's body , which was performed on September 21 by Professor Robert Donald Teare , a forensic pathologist . Teare reported that Hendrix was " well nourished and muscular " , and he identified a quarter @-@ inch scar on Hendrix 's left wrist . He said that there were " no stigmata of [ intravenous ] drug addiction . Once these marks are there [ in the skin ] , they never go away . In this case , there were no marks at all . " Although Teare observed that the right side of Hendrix 's heart was widely dilated , he found no evidence of valvular heart disease . He discovered a partially collapsed left lung and 400 ml of fluid in Hendrix 's chest . Both lungs were congested , and vomit was found in the smaller bronchi . According to Teare , Hendrix 's stomach " contained a medium @-@ sized partially digested meal in which rice could be distinguished . " Teare concluded that Hendrix 's kidneys were healthy , and his liver was congested . His " bladder was half full of clear urine . " He stated that Hendrix 's blood alcohol content was 100 mg per 100 ml , " enough to fail a breathalyzer test ... the equivalent of about four pints of beer . " Teare reported that analysis of Hendrix 's blood " revealed a mixture of barbiturates consistent with those from Vesparax " , and he estimated that drug concentrations translated to ingestion of 1 @.@ 8 grams of barbiturate , 20 mg of amphetamine , and 20 mg of cannabis . Teare gave the cause of death as : " Inhalation of vomit due to barbiturate intoxication . " He did not attempt to determine Hendrix 's time of death . 
 Thurston began an inquest on September 23 , and on September 28 he concluded that Hendrix had aspirated his own vomit and died of asphyxia while intoxicated with barbiturates . Citing " insufficient evidence of [ the ] circumstances " , he recorded an open verdict . He commented : " The cause of death was clearly inhalation of vomit due to barbiturate intoxication , but there is no evidence as to intention to commit suicide ... If the question of intention cannot be answered , then it is proper to find the cause of death and leave it an open verdict . " Dannemann later stated that Hendrix had taken nine of her prescribed Vesparax sleeping tablets . Intended to be taken in half @-@ tablet doses , nine tablets of the powerful sedative amounted to 18 times the recommended amount . 
 After Hendrix 's body had been embalmed by Desmond Henley , it was flown to Seattle , Washington , on September 29 . After a service at Dunlop Baptist Church on October 1 , he was interred at Greenwood Cemetery in Renton , Washington , the location of his mother 's gravesite . Hendrix 's family and friends traveled in twenty @-@ four limousines . More than two hundred people attended the funeral , including several notable musicians such as the original Experience members Mitch Mitchell and Noel Redding , as well as Miles Davis , John Hammond and Johnny Winter . 
 = = Inconsistencies and the Scotland Yard inquiry = = 
 Tony Brown , author of Jimi Hendrix : The Final Days ( 1997 ) , had been in regular contact with Dannemann from 1980 until her death in 1996 . He visited with her on multiple occasions and spoke with her numerous times over the phone . Soon after contacting her , Brown came to the conclusion that her account of the events of Hendrix 's final days " would change from one call to the next . " In the days following Hendrix 's death , she gave two significantly different accounts of the morning of September 18 . 
 At approximately 4 p.m. on September 18 , Dannemann told Police Sergeant John Shaw : " We went to sleep about 7 a.m. When I woke up at eleven his face was covered in vomit , and he was breathing noisily . I sent for an ambulance , and he was taken to hospital . I also noticed that ten of my sleeping tablets were missing . " In a statement given to P. <unk> of the coroner 's office on September 24 , she said : 
 I made a sandwich and we talked until about 7 a.m. He then said that he wanted to go to sleep . He took some tablets , and we went to bed . I woke up about 11 : 00 a.m. , and saw that Jimi 's face was covered in vomit . I tried to wake him but could not . I called an ambulance and he was taken to the hospital in Kensington ... Prior to going with him to the hospital , I checked my supply of Vesparax sleeping tablets and found that nine of them were missing . 
 In Dannemann 's initial statements , she said she awoke at 11 a.m. on September 18 . During the inquest she stated that she awoke at 10 : 20 a.m. , and left to purchase cigarettes , something she had previously failed to mention . In 1971 , she wrote a manuscript in which she said she awoke at 10 a.m. In 1975 , during an interview with author Caesar Glebbeek , Dannemann stated that she awoke at 9 a.m. According to Burdon , Dannemann phoned him as " the first light of dawn was coming through the window . " Stickells said he received a phone call regarding a problem with Hendrix " between 8 a.m. and 9 a.m. " Mitchell said he waited for Hendrix at the Speakeasy Club until they closed at 4 a.m. , and a couple of hours after his hour and a half drive home , he received a phone call from Stickells , who told him Hendrix had died . In her statements to the police and coroner 's office , Dannemann never mentioned telephoning Burdon . 
 Although Dannemann stated that Hendrix was alive when placed in the ambulance at approximately 11 : 30 a.m. and that she rode with him on the way to the hospital , the ambulance crew later denied she was there . Statements from the paramedics who responded to the call support that they found Hendrix alone in the flat when they arrived at 11 : 27 a.m. , fully clothed and apparently already dead . Jones later commented : " [ When ] we arrived at the flat , the door was flung wide open , nobody about , just the body on the bed . " Saua stated : " There was just me and the casualty and Reg the driver . Nobody else . " Burdon stated : " [ Dannemann ] didn 't leave in the ambulance ; she was with me " . According to Jones , Hendrix 's bowels and bladder had released some of their contents prior to the ambulance crew 's arrival at the Samarkand . Saua stated that the vomit was dry when they arrived , making use of their <unk> ineffective . Saua commented : " When we moved [ Hendrix ] , the gases were gurgling , you get that when someone has died " . According to police officer Smith : " The ambulance men were there , but Jimi was dead ... There was really nothing they could do for him . " Smith also disputes Dannemann 's claim that she was there with Hendrix at the flat and in the ambulance : 
 No , I remember quite clearly the doors shutting on the crew and Jimi ... there was no one about . If she had been in the flat , they would never have called us to come ... But because no one was there , he was dead , and circumstances were a little odd , suspicious , they radioed ... us in . It wasn 't until later in the day that I found out that it was Jimi Hendrix . 
 In 1992 , after having conducted an extensive review of the events of September 18 , 1970 , the London Ambulance Service issued an official statement : " There was no one else , except the deceased , at the flat when they arrived ; nor did anyone else accompany them in the ambulance to St. Mary Abbotts Hospital . " 
 In 1992 , having arranged for a private investigation of Hendrix 's death , Etchingham supplied the results of the effort to UK authorities and requested they reopen the coroner 's inquest . After a several @-@ month inquiry by Scotland Yard , during which every interested party to the events was interviewed , officials were confident the request would be granted . The investigation eventually proved inconclusive in 1993 , when Attorney General Sir Nicholas Lyell decided that proceeding with the investigation would not serve the public , due in part to the excessive time that had passed since Hendrix 's death . 
 = Liv Tyler = 
 Liv Rundgren Tyler ( born Liv Rundgren ; July 1 , 1977 ) is an American actress and former child model . She is the daughter of Aerosmith 's lead singer , Steven Tyler , and model Bebe Buell . Tyler began a career in modeling at the age of 14 but , after less than a year , she decided to focus on acting . After her film debut Silent Fall ( 1994 ) , she appeared in supporting roles in Empire Records ( 1995 ) , Heavy ( 1996 ) and That Thing You Do ! ( 1996 ) . Tyler later achieved critical recognition in the leading role in Bernardo Bertolucci 's Stealing Beauty ( 1996 ) , playing a teenage girl visiting her deceased mother 's artist friends in Italy . She followed this by appearing in supporting roles including Inventing the Abbotts ( 1997 ) and Robert Altman 's black comedy Cookie 's Fortune ( 1999 ) . 
 Tyler achieved international recognition as a result of her portrayal of Elf maiden Arwen <unk> in the Lord of the Rings film trilogy ( 2001 – 2003 ) . She has appeared in an eclectic range of films , including the 2004 comedy Jersey Girl , the indie film Lonesome Jim ( 2005 ) , the drama Reign Over Me ( 2007 ) and big @-@ budget studio films such as Armageddon ( 1998 ) , the home invasion horror film The Strangers ( 2008 ) and The Incredible Hulk ( 2008 ) . 
 In 2014 , Tyler made her television debut on the HBO series The Leftovers in a recurring role . 
 She has served as a United Nations Children 's Fund ( UNICEF ) Goodwill Ambassador for the United States in 2003 , and as a spokesperson for Givenchy 's line of perfume and cosmetics . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Tyler was born Liv Rundgren at Mount Sinai Hospital in East Harlem , New York . She is the only daughter of Bebe Buell , a model , singer , and former Playboy Playmate ( Miss November 1974 ) , and Steven Tyler , the lead singer of Aerosmith . Her mother named her after Norwegian actress Liv Ullmann , after seeing Ullmann on the cover of the March 5 , 1977 issue of TV Guide . She is of Italian , German , Polish , and English ancestry on her father 's side and German ancestry on her mother 's side . Tyler has three half @-@ siblings : Mia Tyler ( born 1978 ) , Chelsea Anna Tallarico ( born 1989 ) , and Taj Monroe Tallarico ( born 1992 ) . Her maternal grandmother , Dorothea Johnson , founded the Protocol School of Washington . 
 From 1972 to 1979 , Liv ’ s mother Bebe Buell lived with rock musician Todd Rundgren . In 1976 , Buell became unexpectedly pregnant from a brief relationship with Steven Tyler . On July 1 , 1977 , Buell gave birth , naming the daughter Liv Rundgren and claiming that Todd Rundgren was the biological father . Rundgren and Buell ended their romantic relationship but Rundgren put his heart and soul into the " white lie " . At age eight Liv met Steven Tyler and noticed a resemblance she shared with his other daughter , Mia . When she asked her mother about the similarity , the secret was revealed . The truth about Tyler 's paternity did not become public until six years later in 1991 , when she changed her name from Rundgren to Tyler , but kept the former as a middle name . Buell 's stated reason for the initial decision was that Steven was too heavily addicted to drugs at the time of her birth . Since learning the truth about her paternity , Liv and Steven have developed a close relationship . They also have worked together professionally , once when she appeared in Aerosmith 's music video for " Crazy " in 1993 , and again when Aerosmith performed many of the songs in the film Armageddon ( 1998 ) in which Tyler starred . 
 According to Tyler " ... Todd [ Rundgren ] basically decided when I was born that I needed a father so he signed my birth certificate . He knew that there was a chance that I might not be his but .... " He paid to put her through private school , and she visited him several times a year . 
 Tyler maintains a close relationship with Rundgren . " I ’ m so grateful to him , I have so much love for him . You know , when he holds me it feels like Daddy . And he ’ s very protective and strong . " 
 Tyler attended the Congressional Schools of Virginia , Breakwater School , and <unk> School in Portland , Maine , before returning to New York City with her mother at age 12 . She went to York Preparatory in New York City for junior high and high school after her mother researched the school to accommodate Tyler 's ADHD . She graduated in 1995 and left to continue her acting career . When asked about the way she spent her youth , Tyler said : " For me , I didn ’ t get much of a childhood in my teen years because I ’ ve been working since I was 14 . But that also kept me out of trouble . When everybody was doing acid and partying like crazy , I was at work on a movie in Tuscany ... having my own fun , of course , but it was a different kind of thing . I have no regrets . I love the way my life has gone . " 
 = = Career = = 
 = = = Early work = = = 
 Tyler received her first modeling job at age 14 with the assistance of Paulina <unk> , who took pictures of her that ended up in Interview magazine . She later starred in television commercials . She , however , became bored with her modeling career less than a year after it started , and decided to go into acting , although she never took acting lessons . Tyler first became known to television audiences when she starred alongside Alicia Silverstone in the music video for Aerosmith 's 1993 song " Crazy " . 
 = = = 1994 – 1997 : Film debut ; Stealing Beauty = = = 
 Tyler made her feature film debut in Silent Fall in 1994 , where she played the elder sister of a boy with autism . In 1995 , she starred in the comedy drama Empire Records . Tyler has described Empire Records as " one of the best experiences " she has ever had . Soon after , she landed a supporting role in James Mangold 's 1996 drama Heavy as Callie , a naive young waitress . The film received favorable reviews ; critic Janet Maslin noted : " Ms. Tyler ... gives a charmingly ingenuous performance , betraying no self @-@ consciousness about her lush good looks . " 
 Tyler had her breakthrough role in the art house film Stealing Beauty ( 1996 ) , in which she played Lucy Harmon , an innocent , romantic teenager who travels to Tuscany , Italy , intent on losing her virginity . The film received generally mixed reviews , but Tyler 's performance was regarded favorably by the critics . Variety wrote : " Tyler is the perfect accomplice . At times sweetly awkward , at others composed and serene , the actress appears to respond effortlessly and intuitively to the camera , creating a rich sense of what Lucy is about that often is not explicit in the dialogue . " Empire noted , " Liv Tyler ( here <unk> resembling a <unk> young Ava Gardner ) with a rare opportunity to <unk> , a break she capitalizes on with composure . " The film was directed by Bernardo Bertolucci , who chose Tyler for the role after meeting with a number of young girls in Los Angeles , including Tyler 's music video co @-@ star Alicia Silverstone . Bertolucci said " there was something missing in all of them " . He later said that what he saw in Tyler was a gravitas he described as " a New York aura " . During promotion of the film , Tyler said she wanted to separate herself from the character during production : " I tried my damnedest not to think of my own situation . But at one point , after a take , I just started to cry and cry . I remembered when I found out about my dad and how we just stared at each other from head to toe taking in every nook and cranny . " 
 She later appeared in That Thing You Do ! ( 1996 ) , a movie about a fictional one @-@ hit wonder rock band called The Wonders , following their whirlwind rise to the top of the pop charts , and just as quickly , their plunge back to obscurity . The film was written and directed by Tom Hanks . It grossed over $ 25 million worldwide , and was met with favorable reviews . The following year , she appeared in Inventing the Abbotts in 1997 , in which she played the daughter of Will Patton and Barbara Williams ' characters . The movie is based on a short story by Sue Miller . Entertainment Weekly declared Tyler 's performance as " lovely and pliant " . That same year , Tyler was chosen by People magazine as one of the 50 Most Beautiful People . 
 = = = 1998 – 2000 : Mainstream exposure = = = 
 Tyler next appeared in Armageddon ( 1998 ) , where she played the daughter of Bruce Willis ' character and love interest of Ben Affleck 's character . The film generated mixed reviews , but was a box office success earning $ 553 million worldwide . The movie included the songs " I Don 't Want to Miss a Thing " and " What Kind of Love Are You On " by Aerosmith . In a 2001 interview with The Guardian , she said that she initially turned down the role in Armageddon ; " I really didn 't want to do it at first and I turned it down a couple of times , but the biggest reason I changed my mind was because I was scared of it . I wanted to try it for that very reason . I mean , I 'm not really in this to do amazing things in my career – I just want it to be special when I make a movie . " 
 She was then cast in the drama Onegin ( 1999 ) , a film based on the 19th century Russian novel of the same name by Alexander Pushkin , in which she portrayed Tatyana Larina and co @-@ starred with Ralph Fiennes . Tyler was required to master an English accent , though Stephen Holden of The New York Times felt that her approximation of an English accent was " inert " . The film was critically and financially unsuccessful . That same year , she appeared in the historical comedy film Plunkett & Macleane . 
 She later appeared in two films directed by Robert Altman , Cookie 's Fortune ( 1999 ) and Dr. T & the Women ( 2000 ) . In Cookie 's Fortune , she was part of an ensemble cast that included Glenn Close , Julianne Moore , Chris O 'Donnell , and Patricia Neal . Her performance well received among critics ; Salon.com wrote : " This is the first time in which Tyler 's acting is a match for her beauty ( she 's always been a bit forlorn ) . Altman helps her find some snap , but a relaxed , silly snap , as in the cartoon sound she makes when she takes a midday swig of bourbon . The lazy geniality of the movie is summed up by the way Emma [ Tyler 's character ] saunters off to take a swim with her cowboy hat and pint of Wild Turkey . " Entertainment Weekly also noted that Tyler is " sweetly gruff as the tomboy troublemaker " . In the romantic comedy , Dr. T & the Women , she played Marilyn , a gynecological patient of Richard Gere 's character , who is the lesbian lover of his daughter , played by Kate Hudson . 
 = = = 2001 – 2007 : Lord of the Rings = = = 
 In 2001 , Tyler played the object of infatuation for three men ( Matt Dillon , John Goodman , and Paul Reiser ) in the comedy One Night at McCool 's . In discussion of the role , she said it was " definitely the first part where I had to be so physically aware and have people so aware of me physically . Maybe it 's not hard for anybody else , but it is a bit for me . I mean I love my body and I feel very comfortable in my skin but this was tough . " Peter Travers of Rolling Stone wrote : " Tyler , a true beauty , gives the role a valiant try , but her range is too limited to play this amalgam of female perfection . " 
 In 2001 , she starred in the feature film The Lord of the Rings : The Fellowship of the Ring , directed by Peter Jackson . She played the Elf maiden Arwen <unk> . The film is based on the first volume of J. R. R. Tolkien 's The Lord of the Rings . The filmmakers approached Tyler after seeing her performance in Plunkett & Macleane . She learned to speak the fictitious Elvish language that was created by Tolkien . Mick LaSalle of the San Francisco Chronicle noted that Tyler 's performance was " lovely and earnest " . 
 A year later , Tyler again starred as Arwen in The Lord of the Rings : The Two Towers , the second installment of the series . The film received favorable reviews . She spent months learning sword fighting to be used during the concluding battle scenes in The Two Towers , but her scenes were removed after the script was changed . The film was an enormous box office success , earning over $ 926 million worldwide , out @-@ grossing its predecessor , which earned over $ 871 million . In 2003 , Tyler featured in the third and last installment of the series , The Lord of the Rings : The Return of the King . 
 Following the success of The Lord of the Rings , she appeared opposite her Armageddon co @-@ star Ben Affleck in writer @-@ director Kevin Smith 's romantic comedy Jersey Girl ( 2004 ) , playing a woman who meets a widowed father played by Affleck , re @-@ opening his heart to love . In an interview with MTV News , Tyler confessed that she felt " scared and vulnerable " while filming Jersey Girl , adding " I was so used to those other elements of the character [ Arwen ] . On The Lord of the Rings , a lot of things were done in post @-@ production , whereas this was really just about me and Ben sitting there , just shooting off dialogue . " However , she reiterated that doing Jersey Girl was what she wanted to do . 
 In 2005 , she appeared in Steve Buscemi 's independent drama Lonesome Jim , where she was cast alongside Casey Affleck , as a single mother and nurse who reconnects with an old fling who has returned to their small town in Indiana after a failed run as a novelist in New York . The film was screened at a special presentation at the 2005 Sundance Film Festival where it was nominated for the Grand Jury Prize . Her next appearance in film was in a supporting role as an insightful therapist who tries to help a once @-@ successful dentist ( Adam Sandler ) cope with the loss of his family in the September 11th attacks in Reign Over Me ( 2007 ) . 
 = = = 2008 – present : Box office hits ; The Leftovers = = = 
 In 2008 , she starred in the home invasion horror film The Strangers with Scott Speedman , a film about a young couple who are terrorized one night by three masked assailants in their remote country house . Although the film garnered a mixed reception among critics , it was a major box office success , earning over $ 80 million over its considerably smaller $ 9 million budget . In an interview with Entertainment Weekly , she noted that The Strangers was the most challenging role of her career . " It was as far as I could push myself in every way : physically , emotionally , mentally . " 
 She appeared in The Incredible Hulk ( 2008 ) , in which she played Dr. Betty Ross , the love interest of the title character , played by Edward Norton . Tyler was attracted to the love story in the script , and was a fan of the television show . She said filming the part was " very physical , which was fun " , and compared her performance to " a deer caught in the headlights " . The Incredible Hulk was a box office success , earning over $ 262 million worldwide . The Washington Post , in review of the film , wrote : " Tyler gives Betty an appropriately angelic nimbus of ethereal gentleness as the one Beauty who can tame the Beast ... during their most pivotal encounters . " 
 Tyler appeared in two films released in 2011 : Super and The Ledge . In April 2011 , publishing house Rodale announced that Tyler and her grandmother Dorothea Johnson , an etiquette expert , have written a book called Modern Manners . It was released October 29 , 2013 . 
 In 2014 she appeared in Space Station 76 , a film directed by Jack <unk> , starring also Matt Bomer and Patrick Wilson . 
 In June 2014 Tyler began appearing as a regular in the HBO television series The Leftovers . 
 In 2016 Tyler took on a role opposite Bel <unk> in the fantasy / horror drama <unk> directed by Fritz Böhm . The film also marks her debut as a producer . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 In 1998 , Tyler began dating British musician Royston Langdon of the band Spacehog . She and Langdon became engaged in February 2001 , and married in Barbados on March 25 , 2003 . On December 14 , 2004 , she gave birth to a son , Milo William Langdon . On May 8 , 2008 , the couple confirmed through representatives that they would be separating . In an interview with the Australian Daily Telegraph , Tyler revealed that her separation from Langdon led her to move to Los Angeles , explaining that it was hard to be in the Manhattan home that they had shared . In June 2010 , Tyler stated she was " far too sensitive " for casual dates , adding " I fall in love once in a blue moon . " In September 2014 , Tyler confirmed she was pregnant with her second child ; the father is sports and entertainment manager David Gardner . On February 11 , 2015 Tyler had her second son , Sailor Gene Gardner , who was born six weeks early . On January 8 , 2016 Tyler announced that she was expecting her third child and second with Gardner . Her third child and first daughter , Lula Rose Gardner , was born on July 10 , 2016 . 
 Tyler was formerly a vegan , but later began to eat meat . In 2003 , she became the spokesperson for Givenchy perfume and cosmetics ; in 2005 the brand named a rose after her , which was used in one of its fragrances . In 2009 , Tyler signed on for two more years as Givenchy spokesperson . On December 8 , 2011 , Givenchy announced a collaboration between Givenchy perfumes and Sony Music . In the video released on February 7 , 2012 , Liv Tyler covered the INXS song " Need You Tonight " . 
 Tyler learned Transcendental Meditation in New York City . In December 2012 she participated in a charity gala for the David Lynch Foundation to provide Transcendental Meditation to disadvantaged sections of society . At the event she said , " it helps me make better decisions and be a better mother , and just deal with the daily stress of the modern world that we live in . It helps with everything . " 
 = = = Activism = = = 
 Tyler is an active supporter of the charitable United Nations Children 's Fund ( UNICEF ) . She was appointed as a Goodwill Ambassador for the United States in 2003 . In November 2004 , she hosted the lighting of the UNICEF Snowflake in New York City . Tyler also served as spokesperson for the 2004 Givenchy Mother 's Day promotion , in support of UNICEF 's Maternal & Neonatal Tetanus ( <unk> ) campaign . 
 Since 2004 , she has donated to the Women 's Cancer Research Fund to support innovative research , education , and outreach directed at the development of more effective approaches to the early diagnosis , treatment and prevention of all women 's cancers . In October 2007 , Tyler , along with her mother , Bebe Buell and her grandmother , Dorothea Johnson , helped launch the <unk> @-@ C Pink energy drink , in which the event was in honor of Breast Cancer Awareness month . 
 = = Filmography = = 
 = = = Television = = = 
 = = Discography = = 
 = = = Singles = = = 
 2012 : " Need You Tonight " ( Music Of Very Irresistible Givenchy Electric Rose ) : cover of INXS song 
 = Sleepy Hollow Country Club = 
 Sleepy Hollow Country Club is a historic country club in Scarborough @-@ on @-@ Hudson in Briarcliff Manor , New York . The club was founded in 1911 , and its clubhouse was known as Woodlea , a 140 @-@ room , Vanderbilt mansion owned by Colonel Elliott Fitch Shepard and his wife Margaret Louisa Vanderbilt Shepard . It was built in 1892 – 95 at a cost of $ 2 million ( $ 52 @.@ 7 million in 2015 ) and was designed by the architectural firm McKim , Mead & White ; the estate became a contributing property to the Scarborough Historic District ( on the National Register of Historic Places ) in 1984 . 
 Woodlea 's exterior was designed in an English Renaissance Revival style , incorporating Beaux @-@ Arts details . The building 's facades are composed primarily of buff @-@ colored Italian brick . The south and west facades are symmetrical , but the overall plan of the house is not . The house 's west facade is the longest and most ornate , and has a view of the Hudson River from its west @-@ facing windows and adjoining terrace . The main entrance is on the building 's south , directly approached from the south drive . The interior also has significant features , including marble fireplaces , coffered ceilings , and extensive carved wood and plaster detail . The house has between 65 @,@ 000 and 70 @,@ 000 square feet ( 6 @,@ 039 and 6 @,@ 503 m2 ) of interior space , making it one of the largest privately @-@ owned houses in the United States . 
 = = Club = = 
 The club currently has 338 acres ( 0 @.@ 5 sq mi ) and a 27 @-@ hole golf course with tree @-@ limb footbridges . Facilities include the main clubhouse , a pool complex , ten Har @-@ Tru tennis courts , four aluminum heated platform tennis courts , four squash courts , eighteen guest rooms , skeet and trap areas , a 45 @-@ horse boarding facility , twenty paddocks , a large indoor riding arena , pro shops for golf and paddle sports , a fitness complex , the golf course and practice range ( non @-@ contributing ) , outdoor riding rings , stables , and a carriage house . Youth activities include golf , tennis , squash and riding . The clubhouse has three dining rooms , and altogether the club can hold 400 guests . The club currently has 570 members , and a staff consisting of 60 year @-@ round employees and 200 during the height of the season . The stables have a tack room , fifty stalls , and two indoor arenas , and they host the Sleepy Hollow Stable and Riding Academy . The club 's gross revenue is $ 12 million ; of it , $ 2 @.@ 5 million is from food and beverage sales . The club property surrounds Saint Mary 's Episcopal Church on three sides and slopes upwards east from U.S. Route 9 . The clubhouse , which is open through every season of the year , sits on a wide central plateau . Notable early members included George G. Haven , V. Everit Macy , George W. Perkins , Moses Taylor , Oakleigh Thorne , and Frank Vanderlip ; notable current members include Bill Murray , James Patterson , and several members of the Rockefeller family . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Name = = = 
 Sleepy Hollow Country Club , founded in 1911 , predates the 1996 renaming of the neighboring village of North Tarrytown to Sleepy Hollow . The club is named after its location in the river valley of the Pocantico River , a river which was once called <unk> ( " sleepers ' harbor " in Dutch ) ; the Dutch name later grew to apply to the valley . Today , as a geographic term , " Sleepy Hollow " refers only to the incorporated village . 
 = = = 19th century = = = 
 Sleepy Hollow 's clubhouse was once a private residence named Woodlea . The mansion retained the name of a former house of J. Butler Wright , who lived there and called it Woodlea ; it dates to around 1806 . Wright 's Victorian house , of painted brick with porches and a high tower on one end , was later renamed the Villa . Colonel Elliott Fitch Shepard came to the Briarcliff area in the early 1890s , and having purchased the house and its 500 @-@ acre ( 0 @.@ 8 sq mi ) property , ordered construction of the existing house and improvements to the grounds . Construction on the mansion began in 1892 , and it was completed in 1895 . In 1892 Shepard ordered the construction of Scarborough 's first dock ( at the present Scarborough Park ) to allow construction materials to be shipped to his property . Shepard died in 1893 , leaving his wife Margaret to oversee the completion of Woodlea . After his death , Margaret lived there only during spring and autumn , with less frequent trips as time went on . In November 1896 , Maria Louisa <unk> ( Margaret 's mother and widow of William Henry Vanderbilt ) died in the house . Maria 's sister and Margaret called for a Scarborough doctor who was unable to assist her . By 1900 , Margaret began selling property to Frank Vanderlip and William Rockefeller , and she sold the house to the two men in 1910 . Vanderlip thought of it as too big of a bargain to pass up – the Shepards had already spent $ 2 million ( $ 50 @.@ 8 million in 2015 ) on the property , and Margaret had offered it for only $ 165 @,@ 000 ( $ 4 @,@ 190 @,@ 400 in 2015 ) . Narcissa Vanderlip thought the house too large and grand to live in , and so the Vanderlips stayed in their nearby property of Beechwood . 
 = = = 20th century to the present = = = 
 The two men assembled a board of directors to form a country club , including future Titanic victim John Jacob Astor IV , coal baron Edward Julius <unk> , cotillion leaders Elisha Dyer and <unk> Stewart , and sportsmen W. Averell Harriman , Cornelius Vanderbilt III , and Harrison A. Williams . The country club was incorporated on May 11 , 1911 , with 600 members . The directors ' first meeting took place at Vanderlip 's office at 55 Wall St. , the National City Bank Building ( Vanderlip was the president of the bank at the time ) . Initiation and yearly dues were each $ 100 ( $ 2 @,@ 500 in 2015 ) . For the first few years , the club rented Woodlea for $ 25 @,@ 000 ( $ 634 @,@ 900 in 2015 ) a year , and in 1912 the club purchased the property from Vanderlip and Rockefeller for $ 350 @,@ 000 ( $ 8 @,@ 582 @,@ 200 in 2015 ) . The club then constructed the golf course in close harmony to the existing lawns , and also built an outdoor garden theater with clipped cedars and a 16th @-@ century Italian portal . The club ended up paying $ 310 @,@ 000 for the land and house , and spent another $ 100 @,@ 000 on improvements . The club spent four years , starting in 1910 , rearranging the house 's kitchen , pantries , and service wing to house and serve more people , and in renovating one of the stables into a garage . The club also constructed more tennis courts and a toboggan slide for use in the winter . The grounds had been designed by the sons of Frederick Law Olmsted from 1895 to 1901 , using American and foreign trees ; the club had Charles B. Macdonald and Seth Raynor design the first golf course in 1911 , and A. W. Tillinghast designed an update in 1935 , succeeded by Gil Hanse 's redesign from 18 to 27 holes around 2008 . 
 In 1917 the club had 1 @,@ 000 members , and its president was Frank Vanderlip . In June of that year , William Rockefeller purchased 387 acres ( 0 @.@ 6 sq mi ) for the club , bringing its area to 480 acres ( 0 @.@ 8 sq mi ) ( the house was originally sold with only 93 acres ( 0 @.@ 1 sq mi ) ) . Rockefeller spent $ 600 @,@ 000 ( $ 11 @,@ 082 @,@ 100 in 2015 ) , making it the largest single real estate transaction in the county . The purchases allowed for the construction of about 40 houses on the club property . New facilities were built in the 1920s , including a manager 's house , skeet house , squash house , indoor riding ring , and swimming pool . The club had operated at a loss from the beginning , and after the Wall Street Crash of 1929 , club members were not successful in maintaining their wealth , and membership declined . Cuts were made – horses were sold , Woodlea was closed except for special occasions , and the golf house became the primary clubhouse . 5 @-@ acre ( 0 @.@ 008 sq mi ) building lots north of Woodlea were sold to members . The club was also not successful during World War II and later ; in 1950 a member could stay overnight at Woodlea for $ 5 ( $ 49 in 2015 ) , and for less in the golf house . The first formal dance that year also cost $ 5 a person . In 1961 , in time for the club 's 50th anniversary , Woodlea was redecorated with more modern fabrics , warm gold and forest green carpets , dropped lighting , and some lowered ceilings . 
 Original to the house , and occupying its northwest terrace against its service wing , was an Italian garden with vine @-@ clad <unk> on each side , symmetrical gravel paths , marble benches , and long stone balustrades , giving it characteristics of a hanging garden . The garden was below the house 's first floor , and was built against the hillside , occupying a portion of the slope that falls far below it . The lower walls of the house were screened with a row of large cedars planted on the highest part of the garden . The garden formed an immense rectangular space , and on the four sides of the terrace there were <unk> thickly overgrown with vines . In the center was a pool and fountain . Walks and beds of flowers and shrubbery occupied the rest , visible from the west @-@ facing windows of the house . 
 The garden was demolished in the 1960s , as was the golf house ( in 1967 ) . In the garden 's location and replacing the use of the golf house , a wing was added to the clubhouse , constructed on the northeast terrace and completed in 1962 . The building holds a pro shop , dining facilities , and locker rooms . The structure was designed to be spacious and convenient and not be noticeable from the grounds below , although from Woodlea , the sight of the tar roof and ventilators was noted to be worse than the prior standing gardens . In 2014 the country club expanded and renovated the snack bar building , renovated the locker room building exterior , constructed a large array of solar panels on the roof of the locker room and dining facility building , and performed other renovations . Replacing the golf house 's location , a pool facility and tennis shop was constructed in 1968 . 
 = = Architecture = = 
 = = = Woodlea = = = 
 The architect of Woodlea is variously stated as McKim , Mead & White , and Stanford White , although according to William Mitchell Kendall in his 1920 list of the firm 's works , he attributes the house 's design to McKim , Mead & White , with W. R. Mead as the supervising architect . 
 = = = = Exterior = = = = 
 Woodlea 's exterior was designed in an English Renaissance Revival style . The house is said to have been modeled after Kimberley Hall in Kimberley , Norfolk . Its classical devices of 18th @-@ century English architecture include urns , pediments , columns , and balusters . The house also is a full @-@ blown expression of the American Renaissance . Woodlea incorporates characteristics of the Beaux @-@ Arts style of architecture – the exterior dictates the use of the interior , with family and guest rooms on the third floor . At the north end of the house , situated farthest from the main entrance , and of a size larger than most houses , is the service wing , which contains the servant quarters . Compared to the rest of the house , this wing has lower ceilings , smaller windows , and less exterior trim . In the early 1900s , the wing was clad in ivy . 
 Woodlea is constructed of buff @-@ colored pressed Italian brick with pale stone trim . It is three stories tall , seven bays wide , and more than fourteen bays deep . The south and west facades are both symmetrical , although the house has an asymmetrical overall plan . The house has pedimented pavilions and entrance porticos on the west , south , and east ; window trim consisting of stone surrounds , pediments , lintels , and sills ; classical balusters and quoins . The house 's third story is separated visually by a stone string course and is topped with a <unk> cornice . From a shallow hipped roof rise brick chimneys that are trimmed and capped with stone . The pavilion pediments have decorative urn @-@ shaped elements . The house 's windows are primarily rectangular , double hung , one @-@ over @-@ one panel style , except for a large triple Palladian window , which has stained glass and is situated midway up the house 's main staircase , illuminating its lower steps . The house has distinctive quoins , pediments , and classical balustrades of pale gray limestone . 
 The west facade of the house is the most ornate , and faces the Hudson River , with a view of the river from its terrace and west @-@ facing windows . The curtain wall between the facade 's pavilions contains a semicircular portico , and its entablature is upheld by Ionic columns , and supports a balustrade . A flight of semicircular steps descends to the terrace . The river front is parallel with the east front , which had a porte @-@ cochère , a minor entrance , and a service entrance . The main entrance is at the building 's south , directly approached by the south drive . The entrance is recessed , with a portico of Ionic columns over the entranceway . 
 The house has been described as " low and spreading , notwithstanding its unusual height " . It has between 65 @,@ 000 and 70 @,@ 000 square feet ( 6 @,@ 000 and 6 @,@ 500 m2 ) , making it one of the largest houses in the U.S. The property has about three miles of wide driveways . 
 = = = = Interior = = = = 
 The house also has significant interior features , including marble fireplaces , wood paneling , coffered ceilings , window and door architraves , parquet floors , and extensive carved wood and plaster detail , primarily in the <unk> mold . The original furnishings together were reported in 1895 to have cost hundreds of thousands of dollars , and to have included rare tapestries , carved woods , paintings , and Italian marble . 
 In 1906 , the house had 16 bathrooms and 65 rooms , including 20 for servants . The house 's main door opens into a square vaulted vestibule , walled throughout with highly polished yellow marble . It leads into the main hall , which is paneled to the ceiling in wood , painted white , the corners and angles accentuated by pilasters , and the rich mahogany doors encased within monumental frames . The white ceiling is intricately coffered . The hall has a large fireplace of carved white marble and a large table in the room 's center , which was on a large red rug covering most of the floor . The first floor also has an enfilade of three rooms : the green <unk> and cedar @-@ paneled living room , the white and gold drawing room , and the dark mahogany dining room . The three rooms have a span or linear distance of over 150 feet . A corridor connects the main hall to three rooms ; it has recessed windows , dividing the corridor into bays . The corridor has pilasters and the same coffered ceiling of the main hall , and it used to have heavy velvet curtains at the window alcoves and entrance to the hallway ; the windows had curtains of delicate salmon silk . 
 The first room from the corridor was the living room , with a wainscot , pilasters , cornice , and door and window frames all of Spanish cedar , and a mantelpiece imported from an Italian chateau . Walls are paneled in green silk , mirroring the rug and furnishings . The drawing room , music room , or parlor was at the center , with paneled walls in ivory white and gold , with gilded moldings and ornaments . There are richly interlaced panels above the doorways with paintings inserted in them . The mantle is of mottled purple and white marble , and has a built @-@ in mirror above it . The room has richly gilt chandeliers hanging from ornamental reliefs in the otherwise plain ceiling . Furniture was of tapestry and gold , with a light rug and yellow and gold curtains at the windows and doors . 
 The dining room had a high wainscot of mahogany , paneled in rectangles , above which is a broad tapestry frieze . The ceiling is beamed with closely set beams , and the cornice is mahogany like the other woodwork . The room is lighted by the cluster of lights applied to the wainscot . The house 's pantry was " as large as many New York apartments " , had a counter and wash bowls and large rows of glazed closets around other walls . The kitchen and serving room had a refrigerator and were well stocked and equipped . The breakfast room was green and white , woodwork painted white , walls covered in Nile green cloth ; it had a wood mantel with facings of mottled white marble . Adjoining is the morning @-@ room , finished in quartered oak , with walls papered in red stripes of two shades , has a quartered oak wainscot and white cornice , curtains and furniture are red and gold . 
 The library is on the right of the hall , removed from the other rooms ; it once held a billiard table . The walls are lined with tall bookcases , and were otherwise covered in large square panel @-@ like pieces of leather . The room has a richly coffered ceiling and had green and brown curtains . The house has bedrooms of various sizes , most large , with Mrs. Shepard 's the biggest . Each room has distinct furnishings and from moderate to rich decoration . One particular was the Moorish room , furnished in the Moorish style , with mantel and furniture inlaid with mother of pearl . The third floor had bedrooms , a children 's suite and a large playroom . 
 The house 's room arrangement was planned for convenience and comfort , as compared to typical English mansions , which often were built with kitchens far from the dining room . Woodlea has 140 rooms , which were designed not to be drafty , and with important rooms not too remote . The rooms are all over @-@ scaled in terms of the height of the ceilings and size of the doors , with large fireplaces , and the length and breadth of the stairway to the house 's second floor . 
 = = = Stable = = = 
 The stable was designed by McKim , Mead & White and built in the late 19th century using the same yellow brick used for the main residence . The stable is two and a half stories high , 29 bays wide , and 5 bays deep , and it has a gable roof covered with asbestos shingles that replaced its original ceramic tile . On the roof 's ridge sits a shallow monitor , flanked by two taller <unk> monitors with louvered ventilating elements and bell @-@ cast copper roofs . 
 The end bays of the west ( main ) facade are framed in pedimented pavilions , which have recessed brick panels above the impost line , and below it are bricks coursed to resemble rustication . One glazed roundel is at the middle of each tympanum . The pedimented central bay has an arched recessed entrance with a pair of oversized double wood doors beneath a fanlight . The arch is flanked with blind roundels above the impost line , with rustication below . The bay 's tympanum is undecorated . The arch impost line continues as a belt course between the pavilions and forms the sills for recessed wood @-@ framed , fixed @-@ sashed , nine @-@ light windows on the building 's second level . The windows are divided by Doric pilasters . 
 <unk> at the main facade 's lower level is only narrow wood @-@ framed double @-@ hung glazed embrasures with two @-@ over @-@ two sash . The facades have a <unk> cornice , repeated within the pediments and arched pavilion lintels . The stable is built into a hill , and has a partial basement level with 51 stalls . 
 The two @-@ story interior space on the first floor was originally used for carriages and then for automobiles , and now is used as an indoor exercising ring for the horses occupying the stalls below . In the end pavilions , there is a reception area , tack room , and small apartment designed to be occupied by the riding instructor . 
 = = = Golf house = = = 
 In the 1920s , the old Butler Wright house became the golf house . It was at the center of the club 's sporting operations , originally holding a pro shop , dining room , bar , and bedrooms . In 1931 , it was refurbished with more showers and dressing rooms , an addition to the locker room to double its space and increase the lounge space , an enlarged kitchen , a new women 's locker room and sitting room , a larger dining veranda , an enclosed porch on the northwest corner of the building , and a new porch on the building 's east side . The club 's first pool was constructed adjoining the house in 1930 , necessitating the construction of the showers and dressing rooms . The building was demolished in 1967 . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 Both of the country club 's Route 9 entrances have a gatehouse . Both are small , two stories high , three bays wide , and one bay deep , and were constructed along with the house in the 1890s . The gatehouses resemble Woodlea in materials and simplified stylistic detail . Both gatehouses have gable roofs and a shed @-@ roofed one @-@ story high rear addition . The houses have stone and brick pedimented porticos over their entranceways . The lower @-@ level windows have flat @-@ arched surrounds with keystones ; the oculi break the cornice lines beneath <unk> arched pediments . The northern gatehouse has another one @-@ story rear addition and a small one @-@ car garage . The club 's gates are made of French @-@ imported carved stone and ironwork . 
 = = = Pool house = = = 
 The pool house was built in 1968 and is brick with wood @-@ framed casement windows . It is a divided brick building with locker rooms on the larger west section and a refreshment area on the smaller east section . The west section has a flat roof , and the east section has a shallow hipped roof with a broad overhang . The building does not contribute to the former historic estate . 
 = = = Skeet house = = = 
 The skeet house was built around 1925 , and is a small one @-@ story log building , three bays wide and one bay deep with a gable roof . The interior is rustic , with a small kitchen and one large multi @-@ purpose room . The building contributes to the estate 's early 20th century development . 
 = = = Logan Memorial Riding Ring = = = 
 The 17 @,@ 000 @-@ square @-@ foot ( 1 @,@ 600 m2 ) building , originally named the Logan Riding Ring , was completed in 1929 . Mrs. Thomas F. Logan , an Ardsley resident and member of the Sleepy Hollow Riding Committee , funded the building 's $ 300 @,@ 000 expense ( $ 3 @.@ 54 million in 2015 ) and supervised its construction . The building has a length of 180 feet and a width of 95 feet . Its exterior is stucco over concrete block ; the building has a main section with a round @-@ arched asbestos @-@ shingled roof , and is two stories high , five bays wide ( 95 feet ( 29 m ) ) , and ten bays deep ( 180 feet ( 55 m ) ) . The building has narrow metal @-@ framed tripartite casement windows with brick sills . The upper , eight @-@ light sections of the windows open horizontally , and the lower portions with sixteen lights open vertically ; the central twenty @-@ light sections are fixed . The structure 's bays are divided on the side facades by sloping concrete ground @-@ to @-@ cornice buttresses , paired at the intersections of the side and rear facades . Around 1931 , an exhibition ring and corrals were constructed near the riding ring . 
 The main ( west ) facade has a projecting two and a half @-@ story gable roof section that is three bays wide and two deep . Decorative detail on the exterior includes quoins , the James Gibbs @-@ inspired surround on the main entrance , and the molded surrounds and keystones of the casement windows . In the northwest corner of the intersection between the building 's two sections is a one @-@ story @-@ high , one @-@ bay @-@ square addition with a narrow metal casement window on the west facade and a large double entrance for horses on the north . The building 's interior consists of a large riding ring that is open to the rafters , and in the gable @-@ roofed section , there are lockers and changing rooms on the first floor and a multi @-@ purpose room on the second ; on one of its walls is a floor @-@ to @-@ ceiling window permitting view of the ring activity below . 
 = = = Squash house = = = 
 The squash house was constructed around 1920 , completed in 1931 , and was demolished between 2011 and 2013 . It was located near the Logan Riding Ring , on the club 's south entrance road . It was two stories high , five bays wide and nine bays deep , and was stucco @-@ covered with a flat roof . There were two entrances on the main ( south ) facade , one at ground level and another on the balcony . The entrances had double wooden doors , paneled below and glazed above . All of the building 's windows consisted of wood @-@ framed , paired casement windows with brick sills . A veranda with Tuscan piers extended the length of the main facade , interrupted by a two @-@ bay @-@ wide , one @-@ bay @-@ deep projection east of the main entrance . The building 's interior contained a doubles court , two singles courts , a reception room , locker rooms , showers , and a spectators ' gallery seating 150 . Across the road from where the building stood is an outdoor riding ring enclosed by a rough rail fence . To the west of the building 's site , standing alone in the tall grass , is a 16th @-@ century post @-@ and @-@ lintel stone element , which was at the center of the stage of a 1 @,@ 500 @-@ seat outdoor Greek amphitheater that was part of the Shepard estate and was since dismantled . 
 = = = Former manager 's house = = = 
 The manager 's house was built of brick and stucco around 1920 . It is two stories high , four bays wide , two bays deep , and has an asymmetrical plan . The building has a shallow hip roof with exposed rafter ends . Its windows are primarily one @-@ over @-@ one and double @-@ hung with wood trim , with window @-@ sills made of concrete . There is a three @-@ story rectangular brick tower set into the main ( west ) facade . The tower is open at the top beneath a wide wood fascia . The building has a brick chimney decorated with corbelling ; its chimney coping and caps are made of concrete . The building is now rented to the members . 
 = = = Carriage barn complex = = = 
 The carriage barn complex predates the Shepards ' ownership of the property ; it was built around 1875 as part of Wright 's original estate . The most prominent component is the brick carriage house , which was designed by McKim , Mead & White . It is made of brick with granite trim and is one and a half stories high , ten bays wide and three bays deep . It has a steeply pitched slate hip roof with spring eaves and exposed rafters . At the roof 's ridge sits an octagonal ventilating element with a bell @-@ cast roof . 
 On the main ( north ) facade , there is a two @-@ bay @-@ wide projection with a hip roof and two wall dormers . There is a large roof dormer on the side ( east ) facade which provides exterior access to the hayloft . Other fenestration includes small square windows with fixed sashes near the eaves on all facades and four double @-@ hung windows , two per level , in the main facade 's pavilion . Each end facade has a set of large double wood carriage doors . The complex now serves as a storage and maintenance facility for the club 's golf carts . 
 Opposite the carriage barn is another building , also of brick but with a low hip roof . It is one story high , one bay deep and five bays wide . There are three sets of overhead doors on the main ( south ) facade of the building . A high brick wall encloses the entire complex , and sections of the corner utility structures are a part of the surrounding wall . There is a small building in the northeast corner of the complex ; it is one bay square with a steep hip roof with spring eaves . It has single round windows near the root line , on two facades . The building 's entrance , on the south facade , is made of wood . The building has a counterpart across the yard , with a low hip roof , a large brick chimney , and a stone water table and string course ; it has overhead doors on the north facade . 
 = = Popular culture = = 
 In the 2011 – 12 television show Pan Am , Sleepy Hollow Country Club was the setting for much of the series ' third episode . Other media filmed at the country club include the 2012 show 666 Park Avenue , the 2009 – present show The Good Wife , the 2009 film The Six Wives of Henry <unk> , the 2006 – 13 show 30 Rock , the 2009 television special Michael J. Fox : Adventures of an Incurable Optimist , the 2010 film The Bounty Hunter , and the music video of Beyoncé 's 2011 song " Best Thing I Never Had " . 
 = = Scorecard = = 
 = To SquarePants or Not to SquarePants = 
 " To SquarePants or Not to SquarePants " , also known as " To SquarePants or Not to " , is the 9th episode of the sixth season and the 109th overall episode of the American animated television series SpongeBob SquarePants . It originally aired on Nickelodeon in the United States on July 17 , 2009 . 
 The series follows the adventures and endeavors of the title character and his various friends in the underwater city of Bikini Bottom . In this episode , SpongeBob 's pants have shrunk in the dryer . Unable to find a new pair , he tries round pants , but no one seems to recognizes him as SpongeBob <unk> . 
 The episode was directed by Alan Smart , and was written by Luke Brookshier , Nate Cash , and Steven Banks . On July 21 , 2009 , the DVD version of the episode was released . Upon release , the episode received positive reviews . 
 = = Plot summary = = 
 It is laundry day , and SpongeBob is drying a whole load of his " square pants " . But while all his pants are in the dryer , SpongeBob gets distracted by Patrick who wants SpongeBob to hear him make funny sounds with his tongue for a long time . Eventually , SpongeBob goes to check on his pants which all shrunk in the dryer ; he heads to the mail to buy new pairs . Upon hearing there will not be another shipping of " square pants " for months , SpongeBob tries out several different styles of pants at the mall until he finally chooses a pair of " round pants " . 
 SpongeBob wanders around town and Patrick is unable to recognize him because of the new pants , SpongeBob is greeted by Sandy who teases SpongeBob by pretending she does not recognize him and makes comments about his clothes in a good way . SpongeBob sees Squidward who also pretends he does not know him . SpongeBob heads home , although Patrick does not let him in because the house belongs to SpongeBob SquarePants before he " left " . 
 Feeling discouraged by the idea nobody knows who he is , SpongeBob decides to start a new life as " SpongeBob <unk> " , to which he decides to re @-@ apply to his job at the Krusty Krab . When he meets Squidward at the restaurant , SpongeBob acts as if this is his first time applying at the Krusty Krab and has never met Squidward before . Squidward decides to take advantage of this by training SpongeBob to act like him , a horrible employee , in hopes SpongeBob will later get fired . After a series of complaints from the customers , Mr. Krabs confronts SpongeBob for his lousy work , to which SpongeBob explains since he has new pants , he is no longer " SpongeBob SquarePants " . Mr. Krabs then convinces SpongeBob he should take his pants off then . SpongeBob , no longer wearing pants , then continues to be his normal self and go back to being a good employee . When Sandy comes in seeing SpongeBob in his underwear , however , she ( teasingly ) calls him " SpongeBob <unk> " , SpongeBob looks at his underwear and screams , ending the episode . 
 = = Production = = 
 " To SquarePants or Not to SquarePants " was written by Luke Brookshier , Nate Cash , and Steven Banks , and was directed by Alan Smart . Brookshier and Cash also functioned as storyboard directors . The episode originally aired on Nickelodeon in the United States on July 17 , 2009 , with a TV @-@ Y7 parental rating . 
 The episode was a part of the network 's tenth anniversary celebration of SpongeBob SquarePants . Starting July 17 , 2009 at 8 : 00 pm EDT , Nickelodeon aired a 50 @-@ hour SpongeBob marathon titled " The Ultimate SpongeBob SpongeBash Weekend " . The marathon started with the premiere of " To SquarePants or Not to SquarePants " at 8 pm . 
 On July 21 , 2009 , the episode became available on the DVD compilation of the same name , along with fellow sixth season episodes " Squid 's Visit " , " The Splinter " , " Slide Whistle Stooges " , " Boating Buddies " , " The Krabby <unk> " , " The Slumber Party " , and " Grooming Gary " . " To SquarePants or Not to SquarePants " was also released on the series ' season six DVD compilation . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The episode and its DVD release received positive reviews . Paul Mavis of DVD Talk positively responded to the episode and wrote that " There are laughs in ' To SquarePants or Not to SquarePants . ' " Gordon Sullivan of DVD Verdict gave the episode a score of 5 out of 10 and said " [ the episode ] was one of the slighter entries [ on the DVD ] , with the core joke being fairly well @-@ handled with no one recognizing SpongeBob , but it went on just a little too long . April Pohren of the Blogcritics said " [ the episode ] is original and comical . " 
 = Tales of Hearts = 
 Tales of Hearts ( Japanese : <unk> , Hepburn : Teiruzu Obu Hātsu ) is a Japanese role @-@ playing game released for the Nintendo DS in Japan and the PlayStation Vita worldwide . It is the eleventh main entry in the Tales series , developed by Namco Tales Studio and published by Bandai Namco Games . The Japan @-@ exclusive DS version received two editions : the " Anime Edition , " featuring cutscenes by Production I.G , and the " CG Movie Edition , " featuring CGI cutscenes created by Shirogumi Ltd . A remake of the game , Tales of Hearts R ( <unk> <unk> , Teiruzu Obu Hātsu Āru ) , was released on the Vita in March 2013 and later released in western regions in November 2014 . Hearts R was also ported to iOS and released in Japan in October 2013 although it was pulled from the App Store on March 31 , 2016 , and therefore no longer available for download . Hearts R was developed by 7th Chord and includes staff from Bandai Namco Studios . 
 The game follows main protagonist Kor Meteor after he discovers a woman named Kohaku Hearts and her brother Hisui near his home town . When Kohaku is attacked by a mysterious antagonist named Incarose and infected by a monster called a xerom , Kor attempts to cure her using his Soma , an ancient weapon designed to fight xerom . In the process , he ends up shattering Kohaku 's Spiria , the essence of her heart and emotions , and scattering the pieces across the world . Together with Hisui , Kor sets off with Kohaku on a quest to restore her Spiria . Its characteristic genre name , a concept used extensively in the Tales series , is Kokoro to deau RPG ( <unk> ? , lit . " A Meeting Between Hearts RPG " ) . It represents the game 's central theme of people 's hearts uniting to overcome strife . For Hearts R , extra story scenes were created and the genre name was altered to <unk> kokoro to deau RPG ( <unk> ? , lit . " A New Meeting Between Hearts RPG " ) . 
 Hearts began production in the winter of 2006 , during the final development stages of the PlayStation 2 remake of Tales of Destiny . It was produced by Hideo Baba , the former brand manager for the series . Though the third title on the DS , it was the first portable title to be developed by Namco Tales Studio . The remake was mostly handled by different development staff , but the writer and character designer both returned to add new content . Both versions of the game have received strong sales and highly positive reviews in Japan , with the DS version selling 260 @,@ 000 units by 2009 . Reviews of the DS version have been positive overall , while western reviews of Hearts R have been mixed to positive . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Like previous entries in the Tales series , Tales of Hearts is an action role @-@ playing game . The game is split into two main areas : the field map and battlefield arenas triggered upon encountering an enemy . The battle arenas are fully rendered and played out in 2D . Characters are rendered outside pre @-@ rendered cutscenes as 2D character sprites against 3D backgrounds . For the original Nintendo DS version , the top screen shows the main visuals , while the bottom screen shows the navigation map and other functions . Battles are triggered by running into enemy sprites rather than appearing as random encounters . As with previous titles , Skits , extra conversations between characters , are available for the player to trigger . 
 The battle system is a variant on the Linear Motion Battle System ( LMBS ) from multiple Tales titles : an action @-@ based combat system similar to a fighting game : button commands instantly trigger various attacks and actions , and different attacks string together to form combos . The system used in Hearts is called the " Combination Aerial LMBS " . Up to three characters participate in battle , with one controlled by the player and the other two controlled via artificial intelligence . The two AI characters be assigned to perform different actions such as healing or attacking . The " Combination " element refers to a special gauge that fills up and can be used to perform special attacks with party members not assigned in battle . A second " Emotion " gauge determines how many moves a character can perform : the gauge fills while the character is blocking , and is depleted by performing actions . The lower the gauge is , the lower a character 's defenses are . Characters can employ special attacks called " Combination Blasters , " Hearts ' take on the series ' staple Mystic Artes ( " Hi @-@ <unk> " in the Japanese version ) . Defeated enemies drop items and materials that can be used to level up character abilities , with certain combinations of items yielding certain abilities and skills . Once enough skills have been learned , a character 's weapon can be upgraded via three separate skill trees , with the abilities and power of the character changing according to the choice of skills beforehand . 
 For the PlayStation Vita remake , the gameplay takes place in 3D environments with fully rendered character models . Along with including a fourth AI @-@ controlled character in battle , Hearts R uses a redesigned battle system titled the Aerial Chase Linear Motion Battle System ( called " Arc Chase " in the Japanese version ) . The " chase link " mechanic enables a character to follow an enemy after knocking it into the air and continue a combo attack . By selecting an ally at the right moment , the player character can perform a Chase Cross attack , while holding down the attack button activates a finishing move . Multiple items found in chests scattered across the land can be used in battle ( such as curative items ) and for obstacles and objects in the field areas . Multiple elements from the series , including cooking healing recipes , are included . Random encounters with enemies on the field are also present . Characters level up using Soma Build Points ( SBP ) , with the " soma " being a character 's signature weapon and points causing the Soma to evolve , granting new abilities . <unk> are assigned to character stat values called <unk> Parameters , which strengthen different character stats . Mystic Artes from the original game are carried over , along with new ones . Also added are Union Artes , special attacks unique to a particular character pairing . Characters can be assigned special accessories called " Combo Commands " : activated by a specific set of button presses , the accessory grants a character full access to all their Artes for a limited time . 
 = = Plot = = 
 = = = Setting = = = 
 Tales of Hearts is set on the worlds of Organica and Minera ( known to Organicans as the " white moon " ) , with the events of the story mostly taking place on Organica . Two millennia before the present day , Minera was in a state of war with itself , and Organica 's inhabitants were used by the Minerans as a food source for organic weapons called <unk> . The <unk> were designed to attack Spirias , the crystalline essence of a person 's emotions , and either destroyed them or infected them with an ailment known as despir . Some Minerans who sympathized with the Organicans ' plight and wishes for peace provided them with weapons to fight off the xerom , called Soma . In the present day , after Minera was destroyed , the xerom continue to threaten the people of Minera and the people who bear <unk> and fight the creatures are called <unk> . Other remnants of the Mineran civilization left on the planet include the airship fortress Mysticete , mostly known to the Organicans as the " Forest of Thorns " , and <unk> , machines with synthetic Spirias who acted as guardians to important Minerans . During the events of Hearts , Organica is under the united rule of the Maximus Empire , which waged a war against the world 's other factions eighteen years before in a conflict called the " Unification War " . 
 = = = Characters = = = 
 Kor Meteor 
 A boy with a strong curiosity for the world , Kor lives on an isolated island with his grandfather Sydan . Encountering Kohaku and Hisui and venturing beyond his town for the first time , his grandfather is killed by Incarose . His attempt to save Kohaku from an attack of despir unwittingly causes her Spiria to shatter , prompting Kor to join Hisui and Kohaku in an effort to restore her . By the end of the game he has developed romantic feelings for Kohaku . His name is Shing <unk> ( <unk> ・ <unk> , <unk> <unk> ) in the original Japanese . His first name was based on the Japanese words " shin " ( 心 ) and " gu " ( <unk> ) , which was intended to mean that he " is armed with a heart . " His surname was taken from the English word " meteorite " . Kor is voiced by Tetsuya <unk> . 
 Kohaku Hearts ( <unk> ・ ハーツ , Kohaku Hātsu , <unk> Hearts in Japanese ) 
 A girl who travels the world with her brother searching for a Soma , guided on her quest by Lithia . Attacked by Incarose and infected by a xerom , Kor 's attempt to save her ends up shattering her Spiria , rendering her virtually emotionless . During the course of the game , she develops romantic feelings for Kor . Kohaku 's first name is the Japanese word for " amber " . Her name is alternately translated as " Amber Hearts " . Kohaku is voiced by Marina Inoue . 
 Hisui Hearts ( <unk> ・ ハーツ , Hisui Hātsu ) 
 Kohaku 's older brother . Because of the circumstances of their mother 's death , he is overprotective of his sister . He is initially distant and cold towards Kor because of the latter 's actions with Kohaku , but gradually comes around . Hisui 's first name is the Japanese word for " jade " . His name is alternately translated as " <unk> Hearts " . Hisui is voiced by Masaya <unk> . 
 Ines Lorenzen ( <unk> ・ <unk> , <unk> <unk> , Innes Lorenz in Japanese ) 
 A woman who is the manager and sole employee of the transport shop " Wanderlust " . Possessed of superhuman strength , she initially accompanies the group to help sell her wares . Her surname is based on the mineral <unk> . Ines is voiced by Shizuka Itō . 
 Beryl Benito ( <unk> ・ <unk> , <unk> Benito ) 
 A girl who ran away from her village to become a court painter , she is easily conned due to her inexperience of the world and prone to be nihilistic . Her name is directly drawn from both the eponymous gemstone and the mineral <unk> . Beryl is voiced by Saeko Chiba . 
 Kunzite ( <unk> , <unk> ) 
 A guardian knight hidden from the public by those currently using him , he is an ancient machine constructed with functions that mimic and understand human emotions , giving him the equivalent of a heart . He was created as <unk> 's guardian . His name is one of the names for spodumene . Kunzite is voiced by <unk> <unk> . 
 Chalcedony Akerman ( <unk> ・ <unk> , <unk> <unk> , <unk> <unk> in Japanese ) 
 The leader of the Crystal Knights , Chalcedony has been a skilled swordsman from childhood , and is initially antagonistic towards the protagonists . Originally a non @-@ player character ( NPC ) in Hearts , he is included as a playable character in Hearts R. Chalcedony is voiced by Hiroshi Kamiya . 
 Gall Gruner ( <unk> ・ <unk> , <unk> <unk> , <unk> <unk> in Japanese ) 
 A veteran Somatic who joins Kor 's group in the hope of destroying the <unk> . He became a master after his wife and daughter were killed by <unk> , and becomes attached to Kohaku as she reminds him of his daughter . Initially cold and distant , he begins to show a lighter side while traveling with the group . Gall is voiced by Hideo Ishikawa . 
 = = = Story = = = 
 Note : Aside from the addition of Gall and Chalcedony 's presence in the late section of the game , the plots of Hearts and Hearts R are the same . 
 Kor Meteor , a young man living on a remote island with his grandfather Sydan and being trained as a Somatic , encounters Kohaku and Hisui Hearts outside his village : they are fleeing from the female mechanoid Incarose and are seeking a Soma . After finding one on the island , the island is attacked by Incarose and a group of xerom . During the conflict , Sydan is fatally injured by Incarose and Kohaku is infected with despir . Despite his inexperience , Kor enters Kohaku to destroy the infection . While there , he encounters a Mineran called Lithia <unk> , who has been using Kohaku as a host . Sensing a hostile presence inside Kor during an angry outburst from him , Lithia causes Kohaku 's Spiria to shatter : aside from one fragment , the pieces are scattered across the world . Feeling responsible , Kor chooses to go with Hisui to restore Kohaku 's Spiria . During their quest , they are joined by Somatic Gall , Ines , Beryl , Kunzite , and reluctantly Chalcedony : through their early encounters with him , they become involved in a conflict between the Maximus Empire 's military and religious authorities . They are also opposed by Silver , the head of a rebel militant group who wants to use Mineran technology to topple the Empire and create a new world order . They eventually arrive at the fortress Mysticete , where they retrieve the final piece from Silver and are forced to kill him when he fuses with a xerom . It is then revealed that Kor holds the consciousness of Creed Graphite , a hostile Mineran and Incarose 's master , within him . Creed and <unk> , within their respective hosts , briefly do battle , but the effort on Lithia 's part breaks a seal containing their physical forms , allowing the two Minerans to return to them . 
 The group escape Mysticete with Lithia , who explains that in an effort to stop the warring on Minera , Creed , Lithia and her sister Fluora created Gardenia , a xerom capable of remotely absorbing Spirias . Though intended to quell violent thoughts in the population , Gardenia went berserk when activated and absorbed every Spiria on Minera , <unk> the planet . Fluora used herself to seal Gardenia away , and when Creed attempted to free Fluora , Lithia interfered , causing both to be separated from their physical forms : since then , they have been living in <unk> hosts and battling each other for two millennia . Creed , who still believes the Minerans are alive within Gardenia , intends to undo Fluora 's work and rebuilding Minera at the cost of Organica and its people . In the aftermath , Kohaku and Kor find out how Lithia and Creed ended up inside them : eighteen years before , Creed and Lithia were respectively in the bodies of Zirconia , then @-@ ruler of the Maximus Empire , and Iola Hearts , Kohaku 's mother . Iola faced Zirconia with a group of <unk> that included Sydan and Kor 's mother Kardia , who was then carrying him . During their final battle , Iola 's Spiria was shattered , forcing Lithia to transfer herself into the unborn Kohaku 's Spiria , and Creed was forced to abandon his host , leaving Zirconia emotionally scarred . Creed attempted to possess Kardia 's child , but with help from the unborn Kor , she succeeded in sealing Creed away with Kor 's help at the cost of her Spiria . Though Kor is initially disheartened by these revelations , Kohaku helps bring him round . 
 With Creed controlling Mysticete and xerom attacking people across the planet , the group , along with <unk> and <unk> , manage to unite the disputing factions of the Maximus Empire . With the world now united against the xerom , they set off to find the means of turning Chalcedony 's wing @-@ based Soma into an airship for their use . In gathering the final component inside an active volcano , Incarose attacks them and the group are forced to leave <unk> and <unk> to die . After this , Lithia is shown to be dying , as her Spiria is in a severely weakened condition , but she resolves to live until her mission is complete . During their first assault on Mysticete , the group are repelled and end up on Minera . Finding their way to a transport tower that can take them to Gardenia , they have a final confrontation with Incarose , who is defeated and forced to provide the power for their journey at the cost of her life . Reaching Gardenia , the two are unable to prevent Creed from freeing Fluora and activating Gardenia . Gardenia instantly absorbs Fluora , and Creed fuses with it in an attempt to gain control over it . When he is defeated , Kor and Kohaku , together with his friends and the still @-@ living Mineran Spirias , destroy Gardenia , then escape as Creed dies with Gardenia . After learning that the Minerans have a chance of being reborn , Kunzite saves the dying Lithia by sealing her inside his Spiria and entering a comatose state . After this , the rest of the group return to Kor 's home village , where Kor and Kohaku confirm their love for each other . 
 = = Development = = 
 Hearts began development in the winter of 2006 , while debugging was being performed on the PlayStation 2 remake of Tales of Destiny , though active development did not begin until spring the following year . The production was headed by Hideo Baba , producing his first original Tales game , and the development team was made up of members from both " Team Symphonia " ( the team behind 3D entries in the series ) and " Team Destiny " ( responsible for 2D titles ) . Multiple development assets were borrowed from the Destiny remake for use in Hearts . The earliest form of the game was as a DS remake of Destiny . The game 's characteristic genre name , a recurring feature of the series in Japan , was Kokoro to deau RPG ( <unk> ? , lit . " A Meeting Between Hearts RPG " ) , which represented the core theme of people 's hearts meeting and uniting to overcome difficulties in their lives . The characters were designed by regular Tales series designer Mutsumi Inomata . Inomata worked on the designs while she was also working on character designs for Tales of Innocence , and found it hard working on both titles at once . The characters ' names were inspired by various ores and gemstones . More conventional names were repeatedly suggested and rejected . 
 Despite being the third Tales title on the Nintendo DS after Tales of the Tempest and Innocence , it was the first to be produced by Namco Tales Studio , and thus it was an unusual experience for the development team . According to director Naoto <unk> , one of the most difficult aspects was creating a suitable interface and fitting the game 's content on the limited hardware , which required a trial @-@ and @-@ error programming process . During the early phases , the team considered ways of using the DS touch screen during battles , but this was eventually scrapped and the final game made little to no use of the feature . Production I.G created the anime cutscenes , while Shirogumi Ltd created CGI cutscenes for a separate edition of the game . The CGI cutscenes were worked on by a three @-@ person team , including company director Manabu <unk> : the three worked closely with the development team to make sure the cutscenes fit properly into the game , and that they did justice to Inomata 's character designs despite the different animation style . One issue they had was lip @-@ synching dialog to the CGI character models . The main reason behind the creation of CGI cutscenes was that the team wanted to try something new , attempting to sell two versions of the games . Hearts was released as two separate game editions : the " Anime Edition " , featuring the cutscenes by Production I.G , and " CG Movie Edition " , using the Shirogumi cutscenes . After release , it was determined that the CGI cutscenes were less popular with fans . Speaking to Siliconera after the game 's release , Baba said that it was the Tales game he most wanted western players to try out , due to its story and technical achievements . 
 = = = Hearts R = = = 
 Hearts R was primarily developed by Japan @-@ based developer 7th Chord , with staff from in @-@ house development studio Bandai Namco Studios helping with development . The game was a complete remake of Hearts , featuring full voice acting for the main scenario , new playable characters , 3D graphics and over ten new anime cutscenes created by Production I.G. in addition to the " Anime Edition " cutscenes already present . Due to the poor reception of the " CG Edition " by the fanbase , it was decided not to use CGI cutscenes again . It was given an altered genre name : <unk> kokoro to deau RPG ( <unk> ? , lit . " A New Meeting Between Hearts RPG " ) . The staff of the game also had differences : Hironori Naoi replaced <unk> <unk> as director , while Takashi <unk> ( also known under the alias " Ryuji <unk> " ) and Mika Murakita produced the game in place of Baba . Inomata returned as character designer . 
 The concept behind Hearts R was to leave the base story and theme intact while building on and improving it , using the development of Innocence R as a template . It was developed alongside Innocence R , and many staff overlapped on the projects . Naoi joined the team in early 2012 , after finishing work on Tales of the Heroes : Twin Brave , and was the principle developer for the new combat system . In the middle of development , the " Chase Link " system was added based on a similar gameplay mechanic from Innocence R. Naoki <unk> , the scenario writer for Hearts , returned to co @-@ write the extra story content with <unk> Maeda . For the rebuilt battle system , the team were asked by Baba to create a sense of speed when compared with the original . Along with the gameplay and story additions , two new playable characters were introduced : Chalcedony and new character Gall Gruner . Chalcedony , originally an antagonist in Hearts , was included in the playable cast to fully explore the character 's relationship with Kor . Gall was originally conceived as a woman , but at a suggestion from Murakita for a mature leader figure for the group , Gall was changed to a man . <unk> 's design was based on a picture of <unk> wearing sunglasses . The narrative connection to Innocence R was initially unplanned , but positive fan reception prompted the team to add it in . 
 = = = Audio = = = 
 Heart 's soundtrack was composed by veteran Tales composer Motoi Sakuraba , Hiroshi Tamura and Shinji Tamura ( as Hibiki Aoyama ) . The official soundtrack album , Tales of Hearts Original Soundtrack , was published by BMG Japan on two compact discs on December 10 , 2008 . In addition to the original soundtrack , a special disc of selected arranged tracks titled Tales of Hearts CG Movie Edition Visual & Original Soundtrack DVD was released alongside the " CG Movie Edition " of the game . Reviews of the soundtrack have been mixed . RPGFan 's Patrick Gann both called it the best soundtrack of the three <unk> DS Tales games and a weaker soundtrack than the console @-@ based Tales games . Max Nevill of Game @-@ OST was also mixed , feeling that the album was too much like previous Tales scores by Sakuraba . Some tracks did please him , but he noted that some might not find them to their taste . The music featured in Hearts R was re @-@ arranged and added to by Kazuhiro Nakamura and Sakuraba . 
 The game 's theme song , " Eien no Ashita " ( <unk> , " Eternal Tomorrow " ) , was written and performed by Japanese rock band Deen , who had previously performed the theme song for the original version of Destiny . The single reached 6th place in the Oricon charts during its first week of release and remained in the charts for eight weeks . Both Gann and Nevill praised the song and the multiple versions found in the soundtrack : Nevill called it " a charismatic and emotional rock ballad " , while Gann referred to it as " a great opening single " . 
 = = Release = = 
 In order to compete against Square Enix 's PlayStation Portable exclusive Dissidia Final Fantasy , which was releasing on the same day as Hearts , the company heavily promoted the game at several events and offered multiple pre @-@ order bonuses for buyers . The original version of Hearts has not been released in the west , and a fan translation for this version was released in 2009 . Hearts R came as both a standard edition and a special edition titled " Linked Edition " , which included a Vita and accessories themed after the game . First print copies of Hearts R gave access to a special downloadable game called Tales of Hearts R : Infinite Evolve . Rendered in the same graphic style as Hearts , it is a game separate from the main story with an exponentially increasing difficulty level . At release , DLC outfits for the characters were created themed around " idol " , " school " , " maid " and " butler " . Another set was based around protagonists from previous Tales games . Hearts R was also ported to and released on iOS mobile devices in October 2013 exclusively in Japan . 
 = = = Vita version = = = 
 Speculation about the existence of Hearts R started back in early 2012 . The game was first teased during the credits of Innocence R , with both a post @-@ credits message saying " To be continued to next Re @-@ imagination " , and artwork in certain dungeons featuring scenes and characters from both Hearts and Tempest . This caused speculation as to whether the next remake was Tempest , Hearts or both . Hearts R was officially announced in Weekly Shōnen Jump in October 2012 . 
 The localization of the title was originally unplanned , but during heavy promotion of the Tales series in Europe and North America alongside the domestic release of Innocence R and Hearts R , there were multiple requests from the western fanbase to bring the titles west : as Hearts R was the most recent title , it was chosen for localization . The localization was officially announced in April 2014 . Unlike previous localizations , the game remained with Japanese voice acting , but with subtitles in multiple languages . This decision was influenced both by limited space on the Vita cartridge and fan requests for the original Japanese voice track . The North American physical release was exclusive to video game retail line GameStop . It also received a digital release on PlayStation Store . For its European release , a special day @-@ one " Soma Linked Edition " was created : it featured three costumes from Tales of Vesperia . The edition also included a code to enter a competition for five autographed Japanese Collector 's Editions of Hearts R , which would include a special congratulatory video from Baba and a personalized case featuring the winner 's name . Pre @-@ order downloadable content in the form of character costumes was also created . The costume DLC was also made available in North America from selected stores . The stores also had a limited digital release of the game alongside the physical release . Hearts R is compatible with the PlayStation TV . 
 = = = Media adaptations = = = 
 Hearts R received a manga adaptation of the same name . The manga was eventually collected into a single volume and released under the title Tales of Hearts R Comic Anthology ( テイルズ オブ ハーツ R コミックアンソロジー , Teiruzu Obu Hātsu R Komikku Ansorojī ) on 25 June 2013 . An official strategy guide , Tales of Hearts R Official Complete Guide ( テイルズ オブ <unk> <unk> , Teiruzu Obu Hātsu R Kōshiki Konpurīto Gaido ) , was released on 14 March 2013 . Five audio dramas based on Hearts were produced after the release of the official soundtrack , released under the general name of Tales of Hearts Drama CD ( テイルズ オブ ハーツ <unk> , Teiruzu Obu Hātsu Dorama CD ) . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Nintendo DS = = = 
 Bandai Namco had high expectations for Hearts , preparing shipments of 400 @,@ 000 units , based on previous high sales they had for Innocence . During its week of release , Hearts reached fourth place in Famitsu 's sales charts and fifth place in Dengeki 's . It sold 137 @,@ 000 units in its week of release , more than Innocence in a similar period : the " Anime Edition " accounted for 122 @,@ 000 units , while the " CG Movie " edition sold 15 @,@ 000 . According to Famitsu , Hearts sold a slightly higher 140 @,@ 000 units in its first week . By the end of the year , both versions of the game together had sold 176 @,@ 526 units , placing # 72 in Famitsu 's list of 2008 's 100 best @-@ selling titles . As of 2009 , the game has sold 260 @,@ 000 units . 
 Famitsu gave the game 33 / 40 points from four reviewers . They praised the battles as being " plain fun " , there being " a ton of volume to the story " and both the anime and CG cutscenes . Their main criticism was that there was little difference between the two versions besides the cutscenes . Japanese gaming site Game Watch Impress was greatly positive about most aspects , saying it would fully satisfy fans of the series despite some elements falling below expectations for the series . Andrew Barker of RPGFan , reviewing an imported version of the " Anime Edition " of Hearts , was highly positive : he praised the story for straying from the normal course of a Tales narrative , called the graphics " outstanding " , the music " excellent " , and was generally positive about the battle system and graphic presentation . It was also awarded the site 's " Editor 's Choice " award . 
 = = = PlayStation Vita = = = 
 Hearts R also did well commercially in Japan , selling 55 @,@ 258 copies in its first week , outselling previous Vita Tales title Innocence R. The title sold 75 @,@ 049 units by June that year , ranking among Japan 's fifty top @-@ selling games of that year . Famitsu ranked Hearts R a little higher than the original , giving it 34 / 40 : they cited the battles as being " more exciting " than in Hearts , and generally praised the additions to the story . They also praised the graphical overhaul , calling it " a true Tales at the core . " Dengeki PlayStation also praised the game , with the four reviewers giving it scores of 80 , 85 , 90 and 93 . Praise went to the fully voiced main scenario , the new playable characters and aspects of the battle system . The main criticisms were " flat " graphics and other elements of the battle system such as the lack of character support and companion AI . 
 Western reviews of the title have been mixed to positive : review aggregate sites GameRankings and Metacritic gave it scores of 76 @.@ 77 % and 77 / 100 based on 22 and 23 critic reviews respectively . The gameplay was a general point of praise . RPGFan 's John McCarroll said that its various elements " tie together to provide a cohesive battle experience that 's quite enjoyable " despite him finding it inferior to Tales of Graces , and Destructoid 's Kyle MacGregor said that the experience " can be quite fun " . Hardcore Gamer 's Adam Beck said that the combat " works perfectly on the handheld system " , while Kimberley Wallace of Game Informer said that the pace and various features " help keep [ the battles ] exciting . " Andrew Fitch of Electronic Gaming Monthly was more mixed about the gameplay , citing the combat as a less smooth experience compared to previous Tales titles and being annoyed at the reintroduction of random encounters , a feature not present in the original Hearts . 
 The story received a generally mixed response . Beck found the characters to be a mixed assortment , being particularly unimpressed with Kohaku 's condition through most of the game and stating that her awkward romance with Kor " almost feels forced " . Wallace referred to the storyline as " cheesy and campy " , stating that it didn 't impress her despite it not being taken very seriously . McCarrol was unimpressed by the story or the cast , while MacGregor cited the story as " a slow @-@ burn " , though commenting that the cast succeeded in seeming like real people rather than character archetypes . In contrast with the other reviewers , Fitch generally enjoyed the story , calling it one of the stronger casts and narratives of recent Tales titles . The localization received some criticism over discrepancies between the English text and Japanese dialogue , with Fitch describing it as " written with an ultimately canceled English dub in mind " , and McCarrol citing the renaming of some characters despite the presence of the original Japanese as a downside . MacGregor , while not minding the setup , was concerned that the lack of an English option would cause controversy . Todd Ciolek of Anime News Network listed the game as the second most overlooked title from 2014 , stating that its release mediums and close proximity to the release of Tales of Xillia 2 hampered its notability . 
 = John Winchester ( Supernatural ) = 
 John Eric Winchester is a fictional character on The CW Television Network 's drama / horror television series Supernatural , and the protagonist of the comic book spin @-@ off series Supernatural : Origins . Developed by series creator Eric Kripke , the character is mainly portrayed by Jeffrey Dean Morgan . John is the father of Sam and Dean Winchester , the show 's protagonists . 
 Seeking revenge after his wife Mary was killed by the demon Azazel , John Winchester became a hunter and raised his two sons to fight the supernatural . John disappears early in Supernatural , and the first season revolves primarily around Sam and Dean trying to find him . Morgan was also filming episodes of Grey 's Anatomy while the first season of Supernatural was under production , and future appearances of the character were hindered by his busy schedule . While Morgan 's portrayal has been praised , fans and critics were generally frustrated at the character for keeping so many secrets . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The father of series protagonists Sam and Dean Winchester , John Winchester first appears in the pilot episode of the series , but plot devices such as flashbacks and time travel detail his background in later seasons . Apparently abandoned by his father at a young age — his father actually died while serving a secret order known as the Men of Letters — John Winchester grew up hating the man . John left high school to join the Marine Corps , eventually attaining the rank of corporal and receiving many medals for his service in Vietnam . After leaving the service , he found a job as a mechanic , and fell in love with Mary Campbell . 
 In the fourth season episode " In the Beginning " , Dean is sent back through time by the angel Castiel . Dean meets his parents ' former selves , and ends up convincing John to buy the 67 Chevy Impala that he eventually inherits . Dean later watches John being killed by Azazel , though the demon then resurrects him in exchange for Mary 's permission to enter her house in ten years . When the angel Anna Milton travels back in time in the fifth season episode " The Song Remains the Same " to prevent the births of Sam and Dean , John agrees to serve as a temporary vessel for the archangel Michael to stop her . Michael subsequently kills Anna and erases John and Mary 's memories of the incident . 
 Azazel later uses his pact with Mary to enter their home in the pilot episode , and ultimately kills her . The second season episode " All Hell Breaks Loose , Part One " reveals that she had witnessed the demon secretly feeding his blood to Sam . John investigated the incident and learned of the existence of the supernatural . His desire to find and kill Azazel led him to become a hunter of supernatural creatures . He took his sons with him during his travels , but often left them alone in motels for long periods of time during his hunts , leaving Dean with instructions to " shoot first and ask questions later " while watching over Sam . 
 As revealed in the fourth season episode " Jump the Shark " , John slept with a woman he met while away on a hunt . Learning over a decade later that he had fathered her son Adam , John made occasional visits over the years to partake in father @-@ son activities with him . He hid the truth from Adam to protect him , and never revealed to him the existence of Sam and Dean , nor vice versa . Meanwhile , John trained Sam and Dean to become hunters . However , Sam later left this life to start anew in college , leading to a fallout between John and his son . 
 Twenty @-@ two years after Mary 's death , John disappears while on a hunt , forcing Sam and Dean to reunite in an unsuccessful attempt to find him . Sam returns to the life of a hunter after Azazel kills his girlfriend . John reluctantly chooses to avoid his sons throughout most of the season while he investigates something , eventually reuniting with them in the episode " Shadow " . However , the demonic Meg Masters attacks them and reveals that Azazel is after John . After escaping from Meg , the brothers split up from their father to keep him from the demons . When vampires murder his old mentor and steal the Colt — a mystical gun capable of killing anything — John teams up with Sam and Dean in " Dead Man 's Blood " to retrieve it . Because demons cannot be killed by conventional means , they hope that the Colt will be effective against Azazel . In response , Meg begins killing the Winchesters ' friends in " Salvation " , and threatens to kill more unless they deliver the Colt . John is captured after trying to give her a fake gun , and reveals himself to be possessed by Azazel when the brothers come to his rescue in the first season finale " Devil 's Trap " . However , he manages to resist the demon 's control . Despite John 's pleas for Sam to shoot him with the Colt , Sam cannot bring himself to do so and allows Azazel to escape . As the Winchesters flee in Dean 's Impala , a demonically @-@ possessed trucker crashes into them . 
 In the second season premiere , " In My Time of Dying " , Sam and John awake in the hospital with only minor injuries , but a dying Dean is comatose . John secretly summons Azazel , and seems to know what the demon 's plans are . He then makes a deal to save Dean , giving up his life , soul , and the Colt . Before dying , John instructs Dean to kill Sam should he become evil . The fourth season episode " On the Head of a Pin " reveals that the demon Alastair tortured John in Hell for over a century , with John refusing the demon 's offer to stop if he himself would torture someone else . His soul escapes from Hell in the second season finale " All Hell Breaks Loose , Part 2 " when a gateway to Hell is opened . He saves Dean from Azazel , and distracts the demon long enough for Dean to kill him with the Colt . John then gives Sam and Dean a loving smile before becoming engulfed in a white light . However , the fifth season episode " Dark Side of the Moon " suggests that he might not be in Heaven . 
 = = Characterization = = 
 Actor Jeffrey Dean Morgan deemed John a " tormented soul " , motivated by an " equal combination of revenge and protecting his sons " . Following the death of their mother , Sam and Dean became secondary to John 's quest of killing the demon responsible , although Morgan believed that this aspect changed once John began spending more time with them again . Though he thought that John was not the world 's best dad and " definitely made a lot of mistakes " , the actor noted that " he did things , even when they were wrong , for the good of his sons " . John Kubicek of BuddyTV felt that this reasoning extended to John 's decision to hide the truth from Adam to protect him . Kubicek also suggested that John became involved in Adam 's life to achieve " some level of normalcy " as a father , an opportunity he had previously lost following the death of Sam and Dean 's mother . Overall , Morgan felt that John " loved those kids more than he loved his own life " , with the character 's demonic pact with Azazel serving as " his way of finding redemption " . 
 Regarding his portrayal of the character , Morgan commented , " I played him with extra angst . I think what was on the page , what I foresaw — not knowing where it was going , because no one would ever tell me anything — there was always a lot more going on in his head than he was going to show anybody , including his sons . Because , indeed , there was a lot more going on . " Kripke later confirmed this , stating , " It 's our view that John knew everything the producers of the show know . John knew stuff we 're not even ready to reveal , that won 't come out for a couple of seasons . He was an awesome hunter , and by the time he showed up in ' Dead Man 's Blood ' , he knew it all . " 
 = = Development = = 
 In writing the pilot episode , series creator Eric Kripke made several dramatic revisions to John 's storyline . The first draft of the script had Sam and Dean being raised by their aunt and uncle , though this was changed when Kripke realized that the backstory became much less complicated by having John raise them on the road . Another revision had John dying at the end of the episode instead of Sam 's girlfriend Jessica . Though he survives in the final version of the pilot , the writers decided halfway through production of the first season that John did have to die , as they believed his separation from his sons " split the show " by having him away " doing more interesting things than the boys are doing " . Kripke also felt that John kept Sam and Dean away from the " front lines " , his death being required to allow the brothers to " explore , investigate and confront the yellow @-@ eyed demon directly " . The writers initially intended for John to die in the car accident in " Devil 's Trap " , but they ultimately postponed his death to prevent the finale from becoming too dark . Following the character 's eventual escape from Hell , executive producer Ben Edlund stated that even the writers are unsure of where John 's soul ended up . 
 Evil Dead @-@ actor Bruce Campbell was Kripke 's first choice to portray the character . However , Campbell was unavailable , and Jeffrey Dean Morgan eventually received the role . Due to the fact that Morgan 's scene in the pilot episode takes place 22 years before the series , Morgan expected to be replaced by an older actor for subsequent episodes . Being only 12 years older than Jensen Ackles , who portrays the eldest son Dean , Morgan was surprised when he was asked to reprise the role . Ackles and Jared Padalecki often teased him about the age difference during filming . Throughout the season , Morgan became frustrated at times due to his character 's avoidance of his sons , stating , " It pissed off everybody , it pissed off us as actors , it pissed off the audience watching , because none of us really knew where we were gonna go . " However , he reasoned that John 's motivation for his actions was due to having knowledge that nobody else had . 
 During production of Supernatural 's first season , Morgan was also working on the shows Weeds and Grey 's Anatomy , so he was often traveling back and forth between Los Angeles and Vancouver . This interfered at times with Morgan 's acting , as he had trouble getting " Winchester @-@ y enough " after portraying the nice character of Denny Duquette on Grey 's Anatomy . Morgan commented , " I was stuck in Denny @-@ land , where I was being too nice . Winchester 's harder to find . Denny 's more me . He 's an intense guy , John is . And Denny , for a guy who 's having trouble living , he 's just a charming dude . " Morgan was at first reluctant to return for Supernatural 's second season due to his role on Grey 's Anatomy . Although he lent his voice for the third season episode " Long @-@ Distance Call " , future appearances of Morgan as the character after the second season have been hindered due to the actor 's busy schedule . Nevertheless , both Kripke and writer Sera Gamble have stated that they " would love to have him back . " The scheduling conflict has continued into the sixth season of Supernatural , with executive producer Robert Singer revealing that the writers had considered bringing the character back in the alternate reality episode " My Heart Will Go On " instead of Ellen Harvelle , but due to concerns that they would not be able to secure Morgan 's return , they ultimately chose Ellen for the deceased character they would have ( temporarily ) return in the episode . During the production of the fifth season , Morgan had an interview with MovieWeb in which he stated that no one from the show had contacted him about making another appearance , and expressed the desire to return for at least one more episode in what was then @-@ believed to be the show 's final season , as he had enjoying working with on @-@ screen sons Jensen Ackles and Jared Padalecki and he felt that John 's storyline had ended too soon . 
 = = Reception = = 
 While critics praised Morgan for his performance in the role , their reaction to the character has generally been mixed . Don Williams of BuddyTV felt that John is a " rather divisive character " , with some fans not understanding John 's motivation for keeping his sons in the dark . However , Williams himself found the character to be " completely fascinating " . He chose " In My Time of Dying " as the second best episode of the series , mainly because of John 's contributions , stating , " Even if you 're not a huge fan of Poppa Winchester , I think it 's impossible not to be moved by the final ten minutes of this episode ... John 's final speech to Dean , where he finally tells his son that he 's proud of him , is one hell of a tear @-@ jerker , and both Jeffrey Dean Morgan and Jensen Ackles knock that scene out of the park . " Williams praised Matt Cohen 's performance of a younger version of the character in the time @-@ travel episode " In the Beginning " , believing that he " did an excellent job at portraying a more innocent John Winchester than we 've ever seen before " . 
 Diana Steenbergen of IGN also criticized John for his lack of explanation , feeling that " it is not exactly easy to watch John treat Dean and Sam so dismissively , especially after they have been nearly killing themselves all season to find him " . However , Steenbergen praised Morgan for his acting , writing , " Even though he is used sparingly throughout the series , Jeffrey Dean Morgan is always effective as John . " She also felt that he brought " emotional weight " to the character , allowing the audience to " feel John 's weariness , and his resignation that things will most likely not go well " . While Brian Tallerico of UGO enjoyed Morgan 's performance , he was happy that the character was killed off because John 's presence made Sam and Dean into " followers " that were " merely existing in the wake of their father " . With their father gone , the brothers are no longer prevented from " heading up the battle with the other side " . 
 = Michael Bruxner = 
 Lieutenant Colonel Sir Michael Frederick Bruxner KBE , DSO , JP ( 25 March 1882 – 28 March 1970 ) was an Australian politician and soldier , serving for many years as Leader of the Country Party and its predecessors . Born in <unk> in Northern New South Wales , Bruxner was educated at The Armidale School and started studies at University of Sydney but later dropped out to take up employment as a grazier and station agent in Tenterfield . After serving in the Citizen Military Forces from 1911 , Bruxner enlisted into the Australian Light Horse upon the outbreak of the First World War in 1914 . Serving with distinction in Gallipoli , Egypt and Palestine , he was promoted to lieutenant colonel and awarded the Distinguished Service Order . 
 Returning to Australia in 1919 , Bruxner sold his business and joined the Progressive Party , being elected to the Parliament of New South Wales for Northern Tablelands at the 1920 election . Bruxner came to political prominence when he led the rural " True Blues " faction of the Progressive Party that went against their Leader 's decision to form a coalition in Sir George Fuller 's short @-@ lived government in 1921 . Bruxner emerged as the leader of the reduced Progressive Party , which consisted of the members of his faction , but they nevertheless joined with Fuller 's Nationalists to form government in 1922 . Bruxner also became involved in the New England New State Movement . Bruxner resigned the party leadership , now for the renamed Country Party , at the end of 1925 . 
 At the 1927 election , with the abandonment of proportional representation , he won the new seat of Tenterfield unopposed . Bruxner was included in new Premier Thomas Bavin 's cabinet as Minister for Local Government , which included the responsibility for transport . He served until Labor won the 1930 election . In April 1932 Bruxner was elected again as the new party Country Party Leader , which he would hold continuously until 1958 . When Sir Philip Game dismissed Jack Lang and called upon the Leader of the Opposition Bertram Stevens to form a caretaker government in 1932 , Stevens formed a coalition with Bruxner 's Country Party and Bruxner was named as the first Deputy Premier of New South Wales . Bruxner was also sworn in as Minister for Transport and briefly resumed his former Local Government portfolio . Bruxner also worked with his long @-@ time friend and Minister for Education David Drummond , to establish the New England University College in 1938 , which was later to become the University of New England . 
 Bruxner was central in ensuring Alexander Mair became Premier after Stevens was defeated in the house in August 1939 . The Coalition lost government at the 10 May 1941 election and Bruxner would never again serve in government . The rest of Bruxner 's parliamentary career was to be on the opposition benches , leading the Country Party through five more elections and through the instability of the larger opposition parties that eventually united as the Liberal Party of Australia . On 6 May 1958 , Bruxner formally resigned as Leader of the Country Party , having served continuously in that role since 1932 . He continued to serve in his capacity as Member for Tenterfield for one more term before retiring from politics before the 1962 election . Bruxner was Knighted as a KBE in 1962 and thereafter served in various capacities on boards and continued his passion for horses before his death aged 88 on 28 March 1970 . 
 = = Early life and military career = = 
 Bruxner was born in <unk> , near the Clarence River in Northern New South Wales , the second son of English @-@ born grazier Charles Augustus Bruxner ( 1851 – 1915 ) and his wife Sarah Elizabeth Barnes ( 1858 – 1941 ) . Bruxner was initially educated in private tuition but was soon sent as a boarder first at St Mark 's Crescent School in Darling Point , Sydney and then to The Armidale School , where he became School Captain in 1900 . From 1901 to 1903 , he studied arts and law at the University of Sydney while resident at St Paul 's College , but was expelled for non @-@ attendance of lectures . 
 Returning to home to work as a grazier , Bruxner eventually moved to Tenterfield and set up business as a Stock and station agent . He also purchased " Roseneath " , a grazing property near Tenterfield , where he bred Hereford cattle . On 17 June 1908 at Christ Church , Kiama , he married Winifred Catherine Hay Caird . Bruxner became vice @-@ president of the local agricultural society and of the Cricket and Rugby clubs in Tenterfield . Being a racehorse owner , Bruxner also rose to be President of the Tenterfield Jockey Club from 1909 to 1911 . He was commissioned as a Justice of the Peace in 1914 . 
 Bruxner started his military career when he was commissioned as a second lieutenant on 11 September 1911 in the 6th Australian ( New England ) Light Horse , Citizen Military Forces , which was redesignated the 5th the following year . When the First World War broke out in September 1914 , Bruxner joined up soon after on 10 October 1914 with the 6th Light Horse Regiment in the Australian Imperial Force . Promoted to captain , Bruxner was sent with his unit to take part in the Gallipoli Campaign , being wounded several times . Later , in 1916 , he commanded the 6th during part of the Battle of Romani and served with distinction in the Sinai and Palestine Campaign , for which he was mentioned in despatches twice . On 30 May 1917 was appointed by the President of France , Raymond Poincaré , as a Chevalier of the Légion d 'honneur " in recognition of distinguished services during the campaign " . Also in 1917 , Bruxner was appointed to General Headquarters and rose to be assistant adjutant and quartermaster @-@ general of the ANZAC Mounted Division . For his service he was promoted to lieutenant colonel and appointed as a Companion of the Distinguished Service Order ( DSO ) in 1919 . 
 In July 1919 , he returned Australia and was discharged a month later in August . Bruxner then returned to Tenterfield , sold his stock and station agency and went back to his property as a grazier . They eventually raised a family , having a daughter , Helen Elizabeth Bruxner , and two sons , James Caird and John Michael Bruxner . 
 = = Early political career = = 
 As a prominent member of his local community , Bruxner became involved in emerging movements to have a political force for regional areas and joined and was convinced by friends to stand as a Progressive Party candidate in the 1920 New South Wales state election . Bruxner was elected under proportional representation with 23 % as the second member of the New South Wales Legislative Assembly district of Northern Tablelands alongside his friend David Drummond . 
 On 20 December 1920 , the Labor Party Premier , James Dooley , and his cabinet resigned after having lost a vote in the New South Wales Legislative Assembly a week before . The Governor , Sir Walter Davidson , then commissioned the Leader of the Opposition , Sir George Fuller , as Premier . As Fuller did not have a majority , he initiated attempts to form a coalition with the Progressive Party . The Progressives split over whether to join the Fuller government into an urban wing , led by Leader Walter <unk> and Deputy Leader Thomas Bavin , which agreed to enter Fuller 's coalition and a rural wing ( " The True Blues " ) , led by Bruxner and Ernest Buttenshaw who offered Fuller only conditional support . After seven hours in government , still without a workable majority , Fuller requested a double @-@ dissolution from Davidson . Davidson refused , on the basis that Dooley still had a majority in the lower house , and Fuller resigned . 
 Davidson then re @-@ commissioned Dooley , who was then granted a dissolution for an election in March 1922 . The Progressives were permanently divided and Bruxner and the " True Blues " who had opposed the coalition maintained their separate identity , while the urban members of the party joined Fuller 's Nationalist Party . The Rural Progressives then elected Bruxner in 1922 as Leader for the election . The Progressives were reduced to nine rural members at the 1922 election and entered a Coalition with the Nationalists . Bruxner increased his margin to become the first electorate member with 39 % . Bruxner also became involved in the New England New State Movement and helped pass a formal request to the Commonwealth by the Legislative Assembly to establish a new state in northern New South Wales . The request resulted in the 1924 Cohen Royal Commission into New States . 
 At the May 1925 election , Bruxner retained his seat with an increased margin of 41 % , while the Nationalist / Progressive Government lost office to Jack Lang and the Labor Party . After the election , the Progressive party renamed themselves the Country Party , reflecting the electoral base of the party . Bruxner resigned the leadership at the end of 1925 , citing the difficulty in balancing the needs of his family with the commitments of his political career , and was succeeded by Ernest Buttenshaw . 
 = = Minister of the Crown = = 
 At the 1927 election , with the abandonment of proportional representation , he won the new seat of Tenterfield unopposed . At the election , Lang 's Labor Party was defeated and Bruxner was included in new Premier Bavin 's cabinet as Minister for Local Government , which included the responsibility for transport . As Minister , Bruxner was responsible for the amendment to the Main Roads Act which gave more powers to the Main Roads Board and provided for the reclassification of the principal roads of the State . All the roads of the state were classified in accordance with their order of importance , which formed the basis for which road development was funded . His view that transport should be a public asset was reinforced when he brought through the passage of the Transport Act 1930 , which regulated private bus services to prevent the collapse of government @-@ owned tramways and railways . He remained as Minister until the Bavin Government was defeated by Lang at the 1930 election . At the election , Bruxner retained his seat with 59 % . On 23 December 1930 , Bruxner was granted by King George V retention of the title " The Honourable " for having served for more than three years as a Member of the Executive Council of New South Wales . 
 As the political climate in New South Wales became more volatile after Lang 's attempts to abolish the Legislative Council and conflict with the Federal Government over debts , Bruxner emphasised the need that the Country Party remain independent of the United Australia Party ( which had succeeded the Nationalist Party ) amidst calls for the opposition to unite . On 26 April 1932 , Country Party Leader Buttenshaw notified the party of his intention to resign . Bruxner was then elected as the new party Leader . 
 = = Deputy Premier = = 
 Not long after , on 13 May Governor Sir Philip Game dismissed the Lang government and called upon the Leader of the Opposition and UAP Leader Bertram Stevens to form a caretaker government . Stevens formed a coalition with Bruxner 's Country Party and immediately called an election . Lang 's NSW Labor Party was heavily defeated and the Country Party gained eleven seats and held five seats on the cabinet . Bruxner retained his seat again unopposed ( he would be elected unopposed a total of five times during his term ) . This time , the Country Party was an equal partner in the coalition and Bruxner was named as the first Deputy Premier of New South Wales . Sworn in on 16 May 1932 as Minister for Transport , Bruxner also briefly resumed his former Local Government portfolio during the caretaker period until 17 June 1932 . 
 Insistent that his party take an equal role in the coalition government , Bruxner formed a good working relationship and long @-@ lasting friendship with Stevens that would ensure the government 's stability . The Stevens government had significant success , reducing Lang 's 2 million pound deficit by 75 % . However , one significant problem was that Stevens had trouble with an unruly backbench , and increasingly depended upon Bruxner and the Country Party . As Deputy Premier , Bruxner saw himself as loyal to Stevens , but still managed to push through several initiatives that specifically benefited rural areas , including another royal commission on the question of new States in 1935 . The May 1935 election saw Stevens and Bruxner retaining government against a divided and fractious Labor opposition and Bruxner was returned unopposed again in his seat . 
 Bruxner detested the UAP Deputy Leader and Minister for Public Works and Local Government , Eric Spooner , whom Bruxner saw as trying to undermine confidence in Steven 's leadership and reducing Country Party influence in the government . When Stevens went on a visit to London in March 1936 for six months until October , Bruxner became Acting Premier , with Spooner as Acting Deputy . The animosity between the two became most pronounced at this time , often over the most petty issues . In May 1937 , Bruxner visited the United Kingdom as a member of the NSW parliamentary delegation to the coronation of King George VI . At the March 1938 election , the Stevens @-@ Bruxner government <unk> power against Lang and the still @-@ divided Labor Party . Bruxner was re @-@ elected with 61 % of the vote . Bruxner worked with his long @-@ time friend , now Minister for Education David Drummond , to establish a regional tertiary education institution . After the 1938 election , they moved to establish the New England University College , a constituent college of the University of Sydney in the city of Armidale , and Bruxner was appointed to the first Advisory Council , on which he served until 1951 . 
 In July 1939 , Stevens and Colonial Treasurer Alexander Mair attempted to address Spooner 's unwillingness to accede to cabinet decisions regarding ministerial expenditure by creating a committee of four , consisting of Mair , Stevens , Spooner and Bruxner , to approve all expenditure . Furious at this gesture , Spooner resigned on 21 July 1939 as Minister and Deputy Leader , citing a ' disagreement in government policy on relief works ' as the reason . Despite Spooner 's departure , the stability of the government was to be short . On 1 August 1939 , Spooner carried a motion of no confidence in Stevens in the house , which unexpectedly passed by two votes , owing to the absence of several ministers . On 3 August Stevens tendered his resignation to the Governor , Lord Wakehurst , but was granted several days to remain until his successor was chosen . 
 Upon the resignation , Spooner was touted as Stevens ' possible successor until Bruxner , who had always detested Spooner , refused to form a coalition government with him . At a UAP party meeting on 5 August , Spooner chose not to nominate and Steven 's favoured candidate , Alexander Mair , defeated Athol Richardson 18 votes to 6 , becoming Leader of the United Australia Party and was sworn in as Premier by Lord Wakehurst on the same day . Mair , who had got on well with Bruxner , ensured the survival of the coalition government . Mair attempted to shore up unity in his party to save the government . In the last months of government Bruxner was preoccupied with preparation for Australia 's entry into the Second World War . He equipped railway workshops with modern machine tools and established National Emergency Services to deal with air raids . 
 However , despite the efforts of Mair and Bruxner , the controversy surrounding Stevens ' departure and a resurgent Labor Party , now led by the moderate William McKell , ensured that the popularity of the government never recovered . At the campaign for the 10 May 1941 election , the government performed poorly , finding it difficult to distinguish themselves from the past and proposing policies but only promising action after the war . McKell 's Labor Party did the opposite , leaving war matters to the federal government and promising current reforms . At the election , the Labor Party polled more than half the vote while Bruxner 's Country Party lost nine seats and Mair 's UAP lost twenty seats . Bruxner retained his seat with 56 % . Bruxner would never again hold ministerial office and the conservative political forces would not take government again until Robert Askin and Charles Cutler won the 1965 election . 
 = = In opposition = = 
 The rest of Bruxner 's parliamentary career was to be on the opposition benches , due largely to the disintegration of the larger opposition party , the UAP , after the 1943 Federal election . A large number of former UAP members then formed the Democratic Party in New South Wales , led by Mair , who continued as Opposition Leader . Mair resigned as Democratic Party Leader on 10 February 1944 , to be replaced by former Assembly Speaker Reginald Weaver . At the 1944 election , Bruxner 's stable leadership ensured that the Country Party retained all ten of its seats in the Legislative Assembly . Bruxner retained his seat with 67 @.@ 73 % . 
 Bruxner witnessed the fragmented opposition parties forming into the Liberal Party of Australia in 1945 , under the leadership of Weaver , Mair and then former Justice Minister Vernon Treatt from March 1946 . Bruxner led the party , again being elected unopposed , again at the May 1947 election , achieving an overall gain of 5 seats from independents and the Labor Party , now led by James McGirr . Recognising the importance of the larger Liberals to opposing Labor while also being responsive to the needs of the Country Party 's rural voters , Bruxner maintained the Country Party 's coalition with the Liberals as well as trying to prevent seat conflicts between the two parties . However , it was to be the persistence of these " tri @-@ cornered " contested seats between Labor , Liberal and Country candidates that were to prove problematic not only for maintaining the coalition but also for attempting to wrest government from Labor . 
 Treatt and Bruxner led the Coalition at the 17 June 1950 election , which resulted in a hung parliament . The Country Party gained two seats for a total of 17 for a Coalition total of 46 seats . With the Labor Party also holding 46 seats , the balance of power lay with the two re @-@ elected Independent Labor members , James Geraghty and John Seiffert , who had been expelled from the Labor Party for disloyalty during the previous parliament . Seiffert was readmitted and , with the support of Geraghty , McGirr and Labor were able to stay in power . Bruxner retained his seat with 60 % . He sold his " Roseneath " property in 1950 and in 1951 bought the homestead section of Old Auburn Vale station , dividing his time between there and his Sydney residence in Bellevue Hill . 
 The near loss of the election by Labor further weakened McGirr 's position and he was replaced as premier by Joseph Cahill in April 1952 . Cahill had won popular support as a vigorous and impressive minister who had resolved problems with New South Wales ' electricity supply and in his first 10 months as premier had reinvigorated the party . He brought order to the government 's chaotic public works program . In addition , he attacked the increasingly unpopular federal Coalition government of Robert Menzies . All this , combined with Bruxner and Treatt constantly clashing over policy and candidate issues , contributed to the Liberal @-@ Country Coalition again being defeated at the 14 February 1953 election . This amounted to a total loss of ten seats , three being Country Party seats , and a swing against them of 7 @.@ 2 % . Bruxner retained his seat with 60 @.@ 15 % . 
 Murray Robson replaced Treatt as Leader of the Opposition in August 1954 . Like other senior members of the Liberals , after having no conservative government since Alexander Mair in 1941 , Robson had no experience in government , he had little interest in policy except for Cold War anti @-@ communism , ignored majority views of his party and fellow parliamentary colleagues and Robson 's attempts to forge a closer alliance with Bruxner and the Country Party , failed dismally and alienated him from many in his party . Robson was replaced by Pat Morton as leader in September 1955 . Bruxner , now aged 70 and having fallen ill several times , led the Country Party one last time at the March 1956 election , which resulted in another labour victory and Country Party regained the seat of Armidale , but overall the government 's majority fell from twenty to six . Bruxner retained Tenterfield unopposed . 
 On 6 May 1958 , Bruxner formally resigned as Leader of the Country Party , having served continuously in that role since 1932 . He continued to serve in his capacity as Member for Tenterfield , retaining his seat one final time at the March 1959 election , with 68 % of the vote . After a final term he retired from the assembly before the election in 1962 . 
 = = Retirement and legacy = = 
 Upon his retirement , his youngest son , James Caird ( Tim ) Bruxner , who had served with distinction in the 2nd AIF and the Royal Australian Air Force during World War II , gained preselection for his father 's vacated seat , allegedly against his parent 's advice , and won it at the 1962 election . Tim Bruxner went on to become a member of the Askin , Lewis and Willis Cabinets from 1973 – 1976 , including in his father 's old portfolio as Minister for Transport and as Deputy Leader of the Country Party . His eldest son , John Michael Bruxner , having graduated from Sydney University with honours in law in 1935 , was admitted to the Bar in 1936 and also served in the 2nd AIF as an officer . On 2 June 1954 , he was appointed as a Judge of the District Court of New South Wales . 
 Upon retiring from politics , Bruxner was appointed as a Knight Commander of the Order of the British Empire in 1962 " For political and public services " . On 2 November 1959 , the Mains Roads Board named the highway spanning across Northern NSW as the " Bruxner Highway " in recognition of his services to transport and roads in NSW . Throughout his life , Bruxner had maintained his passion for horses , including as a member of the Australian Jockey Club and the Sydney Turf Club . From 1960 Bruxner was also Deputy President of the Royal Agricultural Society of New South Wales . His wife Winifred having died the year before in 1969 , Bruxner died on 28 March 1970 , survived by his daughter and both sons . His portrait by William Chandler is in the National Party offices in Sydney , and a sketch of him by George Washington Lambert is in the Australian War Memorial , Canberra . 
 = ' Adud al @-@ Dawla = 
 <unk> ( <unk> ) Khusraw ( Persian : <unk> <unk> ) , better known by his laqab of <unk> al @-@ Dawla ( Arabic : <unk> الدولة , " Pillar of the [ Abbasid ] Dynasty " ) ( September 24 , 936 – March 26 , 983 ) was an emir of the Buyid dynasty , ruling from 949 to 983 , and at his height power ruling an empire stretching from Makran as far to Yemen and the shores of the Mediterranean Sea . He is widely regarded as the greatest monarch of the dynasty , and by the end of his reign was the most powerful Muslim ruler . 
 The son of Rukn al @-@ Dawla , Fanna Khusraw was given the title of Adud al @-@ Dawla by the Abbasid caliph in 948 when he was made emir of Fars after the death of his childless uncle Imad al @-@ Dawla , after which Rukn al @-@ Dawla became the senior emir of the Buyids . In 974 Adud al @-@ Dawla was sent by his father to save his cousin Izz al @-@ Dawla from a rebellion . After defeating the rebel forces , he claimed the emirate of Iraq for himself , and forced his cousin to abdicate . His father , however , became angered by this decision and restored Izz al @-@ Dawla . After the death of Adud al @-@ Dawla 's father , his cousin rebelled against him , but was defeated . Adud al @-@ Dawla became afterwards the sole ruler of the Buyid dynasty and assumed the Persian title Shahanshah ( " King of Kings " ) . 
 When Adud al @-@ Dawla became emir of Iraq , the capital city , Baghdad , was suffering from violence and instability owing to sectarian conflict . In order to bring peace and stability to the city , he ordered the banning of public demonstrations and polemics . At the same time , he patronized a number of Shia scholars such as al @-@ <unk> , and sponsored the renovation of a number of important Shia shrines . 
 In addition , ' Adud al @-@ Dawla is credited with sponsoring and patronizing other scientific projects during his time . An observatory was built by his orders in Isfahan where Azophi worked . Al @-@ Muqaddasi also reports that he ordered the construction of a great dam between Shiraz and Estakhr in 960 . The dam irrigated some 300 villages in Fars province and became known as Band @-@ e Amir ( port of the emir ) . Among his other major constructions was the digging of the Haffar channel , that joined the Karun river to the Shatt al @-@ Arab river ( the confluence of the Tigris and the Euphrates ) . The port of <unk> was built on the Haffar , at its joining point with the Shatt al @-@ Arab . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Fanna Khusraw was born in Isfahan on September 24 , 936 , he was the son of Rukn al @-@ Dawla , who was the brother of Imad al @-@ Dawla and Mu 'izz al @-@ Dawla . According to Ibn <unk> , Fanna Khusraw 's mother was the daughter of the Daylamite <unk> nobleman al @-@ Hasan ibn al @-@ <unk> , who was the cousin of the prominent Daylamite military leader Makan ibn Kaki . 
 = = Reign = = 
 = = = Rule in Fars = = = 
 In 948 , Fanna Khusraw was chosen by his uncle Imad al @-@ Dawla as his successor because he had no heir . Imad al @-@ Dawla died in December 949 , and thus Fanna Khusraw became the new ruler of Fars . However , this appointment was not accepted by a group of Daylamite officers , who shortly rebelled against Fanna Khusraw . Rukn al @-@ Dawla quickly left for southern Iran to save his son , and was joined by the vizier of Mu 'izz al @-@ Dawla for the same purpose . Together they defeated the rebels and put Fanna Khusraw on the throne in Shiraz . Fanna Khusraw then requested the title of " Taj al @-@ Dawla " ( Crown of the state ) from the Abbasid caliph . However , to Mu 'izz al @-@ Dawla , the title of " Taj " ( " crown " ) implied that Fanna Khusraw was the superior ruler of the Buyid Empire , provoking a reaction from him , and making him decline Fanna Khusraw 's request . A more suitable title ( " Adud al @-@ Dawla " ) ( " Pillar of the [ Abbasid ] Dynasty " ) was instead chosen . Adud al @-@ Dawla was only thirteen when he was crowned as the ruler of Fars , and was educated there by his tutor Abu ' l @-@ Fadl ibn al- ' Amid . 
 After the death of Imad al @-@ Dawla in 949 , Adud al @-@ Dawla 's father Rukn al @-@ Dawla , who was the most powerful of the Buyid rulers , claimed the title of senior emir , which Mu 'izz al @-@ Dawla and Adud al @-@ Dawla recognized . In 955 , a Daylamite military officer named Muhammad ibn Makan seized Isfahan from Rukn al @-@ Dawla . Adud al @-@ Dawla then marched towards the city and recaptured it from Muhammad ibn Makan . Another Daylamite military officer named <unk> also shortly rebelled against Mu 'izz al @-@ Dawla , while his brother <unk> rebelled against Adud al @-@ Dawla at Shiraz . Abu ' l @-@ Fadl ibn al- ' Amid , however , managed to suppress the rebellion . 
 In 966 , Adud al @-@ Dawla and Mu 'izz al @-@ Dawla made a campaign to impose Buyid rule in Oman . Mu 'izz al @-@ Dawla died in 967 , and was succeeded by his eldest son Izz al @-@ Dawla as emir of Iraq . The same year , Adud al @-@ Dawla aided the Ziyarid Bisutun in securing the Ziyarid throne from his brother Qabus . Adud al @-@ Dawla and Bisutun then made an alliance , and Bisutun married a daughter of Adud al @-@ Dawla , while he married a daughter of Bisutun . 
 = = = Campaigns in eastern Iran = = = 
 In 967 , Adud al @-@ Dawla took advantage of the quarrel between the <unk> ruler Muhammad ibn Ilyas and his son in Kerman to annex the province to his domain . Mu 'izz al @-@ Dawla had already attempted to conquer the province but was defeated by the <unk> . Adud al @-@ Dawla conquered all of Kerman , and appointed his son Shirdil Abu 'l @-@ Fawaris as the viceroy of the province , while a Daylamite officer named <unk> ibn <unk> was appointed as the chief captain of the army of Kerman . 
 In the next year , Adud al @-@ Dawla negotiated peace with the Saffarid ruler Khalaf ibn Ahmad , who agreed to recognize Buyid authority . In 969 / 970 , Sulaiman , the son of Muhammad ibn Ilyas , wanted to regain his kingdom of Kerman , and invaded the region . Adud al @-@ Dawla managed to defeat the army of Sulaiman and continued to expand his domains to the strait of Hormuz . During his campaign in southern Iran , many Iranian tribes converted to Islam and pledged allegiance to him . On August / September 971 , Adud al @-@ Dawla launched a punitive expedition against the Baloch tribes who had declared independence . Adud al @-@ Dawla defeated them on January 8 , 972 , and installed loyal landowners to control the region . Afterwards , Adud al @-@ Dawla and his father Rukn al @-@ Dawla signed a peace treaty with the Samanids by paying them 150 @,@ 000 dinars . In the same year , Adud al @-@ Dawla conquered most of Oman , including its capital , Sohar . 
 = = = Rebellion of <unk> @-@ Tegin and aftermath = = = 
 In 974 , Izz al @-@ Dawla was trapped in Wasit by his troops who under leader <unk> @-@ Tegin had rebelled against him . Adud al @-@ Dawla quickly left Fars to quell the rebellion , where he inflicted a decisive defeat on the rebels on January 30 , 975 , who under their new leader <unk> fled to Syria . Adud al @-@ Dawla then made a plot which forced Izz al @-@ Dawla to abdicate in his favor on March 12 , 975 . Rukn al @-@ Dawla , greatly angered at this action , protested against Adud al @-@ Dawla , claiming that the line of Mu 'izz al @-@ Dawla could not be removed from power . Adud al @-@ Dawla tried to make an agreement with his father by proposing to pay tribute to him . Rukn al @-@ Dawla , however , rejected his offer , and then restored Izz al @-@ Dawla as the ruler of Iraq . The consequences of the restoration of Izz al @-@ Dawla would later lead to war between him and Adud al @-@ Dawla after the death of Rukn al @-@ Dawla . 
 In 975 Adud al @-@ Dawla launched an expedition to take Bam and defeated another son of Muhammad ibn Ilyas who sought to reconquer to Kerman . 
 = = = Struggle for power in Iraq and war with the Hamdanids = = = 
 On September 16 , 976 , Rukn al @-@ Dawla , the last of the first generation Buyids , died . After his death , Izz al @-@ Dawla prepared to take revenge against Adud al @-@ Dawla . He made an alliance with Fakhr al @-@ Dawla , the brother of Adud al @-@ Dawla and his father 's successor to the territories around Hamadan . He also made an alliance with the Hamdanids prevailing in northern Iraq , the <unk> ruler Hasanwayh and the ruler of the marshy areas of southern Iraq . However , Mu 'ayyad al @-@ Dawla , the third son of Rukn al @-@ Dawla , remained loyal to his eldest brother . 
 Izz al @-@ Dawla then stopped recognizing the rule of his cousin Adud al @-@ Dawla , and stopped mentioning his name during Friday prayers . Adud al @-@ Dawla , greatly outraged by his cousin , marched towards Khuzestan and easily defeated him in Ahvaz on July 1 , 977 . Izz al @-@ Dawla then asked Adud al @-@ Dawla for permission to retire and settle in Syria . However , on the road to Syria , Izz al @-@ Dawla became convinced by Abu Taghlib , the Hamdanid ruler of Mosul , to go fight again against his cousin . On May 29 , 978 , Izz al @-@ Dawla along with Abu Taghlib invaded the domains of his Adud al @-@ Dawla and fought against him near Samarra . Izz al @-@ Dawla was once again defeated , and was captured and executed at the orders of Adud al @-@ Dawla . He then marched to Mosul and captured the city , which forced Abu Taghlib to flee to the Byzantine city of <unk> , where he asked for aid . Adud al @-@ Dawla then spent one year in Mosul to consolidate his power , while his army were completing the conquest of Diyar Bakr and Diyar Mudar ; The important Hamdanid city of Mayyafariqin was shortly captured by them , which forced Abu Taghlib to flee to Rahba from where he tried to negotiate peace with Adud al @-@ Dawla . Unlike the rest of the Buyids who had held the region temporarily , Adud al @-@ Dawla had complete control of the region during the rest of his reign . 
 Adud al @-@ Dawla , now the ruler of Iraq , then took control of the territories under the control of the Bedouins and Kurds . He also killed almost all the sons of Hasanwayh , and appointed Badr ibn Hasanwayh , the last surviving son of Hasanwayh , as the ruler of the <unk> dynasty . It should be understood that during that period the word " Kurd " meant nomad . He then subdued the Shayban tribe , and fought against Hasan ibn ' Imran , the ruler of <unk> . He was , however , defeated , and made peace with Hasan who agreed to recognize his authority . During the same period , Adud al @-@ Dawla had Izz al @-@ Dawla 's former vizier Ibn <unk> arrested , blinded , and then trampled to death by elephants . His corpse was thereafter impaled at the head of the bridge in Baghdad , where it would remain until Adud al @-@ Dawla 's death . 
 = = = War in northern Iran = = = 
 During the same period , Bisutun died , and his kingdom was thrown into civil war ; his governor of Tabaristan , <unk> ibn Bani , supported his son as the new Ziyarid ruler , while Bisutun 's brother Qabus claimed the throne for himself . Adud quickly sent an army to aid Qabus against <unk> . Qabus managed to defeat him and capture the son of Bisutun in <unk> . Adud then made the Abbasid caliph give Qabus the title of Shams al @-@ Ma 'ali . 
 In May 979 , Adud al @-@ Dawla invaded the territories of his brother Fakhr al @-@ Dawla , who was forced to flee to Qazvin and then to Nishapur , a large part of his troops deserted . Adud al @-@ Dawla then moved to Kerman and later Kermanshah where he set up a governor . In August / September 980 , Adud al @-@ Dawla captured Hamadan and occupied the entire area south of the city which would remain in Buyid hands in half a century . Shortly after , on October / November of the same year , Sahib ibn Abbad , the vizier of Adud al @-@ Dawla 's younger brother Mu 'ayyad al @-@ Dawla , arrived from Ray to negotiate a transfer of power in the city in favor of his master . Adud al @-@ Dawla , recognized his younger brother Mu 'ayyad because of his loyalty , and gave him the troops of Fakhr al @-@ Dawla and helped him conquer Tabaristan and Gorgan from Qabus who had betrayed Adud by giving refugee to Fakhr al @-@ Dawla . Mu 'ayyad al @-@ Dawla shortly managed to conquer these two provinces . 
 = = = Consolidation of the Empire and peace negotiations with the Byzantines = = = 
 Adud al @-@ Dawla was now the senior ruler of the Buyid Empire , and several rulers such as the Hamdanids , Saffarids , <unk> , <unk> and even other lesser rulers who controlled Yemen , including its surrounding regions , acknowledged his authority . Other regions such as Makran , was also under Buyid control . 
 Adud al @-@ Dawla then returned to Baghdad , where he built and restored several buildings in the city . He also stopped the quarrel between the Daylamites and Turks of the Buyid army . In 980 , the Byzantine rebel Bardas Skleros fled to Mayyafariqin . When he arrived to the city , he sent his brother to Baghdad to offer his <unk> to Adud al @-@ Dawla and make an alliance against the Byzantines , which Adud al @-@ Dawla accepted . A Byzantine envoy from Constantinople shortly arrived to Baghdad and tried to persuade Adud al @-@ Dawla to hand over the rebel , but he refused and kept the rebel and some of his family members in Baghdad for the rest of his reign , thus standing in a strong position for his diplomacy with the Byzantines . In 981 , Adud al @-@ Dawla sent Abu Bakr <unk> to Constantinople to negotiate for peace . However , he was most likely sent to spy on the Byzantines and how their military functioned , since Adud al @-@ Dawla was planning to invade Byzantine territory . 
 In 982 , Adud al @-@ Dawla sent another envoy to <unk> , this time under Abu Ishaq ibn <unk> , who after having spent three months in the city , concluded a 10 @-@ year peace treaty with them . One year later , a Byzantine envoy arrived back in Baghdad , but Adud al @-@ Dawla was too ill to bring an end to the negotiations . In the end , the 10 @-@ year peace treaty was finally completed , and the Byzantines also agreed to mention Adud al @-@ Dawla 's name in the Friday prayer in Constantinople . Sahib ibn Abbad , is known to have said the following thing about this event : " he [ Adud al @-@ Dawla ] has done what no kings of the Arabs nor any Chosroes [ kings ] of the Persians could – he has Syria and the two <unk> , and he is close to the Despot of Byzantium and the Maghribi by his continuous correspondence . " 
 = = Administration and contributions = = 
 Adud al @-@ Dawla kept his court in Shiraz . He visited Baghdad frequently and kept some of his viziers there , one of them being a Christian named Nasir ibn Harun . Furthermore , he had several Zoroastrian statesmen who served him , such as Abu Sahl Sa 'id ibn Fadl al @-@ Majusi , who served as his representative of Baghdad before his conquest of Iraq ; Abu 'l @-@ Faraj Mansur ibn Sahl al @-@ Majusi , who served as his financial minister ; and Bahram ibn Ardashir al @-@ Majusi , who served as a Buyid official . Adud al @-@ Dawla seems to have greatly respected their religion . 
 Under him the Buyid kingdom flourished . His policies were liberal so there were no riots during his reign . He embellished Baghdad with numerous public buildings . He also built a famous public hospital known as the Al- ' <unk> Hospital . It was the largest hospital of that time , and was destroyed during the Mongol conquests . Many prominent figures worked at the hospital , such as ' Ali ibn al- ' Abbas al @-@ Majusi and Ibn Marzuban . 
 Adud al @-@ Dawla also build caravanserai 's and dams . The city that has particularly benefited from this work is Shiraz . In the region of Shiraz , he built a palace with three hundred and sixty rooms with advanced wind towers for air conditioning system of residential rooms . The population of Shiraz had increased so much during his reign that he built a satellite city near the city for his army . The name of the city was Kard @-@ i <unk> Khusraw ( " made by Fanna Khusraw " ) , making a clear reference to the names that the Sasanians gave their foundations . 
 There were two annual festivals in the city . The first to commemorate the day when the water pipe reached the city and the second to recall the date of the founding of the city . Both celebrations were instituted by Adud al @-@ Dawla on the model of the holiday of Nowruz , the Iranian New Year . 
 All these activities greatly expanded the economy of Fars so that the tax income was tripled in the 10th @-@ century . His contributions to the enrichment of Fars made it a region of relative stability and prosperity for the culture of Iran during the Seljuq and Mongol invasions . 
 = = Family = = 
 Adud al @-@ Dawla , in order to maintain peace , established marriage ties with several rulers ; his daughter was married to the Abbasid caliph at @-@ Ta 'i , while another was married to the Samanids and the Ziyarid ruler Bisutun . Adud al @-@ Dawla himself had several wives , which included ; the daughter of Bisutun ; the daughter of Manadhar , an <unk> king ; and the daughter of <unk> , an <unk> king . From these wives , Adud al @-@ Dawla had several sons ; Abu 'l @-@ Husain Ahmad and Abu Tahir <unk> , from the daughter of Manadhar ; Abu Kalijar Marzuban , from the daughter of <unk> ; and Shirdil Abu 'l @-@ Fawaris , from a Turkic concubine . Adud al @-@ Dawla also had a younger son named Baha ' al @-@ Dawla . Abu 'l @-@ Husain Ahmad was supported by his mother and his uncle <unk> ibn Manadhar as the heir of the Buyid Empire . However , Abu Kalijar Marzuban , because of his more prominent descent , was appointed as heir of the Buyid Empire by Adud al @-@ Dawla . 
 = = Ancestry = = 
 = = Death and succession = = 
 Adud al @-@ Dawla died at Baghdad on March 26 , 983 , and was buried in Najaf . His son Abu Kalijar Marzuban , who was in Baghdad at the time of his death , first kept his death secret in order to ensure his succession and avoid civil war . When he made the death of his father public , he was given the title of " <unk> al @-@ Dawla " . However , Adud al @-@ Dawla 's other son , Shirdil Abu 'l @-@ Fawaris , challenged the authority of <unk> al @-@ Dawla , resulting in a civil war . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Adud al @-@ Dawla , like the previous Buyid rulers , maintained the Abbasids in Baghdad , which gave legitimacy to his dynasty in the eyes of some Sunni Muslims . However , he showed more interest than his predecessors to the pre @-@ Islamic culture of Iran , and was proud of his Iranian origin . He visited Persepolis alongside <unk> , the Zoroastrian chief priest ( <unk> ) of <unk> , who read the pre @-@ Islamic inscriptions in the city for him . Adud al @-@ Dawla later left an inscription in the city , which tells about his awareness of being heir of an ancient pre @-@ Islamic civilization . Adud al @-@ Dawla even claimed descent from the Sasanian king Bahram V Gur , minted coins of him wearing a Sasanian type crown , and carried the traditional Sasanian inscription ; Shahanshah , may his glory increase . While the reverse side of the coin said : May Shah Fanna Khusraw live long . 
 However , he still preferred Arabic authors more than Persian ones . There is very little evidence which shows his interest in Persian poetry . He spoke Arabic , wrote in Arabic and was proud to be a student of a famous Arab grammarian . He studied science in Arabic , including astronomy and mathematics . Many books written in Arabic were dedicated to him whether religious or secular content . Apparently showing interest in Arabic rather than Persian , Adud al @-@ Dawla followed the mainstream of intellectual life in a provincial town where culture was dominated by Arabic and Persian . 
 Like many of his contemporaries , he does not seem to have felt that his admiration for the pre @-@ Islamic Iranian civilization conflicted with his Muslim Shiite faith . According to some accounts , he repaired the Imam Husayn Shrine in Karbala , and built a mausoleum of Ali in Najaf , which is today known as the Imam Ali Mosque . He is said to have been generous to a prominent Shiite theologian , but did not follow a Shiite religious policy and was tolerant to the Sunnis . He even tried to get closer to the Sunnis by giving his daughter in marriage to the caliph , which was a failure because the caliph refused to consummate the marriage . 
 = The Boat Race 1989 = 
 The 135th Boat Race took place on 25 March 1989 . Held annually , the Boat Race is a side @-@ by @-@ side rowing race between crews from the Universities of Oxford and Cambridge along the River Thames . Oxford won by two @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half lengths . It was the seventh occasion that the race was umpired by Ronnie Howard , and the first time in the history of the race that both crews were coxed by women . 
 In the reserve race , Oxford 's Isis won , while Cambridge won the Women 's Boat Race . 
 = = Background = = 
 The Boat Race is a side @-@ by @-@ side rowing competition between the University of Oxford ( sometimes referred to as the " Dark Blues " ) and the University of Cambridge ( sometimes referred to as the " Light Blues " ) . First held in 1829 , the race currently takes place on the 4 @.@ 2 @-@ mile ( 6 @.@ 8 km ) Championship Course on the River Thames in southwest London . The rivalry is a major point of honour between the two universities , followed throughout the United Kingdom and broadcast worldwide . Oxford went into the race as reigning champions , having won the 1988 race by five @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half lengths , with Cambridge leading overall with 69 victories to Oxford 's 64 ( excluding the " dead heat " of 1877 ) . The event was sponsored by Beefeater Gin ; prior to the race , it was announced that the company would be sponsors for the following three years in a deal worth £ 700 @,@ 000 . Former Oxford Blue Ronnie Howard was the umpire for the race for the seventh occasion . 
 Cambridge were coxed by Leigh Weiss while Oxford 's cox was Alison <unk> – it was the first time in the history of the Boat Race that both crews had female coxes . Prior to the race , Oxford coach Pat Sweeney criticised Weiss : " Their cox is so useless she might hit us . It 's not her fault , but Cambridge should have chosen someone who knows the river . " Weiss responded " I feel confident that I will make the decisions to make Cambridge win . " 
 The first Women 's Boat Race took place in 1927 , but did not become an annual fixture until the 1960s . Until 2014 , the contest was conducted as part of the Henley Boat Races , but as of the 2015 race , it is held on the River Thames , on the same day as the men 's main and reserve races . The reserve race , contested between Oxford 's Isis boat and Cambridge 's Goldie boat has been held since 1965 . It usually takes place on the Tideway , prior to the main Boat Race . 
 = = Crews = = 
 Cambridge were pre @-@ race favourites , as their crew weighed an average of almost 12 pounds ( 5 @.@ 4 kg ) per rower more than their opponents , the largest difference since the first Boat Race . Cambridge 's Toby Backhouse weighed in at 16 st 11 lb ( 106 @.@ 3 kg ) making him the heaviest rower in the history of the event . The Oxford boat featured three former Blues while Cambridge 's contained five . Cambridge 's chief coach was Mike Lees while Oxford University Boat Club selected Sweeney as coach , and Steve Royle to be their full @-@ time director . 
 = = Races = = 
 Cambridge won the toss and elected to start from the Surrey station . After an early clash of blades , Oxford crept ahead and held a lead of three seconds by the Mile Post . Two minutes later Oxford had a clear water advantage and continued to pull away , holding a six @-@ second lead at Hammersmith Bridge . The lead had extended slightly by the Chiswick Steps ; Cambridge failed to make any ground on Oxford who swept under Barnes Bridge eight seconds ahead . Oxford maintained the lead to pass the finish post two @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half lengths clear . 
 In the reserve race , Oxford 's Isis won by one @-@ and @-@ a @-@ quarter lengths , their first victory in three years. while Cambridge won the 44th Women 's Boat Race by one length in a time of 6 minutes and 20 seconds , their second victory in three years . 
 = = Reaction = = 
 Umpire Ronnie Howard said " It was a damaging race , and I was looking for possible breakages " . Oxford 's stroke Richard Thorp explained " We expect it [ clashing ] but Ali [ <unk> ] has so much more experience of the Tideway " . Former Oxford coach Dan Topolski suggested that " the race is a battle of guts and willpower , and Cambridge settled to a steady rhythm too soon . " 
 = Brother from Another Series = 
 " Brother from Another Series " is the sixteenth episode of The Simpsons ' eighth season . It originally aired on the Fox network in the United States on February 23 , 1997 . Sideshow Bob is released from prison into the care of his brother Cecil and claims to be a changed man . However , Bart does not believe him and tries to find out what Bob is up to . It was the first episode directed by Pete Michels and was written by Ken Keeler . The episode guest stars Kelsey Grammer in his sixth appearance as Sideshow Bob and David Hyde Pierce as Cecil . The title is not only a pun on the movie The Brother from Another Planet ( used for a previous episode as well ) , but also a reference to the fact that guest stars Kelsey Grammer ( Frasier Crane ) and David Hyde Pierce ( Niles Crane ) also played bickering brothers on the NBC sitcom Frasier . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Former criminal Sideshow Bob is declared a changed man by Reverend Lovejoy and released from prison on a work program , despite the protests of Bart. Bob is surprised to be taken into the care of his brother Cecil as the two had previously not spoken for ten years . A flashback reveals the cause of this rift : Cecil had auditioned to become the new sidekick for Krusty the Clown , a job he had long desired , but Bob , who had not originally intended to be the sidekick , was chosen instead . Cecil , who is Springfield 's chief hydrological and hydrodynamical engineer , employs Bob to supervise the construction of a hydroelectric dam in a river near Springfield , while Bart , believing that Bob is still evil , continuously follows him around . Bob begins to become intensely annoyed by Bart 's intrusions into his personal life and the dam 's incompetent laborers ( Cletus and his family ) , and he expresses a desire to see the dam burst and obliterate Springfield . 
 Meanwhile , Bart enlists Lisa to help find out what Sideshow Bob is up to , but only ends up being discovered rummaging in Bob 's trash and angrily escorted home by him . They finally decide to search in Bob 's trailer at the dam construction site , and discover a briefcase full of cash . On being interrupted by Bob , the children run and hide inside the dam 's turbine room , but are cornered . When confronted with the money , Bob denies knowing anything about it , stating that he 's putting up his finances to build the dam walls out of concrete , but is distraught to see the walls empty and poorly constructed . The kids then believe that Bob is cutting back on construction materials by embezzling the money for himself , but Cecil shows up with a gun and reveals that he is the one who embezzled the money ; now he plans on framing Bob and using him as a scapegoat when the poorly constructed dam collapses . He officially declares his greed of the money motivated him to enact his plan , though he privately admits to Bob that his true motivation was because of Bob being chosen as Krusty 's sidekick instead of Cecil . Without hesitation , Cecil locks Bob , Bart and Lisa in the dam and prepares to blow it up , taking the money with him . 
 Deciding to work together , Bart , Lisa , and Bob escape and try to save the dam . While Lisa and Bob set about defusing Cecil 's dynamite , Bart jumps at Cecil before he can press the plunger . Cecil attempts to swat him off with the briefcase of money , but the case bursts open and the money is lost . Cecil manages to throw Bart off the cliff , declaring he will kill Bart as Bob never could ; ironically , Bob grabs the cord of the dynamite and dives down in an effort to save him . As the two dangle down the side of the dam , Bob decides to cut the cord on the dynamite in an act of self @-@ sacrifice to prevent Cecil from destroying the town , but his and Bart 's perilous fall is broken by a conveniently placed pipe . 
 The police arrive and Cecil is immediately arrested . Bob gloats over his victory , having gained the respect from Bart and Lisa , who now believed that Bob has truly changed . Unfortunately , Chief Wiggum suddenly arrives and arrests Bob , believing him to be involved in the plot as well , despite Bart and Lisa 's protests . As they are taken away , Cecil tricks Bob into swearing revenge on Bart and incriminating himself . Upon realizing that he just made Bart his enemy again , Bob gets angry at Cecil for it . Just after the brothers are taken away , the dam crumbles and releases a torrent of water on Springfield , only to do apparently minimal damage . Wiggum muses on the evil the brothers could concoct while locked up together ; in reality , the brothers merely continue to bicker childishly , as Bob is still angry at Cecil for making Bart his nemesis again . 
 = = Production = = 
 The episode was written by Ken Keeler , who had been watching a lot of Frasier at the time and had been assigned to write a Sideshow Bob episode and he thought it would be a good idea to mix the two . Pierce was cast as Sideshow Bob 's brother , causing Pierce to joke , " Normally , I would not do something like this . But how often do you get a chance to work with an actor like Kelsey Grammer and , more importantly , play his brother ? " While Sideshow Bob is addressing the crowd , a man near the back raises his hand and says " probably " ; he is also voiced by David Hyde Pierce , who had wanted to be a man in a crowd . 
 An early draft of the episode originally featured an Opera house explosion , which was changed because the writers felt using a dam would be more exciting . An early rule of Sideshow Bob episodes was to recap what had gone on in previous Bob episodes , in case the viewer had forgotten who he was . The original script was run by the Frasier producers to make sure they were okay with it , and they only had one problem . There was a very brief scene in which Cecil talks to a visible character and refers to her as " Maris " , who in Frasier is an unseen character , and the producers of Frasier said the scene should go . The writers spent a long time trying to figure out a civilization that considered chief hydrological engineer a true calling and chose the Cappadocians , who were famous for underground cities although not specifically dams . 
 Cecil was drawn to resemble David Hyde Pierce , but still look similar to Bob . According to director Pete Michels , it was difficult to draw Bob and Cecil standing together because their feet are both so big . There was a scene featuring Hans Moleman and his house , which was cut , but his house can still briefly be seen in the scene where Cecil throws Bart off a cliff . The sequence was cut in order to make room for the explanation of why Bob was sent back to prison . Ken Keeler has said that it is his favorite deleted scene . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 The " Krusty the Clown Prison Special " is based on Johnny Cash 's 1968 appearance at Folsom Prison . Krusty 's song is a parody of " Folsom Prison Blues " . The mention of Arthur Fiedler 's wake is an apparent reference and parody of Frasier Crane 's upper class Seattle lifestyle . The episode contains several references to Frasier , with the intention of making it obvious that The Simpsons was parodying the series . These include a title card just before the start of the second act which says " Frasier is a hit show on the NBC television network " in a similar typeface and style as Frasier 's intertitles , with jazz music playing over it as it does in the series . When Bart jumps on Cecil and says " guess who , " Cecil replies with " Maris ? " Cecil 's inability to see Bart also refers to the fact that Maris , Niles ' wife in Frasier , is never actually seen . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In its original broadcast , " Brother from Another Series " finished 39th in ratings for the week of February 17 – 23 , 1997 , with a Nielsen rating of 9 @.@ 1 , equivalent to approximately 8 @.@ 8 million viewing households . It was the fourth highest @-@ rated show on the Fox network that week , following The X @-@ files , King of the Hill and Melrose Place . Beforehand , the media said the episode " looks promising , " and afterwards journalist Ben Rayner called it one of director Peter Michels ' " classics . " This episode was nominated for a Primetime Emmy Award for Sound Mixing for a Comedy Series or Special . In a 2008 article , Entertainment Weekly named Pierce 's role as Cecil as one of the sixteen best guest appearances on The Simpsons . Grammer and Pierce were ranked second on AOL 's list of their favorite 25 Simpsons guest stars . 
 = Hurricane Madeline ( 1976 ) = 
 Hurricane Madeline was a Category 4 hurricane that made landfall in Mexico in October 1976 . Madeline formed on September 29 , not far from Central America . The next day , the circulation dissipated , and as a result weakened to a remnant low . Four days later , on October 3 , the low regenerated into a tropical depression . The system remained weak for three days as it drifted west @-@ northwest . When it began to recurve towards Mexico on October 6 , the cyclone rapidly intensified , eventually making landfall at peak intensity as a Category 4 . Shortly after landfall , the cyclone rapidly dissipated . 
 Prior to the arrival of Madeline , 15 @,@ 000 people evacuated form the coast , which had already been impacted by Hurricane Liza . Heavy damage was reported , along with seven fatalities . Two dams were flooded ; extensive crop damage was reported . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 Early on September 27 , 1976 , the Eastern Pacific Hurricane Center ( EPHC ) reported that a tropical disturbance had formed about 770 km ( 480 mi ) to the southwest of San Jose , Costa Rica . During the next two days the disturbance slowly developed while moving northwest . By the morning of September 29 , the disturbance was upgraded to a 40 mph ( 65 km / h ) tropical storm and based on ship reports and satellite imagery . Due to the fact that it attained tropical storm status , it was named Madeline . At this time , the cyclone had developed a center of circulation . Its intensification was short @-@ lived and Madeline remained at tropical storm strength for just 12 hours before it was downgraded into a tropical depression . Madeline remained at tropical depression strength until September 30 . At that time , the EPHC reported that the circulation center was no longer visible and downgraded the system to a remnant low , while located 575 mi ( 925 km ) to the southeast of Acapulco , Mexico . 
 Over the following days , the low moved towards the west and started to regenerate with a circulation center becoming visible early on October 3 . Based on this , the EPHC re @-@ upgraded Madeline to a tropical depression . Continuing to intensify , Madeline was soon upgraded to a tropical storm for the second time . During the next day or two , Madeline remained near stationary before turning towards the northeast on October 5 . As the cyclone moved over an area of warm seas surface temperatures , the storm started to intensify . During the next day , Madeline slowly developed an eye before intensifying into a hurricane . In addition , a Hurricane Hunter aircraft reported winds 75 mph ( 120 km / h ) winds and a pressure of 984 millibars . 
 During October 7 , with warm water helping to fuel its intensification , Madeline quickly intensified into a Category 2 hurricane , and was upgraded to a major hurricane ( Category 3 or higher on the Saffir @-@ Simpson Hurricane Scale ) early on October 8 . Based on hurricane hunter reports , Madeline reached its peak sustained winds of 145 mph ( 230 km / h ) and a peak pressure of 940 millibars early on the 8th . This made Madeline a moderate Category 4 hurricane . Later that morning Madeline made landfall to the northwest of Zihuatanejo as a powerful Category 4 hurricane , before it rapidly dissipated over land . 
 = = Preparations and impact = = 
 Mexican army headquarters put in effect an emergency plan three days prior to the arrival of the hurricane . An estimated 15 @,@ 000 people evacuated from threatened areas in the path of Madeline . According to one report , evacuations prior to Madeline were considered a success . Hurricane warnings and flood warnings were issued along the coastlines of Michoacán and Guerrero . In addition , tropical storm warnings were issued for nine states in Mexico . This warning area extended as far inland as the area west of the Gulf of Mexico . 
 Hurricane Madeline produced heavy rains over Mexico , peaking at 16 @.@ 57 in ( 421 mm ) , rainfall fell at El <unk> / San Marcos . According to Comision Nacional del Agua , a parent agency of the Servicio Meteorológico Nacional , rainfall fell at 2 @,@ 069 sites . Damage from the hurricane was considered to be severe . In Chilpancingo , Guerrero , two people drowned from the hurricane . In addition , five other deaths were reported . The cyclone also flooded two major hydro @-@ electrical dams and power outages were reported . While no serious damage was reported in Zihuatanejo , many boats were damaged . In addition , the storm caused extensive crop damage . Losses from Madeline , combined with previous hurricanes Liza and Kathleen , were estimated at $ 200 million ( 1976 USD ) . It was the second storm to strike Mexico within a week ; Hurricane Liza was the first . When Madeline was over the ocean , it impacted several ships , but no major damage from these ships was reported . 
 = Raymond D. Tarbuck = 
 Raymond D. Tarbuck ( 4 May 1897 – 15 November 1986 ) was a rear admiral in the United States Navy who is best known as a planner with General Douglas MacArthur 's General Headquarters ( GHQ ) Southwest Pacific Area during World War II . 
 A 1920 graduate of the United States Naval Academy in Annapolis , Maryland , Tarbuck spent most of his early career on destroyers . During a tour of duty in the Caribbean , he served ashore with the United States occupation of Nicaragua . Later , while at the Naval War College at Newport , Rhode Island , he wrote a thesis entitled " The Nicaraguan Policy of the United States " , which was subsequently published by the United States Naval Institute . 
 Tarbuck received his first command , the destroyer USS Macdonough in May 1939 , and in March 1941 , he assumed command of Destroyer Division 70 . Then , in October 1941 , he became an instructor in air observer and navigator training with the United States Army Air Corps at Maxwell Field , Alabama . In 1943 he was assigned to General MacArthur 's GHQ , where he planned a series of combined operations , and accurately predicted the course of the Battle of Leyte Gulf . He served with GHQ until December 1944 , when he became chief of staff of the VII Amphibious Force . 
 After the war he became the chief of staff of Amphibious Forces , Atlantic Fleet . His last command was of the battleship USS Iowa . He retired from active service on 1 July 1950 , and received a tombstone promotion to the rank of rear admiral . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Raymond Dumbell { Sic } ( Ray ) Tarbuck was born in Philadelphia on 4 May 1897 . His middle name caused him embarrassment and was seldom used , and he preferred the shortened form of his first name . He was educated at Philadelphia Central High School and the Philadelphia College of Pedagogy , where he studied to be a teacher , graduating with a Bachelor of Arts degree . He also attended the Naval Academy Preparatory School . 
 Tarbuck was appointed to the United States Naval Academy in Annapolis , Maryland in June 1917 by Congressman George W. Edmonds of Pennsylvania 's 4th congressional district . At the Academy he was on the shooting team , and was assistant art editor of the Lucky Bag , and the editor of The Log magazine . While there he took his summer cruises on the battleships USS Missouri and USS North Dakota during World War I. He was commissioned as an ensign on graduation on 5 June 1920 . His class was graduated in two groups due to the disruption caused by World War I. For his first assignment , he chose the destroyer tender USS Dixie , because it was based at the League Island Navy Yard in Philadelphia , and he was in love with Marion Orf , a woman who lived in Philadelphia 's Germantown section . The two were married in 1921 . They had a son , Richard Ray Tarbuck , and a daughter , Joan . 
 As had been his intention , Tarbuck 's early service was on destroyers , first as engineer and radio officer on the USS Robinson and then as chief engineer on the USS McCormick from 1922 to 1924 The ship sailed to the Black Sea , where Tarbuck observed the Russian Civil War first hand . He served in succession as torpedo officer on the destroyer USS Sharkey , as a communications officer on the cruiser USS Concord and as gunnery officer on the destroyer USS Flusser . During this cruise in the Caribbean , he served ashore with the United States occupation of Nicaragua . 
 Tarbuck attended the Naval Postgraduate School at Annapolis from 1927 to 1928 , and then the Naval War College at Newport , Rhode Island . While there he wrote a thesis entitled " The Nicaraguan Policy of the United States " , which was subsequently published by the United States Naval Institute . He returned to sea in 1929 as executive officer of the destroyer USS Stewart , which sailed to China , Japan and the Philippines as part of the Asiatic Fleet . His daughter Joan died in Shanghai . On returning to the United States in 1932 , he was assigned to the University of California as a Naval Reserve Officers Training Corps instructor . He taught astronomy there as an assistant professor . Robert Gordon Sproul requested that Tarbuck be permanently assigned to the university , but the Navy turned him down on the grounds that Tarbuck 's career would suffer without sea duty . Tarbuck 's next assignment was to a battleship , the USS West Virginia , where he was promoted to lieutenant commander . Following the pattern of alternating duty at sea with duty ashore , he was assigned to the Fleet Training Division of the Bureau of Navigation from June 1937 to May 1939 . 
 = = World War II = = 
 In May 1939 , Tarbuck received his first command , of the destroyer USS Macdonough , which was part of the U.S. Pacific Fleet . While he was its captain , he was promoted to the rank of commander . In March 1941 , he assumed command of Destroyer Division 70 , which consisted of five destroyers based on the West Coast . In October 1941 , he was ordered to report to the Naval Air Station Pensacola , an unusual destination for a non @-@ aviator . The United States Army Air Corps had requested that some Naval officers be sent to Maxwell Field , Alabama , as instructors in air observer and navigator training , and Tarbuck was one of the three officers selected . At Maxwell , he wrote three manuals on ship and aircraft recognition , which became course materials . The ability to speak " Army " , and knowledge of the conduct of land , sea and air operations , would prove important in his selection for his next post . He was promoted to captain on 20 June 1942 . 
 In 1943 , the Supreme Commander in the Southwest Pacific Area , General Douglas MacArthur , requested a Naval officer for his General Headquarters ( GHQ ) to replace Captain Herbert J. Ray , an officer who had escaped from the Philippines with him in 1942 . Ray had been appointed to command the battleship USS Maryland , and Tarbuck was chosen to replace him . En route to Australia , Tarbuck met with Admiral Chester Nimitz , who told him in no uncertain terms that anti @-@ Army and anti @-@ MacArthur sentiments had no place in his command . As it was , Tarbuck became a loyal supporter of MacArthur . 
 Tarbuck expected to become the head of a naval section within GHQ , but instead found himself part of Brigadier General Stephen J. Chamberlin G @-@ 3 Section , the staff section responsible for planning and operations . He found that more than forty naval officers were working at GHQ , but they were dispersed , working in nearly every corner of the staff . Tarbuck became head of a planning group known as the Red Team . This was one of three teams ; there was also a White Team under a US army officer , Colonel Peyton , and a Blue Team under an Australian Army officer , Brigadier Tom White . 
 His job was to prepare staff studies on upcoming potential operations . While he did do naval planning , his team prepared plans that coordinated land , air and sea operations . A staff study might be put into effect and become an operation , or MacArthur might shelve it in favor of an alternative operation , especially if the staff study revealed that it would be too time @-@ consuming , difficult or costly . The three teams would work simultaneously on three different objectives in leapfrog fashion . Tarbuck routinely attended staff conferences that involved naval matters . 
 He led the planning for the Battle of Leyte , known as Operation King II , and predicted that the Japanese fleet would attempt to intervene , striking at the invasion force through the Surigao Strait . His warning that the Japanese fleet would sortie was discounted by MacArthur 's chief intelligence officer , Brigadier General Charles A. Willoughby , but Tarbuck put his objection in writing . MacArthur would later commend him for an accurate prediction of the course of the Battle of Leyte Gulf . 
 Tarbuck was on hand to see the battle as an observer on the command ship USS Blue Ridge . He watched as his predictions on the courses of the Battle of Surigao Strait and Battle off Samar unfolded . On the morning of 25 October he wrote : 
 It now becomes apparent that an extremely critical situation exists . The enemy 's Second Diversion Attack Force has sortied into the Pacific Ocean through the San Bernardino Strait under the cover of darkness to attack our escort carriers , convoys , or Leyte Gulf shipping . 
 A while later he wrote : 
 People here feel that Halsey 's Third Fleet are chasing a secondary force , leaving us at the mercy — of which there is none — of the enemy 's main body . 
 In his report on the battle , Vice Admiral Randall Jacobs called Tarbuck 's predictions as " almost uncanny " . For his service with GHQ , Tarbuck was awarded the Legion of Merit . 
 In December 1944 , Tarbuck became chief of staff of the VII Amphibious Force , which was under the command of Rear Admiral Daniel E. Barbey . He was promoted to the wartime rank of commodore on 3 April 1945 . When Barbey went on leave , he left Tarbuck in command of VII Amphibious Force , despite the fact that his three amphibious group commanders , William Fechteler , Albert G. Noble and Arthur D. Struble were all rear admirals . They were in overall command of the operations for which they were responsible however . For his service as chief of staff of the VII Amphibious Force , Tarbuck was awarded a second Legion of Merit . His citation read : 
 For distinguishing himself by exceptionally meritorious conduct in connection with amphibious operations against Japanese forces in the Philippine Islands and Borneo from December 1944 to July 1945 . As chief of staff to Commander , VII Amphibious Force he was directly concerned with the planning and execution of all amphibious operations in the Southwest Pacific during this period . These included the landings on the island of Luzon at Lingayen , Zambales , Nasugbu , Legaspi , Bataan , Corregidor , and on the islands guarding the entrance to Manila Bay ; on the islands of Palawan , Lubang , Panay , Cebu , Negros , <unk> , Jolo and <unk> ; on the island of Mindanao at Zamboanga , <unk> , <unk> Bay and Davao ; in Borneo at Tarakan and Brunei Bay . In addition he assisted in the preparation of plans for minesweeping operations covering an area of approximately six thousand square miles in Philippine waters . 
 = = Later life = = 
 Tarbuck became the chief of staff of Amphibious Forces , Atlantic Fleet in December 1945 . He reverted to the rank of captain on 20 June 1946 . On 30 June he assumed command of the battleship USS Iowa . After a year in this command , he became Inspector General of the Eleventh Naval District at San Diego , California . At the conclusion of this posting , he retired from active service on 1 July 1950 . On retirement , he received a tombstone promotion to the rank of rear admiral . 
 He became program administrator for the San Diego Fine Arts Gallery , and served with the San Diego Board of Health and other community projects . He also served on the South Bay Committee for San Diego . He died in Coronado , California on 15 November 1986 , and was interred in the Fort Rosecrans National Cemetery , San Diego , California . His papers are in the Douglas MacArthur Memorial in Norfolk , Virginia . 
 = No. 1 Wing RAAF = 
 No. 1 Wing was an Australian Flying Corps ( AFC ) and Royal Australian Air Force ( RAAF ) wing active during World War I and World War II . The wing was established on 1 September 1917 as the 1st Training Wing and commanded the AFC 's pilot training squadrons in England until April 1919 , when it was disbanded . It was reformed on 7 October 1942 as a fighter unit comprising two Australian and one British flying squadrons equipped with Supermarine Spitfire aircraft , and a mobile fighter sector headquarters . The wing provided air defence to Darwin and several other key Allied bases in northern Australia until the end of the war , and was again disbanded in October 1945 . 
 During its first months at Darwin , No. 1 Wing intercepted several of the air raids conducted against Northern Australia by the Imperial Japanese Army Air Force and Imperial Japanese Navy . Although the wing was hampered by mechanical problems with its Spitfires and suffered heavy losses in some engagements , it eventually downed a greater number of Japanese aircraft than it lost in combat . After the final Japanese air raid on northern Australia in November 1943 , No. 1 Wing saw little combat , which led to its personnel suffering from low morale . The wing 's two Australian flying squadrons were replaced with British units in July 1944 , and subsequent proposals to move these squadrons to more active areas were not successful . 
 = = World War I = = 
 The 1st Training Wing was formed at Minchinhampton , England on 1 September 1917 . It commanded No. 5 , No. 6 , No. 7 and No. 8 Squadrons of the AFC . The wing 's role was to train replacement pilots for the four operational AFC squadron in Palestine and France . Each of the training squadrons provided replacements to a specific operational squadron ; No. 5 trained pilots for No.1 Squadron , No. 6 supported No. 2 Squadron , No. 7 was aligned with No. 3 Squadron and No. 8 supported No. 4 Squadron . By the time Lieutenant @-@ Colonel Oswald Watt was appointed to command the wing in February 1918 , its headquarters had moved to Tetbury . In keeping with their varied responsibilities , the 1st Training Wing 's squadrons operated a wide variety of aircraft and most were split between several bases . From the spring of 1918 No. 5 and No. 6 Squadrons were stationed at Minchinhampton Airfield while No. 7 and No. 8 Squadrons were at <unk> Airfield . Both facilities had been purpose @-@ built for the AFC over the autumn and winter of 1917 / 1918 . Watt proposed moving the wing to France , but this did not eventuate . 
 Following the war the 1st Training Wing continued to conduct pilot training courses in England . This activity was undertaken to strengthen the AFC and keep pilots and ground crew occupied until they were repatriated to Australia . Most of the wing 's personnel were given leave in April 1919 and several of its pilots took part in a fly @-@ past over London on Anzac Day . The four training squadrons were disbanded on 6 May 1919 , the day the wing left Minchinhampton to begin the journey back to Australia . The last entry in the 1st Training Wing 's war diary had been made in April that year . While Watt placed a strong emphasis on safety , the 1st Training Wing 's trainee pilots inevitably suffered a number of flying accidents , resulting in at least 17 fatalities between 1917 and 1919 . At least 15 other members of the wing died from disease or were killed in accidents on the ground . 
 In 1919 the AFC was disbanded and succeeded by the Australian Air Corps , which was in turn replaced with an independent Australian Air Force on 31 March 1921 ( the " Royal " prefix was added in August ) . The first proposal for the RAAF 's force structure considered by its Air Board included two fighter wings , designated No. 1 Wing and No. 2 Wing , each comprising two fighter squadrons . In July 1920 the Air Council , which oversaw the RAAF , approved the establishment of a base at Laverton , Victoria to house No. 1 Wing and its component squadrons ( No. 1 and No. 2 Squadrons ) as well as No. 1 Aircraft Depot . No. 1 and No. 2 Squadrons were formed in January 1922 , but in July that year No. 2 Squadron was disbanded and No. 1 Squadron reduced to a cadre . The RAAF 's proposed force structure was subsequently amended in 1924 so as not to include any fighter squadrons or wing headquarters . 
 = = World War II = = 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 At the outbreak of the Pacific War in December 1941 the RAAF did not possess any modern fighters in or near Australia . Following the Bombing of Darwin on 19 February 1942 , which caused heavy damage to the military installations at the town and ships in its harbour , the Australian Government began to urgently look for fighter aircraft . As the Australian aviation industry was not capable of producing fighter aircraft at the time , the government sought assistance from the United States and Britain . While the US Government responded by providing the RAAF with what became a steady flow of P @-@ 40 Kittyhawk aircraft , Britain was initially unable to allocate fighters to Australia due to its heavy commitments in the North African Campaign and elsewhere . 
 Japanese air units attacked the Darwin area multiple times during 1942 . The P @-@ 40 equipped United States Army Air Forces ' ( USAAF ) 49th Fighter Group was deployed to Darwin following the 19 February raid , and its first squadron became operational there in mid @-@ March . The group 's three squadrons were ready for operations in late April , and subsequently intercepted all Japanese daylight raids on the area . The 49th Fighter Group began to withdraw from Darwin in August 1942 and was replaced by two Australian P @-@ 40 squadrons ; No. 77 Squadron arrived in August and No. 76 Squadron in October . During its time at Darwin the 49th Fighter Group shot down 79 Japanese aircraft and lost 21 P @-@ 40s . As well as bombing targets near Darwin , Japanese air units also occasionally struck other small Australian towns , attacked shipping sailing off the north coast and flew reconnaissance sorties over Allied bases . 
 In May 1942 the Australian Minister for External Affairs H.V. " Doc " Evatt travelled to the United States and Britain to seek additional aircraft for the RAAF . Evatt first visited the United States , where the government agreed to increase the number of aircraft it would provide to Australia . He then travelled to London and met with Prime Minister Winston Churchill . In this meeting , Evatt requested that Britain provide an aircraft carrier to serve with the Royal Australian Navy , and an allocation of Spitfire fighters for the RAAF . Evatt had not received advice from the RAAF on the Spitfire 's suitability for Australian conditions , and appears to have assumed that it would perform as well in Australia as it had in Europe . While Britain could not spare an aircraft carrier , after several days of discussions Churchill agreed on 28 May to send three fully equipped Spitfire squadrons to Australia . The squadrons selected were No. 452 Squadron RAAF , No. 457 Squadron RAAF and No. 54 Squadron RAF , all of which had seen combat over Europe against the Luftwaffe . Under the agreement each squadron would be initially equipped with 16 Spitfires and a further 15 aircraft would be sent to Australia each month as replacements . Churchill 's role in sending Spitfire units to Australia led to No. 1 Wing often being referred to as the " Churchill Wing " . 
 Delays in shipping Spitfires to Australia disrupted No. 1 Wing 's formation . In late June 1942 the British Government diverted all but six of the initial 48 aircraft to Egypt to reinforce the three RAF Spitfire squadrons there after the German victory in the Battle of Gazala ; most of these aircraft were allocated to No. 92 Squadron RAF with the remainder forming a reserve to replace future losses . The Australian Government protested against this action , but reluctantly accepted it after Churchill refused to counteract the diversion . During the same period , the men of the three Spitfire squadrons sailed from Liverpool on board the MV Stirling Castle on 21 June and disembarked at Melbourne with the six remaining Spitfires on 13 August . A shipment of 43 Spitfires left England on 4 August and arrived in Australia in late October , and further deliveries continued to be made until June 1945 . 
 The deployment of Spitfires to Australia was kept secret so that the Japanese were not alerted to their presence , and the Australian Government directed that the aircraft be referred to as <unk> ( after the brand of cigarettes ) and their Merlin engines as Marvels . General Douglas MacArthur , the commander of Allied forces in the South West Pacific Area , agreed that the Australian Government could choose when to announce the presence of the Spitfires , but warned against exaggerating the impact they were likely to have . 
 No. 1 Wing was formed at RAAF Station Richmond on 7 October 1942 . Its initial commander was Group Captain Allan Walters and the wing leader was Wing Commander Clive Caldwell , Australia 's top @-@ scoring flying ace of the war . At this time the RAAF had received 71 tropicalised variants of the Spitfire Vc and another 33 were en route to Australia . These aircraft differed from the standard Spitfire Vc in that they been fitted with a Vokes air filter beneath their nose to reduce the amount of sand and dust which entered the engine ; Caldwell believed that this modification reduced the Spitfires ' performance . As well as the three Spitfire squadrons , No. 1 Wing also included No. 10 Mobile Fighter Sector Headquarters . Many of the squadrons ' most experienced pilots were posted to other units before they departed Britain , and only 37 of the 95 pilots in the wing as at May 1943 had previously seen combat . 
 Following its formation the wing undertook training in the Richmond area until late December 1942 . Its performance during these exercises was hindered by a lack of previous contact between the Australian and British pilots which was exacerbated by the three squadrons being based at different airstrips in the Sydney region . A number of accidents occurred , resulting in the deaths of four pilots . Richmond 's base commander , Group Captain Paddy Heffernan , found that the veterans of the European theatre of operations " tended to consider themselves invincible " , and reacted with disdain when he warned them that the Japanese A6M Zero could outmanoeuvre the Spitfire . On 29 December the wing held a formal dinner at RAAF Station Richmond which was attended by H.V. Evatt , Minister for Air Arthur Drakeford , Chief of the Air Staff Air Vice Marshal George Jones , and Group Captain Heffernan . 
 = = = Early engagements = = = 
 The wing was ready for combat operations at the end of 1942 and was assigned responsibility for defending Darwin against Japanese air attacks . The bulk of the units departed Richmond in air , land and sea parties during January 1943 , following an advance party that had set out on 31 December . No. 54 and No 452 Squadrons ' air parties arrived at RAAF Station Darwin and Batchelor Airfield respectively on 17 January , and No. 457 Squadron began to operate from Livingstone Airfield on 31 January . No. 452 Squadron subsequently moved to Strauss Airfield on 1 February . The Darwin area had been attacked 50 times by the time No. 1 Wing arrived . Conditions at Strauss and Livingstone were primitive , with these airfields comprising narrow dirt runways and tree @-@ lined taxiways . The pilots were not familiar with operating from such under @-@ developed airfields , and the squadrons at Strauss and Livingstone suffered a high accident rate during February and March 1943 . The airmen also found the region 's hot and humid climate to be oppressive . This was the first time that Spitfires had operated in a tropical environment , and the aircraft were found to have lesser performance than in other climatic conditions . The region 's remoteness also contributed to supply difficulties , and No. 1 Wing continually suffered from a shortage of spare parts for its Spitfires . Despite these limitations to Spitfire operations , the wing 's arrival improved the morale of Allied military units near Darwin and allowed No. 77 Squadron to be transferred from Darwin to Milne Bay in New Guinea . No. 1 Wing first saw combat on 6 February 1943 when a No. 54 Squadron Spitfire shot down a Mitsubishi Ki @-@ 46 " Dinah " reconnaissance aircraft near Darwin . Another Dinah overflew Darwin the next day but was not intercepted , and no further Japanese aircraft ventured into the area during the month . 
 No. 1 Wing engaged in its first large @-@ scale battles during March 1943 . On 2 March , No. 54 and No. 457 Squadrons intercepted 16 Japanese aircraft , which had attacked Coomalie Creek Airfield . Four of the raiders were shot down , two of them by Wing Commander Caldwell . This engagement led Prime Minister John Curtin to announce on 4 March that Spitfires were operational in Australia . His statement in the House of Representatives was greeted with cheers from the members of parliament present and No. 1 Wing received positive media coverage . Winston Churchill also took an interest in the wing 's operations and sent a cable expressing satisfaction with its combat debut . On 7 March four No. 457 Squadron aircraft intercepted and shot down a Dinah about 15 miles ( 24 km ) from Darwin . The entire wing intercepted a force of over 40 Japanese bombers and fighters that attacked Darwin on 15 March , shooting down eight raiders but losing four Spitfires and three pilots . No. 452 Squadron 's commander , Squadron Leader R.E. Thorold @-@ Smith , was one of those killed . Thorold @-@ Smith was leading the wing at the time , and its attacks were uncoordinated for the remainder of the engagement as none of the other pilots assumed his responsibilities . Nine military personnel and five civilians were also wounded by approximately 100 bombs dropped on Darwin during the raid . The Spitfires used dogfighting tactics during the battle , causing some to run dangerously low on fuel ; the USAAF units previously based at Darwin had discovered that these tactics were not effective against the highly maneuverable Japanese fighters . No. 1 Wing did not see action again during March and April , and its flying was limited to training exercises which usually lasted for less than an hour . 
 The wing 's next battle on 2 May 1943 led to controversy . On that day , 33 Spitfires intercepted a force of 27 Japanese fighters and 25 bombers after they attacked Darwin . No. 54 Squadron engaged the fighters while the other squadrons attacked the bombers . In the 25 @-@ minute engagement , the wing shot down between six and ten Japanese aircraft for the loss of five Spitfires . Five more Spitfires also made forced landings due to fuel shortages and three broke off after suffering engine failures ; all but two of these aircraft were later repaired . Following the raid , General MacArthur 's General Headquarters stated in its regular communique that the Allied losses at Darwin had been " heavy " , a term it had not previously applied to fighting in the North Western Area . This led to criticism of No. 1 Wing in the Australian media and the Advisory War Council requested that Air Vice Marshal Jones provide it with a report explaining the losses caused by mechanical problems and fuel shortage . In his report , Jones stated that the wing 's equipment was in good condition and attributed its losses to tactical errors made by Caldwell , adverse weather conditions and the pilots ' inexperience with their aircraft . Caldwell rejected this criticism of his leadership , and argued after the war that Jones had not properly investigated the engagement . To avoid further losses from fuel shortages the Spitfires were fitted with drop tanks and banned from dogfighting . 
 The raid of 2 May marked the start of an upsurge in Japanese aerial activity over northern Australia . A detachment of six No. 457 Squadron aircraft was deployed to Milingimbi Island on 9 May after the airfield there was attacked . This detachment intercepted subsequent raids on 10 and 28 May , shooting down four Japanese for the loss of three Spitfires . On 20 June No. 1 Wing intercepted two Japanese raids on Darwin . While the raiders bombed the suburb of Winnellie and RAAF Station Darwin , the Allied fighters shot down nine bombers and five fighters and damaged another ten aircraft for the loss of two Spitfires . This was the most successful engagement fought by the RAAF over Darwin up to that time , and General MacArthur sent a congratulatory message to the defenders . The battle also received positive media coverage which restored public confidence in No. 1 Wing . The facilities which housed No. 54 Squadron 's photographic and parachute sections were badly damaged during the raid , but the unit 's ground crew did not suffer any casualties . Several days after the engagement Group Captain Walters was posted to take command of No. 5 Service Flying Training School and Caldwell was appointed the wing 's acting commanding officer . On 22 June No. 1 Wing was scrambled to intercept two large forces of incoming aircraft , but was subsequently directed by ground control to not engage them after it was determined that the Japanese force was made up only of fighters . 
 Air combat continued over Darwin in late June . The wing intercepted a further raid on the town on 28 June when 42 Spitfires were scrambled to intercept nine bombers escorted by nine fighters . In the subsequent engagement four Japanese fighters and two bombers were shot down while Allied losses were limited to a single Spitfire destroyed during a forced landing . Two days later , No. 1 Wing intercepted a force of 27 Mitsubishi G4M " Betty " bombers escorted by 23 Zeros which was en route to attack the USAAF heavy bomber base at Fenton airstrip and shot down six bombers and two fighters . The wing lost six Spitfires during this battle , including three to mechanical problems . Enough of the Japanese force made it through the defences to attack Fenton , and three USAAF B @-@ 24 Liberators were destroyed and seven damaged . While June had been the most successful month in No. 1 Wing 's history , its strength declined considerably due to losses from combat and mechanical problems . At the end of June the commander of the North Western Area , Air Commodore Frank Bladin , requested 22 Spitfires from Vice Air Marshal Jones to bring the wing up to strength . In response , RAAF Headquarters stated that it would dispatch 17 Spitfires to Darwin during the next week and was preparing an additional 33 aircraft which had recently arrived in Australia . 
 No. 1 Wing saw further action in July 1943 . On 3 and 4 July , Dinahs flew over the Darwin area without being intercepted . These preceded a major raid against Fenton on 6 July by 26 bombers and 21 fighters . The wing scrambled 33 aircraft to meet this force , and shot down nine of the raiders , losing seven Spitfires due to air combat or mechanical problems ; a B @-@ 24 was also destroyed on the ground . The wing 's high losses in this engagement were partially attributed to the worn state of the Spitfires ' engines , and Bladin again signalled RAAF Headquarters to seek the immediate delivery of new aircraft . These began to arrive at No. 1 Wing 's bases on 10 July . The attack on 6 July was the last major raid on the Darwin area , and the Spitfires saw little action during the remainder of the month and early August with flying operations limited to exercises and false alerts . By this time , the wing had been credited with 63 confirmed ' kills ' and a further 13 probably destroyed . In exchange , it had lost 44 aircraft , though only 17 were due to Japanese action . The Japanese official history produced after the war praised the effectiveness of No. 1 Wing and the radar stations around Darwin , stating that from mid @-@ 1943 they were at " the highest level in the world " . Nevertheless , Air Vice Marshal Adrian Cole , who replaced Bladin on 22 July , assessed the fighter force near Darwin as not being adequate to counter an invasion , and noted that the Spitfires had been forced to break off some engagements after running low on fuel . To counter these perceived shortfalls he requested units equipped with long ranged P @-@ 38 Lightning fighters . This request was not met , however , as all Lighting @-@ equipped units were committed to the fighting in New Guinea and the Solomon Islands . 
 = = = Final engagements = = = 
 In late July 1943 , No. 1 Wing 's headquarters was disbanded to make it easier to deploy the Spitfire squadrons to different areas as the need arose . Under the new command arrangements , the squadrons reported directly to the North @-@ Western Area 's headquarters for administrative purposes and No. 5 Fighter Sector Headquarters controlled all fighter operations . This change also aimed to end the confusion which existed at the time between whether the wing leader or senior ground controller in the fighter sector headquarters was responsible for directing the Spitfires during battle . No. 5 Fighter Sector Headquarters was redesignated No. 1 Wing on 25 September when Wing Commander Peter Jeffrey assumed command from Caldwell , who had been appointed No. 2 Operational Training Unit 's chief flying instructor . The headquarters ' role remained unchanged , however . 
 In the meantime , No. 1 Wing continued to respond to Japanese aerial activity over northern Australia . On the night of 13 / 14 August 18 Japanese aircraft raided Fenton and Coomalie Creek airfields . While No. 57 and No. 452 Squadrons scrambled Spitfires , they were unable to intercept the raiders . At this time the remainder of the wing was holding a dinner at Darwin to celebrate the anniversary of its return to Australia . No. 1 Wing had greater success on 17 August when it shot down all four of the Dinahs dispatched to the Darwin area that day ; three were destroyed by No. 457 Squadron and the fourth by Caldwell who was flying with No. 452 Squadron . This success led to celebrations within the wing and <unk> sent the pilots a message congratulating them for " 100 per @-@ cent de @-@ <unk> Fenton . <unk> the pageant " . Another night raid took place on 20 / 21 August , but the ten Spitfires scrambled did not make contact with the 18 raiders . From August the Japanese bomber units mainly conducted attacks on the Darwin area at night so that their aircraft were not intercepted by Spitfires . 
 No. 1 Wing fought its last major engagements during September and November 1943 . On 7 September , the Japanese dispatched a twin @-@ engined reconnaissance aircraft escorted by 20 fighters to the Darwin area . The 48 Spitfires scrambled in response to this force were led by Flight Lieutenant Bob Foster . This was Foster 's first experience in leading the wing , and he <unk> No. 54 and 452 squadrons ' aircraft , leading to them being ' bounced ' by Japanese fighters . In the subsequent combat three Spitfires were shot down while the wing claimed one fighter destroyed and two ' probables ' . No. 457 Squadron was able to gain a height advantage on the Japanese , however , and shot down four fighters without loss . A further two night raids were made against Fenton on 15 and 27 September but the Spitfires scrambled in response were unable to find the bombers on either occasion . No. 1 Wing experienced a major turnover of personnel during September as pilots completed their nine @-@ month tours of duty . While this led of a loss of experienced airmen , the new pilots were often better trained than the men they replaced . No attacks took place during October , and the wing did not make contact with the Japanese until 6 November when a flight of six Spitfires which been deployed to Drysdale River Mission , Western Australia on the 3rd of the month failed in an attempt to intercept a reconnaissance aircraft near the settlement . In the early hours of 12 November nine Spitfires were scrambled to intercept nine Japanese aircraft which were bound for Darwin and Fenton . Two Betty bombers were shot down over Darwin Harbour by Flying Officer John Smithson and no Allied aircraft were lost . Both these aircraft were commanded by senior officers , and their deaths lead to the cancellation of further Betty bomber operations in the Darwin area . 
 = = = Garrison duty = = = 
 The raid on 12 November 1943 was the last Japanese attack on northern Australia . In December the Japanese transferred several of the air units based in the islands north of Australia to New Guinea and the Solomon Islands to counter Allied offensives . Few Japanese aircraft were subsequently based within 600 miles ( 970 km ) of Darwin , and the focus of the Allied forces in the North @-@ Western Area shifted from defending northern Australia to attacking Japanese positions in the Netherlands East Indies ( NEI ) and western New Guinea . As a result , No. 1 Wing had little to do and morale declined . Spitfires were scrambled in response to several false alerts during the last months of the year , but flying was heavily curtailed by the monsoon from November . Most of the wing 's veteran pilots were posted to other units at the end of 1943 and were replaced with less experienced aircrew . 
 On 25 February 1944 Wing Commander Dick Cresswell , who had previously commanded No. 77 Squadron , was appointed No. 1 Wing 's new wing leader . Creswell 's posting to this role was made upon the request of Jeffery , who tasked him with reducing the wing 's rate of flying accidents . Creswell achieved this through instructing pilots to make ' power on ' approaches and landings and having the Spitfires ' wheels modified . On 8 March , No. 1 Wing was ordered to urgently dispatch No. 452 and No. 457 Squadrons to the vicinity of Perth , Western Australia in response to concerns that a Japanese naval force would raid the area . Both squadrons arrived at RAAF Station Guildford on 12 March after a long flight in severe weather conditions during which one Spitfire crashed at Carnarvon and another made a forced landing at Gingin . On the day of their arrival the two squadrons assumed responsibility for air defence of the Perth @-@ Fremantle area alongside the CAC Boomerang @-@ equipped No. 85 Squadron RAAF . No attack eventuated , however , and the Spitfire squadrons were directed to return to Darwin on 20 March . During this period the Kittyhawk @-@ equipped No. 84 Squadron was transferred from Horn Island to Livingstone Airfield to replace the Spitfires while they were at Perth ; this unit arrived at Livingstone on 12 March and departed twelve days later . On 18 April the wing made strafing attacks on Japanese positions in the Babar Islands . Later that month No. 452 Squadron converted to the more advanced Mark VIII Spitfire . In May 1944 , No. 1 Wing 's headquarters and No. 57 and 457 Squadrons were deployed to Exmouth Gulf in Western Australia to protect the facilities which had been established to refuel the British Eastern Fleet before Operation Transom , during which it attacked Surabaya in Java . This deployment was hampered by a shortage of transport aircraft and inadequate facilities at Exmouth Gulf and the airstrips en route to the area . Cresswell also left the wing in May to become the wing leader of No. 81 Wing . On 12 June No. 452 Squadron aircraft shot down a Dinah . Despite the limited Japanese air activity , Air Vice Marshal Cole continued to regard No. 1 Wing as being " essential " to the defence of the North Western Area and in May reported that he could not release it for other duties . 
 No. 1 Wing was restructured from July 1944 . On 1 July , No. 452 and No. 457 Squadrons were transferred to No. 80 Wing RAAF , which had been formed to conduct offensive operations in the NEI under the command of Clive Caldwell . They were replaced by two other British units ; No. 548 and No. 549 Squadrons RAF . These squadrons had been dispatched to Australia as a result of a further meeting between H.V. Evatt and Winston Churchill in July 1943 in which Evatt had requested additional RAF units . They were formed from British pilots and Australian ground crew at <unk> , Queensland on 15 December 1943 but did not receive their Mark VIII Spitfires until April the next year . No. 548 Squadron was initially stationed at Livingstone Airfield , and its air echelon arrived there on 10 June after a flight in which four Spitfires made forced landings when they ran low on fuel . No. 549 Squadron 's air echelon arrived at Strauss Airfield on 16 June and its rear echelon completed its movement from Queensland on 14 July . On 20 July , two No. 54 Squadron Spitfires operating out of Truscott Airstrip shot down a Dinah . This was the last Japanese aircraft to be destroyed over Northern Australia . 
 After July 1944 , No. 1 Wing 's combat flying was limited to occasional raids on Japanese positions . Aircraft from the wing strafed <unk> in the Tanimbar Islands on 5 September . After the raid Jeffery told Caldwell that it had been conducted only as a means of boosting his pilots ' morale . Caldwell believed that the danger of flying Spitfires to the edge of their range in such operations outweighed the benefits which could be gained , and did not allow his pilots to participate in them . Group Captain Brian " Blackjack " Walker assumed command of No. 1 Wing in October ; he had previously served at Darwin as No. 12 Squadron RAAF 's commander . From 24 October the wing 's three squadrons were all stationed at Darwin 's civil airfield , which was located 1 mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) from RAAF Station Darwin . On 27 November seven Spitfires , five of which were drawn from No. 549 Squadron , escorted B @-@ 25 Mitchells to Cape Lore , Timor and strafed the area before the bombers made their attack . This was the longest operational flight made by Spitfires during the war . 
 Boredom continued to be a major problem for No. 1 Wing , and morale declined sharply in 1945 after No. 80 Wing left Darwin for the NEI and most of the Spitfires were grounded due to cooling system problems . <unk> caused by a lack of opportunities for air combat were a common problem across the RAAF 's fighter squadrons in the SWPA , and contributed to the " Morotai Mutiny " of April 1945 when Caldwell and seven other officers attempted to resign in protest against their units ' being primarily tasked with attacking isolated Japanese garrisons . The Australian and British governments discussed replacing the RAF pilots with Australians or transferring the squadrons to a more active area , and in July 1945 Air Vice Marshal William Bostock , who led RAAF Command , proposed transferring two No. 1 Wing squadrons to Borneo to operate in the ground attack role . This did not eventuate , however , and the only action undertaken by the wing during 1945 was an attack made by six Spitfires on Japanese positions at Cape Chater , Timor on 3 June . Following the end of the war , No. 1 Wing 's headquarters closed at Darwin on 12 October 1945 , and the three British squadrons were disbanded on 31 October . 
 = IC in a Sunflower = 
 IC in a Sunflower ( Japanese : 集積回路のヒマワリ , Hepburn : <unk> no Himawari ) is a science fiction josei ( targeted towards women ) manga written and illustrated by Mitsukazu Mihara . It is a collection of seven , unrelated short stories which appeared in the Japanese manga magazine Feel Young from 1994 to 1997 . The stories were then collected into a bound volume in Japan by Shodensha on October 18 , 1997 . Tokyopop licensed IC in a Sunflower for an English @-@ language release in North America , and published it on January 2 , 2007 . IC in a Sunflower was positively received by English @-@ language critics and readers . Reviewers identified various themes and literary elements in the collection , and generally enjoyed the short stories and art . 
 The seven short stories consist of Mihara 's 1994 debut " Keep Those Condoms Away From Our Kids " ( <unk> , " <unk> no <unk> <unk> @-@ tachi " ) , set in a future in which an AIDS vaccine destroyed the desire for sex ; " The Iron Maiden " ( <unk> ) , which focuses on a young woman haunted by her childhood sexual abuse ; " The Sunflower Quality Of An Integrated Circuit " ( 集積回路のヒマワリ ) , which deals with the events surrounding a couple and their robotic housekeeper ; " The Other Side Of The Rose Wire " ( <unk> ) , which centers on a boy in love with a girl caring for her elderly father ; " Fish Out Of Water " ( <unk> ) , which revolves around a captured mermaid ; " Mister Mineral " ( <unk> ) , which features a disturbed college student ; and " Alive " ( <unk> ) , which is set in a future where human cloning is practiced . 
 = = Plot = = 
 IC in a Sunflower consists of seven short stories , a format that Mitsukazu Mihara frequently uses for her narrative . The stories are unrelated to each other , each featuring a different protagonist . The stories of IC in a Sunflower sometimes incorporate a twist ending . 
 " Keep Those Condoms Away From Our Kids " ( <unk> , " <unk> no <unk> <unk> @-@ tachi " ) revolves around a future in which teenagers do not have a desire for sex , as a result of an AIDS vaccine . The story focuses on <unk> , who is taught about sex in school and encouraged by his parents , but ultimately neither understands nor has a desire for sex . 
 " The Iron Maiden " ( <unk> ) focuses on a woman who struggles to create a happy life for herself despite the childhood sexual abuse done to her by her older brother . In her backstory , her parents refused to believe her as a child about her brother 's abuse towards her , and upset , she bites her doll and develops a compulsive habit of biting . Later , as an adult , she settles down with a husband and child , but after discovering her battered doll which triggers memories of her unhappy childhood , she bites her child . 
 " The Sunflower Quality Of An Integrated Circuit " ( 集積回路のヒマワリ ) centers on Vanilla , an android who keeps house for an old man married to a younger , unfaithful woman . The man treats Vanilla well , seeing her as a daughter , and the two have tea in the garden ; his wife , in contrast , abuses her and allows her lover to do the same . After the old man reveals his plans for divorce , his wife murders him and orders Vanilla to bury the remains . Vanilla obeys , although she recognizes that the remains were of the old man . The story ends with Vanilla in the garden , keeping her promise to the man by having tea when the sunflowers bloom . 
 In " The Other Side Of The Rose Wire " ( <unk> ) , a boy falls in love from afar with a girl taking care of her elderly father . After she fails to appear with her father one day , he finds her dressed in mourning clothes with a smile on her face and burning the basket she kept with her . 
 " Fish Out Of Water " ( <unk> ) focuses on a captured mermaid and her refusal to speak . Her captor attempts to pull her out of the bathtub where she had been living , and she remembers that she was a girl whose mother had tried to drown her and herself in a lake years ago . Her mother died , but she survived and imagined herself as a mermaid . She then wakes up from her delusion , finding herself in a hospital instead of a bathtub , and can begin to recover . 
 " Mister Mineral " ( <unk> ) revolves around a college student , who collects rocks and is tormented by his memories of dissecting a frog . After learning that his girlfriend is pregnant , he becomes upset and tosses her into a busy highway . 
 Set in a future where human cloning is practiced , " Alive " ( <unk> ) focuses on Tou , a clone sent to live in an orphanage of humans as part of an assignment . There , he meets a cheerful girl named <unk> and after some time , she is taken to be killed for her organs . It is then revealed that Tou only thought he was a clone . 
 = = Style and themes = = 
 In IC in a Sunflower and all her works , Mihara uses character designs incorporating Lolita fashion — a clothing style influenced by the Rococo style and the Victorian and Edwardian eras . She explained that that particular style conveys the duality of her characters : " It 's about showing the delicate balance of ' delicate , yet strong , ' or ' selfish and wild , yet lustful . ' " Mihara has been involved with the shaping of the Gothic Lolita style — a subset of the Lolita fashion which incorporates dark colors — through her artwork ; she illustrated the first eight covers of the fashion magazine @-@ book Gothic & Lolita Bible and later returned to illustrating the covers with the twenty @-@ seventh volume in fall 2007 . 
 Reviewers have identified multiple themes and literary elements in the manga . According to Mania Entertainment 's Nadia Oxford , Mihara uses minimal dialogue and narrative , instead conveying emotion through the behavior of the characters . IGN 's A.E. Sparrow stated that the theme of the stories was the meaning of humanity , while Oxford wrote that the manga contains " themes of dystopian society and the fragile nature of the human mind . " Sparrow thought that mental instability figures prominently in the stories . According to him , " Keep Those Condoms Away From Our Kids " deals with " the nature of sex , " while Oxford believed that the story raises the question of the declining birth rate of Japan and other developed countries . Jason Thompson , author of Manga : The Complete Guide , considered " The Sunflower Quality of an Integrated Circuit " to have elements from film noir . By featuring a mute mermaid in " Fish Out Of Water " , Mihara makes an implicit reference to the fairytale " The Little Mermaid " , according to Oxford . The treatment of the elderly , children , or the unborn is the focus of some of the stories , according to Sparrow . Sparrow and Dan <unk> of Ain 't It Cool News speculated that " Alive " focuses on the meaning of living . 
 = = Release = = 
 Written and illustrated by Mitsukazu Mihara , the seven short stories of IC in a Sunflower appeared in the Japanese manga magazine Feel Young from 1994 to 1997 ; Mihara made her debut as a manga artist with " Keep Those Condoms Away From Our Kids " in 1994 , which won a contest in Feel Young . The short stories were published by Shodensha in a bound volume , ( ISBN <unk> ) , in Japan on October 18 , 1997 . For her stories , she generally draws inspiration from real @-@ life problems in society or unhappy times in her own life . 
 Tokyopop licensed IC in a Sunflower for an English @-@ language release in North America and the United Kingdom , along with four of her other works : The <unk> , Beautiful People , Haunted House and R.I.P. : Requiem in <unk> . Beni <unk> Conrad translated IC in a Sunflower from Japanese , and Nathan Johnson adapted it for an English @-@ language audience . Tokyopop published it on January 2 , 2007 ( ISBN 978 @-@ 1 @-@ <unk> @-@ 769 @-@ 6 ) . However , Tokyopop 's North American branch stopped publishing on May 31 , 2011 . 
 = = Reception and legacy = = 
 IC in a Sunflower was positively received by English @-@ language reviewers and readers . The manga ranked eighth on About.com 's 2007 Reader Poll for the best new josei manga , manga targeted towards women . Douresseaux praised the collection as " easily some of [ Mihara 's ] best work made available in English . " Sparrow highly recommended the manga , describing it as " a darker counterpart to Beautiful People . " The art was a frequent source of praise among reviewers , although <unk> wrote that some of the older stories had art not on the same level of refinement as her later work Doll . Mihara 's storytelling also went over well with critics ; Oxford commended Mihara 's ability to create unrelated short stories , something not commonly seen in manga . Rating the manga two @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half out of four stars , Thompson enjoyed some of the stories , but felt that the occasionally predictable endings or " ideas " that the story failed to expand upon hurt the manga . Upon learning that her illustrations and stories in general had been positively received in the West , Mihara was surprised and pleased " that people are overcoming the cultural barrier and just getting the message ! " 
 Appearing as a serial in Feel Young from 1998 to 2002 , Mihara 's science @-@ fiction josei manga Doll examines the relationships between the eponymous androids and their human owners in the future . The narrative primarily consists of unrelated short stories , but also develops an overall plot involving Ichiro , a man who illegally remodels the androids , and his revenge against the corporation which creates them . The character Vanilla from " The Sunflower Quality Of An Integrated Circuit " appears in Doll as one of the nine prototypes . Discovered by Ichiro and his Doll companion , she acts as if she suffers from psychological trauma , which she overcomes by recovering her memories of having to bury her master . 
 = Artur Phleps = 
 Artur Gustav Martin Phleps ( 29 November 1881 – 21 September 1944 ) was an Austro @-@ Hungarian , Romanian and German army officer who held the rank of SS @-@ Obergruppenführer und General der Waffen @-@ SS ( lieutenant general ) in the Waffen @-@ SS during World War II . An Austro @-@ Hungarian Army officer before and during World War I , he specialised in mountain warfare and logistics , and had been promoted to Oberstleutnant ( lieutenant colonel ) by the end of the war . During the interwar period he joined the Romanian Army , reaching the rank of General @-@ <unk> ( major general ) , and also became an adviser to King Carol . After he spoke out against the government , he was sidelined and forcibly retired from the army . 
 In 1941 he left Romania and joined the Waffen @-@ SS as a SS @-@ Standartenführer ( colonel ) under his mother 's maiden name of Stolz . Seeing action on the Eastern Front as a regimental commander with the SS Motorised Division Wiking , he later raised and commanded the 7th SS Volunteer Mountain Division Prinz Eugen , raised the 13th Waffen Mountain Division of the SS Handschar ( 1st Croatian ) , and commanded the V SS Mountain Corps . Units under his command committed many crimes against the civilian population of the Independent State of Croatia , Territory of the Military Commander in Serbia and Italian governorate of Montenegro . His final appointment was as plenipotentiary general in south Siebenbürgen and the Banat , during which he organised the evacuation of the Volksdeutsche ( ethnic Germans ) of Siebenbürgen to the Reich . In addition to the Knight 's Cross of the Iron Cross , Phleps was awarded the German Cross in Gold , and after he was killed in September 1944 , he was awarded the Oak Leaves to his Knight 's Cross . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Phleps was born in <unk> ( <unk> ) , near Hermannstadt in Siebenbürgen , then a part of the Austro @-@ Hungarian Empire ( modern @-@ day Romania ) . At the time , Siebenbürgen was densely populated by ethnic Germans commonly referred to as Transylvanian Saxons . He was the third son of the surgeon Gustav Phleps and Sophie ( née Stolz ) , the daughter of a peasant . Both families had lived in Siebenbürgen for centuries . After finishing at the Lutheran Realschule school in Hermannstadt , Phleps entered the Imperial and Royal cadet school in Pressburg ( in modern @-@ day Slovakia ) in 1900 , and on 1 November 1901 was commissioned as a Leutnant ( lieutenant ) in the 3rd Regiment of the <unk> <unk> ( mountain infantry ) . 
 In 1903 , Phleps was transferred to the 11th <unk> ( rifle ) Battalion in Güns ( in modern @-@ day Hungary ) , and in 1905 was accepted into the Theresian Military Academy in Wiener Neustadt . He completed his studies in two years , and was endorsed as suitable for service in the General Staff . Following promotion to Oberleutnant ( first lieutenant ) he transferred to the staff of the 13th Infantry Regiment at <unk> in Slavonia , and then the 6th Infantry Division in Graz . This was followed by a promotion to Hauptmann ( captain ) in 1911 along with a position on the staff of the XV Army Corps in Sarajevo , where he specialised in mobilisation and communications in the difficult terrain of Bosnia and Herzegovina . 
 = = World War I = = 
 At the outbreak of World War I , Phleps was serving with the staff of the 32nd Infantry Division in Budapest . The division was involved in the early stages of the Serbian campaign , during which Phleps was transferred to the operations staff of the Second Army . The Second Army was soon withdrawn from the Serbian front and deployed via the Carpathian Mountains to the Austro @-@ Hungarian province of Galicia ( modern @-@ day Poland and Ukraine ) to defend against a successful offensive by the Russian Empire . The Second Army continued to fight the Russians in and around the Carpathians through the winter of 1914 – 1915 . In 1915 Phleps was again transferred , this time to Armeegruppe Rohr commanded by General der Kavallerie ( General ) Franz Rohr von Denta , which was formed in the Austrian Alps in response to the Italian declaration of war in May 1915 . Armeegruppe Rohr became the basis for the formation of the 10th Army , which was headquartered in Villach . Phleps subsequently became the deputy quartermaster of the 10th Army , responsible for organising the supply of the troops fighting the Italians in the mountains . 
 On 1 August 1916 , Phleps was promoted to Major . Later that month , King Ferdinand of Romania led the Kingdom of Romania in joining the Triple Entente , and subsequently invaded Phleps ' homeland of Siebenbürgen . On 27 August , Phleps became the chief of staff of the 72nd Infantry Division , which was involved in Austro @-@ Hungarian operations to repel the Romanian invasion . He remained in this theatre of operations for the next two years , ultimately serving as the chief quartermaster of the German 9th Army , and was awarded the Iron Cross 2nd Class on 27 January 1917 . In 1918 he returned to the mountains when he was transferred to Armeegruppe Tirol , and ended the war as an Oberstleutnant ( lieutenant colonel ) and chief quartermaster for the entire Alpine Front . 
 = = Between the wars = = 
 After the war the Austro @-@ Hungarian Empire was dissolved , and Phleps returned to his homeland , which had become part of Romania under the Treaty of Trianon . He joined the Romanian Army and was appointed as commander of the Saxon National Guard , a militia formed from the German @-@ speaking people of Siebenbürgen . In this role he opposed the Hungarian communist revolutionary government of Béla Kun , which fought Romania in 1919 . During a battle at the Tisza river against Kun 's forces he disobeyed direct orders and was subsequently court @-@ martialled . The trial concluded that Phleps had saved the Romanian forces through his actions , and he was promoted to Oberst ( colonel ) . He commanded the 84th Infantry Regiment , then joined the general staff and taught logistics at the War Academy in Bucharest . He attended the V Army Corps staff college in Kronstadt , and published a book , Logistics : Basics of Organisation and Execution , in 1926 which became the standard work on logistics for the Romanian Army . Ironically , after the book was published , Phleps failed his first general 's examination on the topic of logistics . He commanded various Romanian units , including the 1st Brigade of the vânători de <unk> ( mountain troops ) and also acted as a military advisor to King Carol II in the 1930s . Phleps reached the rank of Generalleutnant ( major general ) despite his disdain for the corruption , intrigue and hypocrisy of the royal court . After criticising government policy and publicly calling King Carol a liar when another general tried to twist his words , he was transferred to the reserves in 1940 and forcibly retired from the service in 1941 . 
 = = World War II = = 
 = = = SS Motorised Division Wiking = = = 
 In November 1940 , with the support of the leader of the <unk> in <unk> ( ethnic Germans in Romania ) , Andreas Schmidt , Phleps had written to the key Waffen @-@ SS recruiting officer SS @-@ Brigadeführer und Generalmajor der Waffen SS ( Brigadier ) Gottlob Berger offering his services to the Third Reich . Phleps subsequently asked for permission to leave Romania to join the Wehrmacht , and this was approved by the recently installed Romanian <unk> ( dictator ) General Ion Antonescu . Phleps volunteered for the Waffen @-@ SS instead , enlisting under his mother 's maiden name of Stolz . According to the historian Hans <unk> , Phleps joined the Waffen @-@ SS because Volksdeutsche were not permitted to join the Wehrmacht . He was appointed as a SS @-@ Standartenführer ( colonel ) by Reichsführer @-@ SS Heinrich Himmler and joined the SS Motorised Division Wiking , where he commanded Dutch , Flemish , Danish , Norwegian , Swedish and Finnish volunteers . When Hilmar Wäckerle , the commander of SS @-@ Regiment Westland , was killed in action near Lvov in late June 1941 , Phleps took over command of that regiment . Phleps distinguished himself in the fighting at Kremenchuk and Dnipropetrovsk in the Ukraine , commanded his own Kampfgruppe , became a confidant of Generalmajor ( Brigadier General ) Hans @-@ Valentin Hube , commander of the 16th Panzer Division , and was subsequently promoted to SS @-@ Oberführer ( senior colonel ) . In July 1941 he was awarded the 1939 clasp to his Iron Cross ( 1914 ) 2nd Class and then the Iron Cross ( 1939 ) 1st Class . 
 = = = 7th SS Volunteer Mountain Division Prinz Eugen = = = 
 On 30 December 1941 , Generalfeldmarschall ( Field Marshal ) Wilhelm Keitel advised Himmler that Adolf Hitler had authorised the raising of a seventh Waffen @-@ SS division from the Volksdeutsche ( ethnic Germans ) of Yugoslavia . In the meantime , Phleps reverted to his birth name from his mother 's maiden name . Two weeks later , SS @-@ Brigadeführer und Generalmajor der Waffen SS Phleps was selected to organise the new division , On 1 March 1942 , the division was officially designated the SS @-@ Freiwilligen @-@ Division " Prinz Eugen " . Phleps was promoted to SS @-@ Gruppenführer und Generalleutnant der Waffen SS ( major general ) on 20 April 1942 . After recruitment , formation and training in the Banat in October 1942 , the two regiments and supporting arms were deployed into the southwestern part of the Territory of the Military Commander in Serbia as an anti @-@ Partisan force . Headquartered in Kraljevo , with its two mountain infantry regiments centred on Užice and Raška , the division continued to train . Some artillery batteries , the anti @-@ aircraft battalion and the motorcycle battalion and cavalry squadron continued to form in the Banat . During his time with the 7th SS Division , Phleps was referred to as " Papa Phleps " by his troops . 
 In early October 1942 , the division commenced Operation Kopaonik , targeting the Chetnik force of Major Dragutin <unk> in the Kopaonik Mountains , which ended with little success , as the Chetniks had forewarning of the operation and were able to avoid contact . After a quiet winter , in January 1943 Phleps deployed the division to the Independent State of Croatia ( NDH ) to participate in Case White . Between 13 February and 9 March 1943 he was responsible for the initial aspects of raising the 13th Waffen Mountain Division of the SS Handschar ( 1st Croatian ) in the NDH in addition to his duties commanding the 7th SS Division . During Case White , the division captured Bihać and Bosanski Petrovac , killed over 2 @,@ 000 Partisans and captured nearly 400 . After a short rest and refit in April , the division was committed to Case Black in May and June 1943 , during which it advanced from the Mostar area into the Italian governorate of Montenegro , killing 250 Partisans and capturing over 500 . 
 In May 1943 , Phleps became frustrated by the failure of his Italian allies to cooperate with German operations , which was demonstrated in his reputation for forthright speech . During a meeting with his Italian counterpart in Podgorica , Montenegro , Phleps called the Italian Corps commander General Ercole <unk> a " lazy macaroni " . Phleps scolded his Wehrmacht interpreter , Leutnant Kurt Waldheim for toning down Phleps ' language , saying , " Listen Waldheim , I know some Italian and you are not translating what I am telling this so @-@ and @-@ so " . On another occasion , Phleps threatened to shoot Italian sentries who were delaying his passage through a checkpoint . While under Phleps ' command , the division committed many crimes against the civilian population of the NDH , especially during Case White and Case Black . These included " burning villages , massacre of inhabitants , torture and murder of captured partisans " , and the division thereby developed a distinctive reputation for cruelty . This was the subject of international controversy when Waldheim 's service in the Balkans became public in the mid @-@ 1980s , during his successful bid for the Austrian presidency . On 15 May 1943 , Phleps handed over command of the division to SS @-@ Brigadeführer und Generalmajor der Waffen SS Karl von <unk> . 
 In July 1943 , Phleps was promoted to Obergruppenführer und General der Waffen @-@ SS ( lieutenant general ) , awarded the Knight 's Cross of the Iron Cross , and placed in command of the V SS Mountain Corps . 
 = = = V SS Mountain Corps = = = 
 The formations under the command of V SS Mountain Corps varied during <unk> 's command . In July 1944 , it consisted of the 118th Jäger Division and 369th ( Croatian ) Infantry Division in addition to the 7th SS and 13th SS divisions . Throughout <unk> 's command , the corps was under the overall control of 2nd Panzer Army and conducted anti @-@ Partisan operations throughout the NDH and Montenegro . These operations included Operations Kugelblitz ( ball lightning ) and <unk> ( blizzard ) , which were part of a major offensive in eastern Bosnia in December 1943 , but they were only a limited success . Phleps had met personally with Hitler to discuss the planning for Operation Kugelblitz . 
 Due to the unreliable nature of the troops loyal to the NDH government , Phleps utilised Chetnik forces as auxiliaries , stating to a visiting officer that he could not disarm the Chetniks unless the NDH government provided him with the same strength in reliable troops . In January 1944 , due to fears that the Western Allies would invade along the Dalmatian coastline and islands , V SS Mountain Corps forced the mass evacuation of male civilians between the ages of 17 and 50 from that area . Phleps was criticised by both NDH and German authorities for the harshness with which the evacuation was carried out . During the first six months of 1944 , elements of the V SS Mountain Corps were involved in Operation <unk> ( Forest Fever ) in central Bosnia , Operation Maibaum ( Maypole ) in eastern Bosnia , and Operation Rösselsprung ( Knight 's Move ) , the attempt to capture or kill the Partisan leader Josip Broz Tito . 
 On 20 June 1944 , Phleps was awarded the German Cross in Gold . In September , he was appointed plenipotentiary general of German occupation troops in south Siebenbürgen and the Banat , organising the flight of the Volksdeutsche of north Siebenbürgen ahead of the advancing Soviet Red Army . 
 = = Death and aftermath = = 
 While en route to a meeting with Himmler in Berlin , Phleps and his entourage made a detour to reconnoitre the situation near Arad , Romania after receiving reports of Soviet advances in that area . Accompanied only by his adjutant and his driver , and unaware of the presence of Red Army units in the vicinity , he entered <unk> , a village approximately 20 kilometres ( 12 mi ) north of Arad , on the afternoon of 21 September 1944 . Soviet forces were already in the village , and Phleps and his men were captured and brought in for interrogation . When the building in which they were held was attacked by German aircraft later that afternoon , the prisoners tried to escape and were shot by their guards . <unk> suspects that Phleps had been set up by Hungarian army officers who had found out that Phleps knew of plans for Hungary to switch sides as Romania had done shortly before . Phleps ' personal effects , including his identity card , tags and decorations , were found by a Hungarian patrol and handed over to German authorities on 29 September 1944 . Phleps had been listed as missing in action since 22 September 1944 when he did not show up for his meeting with Himmler , who had issued a warrant for Phleps ' arrest . 
 Phleps was posthumously awarded the Oak Leaves to his Knight 's Cross on 24 November 1944 , which was presented to his son , SS @-@ Obersturmführer ( First Lieutenant ) <unk> Reinhart Phleps , a battalion doctor serving in the 7th SS Division . Soon after his death , the 13th Gebirgsjäger Regiment of the 7th SS Division was given the cuff title Artur Phleps in his honour . Phleps was married ; his wife 's name was Grete and in addition to their son Reinhart , they had a daughter , <unk> . One of Phleps ' brothers became a doctor , and the other was a professor at the Danzig technical university , now Gdańsk University of Technology . 
 = = Accusations of war crimes = = 
 Phleps was accused by the Yugoslav authorities of war crimes in association with the atrocities committed by 7th SS Division in the area of Nikšić in Montenegro . At the Nuremberg trials on 6 August 1946 , a document from the Yugoslav State Commission for Crimes of Occupiers and their Collaborators regarding the crimes of the 7th SS Division was quoted as follows : 
 At the end of May 1943 the division came to Montenegro to the area of <unk> in order to take part in the fifth enemy offensive in conjunction with the Italian troops . [ ... ] The officers and men of the SS division Prinz Eugen committed crimes of an outrageous cruelty on this occasion . The victims were shot , slaughtered and tortured , or burnt to death in burning houses . [ ... ] It has been established from the investigations entered upon that 121 persons , mostly women , and including 30 persons aged 60 – 92 years and 29 children of ages ranging from 6 months to 14 years , were executed on this occasion in the horrible manner narrated above . The villages [ and then follows the list of the villages ] were burnt down and razed to the ground . [ ... ] For all of these most serious War Crimes those responsible besides the actual <unk> members of the SS Division Prinz <unk> all superior and all subordinate commanders as the persons issuing and transmitting the orders for murder and devastation . Among others the following war criminals are known : SS <unk> and Lieutenant General of the Waffen @-@ SS Phleps ; Divisional Commander , Major General of the Waffen @-@ SS Karl von <unk> ; Commander of the 13th Regiment , later Divisional Commander , Major General Gerhard Schmidhuber ... 
 = = Awards = = 
 Phleps received the following awards during his service : 
 Austrian Military Merit Medal ( Signum <unk> ) 
 in Bronze with war decoration and swords on 13 October 1914 
 in Silver with war decoration on 15 March 1916 
 Austrian Military Merit Cross 3rd Class with war decoration and swords on 3 July 1915 
 Decoration for Services to the Red Cross 2nd Class with war decoration on 23 October 1915 
 Prussian Iron Cross ( 1914 ) 2nd Class on 27 January 1917 
 Austrian Order of the Iron Crown 3rd Class with war decoration and swords on 24 April 1917 
 Officers cross of the Order of Franz Joseph with war decoration and swords on 23 July 1918 
 Order of the Star of Romania 
 Officers cross with swords on ribbon of military merit on 12 March 1920 
 Commanders cross on 28 February 1933 
 Czechoslovak War Cross on 1 March 1928 
 Order of the Yugoslav Crown 2nd Class in 1933 
 Bulgarian Order of Military Merit 2nd Class on 26 April 1934 
 Romanian Order of the Crown 
 Commander on 1 January 1927 
 Grand Cross on 10 May 1939 
 Clasp to the Iron Cross ( 1939 ) 2nd Class on 10 July 1941 
 Iron Cross 1st Class on 26 July 1941 
 Infantry Assault Badge in Bronze on 7 November 1943 
 German Cross in Gold on 20 June 1944 as SS @-@ Obergruppenführer und General der Waffen @-@ SS in the V SS Mountain Corps 
 Knight 's Cross of the Iron Cross with Oak Leaves 
 Knight 's Cross on 4 July 1943 as SS @-@ Brigadeführer und Generalmajor der Waffen SS and commander of SS @-@ Division " Prinz Eugen " 
 <unk> Oak Leaves on 24 November 1944 ( posthumously ) as SS @-@ Obergruppenführer und General der Waffen @-@ SS , commanding general of the V SS Mountain Corps and Higher SS and Police Leader as well as commander @-@ in @-@ chief in Siebenbürgen . 
 = = = Books = = = 
 = = = Journals = = = 
 = = = Websites = = = 
 = Neville Cardus = 
 Sir John Frederick Neville Cardus , CBE ( 3 April 1888 – 28 February 1975 ) was an English writer and critic . From an impoverished home background , and mainly self @-@ educated , he became The Manchester Guardian 's cricket correspondent in 1919 and its chief music critic in 1927 , holding the two posts simultaneously until 1940 . His contributions to these two distinct fields in the years before the Second World War established his reputation as one of the foremost critics of his generation . 
 Cardus 's approach to cricket writing was innovative , turning what had previously been largely a factual form into vivid description and criticism ; he is considered by contemporaries to have influenced every subsequent cricket writer . Although he achieved his largest readership for his cricket reports and books , he considered music criticism as his principal vocation . Without any formal musical training , he was initially influenced by the older generation of critics , in particular Samuel Langford and Ernest Newman , but developed his own individual style of criticism — subjective , romantic and personal , in contrast to the objective analysis practised by Newman . Cardus 's opinions and judgments were often forthright and unsparing , which sometimes caused friction with leading performers . Nevertheless , his personal charm and gregarious manner enabled him to form lasting friendships in the cricketing and musical worlds , with among others Newman , Sir Thomas Beecham and Sir Donald Bradman . 
 Cardus spent the Second World War years in Australia , where he wrote for The Sydney Morning Herald and gave regular radio talks . He also wrote books on music , and completed his autobiography . After his return to England he resumed his connection with The Manchester Guardian as its London music critic . He continued to write on cricket , and produced books on both his specialisms . Cardus 's work was publicly recognised by his appointment as a Companion of the Order of the British Empire ( CBE ) in 1964 and the award of a knighthood in 1966 , while the music and cricket worlds acknowledged him with numerous honours . In his last years , he became a guru and inspirational figure to aspiring young writers . 
 = = Biography = = 
 = = = Early life = = = 
 = = = = Family background and early childhood = = = = 
 Neville Cardus was born on 3 April 1888 in Rusholme , Manchester . Throughout his childhood and young adulthood he was known as " Fred " . There has been confusion over his birth date ; some sources give it as 2 April 1889 , and Cardus himself hosted a dinner party on 2 April 1959 believing this to be his 70th birthday . His birth certificate , however , confirms the earlier date . Neville 's mother was Ada Cardus , one of several daughters of Robert and Ann Cardus of 4 Summer Place , Rusholme . On 14 July 1888 , when the baby was three months old , Ada left her parents ' home and married John Frederick Newsome , a blacksmith . Apart from their shared forenames , there is no evidence that Newsome was Neville 's father , who is described in Cardus 's autobiographical works as a violinist in an orchestra . The Newsome marriage was short @-@ lived , and within a few years Ada and Neville had returned to her parents ' home in Summer Place . 
 Robert Cardus was a retired policeman ; to augment his small pension the family took in neighbours ' washing , and the household income was further supplemented by his daughters ' earnings from part @-@ time prostitution . In his autobiographical writings , Cardus refers to his home environment at Summer Place as " sordid ... unlettered and unbeautiful " , yet enlivened by laughter : " Humour kept breezing in " . Commentators have suggested that Cardus tended to overstate the deprived aspects of his childhood ; his biographer Christopher Brookes asserts that " Cardus was the product neither of a slum , nor a cultural desert " . Robert Cardus , though uneducated , was not illiterate , and was instrumental in awakening his grandson 's literary interests . Theatres , libraries and other cultural facilities were easily accessible from the Cardus home . 
 Neville 's formal schooling was limited to five years at the local board school , where the curriculum was basic and the methods of tuition harsh : " [ T ] he boy who showed the faintest sign of freedom of the will was caned " . This experience did not curb Neville 's intellectual curiosity ; at a very young age he was expanding his cultural horizons , through the worlds of reading and of music hall and pantomime . When he was 10 years old he discovered the novels of Dickens ; years later he wrote that there were two classes of person , " those who have it in them from birth onwards to appreciate Dickens and those who haven 't . The second group should be avoided as soon as detected " . His earliest creative writing took the form of a handwritten magazine , The Boy 's World , full of articles and stories he had written . He circulated it among his schoolmates , until it was discovered and torn up by an irate teacher . 
 = = = = Manchester , 1901 – 12 = = = = 
 After Robert Cardus 's death in 1900 the family moved several times , eventually breaking up altogether . Cardus left school in 1901 and took a variety of short @-@ term , unskilled jobs before finding more secure employment as a clerk with Flemings ' marine insurance agency . He lived for a time with his Aunt Beatrice with whom , according to Brookes , he had at an early age " embarked on a lifelong love affair ... In his eyes she could do no wrong " . A flamboyant character , Beatrice brought colour into Cardus 's life ; she encouraged him to read worthwhile books and her memory , Brookes asserts , " remained a potent inspirational force " throughout his later life as a writer . She also bought him his first cricket bat . 
 These years were a period of intense self @-@ education . Cardus became an habitué of the local libraries , and extended his reading from Dickens to include many of the masters of literature : Fielding , Thackeray , Conrad and — with more reservation — Hardy and Henry James . In due course he added philosophy and metaphysics to his curriculum ; this began with his discovery of George Henry Lewes , which led him on to the works of Kant , Hume , Berkeley and , eventually , Schopenhauer . He supplemented these studies by attending free lectures at Manchester University , and met regularly with a group of like @-@ minded <unk> at Alexandra Park or , in the winter , at the Lyons café in Albert Square , to discuss and debate for whole afternoons . At first Cardus 's schedule of self @-@ improvement was random ; eventually he compiled what he called a " cultural scheme " whereby he devoted a set weekly number of hours to different subjects . 
 Cardus 's interest in music began with the popular tunes sung by his mother and her sisters in the family home . He remembered hearing for the first time the melody of the " <unk> " song from Franz Lehár 's operetta The Merry Widow , which " curled its way into my heart to stay there for a lifetime " . In April 1907 he was " swept ... into the seven seas of music " by a performance of Edward German 's operetta Tom Jones . " I am unable to explain " , Cardus wrote many years later , " why it should have been left to Edward German — of all composers — to release the flood " . He began going to the Hallé Orchestra 's concerts at the Free Trade Hall where , on 3 December 1908 , he was present at the premiere of Elgar 's first symphony , under Hans Richter . He regularly attended the fortnightly concerts at the Royal Manchester College of Music , where students ' performances were assessed by the principal , Adolph Brodsky . As part of his scheme of study , Cardus briefly took singing lessons , his only formal instruction in music . In 1912 Cardus published his first musical article , " Bantock and Style in Music " , in Musical Opinion . 
 Alongside his intellectual pursuits Cardus played and followed cricket . As a small boy he had begun to visit Old Trafford Cricket Ground to watch Lancashire matches : " The first cricketer I saw was A.C. MacLaren ... I can still see the swing of MacLaren 's bat , the great follow @-@ through finishing high and held there with the body poised " . In 1902 he saw the Test match against Australia in which Victor Trumper scored a century before lunch and thereby won a permanent place among Cardus 's heroes . Cardus first played cricket on rough waste land close to his home in Rusholme ; as he matured he developed as an effective medium @-@ paced off break bowler , and for several seasons from 1908 onwards he played as a weekend professional in Manchester league cricket . " I am not ashamed to confess that I seldom hesitated , as soon as a batsman came to the crease , to let him have a quick one bang in the penis ; after which a quick , simple straight one would invariably remove him from the scene " . 
 = = = Shrewsbury = = = 
 In the spring of 1912 , in search of a change from his unrewarding clerical job , Cardus applied for the post of assistant cricket coach at Shrewsbury School , citing his bowling averages in Manchester club cricket . He reasoned that , by living frugally during the Shrewsbury summers , he would be able to finance his winter studies of music and literature . His application was successful , and in May 1912 he began his duties . He worked initially under Attewell , a former Nottinghamshire professional , and later under the Yorkshire and England cricketer Ted Wainwright . Cardus established good working relations with both of these , but identified most closely with Cyril Alington , the school 's headmaster : " Because of Alington I call myself ... an old <unk> " . Alington first detected Cardus 's intellectual potential when he found him reading a copy of Gilbert Murray 's translation of Euripides 's drama Medea . In August 1914 , in addition to his cricketing duties he became Alington 's secretary , after the previous incumbent joined the army at the outbreak of war ; Cardus was rejected for military service because of his poor eyesight . 
 Cardus did not find his duties at Shrewsbury onerous . He made frequent trips to Manchester , for Hallé concerts or to watch Thomas Beecham conduct at the Manchester Opera House . He found time for other work ; thus , in 1913 , he was the music critic for the northern edition of The Daily Citizen . This short @-@ lived newspaper was an official organ of the early Labour Party ; mainly out of admiration for Bernard Shaw Cardus had joined the Independent Labour Party , but quickly lost interest in socialism : " Their creed or system was obviously not to be a means to an end but an end in itself " . According to Brookes , the influence of Shrewsbury School affected Cardus to the extent that " [ t ] he playing fields of an English public school were for him a more natural setting than the iconoclastic frenzy of the Lyons café where socialism vied with Richard Strauss for pride of place in the race to modernity " . The Daily Citizen paid poorly , and Cardus 's association with it soon ended . 
 Cardus spent his winters in Manchester , studying hard in anticipation of any opportunity for an opening as a music critic , eking out his summer savings by taking temporary clerical work . Around 1916 he met Edith King , an art teacher and amateur actress who became a regular attender at the Lyons café meetings . In the summers , when Cardus returned to Shrewsbury , she kept him informed of musical and cultural events in Manchester . The Shrewsbury years , which Brookes describes as a " magical interlude " , ended suddenly when , at the end of the 1916 summer , Alington was appointed headmaster of Eton . Initially it seemed likely that Cardus would join him there as his secretary , but Cardus 's military exemption was under review ; the uncertainty of his position ended the possibility of a post at Eton . He left Shrewsbury in September 1916 with little money , and no immediate prospects of regular work . 
 = = = Manchester Guardian , 1917 – 1940 = = = 
 = = = = First years = = = = 
 In the winter of 1916 – 17 Cardus continued his private studies while working intermittently ; among various jobs , he collected insurance premiums for a burial society . Early in January 1917 he wrote to C. P. Scott , The Manchester Guardian 's editor , asking for any available post at the paper , as " the means whereby to continue my education " . To bolster his chances he enclosed specimens of his writing . The result was , first , a temporary unpaid position as Scott 's secretary , but in mid @-@ March Scott offered a job on the paper 's reporting staff . The writer J. B. Priestley later asserted that Cardus , who did not know shorthand , was engaged not as a reporter , but as a " writer " . In Cardus 's own account of these years he appears to have been fully engaged in reporters ' duties , his lack of shorthand being dismissed by the chief reporter , Haslam Mills , who paraphrased Shakespeare : " Some men are born to shorthand , others achieve shorthand , while others have shorthand thrust upon them " . Mills advised Cardus to concentrate on style : " We can be decorative at times ; we can even be amusing . Here , possibly , you will find scope " . 
 Within a year Cardus had been moved from the reporters ' room to take charge of the paper 's " Miscellany " column . He also resumed the duties of part @-@ time secretary to Scott , who was at this time over 70 , and had edited The Manchester Guardian since 1872 . Despite his years , he struck Cardus as " of inexhaustible energy and aliveness " . Scott was a demanding employer , who gave his young writers free rein , but expected in return long hours and total dedication . Driven hard , sometimes to the point of exhaustion , Cardus nevertheless relished these years , and never complained to Scott of weariness . Early in 1919 his role changed again , when he was made junior drama critic under the direction of C.E. Montague , the paper 's principal theatre critic who had returned from war service with no great desire to continue in the role . Cardus 's principal ambitions still lay in the direction of music criticism , though he recognised that this door was closed while Samuel Langford , music critic since 1906 , remained in post . In preparation for any opportunity that might arise in that direction , Cardus maintained a daily two @-@ hour study of music or music literature . 
 = = = = Cricket correspondent = = = = 
 In the spring of 1919 , while recovering from a serious pulmonary condition , Cardus took up a suggestion from his news editor , William Percival Crozier , that he should watch some cricket at Old Trafford and , if he felt able , write reports on a few matches . On 19 May 1919 Cardus went to the first day of Lancashire 's match with Derbyshire . His first published cricket report , on the following day , showed little sign of his later characteristic style : " I simply had no intention of writing on cricket for any length of time ; this was a spare @-@ time affair ... and I fitted myself into the idioms and procedures of the sporting writers of 1919 " . Scott nonetheless saw a potential , and from the beginning of 1920 Cardus became the paper 's regular cricket correspondent , under the by @-@ line " Cricketer " , a position he held for 20 years . 
 Cardus 's emergence as cricket correspondent was concurrent with another appointment , that of deputy and successor designate to Langford as music critic . In January 1920 Cardus deputised for Langford at a recital by the Russian tenor Vladimir Rosing , and impressed Scott with the quality of his notice . With the succession to Langford assured , and a significant increase in salary , Cardus was happy to devote his summers exclusively to cricket . He remained circumspect about his commitment to the sport : " Never have I regarded my cricket as more than a means to an end ; that end being always music " . Nevertheless , he developed a style of cricket reporting that quickly lifted him to the forefront of contemporary sports writers . He did this , according to his fellow cricket writer Gerald Howat , by using imagery and metaphor to create " a mythology of characters and scenes " . John Arlott described Cardus as " the creat [ or ] of modern cricket writing " . 
 The new sense of financial and professional security was probably instrumental in the decision of Cardus and Edith King to marry , on 17 June 1921 . The marriage , which lasted until Edith 's death 47 years later , was unconventional ; the couple led individual lives and rarely lived together , while remaining devoted friends . Cardus described his wife as " a great spirit and character , born for sisterhood not marriage . " From this time onward , Cardus used the forename " Neville " in place of " Fred " , and adopted the initials " N.C. " for his music reviews , to distinguish this persona from " Cricketer " . In August 1921 Cardus gained what he termed " the only scoop of my career " , when he reported the unexpected victory by 28 runs of MacLaren 's scratch side over the previously unbeaten Australian touring team . The match , at The <unk> ground at Eastbourne , had attracted little interest from other cricket correspondents , being treated as a foregone conclusion . 
 The focus of much of Cardus 's cricket writing was the Lancashire side of the inter @-@ war years , and in particular their twice @-@ yearly battles with rivals Yorkshire . His eye was as much on the players and their personalities as on the game , on " the match within the match " , with the actual scores treated as secondary . Cardus justified this : " Do I add up the notes of a Mozart " Vivace " to evaluate the music ? " To meet Cardus 's requirements , the players were sometimes " enlarged " , notably Emmott Robinson , the veteran Yorkshire all @-@ rounder of the 1920s who through Cardus 's pen became " the apotheosis of Yorkshire cricket and Yorkshire character " . In the 1930s , Cardus 's style became less effusive , as his older heroes were replaced by players with , in his view , less romantic appeal . Bradman was an exception ; after his exploits in the England versus Australia Test series of 1930 Cardus described the Australian as " an incredible exponent who in himself sums up all the skill and experience that have gone before him ... he has kindled grand bonfires of batsmanship for us " . 
 Selections from Cardus 's Manchester Guardian cricket writings were published in a series of books between 1922 and 1937 . Because of financial constraints the paper did not send " Cricketer " to Australia to cover the " Bodyline " tour of 1932 – 33 . Cardus was generally approving of Jardine 's controversial bodyline tactics , writing on 5 March 1933 : " [ H ] ad [ Jardine ] been a weak man , all the energy of Larwood [ England 's premier bowler ] might have proved as vain a thing as it did in 1930 " . In 1936 – 37 , Cardus accompanied the MCC team to Australia ; otherwise he continued to write on English domestic cricket until the 1939 season was summarily truncated . On 1 September , the day that Germany invaded Poland , Cardus observed the removal of the bust of W. G. Grace from the Lord 's pavilion ; he was informed by a bystander : " That means war " . 
 = = = = Music critic = = = = 
 Following Langford 's death in May 1927 , Cardus became The Manchester Guardian 's chief music critic . For several years he had worked closely with Langford , whose influence on the younger man was equalled only by that of Ernest Newman , Langford 's predecessor as the paper 's music critic : " Langford taught me to feel and translate , while Newman taught me to observe and analyse " . Cardus 's fellow @-@ critic Hugo Cole has described his approach as personal rather than academic , based on his own reactions to the music he was hearing , and with a complete independence of judgement . Cardus was , Cole says , " the last distinguished music critic never to have received formal musical training ... he was a writer first , and a music critic second " . 
 Cardus 's lack of deference sometimes led to friction , as with Hamilton Harty , chief conductor of the Hallé Orchestra from 1920 . In his reviews of the Hallé concerts until Harty 's departure in 1933 , Cardus frequently criticised the conductor 's choices and interpretations . On one occasion he observed that Harty 's rendering of the adagio in Beethoven 's Ninth had broken the world record for slowness , and quoted minutes and seconds . Responding to Harty 's outraged protests , Cardus threatened to bring an alarm clock to the next performance , " less for critical purposes than for those of personal convenience " . When Harty left , he was not replaced as chief conductor ; the Hallé employed distinguished visiting conductors such as Beecham , Malcolm Sargent , Pierre Monteux , Adrian Boult and Ernest Ansermet . Cardus considered that a lack of central direction was adversely affecting the orchestra , and his biting criticisms of some performances led to temporarily strained relations . 
 Cardus often expressed views contrary to popular and critical opinion . He dismissed Stravinsky 's The Rite of Spring as " a sophisticated exploitation of primitive rum @-@ ti @-@ tum " . When Harty introduced Gershwin 's symphonic poem An American in Paris into a Hallé concert , Cardus proposed " a 150 per cent [ import ] tariff against this sort of American dry @-@ goods " . He professed to think that Sullivan 's " preoccupation with comic opera , to the neglect of oratorio and symphony " was a " deplorable " loss to English music , although he also wrote that without Gilbert , nothing of Sullivan 's music would have survived . Cardus championed Delius against the consensus of his fellow @-@ critics : " His music looks back on days intensely lived through ; it knows the pathos of mortal things doomed to fade and vanish " . At the 1929 Delius Festival in London , Cardus briefly met the composer , who thought he looked too young to be The Manchester Guardian 's music critic , and counselled him : " Don 't read yourself daft . Trust to y 'r emotions " . Also against the grain of critical opinion , Cardus commended the then unfashionable music of Richard Strauss and Anton Bruckner . 
 In 1931 Cardus visited the Salzburg Festival , where he met Beecham and began a friendship which lasted until Sir Thomas 's death in 1961 — despite numerous disagreements . One of Cardus 's notices in 1937 so incensed Beecham that he announced he would not conduct any concert at which Cardus was present . Cardus later numbered Beecham , with Elgar and Delius , as " one of the three most original spirits known in English music since Purcell " . The annual Salzburg Festival became a highlight of Cardus 's musical calendar ; in 1936 he saw Toscanini conduct a performance there of Wagner 's Die Meistersinger that , he said , " will remain in the mind for a lifetime ... Toscanini held us like children listening to a tale told in the chimney corner , lighted by the glow of olden times " . Cardus 's final prewar Salzburg visit was in 1938 , just after the German @-@ Austrian Anschluss which led to the withdrawal in protest of many of the Festival 's leading figures . 
 Despite financial incentives from London newspapers , Cardus remained loyal to The Manchester Guardian . On the outbreak of war in September 1939 the Free Trade Hall closed , requisitioned for military purposes . The Hallé Society left Manchester to tour with Sargent around the north @-@ west of England . With no music in Manchester and all first @-@ class cricket suspended , Cardus was unemployed , " imprisoned in Manchester , useless to anybody " . Thus , when he received an offer from Sir Keith Murdoch to join The Herald of Melbourne in Australia , he accepted immediately . 
 = = = Australia = = = 
 Cardus had been known to Australian readers since the 1920s , when The Argus in Melbourne reported his view that Australians made cricket " a war game ... with an intensity of purpose too deadly for a mere game . " His books on cricket were widely reviewed in the Australian press in the 1920s and 30s ; one critic commented in 1929 , " Mr. Cardus mingles fancy with fact . The latter is preferable . " Another Australian writer , quoting him extensively in 1932 , observed , " Mr. Cardus is a gifted writer and a most impartial critic . " By 1936 he was known to a considerable section of the Australian public as a cricket writer , although he was hardly known there in his musical capacity . 
 The 1936 – 37 MCC tour of Australia under G.O. Allen was the occasion of Cardus 's first visit to the country . During the tour he made , or consolidated , friendships with players and colleagues including C. B. Fry and Donald Bradman . Fry , a former England cricket captain , was a boyhood hero of Cardus , and was covering the Tests for the London Evening Standard . In Bradman , Cardus found a sophistication and sensitivity that other writers had failed to detect . When interviewed on his arrival in Australia , Cardus speculated how he would cope for the six months of the tour without music ; he was touched when the following day music students in Perth gave him a private recital of music by Chopin and Hugo Wolf . During this tour Cardus wrote for The Herald in Melbourne , and broadcast about cricket on Australian radio . 
 Cardus made a private visit to Australia from mid @-@ January to mid @-@ March 1938 . When he joined The Herald in 1940 , his initial brief was to cover a series of concerts conducted by Beecham for the Australian Broadcasting Commission ( ABC ) . Daily contact between the two men during Beecham 's time in Australia between June and October 1940 helped to consolidate their friendship . At the end of his tour Beecham tried to persuade Cardus to join him in sailing to America , asking , " Do you propose to stay in this barbarous country all your life ? " Cardus insisted on remaining in Australia , but moved from Melbourne to Sydney . Concluding that he could not satisfactorily review concerts for an evening newspaper , he joined the staff of The Sydney Morning Herald ( SMH ) . 
 At first Cardus failed to adjust his expectations to the prevailing standard of music @-@ making in Australia , which was not at that time comparable to the best on offer in Europe or America . He was accused of being " just one more sneering <unk> bastard come to hand down higher wisdom to the ignorant colonials . " His biographer Christopher Brookes suggests that Cardus was applying critical standards " more appropriate to Salzburg than to Sydney " . Over the next two years Cardus and the public slowly came to terms with each other , and by 1942 he was both popular and respected among Australians . 
 For ABC Cardus presented a weekly hour @-@ long programme , " The Enjoyment of Music " , which enlarged the audience for classical music across the country . His topics included concert works , such as the late Beethoven string quartets and Mahler 's Ninth Symphony , operas including The Marriage of Figaro and Der Rosenkavalier , and performers such as Wilhelm Furtwängler and Arturo Toscanini . He also gave a weekly , fifteen @-@ minute talk on music , illustrated by records , for the children 's Argonauts Club programme and regularly wrote for ABC Weekly . 
 Early in 1942 Cardus rented a small flat in the Kings Cross district of Sydney , where he wrote his Ten Composers ( 1945 ) and Autobiography ( 1947 ) . He said later that he found the discipline of writing for seven hours a day difficult at first , but that the process had turned him from a journalist into something more substantial . When later in 1942 his wife announced her intention of sailing from England to join him , Cardus declined to move to a larger flat to accommodate them both , and rented a separate establishment for her a mile away . They dined together once a week , but otherwise continued to lead largely separate lives . 
 By the end of the war Cardus 's thoughts were turning to England . Refusing an offer of a highly paid permanent contract to cover both music and cricket for the SMH he considered his options ; with some reluctance he agreed to cover the MCC 's 1946 – 47 tour of Australia for the SMH and also for The Times and The Manchester Guardian . The novelist Charles Morgan wrote of Cardus 's reports , " the best [ I have ] read these 40 years . Who shall dare to say now that George Meredith is forgotten ? " 
 = = = Later career = = = 
 = = = = Years of uncertainty = = = = 
 In April 1947 Cardus returned to England . He had not as yet decided to leave Australia permanently , but " felt in need of spiritual refreshment " . He found a war @-@ weary England in which much had changed ; familiar landmarks had disappeared , and old friends and acquaintances had died . The Free Trade Hall was a burnt @-@ out shell , and the Queen 's Hall in London completely destroyed ; however , Cardus was struck by the apparent good health of the English music scene . He also found an undamaged Lord 's , and enjoyed a season of magnificent cricket , marked by the batting exploits of the Middlesex pair , Denis Compton and Bill Edrich . Cardus was back in Sydney by the end of the year , but early in 1948 , having accepted an offer from The Sunday Times to cover that year 's Test series against Australia , he left for England again . 
 Another factor that brought Cardus to England in 1948 was the prospect of succeeding Newman , whose retirement as chief music critic of The Sunday Times was assumed to be imminent . However , Newman had no intention of retiring , and made it clear that he would resent any successor @-@ designate looking over his shoulder . Feeling slighted , Cardus resigned from the paper and accepted an offer from the London Evening Standard to be its music critic . This new appointment was short @-@ lived ; Cardus 's lengthy and discursive concert reviews were incompatible with this paper 's style , and were ruthlessly cut by subeditors . At the end of 1948 he was back in Australia , proclaiming his intention to settle there permanently . This determination , too , was brief ; the lure of London life proved irresistible . Because of the commercial success of his Autobiography , published in 1947 , and the immediate commissioning of a second autobiographical work , Cardus was not under immediate financial pressure . He left Australia again in the spring of 1949 , and although he spent the English winter of 1950 – 51 in Australia , writing about the 1950 – 51 England v. Australia Test series for the Sydney Morning Herald , London was thereafter his permanent home . Here he worked as a freelance writer , in which role he resumed his association with The Manchester Guardian . In December 1951 he was appointed the paper 's London music critic , on a permanent salaried basis . 
 = = = = London critic = = = = 
 In 1949 Cardus set up his London home at the National Liberal Club , while Edith took a flat in <unk> Mansions , just off Baker Street . The pair lived harmoniously apart , though in frequent contact , until Edith 's death . Cardus found London 's musical life invigorating , with five major orchestras and a host of distinguished conductors and solo artists performing regularly . Toscanini paid his final visit to England in 1952 , with two concerts at the Royal Festival Hall . Outside London , Cardus was a regular visitor to the Edinburgh Festival and to Glyndebourne , and was in Manchester for the reopening of the Free Trade Hall and the " homecoming " of the Hallé Orchestra in November 1951 . The inaugural concert concluded with Kathleen Ferrier singing " Land of Hope and Glory " . Cardus had first heard Ferrier at the Edinburgh Festival in 1947 ; he became a devoted admirer to the extent that , eventually , questions were raised about his critical blindness to her technical weaknesses . He wrote of her singing that it was , " like the woman herself ... imbued with a quiet but reliant sense and a feeling for the fun and goodness of life " . He was devastated by her death from cancer in October 1953 ; the following year he edited and contributed to a memorial volume of tributes . 
 For The Manchester Guardian , Cardus wrote around 30 music articles a year . These included " survey " pieces , which often reflected his personal enthusiasms ; a regular subject was the music of Gustav Mahler , who in the early 1950s was by no means a popular composer with British audiences . Cardus sought to change that , with a series of articles between 1952 and 1957 under titles such as " Mahler 's Growing Influence " , " Misunderstanding Mahler " , and " The Mahler Problem " . He wrote the first volume of a detailed analysis entitled Gustav Mahler : His Mind and his Music ; the book , dealing with Mahler 's first five symphonies , was published in 1965 , but was poorly received by critics . Volume II was never written . 
 Throughout the 1950s and 1960s Cardus wrote cricket articles ; these included an annual reflection for Wisden Cricketers ' Almanack and occasional columns for The Manchester Guardian , for whom he covered the 1953 Test Matches against Australia . In the English winter of 1954 – 55 Cardus made his final visit to Australia , to report on the Test series for The Sydney Morning Herald ; he undertook to write " impressions " rather than day @-@ to @-@ day reports on play . He found time to enjoy Sydney 's theatrical and music scene , but was disappointed in what he perceived as a decline in the city 's musical standards . 
 In the decades after the war many of Cardus 's earlier heroes and acquaintances died . On Fry 's death in 1956 Cardus wrote of him as " A great Englishman , measured by any standards of occupation , art and civilisation " . In 1959 , still in harness , Newman died at the age of 90 ; Cardus considered him the most outstanding of all music critics , and thought he should have been appointed a Companion of Honour ( CH ) , or even to the Order of Merit . Beecham died on 8 March 1961 . Cardus had for some years noted a decline in his old friend 's powers , though he had written in 1954 , on the occasion of Beecham 's 75th birthday , of the debt the music world owed to the conductor : " He led us out of the Teutonic captivity . He showed us other and more sensitive worlds " . After Beecham 's death , Cardus organised the publication of a celebratory memoir , as he had done with Kathleen Ferrier . To an extent the departed idols were replaced with new heroes : in music , Herbert von Karajan , Otto Klemperer , Clifford Curzon and Claudio Arrau ; in cricket , Keith Miller and Garfield Sobers . Cardus maintained a keen antagonism towards much of contemporary music ; discussing Pierre Boulez 's <unk> <unk> <unk> after a performance in 1965 , he said he " could not relate the varied succession of aural phenomena to music as my musical intelligence and senses recognise music " . 
 In 1964 Cardus was appointed a Commander of the Order of the British Empire ( CBE ) . In a letter to his friend Marjorie Robinson he described the investiture at Buckingham Palace , remarking that the Queen " might have been any nice shy young lady in D.H. Evans or Kendal Milnes " . Just over two years later Cardus was awarded a knighthood , the first music critic to receive such an honour , although in all likelihood it was awarded as much for his cricket writing . Years previously Beecham had advised : " In the unlikely event of you being offered a knighthood , Neville , take it . It makes tables at the Savoy so much easier to come by " . 
 = = = = Final years = = = = 
 Edith Cardus died on 26 March 1968 . Despite their separate day @-@ to @-@ day lives , she had been an influential presence for nearly all Cardus 's adult life ; they had communicated by telephone almost daily , and he felt her loss keenly . After her death he left the National Liberal Club and moved into her flat , which remained his base for the rest of his life . In the ensuing months he worried about his deteriorating relationship with The Guardian ; the paper had been renamed in 1959 following reorganisation , and its editorial offices had moved to London in 1964 . Cardus felt that much of the old ethos had departed , and that his once @-@ sacrosanct copy was now at the mercy of subeditors . He was particularly incensed by the treatment meted out to his 1969 Edinburgh Festival reports , and referred to the subeditors ' room as " the Abattoir " in one of many letters complaining of editorial butchery . 
 As well as his work for The Guardian Cardus wrote occasionally for The Sunday Times , a particular pleasure to him in view of his failure to achieve Newman 's post . In 1970 he published Full Score , the last of his autobiographical works and , in Daniels 's view , the least substantial of all the Cardus books . In his eighties , Cardus assumed the role of guru to young aspiring writers , before whom he would hold court in favourite locations : the Garrick Club , the National Liberal Club , or Lord 's . According to Daniels , Cardus " thrived in the role of patron , encourager , [ and ] <unk> " . Howat describes his appearance in these years as not having changed much from his younger days : " ... the lean , ascetic figure of moderate height , with sharp features , sleek hair , and strong glasses " . 
 Cardus died on 28 February 1975 at the Nuffield Clinic , London , a few days after collapsing at home . His cremation service was private . On 4 April more than 200 people attended a memorial service at St Paul 's , Covent Garden . These included representatives from Cardus 's worlds of cricket , journalism and music . Flora Robson and Wendy Hiller gave readings , and Clifford Curzon , with the Royal Philharmonic Orchestra , played the second movement of Mozart 's Piano Concerto No. 23 . The eulogy was given by the cricket writer and historian Alan Gibson , who took as his text verses from Blake 's <unk> of Innocence : 
 = = Reputation , honours and influence = = 
 Cardus 's contribution to cricket writing has been acknowledged by various commentators on the game . John Arlott wrote : " Before him , cricket was reported ... with him it was for the first time appreciated , felt , and imaginatively described . " Howat commented : " He would have his imitators and <unk> , and no serious cricket writer would remain unaffected by him " . His influence on his successors was more specifically acknowledged by Gibson : 
 " All cricket writers of the last half century have been influenced by Cardus , whether they admit it or not , whether they have wished to be or not , whether they have tried to copy him or tried to avoid copying him . He was not a model , any more than Macaulay , say , was a model for the aspiring historian . But just as Macaulay changed the course of the writing of history , Cardus changed the course of the writing of cricket . He showed what could be done . He dignified and illuminated the craft " . 
 As a music critic , Cardus 's romantic , instinctive approach was the opposite of Newman 's objective school of musical criticism . Initially in awe of Newman 's reputation , Cardus soon discovered his own independent , more subjective voice . A fellow critic wrote that Newman " probed into Music 's vitals , put her head under deep X @-@ ray and analysed cell @-@ tissue . Cardus laid his head against her bosom and listened to the beating of her heart . " Despite their different approaches , the two writers held each other in considerable regard ; at times , Newman 's own prose showed the influence of Cardus 's style . Among leading musicians who have paid tribute to Cardus , Yehudi Menuhin wrote that he " reminds us that there is an understanding of the heart as well as of the mind ... in Neville Cardus , the artist has an ally " . Colin Davis highlighted " the quality and verve of Cardus 's writing " , which had made him a household name . 
 Beside his CBE and knighthood , Cardus received numerous honours from the musical and cricketing worlds , at home and overseas . In 1963 he was awarded the City of Bayreuth 's Wagner Medal ; he was given honorary membership of the Royal Manchester College of Music in 1968 , and of the Royal Academy of Music in 1972 . The Hallé Orchestra honoured him with two special concerts in April 1966 to mark his long association with the orchestra . In 1970 he received the Austrian Cross of Honour for Science and Art , 1st class . Among the honours he most valued was the presidency of Lancashire County Cricket Club , which he accepted in 1971 . 
 Cardus was not an " establishment " figure . His friends encountered initial resistance when they sought his election to the MCC , although he was eventually accepted in 1958 . He was denied the civic honour of the Freedom of the City of Manchester , and although he made light of this omission he was hurt by it . Long after his death , the city named a pathway close to the rebuilt Summer Place " Neville Cardus Walk " . Aside from formal institutional recognition , Cardus was highly regarded by prominent individual cricketers and musicians , as indicated by the " tribute book " he received at his 70th birthday celebration lunch . The book included contributions from Wilfred Rhodes , Jack Hobbs and Len Hutton , and also from Klemperer , Elisabeth Schwarzkopf and Bruno Walter . He managed to maintain close friendships with both Beecham and Sir John Barbirolli , though the two conductors cordially disliked one another . 
 In the conventional sense , Cardus was not a religious man ; Dennis Silk , a one @-@ time MCC president , suggests that Cardus 's religion was " friendship " . In Autobiography Cardus says he found his Kingdom of Heaven in the arts , " the only religion that is real and , once found , omnipresent " — though his rationalism was shaken , he confesses , when he came to understand the late string quartets of Beethoven . He ends his autobiography by declaring : " If I know that my Redeemer liveth it is not on the church 's testimony , but because of what Handel affirms " . 
 Within the relaxed framework of his marriage , Cardus enjoyed relationships with many women . These included Hilda " Barbe " Ede , with whom he shared a passionate affair in the 1930s before her sudden death in 1937 ; Cardus referred to her as " Milady " , and devoted a chapter of Full Score to her . After his return from Australia his closest women friends were Margaret Hughes and Else Mayer @-@ <unk> , to whom he referred respectively as his " cricket wife " and his " music wife " . Hughes , who was more than 30 years younger than Cardus , became his literary executor after his death , and edited several collections of his cricketing and musical writings . 
 = = Books by Cardus = = 
 The list includes all original works together with collections , anthologies and books edited or jointly edited by Cardus . Posthumous publications are included . Publication year relates to the original edition ; many of the books have been reissued , often by different publishers . 
 = = = Autobiographical works = = = 
 Autobiography . London : Collins . 1947 . OCLC <unk> . 
 Second Innings — Autobiographical Reminiscences . London : Collins . 1950 . OCLC <unk> . 
 My Life ( edited by H.G. Earnshaw ) . London : Collins . 1965 . OCLC <unk> . A condensed edition of Autobiography and Second Innings 
 Full Score . London : Cassell . 1970 . ISBN <unk> . 
 Conversations with Cardus ( edited by Robin Daniels ) . London : Gollancz . 1976 . ISBN <unk> . 
 = = = Music books = = = 
 Samuel Langford — Musical Criticisms ( edited by Neville Cardus ) . London and Oxford : Oxford University Press . 1929 . OCLC <unk> . 
 Ten Composers . London : Jonathan Cape . 1944 . OCLC <unk> . ( Chapters on Schubert , Wagner , Brahms , Mahler , Richard Strauss , César Franck , Debussy , Elgar , Delius and Sibelius ) 
 Music for Pleasure . Sydney and London : Angus & Robertson . 1942 . OCLC <unk> . 
 Kathleen Ferrier — A Memoir . London : Hamish Hamilton . 1954 . OCLC <unk> . ( A memorial volume , edited by Cardus , with additional contributions by Winifred Ferrier , Sir John Barbirolli , Benjamin Britten , Roy Henderson , Gerald Moore and Bruno Walter ) 
 Talking of Music . London : Collins . 1957 . OCLC <unk> . 
 A Composers Eleven . London : Jonathan Cape . 1958 . OCLC <unk> . ( A revised version of Ten Composers , with an additional chapter on Bruckner ) 
 Sir Thomas Beecham — A Memoir . London : Collins . 1961 . OCLC <unk> . 
 Gustav Mahler — His Mind and His Music . London : Gollancz . 1965 . OCLC <unk> . 
 The Delights of Music — A Critic 's Choice . London : Gollancz . 1966 . OCLC <unk> . 
 What is Music ? ( edited by Margaret Hughes ) . London : White Lion . 1977 . ISBN <unk> . 
 Cardus on Music — A Centenary Collection ( edited by Donald Wright ) . London : Hamish Hamilton . 1988 . ISBN <unk> . 
 = = = Cricket books = = = 
 A Cricketer 's Book . London : Grant Richards . 1922 . OCLC <unk> . 
 Days In the Sun — A Cricketer 's Journal . London : Grant Richards . 1924 . OCLC <unk> . 
