 Numerous easter eggs and secrets were added to the game to fuel the exploration efforts and wild speculation of many gamers . One of the most notable features is the pieces of cheese hidden on every level . These were deliberately placed by one of the game 's artists as a graphical oddity for the player 's confusion . The face of celebrity Nintendo fan Robin Williams was used for Daniel Carrington . The face of Shigeru Miyamoto along with faces of other Nintendo executives and games journalists can be seen on minor characters such as enemy guards in the missions and as selectable avatars in the multiplayer mode . The ranking system of the Combat Simulator mode awards a special username and password to skilled players . Rare had originally intended these details to allow access to password @-@ protected parts of the official Perfect Dark website , but these sections were never implemented . 
 = = Marketing and release = = 
 Rare announced in mid @-@ 1998 that their follow @-@ up to GoldenEye 007 would appear at that year 's Electronic Entertainment Expo in Atlanta as Nintendo 's lead game , and claimed that the game , using the same engine as its predecessor , would be available by Christmas 1999 . The release date gradually slipped but the game continued to be heavily trailed in magazines , with Nintendo Official Magazine predicting that it would be " the best shooting game this century " . A working version of the game appeared at the European Computer Trade Show 1998 ; N64 Magazine described the preview as having " the kind of attention to detail that had everyone who saw [ it ] drooling " . Shortly before release , Rare unveiled a number of websites for companies in the game 's universe , such as <unk> , to promote interest in the game 's storyline . 
 The first release of the game came on 22 May 2000 in North America . Nintendo arranged a number of publicity stunts to promote the release , including hiring model Michele Merkin , who appeared as the lead character Joanna Dark in commercials and in @-@ store promotions for the game cartridge . Unlike GoldenEye 007 , the game received an M ( Mature ) rating from the Entertainment Software Rating Board due to its graphic content and adult language . This caused some controversy , as Nintendo has a reputation for family @-@ friendly games like Mario and Pokémon . Total sales for the game reached 1 @.@ 3 million copies in the United States . The European release followed on 30 June , and finally the game was released in Japan on 21 October . The Japanese launch was a success , with the sale of 35 @,@ 000 copies in the first week , and 77 @,@ 000 in total . Worldwide , Perfect Dark sold 3 @.@ 2 million copies according to game designer Chris Tilston . As a result , a Player 's Choice edition was released in 2001 . 
 A separate Game Boy Color game set in the same fictional universe , also titled Perfect Dark , was released shortly afterwards in August 2000 to help promote the Nintendo 64 game . Although its storyline is different from the Nintendo 64 title , the game features a compatibility mode that allows certain features within the Nintendo 64 game to alternatively be unlocked , via a Transfer Pak . On the other hand , a double soundtrack album , titled Perfect Dark : Dual CD Soundtrack , which features the complete score of the game , was released on 15 November 2000 exclusively through Nintendo Power magazine . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Upon release , Perfect Dark received very strong reviews from magazines and websites . Critics praised multiple aspects of the game , particularly its graphics , sound and value . GameSpot reviewer Joe Fielder awarded the game a rating of 9 @.@ 9 out of 10 , making it the highest @-@ reviewed first @-@ person shooter of the site . He commented , " As a single @-@ player or multiplayer [ first @-@ person shooter ] experience , Perfect Dark is unparalleled on the console systems " . Patrick Klepek , writing for Gaming Age , described it as " probably one of the best [ first @-@ person shooters ] to be released in quite a while " , while Chi Kong Lui of GameCritics criticised the game for its weak characters and unoriginal storyline , but nevertheless judged the " extraordinary amount of high @-@ quality multiplayer modes and features " , meant that " the game is still a blast " . 
 The graphics were praised for their dynamic lighting , clean textures , and realistic and fluid animations . IGN journalist Matt Casamassina remarked that the levels are much more detailed than the ones from GoldenEye 007 and that the polygon character models and weapons are " wonderfully animated " . Game Revolution highlighted the game 's semi @-@ realistic look , saying that it " adds to the depth and addiction of the game " . The sound received similar praise , with Jonathan Nicklas of Gaming Target comparing it favourably to that of Capcom 's survival horror title Resident Evil 2 . The voiced cutscenes , amount of ambient noises , musical score , and Dolby Surround Sound capabilities were said to effectively bring the game to life . The music was described as a mixture between Vangelis ' Blade Runner theme and the GoldenEye 007 soundtrack . 
 The gameplay was generally praised for the challenging artificial intelligence of enemies and varied level design . GameCritics credited the missions for their " nice mix of timed , patterned , and random events that makes playing through them different and refreshing each time " . The enemies were admired for their use of squad tactics , for waiting for the player to come back instead of obediently chasing after them , and for ducking around a corner for cover . GamePro also gave high marks to the game 's Counter Operative mode , noting that the player " never [ knows ] which of the random bad guys [ the ] opponent controls " . The multiplayer and replay value were seen as the strongest features of the game . Reviewers noted that the flexibility of options , amount of game modes , " clever " weapons , number of unlockable features , and customisable Simulants give the game " endless replay value " . GameCritics stated that " Perfect Dark is easily the most advanced , elaborate , and entertaining multiplayer gaming experience on any home console . " 
 One frequently criticised aspect of the game was its low and inconsistent frame rate . According to Trigger Happy author Steven Poole , " The game 's inadequate temporal resolution — owing to a wrongheaded choice to privilege visual detail over frame @-@ rate — made it unplayable at higher difficulty levels . " In contrast , IGN pointed out that the frame rate " can be sluggish in certain wide @-@ open areas or when there are lots of enemies on @-@ screen , but for some odd reason it 's never really bothersome . Most of the time you 're so caught up in the game that you don 't notice it , and when you do , you 're willing to forgive it as Perfect Dark is just too much fun to dwell on such an issue " . Poole also described the " lazy sci @-@ fi fetishism " of Joanna Dark 's character design as " a blatant and doomed attempt to steal the thunder of Lara Croft " , and argued that she illustrated the challenges of characterising the protagonists of first @-@ person shooters , a problem that GoldenEye 007 had avoided by using the already well @-@ known character James Bond . 
 The overall positive reaction from critics can be gauged by the results of review compilation sites . The game has a Metacritic rating of 97 out of 100 , which is considered " universal acclaim " , and a GameRankings aggregate review score of 95 % as of June 2007 . Perfect Dark has also been featured in several " greatest game " lists . In 2006 , the game was placed at number 15 on IGN 's Readers Choice Top 100 Games Ever and Nintendo Power rated it the 100th best game made on a Nintendo system . In 2007 , the game was placed at number 86 on IGN 's Top 100 Games of All Time and Edge placed it at number 28 on their list of 100 Best Videogames ( a list voted for by readers , Edge staff and gaming industry professionals ) . Rare was also recognised for its work on the game , as the company was awarded the BAFTA Interactive Entertainment Moving Images Award for 2000 and the Golden Satellite Award for Best Interactive Product in 2001 . At the GameSpot 's 2000 Game of the Year Awards , Perfect Dark was awarded Best Nintendo 64 Game and Best Shooting Game . 
 Edge published two retrospective articles on Perfect Dark in 2007 and 2008 . The magazine acknowledged that the game 's frame rate and other dated elements of its design rendered it " nigh @-@ on unplayable " , but found its ambitious range of options still praiseworthy : " At release , Perfect Dark was the most comprehensive first @-@ person shooter ever made , and in some ways it still is . " Edge found the ambitious mentality which resulted in weapons and computer @-@ controlled players being " designed for possibilities rather than balance " , both one of Perfect Dark 's most interesting aspects and the cause of its biggest problem : " Restraint [ ... ] would have made Perfect Dark a tighter , more focused experience , helped with those framerate issues , and removed almost all of the fun . " The magazine concluded that despite Perfect Dark not standing up as a good game to play in 2008 , " its currency of ideas and provocation [ ... ] remains sound . " 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Perfect Dark was one of the last first @-@ person shooters released for the Nintendo 64 , which was already nearing the end of its lifespan ; Nintendo unveiled their upcoming console , the GameCube , at SpaceWorld 2000 . A " sister " game to Perfect Dark , called Velvet Dark , was initially planned to be developed for either the Nintendo 64 or GameCube in late 2000 , but the project was ultimately abandoned . Also notable is the fact that Perfect Dark features a character named Velvet Dark that can be controlled by the second player in the game 's co @-@ operative mode . Twenty months before Perfect Dark was released , several members of the development team left Rare to form Free Radical Design . This company would develop the PlayStation 2 game TimeSplitters , another first @-@ person shooter based around a completely new engine . TimeSplitters and its sequels bear several gameplay and presentational similarities to GoldenEye 007 and Perfect Dark , including a similar aiming system and unlockable options through quick level completions . 
 Meanwhile Rare began development of a prequel titled Perfect Dark Zero for the GameCube . In 2002 , the company was purchased by Microsoft and the development of the game was subsequently transferred to Microsoft 's Xbox console . It was later decided that the game would instead be released for the Xbox 360 as a launch title . Perfect Dark Zero retains Perfect Dark 's mission objective system and Joanna Dark as the protagonist , but other features were not carried over . The game 's multiplayer mode supports more players due to the more advanced Xbox 360 hardware , and can also be played online via Xbox Live . Perfect Dark Zero received generally positive reviews from critics , but some publications such as Eurogamer and Game Informer felt it was a disappointment . 
 Perfect Dark 's worldwide sales were not as great as its predecessor 's eight million , and Joanna Dark did not attain the same status in pop culture as other video game heroines such as Tomb Raider 's Lara Croft . Nevertheless , the game 's universe continued to be developed with the release of the novel Perfect Dark : Initial Vector , a Rare @-@ sanctioned paperback by Greg Rucka . The novel is set in the time between Perfect Dark Zero and Perfect Dark , and portrays Joanna Dark as an ex @-@ bounty hunter drawn into the Carrington Institute 's battle with dataDyne through her own vendetta against the hyper @-@ corporations . Rucka stated , " If you 've played the first game , you 're going to get a huge treat , because a lot of stuff that happens in Perfect Dark we set up in the novel . " In 2007 , two new titles were developed : the comic series Perfect Dark : Janus ' Tears , written by Eric Trautmann , and a second novel by Rucka titled Perfect Dark : Second Front , both of which are direct chronological sequels . 
 In 2010 , Perfect Dark was remade on the Xbox 360 as an Xbox Live Arcade game , featuring reworked graphics and online features ( see Perfect Dark XBLA ) . The development of the remake was handled by 4J Studios , the same studio that previously handled the Xbox Live Arcade ports of Rare 's platform games Banjo @-@ Kazooie and Banjo @-@ Tooie . The remake was generally well received : while some critics considered the relatively unchanged game to be outdated , most agreed that the title was a solid revival of a classic . In August 2015 , both Perfect Dark Zero and the Xbox Live Arcade version of Perfect Dark were released for the Xbox One as part of Microsoft 's Rare Replay collection . 
 = Tribal Hidage = 
 The Tribal Hidage is a list of thirty @-@ five tribes that was compiled in Anglo @-@ Saxon England some time between the 7th and 9th centuries . It includes a number of independent kingdoms and other smaller territories and assigns a number of hides to each one . The list of tribes is headed by Mercia and consists almost exclusively of peoples who lived south of the Humber estuary and territories that surrounded the Mercian kingdom , some of which have never been satisfactorily identified by scholars . The value of 100 @,@ 000 hides for Wessex is by far the largest : it has been suggested that this was a deliberate exaggeration . 
 The original purpose of the Tribal Hidage remains unknown : many scholars believe that it was a tribute list created by a king , but other possibilities have been suggested . The hidage figures may be purely symbolic and merely reflect the prestige of each territory , or they may represent an early example of book @-@ keeping . Many historians are convinced that the Tribal Hidage originated from Mercia , which dominated southern Anglo @-@ Saxon England until the start of the 9th century , but others have argued that the text was Northumbrian in origin . 
 The Tribal Hidage has been of great importance to historians since the middle of the 19th century , partly because it mentions territories unrecorded in other documents . Attempts to link all the names in the list with modern places are highly speculative and all resulting maps are treated with caution . Three different versions ( or recensions ) of the Tribal Hidage have survived , two of which resemble each other : one dates from the 11th century and is part of a miscellany of works ; another is contained in a 17th @-@ century Latin treatise ; the third version , which has survived in six mediaeval manuscripts , has many omissions and spelling variations . All three versions appear to be based on the same lost manuscript : historians have been unable to establish a date for the original compilation . The Tribal Hidage has been used to construct theories about the political organisation of the Anglo @-@ Saxons , and to give an insight into the Mercian state and its neighbours at a time when Mercia held hegemony over a number of other peoples . It has been used to support theories regarding the origin and location of the tribes in the list and the way in which the tribes were systematically assessed and ruled by others . Some historians have proposed that the Tribal Hidage is not a list of peoples but of administrative areas . 
 = = The hide assessments = = 
 The Tribal Hidage is , according to D. P. Kirby 's description , " a list of total assessments in terms of hides for a number of territories south of the Humber , which has been variously dated from the mid @-@ 7th to the second half of the 8th century " . Most of the kingdoms of the Heptarchy are included . Mercia , which is assigned 30 @,@ 000 hides , is at the top at the list , followed by a number of small tribes to the west and north of Mercia , all of which have no more than 7000 hides listed . Other named tribes have even smaller hidages , of between 300 and 1200 hides : of these the <unk> , <unk> , <unk> and <unk> cannot be identified , whilst the others have been tentatively located around the south of England and in the border region between Mercia and East Anglia . <unk> can be heard as <unk> and understood as the area settled by Jutes in and near the Meon Valley of Hampshire . The term ' <unk> ' is a late <unk> <unk> of the Old English ' <unk> ' ( people / men of ) the letter forms of ' w ' <unk> and the long @-@ tailed ' r ' being read as ' g ' . A number of territories , such as the <unk> , have only been located by means of place @-@ names evidence . The list concludes with several other kingdoms from the Heptarchy : the East Angles ( who are assessed at 30 @,@ 000 hides ) , the East Saxons ( 7 @,@ 000 hides ) , Kent ( 15 @,@ 000 hides ) , the South Saxons ( 7 @,@ 000 hides ) and Wessex , which is assessed at 100 @,@ 000 hides . 
 The round figures of the hidage assessments make it unlikely they were the result of an accurate survey . The methods of assessment used probably differed according to the size of the region . The figures may be of purely symbolic significance , reflecting the status of each tribe at the time it was assessed . The totals given within the text for the figures suggest that the Tribal Hidage was perhaps used as a form of book @-@ keeping . Frank Stenton describes the hidage figures given for the Heptarchy kingdoms as exaggerated and in the instances of Mercia and Wessex , " entirely at variance with other information " . 
 = = The surviving manuscripts = = 
 A manuscript , now lost , was originally used to produce the three known different recensions of the Tribal Hidage : these have been named <unk> A , B and C. 
 Recension A , the earliest and most complete copy of the Tribal Hidage , dates from the 11th century . It is included in a miscellany of works , written in Old English and Latin , with Aelfric 's Latin Grammar and his homily De initio <unk> , a work written in 1034 . It is in the keeping of the British Library , reference MS Harley <unk> . It was written by several different scribes , at a date no later than 1032 . 
 Recension B , which resembles Recension A , is contained in a 17th @-@ century Latin treatise , <unk> in <unk> <unk> ad rem <unk> <unk> , written by Henry Spelman in 1626 . The tribal names are given in Old English . There are significant differences in spelling between the two recessions . The differences ( for instance Spelman 's use of the word <unk> ) indicate that the text he copied was not Recension A , but a different text , written in Latin . According to Peter Featherstone , the highly edited form of the copied text suggests the possibility that Spelman embellished the Latin text himself . 
 Recension C has survived in six Latin documents . The texts each contain common omissions and spellings . Four versions , of 13th @-@ century origin , formed part of a collection of legal texts and , according to Featherstone , " may have been intended to act as part of a record of native English custom " . The other two versions are a century older : one is flawed and may have been a scribe 's exercise and the other was part of a set of legal texts . 
 = = Origin = = 
 Historians have not been able to agree upon the date for the original compilation of the list . According to Campbell , who notes the plausibility of it being produced during the rise of Mercia , the document can probably be dated back to the 7th or 8th century . Other historians , such as J. Brownbill , Barbara Yorke , Frank Stenton and Cyril Hart , have generally agreed that the Tribal Hidage originated from Mercia at around this time , although they have different theories for the identity of the Mercian overlord under whom the list was compiled . Wendy Davies and Hayo Vierck have placed the document 's origin more precisely at 670 @-@ 690 . 
 There is near universal agreement that the text originates from Mercia , partly because the kings of Mercia are known to have held extensive power over other Anglo @-@ Saxon territories from the late 7th to the early 9th centuries , but also because the list , headed by Mercia , is almost exclusively of peoples who lived south of the river Humber . Peter Featherstone has concluded that the original material , dating from late 7th century Mercia , was then used to be included in a late 9th century document and asserts that the Mercian kingdom " was at the centre of the world mapped out by the Tribal Hidage " . Frank Stenton acknowledged that the evidence is not conclusive when he noted that " the Tribal Hidage was almost certainly compiled in Mercia " . 
 In contrast to most historians , Professor Nicholas Brooks has suggested that the list is of Northumbrian origin , noting that it would account for the inclusion of Elmet and the absence of the two Northumbrian kingdoms of Deira and Bernicia . He notes that a Mercian tribute list was would not have been headed by Mercia , as " an early mediaeval king did not impose tribute upon his own kingdom " : it must have been a list produced by another kingdom , perhaps with an altogether different purpose . 
 N. J. Higham has argued that because the date of the original information is unknown and the largest Northumbrian kingdoms are not included in the Tribal Hidage , it cannot be proved to be a tribute list of Mercian origin . He notes that Elmet , which was never a province of Mercia , is included in the list . He suggests that the Tribal Hidage may have been a tribute list drawn up by Edwin of Northumbria in the 620s , and that it probably originated before 685 , after which no Northumbrian king exercised imperium over the <unk> kingdoms . According to Higham , the values assigned to each people are likely to be specific to the events of 625 @-@ 626 , representing the individual contracts made between Edwin and those who recognised his overlordship at that time . This explains the artificial and rounded nature of the figures that were arrived at : the figure of 100 @,@ 000 hides for the West Saxons was probably the largest number Edwin knew . However , D. P. Kirby notes that the Northumbrian origin theory has not been generally accepted as convincing . 
 = = Purpose = = 
 The purpose of the Tribal Hidage remains unknown . Over the years different theories have been suggested for its purpose , linked with a range of dates for its creation . 
 According to many experts , the Tribal Hidage was a tribute list created upon the instructions of an Anglo @-@ Saxon king such as Offa of Mercia , Wulfhere of Mercia or Edwin of Northumbria — but it may have been used for different purposes at various times during its history . Cyril Hart has described it as a tribute list that involved all of Anglo @-@ Saxon England south of the Humber and that was created for Offa , but acknowledges that no proof exists that it was compiled during his rule . Higham notes that the syntax of the text requires that a word implying ' tribute ' was omitted from each line and argues that it was " almost certainly a tribute list " . According to Higham , the large size of the West Saxon <unk> indicates that there were close links between the scale of tribute and any political considerations . James Campbell has argued that if the list served any practical purpose , it implies that tributes were assessed and obtained in an organised way , and notes that , " whatever it is , and whatever it means , it indicates a degree of orderliness , or coherence in the exercise of power ... " . 
 Yorke acknowledges that the purpose of the Tribal Hidage is unknown and that it may well not be , as has been commonly argued , an overlord 's tribute list . She warns against assuming that the minor peoples ( of 7000 hides or less ) possessed any " means of defining themselves as a distinct gentes " . She notes that among these , the Isle of Wight and the South Gyrwe tribes , tiny in terms of their hidages and geographically isolated from other peoples , were among the few who possessed their own royal dynasties . 
 P. H. Sawyer argues that the values may have had a symbolic purpose and that they were intended to be an expression of the status of each kingdom and province . To Sawyer , the obscurity of some of the tribal names and the absence from the list of others points to an early date for the original text , which he describes as a " monument to Mercian power " . The 100 @,@ 000 hides assigned to Wessex may have reflected its superior status at a later date and would imply that the Tribal Hidage in its present form was written in Wessex . The very large hidage assessment for Wessex was considered to be an error by the historian J. Brownbill , but Cyril Hart maintains that the value for Wessex is correct and that it was one of several assessments designed to exact the largest possible tribute from Mercia 's main rivals . 
 = = Historiography = = 
 Sir Henry Spelman was the first to publish the Tribal Hidage in his first volume of Glossarium <unk> ( 1626 ) and there is also a version of the text in a book written in 1691 by Thomas Gale , but no actual discussion of the Tribal Hidage emerged until 1848 , when John Mitchell Kemble 's The Saxons in England was published . In 1884 , Walter de Gray Birch wrote a paper for the British Archaeological Society , in which he discussed in detail the location of each of the tribes . The term Tribal Hidage was introduced by Frederic William Maitland in 1897 , in his book Domesday Book and Beyond . During the following decades , articles were published by William John Corbett ( 1900 ) , Hector Munro Chadwick ( 1905 ) and John Brownbill ( 1912 and 1925 ) . The most important subsequent accounts of the Tribal Hidage since Corbett , according to Campbell , are by Josiah Cox Russell ( 1947 ) , Cyril Hart ( 1971 ) , Wendy Davies and Hayo Vierck ( 1974 ) and David Dumville ( 1989 ) . 
 Kemble recognised the antiquity of Spelman 's document and used historical texts ( such as Bede 's Historia ecclesiastica gentis Anglorum ) to assess its date of origin . He proposed locations for each tribe , without attempting to locate each one , and suggested that some Anglo @-@ Saxon peoples were missing from the document . Birch , in his paper An Unpublished Manuscript of some Early Territorial Names in England , announced his discovery of what became known as Recension A , which he suggested was a 10th or 11th century copy of a lost 7th @-@ century manuscript . He methodically compared all the publications and manuscripts of the Tribal Hidage that are available at the time and placed each tribe using both his own theories and the ideas of others , some of which ( for instance when he located the <unk> in Woking , Surrey ) are now discounted . Maitland suspected that the accepted number of acres to each hide needed to be reconsidered to account for the figures in the Tribal Hidage and used his own calculations to conclude that the figures were probably exaggerated . John Brownbill advised against using Latin versions of the document , which he described as error @-@ prone . He determined that the Old English manuscript was written in 1032 and was a copy of an original Mercian manuscript . Chadwick attempted to allocate each tribe to one or more English shires , with the use of key passages from historical texts . 
 In 1971 , Hart attempted a " complete reconstruction of the political geography of Saxon England at the end of the 8th century " . Assuming that all the English south of the Humber are listed within the Tribal Hidage , he produced a map that divides southern England into Mercia 's provinces and outlying dependencies , using evidence from river boundaries and other topographical features , place @-@ names and historical borders . 
 = = Importance for historians = = 
 The Tribal Hidage is a valuable record for historians . It is unique in that no similar text has survived : the document is one of a very few to survive out of a great many records that were produced by the administrators of the Anglo @-@ Saxon kingdoms , a " chance survivor " of many more documents , as Campbell has suggested . Hart has observed that " as a detailed record of historical topography it has no parallel in the whole of western Europe " . The Tribal Hidage lists several minor kingdoms and tribes that are not recorded anywhere else and is generally agreed to be the earliest fiscal document that has survived from mediaeval England . 
 Historians have used the Tribal Hidage to provide evidence for the political organisation of Anglo @-@ Saxon England and it has been " pressed into service by those seeking to interpret the nature and geography of kingships and of ' peoples ' in pre @-@ Viking England " , according to N. J. Higham . In particular , the document has been seen as invaluable for providing evidence about the Mercian state and those peoples that were under its rule or influence . 
 Alex Woolf uses the concentration of tribes with very small hidages between Mercia and East Anglia as part of an argument that there were in existence " large , multi @-@ regional provinces , some of which were surrounded by small , contested territories " . Stenton positions the Middle Anglian peoples to the south @-@ east of the Mercians . He suggests that an independent Middle Anglia once existed , seemingly consisting of twenty of the peoples that were listed in the Tribal Hidage . The expansion of Wessex in the tenth century would have caused the obliteration of the Middle Anglia 's old divisions , by which time the places listed would have become mere names . Middle Anglia in the 7th century constitutes a model for the development of English administrative units during the period , according to Davies and Vierck , who demonstrate that it was created by Penda of Mercia when he made his son Peada king of the Middle Angles at the time that they were introduced to Christianity . 
 James Campbell refutes suggestions that the hides given for each tribe were the sum of a system of locally @-@ collected assessments and argues that a two @-@ tier system of assessment , one for large areas such as kingdoms and a more accurate one for individual estates , may have existed . He considers the possibility that many of the tribes named in the Tribal Hidage were no more than administrative units and that some names did not originate from a tribe itself but from a place from where the people were governed , eventually coming to signify the district where the tribe itself lived . Barbara Yorke suggests that the <unk> / <unk> form of several of the place @-@ names are an indication that they were named after a feature of the local landscape . She also suggests the tribes were dependent administrative units and not independent kingdoms , some of which were created as such after the main kingdoms were stabilized . 
 The term Tribal Hidage may perhaps have led scholars to underestimate how the names of the tribes were used by Anglo @-@ Saxon administrators for the purpose of labelling local regions ; the names could be referring to actual peoples ( whose identity was retained after they fell under Mercian domination ) , or administrative areas that were unconnected with the names of local peoples . Campbell suggests that the truth lies between somewhere between these two possibilities . Davies and Vierck believe the smallest of the groups in the Tribal Hidage originated from populations formed into tribes after the departure of the Romans in the fifth century and suggest that these tribes might sometimes have joined forces , until large kingdoms such as Mercia emerged around the beginning of the 7th century . Scott <unk> has argued that the Tribal Hidage provides evidence that Anglo @-@ Saxon governments required a system of " detailed assessment " in order to construct great earthworks such as Offa 's Dyke . 
 The kingdom of East Anglia is recorded for the first time in the Tribal Hidage . According to Davies and Vierck , 7th century East Anglia may have consisted of a collection of regional groups , some of which retained their individual identity . Martin Carver agrees with Davies and Vierck when he describes the territory of East Anglia as having unfixed borders , stating that " political authority appears to have primarily invested in people rather than territory " . 
 = = = Early printed texts and commentaries = = = 
 Birch , Walter de Gray ( 1884 ) . " An Unpublished Manuscript of some Early Territorial Names in England " . Journal of the British Archaeological Society . 1 40 : 28 – 46 . Retrieved 13 November 2011 . 
 Brownbill , J. ( October 1912 ) . " The Tribal Hidage " . The English Historical Review 27 : 625 – 648 @.@ doi : 10 @.@ 1093 / <unk> / <unk> Retrieved 13 November 2011 . 
 Chadwick , H. M. ( 1907 ) . " 1 England in the Sixth Century " . The Origin of the English Nation . Cambridge : Cambridge University Press. pp. 6 – 10 . Retrieved 14 November 2011 . 
 Gale , Thomas ( 1691 ) . Historiae Britannicae , Saxonicae , Anglo @-@ <unk> Scriptores XV , volume 3 ( in Latin ) . <unk> p . 748 . Retrieved 14 November 2011 . 
 Kemble , John Mitchell ( 1876 ) . The Saxons in England , volume 1 . London : Bernard <unk> pp. 81 – 84 . 
 Maitland , Frederic William ( 1907 ) . Domesday Book and Beyond : Three Essays in the Early History of England . Cambridge : Cambridge University Press. pp. 506 – 509 . 
 Riley , Henry ; Carpenter , John ( 1860 ) . " Extracts from the Cottonian <unk> of Liber <unk> and Liber Legum Regum <unk> which have not previously appeared in the Government publications " . Chronicles and memorials of Great Britain and Ireland during the Middle Ages ( in Latin and English ) . London : Great Britain Public Record Office. pp. 626 – 627 . Retrieved 14 November 2011 . 
 Spelman , Henry ( 1626 ) . Glossarium <unk> ( in Latin ) ( 1687 ed . ) . London. pp. 291 – 292 . Retrieved 17 November 2011 . 
 = = = Modern sources = = = 
 Baxter , Stephen David ; <unk> , Catherine E. ; Nelson , Janet L. ; et al . ( eds . ) . Early Medieval Studies in Memory of Patrick Wormald . Farnham ( UK ) , Burlington ( USA ) : Ashgate . 
 Brooks , Nicholas ( 2000 ) . Anglo @-@ Saxon Myths : State and Church 400 @-@ 1066 . London : Hambledon Press . ISBN 1 @-@ 85285 @-@ 154 @-@ 6 . 
 Campbell , James , ed . ( 1991 ) . The Anglo @-@ Saxons . London : Penguin . ISBN 0 @-@ 14 @-@ <unk> @-@ 5 . 
 Campbell , James ( 2000 ) . The Anglo @-@ Saxon State . London , New York : Hambledon and London . ISBN 1 @-@ 85285 @-@ 176 @-@ 7 . 
 Carver , M. O. H. , ed . ( 1992 ) . The Age of Sutton Hoo : the Seventh Century in North @-@ western Europe . Woodbridge : Boydell Press . ISBN 0 @-@ 851 @-@ <unk> @-@ 5 . 
 Davies , Wendy ; Vierck , Hayo ( 1974 ) . " The Contexts of Tribal Hidage : Social Aggregates and Settlement Patterns " . <unk> Studien 8 . Berlin , New York : De <unk> . ISBN 978 @-@ 3 @-@ 11 @-@ <unk> @-@ 2 . 
 <unk> , Scott , ed . ( 2010 ) . The Cambridge Companion to Bede . Cambridge , New York : Cambridge University Press . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 521 @-@ <unk> @-@ 0 . 
 Featherstone , Peter ( 2001 ) . " The Tribal Hidage and the <unk> of Mercia " . In Brown , Michelle P. ; Farr , Carol Ann . Mercia : an Anglo @-@ Saxon Kingdom in Europe . London : Leicester University Press . ISBN 0 @-@ 8264 @-@ <unk> @-@ 8 . 
 Hart , Cyril ( 1971 ) . " Tribal Hidage " . Transactions of the Royal Historical Society . 5th series 21 : 133 – 157 @.@ doi : 10 @.@ 2307 / <unk> . 
 Higham , N. J. ( 1995 ) . An English Empire : Bede and the Early Anglo @-@ Saxon Kings . Manchester : Manchester University Press . ISBN 0 @-@ 7190 @-@ <unk> @-@ 3 . 
 Hill , David ; Rumble , Alexander R. ( 1996 ) . The Defence of Wessex : the Burghal Hidage and Anglo @-@ Saxon Fortifications . Manchester , New York : Manchester University Press . ISBN 0 @-@ 7190 @-@ <unk> @-@ 0 . 
 Hines , John , ed . ( 1997 ) . The Anglo @-@ Saxons from the Migration Period to the Eighth Century . Woodbridge : Boydell Press . ISBN 1 @-@ <unk> @-@ 034 @-@ 5 . 
 Hunter Blair , Peter ( 2003 ) . An Introduction to Anglo @-@ Saxon England . Cambridge : Cambridge University Press . ISBN 0 @-@ 521 @-@ <unk> @-@ 0 . 
 Kirby , D.P. ( 2000 ) . The Earliest English Kings . London and New York : Routledge . ISBN 0 @-@ <unk> @-@ <unk> @-@ 8 . 
 Neal , James R. ( May 2008 ) . Defining power in the Mercian Supremacy : An examination of the dynamics of power in the kingdom of the <unk> . ( Submitted thesis ) . Reno : University of Nevada . Retrieved 17 August 2011 . 
 Sawyer , P. H. ( 1978 ) . From Roman Britain to Norman England . London : Methuen . 
 Stenton , Sir Frank ( 1988 ) . Anglo @-@ Saxon England . New York : Oxford University Press . ISBN 0 @-@ 19 @-@ <unk> @-@ 1 . 
 Woolf , Alex ( 2000 ) . " Community , Identity and Kingship in Early England " . In Frazer , William O. ; Tyrrell Andrew . Social Identity in Early Medieval Britain . London and New York : Leicester University Press . ISBN 0 @-@ <unk> @-@ 0084 @-@ 9 . 
 Yorke , Barbara ( 2000 ) . " Political and Ethnic Identity : A Case Study of Anglo @-@ Saxon Practice " . In Frazer , William O. ; Tyrrell Andrew . Social Identity in Early Medieval Britain . London and New York : Leicester University Press . ISBN 0 @-@ <unk> @-@ 0084 @-@ 9 . 
 = Ezra Meeker = 
 Ezra Manning Meeker ( December 29 , 1830 – December 3 , 1928 ) was an American pioneer who traveled the Oregon Trail by ox @-@ drawn wagon as a young man , migrating from Iowa to the Pacific Coast . Late in life he worked to memorialize the Trail , repeatedly retracing the trip of his youth . Once known as the " Hop King of the World " , he was the first mayor of Puyallup , Washington . 
 Meeker was born in Butler County , Ohio , to Jacob and Phoebe Meeker . His family relocated to Indiana when he was a boy . He married Eliza Jane Sumner in 1851 ; the following year the couple , with Ezra 's brother and with their newborn son , set out for the Oregon Territory , where land could be claimed and settled on . Although they endured hardships on the Trail in the journey of nearly six months , the entire party survived the trek . Meeker and his family briefly stayed near Portland , then journeyed north to live in the Puget Sound region . They settled at what is now Puyallup in 1862 , where Meeker grew hops for use in brewing beer . By 1887 , his business had made him wealthy , and his wife built a large mansion for the family . In 1891 an infestation of hop aphids destroyed his crops and took much of his fortune . He later tried his hand at a number of ventures , and made four largely unsuccessful trips to the Klondike , taking groceries and hoping to profit from the gold rush . 
 Meeker became convinced that the Oregon Trail was being forgotten , and he determined to bring it publicity so it could be marked and monuments erected . In 1906 – 1908 , although in his late 70s , he retraced his steps along the Oregon Trail by wagon , seeking to build monuments in communities along the way . His trek reached New York , and in Washington , D.C. he met President Theodore Roosevelt . He traveled the Trail again several times in the final two decades of this life , including by oxcart in 1910 – 1912 and by airplane in 1924 . During another such trip , in 1928 , Meeker fell ill but was succored by Henry Ford . On his return to Washington state , Meeker became ill again and died there on December 3 , 1928 at age 97 . Meeker wrote several books ; his work has continued through the activities of such groups as the Oregon @-@ California Trails Association . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Ezra Manning Meeker was born in Butler County , Ohio , near Huntsville , on December 29 , 1830 , the son of Jacob ( 1804 – 1869 ) and Phoebe ( Baker ) Meeker ( 1801 – 1854 ) . His paternal ancestors had been among the early settlers of Elizabeth , New Jersey , where their ancestral home was located . In the American Revolutionary War , about twenty Meekers fought for the new nation . Ezra was the fourth of the six children Jacob and Phoebe had together , with older brothers John , Manning ( died at age one week ) and Oliver , and a younger sister Hannah and brother Clark . 
 Jacob was a miller and farmer . In 1839 , the family moved from Ohio to Indiana , close to Indianapolis — Ezra and his older brother Oliver walked behind the family wagon for 200 miles ( 320 km ) . Ezra had little formal education ; he later estimated a total of six months . Phoebe , seeing that her son 's mind was not well adapted to formal learning , allowed him to earn money through odd jobs . He obtained work as printer 's devil at the Indianapolis Journal , where his duties involved delivering the newspaper to subscribers , among them local pastor Henry Ward Beecher . In 1845 , Phoebe 's father , a Cincinnati merchant , gave his daughter $ 1 @,@ 000 , enough to buy the family a farm . As both Jacob and Ezra Meeker realized the boy enjoyed the outdoor life more than inside work , Jacob placed Ezra in charge of the farm , allowing the elder Meeker to work as a miller . 
 = = Migration to Oregon Territory ( 1852 ) = = 
 Ezra Meeker married his childhood sweetheart , Eliza Jane Sumner , in May 1851 . The <unk> lived about four miles from Indianapolis , and like the Meekers were family farmers who did not hire help . When he asked her for her hand , he told her he wanted to farm , which she accepted as long as it was on their own property . In October 1851 , the couple set out for Eddyville , Iowa , where they rented a farm . They had heard that land in Eddyville would be free , but this was not the case . Ezra , working in a surveyor 's camp , decided that he did not like Iowa 's winters — a prejudice shared by his pregnant wife . Reports were circulating through the prairies about the Oregon Territory 's free land and mild climate . Also influencing the decision was the urging of Oliver Meeker who , with friends , had outfitted for the trip to Oregon near Indianapolis , and had come to Eddyville to recruit his brother . Ezra and Eliza Jane Meeker vacillated on the decision , and it was not until early April 1852 , more than a month after the birth of their son Marion , that they decided to travel the Oregon Trail . 
 That April , Ezra , Eliza Jane , Oliver , and Marion Meeker set out to journey to Oregon , some 2 @,@ 000 miles ( 3 @,@ 200 km ) in all . With their wagon , they had two yokes of oxen , one of cows and an extra cow . They were accompanied by William Buck , who would remain with them much of the way before separating from them to go to California . Buck outfitted the wagon , Meeker selected the animals , and with his wife carefully prepared food supplies . The wagons of Meeker 's grouping traveled together by informal agreement ; there was no wagon master in overall charge . 
 A number of Oliver Meeker 's friends from Indianapolis joined the group before the party left Iowa . They crossed the Missouri River at the small Mormon settlement of Kanesville ( today Council Bluffs , Iowa ) . Meeker recounted that , as he stood on the far side of the Missouri , he felt as if he had left the United States . As they journeyed westward along the Platte River in Nebraska Territory , there were such large numbers traveling that they were never out of sight of the tens of thousands of other pioneers journeying west that year . Sometimes several wagons advanced side by side . The Meekers chose a slow , steady pace , unlike many who sought to rush along as quickly as possible . Piles of abandoned possessions lined the way , cast aside to lighten loads . As the party went further west , they passed some of those who had hurried past them , and whose wagons had broken down or whose oxen had died as a result of failure to care for them properly . Disease was an ever @-@ present risk ; at the present site of Kearney , Nebraska , Oliver Meeker was stricken with illness . This led to a division of the group when most of Oliver 's friends , including later Idaho Territory governor David W. Ballard , refused to wait . Oliver recovered after four days , and was one of the lucky ones — his brother later estimated that one in ten of those who took the Trail perished during the journey . Ezra Meeker remembered meeting one wagon train , slowly moving east against the flow of traffic . That group had made it as far as Fort Laramie ( today in Wyoming ) before losing the last of its menfolk , and the women and children turned back , hoping to regain their homes in the East . He never learned if they made it . According to local historians Bert and Margie Webber , " all of these deaths made a great impression on the young man " . 
 They encountered Native Americans , who would sometimes demand provisions for passage , but none were given and none of the incidents ended with violence . The travelers ' stores were supplemented by shooting bison , which roamed the Great Plains in huge numbers . Despite being a source of food , the bison were a danger as their stampedes could destroy property and kill irreplaceable stock . In southeastern Idaho , the California Trail separated from the Oregon , and Buck and some of the rest of the party split off there ; they settled in California and remained friends with Meeker until their deaths . 
 Meeker found that the final stretch between Fort Boise ( now Boise , Idaho ) and The Dalles was the most difficult . The section is filled with mountains and deserts , and there was little chance of supplementing stores . Those who entered this 350 miles ( 560 km ) segment with exhausted teams or minimal supplies often died along it . Others shed baggage brought across half a continent , saving only provisions . Parties who feared this part of the journey sometimes tried to float down the Snake and Columbia Rivers ; many were wrecked in the rapids and died . At The Dalles , where river passage was available to Portland , the Meeker party found a motley crowd of emigrants . With the money earned at the ferry , they booked passage downriver . Oliver Meeker brought the livestock ahead overland , and met Ezra and his family on their arrival in Portland on October 1 , 1852 , where they slept inside a house for the first time since leaving Iowa . Ezra Meeker had lost 20 pounds ( 9 @.@ 1 kg ) and possessed $ 2 @.@ 75 in cash . All of the party survived , although Jacob Davenport , one of Oliver Meeker 's friends from Indiana , became ill on the final part of the trip and died some weeks after reaching Portland . All but one of the livestock completed the trip — a cow was lost while crossing the Missouri River . Ezra Meeker considered his journey over the Oregon Trail to have been the making of him as a man . 
 = = Territorial pioneer = = 
 = = = Early days = = = 
 Meeker 's first employment in the Pacific Northwest was unloading a ship that had docked at Portland . He moved to the nearby town of St. Helens , where construction of a wharf in competition with Portland 's was under way — Oliver rented a house to lodge workers in , and Ezra went to help his brother . By this time , Ezra Meeker and his wife were determined to fulfill their original plan to farm , and when work was abandoned on the wharf , he went to find land which could be cultivated . 
 Meeker first made a claim in January 1853 about 40 miles ( 64 km ) downriver from Portland , on the current site of Kalama , Washington . There , he built a log cabin and began his first farm . He did not build close to the water , which proved fortunate as there was a major flood on the Columbia soon after he claimed the land . Instead , he profited from the incident , selling logs the river left on his claim , together with trees he chopped down , for lumber . 
 In April 1853 , Meeker heard that the lands north of the Columbia would become a separate territory ( named Washington Territory ) , with its capital on Puget Sound , an inlet of the Pacific . He decided to travel north with his brother to scout for lands to claim around the waterway . There were as yet only about 500 European @-@ descended inhabitants in the Puget Sound region , of which 100 were in the village of Olympia , which would become the territorial ( and later state ) capital . Despite there only being a few settlers , there was considerable activity in the area — the lumber of Puget Sound fueled San Francisco 's building boom . The Meekers ' first view of Puget Sound was unprepossessing ; the tide was out , exposing mud flats . Nevertheless , they pressed on , building a skiff to travel by water . They were met by friendly Indians , who sold them clams and taught them how to cook the shellfish . Engaging one of the Native Americans as guide , they explored the area , looking for good , well @-@ located farmland . At one point , they entered the Puyallup River , in a region where no white settlers lived , and camped on the present site of Puyallup , but were deterred by the large number of huge trees , which would make it difficult to clear land for farming . They decided on tracts on McNeil Island , not far from the thriving town of Steilacoom , where the farm 's produce could be sold . Oliver remained on the island to build a cabin while his brother went back to fetch family and possessions , and sell their old claims at Kalama . He returned to a cabin in which they installed a glass window that looked over the water to Steilacoom , with a view of Mount Rainier . The Meeker claim was later the site of McNeil Island Corrections Center . 
 Later in 1853 , Ezra and Oliver Meeker received a three @-@ month @-@ old letter from their father , stating that he and other family members wanted to emigrate , and would do so if Oliver Meeker could return to assist them . They immediately responded that Oliver would return to Indiana by early the following year , and put their plans on hold to prepare for and finance his journey by steamship and rail . In August 1854 , Ezra Meeker received word that his relatives were en route , but were delayed and short on provisions . He quickly went to their aid , intending to guide them through the Naches Pass into the Puget Sound area . When he found his family 's party close to the first Fort Walla Walla ( near Richland , Washington ) , he learned that his mother and a younger brother had died along the Trail . He guided the survivors through the pass and to his claim on McNeil Island . 
 Jacob Meeker saw only limited prospects on the island , and the family took claims near Tacoma , where they operated a general store in Steilacoom . On November 5 , 1855 , Ezra Meeker claimed 325 @.@ 21 acres ( 131 @.@ 61 ha ) of land called Swamp Place , near Fern Hill , southeast of Tacoma . He began to improve the land , planting a garden and an orchard . 
 Pursuant to the 1854 Treaty of Medicine Creek , settlers purchased lands from the Indians . The agreement , signed under duress , restricted the Native Americans to inadequate reservations , and in 1855 , the Puget Sound War broke out , bringing unrest to the region over the following two years . Ezra Meeker had maintained good relations with the Native Americans , and did not fight in the conflict , though he accompanied one expedition to recover possessions captured by the Indians . A controversial aspect of the war was the trials and hanging of Chief Leschi , deemed responsible for killing during the conflict . Meeker sat on the jury in the first trial , which resulted in a hung jury , with Meeker and another man holding out for acquittal on the grounds that Leschi was a combatant in wartime . A second trial convicted Leschi , and he was hanged . Meeker described the execution as wrongful , and in later years wrote of the incident . In 1895 , Meeker chartered a special train to bring whites to Leschi 's reburial on tribal land , and in 2004 the Washington State Senate passed a resolution that Leschi had been unjustly treated ; a special historical tribunal made up of past and present justices of the Washington Supreme Court also exonerated Leschi as both he and the man he was said to have killed were combatants . 
 = = = " Hop King of the World " = = = 
 Ezra Meeker 's farm at Swamp Place was not a success as the land was too poor to grow crops . The family continued to run the store in Steilacoom . On January 5 , 1861 , Oliver Meeker drowned while returning from a buying trip to San Francisco , when his ship , the Northerner , sank off the California coast . The Meekers had borrowed to finance the trip , and the losses from this disaster reduced Ezra Meeker to near penury . He secured the squatter 's claim of Jerry <unk> on land in the Puyallup Valley , and moved his wife and children there in 1862 . While clearing his own holdings , he earned money by helping to clear the land of others . His father and surviving brother , John Meeker , also had claims in the valley . John Meeker had come to Washington Territory by ship in 1859 and had settled in the Puyallup Valley . Ezra Meeker ran for the Washington Territorial Legislature in 1861 , but was defeated . In 1869 , Meeker ran for Pierce County Surveyor ; he was defeated by James Gallagher , 138 votes to 116 . 
 In 1865 , Olympia brewer Isaac Wood imported some hop roots from the United Kingdom , hopeful that they would do well in the Pacific Northwest . As hops , used to flavor beer , were not then grown locally , the cost of transport from Britain or New York made his beer expensive , and he hoped Puget Sound @-@ area farmers would grow hops and supply him . He was a friend of Jacob Meeker , and gave him the roots to grow . Jacob passed some of them on to Ezra . The plants grew extremely well , and at the end of the season , the Meekers earned $ 185 from selling Wood the crop . Such a sum was rarely seen in the Puyallup Valley at that time , and a hop @-@ growing boom promptly began . Ezra Meeker , with his head start , was able to repeatedly expand operations , he eventually had 500 acres ( 200 ha ) of hop @-@ growing lands . He also built one of the first hop @-@ drying kilns in the valley . For years Meeker supplied Portland brewer Henry Weinhard . 
 The fertile soil and temperate climate of the valley proved ideal for hops . Not only did the plants thrive , farmers were able to obtain four or five times the usual yield . Meeker , never one to miss an opportunity , formed his own hop brokerage business . In 1870 , he penned an 80 @-@ page pamphlet , Washington Territory West of the Cascades , to promote investment in the region . He took ship for San Francisco , then journeyed east by the new transcontinental railroad , hoping to get the railroads to expand to his region . He met with newspaper editor Horace Greeley ( known for his famous advice , " Go West , young man " ) and with railroad mogul Jay Cooke as part of his promotional blitz . Cooke , who was building the Northern Pacific Railway to cross the northern tier of the country , not only bought up Meeker 's pamphlets to give away to potential investors , but hired Meeker to drum up interest in his railroad . While working from a Manhattan office , Meeker dressed like city dwellers , but did not entirely lose his frontier habits , often stirring a lump of butter into his coffee . 
 In 1877 , Meeker filed a plat for a townsite to surround his cabin . He named the town Puyallup , using the local Indian words for generous people , according to Meeker . The local post office had previously been called " Franklin " , a common designation in the United States ; Meeker , the town 's first postmaster , stated that the new name was likely to remain unique . He later admitted that the pronunciation of Puyallup caused confusion when he visited England — it still remains difficult for non @-@ locals . 
 Meeker strove to improve life in the region , and donated land and money towards town buildings and parks , a theatre and a hotel while defraying the start @-@ up costs of a wood products factory . The Ezra Meeker Historical Society , in their 1972 pamphlet on his life , wrote of his activities : 
 During those years , Mr. Meeker became a dynamic force in the community , and had a part in almost everything that happened in the valley . Restless , forceful , a natural leader , he became a prime mover , galvanizing the citizens of Puyallup into action on such vital problems as the building of streets , roads , homes , schools , and businesses and transforming the forest into one of the most progressive small communities in the state . If he was not leading an undertaking , he was sure to be a busy member of some committee working on it . 
 Hops made many farmers wealthy , including Meeker , who at one point claimed he had earned a half million dollars for his crop . In 1880 , he wrote his first book , Hop Culture in the United States , and soon after became known as the " Hop King of the World " . By the 1880s , he was the wealthiest man in the territory , and had formed a London branch of his hop brokerage . He served as Washington Territory 's representative at the 1885 – 1886 North Central & South American Exposition in New Orleans ; he also took exhibits to London 's Colonial and Indian Exposition after the New Orleans fair closed . In 1886 , Meeker sought the Republican nomination for territorial delegate to Congress , but was defeated after many ballots at the party convention . He became a supporter of women 's suffrage , which was the subject of a long @-@ running political battle in Washington Territory , a dispute which lasted well after statehood in 1889 . 
 Eliza Jane felt that the family should live in a better house than their original cabin , and between 1887 and 1890 built what became known as the Meeker Mansion in Puyallup . The cost was $ 26 @,@ 000 , a very large sum at the time . An Italian artist lived with the Meekers for a year , painting careful details on the ceilings . The Meekers moved in during 1890 , the same year Puyallup was formally incorporated under state law — they donated their old homesite to the town for a park . In 1890 , Meeker served as first mayor of Puyallup . He was elected to a second , non @-@ consecutive term for 1892 . 
 = = Ruin and Klondike = = 
 In 1891 , a blight of hop aphids struck the hop @-@ growing West Coast from British Columbia to California . Although sprays of various liquids were used in an attempt to defeat the insects , use of such pesticides damaged the hops . In 1892 , the crop decreased to half of what it had been before the infestation . Meeker had advanced money to many growers , who were unable to repay him . The problems in the valley were made worse by the Panic of 1893 , a severe worldwide depression . Business after business in which Meeker had invested failed , such as the Puyallup Electric Light Company . He was overextended , and lost much of his fortune , and eventually his lands to foreclosure . 
 Meeker spent part of the winter of 1895 – 1896 in London , recouping what he could from his interests there . In 1896 , gold was discovered both in Alaska and in Canada , and when Meeker returned from the United Kingdom , he found his sons , Marion and Fred , preparing to leave for Cook Inlet , Alaska . They found all the worthwhile claims had already been taken . Nevertheless , the Meeker family saw the finds as a possible road to financial recovery , and founded a company to buy and sell mining claims , though they knew little about the trade . In 1897 , Meeker and his sons journeyed to the Kootenay country of southeastern British Columbia , where gold had been found . Despite the fact Meeker was aged 66 , he undertook a full share of the labor . Both Meeker sons filed claims in Canada , but the mines required additional investment . Meeker raised money to travel to New York to speak with his old contacts , where he received more promises than cash . On the return leg he failed to raise money in visits in Illinois and Minneapolis and by July 1897 , he was back in the Kootenays , working the claim . When the gold discovery in the Klondike in northwestern Canada was publicized that year , Meeker saw that as a better opportunity , and sent his son Fred to investigate . Fred Meeker returned with a report in November ; the Meekers sought to finance a mining expedition to the Klondike , but failed to raise adequate money from investors . 
 Despite his inability to raise funds for mining , Meeker was certain there was a way to make money from the gold rush . He and Eliza Jane spent much of the winter of 1897 – 1898 drying vegetables , and Ezra Meeker departed for Skagway , Alaska , on March 20 , 1898 with 30 @,@ 000 pounds ( 14 @,@ 000 kg ) of dried produce — Fred Meeker and his wife Clara were already across the border in what would soon be designated as the Yukon Territory . The 67 @-@ year @-@ old Meeker , with one business associate , climbed the steep Chilkoot Pass . With thousands of others in boats and on rafts , he floated down the Yukon River once the ice broke up in late May , and sold his vegetables in two weeks in Dawson City . He returned to Puyallup in July , only to set out again with more supplies the following month . This time , he and his son @-@ in @-@ law , Roderick McDonald , opened a store , the Log Cabin Grocery , in Dawson City , and remained through the winter . 
 Meeker returned to the Yukon twice more , in 1899 and 1900 . Most of the money earned through groceries was invested in gold mining , and was lost . When he departed the Klondike for the last time in April 1901 , he left behind him the body of his son Fred , dead of pneumonia in Dawson City on January 30 , 1901 . In his writings , Meeker ascribed his sudden departure from the Yukon in 1901 to mining losses and his upcoming 50th wedding anniversary . Meeker scholar Dennis M. Larsen in his book on the pioneer 's Klondike adventure suggests that a more likely reason was attempts by those who had lost money in Meeker 's enterprises in the 1890s to gain the family 's remaining major asset , the Meeker Mansion . That property was sold by Eliza Jane Meeker to her daughter Caroline and son @-@ in @-@ law Eben Osborne for $ 10 @,@ 000 in mid @-@ 1901 and later that year both Ezra and Eliza Jane executed documents stating that the house had been her separate property , paid for with funds not deriving from Ezra . The sale to the Osbornes included provisions that Ezra and Eliza Jane were to have lifetime residence and $ 50 per month . Ezra Meeker did not live there after his wife 's death in 1909 , and the Osbornes sold the house in 1915 . Eben Osborne died in 1922 , survived by his 91 @-@ year @-@ old father in law . 
 = = Promoting the Trail = = 
 = = = Preparation for 1906 trip = = = 
 Meeker spent the years after the Klondike in Puyallup , where he wrote and served as president of the Washington State Historical Society , which he had helped to found in 1891 . The Ezra Meeker Historical Society described their namesake 's situation after the Klondike expeditions : 
 He was 71 years old . He had been an adventurer , laborer , surveyor , longshoreman , farmer , merchant , community leader , civic builder , richest man in the state , world traveler , miner and writer . He had made and lost millions . He had made money , not so much to hoard , but to do things with — to develop , control forces , build and promote . But his money was gone . It was generally assumed that he had finally come home to stay and live out his days in peace and quiet in his beautiful valley . Not so . He still had dreams . 
 Meeker had long contemplated the idea of marking the Oregon Trail , over which he had traveled in 1852 , with granite monuments . By the early 20th century , he was convinced that the Trail was in danger of being forgotten . Farmers were plowing up the Trail bit by bit , and as towns and cities grew along it , the Trail vanished under streets and buildings . Meeker viewed its preservation as an urgent matter because of this slow disappearance . He wanted the Trail properly marked , and monuments erected to honor the dead . 
 Meeker came up with a scheme to travel along the Trail again by ox @-@ drawn wagon , raising public awareness for his cause . He believed that public interest would provide enough money both to build markers and maintain himself along the way . Though many hucksters traveled by wagon , selling patent nostrums , Meeker felt that he would stand out , as an authentic pioneer able to tell real stories of the Trail — especially if he used authentic gear . He felt that it was likely that once newspapers got wind of his travels , they would give him ample coverage . 
 Meeker did not have much money , so he raised it from friends . Ox @-@ drawn wagons were not a common sight in the Puyallup of 1906 ; Meeker was unable to find an authentic complete wagon , and eventually used metal parts from the remains of three different ones . The construction was done by Cline & McCoy of Puyallup . Meeker found a pair of oxen ; even though one proved unsuitable , the owner insisted on him purchasing both . The one Meeker kept , named Twist , was lodged at the stockyards in Tacoma as he sought another . Meeker fixed on a herd of steers which had been brought in from Montana . He decided on one which was particularly heavy , which he named Dave . Although Dave gave Meeker much difficulty , beginning with the 8 miles ( 13 km ) drive home to Puyallup after the purchase , the animal eventually helped pull the wagon over 8 @,@ 000 miles ( 13 @,@ 000 km ) . 
 Although Meeker had not had a dog in his wagon in 1852 , he knew that people liked them , and sought to add one to his crew . Jim , a large , friendly collie who became an expedition member and Meeker 's companion for the next six years , had belonged to one of Meeker 's neighbors , a Mr. James . Meeker was impressed by the way Jim drove James ' chickens out of the area where the family grew berries , by moving slowly . Five dollars to one of James ' children secured the purchase . Some of Meeker 's friends tried to talk him out of the trip ; one local minister warned against this " impracticable project " , stating that it was " cruel to let this aged man start on this journey only to perish by exposure in the mountains " . 
 Meeker had taken an ox team and wagon to Portland 's Lewis and Clark Exposition in 1905 ; en route he had kept his eyes open for places to set up suitable monuments on the Cowlitz Trail , on which pioneers had journeyed from the Columbia River to Puget Sound . He made arrangements with locals in towns along that trail to raise money to build monuments there . He gave lectures as a fundraiser , but raised little money . He took his team and wagon for daylong shakedown trips , despite the mocking of some who remembered him as Hop King . After several days camped on his lawn as practice for the trip , and then in other nearby locales , Meeker set out from Olympia on February 19 , 1906 . 
 = = = Return to the Trail ( 1906 – 1908 ) = = = 
 According to Larsen in his book on Meeker 's journey east , 
 It 's easy to assume Ezra Meeker 's remarkable 1906 – 08 expedition over the Oregon Trail was a well @-@ oiled machine that worked as planned ... But it wasn 't always an easy journey . ... Faith in the whole enterprise , let alone encouragement , was in rather short supply . His own daughter told him that people would laugh at him if he went out on the trail with an old yoke of oxen ... 
 The first stop after Olympia for " The Old Oregon Trail Monument Expedition " was Tenino , Washington , where Meeker went ahead by train on February 20 , 1906 to make arrangements for the first monument of the trip . He still had no driver , and had his wagon pulled to Tenino by horses , with the oxen trailing behind . He appealed to a local quarry for a suitable stone , which was carved and was dedicated in Tenino at a ceremony on the 21st . He had less success as he journeyed south towards Portland ; at none of the remaining Washington stops was a monument erected , and although Meeker placed wooden posts where monuments should go , most of the designated towns did not follow through . The lack of enthusiasm about Meeker 's mission continued in Portland , where the Unitarian church elders voted against allowing Meeker the use of the building to give a fundraising lecture , pledging to do nothing to " encourage that old man to go out on the Plains to die " . 
 In Portland , Meeker lost his remaining helpers ( one refused to take a pay cut , the others for personal reasons ) . One stayed on for the boat voyage up the Columbia before leaving at The Dalles , where Meeker hired a driver / cook , William Mardon , at $ 30 per month . He remained with Meeker for the next three years . Meeker also installed an odometer on his wagon , calling The Dalles " Mile Zero " of his expedition . In The Dalles , Meeker engaged in activities which would set the pattern for his progress along the Trail : He showed off himself , his wagon and animals , to the public , and sold tickets for a lecture ( fifty cents for adults , half that for children ) he would give about the Oregon Trail , including images shown with a stereopticon . He also met with members of civic committees to raise money for a local monument . Often these monuments were erected after Meeker passed : he would position a post to designate its location . According to reporter James Aldredge in his 1975 article on Meeker 's trip , " for a septuagenarian he must have been blessed with remarkable health and endurance ... When the curious procession got underway , not the least impressive part of it was Meeker himself , with his face framed by his flowing white hair and his patriarchal beard . " According to reporter Bart Ripp in his 1993 article on Meeker , " the first expedition east in 1906 was supposed to be a speaking tour , but people were more interested in seeing the old coot in a covered wagon . It was the 20th century , and Americans wanted a show . " 
 As he journeyed east from The Dalles , Meeker met with more enthusiasm than in his home state as he slowly passed through Oregon and Idaho . As word began to spread , he sometimes found the townsfolk prepared for him , or with a stone ordered or even ready . The monument in Boise , dedicated by Meeker on April 30 , 1906 , stands on the grounds of the Idaho State Capitol . On the road , he camped as he had a half century before , but in towns most often took a hotel room , though who paid for this is uncertain . Near Pacific Springs , Wyoming at South Pass , Meeker had a stone inscribed to mark where the Trail passes through the Continental Divide . 
 Meeker remembered in a memoir , 
 The sight of Sweetwater River , twenty miles [ 32 km ] out from South Pass , revived many pleasant memories and some that were sad . I could remember the sparkling , clear water , the green skirt of undergrowth along the banks , and the restful camps , as we trudged up the stream so many years ago . And now I saw the same channel , the same hills , and apparently the same waters swiftly passing . But where were the camp fires ? Where was the herd of gaunt cattle ? Where the sound of the din of bells ? the <unk> for lost children ? Or the little groups off on the hillside to bury the dead ? All were gone . 
 Nebraska proved resistant to Meeker 's sales pitch , and near Brady , the ox Twist died , possibly after eating a poisonous plant . Meeker had to wire home to supporters for money . He hired teams of horses to pull the wagon on a temporary basis , and an attempt with two cows was not successful . He was able to temporarily yoke Dave with a cow which proved more suitable . At the Omaha Stockyards , Meeker found another ox , which he named Dandy , and broke him in on the way to Indianapolis , near where Meeker had once lived and 2 @,@ 600 miles ( 4 @,@ 200 km ) by road from Puyallup . Beginning in Nebraska , Meeker began to sell postcards from photos taken on the way — there was then a craze for postcards in the United States . He also arranged for the printing of a book about his 1852 trip , much of which he wrote during noontime halts on his 1906 trip . The funds from the sales of these items allowed him to meet expenses on the road . Meeker 's exploits were closely followed in newspapers on the West Coast as eastern and midwestern stories about him were reprinted there — when westerners perceived any slights towards Meeker , indignant editorials followed . 
 After a visit to Eddyville , Iowa , from where he had set out in 1852 , Meeker spent several weeks in Indianapolis , leaving on March 1 , 1907 when his permit to sell on the streets there expired . With the Oregon Trail run completed , he proceeded east through Ohio , Pennsylvania , and New York State , seeking to both raise public awareness and earn some money for himself through sales of his merchandise . He often spent several days in a location , so long as sales of postcards and books flourished . When the expedition reached New York City , Mayor George B. McClellan , Jr. was absent but the acting mayor told Meeker that , although he could not grant him a permit , he would instruct the police not to molest him . The message was apparently not well @-@ communicated , as at 161st and Amsterdam Avenue a policeman arrested Meeker 's helper , Mardon , for driving cattle upon the streets of New York in violation of a local ordinance . A stalemate followed as Meeker refused to move his oxen and the police had no means of doing so . The situation was resolved when higher authority ordered Mardon 's release . Meeker wanted to drive the length of Broadway ; it took a month to get the legal problems resolved . It took him six hours to drive the length of Manhattan . He had arranged with the press for photographers , who took shots of him at the New York Stock Exchange and Federal Hall . Later in his stay , he drove across the Brooklyn Bridge . 
 After a small family reunion at the old Meeker homestead near Elizabeth , New Jersey , Meeker headed south towards Washington , D.C. He had hoped to meet President Theodore Roosevelt at his summer home in Oyster Bay , New York , but Roosevelt 's staff declined , offering a meeting in Washington instead . Members of the Washington State congressional delegation cleared the way , and Meeker met Roosevelt on November 29 , 1907 . The President went outside the White House to view Meeker 's wagon and team , and expressed support for Meeker 's activities , and for a Meeker proposal for a cross @-@ country highway ( there were then none ) in honor of the pioneers . After Washington , the tour wound down : Meeker went home to Puyallup from Pittsburgh by train to see his ailing wife . On his return to the East , he arranged for transport by riverboat and train , with a journey across Missouri by wagon . The expedition was offloaded from the train in Portland , and Meeker proceeded north across Washington State ( receiving a much warmer reception ) on a slow route , finishing in Seattle on July 18 , 1908 . 
 = = = Advocate for the Oregon Trail ( 1909 – 1925 ) = = = 
 Meeker ran a large pioneer exhibit and restaurant at the 1909 Alaska @-@ Yukon @-@ Pacific Exposition in Seattle ; he later ruefully stated the Exposition had cost him his earnings from the book and card sales during his wagon tour . Later that year , he spent time in California , journeying with his wagon and team . Eliza Jane Meeker died in 1909 in Seattle — she had been in poor health for some years . Ezra Meeker was in San Francisco , peddling his wares , when his wife died — it took three days to locate him , after which he journeyed north for the funeral before returning to his work . On New Year 's Day 1910 , Meeker and his wagon and team participated in the Tournament of Roses Parade in Pasadena . 
 In 1910 , the Humphrey Bill , to appropriate money for monuments to mark the Trail , passed the House of Representatives and was introduced in the Senate , with a proviso that no money would be spent unless the Secretary of War could certify that the work would not require any further appropriations . Ezra Meeker set out that year on another two @-@ year @-@ long expedition , with the emphasis this time on locating and marking where the Trail had been , rather than on building monuments . Sometimes the ruts in the ground from the emigrants ' wagons still existed and made it obvious , but other times he had to rely on the memories of old settlers . He journeyed to Texas , but had no success in interesting people in his project there . His tour was ended in 1912 in Denver when a flood struck the city , resulting in damage to his books . Nevertheless , according to Green , Meeker 's two trips resulted in the placement of 150 monuments . A version of the Humphrey Bill passed the Senate in 1913 , but died when the House of Representatives took no action . Despite this failure , groups began marking western trails : the Sons and Daughters of the American Revolution put up plaques along the Cowlitz Trail in 1916 . 
 Beginning in 1913 , Meeker began to plan his role in the 1915 Panama @-@ Pacific Exposition in San Francisco . He had donated his wagon and oxen to a park in Tacoma : when officials there expressed concern about the cost of building a proper pavilion for them , Meeker reclaimed them and set off with them to California . Deeming Dandy unfit for the road , Meeker had him slaughtered in Portland in June 1914 and had the hide shipped back to Tacoma for taxidermy ; in November , the same fate met Dave in California . Meeker 's wagon was exhibited at the Exposition in San Francisco . His tales of the Oregon Trail became one of the star attractions of the Exposition . Nevertheless , he quarreled with the administrators of the Washington State Building , feeling that it should be open on Sundays , when the largest crowds came to the grounds . On his return , the oxen and wagon were mounted as an exhibit at the Washington State History Museum until it closed for a move to new premises in 1995 . The wagon was then deemed too fragile for display . 
 In 1916 , the 85 @-@ year @-@ old Meeker made another trip , this time by Pathfinder automobile . The Pathfinder Company , of Indianapolis , lent Meeker a car with a covered @-@ wagon @-@ style top and a driver as a publicity stunt . Meeker also received a small stipend , and journeyed in the vehicle from Washington , D.C. to Olympia . Meeker saw the use of a motor vehicle as publicizing the need for a transcontinental highway . During this trip , he lectured on the need for a national highway ; before he left he met with President Woodrow Wilson and discussed the topic with him . 
 Bernard Sun , whose grandparents were Oregon Trail pioneers in Wyoming , remembered another side of Meeker : 
 He 'd camp down on Rush Creek with a covered wagon . The old bum was riding a grub line . He 'd grub meals from all the ranchers around here . My grandmother hated the sight of him . He 'd comb that long hair at the dinner table . Put his [ false ] teeth in to eat and take them out to talk . 
 Although World War I distracted public attention from Meeker and his activities , he used the time to plan for the future . On December 29 , 1919 , his 89th birthday , he began work on another book , Seventy Years of Progress in Washington , which was published to favorable reviews . In association with Dr. Howard R. Driggs , a professor of English education at the University of Utah and later at New York University , he published a revised version of his memoirs , Ox @-@ Team Days on the Oregon Trail . In 1922 , he fell ill for one of the few times in his life . Newspapers reported that he refused to stay in bed , and his grandson , a physician , stated that he was going to put Meeker back to bed and " I am going to keep him there — if I can . If I can . " 
 Recovered , the <unk> Meeker began making fresh travel plans . With the International Air Races to be held at Dayton , Ohio , in 1924 , Meeker tried to get the War Department to allow him to fly there . He was successful , and flew with the Army pilot , Oakley G. Kelly . At a stop in Boise , Meeker quipped they were making better time than with his ox team , and in Dayton met aviation pioneer Orville Wright , to whom he commented , " You 'd be surprised at the difference between riding in a Prairie Schooner and in an airplane . " The publicity was so favorable that the Army had Kelly fly Meeker the rest of the way to Washington , D.C. , where the onetime pioneer met President Calvin Coolidge in October 1924 . Meeker returned to Seattle by train . Wanting the government to build a road over Naches Pass , where he had guided his father 's party seventy years before , Meeker ran for the Washington House of Representatives in 1924 from the 47th district but was defeated in the Republican primary by 35 votes . In 1925 , Meeker drove an ox team for several months while touring in J.C. Miller 's Wild West Show . 
 = = = Meeker reaches the end of the trail ( 1925 – 1928 ) = = = 
 By 1925 , Congress had still not passed an appropriation to mark the Trail . One means of federally sponsored fundraising at that time was to get Congress to authorize a commemorative coin ( usually a half dollar ) and designate a sponsoring organization to buy the issue at face value from the government and sell it to the public at a premium . Meeker got the idea from a group of Idahoans seeking a coin to further their preservation work at Fort Hall ; he arranged a merger of efforts . Beginning in 1925 , Meeker pressed for such a half dollar to honor the pioneers and provide money for his efforts , and in April 1926 he appeared before a Senate committee , urging the passage of legislation . Congress obliged , and Coolidge signed the bill on May 17 , 1926 at a ceremony which Meeker attended . 
 Meeker had founded the Old Oregon Trail Association in 1922 . In early 1926 , it was incorporated in New York as the Oregon Trail Memorial Association ( OTMA ) , and was given office space there by the National Highways Association . The legislation authorizing the new coin designated the OTMA as the organization which could purchase Oregon Trail Memorial half dollars from the government . The piece was designed by Laura Gardin Fraser and her husband , James Earle Fraser ( who had designed the Buffalo nickel ) . Six million coins were authorized , and a beginning was made by the striking of 48 @,@ 000 for the Association at the Philadelphia Mint ; when those ran low , 100 @,@ 000 more were coined at the San Francisco Mint . Meeker was less successful with the later issue , and many remained unsold . Although the Bureau of the Mint struck more in 1928 , these remained impounded until after Meeker 's death , with tens of thousands of the earlier issues unsold . 
 Seattle had been Meeker 's home since moving out of the mansion , but in the mid @-@ 1920s the citizens of Puyallup sought to honor him by the erection of a statue in Pioneer Park , the site of Meeker 's one @-@ time homestead . They also sought to preserve the home site , over which Eliza Jane Meeker had planted ivy a half @-@ century before , building a pergola to support the plant . With the statue and pergola completed , Meeker returned to Puyallup for the dedication ceremony in 1926 . The same year , at age 95 , Meeker published his first and only novel , Kate Mulhall , a Romance of the Oregon Trail . 
 Meeker was again advocating better roads , and gained the support of Henry Ford , who built him a Model A car with a covered wagon @-@ style top , dubbed the <unk> , to be used in another expedition over the Trail to publicize Meeker 's highway proposals . In October 1928 , Meeker was hospitalized with pneumonia in Detroit . He returned to Seattle , where he fell ill again . Meeker was taken to a room in the Frye Hotel , where he told his daughter Ella Meeker Templeton , " I can 't go . I have not yet finished my work . " Ezra Meeker died there on December 3 , 1928 , just under a month short of his 98th birthday . His body was taken in procession back to Puyallup , where he was interred beside his wife Eliza Jane in Woodbine Cemetery . Under a plaque based on the Oregon Trail Memorial coin Ezra Meeker had inspired , their gravestone , erected by the OTMA in 1939 , reads , " They came this way to win and hold the West " . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Howard Driggs succeeded Meeker as president of the OTMA , and remained in that capacity at the association and its successor , the American Pioneer Trails Association ( APTA ) , until his own death at age 89 in 1963 . The year 1930 , marking 100 years since both Meeker 's birth and the first wagon train leaving St. Louis for the Oregon Country , was proclaimed the Covered Wagon Centennial . The largest event was at one of the landmarks along the Oregon Trail , Wyoming 's Independence Rock , on July 3 – 5 , 1930 . This event included the dedication of a plaque depicting Meeker , embedded in the rock . For many years , the OTMA made it a practice to go out each summer and dedicate monuments along the Oregon Trail . Although the APTA no longer exists , that mission has been continued by state historical societies and organizations which share its purpose , such as the Oregon @-@ California Trails Association . 
 The commemorative half dollars were struck in small numbers in most years of the 1930s ; after collectors complained about the lengthy series and high prices , Congress forbade further strikings in 1939 . The first route across America , the Lincoln Highway , was completed in the 1920s , and others soon followed . Although Meeker 's highway along the Trail was not built , U.S. 30 generally parallels the route of the Oregon Trail . A number of sites relating to Meeker remain in Puyallup . In addition to his gravesite , and the Meeker Mansion ( now owned by and being restored by the Ezra Meeker Historical Society ) there is Pioneer Park , where the ivy @-@ covered pergola and the statue of Meeker may be found . 
 Local historian Lori Price noted , " Throughout his long life of nearly 98 years , the word for Meeker was action . " Historian David <unk> , in his book on the Oregon Trail , deems Meeker primarily responsible for re @-@ awakening public interest in it . According to Bert Webber , " There would be no ' Oregon Trail ' to enjoy today if Ezra Meeker had not set out , by himself , and without government subsidy , to preserve it . " Driggs stated of Meeker after his death : 
 So the Oregon Trail was blazed and tramped — traders , trappers , gold @-@ seekers , missionaries , colonists — until the highway stretched from the Missouri River to the Pacific Ocean . Years passed and railroads supplanted the old Oregon Trail ; its very location was forgotten ; disputes arose . Then an old man , almost eighty , clambered into a prairie schooner , made in part of some in which the pioneers had journeyed westward , and the Oregon Trail was retraced and marked with monuments , that a people and a nation may not forget . 
 = = Books by Ezra Meeker = = 
 Washington Territory West of the Cascade Mountains . Olympia , Washington Territory : Printed at the Transcript Office . 1870 . OCLC <unk> . Retrieved June 21 , 2013 . 
 Hop Culture in the United States. with W.A. Lawrence . Puyallup , Washington Territory : E. Meeker & Co . 1880 . OCLC <unk> . Retrieved June 21 , 2013 . 
 Pioneer Reminiscences of Puget Sound , the Tragedy of Leschi . Seattle , WA : Lowman & Hanford Stationery and Print . Co . 1905 . OCLC <unk> . Retrieved June 21 , 2013 . 
 Ox Team ; or , The Old Oregon Trail , 1852 – 1906 . New York , NY : Ezra Meeker . 1907 . OCLC <unk> , <unk> . Retrieved June 22 , 2013 . 
 Ventures and Adventures of Ezra Meeker . Seattle , WA : Rainier Print . Co . 1908 . OCLC <unk> . Retrieved June 22 , 2013 . 
 Uncle Ezra 's Pioneer Short Stories for Children . Tacoma , WA : D. W. <unk> n.d. , c . 1915 . OCLC <unk> , <unk> . Retrieved June 22 , 2013 . 
 The Busy Life of Eighty @-@ Five Years of Ezra Meeker . Seattle , WA : Ezra Meeker . 1916 . OCLC <unk> . Retrieved June 23 , 2013 . 
 Seventy Years of Progress in Washington . Seattle , WA / Tacoma , WA : <unk> Printing Co . 1921 . OCLC <unk> , <unk> . Retrieved June 23 , 2013 . 
 Ox @-@ Team Days on the Oregon Trail . Pioneer life series . Revised and edited by Howard R. Driggs , illustrated with drawings by F.N. Wilson . Yonkers @-@ on @-@ Hudson , NY : World Book Co . 1922 . OCLC <unk> , <unk> , <unk> . Retrieved June 24 , 2013 . 
 Kate Mulhall , a Romance of the Oregon Trail . Drawings by Margaret Landers Sanford , Rudolf A. <unk> and Oscar W. Lyons . New York , NY : Ezra Meeker . 1926 . OCLC <unk> . Retrieved June 24 , 2013 . 
 = Batman : Arkham Origins = 
 Batman : Arkham Origins is a 2013 action @-@ adventure video game developed by WB Games Montréal and released by Warner Bros. Interactive Entertainment for Microsoft Windows and the PlayStation 3 , Wii U and Xbox 360 video game consoles . Based on the DC Comics superhero Batman , it is the successor to the 2011 video game Batman : Arkham City and is the third main installment in the Batman : Arkham series . It was released worldwide on October 25 , 2013 . 
 Written by Corey May , Ryan Galletta and Dooma Wendschuh , the game 's main storyline is set five years before that of 2009 's Batman : Arkham Asylum and follows a younger , less @-@ refined Batman . A bounty is placed on him by crime lord Black Mask , drawing eight of the world 's greatest assassins to Gotham City on Christmas Eve . The villains , including the Joker and Anarky , take advantage of the chaos to launch nefarious schemes , while Gotham City police try to apprehend Batman . 
 The game , played from a third @-@ person perspective , focuses on Batman 's combat and stealth abilities , detective skills , and gadgets for combat and exploration . Aside from the main story , Batman can help the police deal with crimes , and confront other supervillains terrorizing the city . Arkham Origins introduces the ability for Batman to virtually recreate crimes , allowing him to investigate the scene and identify the culprit . The game is the first in the series with multiplayer capability . WB Games Montréal took over development duties for Arkham Origins from series creators Rocksteady Studios . 
 While the game received generally positive reviews , it was criticized for replicating previous Arkham games ' content and unnecessarily modifying it , while the multiplayer aspect was considered an unnecessary addition to the series . A companion game , Batman : Arkham Origins Blackgate , was released with Arkham Origins for Nintendo 3DS and PlayStation Vita , and a spin @-@ off mobile game for the iOS and Android platforms was released in October 2013 . An animated sequel , Batman : Assault on Arkham , was released in 2014 , and a successor game , Batman : Arkham Knight , was released in June 2015 . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Arkham Origins is an open world action @-@ adventure game incorporating stealth game tactics . Batman can use his cape to glide around Gotham City and the grapnel gun 's retracting rope to attach to hard @-@ to @-@ reach ledges and extend his flight . Some gadgets from previous Arkham games are present at the start of Arkham Origins , while others become available during play . Returning gadgets include the Cryptographic Sequencer , used to hack security consoles ; the <unk> , used for hooking onto surfaces ; the Batarang , a throwing weapon ; the Remote Batarang , its remote @-@ controlled counterpart ; Explosive Gel , used to destroy weak surfaces and knock down enemies ; Smoke <unk> , used for stealthy exits and entrances ; the Disruptor , which can remotely disable guns and explosive mines , and the <unk> Accelerator , an earlier version of the <unk> Boost . New equipment in Batman 's arsenal include the Remote Claw ; this allows Batman to target two objects and pull them together , allowing him to throw enemies into each other or hit them with objects ( tethering two walled points creates a tightrope for Batman to cross ) ; Shock Gloves , which allow Batman to block electric attacks , disable some enemies and stun shielded ones , and short @-@ circuit objects , and the Concussion Detonator , capable of stunning large enemy groups . 
 The game introduces a fast travel system , allowing Batman to remotely summon his plane ( the Batwing ) to transport him to other areas of the game world quicker than gliding or grappling could . Enemy tower installations prevent Batman from summoning the craft in some areas , and must be disabled to make the Batwing ( not player @-@ controlled ) available . Some towers may be disabled only when the player has the necessary equipment . 
 Players can traverse enemy @-@ controlled areas by stealth or combat . Using an enhanced version of the series ' Freeflow combat system , combat introduces a tracking system assessing the players ' efficiency and highlighting battle achievements ( such as avoiding damage and using gadgets ) . <unk> attacks to maintain momentum , performance is rewarded with experience points . These points can be used in a branching upgrade system to enhance Batman 's abilities and gadgets , allowing players to upgrade several paths or specialize in one . Enemy attacks are prompted with a warning icon , indicating that the attack can be countered . Enemies are armed with weapons such as knives , lead pipes and shields . The game introduces new enemy types : the Martial @-@ Artist ( capable of blocking , evading and countering Batman 's attacks ) , the Armored Enforcer ( invulnerable until he is dazed and de @-@ armored ) and Venom @-@ infused henchmen ( who possess superhuman strength , allowing them to grapple Batman and launch attacks which cannot be countered ) . Some enemies are armed with guns , which can damage Batman , and a player can use stealth predatory tactics to tilt the odds in their favor . Many areas feature stone gargoyles or high outcrops , helping Batman remain concealed while setting traps and knocking out enemies . 
 Arkham Origins offers side missions , including Crime in Progress ( where Batman can assist the Gotham City Police Department ( GCPD ) by rescuing police officers from a gang or keeping an informant from being thrown to his death ) . Most Wanted allows Batman to pursue villains outside of the main story ( such as Anarky , who plants bombs around the city ) . The Dark Knight system offers tasks of escalating difficulty which improve stealth and combat . Batman 's radio scanner also allows him to locate side missions ; completed missions are rewarded with experience points and upgrades to Batman 's equipment . The game features collectible objects and puzzles similar to the Riddler challenges of previous games ( orchestrated by Enigma before assuming his Riddler identity ) . Collectible objects appear , similar to those in previous games . A " 1 vs. 100 " mode in the game 's challenge maps challenges the player to survive in combat against 100 increasingly difficult enemies . 
 The game emphasizes Batman 's detective skills ; for example , he can scan a crime scene with Detective Vision ( displayed in first @-@ person perspective ) to highlight points of interest ; holograms act out theoretical scenarios of the crime . The crimes can be reviewed via Batman 's link to the <unk> in the Batcave ; this allows a player to view virtual recreations of the scene from different angles ( with the ability to move back and forth through the crime 's timeline ) , view it in slow motion or pause while looking for clues to solve the crime . Small ( and large ) crime scenes are distributed throughout Gotham City . Reviewing the downing of a helicopter , Batman is presented with false and accurate clues ; investigation of the scene can reveal that the helicopter was shot , allowing Batman to trace the bullet 's trajectory to a murdered police officer and another crime scene . When a crime is solved , the player is shown a Batman @-@ narrated rundown of the crime . The Batcave is also a hub where Batman can change costumes , upgrade his equipment and access challenge maps to practice combat ( these maps were accessed separately in previous games ) . After completing the story mode a New Game Plus mode is unlocked , enabling a player to replay the game with all their acquired gadgets , experience and abilities ; enemies are tougher , and the icon warning players of attack is disabled . Completing New Game Plus unlocks I Am the Night mode , where the game ends if Batman dies . 
 On compatible systems , the Microsoft Windows version uses Nvidia 's PhysX software engine to produce more realistic , dynamic interactions with the game world . With PhysX enabled , some areas contain additional snow or fog ( which reacts to Batman moving through it ) ; with PhysX disabled , the effects are lessened or absent . 
 = = = Multiplayer = = = 
 Arkham Origins introduces a multiplayer component to the series . Invisible Predator Online revolves around a gang war in Blackgate Prison between supervillains Joker and Bane . Three Joker gang members fight three Bane gang members , and in turn the team of Batman and Robin . Gangs win by killing all the opposing team 's reinforcements , while Batman and Robin win by acquiring intimidation points ( from eliminating gang members ) . A gang member can become boss ( Joker or Bane ) , gaining more @-@ powerful abilities . Gang members can access guns and explosives ; Batman and Robin can access gadgets and abilities from the main game , including Detective Vision . Gang members have a limited Enhanced Vision , which requires recharging . Hunter , Hunted sets three Joker thugs and three Bane thugs against Batman in a last @-@ team @-@ standing match in which each character has one life . 
 = = Synopsis = = 
 = = = Characters = = = 
 Arkham Origins features a large ensemble cast of characters from the history of Batman comics . The main character is Batman ( Roger Craig Smith ) , a superhero trained to the peak of human physical perfection and an expert in martial arts who is aided by his butler , Alfred Pennyworth ( Martin Jarvis ) . Arkham Origins brings Batman into conflict with sadistic , brutal crime lord Black Mask ( Brian Bloom ) . The most powerful man in the city and ruler of Gotham 's criminal underworld , Black Mask has vast wealth and resources , has eliminated his opposition and is consolidating his power . His ebony mask conceals his identity , allowing him to operate publicly as Roman Sionis ( head of Janus Cosmetics ) . Black Mask has a bounty on Batman , which attracts eight accomplished assassins : the physically compelling Bane ( J. B. Blanc ) ; expert marksman Deadshot ; veteran mercenary Deathstroke ( Mark Rolston ) ; poisonous contortionist Copperhead ( Rosa Salazar ) ; the pyromaniac Firefly ( Crispin Freeman ) ; the highly charged Electrocutioner ( Steven Blum ) ; deformed criminal Killer Croc ( Khary Payton ) , and master martial artist Shiva ( Kelly Hu ) . 
 Batman is considered an outlaw by the Gotham City police , and is pursued by Captain James Gordon ( Michael Gough ) , Detective Harvey Bullock ( Robert Costanzo ) and corrupt GCPD officials Commissioner Gillian B. Loeb and SWAT team leader Branden . Other characters include the psychopathic Joker ( Troy Baker ) ; black @-@ market weapons dealer Penguin ( Nolan North ) ; the mind @-@ controlling Mad Hatter ( Peter MacNicol ) ; anti @-@ government , anti @-@ corporate anarchist Anarky ( Matthew Mercer ) ; rogue hacker Enigma ( Wally Wingert ) ; Alberto Falcone ; Gordon 's teenage daughter Barbara , and Blackgate warden Martin Joseph ( Khary Payton ) . The story takes place before Batman 's partnership with Robin ( Josh Keaton ) — although Robin is a playable character outside the main story — and before Barbara becomes Batman 's ally , Oracle . Dr. Harleen Quinzel ( Tara Strong ) , Vicki Vale , Amanda Waller ( C. C. H. Pounder ) , Quincy Sharp ( Tom Kane ) , and Calendar Man make cameo appearances in the game . Mr. Freeze ( Maurice LaMarche ) appears in the downloadable content , " Cold , Cold Heart " . 
 = = = Setting = = = 
 The events in Arkham Origins take place about five years before Batman : Arkham Asylum , in midwinter Gotham City . Batman , an experienced crime @-@ fighter in the second year of his career , is not yet the veteran superhero of Arkham Asylum and Arkham City . He is a mysterious force ; even the police do not know whether he is a vigilante , a myth or a supernatural being . Batman has fought ordinary criminals and gangsters , and is accustomed to being stronger and faster than his opponents . However , on a snowy Christmas Eve he is confronted with more @-@ dangerous foes : eight professional assassins hoping to collect a $ 50 @-@ million bounty placed on Batman 's head by Black Mask . Villains ( including the Joker ) take advantage of the assassins ' arrival to launch their own schemes , and Black Mask 's henchmen instigate a rise in crime and gang activity in the city . 
 The Gotham City Police Department is aware of " the Batman " , and does not condone his approach to crime @-@ fighting . Led by Commissioner Loeb , the GCPD is thoroughly corrupt ; Branden and his SWAT team are hunting for Batman to claim the bounty for themselves . The incorruptible Captain James Gordon is one of the most unpopular members of the force . Batman 's relationship with Alfred is strained ; the butler , an overbearing parental figure , reminds him of his parents ' deaths and Alfred sees Batman as a spoiled child squandering his inheritance on a vigilante crusade . 
 Old Gotham , the section of Gotham City which will become the Arkham City prison , is not yet walled off and has slums , low buildings , a shopping mall and docks ( where Penguin 's ship , the Final Offer , is moored ) . On the Final Offer , Penguin has added a casino , a fighting pit and a sales floor with weapons and ammunition . Across the bridge from Old Gotham is New Gotham , a modern metropolitan area filled with towering skyscrapers . 
 = = = Plot = = = 
 On Christmas Eve , Batman intervenes in a jailbreak at Blackgate Penitentiary led by Black Mask , who executes Police Commissioner Loeb and escapes . Left to battle the hired assassin Killer Croc , Batman prevails but learns that Croc is the first of eight of the world 's deadliest assassins in Gotham City vying to claim a $ 50 million bounty placed on Batman 's head by Black Mask . Hoping to learn Black Mask 's location , Batman tracks the Penguin to his ship . There , he defeats assassins Deathstroke and Electrocutioner and learns from the Penguin that Black Mask was purportedly murdered at an apartment complex . Batman investigates the murder scene , learning that the victim was not Black Mask and that the murder may have involved a criminal known as " the Joker " . 
 Needing more information to solve the case , Batman breaks into the GCPD to access its national criminal database . While escaping , he encounters Captain James Gordon , who is distrusting of Batman , and the corrupt SWAT team , who hope to collect the bounty money for themselves . Following advice from Gordon 's daughter Barbara , Batman enters the sewers beneath the GCPD for permanent access to the database and finds Black Mask 's crew planting explosives . Using the database , Batman deduces that Black Mask was kidnapped by the Joker , presumably to access the Gotham Merchants Bank . At the bank , Black Mask removes his disguise for Batman and reveals himself as the Joker ; having assumed Black Mask 's identity several days prior , the Joker seized his criminal empire and imposed the bounty on Batman . Batman chases the Joker to the Sionis Steel Mill , where he frees Black Mask and defeats the poisonous assassin Copperhead . 
 Tracking the Joker to the Gotham Royal Hotel , Batman discovers that the villain and his men have filled the hotel with explosives , murdered the staff , and taken the guests hostage . The Joker berates the assassins for their failure to kill Batman , throwing Electrocutioner out a window to his death : Batman recovers his electric gloves . The assassins leave , except for Bane , who thinks Batman is coming for the Joker . After traversing the building , Batman finds the Joker on the roof but is forced to battle Bane . Thinking Batman is outmatched , Alfred alerts the police so they will intervene . As Bane escapes by helicopter , he fires a rocket at the Joker , who is thrown from the hotel by the concussive force . Batman saves the Joker , leaving him with the police . Puzzled by the events , the Joker is imprisoned in Blackgate under the care of Dr. Harleen Quinzel ; he tells Quinzel that he and Batman were destined to meet . 
 In the Batcave , Alfred begs Batman to abandon his crusade , fearing he will die , but Batman refuses . Infiltrating Bane 's headquarters , Batman learns that his true identity as Bruce Wayne has been uncovered by the villain . Firefly attacks the Pioneers Bridge , forcing Batman and Gordon to work together to incapacitate the assassin and his bombs . Meanwhile , Bane breaks into the Batcave and nearly kills Alfred . Batman finds the cave in ruins and Alfred dying , but he is able to revive him with Electrocutioner 's gloves . Elsewhere , the Joker has taken over Blackgate after inciting a riot . 
 Realizing he needs allies , Batman works with Gordon and the police to retake the prison . Sitting at the electric chair , the Joker offers Batman a choice : kill Bane , or allow Bane 's heartbeat to charge the chair and kill the Joker . Batman uses the electric gloves to stop Bane 's heart . Satisfied , the Joker leaves , intending to detonate bombs placed around the city . Batman revives Bane , who injects himself with a steroid that transforms him into a hulking beast . He loses the ensuing battle to Batman and suffers amnesia as a side effect from the steroid , thus preserving Batman 's secret identity . With Gordon 's help , Batman locates the Joker in the prison chapel . Dismayed that Bane is still alive , the Joker tries to goad Batman into killing him but Batman subdues him instead . Gordon chooses not to pursue Batman , believing he can help the city . In a radio interview during the credits , Quincy Sharp says he will lobby to reopen Arkham Asylum to house the city 's worst criminals ; after the credits , an imprisoned Deathstroke is approached by Amanda Waller to join her Suicide Squad . 
 = = Development = = 
 By July 2012 , Warner Bros. Interactive Entertainment ( <unk> ) was planning Rocksteady Studios 's next Batman game as a prequel based on the Silver Age of Comic Books , featuring Superman , Wonder Woman , Green Lantern and the Flash . The game would explore Batman 's first confrontation with the Joker , with a release date no earlier than 2014 . In August 2012 , Paul Dini said he would not be involved in writing a sequel to Arkham City . He did not write any of that game 's downloadable content ( including the story @-@ based " Harley Quinn 's Revenge " DLC ) , and said that Warner Bros. and Rocksteady suggested he accept other work if offered . Dini added that he had taken on other projects , preventing his involvement until 2013 . In February 2013 , it was reported that a new game in the Batman Arkham franchise would be released by a developer other than Rocksteady . 
 Development of Batman : Arkham Origins began in late 2011 by Canadian development studio WB Games Montréal ( WB Montréal ) , and the game was announced on April 9 , 2013 . The studio had worked on the Wii U adaptation of Batman : Arkham City , familiarizing itself with the modified Unreal Engine 3 development engine used by Rocksteady ( developer of the first two Arkham games ) . WB Montréal decided not to heavily modify the established combat system ( believing it already worked well ) , but introduced new enemy types with opportunities for new tactics and combat moves to defeat opponents . Although Rocksteady provided advice on technology , game mechanics and its engine , WB Montréal developed the story independently . The plot was partly inspired by the comic @-@ book series Batman : Legends of the Dark Knight and the graphic novel Batman : Year One , detailing the first year of Batman 's career , with Arkham Origins described as a " Year Two " story . Parts of the plot ( such as Batman 's relationships with the Joker , Gordon and the game 's Christmas setting ) were partly inspired by Batman : The Man Who Laughs , Batman : Turning Points and Batman : The Long Halloween , respectively . The story is written by Dooma Wendschuh , Ryan Galletta and Corey May , with input from DC Comics and comic @-@ book writer Geoff Johns . Eric Holmes acted as Arkham Origins ' creative director . Explaining the decision to develop a prequel , Holmes said while the Batman of Arkham Asylum and Arkham City was comparable to his comic counterpart — a fully formed , experienced character — Arkham Origins could explore other aspects of the character ( such as his lack of experience and greater vulnerability ) . The game was considered 80 percent complete by January 2013 , and WB Montréal used the remaining development time to tweak the final product . 
 By April 2013 the developers had decided not to use veteran Batman voice actor Kevin Conroy in the role , preferring a younger voice for Batman 's early career . In May , Roger Craig Smith was announced as the voice of Batman and Troy Baker as the Joker . Conroy said at the 2013 Dallas Comic Con that he had been working on " the next Arkham " , inspiring speculation that he would reprise his role as Batman in Arkham Origins ; however , in June it was confirmed that Conroy would not be in the game . In July , it was announced that Arkham Origins would be the first game in the Arkham series to feature multiplayer gameplay . The multiplayer game was produced by independent British developer Splash Damage under creative director Alastair Cornish , separately from WB Montréal 's work on the main game . The Wii U version of the game is single @-@ player , with Warner Bros. saying that the team was focused on platforms with the largest multiplayer audience . 
 = = = Design = = = 
 Holmes described the Christmas setting as a juxtaposition between the joyful time of year and the grim world of Gotham City , including decorative Santas near Gothic gargoyles and Christmas lights in dark alleys . The city is dislodged from time and space , contrasting 1930s ( and older ) buildings with Batman 's futuristic technology . The New Gotham area was designed for vertical movement , allowing the placement of enemies above and below Batman to create areas dense with activity . The game features high contrast between <unk> and lights , with exaggerated shadows and few balancing colors . The city was divided into residential , industrial and commercial neighborhoods , which were decorated accordingly : the industrial setting is bleak , the commercial area has corporate decorations and residential neighborhoods have lights in their windows . 
 Designers aimed to make the younger Batman 's outfit look " assembled versus manufactured " , pieced together from a number of sources . Holmes said , " [ Batman 's suit is ] not something that was made in a factory . He 's taken pieces of tech either he 's invented , he 's fabricated or things from the Wayne facilities , and he has made this costume out of these pieces . " To emphasize the mystery and fear instilled by Batman in this early stage of his career , art director Jeremy Price and the design team used silhouettes and film noir @-@ style low @-@ key lighting to make the character more imposing . The name " Batman " is used sparingly in this game to emphasize his urban @-@ legend status and the lack of understanding of the character . It was suggested that Batman make mistakes because of his inexperience ( such as tripping or missing with batarangs ) , but this idea was discarded as inconsistent with the character . His inexperience was instead personality @-@ based : learning how to be the city 's protector and overcoming his obsession with vengeance . In designing Batman 's abilities and gadgets , gameplay took precedence over narrative consistency with the previous games ; the designers thought that removing features players had already experienced in those games would make playing Arkham Origins feel less empowering . 
 Holmes acknowledged that Black Mask is not as well known as some of Batman 's other villains ( such as the Joker and Penguin ) , and the character required expansion to make him interesting and scary . Black Mask was considered an appropriate antagonist for Batman 's early career because of his practicality ; he transitions from the typical criminals Batman has been facing and the neurotic , quirky super @-@ villains he will confront in the future . The team decided to make Arkham Origins ' Copperhead a female ( in contrast to the comic 's male character ) with input from Johns . The contortionist character required three motion @-@ capture actors to animate : a stunt woman , a Cirque du Soleil performer and a martial artist . This version of Copperhead will be added to DC Comics ' The New 52 . Anarky , an anti @-@ villain based on anarchist philosophy , was updated in appearance for the game to a street protester with a gang resembling a social movement . The character would appeal to Batman for a partnership ( since he is not necessarily evil ) but , as Holmes said , " is multidimensional in the Batman Universe . " The popularity of anti @-@ corporate and anti @-@ government protest movements factored in the character 's inclusion , and Holmes thought that of all of the villains Anarky was the most timely . The developers drew upon " original Alan Grant and Norm Breyfogle appearances " of Anarky for his character . Each main @-@ story boss reinforces the player 's mastery of a specific game mechanic ( such as Deathstroke , whose fighting focuses on countering attacks ) . The assassins selected for the game were chosen for abilities which would challenge the game mechanics . The boss fights were inspired by Arkham City 's battle against Mr. Freeze , which tasked players with exploring the full range of Batman 's strategies and abilities to overcome the villain . 
 The " Detective Vision " crime scenes were designed to be brief , visually rewarding and fun segments , rather than demanding challenges . The designers worked on the length of time for each scene , seeing how many pieces of evidence players wanted to scan before they had a solution ; they eventually settled on two to three minutes . A number of predator areas ( levels where Batman stalks enemies from the shadows ) provide variety and challenge . For example , the theatre aboard Penguin 's ship was gradually shrunk in size to pack the enemies closer together , and a hovering drone was removed when test players easily overcame it . A dynamic weather system altering gameplay ( such as wind and snow reducing visibility , making snipers more vulnerable to Batman 's stealth ) was implemented during development , but discarded when it was not completed within the available development time . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 The score for Arkham Origins was composed by Christopher Drake , replacing Ron Fish and Nick Arundel ( who composed the scores for Arkham Asylum and Arkham City ) . It was partially inspired by the 1988 action film Die Hard ( also set during Christmas ) , which features sleigh bells in its soundtrack to punctuate specific moments . Drake said that since the game was a prequel , it allowed him more freedom in the score while adhering to " the DNA " of Batman music . He added that although the previous scores were elegant and orchestral , he chose more electronic elements . Drake approached the cinematic scenes as a traditional film score , with the design team describing scenes over the phone while he worked out of Burbank , California . The in @-@ game music was created with layers which activate with action ( such as Batman entering a location or beginning a fight ) , and can be added or subtracted depending on what is occurring . Drake hoped the in @-@ game music would not be boring , since those sections work at differing lengths of time ( dependent on how long a player takes to complete a task ) . 
 The Batman : Arkham Origins – Original Video Game Score was released by WaterTower Music on October 22 , 2013 and features 32 tracks composed for the game . 
 All music composed by Christopher Drake . 
 = = Release = = 
 Batman : Arkham Origins was released worldwide on October 25 , 2013 for Microsoft Windows , PlayStation 3 , Wii U and Xbox 360 . A week before its scheduled release in Europe , the retail Microsoft Windows and Wii U versions were delayed until November 8 . A companion game , Batman : Arkham Origins Blackgate , was released with Arkham Origins for Nintendo 3DS and PlayStation Vita . A spin @-@ off beat ' em up game , also entitled Batman : Arkham Origins , was developed by NetherRealm Studios for iOS and Android . The iOS version was released on October 16 , 2013 , and the Android version was scheduled for release in late 2013 . NetherRealm Studios previously developed Batman : Arkham City Lockdown , a spin @-@ off of Arkham City . The brawler game has players using touchscreen controls to fight enemies one @-@ on @-@ one ( including villains such as Bane and Deathstroke ) . Defeating enemies earns points which can upgrade Batman 's statistics or unlock gadgets and costumes ; costumes unlocked in the game can unlock costumes in the console version and vice versa . 
 Coinciding with Arkham Origins ' United Kingdom launch , voice actors Roger Craig Smith and Troy Baker made a public appearance at Stratford 's GAME retailer . A series of game @-@ character action figures and a working , life @-@ size grapnel @-@ gun replica were released in October 2013 by DC Collectibles and NECA , respectively . In December 2013 , a digital comic book of the same name was released by digital studio <unk> with a prequel to the game . The comic is the first in DC Comics ' <unk> Multiverse initiative , featuring dynamic artwork and sound and the ability to choose while reading how the story progresses ( with several possible outcomes ) . Purchasing all eight chapters unlocks two costumes for the game . 
 = = = Retail editions = = = 
 The PlayStation 3 edition of the game features the Knightfall DLC pack , with alternate Batman outfits based on the character 's design in the 1960s TV series and Azrael 's Batsuit from the " Knightfall " story arc ( 1993 ) . The pack also contains five challenge maps ( based on " Knightfall " ) which task Batman with defeating Bane and the inmates of Blackgate prison : " Azrael Does Not Protect " , " City On Fire " , " No Rest For The Wicked " , " Venom Connection " and " Turning Point " . The UK , Australian and New Zealand Collector 's Edition contains a SteelBook game case and a 30 @-@ centimetre ( 12 in ) statue of Batman and Joker . The North American Collector 's Edition and the Australian and New Zealand Definitive Edition contain a light @-@ up statue of the Joker by Project Triforce , a Batman " Wanted Poster " , Batwing prototype schematic , Anarky logo stencil , glow @-@ in @-@ the @-@ dark map of Gotham City and a Wayne family photo . The North American version also contains the 2013 DC Comics super @-@ villain documentary , Necessary Evil . All regions also get an 80 @-@ page hardback art book , dossiers of the in @-@ game assassins , the Deathstroke DLC and the " First Appearance " skin ( based on Batman 's first appearance in Detective Comics # 27 ) . The PlayStation 3 version also has the Knightfall content . Both editions were released for PlayStation 3 and Xbox 360 . 
 = = = Additional content = = = 
 Deathstroke is available as a playable character for all the game 's challenge maps , with weapons and abilities such as regenerating health and super strength , a rifle @-@ staff with a built @-@ in grapple , a sword , explosives , firearms and his version of Detective Vision ( Tactical Vision ) . The " Deathstroke " pack , available as a preorder bonus , includes two alternate outfits ( worn by the character in the 2013 video game Injustice : Gods Among Us and the 1984 storyline " The Judas Contract " ) and two challenge maps , " No Money Down " and " 100 to 1 " . 
 The " Black Mask Challenge " pack , released in November 2013 , contains two additional challenge maps : " Lot Full " and " Hidden Facility " . Bruce Wayne is playable in the " Initiation " pack , released December 3 , 2013 . The pack contains five challenge maps , with narrative content to explain the setting . " Initiation " features Wayne before he becomes Batman , as he trains under his ninjutsu mentor <unk> in an Asian monastery and comes into conflict with Shiva . The DLC also contains two alternate skins for the character : Initiation Bruce Wayne ( based on his monastery clothing ) and Vigilante Bruce Wayne ( a masked @-@ ninja outfit ) . Also available in December was the " Hunter , Hunted " multiplayer mode . The story @-@ based campaign expansion , " Cold , Cold Heart " was released on April 22 , 2014 . Set a week after the events of Arkham Origins , on New Year 's Eve , " Cold , Cold Heart " ' s narrative focuses on the origin of the supervillain Mr. Freeze and features similarities to the Batman : The Animated Series episode , " Heart of Ice " . The content introduces new equipment for Batman , including the XE suit which generates heat , allowing him to melt ice or throw thermal @-@ charged batarangs . In January 2014 , the Wii U version of the expansion was cancelled by Warner Bros. , who cited a lack of demand as the reason . 
 A number of alternate outfits for Batman and Robin were made available by completing in @-@ game tasks and as downloadable content . Batman 's skins include designs worn in the 1960s TV series , Batman : Noël , Arkham City , Batman : The Animated Series , Batman : Earth One , Batman Incorporated , Batman : Year One , The Dark Knight Returns , " DC One Million " , Brightest Day , Gotham by Gaslight , " Knightfall " , Injustice : Gods Among Us , Blackest Night , The New 52 ( and a metallic variant ) , Red Son , Batman : Dark Knight of the Round Table , The Long Halloween and Thrillkiller . Additional skins include his Sinestro Corps suit , Neal Adams ' 1970s depiction of the character , the " First Appearance " design , the classic Earth @-@ Two design ( and its New 52 variant ) and the " Worst Nightmare " outfit , an original design based on how criminals perceive Batman ( available after completing the game ) . Robin 's skins include Tim Drake 's first and second Robin costumes , his Red Robin costume , the designs from Batman : The Animated Series and Arkham City and a slightly altered version of the default Arkham Origins costume . Cosmetics were also released for the game 's multiplayer component , including Joker 's Vandal Online Vanity Pack and Bane 's Forces Online Vanity Pack . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Pre @-@ release = = = 
 Batman : Arkham Origins was displayed at the 2013 Electronic Entertainment Expo ( E3 ) , and received two Game Critics Awards nominations : Best Action / Adventure Game and Best Console Game . It was also recognized at the expo for " Best Videogame " by Forbes ; " Best Action Game " by Game Informer ; " Best Comic Book @-@ Related Game " by Newsarama and " Best Xbox 360 Game " by IGN . 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 Aggregate @-@ review websites GameRankings and Metacritic rated the PlayStation 3 version 73 @.@ 59 % and 76 / 100 , the Xbox 360 version 73 @.@ 14 % and 74 / 100 , the Wii U version 70 @.@ 50 % and 68 / 100 , and the Microsoft Windows version 73 @.@ 57 % and 74 / 100 . 
 Arkham Origins was considered an incremental installment for the series , rather than a transformative one . GameSpot said that Arkham City expanded on Arkham Asylum by applying the game mechanics to a larger open @-@ world setting , but criticized Arkham Origins for replicating Arkham City without moving the series forward . Other critics agreed , saying that the game 's well @-@ received elements from the previous game were not significantly developed or augmented and it was routine rather than inspired . However , other reviewers rated it on a par with Arkham City . 
 Critics cited Arkham Origins ' handling of the genesis of Batman 's relationships with his adversaries and allies and its question of whether Batman 's presence enhances crime in Gotham City as the game 's greatest assets . Scenes with the Joker received the most praise , with Polygon saying that although he was also a central antagonist in previous Arkham games , the story shone new light on the character ; GameSpot called the story surprising in its exploration of the bond and similarities between Batman and the Joker . The story was criticized for lacking a cohesive narrative ( particularly the opening plot line of assassins hunting Batman , largely forgotten by the game 's end ) , but EGM said that when it works , the story was worthy of any Batman film , TV show or comic book . 
 The game world was well received for its number and variety of side missions and distractions but its scale was criticized as unnecessarily large , with GameSpot describing it as " bigger just for the sake of being bigger " ; Joystiq described the city as unattractive , with the expanded play area increasing the commute but not the enjoyment . Others criticized changes in navigating the city ; some areas prevented grappling , slowing ( or stopping ) travel . Polygon called the world more linear , with fewer chances to revisit areas with new gadgets to open new paths and deviation from the most obvious path necessary only to find collectables . However , some reviewers considered the city 's vastness and activities engrossing . Kotaku criticized the side quests as " busywork " for not advancing the narrative or providing appropriate rewards . Others found the use of previous elements tedious , with replacements simply mimicking the old ( such as the glue grenade , with an identical purpose to Arkham City 's ice grenades ) . 
 Detective Mode , allowing the investigation of crimes , was not considered an improvement by Kotaku and GameSpot ; while they considered it a good idea , its execution was minimal since a player simply looks for the next highlighted piece of evidence rather than solving a puzzle . Game Informer liked it , saying that they were complicated and showed how Batman analyzes a crime scene . The combat system received mixed reviews . The shock gloves were criticized as overpowered and making fights too easy , allowing Batman unblockable attacks ( instantly disabling most opponents ) and removing the need for tactics . Reviewers said that changes to combat punished more than challenged ; greater enemy numbers and variety made sustaining an attack difficult , and ( combined with an array of gadgets which hindered — rather than damaged — enemies ) made encounters long and repetitive . Joystiq noted that the game emphasized combat over stealth . Kotaku called the combat rating system distracting screen clutter which broke the player 's concentration , but GameFront said that the system was positive reinforcement for successful fights . The stealth sections were considered of similar quality to previous installments ; their unchanged function left the methods of obtaining victory the same , making for a rote experience . The Remote Claw was criticized for making stealth sections too easy , allowing multiple enemies to be disabled without moving from the player 's starting position . 
 Critics agreed that Arkham Origins 's boss battles were one area of improvement over its predecessors ; they offered dynamic , <unk> conflicts with their own stories . While not considering all equally fun or impressive , reviewers said that their variety and unpredictability provided excitement . Less @-@ notable characters from the comics were considered less compelling than more @-@ popular characters . 
 The multiplayer component was criticized , with Polygon calling it one of the least necessary multiplayer additions to a typically single @-@ player experience . The gameplay was described as a mediocre shooter , incapable of supporting the necessary use of guns by its villains and with poor control of movement . GameSpot noted that poor weapon accuracy and movement controls made the thugs seem weak and inept , while playing as the heroes lacked empowerment because of more restrictive combat ability and less resistance to damage . Other reviewers called the experience fun and hectic , but lacking sufficient depth to retain long @-@ term interest . 
 The main voice cast was well received . Troy Baker was praised as the Joker , for his performance and as a worthy replacement for longtime previous voice actor Mark Hamill , and criticized for his interpretation 's replicating Hamill 's . Dooma Wendschuh , Ryan Galletta , and Corey May were nominated for the Outstanding Achievement in Videogame Writing award by the Writers Guild of America . The game 's cinematic content , under the direction of supervising sound editor Alain Larose , received a Golden Reel Award nomination for Best Sound Editing in Interactive Entertainment . 
 Reviewers described the " Cold , Cold Heart " DLC as better paced and focused than the main game , owing to its shorter play time that allowed for a more interesting experience . It was also criticized , however , for losing focus near the end , and padding the running time with unnecessary deviations . GameSpot said that the DLC featured a satisfying combination of the series ' combat , stealth , and detective mechanics , and introduced interesting new enemy types that wield ice guns capable of freezing both Batman and other enemies . Reviewers described the story as entertaining , following the interesting character of Mr. Freeze , but considered it lacking in surprise because it replicates that of the 1992 Batman : The Animated Series episode " Heart of Ice " . The final battle against Mr. Freeze was criticized for replicating several elements of the fight against the character in Arkham City . Similarly , IGN and Destructoid noted that the content lacked originality and innovation , providing generic environments and removing , rather than adding new abilities and weapons . 
 = = = Sales = = = 
 During its first week of sales in the United Kingdom Batman : Arkham Origins was the number @-@ one @-@ selling game on all available formats , topping the all @-@ format chart . Its sales were half those of Arkham City during the same time , and approximately even with those of Arkham Asylum . It was the eleventh @-@ best @-@ selling boxed game of 2013 in the country . It was also the top @-@ selling game on the digital @-@ distribution platform Steam between October 20 and 26 , 2013 . 
 = = = Technical issues = = = 
 After the game 's launch , a number of issues on all platforms were noted by the media and players , including lagging ; unending " falling " in the game world , preventing the completion of missions ; no " continue " button on the startup screen , preventing a previous game from continuing , and some progression gameplay failing to unlock . On Windows , a bug prevented players from accessing one of Enigma 's towers ; on the Xbox 360 , the save files were corrupted and unplayable , with crashing and freezing problems . On October 31 , 2013 , these issues were addressed by WB Montréal ; in a community post , it said that the development team fixed many of the multi @-@ platform problems and an update would be available by November 7 . The company added that the Windows @-@ specific issues were addressed in an update which went live on October 31 , and the Xbox 360 issues were still under investigation . In February 2014 , WB Montréal announced that they would not release any additional patches to fix any issues , due to the development team focusing on the upcoming single @-@ player DLC . Any future patches would only address issues preventing progression in the game . 
 = = Series continuation = = 
 Batman : Arkham Knight , the successor to Arkham Origins , was announced in March 2014 . The game , which is a sequel to Arkham City , is once again developed by Rocksteady Studios for PlayStation 4 , Xbox One and Microsoft Windows , and is set one year after the events of Arkham City . An animated sequel , Batman : Assault on Arkham , was released on August 12 , 2014 . The film features the Suicide Squad , hinted at during the credits of Arkham Origins , attacking Arkham Asylum to recover information from the Riddler , but their plans go awry when the Joker escapes , and Batman is drawn to the facility . 
 = Boz ( king ) = 
 Boz ( c . 380 ) was the king of the Antes , an early Slavic people that lived in parts of present @-@ day Ukraine . His story is mentioned by Jordanes in the Getica ( 550 – 551 ) ; in the preceding years , the Ostrogoths under Ermanaric had conquered a large number of tribes in Central Europe ( see <unk> ) , including the Antes . Some years after the Ostrogothic defeat by the invading Huns , a king named Vinitharius , Ermanaric 's great @-@ nephew , marched against the Antes of Boz and defeated them . Vinitharius condemned Boz , his sons , and seventy of his nobles , to crucifixion , in order to terrorize the Antes . These conflicts constitute the only pre @-@ 6th century contacts between Germanics and Slavs documented in written sources . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 Byzantine historian Jordanes wrote in his De origine <unk> <unk> ( or " Getica " , written in 550 or 551 ) that King Ermanaric ( fl . 370s ) of the Greuthungi ( a Gothic tribe , most likely the same as the later Ostrogoths ) , member of the Amali dynasty , managed to subdue a large number of tribes in Europe ( Cassiodorus called him " ruler of all nations of Scythia and Germania " ) , and he is said to have lastly subjugated the Wends ( Slavs ) . Jordanes noted that the Gothic tribes regularly made raids into Slavic territory . 
 Jordanes mentioned three tribes of the same origin , that constituted the Slavs : Wends ( West Slavs ) , Antes ( East Slavs ) and <unk> ( South Slavs ) , and stated that the Antes were the bravest and strongest among these . He also stated that the Antes ' rule was hereditary , while Procopius maintained that the <unk> and Antes " are not ruled by one man , but they have lived from old under a democracy " . According to Roman Smal @-@ <unk> , the Antes received a strong ruling power and military organization over time from the Gothic influence . They inhabited the area between the Dniester and Dnieper , most likely in the region extending from the Vistula to the Danube mouth and eastwards to the Don . The tribal union of the Antes probably included some neighbouring West Slavic tribes . The Antes seem to have attempted to form their own state in the frontiers of – or even within – the Gothic state , judging by Jordanes ' naming Boz as " king " . 
 = = = Story of Boz = = = 
 The Huns , accompanied by the <unk> whom they had just conquered , invaded Ermanaric 's territories . Ermanaric , who feared devastation , took his own life . In the years following Ermanaric 's death , there was a war between the section of the Ostrogoths who remained under Hun rule , and the Antes . 
 Ermanaric 's great @-@ nephew , Vinitharius , who disliked being under Hun rule , withdrew his forces and marched against the Antes in order to defeat them and to show his courage . This took place in the last quarter of the 4th century , possibly around 380 . Boz , the king of the Antes ( rex <unk> ) , had organized an alliance to defend the Antes , and managed to defeat Vinitharius in their first encounters , however , Vinitharius fought valiantly and managed to capture and crucify Boz , together with his sons and 70 of his chiefs ( primates ) . Vinitharius left their bodies hanging to induce fear in those who had surrendered . These conflicts constitute the only pre @-@ 6th century contacts between Germanics and Slavs documented in written sources . 
 = = = Aftermath = = = 
 Afterwards , the Alans ( according to contemporary Marcellinus , though Jordanes said it was Huns ) rushed to rescue their kin , with a decisive battle fought against the Ostrogoths at the river <unk> ( now called <unk> ) , in which the Ostrogoths were defeated and pushed west . The Ostrogoths eventually reached the lower Danube shores . 
 = = Assessment = = 
 Jordanes wrote his name in Late Latin as Boz ( " Boz nomine " ) , though several manuscripts of the Getica use Box or Booz . There are various theories in etymological studies regarding the name . 
 The name has been rendered in the Slavic languages as <unk> ( <unk> , <unk> ; transliterated as <unk> ) . One theory is that it derives from the Slavic word bog , " God " , interpreted as " God 's " . Polish linguist Stanisław <unk> ( 1909 – 2000 ) mentioned * <unk> ( divine ) , * Vo ( d ) žь ( chief ) , and * <unk> ( barefooted ) as possibilites . Polish linguist Stanisław <unk> ( 1906 – 1982 ) concluded that Bos , " barefooted " , was his name , and that the other etymologies put forward by <unk> were less probable ; he supported this by connecting Boz with Bus ( <unk> ) of The Tale of Igor 's Campaign , as Omeljan <unk> ( 1833 – 1894 ) had first done in 1876 . Ukrainian scholar Mykhailo <unk> ( 1866 – 1934 ) speculated that his name was " perhaps <unk> , <unk> , Bohdan " . Ukrainian Bohdan <unk> stressed that as the first <unk> ( <unk> > žь , etc . ) had not yet occurred in Slavic at the time of Boz , * <unk> was unconvincing and * Vo ( d ) žь " even less acceptable " . Although supporting the connection with Bus , he assumed that it was Gothic , as * <unk> , found in similar variants as West Gothic Bōsō , of uncertain date , " probably meaning ' Sorcerer ' " , and Anglo @-@ Saxon <unk> , from the 7th century . 
 His title , rex <unk> , translates to " King of the Antes " . Ukrainian historian Mykola <unk> assumed , as Jordanes used rex for both Germanic rulers and the ruler of the Antes , that the Eastern Slavs had adopted " * <unk> " from the Goths and <unk> it into " <unk> " ( <unk> ) , translated by Jordanes as " rex " . 
 Historian Florin Curta believes that Jordanes ' account regarding Boz and Vinitharius possibly originated in the Gothic oral tradition , given the narrative pattern of the story . He views of Boz as " quasi @-@ legendary " , as he is the only Slavic leader mentioned by Jordanes , while no leader is mentioned by Procopius . 
 Some historians have tried to identify Boz with Bus mentioned in the Tale of Igor 's Campaign , in which boyars tell Sviatoslav I of Kiev ( r . 945 – 972 ) of " Gothic maidens ... singing about the time of Bus " , but this has been refuted . The first to connect the two was Omeljan <unk> ( 1833 – 1894 ) , in 1876 . He was later supported by Stanisław <unk> . 
 = Henoch – Schönlein purpura = 
 Henoch – Schönlein purpura ( HSP ) , also known as IgA vasculitis , anaphylactoid purpura , purpura <unk> , and Schönlein – Henoch purpura , is a disease of the skin , mucous membranes , and sometimes other organs that most commonly affects children . In the skin , the disease causes palpable purpura ( small hemorrhages ) , often with joint pain and abdominal pain . With kidney involvement , there may be a loss of small amounts of blood and protein in the urine ( hematuria and proteinuria ) , but this usually goes unnoticed ; in a small proportion of cases , the kidney involvement proceeds to chronic kidney disease . HSP is often preceded by an infection , such as a throat infection . 
 HSP is a systemic vasculitis ( inflammation of blood vessels ) and is characterized by deposition of immune complexes containing the antibody immunoglobulin A ( IgA ) ; the exact cause for this phenomenon is unknown . It usually resolves within several weeks and requires no treatment apart from symptom control , but may relapse in a third of cases and cause irreversible kidney damage in about one in a hundred cases . 
 = = Signs and symptoms = = 
 Purpura , arthritis and abdominal pain are known as the " classic triad " of Henoch – Schönlein purpura . Purpura occur in all cases , joint pains and arthritis in 80 % , and abdominal pain in 62 % . Some include gastrointestinal hemorrhage as a fourth criterion ; this occurs in 33 % of cases , sometimes , but not necessarily always , due to <unk> . The purpura typically appear on the legs and buttocks , but may also be seen on the arms , face and trunk . The abdominal pain is colicky in character , and may be accompanied by nausea , vomiting , constipation or diarrhea . There may be blood or mucus in the stools . The joints involved tend to be the ankles , knees , and elbows , but arthritis in the hands and feet is possible ; the arthritis is <unk> and hence causes no permanent deformity . Forty percent have evidence of kidney involvement , mainly in the form of hematuria ( blood in the urine ) , but only a quarter will have this in sufficient quantities to be noticeable without laboratory tests . Problems in other organs , such as the central nervous system ( brain and spinal cord ) and lungs may occur , but is much less common than in the skin , bowel and kidneys . 
 Of the 40 % of patients who develop kidney involvement , almost all have evidence ( visible or on urinalysis ) of blood in the urine . More than half also have proteinuria ( protein in the urine ) , which in one eighth is severe enough to cause nephrotic syndrome ( generalised swelling due to low protein content of the blood ) . While abnormalities on urinalysis may continue for a long time , only 1 % of all HSP patients develop chronic kidney disease . Hypertension ( high blood pressure ) may occur . Protein loss and high blood pressure , as well as the features on biopsy of the kidney if performed , may predict progression to advanced kidney disease . Adults are more likely than children to develop advanced kidney disease . 
 = = Pathophysiology = = 
 Henoch – Schönlein purpura is a small @-@ vessel vasculitis in which complexes of immunoglobulin A ( IgA ) and complement component 3 ( C3 ) are deposited on arterioles , capillaries , and venules . As with IgA nephropathy , serum levels of IgA are high in HSP and there are identical findings on renal biopsy ; however , IgA nephropathy has a predilection for young adults while HSP is more predominant among children . Further , IgA nephropathy typically only affects the kidneys while HSP is a systemic disease . HSP involves the skin and connective tissues , scrotum , joints , gastrointestinal tract and kidneys . 
 = = Diagnosis = = 
 The diagnosis is based on the combination of the symptoms , as very few other diseases cause the same symptoms together . Blood tests may show elevated creatinine and urea levels ( in kidney involvement ) , raised IgA levels ( in about 50 % ) , and raised C @-@ reactive protein ( CRP ) or erythrocyte sedimentation rate ( ESR ) results ; none are specific for Henoch – Schönlein purpura . The platelet count may be raised , and distinguishes it from diseases where low platelets are the cause of the purpura , such as idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura and thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura . 
 If there is doubt about the cause of the skin lesions , a biopsy of the skin may be performed to distinguish the purpura from other diseases that cause it , such as vasculitis due to cryoglobulinemia ; on microscopy the appearances are of a hypersensitivity vasculitis , and immunofluorescence demonstrates IgA and C3 ( a protein of the complement system ) in the blood vessel wall . However , overall serum complement levels are normal . 
 On the basis of symptoms , it is possible to distinguish HSP from hypersensitivity vasculitis ( HV ) . In a series comparing 85 HSP patients with 93 HV patients , five symptoms were found to be indicative of HSP : palpable purpura , abdominal angina , digestive tract hemorrhage ( not due to <unk> ) , hematuria and age less than 20 . The presence of three or more of these indicators has an 87 % sensitivity for predicting HSP . 
 Biopsy of the kidney may be performed both to establish the diagnosis or to assess the severity of already suspected kidney disease . The main findings on kidney biopsy are increased cells and Ig deposition in the <unk> ( part of the glomerulus , where blood is filtered ) , white blood cells , and the development of crescents . The changes are indistinguishable from those observed in IgA nephropathy . 
 HSP can develop after infections with streptococci ( β @-@ haemolytic , Lancefield group A ) , hepatitis B , herpes simplex virus , parvovirus <unk> , <unk> , adenovirus , Helicobacter pylori , measles , mumps , rubella , Mycoplasma and numerous others . Drugs linked to HSP , usually as an idiosyncratic reaction , include the antibiotics vancomycin and <unk> , ACE inhibitors <unk> and captopril , anti @-@ inflammatory agent diclofenac , as well as <unk> and <unk> . Several diseases have been reported to be associated with HSP , often without a causative link . Only in about 35 % of cases can HSP be traced to any of these causes . 
 The exact cause of HSP is unknown , but most of its features are due to the deposition of abnormal antibodies in the wall of blood vessels , leading to vasculitis . These antibodies are of the subclass IgA1 in polymers ; it is uncertain whether the main cause is overproduction ( in the digestive tract or the bone marrow ) or decreased removal of abnormal IgA from the circulation . It is suspected that abnormalities in the IgA1 molecule may provide an explanation for its abnormal behaviour in both HSP and the related condition IgA nephropathy . One of the characteristics of IgA1 ( and IgD ) is the presence of an 18 amino acid @-@ long " hinge region " between complement @-@ fixating regions 1 and 2 . Of the amino acids , half is proline , while the others are mainly serine and threonine . The majority of the <unk> and the <unk> have elaborate sugar chains , connected through oxygen atoms ( O @-@ glycosylation ) . This process is thought to stabilise the IgA molecule and make it less prone to proteolysis . The first sugar is always N @-@ acetyl @-@ <unk> ( <unk> ) , followed by other <unk> and sialic acid . In HSP and <unk> , these sugar chains appear to be deficient . The exact reason for these abnormalities is not known . 
 = = = Classification = = = 
 Multiple standards exist for defining Henoch – Schönlein purpura , including the 1990 American College of <unk> ( ACR ) classification and the 1994 Chapel Hill Consensus Conference ( <unk> ) . Some have reported the ACR criteria to be more sensitive than those of the <unk> . 
 More recent classifications , the 2006 European League Against Rheumatism ( <unk> ) and Pediatric <unk> Society ( <unk> ) classification , include palpable purpura as a mandatory criterion , together with at least one of the following findings : diffuse abdominal pain , predominant IgA deposition ( confirmed on skin biopsy ) , acute arthritis in any joint , and renal involvement ( as evidenced by the presence of blood and / or protein in the urine ) . 
 = = Treatment = = 
 Analgesics may be needed for the abdominal and joint pains . It is uncertain as to whether HSP needs treatment beyond controlling the symptoms . Most patients do not receive therapy because of the high spontaneous recovery rate . Steroids are generally avoided . However , if they are given early in the disease episode , the duration of symptoms may be shortened , and abdominal pain can improve significantly . Moreover , the chance of severe kidney problems may be reduced . However , some evidence suggests that steroids do not decrease the likelihood of developing long @-@ term kidney disease . 
 Evidence of worsening kidney damage would normally prompt a kidney biopsy . Treatment may be indicated on the basis of the appearance of the biopsy sample ; various treatments may be used , ranging from oral steroids to a combination of intravenous methylprednisolone ( steroid ) , cyclophosphamide and <unk> followed by prednisone . Other regimens include steroids / azathioprine , and steroids / cyclophosphamide ( with or without heparin and warfarin ) . Intravenous immunoglobulin ( IVIG ) is occasionally used . 
 = = Prognosis = = 
 Overall prognosis is good in most patients , with one study showing recovery occurring in 94 % and 89 % of children and adults , respectively ( some having needed treatment ) . In children under ten , the condition recurs in about a third of all cases and usually within the first four months after the initial attack . Recurrence is more common in older children and adults . 
 = = = Kidney involvement = = = 
 In adults , kidney involvement progresses to end @-@ stage renal disease ( ESRD ) more often than in children . In a UK series of 37 patients , 10 ( 27 % ) developed advanced kidney disease . <unk> , hypertension at presentation , and pathology features ( crescentic changes , interstitial fibrosis and tubular atrophy ) predicted progression . About 20 % of children that exhibit nephrotic or nephritic features experience long permanent renal impairment . 
 The findings on renal biopsy correlate with the severity of symptoms : those with asymptomatic hematuria may only have focal <unk> proliferation while those with proteinuria may have marked cellular proliferation or even crescent formation . The number of crescentic glomeruli is an important prognostic factor in determining whether the patient will develop chronic renal disease . 
 In ESRD , some eventually need hemodialysis or equivalent renal replacement therapy ( RRT ) . If a kidney transplant is found for a patient on RRT , the disease will recur in the graft ( transplanted kidney ) in about 35 % of cases , and in 11 % , the graft will fail completely ( requiring resumption of the RRT and a further transplant ) . 
 = = Epidemiology = = 
 HSP occurs more often in children than in adults , and usually follows an upper respiratory tract infection . Half of affected patients are below the age of six , and 90 % are under ten . It occurs about twice as often in boys as in girls . The incidence of HSP in children is about 20 per 100 @,@ 000 children per year , making it the most common vasculitis in children . 
 Cases of HSP may occur anytime throughout the year , but some studies have found that fewer cases occur during the summer months . 
 = = History = = 
 The disease is named after Eduard Heinrich Henoch ( 1820 – 1910 ) , a German pediatrician ( nephew of Moritz Heinrich Romberg ) and his teacher Johann Lukas Schönlein ( 1793 – 1864 ) , who described it in the 1860s . Schönlein associated the purpura and arthritis , and Henoch the purpura and gastrointestinal involvement . The English physician William Heberden ( 1710 – 1801 ) and the dermatologist Robert Willan ( 1757 – 1812 ) had already described the disease in 1802 and 1808 , respectively , but the name Heberden – Willan disease has fallen into disuse . William Osler was the first to recognise the underlying allergic mechanism of HSP . 
 = Amanita abrupta = 
 Amanita abrupta , commonly known as the American abrupt @-@ <unk> Lepidella , is a species of fungus in the Amanitaceae family of mushrooms . Named for the characteristic shape of its fruit bodies , this white Amanita has a slender stem , a cap covered with conical white warts , and an " abruptly enlarged " swollen base . This terrestrial species grows in mixed woods in eastern North America and eastern Asia , where it is thought to exist in a mycorrhizal relationship with a variety of both coniferous and deciduous tree species . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 Amanita abrupta was first described by American mycologist Charles Horton Peck in 1897 , based on a specimen he found in Auburn , Alabama . Because the remains of the volva are not present on the bulb in dried , mature , specimens , Peck thought that the species should be grouped with Amanita rubescens and A. <unk> . Synonyms include binomials resulting from generic transfers by Jean @-@ Edouard Gilbert to Lepidella in 1928 , and to Aspidella in 1940 . Both of these genera have since been subsumed into Amanita . 
 A. abrupta is the type species of the section Lepidella of the genus Amanita , in the subgenus Lepidella , a grouping of related Amanita mushrooms characterized by their amyloid spores . Other North American species in this subgenus include A. atkinsoniana , A. chlorinosma , A. cokeri , A. daucipes , A. mutabilis , A. onusta , A. pelioma , A. polypyramis , A. ravenelii , and A. rhopalopus . European and Asian species ( also in section Lepidella ) that are phylogenetically related — close to it in the evolutionary family tree — include A. solitaria , A. <unk> , and A. japonica . 
 The specific epithet abrupta refers to the shape of the swollen base , which is abruptly enlarged rather than gradually tapering . The species ' common name is the " American abrupt @-@ <unk> Lepidella " . 
 = = Description = = 
 In Amanita abrupta , as with most mushrooms , the bulk of the organism lies unseen beneath the ground as an aggregation of fungal cells called hyphae ; under appropriate environmental conditions , the visible reproductive structure ( fruit body ) is formed . The cap has a diameter of 4 to 10 centimeters ( 1 @.@ 6 to 3 @.@ 9 in ) , and has a broadly convex shape when young , but eventually flattens . The central portion of the cap becomes depressed in mature specimens . The cap surface is verrucose — covered with small angular or pyramidal erect warts ( 1 – 2 mm tall by 1 – 2 mm wide at the base ) ; the warts are smaller and more numerous near the margin of the cap , and small fragments of tissue may be hanging from the margin of the cap . The cap surface , the warts , and the flesh are white . The warts can be easily separated from the cap , and in mature specimens they have often completely or partly disappeared . The white gills are placed moderately close together , reaching the stem but not directly attached to it . 
 The stem is 6 @.@ 5 to 12 @.@ 5 cm ( 2 @.@ 6 to 4 @.@ 9 in ) tall , and slender , with a diameter of 0 @.@ 5 to 1 @.@ 5 cm ( 0 @.@ 2 to 0 @.@ 6 in ) . It is white , smooth ( glabrous ) , solid ( that is , not hollow internally ) , and has an abruptly bulbous base with the shape of a flattened sphere ; it may develop longitudinal splits on the sides . The base is often attached to a copious white mycelium — a visual reminder that the bulk of the organism lies unseen below the surface . The ring is membranous , and persistent — not weathering away with time ; the ring may be attached to the stem with white fibers . The mushroom has no distinct odor . The edibility of the mushroom is unknown ; however , it is generally not recommended to consume Amanita mushrooms of questionable edibility . 
 = = = Microscopic characteristics = = = 
 When collected in deposit , such as with a spore print , the spores appear white . Viewed with a microscope , the spores are broadly elliptical or roughly spherical , smooth , thin @-@ walled , and have dimensions of 6 @.@ 5 – 9 @.@ 5 by 5 @.@ 5 by 8 @.@ 5 µm . Spores are amyloid ( meaning they take up iodine when stained with Melzer 's reagent ) The basidia ( spore @-@ bearing cells on the edges of gills ) are four @-@ spored and measure 30 – 50 by 4 – 11 µm . The bases of the basidia have clamp connections — short branches connecting one cell to the previous cell to allow passage of the products of nuclear division . The cap cuticle comprises a layer of densely interwoven , sightly gelatinized , filamentous hyphae that are 3 – 8 µm in diameter . The stem tissue is made of sparse , thin , longitudinally oriented hyphae measuring 294 by 39 µm . 
 = = = Similar species = = = 
 The fruit bodies of Amanita <unk> , a species known only from Japan , bears a superficial resemblance to A. abrupta , but A. <unk> differs in having scattered floccose patches ( tufts of soft woolly hairs that are the remains of the volva ) on the cap surface , and pale yellow gills . A. polypyramis fruit bodies have also been noted to be similar to A. abrupta ; however , it tends to have larger caps , up to 21 cm ( 8 @.@ 3 in ) in diameter , a fragile ring that soon withers away , and somewhat larger spores that typically measure 9 – 14 by 5 – 10 µm . The <unk> and size of the spores are reliable characteristics to help distinguish A. abrupta specimens with less prominently bulbous bases from other lookalike species . 
 Mycologists Tsuguo Hongo and <unk> Imazeki suggested in the 1980s that the Japanese mushroom A. <unk> was synonymous with the North American A. abrupta . However , a 1999 study of Amanita specimens in Japanese herbaria concluded that they were closely related but distinct species , due to differences in spore shape and in the microstructure of the volval remnants . Another similar species , A. magniverrucata , is differentiated from A. abrupta by a number of characteristics : the universal veil is clearly separated from the flesh of the cap ; the volval warts disappear more quickly because the surface of the cap cuticle gelatinizes ; the partial veil is more persistent ; the spores are smaller and roughly spherical ; on the underside of the partial veil , the stem has surface fibrils that are drawn upward so as to somewhat resemble a cortina ( a cobweb @-@ like protective covering over the immature spore bearing surfaces ) ; A. magniverrucata has a known distribution limited to the south western coast of North America . 
 = = Habitat , distribution , and ecology = = 
 The fruit bodies of A. abrupta grow on the ground , typically solitary , in mixed conifer and deciduous forests , usually during autumn . The frequency with which fruit bodies appear depends on several factors , such as season , location , temperature , and rainfall . The mushroom has been described as common in the Southeastern United States ; in Texas , it has been called both infrequent , and common in the Big Thicket National Preserve . Like most other Amanita species , A. abrupta is thought to form mycorrhizal relationships with trees . This is a mutually beneficial relationship where the hyphae of the fungus grow around the roots of trees , enabling the fungus to receive moisture , protection and nutritive byproducts of the tree , and affording the tree greater access to soil nutrients . Amanita abrupta is widely distributed throughout eastern North America , where it has been found as far North as Quebec , Canada , and as far south as Mexico . Orson K. Miller claims to have found it in the Dominican Republic where it appeared to be growing in a <unk> association with pine trees . Kuo also mentions a mycorrhizal relationship with both hardwoods and conifers , while Tulloss lists additional preferred tree hosts such as beech , birch , fir , <unk> , oak , and poplar . However , A. abrupta has been shown experimentally to not form mycorrhizae with Virginia Pine . 
 = = = Cited books = = = 
 Jenkins DB . ( 1986 ) . Amanita of North America . Eureka , California : Mad River Press . ISBN 0 @-@ 916422 @-@ 55 @-@ 0 . 
 Metzler V , Metzler S ( 1992 ) . Texas Mushrooms : A Field Guide . Austin , Texas : University of Texas Press . ISBN 0 @-@ 292 @-@ <unk> @-@ 7 . 
 = Datalore = 
 " Datalore " is the 13th episode of the first season of the American science fiction television series Star Trek : The Next Generation , originally aired on January 18 , 1988 , in broadcast syndication . The story was created by Robert Lewin and Maurice Hurley , and turned into a script by Lewin and the creator of the show , Gene Roddenberry . It was Roddenberry 's final script credit on a Star Trek series . The director was originally to be Joe Scanlan , but following delays in pre @-@ production caused by script re @-@ writes , it was reassigned to Rob Bowman . 
 Set in the 24th century , the series follows the adventures of the crew of the Starfleet starship Enterprise @-@ D. In this episode , the Enterprise crew discover and reassemble Data 's " brother " , Lore ( both Brent Spiner ) , who is in league with the entity that destroyed the colony on his home world . 
 The story underwent significant changes prior to filming , with it originally meant to be a romance episode for Data with a female android . It was then altered to an " evil twin " plot at the suggestion of Spiner and elements of Data 's origin were introduced , first as an alien creation and then at the hands of Dr. Noonien Soong . Soong was named by Roddenberry after a friend in the Second World War . Edits to the script continued to be made during filming , and while the look of the episode was praised by cast and crew , the characterisations in the script were not . Ratings for the episode came in at 10 @.@ 3 million for the first broadcast , which was lower than both the previous and subsequent episodes . Critical reception has been mixed , with criticism directed mostly at the quality of the script and Spiner praised for his dual role . 
 = = Plot = = 
 While on the way to Starbase Armus IX for computer maintenance , the Enterprise arrives at the planet Omicron Theta , the site of a vanished colony where the starship Tripoli originally found the android Data ( Brent Spiner ) . An away team travels to the surface and finds that what had been farmland is now barren with no trace of life in the soil . The team also finds a lab which they discover is where Dr. Noonien Soong , a formerly prominent but now discredited robotics designer , built Data . The team also find a disassembled android nearly identical to Data and return with it to the ship . As the course to the Starbase is resumed , the crew reassemble and reactivate Data 's " brother " ( also played by Brent Spiner ) in sickbay . He refers to himself as Lore , and explains that Data was built first and he himself is the more perfect model . He feigns naiveté to the crew , but shows signs of being more intelligent than he is letting on . Later , in private , he tells Data that they were actually created in the opposite order , as the colonists became envious of his own perfection . He also explains that a crystalline space entity capable of stripping away all life force from a world was responsible for the colony 's demise . 
 Lore then incapacitates Data , revealing that he plans to offer the ship 's crew to the entity . When a signal transmission is detected from Data 's quarters , Wesley Crusher ( Wil Wheaton ) arrives to investigate . He finds Lore , now impersonating Data , who explains that he had to incapacitate his brother after being attacked . Wesley is doubtful , but pretends to accept the explanation . Soon after , the same crystalline entity that had attacked the colony approaches the ship . Lore , still pretending to be Data , enters the bridge as the object hovers before the Enterprise and explains that he incapacitated his brother by turning him off , causing Doctor Beverly Crusher ( Gates McFadden ) to be suspicious , since Data had previously treated the existence of such a feature as a closely guarded secret . Lore then explains that he can communicate with the crystalline entity and suggests to Captain Jean @-@ Luc Picard ( Patrick Stewart ) that he should show a demonstration of force by beaming an object toward the entity and then destroying it with the ship 's phasers . 
 Lore 's attempts to imitate Data are imperfect , though , arousing Picard 's suspicion , especially when Lore does not recognize Picard 's usual command to " make it so " . Although Picard sends a security detachment to tail him , Lore disables Lt. Worf ( Michael Dorn ) and evades pursuit . Meanwhile , the suspicious Dr. Crusher and her son , Wesley , reactivate the unconscious Data , and the three of them race to the cargo hold to find Lore plotting with the entity to defeat the Enterprise . When Lore discovers them , he threatens Wesley with a phaser and orders Dr. Crusher to leave . Data quickly rushes Lore and a brawl ensues . Data manages to knock Lore onto the transporter platform , and Wesley activates it , beaming Lore into space . With its conspirator no longer aboard , the crystalline entity departs , and the Enterprise resumes their journey to the starbase . 
 = = Production = = 
 The original story for this episode featured a non @-@ lookalike female android who was intended to be a love interest for Data . The new android was intended to have been created as something that could be deployed into dangerous or hazardous situations , described in the premise as something along the lines of a female android version of Red Adair , the fire fighter . The " evil twin " story was suggested by Brent Spiner instead , and was originally developed to include the creation of Data by an alien race . This was instead dropped and Dr. Noonian Soong was introduced . Soong was named by Gene Roddenberry after his Second World War friend , Kim Noonien Singh , who the character Khan Noonien Singh was also named after . It would be Roddenberry 's final script credit on a Star Trek series . The script made mention of Isaac Asimov and the Laws of Robotics , something which had been suggested should be included at some point in the show as a spoken credit in a memo dated October 28 , 1986 from executive producer Bob Justman . The episode suffered delays during pre @-@ production caused by re @-@ writes to the script , resulting in the script being switched with " The Big Goodbye " , which meant that director Joe Scanlan went on to direct that episode instead . Rob Bowman , who had previously been told by Justman that he was going to direct " The Big Goodbye " after his work on " Too Short a Season " , was instead assigned to direct " Datalore " . 
 He took the new episode on as a challenge , in the belief that the producers didn 't think the episode would work well , which caused him to become determined to put out a good episode . He had numerous discussions with Brent Spiner , Justman , and Rick Berman on aspects of the episode and the technical requirements and effects required an additional day of filming . Bowman credited Spiner for making the episode work , giving one example , " He did the one scene in his own office with Brent sitting down and Lore discussion what it 's like to be human . He did one side , we shot through a double , then turned around , read it the other way and shot the other half of it . Those two characters in those scenes are different people ... he really painted those characters differently . " Edits were still being made to the script during filming , as the writers wanted to introduce a new element to Data , in order to further distinguish him from Lore : an inability to use contractions . Data had used contractions during earlier episodes , and Spiner refused to shoot the scene until a final decision was reached ; production stopped while there was a meeting on this subject between Gene Roddenberry , the producers , and the writers , in the middle of the bridge set . 
 The music for the episode was composed by Ron Jones , and was later released on the second disc of the album Star Trek : The Next Generation : The Ron Jones Project . For this episode , Jones created a six @-@ note theme to represent Lore . The crystalline entity was given a theme of three notes which played through two pieces entitled Crystal Entity and Crystal Attacks . The music played when the away team explore Omicron Theta was similar to that created by Jerry Goldsmith for the 1979 film Alien . Jones acknowledged that link saying that , " I was playing with the stuff like Jerry ’ s music at the beginning of Alien , Bowman was like our Ridley Scott — he was like Ridley Scott Jr. and I was Jerry Goldsmith Jr . " 
 Executive producer Maurice Hurley was pleased with the outcome of the episode , saying " The sets , the design of it and the look of that show was brilliant , I thought that might have been the best @-@ looking show of the first season " . However , he felt that the characterisations weren 't quite right . This was the same opinion as that put forward by actor Brent Spiner , who portrayed both Data and Lore , who thought that Data 's actions were not in line with his expectations of the character . This episode was the second and last appearance of Biff Yeager as Chief Engineer Argyle . He was the only one of the Chief Engineers introduced during the first season to appear twice , with Geordi La Forge ( LeVar Burton ) gaining the role in season two . Wil Wheaton later recalled that the stand @-@ in actor used in this episode really irritated Spiner , and was never used again . He described the stand @-@ in as looking like " a break dancer doing the Robot " whenever he had to portray Data or Lore , and said that " I think the guy was really into playing an android , and his enthusiasm got cranked up to eleven , but by the end of the week , pretty much everyone wanted to deactivate him and sell him to the nearest Jawa . " The events of the episode would be followed up in later seasons , with the crystalline entity returning in the fifth @-@ season episode " Silicon Avatar " . Brent Spiner reprised the role of Lore in the episodes " Brothers " and " Descent " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 " Datalore " was first broadcast on January 18 , 1988 , in broadcast syndication . The episode received Nielsen ratings of 10 @.@ 3 million on the first broadcast , which was a dip between " The Big Goodbye " which received ratings of 11 @.@ 5 in the previous week , and " Angel One " which gained ratings of 11 @.@ 4 million in the next week . 
 Several reviewers re @-@ watched the episode after the end of the series . Keith DeCandido reviewed the episode for Tor.com in June 2011 . He summed it up by saying " What a dreadful episode . While it 's important in the grand scheme of things in what it establishes about Data 's background , the episode itself is horrendously bad , from the clumsy script to the embarrassingly inept body @-@ double work . " He thought the ending was anticlimactic , and that the characters all acted " as dumb as posts " in the episode . The most positive thing he said of the episode was that " Spiner 's teeth marks are all over the scenery when he 's onscreen as Lore " . DeCandido gave " Datalore " a score of four out of ten . Cast member Wil Wheaton watched the episode for AOL TV in December 2007 . While he credited the art direction of the episode , he criticised the story , saying that " it comes down to lazy writing that has things happen because they 're supposed to happen , rather than having them happen organically . The characters are credulous when they should be skeptical , the audience isn 't surprised by anything after the second act , and there are story problems that should have never gotten past the first draft . " He remembered really enjoying the episode as a child , but felt that it didn 't hold up on repeat watchings as an adult , and stated that Spiner 's " fantastic job creating distinctly different characters in Data and Lore " wasn 't enough to remedy the other faults in the episode . He gave it a D grade . 
 Michelle Erica Green , who reviewed the episode for TrekNation in May 2007 , thought she might be more forgiving in hindsight as she knows that the follow @-@ ups to " Datalore " were great episodes . She thought it was reminiscent of the evil twin of Captain James T. Kirk in The Original Series episode " The Enemy Within " and the mirror universe version of Spock seen in " Mirror , Mirror " . She felt that Lore lacked any motivation for what he was intending to do , and that the crew were made to look " pretty stupid " by their inaction to the Lore threat . She thought that the ending was shocking , as transporting the villain into space would never have occurred if they were human , and " a moment of utter inconsistency " as Lore had only just told the entity to attack when the shields drop following a transporter activation . Jamahl Epsicokhan at his website " Jammer 's Reviews " valued the episode for providing backstory to Data , but said that " no one is smart enough to realize the obvious . None of the crew except Boy Wesley realizes that Lore is impersonating Data — and when Wesley ( who is always somehow more observant than the silly adults ) brings this to their attention , we get helpful lines like , " Shut up , Wesley , " which lead to even more helpful lines of would @-@ be teenage rebellion when Wesley complains about the officers not listening to him . Quite simply , this is annoying material , continuing in season one 's trend of Wesley 's child status as a plot device . Meanwhile , all the adults look terminally clueless . " He gave the episode a score of three out of four . 
 Zack Handlen watched " Datalore " for The A.V. Club in April 2010 . Whilst he thought that Data 's origins had significant plotholes , saying that the ship which originally found Data didn 't think it was unusual that the farming colony had been wiped out and hadn 't even searched the planet for Soong 's lab which La Forge finds " after roughly three minutes of looking aimlessly around " . He thought that the role of Lore was a chance for Spiner to showcase his abilities , but felt that the story only scratched the surface of the possible routes that could have been taken . He thought the contraction issue was a problem , as despite saying that Data could not use them , he promptly used them throughout the episode including immediately after Lore was beamed off the ship which caused confusion as it " punishes you for paying attention , because now you 'll be half @-@ convinced that the wrong robot was beamed away , and that Lore somehow won out in the end . " He disliked the response of the crew to Wesley and thought that he was being mistreated , and gave the episode an overall grade of B- . 
 = = Home media and theatrical release = = 
 The most recent release was as part of the season one Blu @-@ ray set on July 24 , 2012 . In order to celebrate the 25th anniversary of Star Trek : The Next Generation and promote the release of the first season on Blu @-@ ray , the episodes " Datalore " and " Where No One Has Gone Before " received a theatrical release in the United States on July 23 , 2012 , in nearly 500 cinemas . " Datalore " was chosen by Star Trek experts Mike and Denise Okuda because of the fan favourite status of Brent Spiner . 
 = The Reporter ( Parks and Recreation ) = 
 " The Reporter " is the third episode of the first season of the American comedy television series Parks and Recreation . It originally aired on NBC in the United States on April 23 , 2009 . The episode was written by Daniel J. Goor and directed by Jeffrey Blitz . In the episode , Leslie enlists a local reporter to write an article about the park , but the interviews go poorly , and the problem escalates after Mark gets romantically involved with the journalist . 
 The episode featured actress and comedian Alison Becker in a guest appearance as Pawnee Journal reporter Shauna Malwae @-@ Tweep . " The Reporter " received generally mixed reviews , with some commentators still comparing it unfavorably to The Office , another comedy series created by the Parks and Recreations co @-@ creators . 
 According to Nielsen Media Research , it was watched by 5 @.@ 23 million households in its original airing , continuing a downward trend in ratings since the pilot episode . " The Reporter " and the rest of the first season of Parks and Recreation was released on DVD in the United States on September 8 , 2009 . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Leslie ( Amy Poehler ) announces she has invited a reporter from the local Pawnee Journal newspaper to write a story about the construction pit that she plans to turn into a park . Leslie meticulously prepares for the interview , instructing the members of her subcommittee to " stay on message . " Over lunch with Mark Brendanawicz ( Paul Schneider ) , Leslie seeks advice on how to deal with the press . Leslie once again tells the documentary crew like she did in the pilot that she previously had sex with Mark and seems to still harbor feelings for him . The reporter , Shauna Malwae @-@ Tweep ( Alison Becker ) arrives the next day to interview Leslie , along with Ann ( Rashida Jones ) and Andy ( Chris Pratt ) . During the interview , Andy reveals he was drunk when he fell in the pit , much to the horror of Leslie and Ann , who were not previously aware of it . 
 Leslie calls Mark for assistance in dealing with the reporter and Mark , seemingly attracted to Shauna , ends up leaving the parks department office with her . The next morning , Leslie waits at the pit for an interview with Shauna . Leslie is surprised when Mark drops Shauna off at the site and , when she sees Shauna is wearing the same dress as the previous day , she realizes Mark and Shauna have had sex . Leslie is standoffish and irritable during the interview , and she later confronts Mark , who says that it is a private matter and tells Leslie she is acting like a " huge dork . " When Leslie says she cannot have this type of behavior from members of her subcommittee , Mark resigns from the committee . Leslie asks for another interview with Shauna , attributing her behavior during their last interview due to food poisoning from a burrito . During the interview , Shauna reads a number of quotes claiming the park will never be built , and that the existence of unicorns , leprechauns and talking monkeys are more likely . Leslie is disappointed to learn Mark provided the quotes . 
 Later , Ann tells Mark about the upcoming story and the negative quotes , which Mark thought was off the record . The two confront Shauna and ask her not to use the quotes . Shauna says that she will not use the quotes since the two are " romantically involved , " but when Mark disputes the idea that they are romantically involved , Shauna appears visibly annoyed . Later , Mark apologizes to Leslie and asks to be reinstated to the committee , to which Leslie happily agrees . Later , Leslie reads the story , which is not entirely positive , but her enthusiasm remains strong . In a B story , Tom ( Aziz Ansari ) deliberately loses at online Scrabble against his boss Ron ( Nick Offerman ) , and is horrified when intern April ( Aubrey Plaza ) plays on his account and beats Ron . Tom insists to Ron that he is the " Scrabble king . " Ron later reveals he knows Tom loses on purpose , but doesn 't mind because Tom is his idea of a model employee : unproductive , lacking initiative and a poor team player . 
 = = Production = = 
 " The Reporter " was written by Daniel J. Goor and directed by Jeffrey Blitz . Blitz previously directed episodes of The Office , a comedy series created by Parks and Recreation co @-@ creator Greg Daniels . Michael Schur , who created Parks along with Daniels , said of Blitz , " He 's such a great director , and it made us feel , launching this new show , safe and happy to have him . " It was originally supposed to be the second episode shown in the series , but the broadcast schedule was changed and " Canvassing , " the original third episode , was shown second instead . Goor was very upset with the switch so , as a prank , the Parks and Recreation producers sent him an e @-@ mail message claiming NBC was going to be further held until the second season because it was preempted by " a sports thing . " 
 The episode was filmed only two weeks after filming wrapped on the pilot episode , which Schur said he regretted because , " Normally , you 'd like to have the usual three months or so to sit back , look at what you made , draw conclusions , tinker , and rewrite . " During " The Reporter , " Parks and Recreation editor Dean Holland developed an editing technique that would be used throughout the rest of the series . During the scene in which Leslie reacts to quotes read to her by the reporter , Amy Poehler improvised a number of jokes , many of which were not going to be used . Holland thought they were all funny , so he created a brief montage inter @-@ cutting several of the lines into the same scene . 
 Like most episodes of Parks and Recreation , many of the scenes in " The Reporter " were improvised by the actors . For example , Chris Pratt changed the original line about Mark , " He 's thinking with his wiener instead of his brain , " to " He 's thinking with the head of his wiener , instead of the head of his brain . " Aziz Ansari also improvised the line about Mark , " That dude has stuck it in some crazy chicks . " Schur was surprised NBC censors allowed either of the lines to stay in the episode . The clip of Leslie trying to confront a raccoon loose in the city hall building was originally filmed for a Parks and Recreation commercial , but was later included into this episode . The scene was filmed to establish a running gag that Pawnee has a terrible raccoon infestation problem . The J.J. ' s Diner eatery featured in the episode was named after Goor 's wife . Poehler speedily eats tremendous amounts of whipped cream on her waffles . This was inspired by Parks and Recreation story editor Rachel Axler , who producer Morgan Sackett said is " a tiny , bird @-@ like woman " who eats enormous amounts of whipped cream . 
 " The Reporter " featured actress and comedian Alison Becker in a guest appearance as Pawnee Journal reporter Shauna Malwae @-@ Tweep . Leslie calls the local Pawnee Journal newspaper " our town 's Washington Post , one of the largest circulation newspaper in the country . A PDF copy of the Pawnee Journal newspaper page from the episode was posted on NBC 's official Parks and Recreation website about Pawnee , Indiana ; it included an article written by Shauna Malwae @-@ Tweep with a photo of Leslie in front of the pit , and references to portions of the article mentioned by Leslie in the episode . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In its original American broadcast on April 23 , 2009 , " The Reporter " was watched by 5 @.@ 23 million households , according to Nielsen Media Research , continuing a downward trend in ratings since the pilot episode . " The Reporter " received a 2 @.@ 4 rating / 8 share among viewers aged between 18 and 34 , and a 2 @.@ 3 rating / 7 share among viewers between 18 and 49 . 
 The episode received mixed reviews . The London Free Press listed it as one of the " best bets " to watch the evening it originally aired . Alan Sepinwall of The Star @-@ Ledger said the small @-@ town government setting and story lines of the show were working , but felt the writing for the Leslie character has been uneven and that individual situations involving her in " The Reporter " were not funny or effective . Matt Fowler of IGN said the Leslie character was funny , particularly when she talks about her failure to remove graffiti penises from a city wall . ( " To this day , I am haunted by those remaining penises . " ) But Fowler said the Scrabble subplot between Tom and Ron was " silly , " and said the Ron character is too one @-@ note and unfunny . 
 Scott Tobias of The A.V. Club said the faux @-@ documentary style of the show , and Leslie 's naive faith about her project and department in this episode , draw unflattering comparisons to The Office , which was also made by the Park and Recreation creators . Tobias said the Scrabble subplot brought " the few good laughs " in the episode . Jason Hughes of TV Squad said he was having trouble connecting to the Leslie character , but felt " The Reporter " allowed for further development of supporting characters like Ron , Tom and Mark , who is portrayed as self @-@ absorbed and " a bit of a douche . " Brigid Brown of Cinema Blend said he believes Rashida Jones is being underutilized by the show . 
 = = DVD release = = 
 " The Reporter , " along with the five other first season episode of Parks and Recreation , was released on a one @-@ disc DVD set in the United States on September 8 , 2009 . The DVD included cast and crew commentary tracks for each episodes , as well as about 30 minutes of deleted scenes . The deleted scenes included on the DVD were originally featured on the official Parks and Recreation website after the episode aired . They included clips of Ann voicing excitement about the pit committee , Leslie asking everyone to " stay on message " with the reporter , and Mark expressing shock about Shauna Malwae @-@ Tweep quoting him . 
 = Bart 's Comet = 
 " Bart 's Comet " is the 14th episode of The Simpsons ' sixth season . The episode originally aired on Fox in the United States on February 5 , 1995 . In the episode , Bart Simpson accidentally discovers a comet , which is heading towards Springfield . The show 's writing staff saw an issue of Time magazine which presented the threat of comets hitting Earth on its cover , and decided to create an episode in a similar vein . John Swartzwelder wrote the script , while Bob Anderson directed . " Bart 's Comet " contains references to Where 's Waldo ? and The Twilight Zone , and received positive commendations from reviewers . 
 = = Plot = = 
 After Bart sabotages Principal Skinner 's weather balloon by adding a Skinner @-@ shaped flag that reads " Hi , I 'm Big Butt Skinner " to it , Skinner decides to punish him by having him help with his amateur astronomy , which he engages in at 4 AM before school starts . Skinner dreams of finding something in the sky and having it named after him . When the weather balloon drifts by the playground , Skinner runs off to catch it , leaving Bart unattended with the telescope . Bart accidentally locates a comet which is named after him , much to the consternation of Skinner , who loses both his chance at having a celestial body named after him , and the grip on the weather balloon , causing it to fly off again . Scientists soon discover that the comet is heading straight for Springfield . Professor Frink plans to launch a missile at the comet , dispelling everyone 's fears ( save only by Lisa , who knows that this plan can backfire , and Moe , because in any circumstance , his tavern will be destroyed anyway ) . However , the missile flies past the comet , instead blowing up the only bridge out of town , dooming the people . 
 After a Congressional bill to evacuate Springfield is defeated due to a congressman attaching a bill to help fund " the perverted arts " to the evacuation bill , Homer decides that they should stay in the bomb shelter that Ned Flanders built . Anticipating this , Ned had built it large enough for both families . One hour before Springfield is destroyed , the rest of the townspeople arrive , demanding a place in the bunker . Homer is unable to close the door and someone has to leave . Homer decides that the only thing the " world of the future " will not need is left @-@ handed stores and tells Ned to go . Ned tells Rodd Flanders to shoot him if he tries to come back in before leaves the bomb shelter , Moe decided that they should play a barnyard noise guessing game to pass the time ; however , it causes a huge argument . 
 Eventually , Homer feels guilty and leaves as well , followed by the other townspeople and they all converge on a hill with Ned to await death . As the comet enters the atmosphere , it burns up in the thick layer of pollution over Springfield , popping Skinner 's weather balloon and destroying Ned 's bunker on the way . The town decides to burn down the observatory to prevent a similar incident from ever happening again . The Simpsons , however , are more worried at the fact Homer correctly predicted the fate of the <unk> it would burn up and fall to earth as a rock no bigger than a Chihuahua 's head ( it even lands next to an actual Chihuahua for comparison ) . 
 = = Production = = 
 The episode was written by John Swartzwelder and directed by Bob Anderson . After seeing an issue of Time magazine , which presented the threat of comets hitting Earth on its cover , the writing staff decided to have an episode based on the concept of a comet hitting Springfield . They fleshed out the episode 's plot over several days and Swartzwelder then set about writing the details of the script . According to showrunner David Mirkin , examples of " Swartzwelder humor " in the episode include the American fighter pilots mistaking Groundskeeper Willie for an Iraqi jet and cutting to Grampa and Jasper outside a 1940s General store . For the bomb shelter scene , the mass of townspeople was constructed on multiple layers so that it was easier to animate . 
 Kent Brockman 's list of gay people is composed of the show 's production staff , who had to sign legal agreements that they would not sue their own show . As a result , according to Groening , many of the staff appear on lists of gay people on the Internet . The episodes marks the first appearance of Database , a character show creator Matt Groening dislikes if he is used for anything more than one line . 
 Mirkin considers the episode to be one of his all time favorites , calling it a " perfect Simpsons episode " due to the size of the plot , emotion and observational humor . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 The couch gag is a reference to the animation of Fleischer Studios . The constellation of the Three Wise Men is a drawing of the The Three Stooges . The townspeople yanking their collars after the rocket destroys the only bridge out of town is a reference to Charles Nelson Reilly 's performance in The Ghost & Mrs. Muir . Waldo from Where 's Waldo ? appears near the top @-@ left of frame during the first group shot in the bomb shelter , imitating the style of the Where 's Waldo ? books . The bomb shelter scenes were based on The Twilight Zone episodes " The Shelter " and " The Monsters Are Due on Maple Street " . The episode makes references to Back to the Future , including when Professor Frink accidentally sets his town model on fire , just like Doc Brown . The Super Friends are named after the 1970s cartoon of the same name and as the comet approaches Springfield , the townspeople sing " Que Sera Sera " , a song originally recorded by Doris Day for Alfred Hitchcock 's 1956 film The Man Who Knew Too Much . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In its original American broadcast , " Bart 's Comet " finished joint 33rd ( with The X @-@ Files and Hangin ' with Mr. Cooper ) in the ratings for the week of January 3 to February 5 , 1995 , with a Nielsen rating of 11 @.@ 3 . It was the fourth highest rated show on the Fox network that week . 
 Warren Martyn and Adrian Wood , the authors of the book I Can 't Believe It 's a Bigger and Better Updated Unofficial Simpsons Guide , called it an " excellent episode " and praised the " great moment when the ever @-@ pious Maude Flanders happily sacrifices her Neddy . " Mikey Cahill of the Herald Sun picked the episode 's chalkboard gag " Cursive writing does not mean what I think it does " as one of his favorite chalkboard gags in the history of the show . Colin Jacobson of DVD Movie Guide said in a review of the sixth season DVD that he did not " share the same level of enthusiasm for it " as Mirkin , concluding : " I think it provides a consistently strong show . It stretches reality a bit , but that ’ s not a problem – or unusual for the series – and the program ends up as a positive one . " Ryan Keefer of DVD Verdict gave the episode a B- . In the July 26 , 2007 issue of Nature , the scientific journal 's editorial staff listed " Bart 's Comet " among " The Top Ten science moments in The Simpsons " . 
 = Michael Bourtzes = 
 Michael Bourtzes ( Greek : Μιχαήλ <unk> , Arabic : <unk> ’ <unk> al @-@ <unk> ; ca . 930 / 35 – after 996 ) was a leading Byzantine general of the latter 10th century . He became notable for his capture of Antioch from the Arabs in 969 , but fell into disgrace by the Emperor Nikephoros II Phokas . Resentful at the slight , Bourtzes joined forces with the conspirators who assassinated Phokas a few weeks later . Bourtzes re @-@ appears in a prominent role in the civil war between Emperor Basil II and the rebel Bardas Skleros , switching his allegiance from the emperor to the rebel and back again . Nevertheless , he was re @-@ appointed as doux of Antioch by Basil , a post he held until 995 , when he was relieved because of his failures in the war against the Fatimids . 
 = = Biography = = 
 = = = Career under Nikephoros II and John Tzimiskes = = = 
 Michael Bourtzes was the first prominent member of the Bourtzes family , originating in the upper Euphrates region , which went on to become one of the major clans of the Byzantine military aristocracy during the 11th century . The name has been proposed as deriving either from the Arabic <unk> , " tower " , or from the placename <unk> or <unk> near Trebizond . Likewise the ethnic origin of the family is disputed among scholars : <unk> Laurent and Jean @-@ Claude Cheynet suggested an Arab origin , while Peter <unk> and Nicholas Adontz advocated an Armenian origin . 
 The date of Michael Bourtzes 's birth is unknown , but must be placed sometime between 930 and 935 . He is first mentioned in late 968 , when he was appointed by Emperor Nikephoros II Phokas ( reigned 963 – 969 ) as patrikios and strategos of the small theme of <unk> Oros ( " Black Mountain " ) , on the southern outliers of the Amanus Mountains . With his base on the newly built fortress of <unk> , Bourtzes and his thousand men were tasked with controlling the northern approaches to the Arab @-@ held city of Antioch . Acting against Nikephoros 's orders not to assault the city in his absence , in the late autumn of 969 , Bourtzes persuaded a traitor inside the city to surrender one of the wall 's main towers , which he then promptly occupied on 28 October . He then defended this post against repeated attacks of the city 's defenders for three days , until the reinforcements led by the stratopedarches Peter arrived and secured the city for the Byzantines . Despite his major role in this success , Bourtzes 's reward was distinctly lacking : angry at him for disobeying his orders , or , according to another account , for laying fire and destroying much of the city , Emperor Nikephoros dismissed him from his post and appointed a kinsman of his , Eustathios <unk> , as the first governor of Antioch . 
 Angered by this treatment , Bourtzes joined a conspiracy involving a number of other prominent generals who were discontent at Nikephoros , chief amongst them John Tzimiskes . On the night of 10 / 11 December 969 , a group of these conspirators , including Tzimiskes and Bourtzes , managed to gain access to the imperial <unk> Palace by sea , and proceeded to murder the emperor and install Tzimiskes as his successor . Despite his prominent role in the assassination of Nikephoros II , the historical sources barely mention Bourtzes for the duration of Tzimiskes 's reign ( 969 – 976 ) . Only Yahya of Antioch records that in summer 971 , with 12 @,@ 000 men , he oversaw the repairs carried out to the walls of Antioch following an earthquake and executed one of the murderers of Patriarch Christopher , but it is not certain whether he had been placed in command there as governor . Rather , at the time of Tzimiskes 's death in January 976 , he is stated by John Skylitzes to have commanded the elite tagma of the <unk> in the army of Bardas Skleros . 
 = = = Career under Basil II = = = 
 At the point of Tzimiskes 's death , imperial power reverted to the legitimate emperors , the young brothers Basil II ( r . 976 – 1025 ) and Constantine VIII ( co @-@ emperor until 1025 , sole emperor in 1025 – 28 ) . In view of their youth and inexperience , however , government essentially continued to be exercised by the powerful parakoimomenos , Basil Lekapenos . Almost immediately , the parakoimomenos moved to forestall any moves by one of the powerful Anatolian magnates to seize the throne and reign as a supposed " guardian " of the two young emperors , like Phokas and Tzimiskes had done . A general reshuffle of the most important army posts in the East followed , interpreted by later historians like Skylitzes as a move to weaken the position of over @-@ powerful strategoi . At this point , Bourtzes was appointed commander of the troops in northern Syria , with his seat at Antioch ; indeed , he seems to have been the first to be titled doux of Antioch . According to Skylitzes , this move was designed by the parakoimomenos to wean him away from his close relationship with Skleros , who as one of the Empire 's senior generals and de facto second @-@ in @-@ command under his relative Tzimiskes , was a prime candidate for usurping the throne . Almost immediately after his appointment , Bourtzes set out in a deep raid into Fatimid @-@ controlled Syria , reaching Tripolis and returning with much booty . 
 In spring , however , Bardas Skleros , now appointed doux of Mesopotamia , rose in revolt and proclaimed himself emperor at his base in Melitene . Bourtzes was commanded by Constantinople to lead his force north , join the army of Eustathios <unk> , now governor of Cilicia , and block the rebel from crossing the Antitaurus Mountains . Leaving his son in control of Antioch , Bourtzes complied and marched north . In the ensuing battle at the fortress of Lapara in the province of Lykandos ( autumn 976 ) , however , the combined loyalist force was routed , with Bourtzes being the first to retreat according to the chroniclers . As Skylitzes pointedly comments , Bourtzes ' conduct during the battle was attributed either to cowardice or to malice ; certainly soon after , he deserted the imperial camp and joined Skleros . According to the contemporary Yahya of Antioch , Bourtzes at first fled to a fortress in the Anatolic Theme , but was followed by Skleros and persuaded to come over to his side . Bourtzes 's defection brought Skleros control of Antioch as well : Bourtzes commanded his son Constantine to join him , and the city was left in the hands of the Arab <unk> , who was soon overthrown by another Arab , <unk> , who also joined Skleros . In the summer of 977 , <unk> was deployed , along with Romanos Taronites , in command of Skleros 's forces shadowing the operations of the imperial army advancing from <unk> to <unk> . The presence of the tribute caravan from Aleppo entangled the two forces in an impromptu fight at <unk> , which ended in a bloody defeat for the rebels . After this , Bourtzes again switched sides and rejoined the imperial army , now led by Bardas Phokas . 
 Nothing is known of Bourtzes 's career for the next twelve years . Uniquely amongst the military leaders who had revolted against him , Basil II continued to rely on Bourtzes and entrusted him again with the critical position of doux of Antioch in 989 , in the aftermath of another rebellion , this time of Bardas Phokas . In November 989 , Bourtzes took the city over from Leo Phokas , the son of Bardas , who himself had submitted to the emperor only months earlier . From this position , over the next few years Bourtzes led the defence of the imperial frontier in a renewed bout of fighting with the Fatimids , as the two empires disputed control over the Hamdanid emirate of Aleppo . 
 In 991 he provided military assistance to the Hamdanid emir of Aleppo , Sa 'd al @-@ Dawla , which enabled the latter to defeat the rebel Bakjur , who with Fatimid help tried to seize Aleppo . Early in the next year , a Fatimid army under Manjutakin advanced on Aleppo . Manjutakin sent a messenger to Bourtzes , claiming that his conflict was with Aleppo , and did not involve the Byzantines , but Bourtzes had the messenger arrested . After defeating the Hamdanids in battle near Apamea , Manjutakin laid siege to Aleppo for 33 days , after which he left part of his forces behind and led the rest to confront Bourtzes , who was marching to the city 's aid . At the ensuing battle at <unk> ( Arabic Jisr al @-@ Hadith ) Bourtzes and his men were defeated . Manjutakin followed up his success by capturing the fortress of <unk> , commanded by Bourtzes ' nephew , and taking him and 300 troops prisoner , before embarking on a plundering raid through Byzantine territory as far as Germanikeia ( Ar . Mar 'ash ) . The Fatimid general returned to Aleppo , but was unable to take it and withdrew later in the year . At about the same time , the Muslim population of Laodicea , Antioch 's seaport , rose in revolt , but Bourtzes was able to put it down and deported the populace to the interior of Byzantine territory in Asia Minor . 
 In the late summer of 993 , Manjutakin launched yet another expedition , capturing Apamea and Larissa ( Ar . Shayzar ) and continuing his raids in the Byzantine province around Antioch , before returning safely to Damascus . In spring 994 , Manjutakin once more moved against Aleppo . Responding to the calls for aid by the Hamdanids , Basil II ordered Bourtzes to come to their aid , and sent the <unk> Leo Melissenos with reinforcements to Syria . The Byzantine army however was surprised and heavily defeated when attacked on two flanks by Manjutakin in a battle at the banks of the Orontes , on 15 September 994 . Manjutakin went on to capture Azaz and continued his siege of Aleppo until the personal intervention of Basil II in a lightning campaign the next year . These failures , as well as accusations that he had exacerbated the conflict by imprisoning the Fatimid ambassador in 992 , brought Basil 's displeasure upon Bourtzes , who was replaced with Damian Dalassenos . 
 Nothing more is known of Michael Bourtzes after that , and it may be that he died sometime around the autumn of 995 . He did , however , have at least three sons , Michael , <unk> , and Samuel , known because they conspired against Constantine VIII after he blinded Michael 's son , named Constantine , in 1025 / 26 . 
 = Farm River State Park = 
 Farm River State Park is a 61 @-@ acre state park on Long Island Sound in the town of East Haven . The undeveloped park is located alongside part of Farm River . The land was acquired by the State of Connecticut and designated a Connecticut state park in 1998 before developers began the construction of luxury condominiums along the river . 
 The land contains marshland , tidal wetlands and a rocky shore that hosts a number of bird species including ducks , gulls , snowy egrets , and blue herons . The unique geology of the uplands and bedrock outcrops provide the landscape diversity and allow the tidal marsh flooding to separate the park into an upper and lower portions . Park activities include picnicking , hiking , bicycling , fishing , crabbing , bird watching , and car @-@ top boating . Public access to the park is limited and boating is restricted to those with passes obtained from Quinnipiac University , who manages the park for the state . 
 = = History = = 
 Farm River State Park covers 61 acres located on the western shoreline of the Farm River . According to local historian Joseph Leary , the Farm River competes with the Housatonic River for the most names , with at least 15 different known names , complicating identification of the river with different native and colonial names . One of these names , Deborah River , named for Deborah Chidsey relates to an incident in which she left Governor Gurdon Saltonstall stranded upon a rock in the river whilst waiting for the tide to recede . The land surrounding the river has been dominated by summer homes as since the early 1970s , when land was inexpensive and available . The land was obtained by the State of Connecticut and designated a state park in 1998 before the construction of luxury condominiums . The State of Connecticut in conjunction with the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service and the Trust for Public Lands to create the park with the purchase of a 57 @-@ acre parcel and another 15 acre parcel on Mansfield Grove Road for a total of $ 1 @.@ 75 million . 
 Though it only has 61 acres , the park has remarkable diversity according to the Connecticut Department of Energy and Environmental Protection . The land contains marshland , tidal wetlands and a rocky shore that hosts a number of bird species including ducks , gulls , snowy egrets , and blue herons . The unique geology of the uplands and bedrock outcrops allow the tidal marsh flooding to separate the park into an upper and lower portions . In 2006 , Quinnipiac University received $ 86 @,@ 000 to install a wireless network communication system in the park , making it the first state park in Connecticut to have Wi @-@ fi capability . Also in 2006 , a vacant and soon to be demolished house was destroyed by arson . The house was going to be demolished to create parking for the park . In 2012 , more than a mile of trail from the D.C. Moore School to Farm River State Park and Short Beach Road was cleared by Boy Scout Troop 401 . 
 = = Activities = = 
 The Farm River State Park is undeveloped , but it does contain two access point trails that leads to scenic vistas . Quinnipiac University , which manages the park , offers passes to the public to launch canoes and kayaks at the site through its Community Boating Program , but the docks are only to be used by those with the pass . In 2004 , Leary referred to a possible development plan to create more parking , install a boardwalk and provide a proper entrance to the Farm River State Park . Park activities include picnicking , hiking , bicycling , fishing , crabbing , bird watching , and car @-@ top boating . 
 The park is described as not being fully operational and only a portion of the park is accessible to the general public . There is access off Connecticut Route 142 ( Short Beach Road ) via an electrically @-@ controlled gate off Mansfield Grove Road . Parking is limited to six cars before the park entrance gate , and a .3 miles ( 0 @.@ 48 km ) walk on a gravel access road leads to the park 's waterfront . For a fee of $ 20 , visitors can obtain a season pass to access the park 's marina . In 2006 , access to the park was the subject of debate with Attorney General Richard Blumenthal stating , " ... it is wrong for the university to close a parking lot on a state park to the general public and there may be and should be some way to accommodate the renters of slips without effectively barring the general public , which , after all , owns it . " 
 = Haywood S. Hansell = 
 Haywood Shepherd Hansell Jr . , ( September 28 , 1903 – November 14 , 1988 ) was a general officer in the United States Army Air Forces ( USAAF ) during World War II , and later the United States Air Force . He became an advocate of the doctrine of strategic bombardment , and was one of the chief architects of the concept of daylight precision bombing that governed the use of airpower by the USAAF in the war . 
 Hansell played a key and largely unsung role in the strategic planning of air operations by the United States . This included drafting both the strategic air war plans ( AWPD @-@ 1 and AWPD @-@ 42 ) and the plan for the Combined Bomber Offensive in Europe ; obtaining a base of operations for the B @-@ 29 Superfortress in the Mariana Islands ; and devising the command structure of the Twentieth Air Force , the first global strategic air force and forerunner of the Strategic Air Command . He made precision air attack , as both the most humane and effective means of achieving military success , a lifelong personal crusade that eventually became the key tenet of American airpower employment . 
 Hansell also held combat commands during the war , carrying out the very plans and doctrines he helped draft . He pioneered strategic bombardment of both Germany and Japan , as commander of the first B @-@ 17 Flying Fortress combat wing in Europe , and as the first commander of the B @-@ 29 force in the Marianas . 
 = = Childhood = = 
 Hansell was born in Fort Monroe , Virginia , on September 28 , 1903 , the son of First Lieutenant ( later Colonel ) Haywood S. Hansell , an Army surgeon , and Susan Watts Hansell , both considered members of the " southern aristocracy " from Georgia . His great @-@ great @-@ great @-@ grandfather John W. Hansell served in the American Revolution , his great @-@ great @-@ grandfather William Young Hansell was an officer in the War of 1812 , and his great @-@ grandfather Andrew Jackson Hansell was a general in the Confederate States Army and Georgia 's adjutant general . His grandfather , William Andrew Hansell , graduated from Georgia Military Institute and also served as an officer in the Confederate Army , first in the 35th Alabama , then as a topographical engineer . 
 Shortly after his birth , the family was stationed in Beijing , China , then in the Philippines , and Hansell learned both Chinese and Spanish at an early age . Captain Hansell was next stationed at Fort McPherson , Georgia , in 1913 , and then at Fort Benning . His father , a firm disciplinarian , sent Hansell to live on a small , family @-@ owned ranch in New Mexico because of a perceived lack of discipline in his schooling . There he learned horsemanship , shooting , and studied with a tutor . 
 = = Education = = 
 Hansell entered Sewanee Military Academy , near Chattanooga , Tennessee , in 1916 , where he acquired the lifelong nickname " Possum . " Although his biographers offer a number of explanations behind the nickname , the most likely is that his facial features gave him the appearance of a possum . At Sewanee he developed a fondness for English literature . As a senior Hansell rose to cadet captain and developed a reputation as a martinet . His harshness with the Corps of Cadets , combined with an excessive number of demerits acquired while the school was temporarily quartered in Jacksonville , Florida , following a fire , led to his reduction to cadet private . 
 Partly as a result of this humiliation , Hansell declined an appointment to the United States Military Academy to attend the Georgia School of Technology , where he was a member of Sigma Nu . Despite problems understanding differential equations , and twice attempting to transfer to another school ( which his father would not permit ) , he overcame his difficulties with complex mathematics and graduated in 1924 with a Bachelor of Science degree in mechanical engineering . While at Georgia Tech he participated in varsity football as a walk @-@ on substitute , and boxing . Hansell was awarded Georgia Tech 's highest individual recognition , membership in the ANAK Society . 
 From 1924 to 1928 he attempted without success to find employment as a civil engineer in California , where his father was now stationed . Instead he worked as an apprentice and journeyman boilermaker with the Steel Tank and Pipe Company in Berkeley , California . Advances in aviation in the 1920s led Hansell to undertake a career in aeronautical engineering , and to gain flying experience , he decided to join the United States Army Air Corps . 
 = = Personality and family = = 
 Short in stature and slightly built , Hansell worked at being an athlete , becoming proficient in tennis , polo , and squash . Socially , he was a noted dancer , and acquired a reputation as " the unofficial poet laureate of the Air Corps . " He was fond of Gilbert and Sullivan , Shakespeare , and Miguel Cervantes ’ Don Quixote . General Ira C. Eaker described him as " nervous and high strung , " and one biographer noted several incidents of imperious temper in social situations . However his correspondence secretary during World War II , T / Sgt. James Cooper , described him as " pleasant and diplomatic , " and an aviation historian described him as " a forward @-@ looking optimist with a sense of humor . " 
 While stationed at Langley Field , Virginia , Hansell met his wife , Dorothy " <unk> " Rogers , a teacher from Waco , Texas , where they were married in 1932 . He fathered three children , son " Tony " ( Haywood S. Hansell III , born in 1933 ) , daughter Lucia ( 1940 ) , and son Dennett ( 1941 ) . While frequent absences , long working hours , and Hansell ’ s autocratic nature severely stressed their marriage during World War II , they remained married for 56 years until his death in 1988 . Hansell 's eldest son continued the family military tradition , graduating from the United States Military Academy in 1955 , becoming a colonel in the United States Air Force , and marrying Olivia Twining , the daughter of General Nathan F. Twining . 
 = = Early Air Corps career = = 
 = = = Pursuit pilot = = = 
 On February 23 , 1928 , Hansell was appointed a flying cadet . He completed primary and basic flying schools at March Field , California , then advanced flight training in pursuit flying at Kelly Field , Texas . He graduated from pilot training on February 28 , 1929 , and was commissioned a second lieutenant in the Army Reserve . He received a regular commission as a second lieutenant , Air Corps , on May 2 , 1929 . 
 Hansell 's first duty assignment was with the 2nd Bombardment Group at Langley Field , testing repaired aircraft . In June 1930 , he spent three months temporary duty with the 6th Field Artillery at Fort Hoyle , Maryland . In September 1930 , he returned to Langley Field and was detached to the Air Corps Tactical School as armament officer . While stationed at Langley , Hansell was involved in two minor accidents in aircraft he was piloting , and in early 1931 was forced to parachute to safety when his Boeing P @-@ 12 stalled during a test flight , going into an unrecoverable spin . He was found at fault for the accident and initially charged $ 10 @,@ 000 by the Air Corps for the expense of the aircraft , but the cost was eventually written off . 
 In August 1931 , Hansell was transferred to Maxwell Field , Alabama , as assistant operations officer , with flying duties in the 54th School Squadron , to support the ACTS , which had located to Maxwell from Langley in July . During that tour of duty he met Captain Claire L. Chennault , an instructor at the Tactical School , and joined " The Men on the Flying Trapeze , " an Air Corps aerobatic and demonstration team . The team performed at the National Air Races at Cleveland , Ohio , in September 1934 . Hansell also worked with Captain Harold L. George , chief of the Tactical School ’ s bombardment section , where his military interest shifted from pursuits to bombers . The friendship that developed from the working relationship led to George becoming both Hansell ’ s mentor and patron . 
 = = = Disciple of strategic airpower = = = 
 Hansell was promoted to first lieutenant on October 1 , 1934 and entered the Air Corps Tactical School at Maxwell Field as a student in the comprehensive 845 @-@ hour , 36 @-@ week course , studying not only air tactics and airpower theory , which comprised more than half of the curriculum , but also tactics of other services , combined ( joint ) warfare , armament and gunnery , logistics , navigation and meteorology , staff duties , photography , combat orders , and antiaircraft defenses . Among his instructors was Captain George , now director of the Department of Air Tactics and Strategy . George 's classes were half lecture , half free discussion and conceptualizing , with George or his assistant Capt. Odas Moon expounding theories and having the students critically examine them for flaws and alternative ideas , debates that continued beyond the classroom as well . 
 Making up the 59 members of his class were five majors , 40 captains , 13 first lieutenants including himself , and one second lieutenant . In addition to 49 Air Corps officers were four Army officers , one from each of that service 's combat arms , two Turkish Army aviators , one Mexican captain , and three Marine Corps aviators , including two future major generals . Among Hansell 's Air Corps classmates were future generals Muir S. Fairchild , Barney Giles , Laurence S. Kuter , and Hoyt S. Vandenberg ; test pilot Lester J. Maitland ; and aviation pioneer Major Vernon Burge , who as a corporal in June 1912 had been the first certified enlisted military pilot . Hansell graduated in June 1935 and was invited to become an instructor at ACTS , one of nine in his class to become ACTS instructors , and the youngest in its history . He served on the faculty from 1935 – 1938 in the Department of Air Tactic 's all @-@ important Air Force Section , first under George , then Major Donald Wilson ( another strategic bombing advocate ) , and lastly Fairchild . 
 Hansell became a member of a group known as the " Bomber Mafia , " ACTS instructors who were both outspoken proponents of the doctrine of daylight precision strategic bombardment and advocates for an independent Air Force . Among the students instructed by Hansell were Eaker , Twining , Elwood R. Quesada , Earle E. Partridge , Kenneth Wolfe , Orvil A. Anderson , John K. Cannon , and Newton Longfellow , all of whom became general officers and strategic airpower advocates during World War II . During this time , Hansell also had a permanent falling out with Chennault after Chennault tried to recruit him to go to China to fly fighters for the Kuomintang government . 
 In September 1938 , still a first lieutenant , Hansell entered the Command and General Staff School at Fort Leavenworth , Kansas , from which he was graduated in June 1939 , shortly after promotion to captain . He then was assigned to the Office , Chief of Air Corps ( OCAC ) , under General Henry H. Arnold , working a series of assignments as Arnold assembled an Air Staff to plan and execute a massive expansion of the Air Corps . 
 After duty in the Public Relations Section , OCAC from July 1 to September 5 , 1939 , he became assistant Executive Officer , OCAC to Ira Eaker from September 6 to November 20 , 1939 . In November 1939 he created , with Major Thomas D. White , the Intelligence Section , Information Division , OCAC . Hansell was its Officer in Charge , Air Corps Intelligence from November 21 , 1939 to June 30 , 1940 ; and its Chief , Operations Planning Branch , Foreign Intelligence Section from July 1 , 1940 to June 30 , 1941 . He was promoted to major on March 15 , 1941 . 
 In the Air Intelligence Section , Hansell became responsible for setting up strategic air intelligence and analysis operations , creating three sections : analysis of foreign air forces and their doctrines , analysis of airfields worldwide including climate data , and preparation of target selection for major foreign powers . Much of the work was accomplished despite hindrance from the War Department ’ s G @-@ 2 office , which felt that such analysis was not " proper military intelligence . " Development of sources of information for such analyses also was primitive , and he used his assignment to <unk> to recruit a number of civilian economic experts who had recently been commissioned in the military . Hansell also created contacts among Royal Air Force officers stationed in Washington , D.C. to enhance his sources . 
 On July 7 , 1941 , Hansell went to London , England , as a special observer attached to the military attaché , where he was privy to the inner workings of RAF intelligence and their target folders on the German industrial infrastructure . In his memoir , Hansell stated that in the exchange of information , the AAF received nearly a ton of material , shipped back to the United States in a bomber . 
 = = AWPD @-@ 1 = = 
 On July 12 , 1941 , Hansell , just returned from London , was recruited by Harold George to join the Air War Plans Division of the newly created AAF Air Staff in Washington , D.C. , as its Chief of European Branch . There a strategic planning team of former " bomber mafia " members ( himself , George , Kuter , and War Plans Group chief Lt. Col. Kenneth N. Walker ) , put together an estimate for President Franklin D. Roosevelt of the numbers of aircraft and personnel needed to win a war against the Axis Powers , well beyond the scope requested of it by the War Plans Division of the General Staff . 
 Hansell ’ s responsibility in the plan , designated AWPD – 1 , was information on German targets . Arnold had given George nine days to write the plan , which would be " Annex 2 , Air Requirements " to " The Victory Program , " a plan of strategic estimates involving the entire U.S. military . 
 Beginning on August 4 , 1941 , they drew up the plan in accordance with strategic policies promulgated earlier that year , outlined in the ABC @-@ 1 agreement with the British Commonwealth , and Rainbow 5 , the U.S. war plan . The group completed AWPD @-@ 1 in the allotted nine days and carefully rehearsed a presentation to the Army General Staff . Its forecast figures , despite planning errors from lack of accurate information about weather and the German economic commitment to the war , were within 2 percent of the units and 5 @.@ 5 percent of the personnel ultimately mobilized , and it accurately predicted the time frame when the invasion of Europe by the Allies would take place . 
 Hansell ’ s contribution to the plan was based on a serious flaw , however . As had most observers , Hansell assumed that the Nazi economy was working at maximum capacity , when in fact it was still at 1938 levels of production , an error that led to an underestimation of the numbers of sorties , bomb tonnage , and time required for bombing to have a decisive effect . However , a more significant error in planning , the omission of long @-@ range fighter escorts for the bombers , seriously impacted the strategic bombing campaign that later took place . Hansell deeply regretted the omission but noted that it reflected the best available information at the time on fighter aircraft capabilities , which was that any means then available to extend range would also seriously degrade a fighter 's air combat performance . Hansell wrote , " Failure to see this issue through proved one of the Air Corps Tactical School 's major shortcomings . " 
 A lack of knowledge about the capability of radar to create an effective centralized early warning system also contributed to the over @-@ reliance on the self @-@ defense capabilities of bombers . However Hansell also argued that ignorance of radar was fortuitous in the long run . He surmised that had radar been a factor in making doctrine , many theorists would have reasoned that massed defenses would make all strategic air attacks too costly , inhibiting if not entirely suppressing the concepts that proved decisive in World War II and essential to the creation of the United States Air Force . 
 = = World War II service = = 
 = = = Planning duties = = = 
 Following the entry of the United States into World War II , Hansell received a rapid series of promotions , to lieutenant colonel on January 5 , 1942 , colonel on March 1 , 1942 , and brigadier general on August 10 , 1942 . In January 1942 , he assisted George and Walker in presenting an organizational plan to the War Department for maintaining the Air Corps as part of the Army during World War II , while dividing the Army into three autonomous branches , a reorganization adopted on March 9 , 1942 , with the creation of the Army Air Forces , Army Ground Forces and Services of Supply . On March 10 , 1942 , Hansell was transferred from AWPD to the Strategy and Policy Group , Operations Division of the War Department General Staff and served on the eight @-@ member Joint Strategy Committee as the USAAF representative . 
 Hansell , at the request of Major General Dwight D. Eisenhower , was assigned on July 12 , 1942 as Officer in Charge , Air Section , ETOUSA headquarters , and simultaneously as deputy theater air officer for Major General Carl A. Spaatz , commander of the Eighth Air Force . His duties were to mold Eisenhower ’ s opinion on the use of airpower , guided by Spaatz , but there is little indication that he succeeded . He also flew combat in a B @-@ 17 to gain first @-@ hand experience with daylight precision bombing , attacking the <unk> marshalling yard at Amiens , France , on August 20 , 1942 . During the mission he developed frostbite on his hands and spent several days recovering from the effects . 
 On August 26 , 1942 he was recalled to USAAF Headquarters to head the planning team for AWPD – 42 , a revision of the air strategy plan in light of ongoing crises in the war , completing it in 11 days . Even though the Navy rejected the plan outright ( because it did not participate in its writing ) and the Joint Chiefs of Staff did not accept it , presidential advisor Harry Hopkins recommended to Roosevelt that he follow the precepts unofficially , which was done . Hansell then returned to England , where he was ironically tasked with diverting a large portion of the strategic bomber force to the Twelfth Air Force to support Operation Torch . 
 = = = Combat wing commander in Europe = = = 
 On December 5 , 1942 Hansell received his first combat command , the 3rd Bombardment Wing . Originally one of the three wings of General Headquarters Air Force , the 3rd was now part of the Eighth Air Force in England , planned as a Martin B @-@ 26 Marauder unit with the mission of supporting the Eighth 's heavy bomber operations by bombing Luftwaffe fighter airfields . However the wing had no aircraft or units yet assigned , and on January 2 , 1943 , Hansell was shifted to command the 1st Bomb Wing , the B @-@ 17 component of VIII Bomber Command . Hansell flew his first mission with his new command the next day to bomb the submarine pens at Saint @-@ Nazaire , France . He saw first hand the effectiveness of German interceptors , as both wingmen of Hansell 's bomber were shot down . Later that month , on a January 13 mission to Lille , France , the pilot of the B @-@ 17 in which he flew was killed in action and the plane nearly shot down on . 
 Hansell commanded the 1st Wing during six critical months when the B @-@ 17 force , with only four inexperienced groups , struggled to prove itself . Among the combat doctrines that Hansell developed himself or approved were use of the defensive combat box formation , detailed mission Standard Operating Procedures , and all aircraft bombing in unison with the lead bomber , each designed to improve bombing accuracy . 
 Hansell recognized the most serious flaws in the daylight precision bombardment theory , that : 
 radar early warning and the lack of long @-@ range escort fighters made deep penetration raids by massed bombers too costly to achieve strategic goals until a means of air superiority was attained , and that 
 German industry , rather than being fragile and fixed , proved to be resilient and mobile . 
 These factors later influenced his planning of similar daylight raids against Japan . 
 On March 23 , 1943 , he headed up a committee of USAAF and RAF commanders to draw up a plan for the Combined Bomber Offensive ( CBO ) . Despite the fact that it altered the target system priorities outlined in AWPD @-@ 42 , and changed the overall goal of the offensive from knocking Germany out of the war using airpower to one of preparing for the invasion of Europe , Hansell approved the designation of the German aircraft industry as its most important target and the destruction of the German Luftwaffe as its top priority . Hansell wrote the final draft of the CBO plan himself . Although Hansell did not personally participate in later strategic bombing operations against Germany , he had been instrumental in setting in motion the plans and policies that led to the near total destruction of German war industry . 
 He continued to fly combat missions at the same rate as his group commanders , with his final mission to Antwerp on May 4 , 1943 , the date that the Joint Chiefs approved the CBO plan . On June 15 , 1943 , noting signs of fatigue and stress , Eaker decided to replace Hansell in command of the 1st Wing with veteran commander Brigadier General Frank A. Armstrong , but retained him as a staff officer , first as an air planner in the COSSAC ( Chief of Staff Supreme <unk> Commander ) headquarters until August 1 , 1943 , when Eisenhower named him deputy commander of the Allied Expeditionary Air Force . He conjointly was part of the Tactical Air Force Planning Committee , where he oversaw the planning for Operation Tidal Wave , the low @-@ level bombing of oil refineries at Ploieşti , Romania , on August 1 , 1943 , and recommended approval of the Schweinfurt @-@ Regensburg mission . While in Washington on this task , he was " captured " by Arnold and accompanied him to the Quadrant Conference in August , where he personally briefed President Roosevelt on strategic bombing to that point . 
 = = = B @-@ 29 operations planning = = = 
 In October 1943 , General Hansell was appointed chief of the Combined and Joint Staff Division , in the Office of the Assistant Chief of Air Staff for Plans , located at Headquarters USAAF . As such he became Air Planner on the Joint Planning Staff . He immediately had an impact on planning of strategic air attacks on Japan . The <unk> draft outline denigrated strategic bombing and declared that an invasion of the home islands was the only means of defeating Japan , but Hansell successfully argued that an invasion should only be a contingency if bombing and a sea blockade of Japan failed to compel a surrender . 
 Hansell accompanied President Roosevelt and the Joint Chiefs aboard the USS Iowa to the Sextant Conference in November , then was appointed Deputy Chief of the Air Staff in December , working directly with Arnold . His main responsibility was developing the operational plans for the B @-@ 29 Superfortress , and he succeeded in gaining three key decisions from the JCS : there would be no diversion of B @-@ 29s to General Douglas MacArthur , the schedule for Operation <unk> was moved forward more than a year to secure bases for the B @-@ 29 in the Mariana Islands , and Twentieth Air Force operations would be entirely independent of control by all three Pacific theater commanders ( MacArthur , Chester W. Nimitz , and Joseph Stillwell ) , reporting directly to the JCS . 
 Hansell drew up the tactical doctrine , <unk> , and the table of organization and equipment of the Twentieth Air Force , which was to be commanded by Arnold personally , including use of AAF Air Staff as the staff of the Twentieth . In addition to his own Air Staff duties , Hansell became chief of staff of the Twentieth Air Force on April 6 , 1944 . When Arnold was incapacitated by a heart attack in May , Hansell acted as de facto commander of the Twentieth Air Force . 
 = = = B @-@ 29 commander = = = 
 On August 28 , 1944 , Arnold made Hansell commander of the XXI Bomber Command , despite misgivings among several senior leaders that while a superb staff officer , he did not have the " temperament " to be a combat commander . Aware of Arnold ’ s legendary impatience , deputy AAF commander General Barney Giles , who was doubtful that Hansell could accomplish the task given him — setting up an effective air campaign in a brief period using an untried aircraft — obtained a commitment from Arnold that he would not relieve Hansell in only a few months . However Hansell ’ s tenure was threatened from the start because his replacement on the Air Staff , Major General Lauris Norstad , did not support the concept of daylight precision bombing , instead advocating massive destruction of Japanese cities by firebombing , a tactic that had been promoted in AAF planning circles as early as November 1943 . Fire raids on Japan were rapidly gaining widespread acceptance among AAF leaders , including Arnold , both to defeat Japan before an invasion was mounted and to satisfy a perception that the American public wanted revenge for three bloody years of war . Hansell , however , opposed the tactic as both morally repugnant and militarily unnecessary . 
 XXI Bomber Command arrived on Saipan on October 12 , 1944 , and from the start Hansell was beset by a host of serious command problems , the worst of which were continued teething problems with the B @-@ 29 , tardy delivery of aircraft , aircrews untrained in high altitude formation flying , primitive airfield conditions , lack of an air service command for logistical support , no repair depots , a total absence of target intelligence , stubborn internal resistance to daylight operations by his sole combat wing , subordinates in the XXI Bomber Command who lobbied for his removal , and Hansell ’ s inferiority in rank in dealing with other AAF commanders in the theater . Furthermore , Hansell was soon prohibited from flying combat missions with his command , possibly because of limited knowledge of the atomic bomb or the perception that he knew the existence of Ultra . 
 High altitude daylight B @-@ 29 raids against the Japanese aircraft industry began November 24 , 1944 with operation San Antonio I , despite misgivings about high losses by both combat crews and Arnold . They were hampered by bad weather and jet stream winds , and as a result , appeared unproductive . Pressured by Arnold ( through Norstad as an intermediary ) for results , Hansell subjected his command to intensive corrective measures that caused more resentment among his aircrews . At the same time commanders in China were strongly recommending removal of XX Bomber Command to another theater as soon as possible , making Major General Curtis E. LeMay , now superior to Hansell in rank , available for command . 
 On January 6 , 1945 , Norstad visited Hansell ’ s headquarters and abruptly relieved him of command , replacing him with LeMay . Hansell was offered the option of commanding XX Bomber Command while it transitioned to Guam , then becoming LeMay ’ s deputy . Although he and LeMay were friends , LeMay had been Hansell ’ s subordinate in England , and Hansell declined the offer . While all the command problems factored into his relief , the main reasons were Hansell ’ s persistence in daylight precision attacks , reluctance to night firebombing , Norstad 's view that Hansell was an impediment to instituting incendiary attacks , and a perception by Arnold and Norstad that the public relations effort by XXI Bomber Command had been unsatisfactory in preparing the American public for such attacks . 
 Hansell left Guam on January 21 , 1945 . Unknown at the time , his precision daylight attacks had succeeded , first in Japan 's immediate and inefficient dispersion of its aircraft engine industry , and later in terms of actual destruction caused by the final raid under his command . A more immediate legacy of his command was his creation , in conjunction with the U.S. Navy , of an effective air @-@ sea rescue system that saved half of all B @-@ 29 crews downed at sea in 1945 . 
 = = Impact on strategic doctrine = = 
 Hansell outlined an alternate strategy for defeating Japan , using precision bombing as its basis , that he believed would have also succeeded by November 1945 while obviating the need for area bombing using incendiaries or the atomic bomb . He did not find fault with the incendiary strategy per se , but rather with the premise that fire @-@ bombing was necessary because otherwise Japan could not be defeated except by invasion of her home islands . Historian Michael Sherry concluded that the case he presented was " powerful " . Arnold by implication had erred in changing AAF strategy , especially taking into account the " deep and pervasive revulsion among the American people against strategic bombing of all sorts " that was a consequence . 
 Historian and Hansell biographer Dr. Charles Griffith concluded that Hansell sacrificed his command of the B @-@ 29 force and his later career on principle , adhering to the idea that precision rather than area bombing was not only more moral , but more effective as a strategy . His dismissal , Griffith argues , was a pivotal event in U.S. airpower doctrine , as the Air Force moved toward a strategy of bombing civilian populations , which led to an increasing dependence on the more potentially devastating , inflexible , and " <unk> " doctrine of nuclear warfare that lasted for decades . 
 Conrad Crane took a somewhat different stance , arguing that despite the firebombing campaign in Japan , American air commanders throughout World War II and thereafter placed an emphasis on precision bombing and avoiding civilian casualties . The use of precision guided weapons in the Gulf War and beyond , he wrote , demonstrated " continued adherence to precision @-@ bombing doctrine and ... significant progress toward the ideal ... first envisioned " by Hansell and the other Air Corps Tactical School theorists . 
 Hansell lectured on the theory of precision air attack throughout his life , particularly at the United States Air Force Academy and the Air War College . He authored three books on air strategy : The Air War Plan That Defeated Hitler ( 1972 ) , The Strategic Air War Against Japan ( 1980 ) , and Strategic Air War Against Germany and Japan : A Memoir ( 1986 ) . Hansell continued to study modern weapons systems , becoming an advocate of the Strategic Defense Initiative and the B @-@ 2 Spirit bomber . However his main focus was in promoting technical advances in precision guided weapons to make precision bombing more practical and therefore more desirable as a military strategy . 
 = = Retirement = = 
 Following his removal from command on Guam , Hansell at his own request received a B @-@ 29 training assignment on February 15 , 1945 , command of the 38th Flying Training Wing at Williams Field , Arizona . In June 1945 , he was transferred to Air Transport Command under his old mentor Lieutenant General Harold George , commanding the Caribbean Wing at West Palm Beach , Florida , from September 30 , 1945 to January 14 , 1946 , and the North Atlantic Wing at Westover Field , Massachusetts , from July 1 , 1946 to August 18 , 1946 . 
 Hansell took early retirement due to a loss @-@ of @-@ hearing disability , retiring with the rank of brigadier general on December 31 , 1946 . He held positions as vice president of Peruvian International Airlines until Peru nationalized the airline in 1949 , and vice president of South Atlantic Gas Company from 1949 until his recall to the military . 
 He was recalled to active duty on July 15 , 1951 , by Air Force Chief of Staff Hoyt S. Vandenberg and assigned as Chief , Military Assistance Program Headquarters , USAF , acting as a senior program manager and advisor to the U.S. Joint Chiefs of Staff . On September 5 , 1952 , he was promoted to major general . In April 1953 , Hansell was appointed the senior Air Force representative to the Weapons Systems Evaluation Group in the Research and Development Office of the Secretary of Defense , Washington , D.C. He retired a second time from the USAF in 1955 . 
 Hansell worked for General Electric , becoming head of its subsidiary in the Netherlands until 1967 , when he retired to Hilton Head , South Carolina . He died on November 14 , 1988 , in Hilton Head , of heart failure and pulmonary edema , as he was preparing to leave for a lecture in Canada . He was interred with full military honors at the United States Air Force Academy Cemetery . 
 = Guitar Hero 5 = 
 Guitar Hero 5 ( initially referred to as Guitar Hero V ) is a music rhythm game and the fifth main entry in the Guitar Hero series . The game was developed by Neversoft and published by Activision , and released internationally in September 2009 for the Xbox 360 , PlayStation 2 , 3 and Wii consoles . Similar to the preceding title , Guitar Hero World Tour , Guitar Hero 5 is geared towards playing in a four @-@ person band experience , including lead and bass guitar , drums , and vocals . The game is available as a standalone title , allowing players to use existing compatible instrument controllers , and as a bundle that provides these controllers . Guitar Hero 5 adds several new features , such as drop @-@ in / drop @-@ out play , bands composed of any combination of available instruments , a Rockfest competitive mode consisting of several various scoring mechanisms , and both song @-@ specific and general Challenges to unlock new avatars , clothing , and other extras in the game . Many of these changes were added to make the game a more social experience , allowing players across a range of skill levels to be able to play cooperatively and competitively against each other both locally and online . 
 Guitar Hero 5 's track list contains 85 songs by 83 separate artists , and like previous Guitar Hero games , several musicians with works in the game have been modeled through motion capture for playable characters in the game , including Johnny Cash , Carlos Santana , Shirley Manson , Matthew Bellamy , and Kurt Cobain . Players can also create their own character and instrument to play with . The game continues to support the user @-@ created music studio introduced in World Tour through GHTunes , and additional downloadable content for the game was also made available . A majority of existing downloadable tracks from World Tour are forward @-@ compatible with Guitar Hero 5 , along with selected on @-@ disc tracks from World Tour and Guitar Hero Smash Hits , and songs from the game could also be exported for a fee to play in its sequel , Guitar Hero : Warriors of Rock , and spin @-@ off game Band Hero . 
 The game was well received by reviewers , who appreciated the improvements in the accessibility of the game , allowing players to immediately jump in and play without spending excessive time in the game 's menus . The game also sold well , however , it sold about less than 50 percent of Guitar Hero : World Tour 's sales , specifically selling 1 @.@ 2 million copies across all platforms . Improvements to both the Career and competitive multiplayer modes were also highlights of the game . However , the game 's track list was considered to be too broad , and controversy arose over the ability to use the avatar of Kurt Cobain to perform in any other song within the game . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Gameplay in Guitar Hero 5 is similar to previous games in the series . Using a special game controller , players attempt to match scrolling notes as they appear on screen along a note track to mimic the playing of rock music and other songs . Hitting correct notes in time with the music increases the player 's score and builds up the performance meter , while missing notes will cause the meter to drop . Should the meter fall below a certain threshold , the song will end prematurely with the player booed off the stage by a virtual audience . <unk> hitting ten consecutive notes will add to the player 's score multiplier by one , up to a maximum of four times the original multiplier . Specially marked sections of the song , if completed correctly , help to build up Star Power , which can then be activated through an action with the controller to further double the current multiplier ( up to 8x ) . 
 As with Guitar Hero World Tour , Guitar Hero 5 supports the playing of lead and bass guitar through guitar controllers , drums through a drum controller , and vocals through a microphone . Players can also play in groups of up to four local or remote players to form a band , co @-@ operatively playing through a song . Whereas in World Tour , a band could only have one of each instrument , Guitar Hero 5 allows players to arrange for any combination of instruments , including all four players on the same instrument if they so choose . While playing in a band , Star Power is now tracked separately for each player , as opposed to collectively for the band as in World Tour . A new play mechanic called " Band Moments " will require all members of the band to play sections of a song successfully to gain rewards , both in a temporary scoring multiplier and visual effects on screen . The Band Revival meter will appear when a player fails out of the song , requiring the other band members to play well as a group together in order to bring the failed player back into the game . Failing to do so will end the song prematurely . 
 = = = Game Modes = = = 
 Guitar Hero 5 allows players to start in a Band Lobby from where they can then launch into any of the game 's modes , add other local and remote players to a party , and switch between the game modes without having to leave the party or lobby , a significant change in response to the difficulties players found in World Tour . The game supports a Career mode ( described below ) , a Quickplay mode , where players can create a set list of numerous songs and play through them . All songs on disc and through downloadable content are immediately available to play in this mode . The game also carries over the competitive modes from previous Guitar Hero games . 
 Two new multiplayer modes are in the game . The first is a " Party Play " mode , which is immediately launched once the game is started . During " Party Play " , the game will automatically play randomly through the available songs . At any time , players can jump in with any instrument and start playing that song after selecting their difficulty and handedness ; additional players can also jump in , drop out , or change their difficulty levels once someone is playing in this mode . The second feature is a " RockFest " mode , which can be played by four players locally or eight online , with several sub @-@ modes that influence how the game is played and scored . In general , each song is divided into roughly 30 @-@ second long sections , and players earn points for their performance over that section based on the specific mode . These points are shown to all players to know how they are faring against the others . Players are able to create a playlist in Rockfest and assign a different mode to each song . The RockFest <unk> include : 
 " Momentum " : Starting at Medium difficulty , players can increase their difficulty and score more points by hitting twenty consecutive notes , but will fall back in difficulty if they miss three notes in a row . 
 " <unk> " : Points are awarded for making " streaks " a series of consecutive notes , with the value further increasing for longer streaks . 
 " Perfectionist " : For each section of a song , players are ranked by the percentage of correct notes hit , with the top player getting the most points . 
 " Do or Die " : A player is forced to wait out until the next section if they miss three notes in the current section of the song . 
 " Elimination " : After each section of a song , the lowest scoring player is eliminated . However if the scoring player decided to stay in , they may do so . 
 " Pro Face @-@ Off " : A standard score attack mode , with the highest score winning points . 
 = = = Career mode and Challenges = = = 
 Guitar Hero 5 features a combined single- and multi @-@ player ( both off- and on @-@ line ) Career mode similar to Guitar Hero : Metallica . Songs in the game are distributed across 13 venues , with all but the first locked at the start . Each venue contains 5 or more specific songs and 1 or more special sponsored gigs , each with Challenges that can be completed along with playing through the song . To unlock the other venues , the players must collect a number of stars based on their performance playing individual songs , with each song offering up to 9 stars : up to 5 for the general scoring performance , an additional star for a perfect performance , and up to 3 for completing the song 's Challenge . Players share the benefits of earning stars for their own respective profiles , thus , a player that may have difficulty completing one song on their own could join with a band that is able to complete it , benefiting from the gain in stars should they then play by themselves or with another group . 
 Guitar Hero 5 introduces Career mode Challenges , that are either tied to specific songs , or allow players to select a song to meet the Challenge requirement in " open gigs " . These were created by Neversoft to allow the developers to take advantage of unique features of many of songs and provide another layer of gameplay , according to Neversoft 's Brian Bright . Each Challenge features three possible completion levels — Gold , Platinum , and Diamond , mimicking the music recording sales certification levels — with Diamond being the most difficult to complete . The song @-@ specific challenges include both instrument @-@ specific challenges , such as correctly vocalizing the repeated " Fame " lyric at the end of David Bowie 's " Fame " as it moves down in pitch , and more general scoring or performance challenges on either specific instruments or for the whole band . Open gig Challenges are presented by sponsors within the game , and are based on performance aspects such as scoring a certain amount of points using Star Power or using the guitar controller 's whammy bar continuously for a length of time . These allow the player to select any song to complete , with some songs potentially being better suited for completing that challenge . The progress towards these Challenges is shown in @-@ game by a record meter that appears when the challenge is active , and fills up similarly to the overall scoring meter as the player successfully completes towards the challenge . Higher completion levels , particularly Diamond , may only be possible by playing the Expert difficulty of a song , but players can take advantage of the mid @-@ song difficulty adjustment feature to complete these if needed . 
 All players are awarded for completing a challenge if one of the members is able to do so , and will be reflected in the individual players ' career <unk> in addition , players can unlock new avatars , outfits , and other content by completing challenges . The rewards of the challenges are used to replace the previous in @-@ game money reward in previous Guitar Hero games . 
 However , the PlayStation 2 version does not include this challenge feature . Rather than doing the challenges to unlock avatars / content , all one must do is complete the gig by successfully completing all songs . Not all gigs have content to unlock , rather just those to which a particular unlockable applies ( for example the Johnny Cash gig allows Johnny Cash to be unlocked as a playable avatar ) . 
 = = = Music studio = = = 
 The Music Studio feature , which allows players to create their own songs and distribute them through the " GHTunes " music service , has been improved . The <unk> mode allows one to precisely create songs up to 10 min , and includes pre @-@ defined sample tracks that can be modified on a note @-@ by @-@ note basis as desired . The new Jam mode lets the players select one of several standard pre @-@ set rhythms and then play along with it on the instrument controllers in a free @-@ form mode ; however , players can then capture any segment of this music and move it to the Mix mode to compile a song . User songs are then uploaded and downloaded through the GHTunes mode of the Music Studio . While songs that violate copyright will still be removed from the service , Neversoft will be less aggressive about this and will rely more on user feedback on such issues . The PS2 version does not support this feature . 
 = = = Characters and customization = = = 
 Avatars of famous musicians are part of the game , performing for songs by that artist and available as unlockable characters . Notably , Kurt Cobain of Nirvana is a playable avatar ; Activision had sought to gain permission to use Cobain 's image for the game for three years , including obtaining the necessary agreements with Courtney Love , who controls Cobain 's estate , and Dave Grohl and Universal Publishing , who control Nirvana 's catalog . Cobain 's avatar was designed with input from Love , who provided photos and videos for the design team to use , and emphasized how she would like Cobain to appear , starting from his appearance in " Smells Like Teen Spirit " and modifying it from there . The avatar includes the T @-@ shirt design based on Daniel Johnston 's " Frog " that Cobain had popularized . Johnny Cash is also a playable character , with tribute artist Terry Lee <unk> helping to provide motion capture for his character . Carlos Santana , Shirley Manson ( of Garbage ) , and Matthew Bellamy ( of Muse ) are also playable avatars , all of whom performed motion capture for their own avatars . There are also unlockable fictional characters like Skeleton , Golden God , Shadow , <unk> , and Gerald Contest Winner . Though Activision approached Jon Bon Jovi to appear in the game , Bon Jovi turned down the offer . While the standard character creator is available for all versions of the game , the Xbox 360 version allows players to import their Xbox Live Avatar into the game , while the Freestyle mode on the Wii version of the game allows use of the players ' Miis in the game . Nine of the characters from previous installments return in this game . They all have a costume that they start with and 3 more can be unlocked by completing challenges . Doing this will unlock also new pieces of clothing for the costume to use for user generated rockers . Also , while Gibson no longer sponsors the game , other guitar manufacturers , like Ibanez , ESP , Paul Reed Smith and Schecter , lent the likenesses of their instruments , allowing for new combinations on assembling custom guitars and basses . For the first time , also , sponsored clothing pieces can be used in customization ( these being shoes from Vans , Dr. Martens and Converse ) There is no money in the game leaving everything available to use , including unlockables . Instruments can also be unlocked to use . Also some clothing now can be changed in style . There are four styles for each ; the one shown , two others that were separate items in previous games ( with exceptions ) , and one new one ( with exceptions ) . <unk> characters outfits can only be changed and users can only decide which outfit they wear . However they can still edit their instruments . Virtual avatars of the real life rockers can also not be changed in any way , including instruments . 
 = = = Console @-@ specific variations = = = 
 The Wii version of the game , developed by Vicarious Visions , is " full feature parity " with the Xbox 360 and PlayStation 3 versions , including support for up to eight players online , each possibly on their own console . Guitar Hero 5 is the first Wii game to support high capacity SD cards , allowing up to about 800 songs to be stored on a 32 GB card . While existing Wii Guitar Hero games allow players to purchase downloadable content one song at a time , Guitar Hero 5 includes the ability to download complete albums and song packs . Players are also able to manage the content of their Wii memory cards through the game 's interface . The game does not require players to enter game @-@ specific Friends Codes , but instead uses the global Wii address book to locate friends . The " Mii Freestyle " mode , introduced in World Tour , is also present , and with changes to address some of the issues with less @-@ skilled players trying to play well together . A " Guitar Hero Nintendo Ecosystem " is introduced in Guitar Hero 5 , letting the Wii version communicate with the Nintendo DS , including a stage manager / video editor DS controller feature in conjunction with the Mii Freestyle mode , and a new game mode called " Roadie Battle " . In Roadie Battle , four players play as two teams ; each team has one player performing on an instrument through the Wii , while the other player uses a DS to connect to the Wii and act as the roadie . During play , the roadie players attempt to sabotage the other team by completing mini @-@ games on the DS that affect the other team 's music performance in a manner similar to Guitar Hero III 's Battle Mode . These can only be cleared by the other DS player performing another mini @-@ game . 
 The PlayStation 2 version of the game , developed by Budcat Creations , features less functionality in comparison to other versions . Besides lacking online play or downloadable content , the game does not include drop @-@ in / drop @-@ out play , multiplayer " RockFest " , nor song challenges . A multitap cannot be used to expand the number of controller ports , limiting the game to two guitars , one drum set and one microphone . 
 = = Development = = 
 The fifth main entry to the Guitar Hero series was announced in December 2008 , with confirmation of its release by the end of 2009 coming in May 2009 , along with the announcement of other new Guitar Hero titles . 
 The Party Play mode was inspired by recognizing that past Guitar Hero games made it difficult to jump into without maneuvering through a number of menus and selection screens . The mode was designed to be used at social gatherings , and was adopted to use whatever instrument controllers that players already had available , thus allowing for various other combinations beyond the standard four @-@ person band . This aspect of the game was then brought to the other band modes to allow the game to remain flexible . 
 A new guitar controller was developed for Guitar Hero 5 , sold with bundles with the game though the option for standalone versions has not yet been determined . Like other Guitar Hero controllers , the guitar @-@ shaped unit features five colored fret buttons on the neck of the guitar , a strum bar to mimic the act of strumming , a whammy bar to alter the pitch of a note , and additional buttons specific to the game console for maneuvering through the game 's menus . The unit is mostly a redesign of the World Tour model with a new red finish and includes the touchpad that is farther up the neck of the controller , allowing the player to play notes via tapping or to slide along its surface for specially marked sections on the note track . The Guitar Hero 5 unit features a more accurate and responsive touchpad due to it being tracked digitally and with added tactile responses , a more accurate strum bar , and a controller finish that makes it easier to handle with sweaty hands . The game remains compatible with previous Guitar Hero game controllers as well as those from Rock Band and selected other rhythm games . 
 = = = Promotion = = = 
 As part of the game 's early promotion , a scavenger hunt contest was announced in the last week of May 2009 . Players would need to search for articles on specific game @-@ related sites to find information on the bands that are to be in Guitar Hero 5 , and then enter those bands at the game 's official website for a chance to win a series of concert tickets in their area . Through this promotion , a large number of artists in the final track list were revealed . 
 A viral video in late July 2009 announced the last handful of songs for the game features four naked women walking down a public street , with black censor bars used to cover their bodies but also used to announce the song names . The video attracted the anger of Bill O 'Reilly , calling the video " shameless " and the models as " <unk> " . 
 For the month of September 2009 , players in the US that purchase Guitar Hero 5 would be able to redeem a code with the game to receive a free copy of Guitar Hero : Van Halen prior to its retail release with the packaging 's offer sticker ( printable if lost ) , a copy of the receipt and a barcode received upon registration . Also in the UK , when pre @-@ ordering Guitar Hero 5 on various websites you would receive a free copy of Guitar Hero World Tour when requested . 
 A television commercial was filmed at the Playboy Mansion and was featured in the 29 November 2009 episode of The Girls Next Door . 
 = = Soundtrack = = 
 Guitar Hero 5 features 85 songs by 83 different artists . Tracks from 30 artists represent their " music @-@ rhythm video game debut " . Brian Bright , project director for the game , has called the track list " fresh " , with 25 % of the songs released in the last 18 months , and more than 50 % from the current decade . Unlike previous versions of the Guitar Hero series , where players must work through a career mode to unlock all the songs in the game , all songs in Guitar Hero 5 are unlocked and available to play in any mode from the start , 
 Bright noted that previously , while " Under Pressure " by Queen and David Bowie was always a song they wanted in Guitar Hero , they could not find the masters for it . However , for Guitar Hero 5 , the masters have since " magically appeared " and are part of the game 's tracklist . For Nirvana 's " Lithium " , the master recordings did not have the appropriate tracks to build the note track from , and they opted to use the live version of the song from the 1992 Reading Festival , notably famous for Cobain appearing on a wheelchair at first amid rumors of his failing health , but shown to be a ruse as Cobain took the stage and celebrated the recent birth of his daughter Frances Bean . The song " You and Me " by Attack ! Attack ! was a result of the band winning a competition to be included in the game . 
 In addition to on @-@ disc songs , Guitar Hero 5 is the first game in the series to reuse content from previous games . All but 6 ( the Jimi Hendrix songs ) of the 158 World Tour downloadable content songs can be imported into Guitar Hero 5 at no cost . Additionally , 35 songs from World Tour , 21 songs from Guitar Hero Smash Hits , and 61 songs from Band Hero can be imported into the game after paying a small transferring fee ; more songs from these games may be made available to Guitar Hero 5 at a later date ( including World Tour tracks . ) The importing process for World Tour and Smash Hits content requires downloading of the content , as these tracks have been recreated with support for Guitar Hero 5 's new gameplay features such as Band Moments . All such imported songs are also be playable in Band Hero . Sixty @-@ nine of the Guitar Hero 5 tracks can be imported into Band Hero . In addition , 39 of the tracks from Guitar Hero : Metallica are importable into Guitar Hero 5 and Band Hero . Since the September 2010 release of the sequel Guitar Hero : Warriors of Rock , no additional songs have been made available for DLC and it is unlikely any additional songs will ever be offered for Guitar Hero 5 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Guitar Hero 5 was well received upon release . Seth Schiesel of The New York Times called Guitar Hero 5 " the most enjoyable Guitar Hero game in several years " and " generally well @-@ tuned , often exhilarating rock ’ n ’ roll experience " . Keza MacDonald of Eurogamer commented that there is " just nothing wrong " with Guitar Hero 5 , given the various stumbling blocks the developers had made from previous iterations of the game , and the way the developers have continued to find new additions to the game . Reviewers greatly appreciated the new features in the game to make it easier to jump in and play music , from the simplification of the menu system to the availability of every song in all the game modes from the start . Erik Brudvig of IGN considers the menu change to be " one of the best things that Neversoft has done " , although the menus are a minor part of the game , it removes much of the frustration with the World Tour and other previous Guitar Hero games ' menu systems . Arthur Gies of GameSpy noted that by simplification of the interface , " Neversoft stripped Guitar Hero down to what works and built up from there " . Reviewers appreciated the immediate launch of the game 's Party Mode once the player put the disk in the system and the ability to jump right into that song through the new menus , and considered this to help make the game enjoyable for social gatherings . Chris Watters of GameSpot considered this mode to be " accessible , welcoming , and delightfully low key " . The changes in Career mode , in which the players need not stick to the same instrument or difficulty throughout , was well appreciated . Brudvig appreciated how this allows the player to complete the Career mode without getting stuck on a song , having to go back to replay the Career mode on other instruments , and that with the addition of song Challenges , provides enough incentive to return to the songs to improve one 's performance . The new multiplayer modes in Rockfest , which replaced more " arcadey " competitive modes , were considered a welcome replacement , as it allowed players of various skill levels to compete fairly against each other , making the game more friendly to the multiplayer experience . However , Matt Helgeson of Game Informer noted that despite the various RockFest modes , it " all comes down to hitting the notes correctly " . 
 The track list , while well received for the most part , was found to be one of the weaker features . While Helgeson and others noted that the track list was " extremely diverse and for the most part well selected " , this diversity was found to work against the game as well . Justin Haywald of 1UP.com noted that with the diverse track list , there would be a good chance players would find songs they liked , but at the same time , would also find songs they loathed . Brudvig noted that while " the goal was to include a bit of everything " , the diversity of the track list ensures " that nobody will like everything on the disc " . Gies noted that while the guitar difficulty progression in the Career mode was strong and better than in previous games , it leaves the vocals and drummer progression " all over the place " , while Schiesel considered the vocals parts " somewhat rough " in comparison to The Beatles : Rock Band . Haywald noted that the singing portions of the game were still weak , with poor indicators to help the player 's performance , and with the possibility of multiple vocalists performing at the same time , would make it hard for a player to keep track of his pitch . While reviews appreciated Activision 's efforts to allow the importing of songs from previous games , the small amount of tracks that were available at launch felt at odds with the impression that Activision had made of the process prior to the game 's release . The improvements made in GHTunes were seen as " leaps and bounds " above the original offering in World Tour , though was still considered to be too unwieldy for average players . 
 On its week of release in the United Kingdom , Guitar Hero 5 was the most purchased title across all game systems , beating The Beatles : Rock Band which was also released during that same week in the country . United States sales of Guitar Hero 5 for the Xbox 360 reached 210 @,@ 800 units on its first month of release , making it the 9th best selling title for the month , and 499 @,@ 000 units total across all platforms were sold , comparable to World Tour 's first month sales of 534 @,@ 000 units . The total revenue for United States sales in September 2009 was $ 33 million , driving primarily by sales of the standalone copy of the game . The game sold just under 1 million copies worldwide by the end of 2009 . 
 Guitar Hero 5 has been nominated for the " Best Family Game " Interactive Achievement Award from the Academy of Interactive Arts & Sciences . 
 = = = Kurt Cobain controversy = = = 
 The inclusion of Kurt Cobain as a playable character in the game has been considered a " strange concept " by some reviewers , reflecting on the possible influence of commercialization pressures that played into Cobain 's suicide . Shortly after the game 's release , it was discovered that once players unlocked the Kurt Cobain Character Pack ( as well as that for any other of the included famous musicians ) , they could use that character for any other song on disc , leading to what some have considered to be awkward virtual performances of Cobain singing songs from completely different genres ; user @-@ created videos of these performances that had attracted the attention to this issue have since been removed from video @-@ sharing sites like YouTube by Activision . Previous games in the series that feature known musicians also allow for the use of their characters , once unlocked , in other songs , except for the case of Jimi Hendrix in Guitar Hero World Tour , the only posthumous artist to appear in the series prior to Guitar Hero 5 . Some have seen this as a scar on Cobain 's legacy ; Jeff Gerstmann of Giant Bomb commented that " it 's the near @-@ mythic legacy he left behind and the way the Nirvana catalog has been protected from commercial interests over the years that makes this stuff so harsh " on his observation of such performances . Tim Walker of The Independent contrasted Cobain 's " posthumous humiliation " to the appearance of virtual characters based on living artists that have appeared in rhythm music games , noting that deceased artists do not have the same fair consideration as live artists that can opt to license their images for such rhythm games . Seth Schiesel of The New York Times countered these arguments , noting that as long as no legal contracts were broken , Cobain and the other artists in the game " are too big and too important to be damaged in a cultural sense by mere inclusion in a video game " . 
 On her Twitter account , Courtney Love expressed her anger at Cobain 's representation in the game and threatened legal action alongside other companies that represent Cobain 's intellectual property . Love further stated that she received no monetary arrangements for Cobain 's appearance , in response to comments that believe Love had " sold out " to Activision and from a statement by Activision CEO Dan Rosensweig claiming that the Cobain estate has " cashed the cheque " . Both Dave Grohl and Krist Novoselic have made statements disapproving the inclusion of Cobain as an unlockable character in the game and have requested that he be locked to only Nirvana songs , and Jon Bon Jovi , who had denied Activision 's offer to include him in the game , supports their concerns about having his image be used to sing other artists ' songs . In response to these statements , Activision claims it had secured all the proper publication rights for Cobain 's image for the game . However , according to attorneys for Love , the contract was not meant to allow Activision to " denigrate his image " . Joystiq noted that the crux of the legal issues revolve around the " right of personality " , which is defined at the state level within the United States ; these rights are presently held by Love due to her ownership of Cobain 's estate , but may have been overridden in the contract with Activision . Band Hero suffered a similar issue , as the group No Doubt , avatars in that game , filed a lawsuit against Activision due to having their avatars be usable to play or sing any song in the game . Love stated to the magazine NME that she will be joining No Doubt in their lawsuit against Activision . 
 = Old Man of Hoy = 
 The Old Man of Hoy is a 449 @-@ foot ( <unk> ) sea stack on the island of Hoy , part of the Orkney archipelago off the north coast of Scotland . Formed from Old Red Sandstone , it is one of the tallest stacks in Britain . The Old Man is popular with climbers , and was first climbed in 1966 . Created by the erosion of a cliff through hydraulic action some time after 1750 , the stack is no more than a few hundred years old , and may soon collapse into the sea . 
 = = Geography = = 
 The Old Man stands close to Rackwick Bay on the west coast of the island of Hoy , in the Orkney Islands , Scotland , and can be seen from the Scrabster to Stromness ferry . From certain angles it is said to resemble a human figure . 
 Winds are faster than 8 metres per second ( 18 mph ) for nearly a third of the time , and gales occur on average for 29 days a year . Combined with the depth of the sea , which quickly falls to 60 metres ( 200 ft ) , high @-@ energy waves on the western side of Hoy lead to rapid erosion of the coast . 
 = = Geology = = 
 The Old Man of Hoy is a red sandstone stack , perched on a plinth of basalt rock , and currently the tallest sea stack in Britain . It is separated from the mainland by a 60 @-@ metre ( 200 ft ) chasm strewn with debris , and has nearly vertical sides with a top just a few metres wide . The rock is composed of layers of soft , sandy and pebbly sandstone and harder flagstones of Old Red Sandstone , giving the sides a notched and slab @-@ like profile . 
 = = History = = 
 The Old Man is probably less than 250 years old , and may soon collapse . The stack is not mentioned in the Orkneyinga saga , written <unk> , and on the Blaeu map of 1600 , a headland exists at the point where the Old Man is now . The McKenzie map of Hoy of 1750 similarly shows a headland but no stack , but by 1819 the Old Man had been separated from the mainland . William Daniell sketched the sea stack at this time as a wider column with a smaller top section and an arch at the base , from which it derived its name . 
 Sometime in the early nineteenth century , a storm washed away one of the legs leaving it much as it is today , although erosion continues . By 1992 a 40 @-@ metre ( 130 ft ) crack had appeared in the top of the south face , leaving a large overhanging section that will eventually collapse . 
 = = Climbing = = 
 The stack was first climbed by mountaineers Chris Bonington , Rusty Baillie and Tom Patey in 1966 . From 8 – 9 July 1967 , an ascent featured in The Great Climb , a live BBC three @-@ night outside broadcast , which had around 15 million viewers . This featured three pairs of climbers : Bonington and Patey repeated their original route , whilst two new lines were climbed by Joe Brown and Ian McNaught @-@ Davis and by Pete Crew and Dougal Haston . 
 Red Szell became the first blind person to climb the Old Man , despite suffering from retinitis pigmentosa that left him with 5 per cent vision . With assistance from Martin Moran and Nick Carter , he scaled the stack in 2013 . 
 There are seven routes up the stack , the most commonly used of which is the original landward facing E1 ( Extremely Severe ) . A log book in a Tupperware container is buried in a cairn on the summit , as an <unk> ' record . As many as fifty ascents of the stack are made each year . 
 = = = BASE jump = = = 
 Roger Holmes , Gus Hutchinson @-@ Brown and Tim Emmett made the first BASE jump from the stack on 14 May 2008 . Hutchinson @-@ Brown died 11 days later during a jump in Switzerland . 
 = Meermin ( VOC ship ) = 
 The Meermin ( Dutch pronunciation : [ <unk> ] ) was an 18th @-@ century Dutch cargo ship of the hoeker type , one of many built and owned by the Dutch East India Company . She was laid down in 1759 and fitted out as a slave ship before her maiden voyage in 1761 , and her career was cut short by a mutiny of her cargo of Malagasy people . They had been sold to Dutch East India Company officials on Madagascar , to be used as company slaves in its Cape Colony in southern Africa . Half her crew and almost 30 Malagasy lost their lives in the mutiny ; the mutineers deliberately allowed the ship to drift aground off Struisbaai , now in South Africa , in March 1766 , and she broke up in situ . As of 2013 , archaeologists are searching for the Meermin 's remains . 
 = = Construction and use = = 
 The Meermin was laid down in 1759 in a shipyard belonging to the Dutch East India Company ( Vereenigde Oost @-@ Indische Compagnie , abbreviated to " VOC " ) in the port of Amsterdam in the Netherlands . The Meermin was a 480 @-@ ton Dutch hoeker , square rigged with three masts . 
 The hoeker originated in the 15th century as a type of fishing vessel with one or two masts in response to the growing Dutch trade in herring , and was known in English as a hoy . Equipped with guns , hoekers were employed as defensive escorts for fishing fleets , or <unk> , in the Second Anglo @-@ Dutch War of the 1660s . They came to be used more widely in trade with the Dutch East Indies via the Cape of Good Hope in southern Africa , as their rounded sterns proved to be more resistant to warping and springing than square sterns , which were prone to " catastrophic leaking when exposed to strong sun . " Larger than most hoekers , the Meermin was unusual for her type in that she was built of oak and had a beakhead , a feature not normally present in smaller merchant vessels . 
 The Meermin was built for use as a slave ship in the VOC 's African trade ; between 1658 and 1799 the VOC acquired and transported 63 @,@ 000 slaves to its Cape Colony , now part of South Africa . The ship began her maiden voyage at Texel , an island off the coast of what is now the Netherlands , on 21 January 1761 , with a crew of 62 under the command of Captain Hendrik Worms ; she arrived at the Cape of Good Hope on 15 June . Although fitted out as a slave ship , vessels such as the Meermin routinely carried other goods when not transporting slaves . 
 = = Mutiny and destruction = = 
 From December 1765 , the Meermin was working the coastline of Madagascar , collecting Malagasy men , women and children for use as slaves in the Cape Colony , under Captain Gerrit Muller and a crew of 56 . Carrying about 140 Malagasy , she set sail from the north @-@ western coast of Madagascar on 20 January 1766 . 
 Two days into the voyage a " large party of [ Malagasy ] " was allowed on deck , the men to assist the crew , and the women to provide entertainment by dancing and singing . This was to prevent death and disease among the Malagasy , so avoiding loss of profit . 
 On 18 February 1766 , the ship 's supercargo ordered some assegais , or African spears , and some swords , to be brought on deck for the Malagasy to clean . When the weapons were clean and the Malagasy were ordered to return them , they attacked the ship 's crew , and took control of the ship . A truce ensued , the terms of which were that if the Malagasy would spare the lives of the remaining crew the ship would be sailed back to Madagascar , but taking advantage of the Malagasy 's lack of navigational skills , the crew instead set sail for the coast of southern Africa . 
 On sighting land , the crew persuaded the Malagasy that what they saw was a part of Madagascar the mutineers were unfamiliar with : after further subterfuge by the crew , the Malagasy set the Meermin to drift towards the shore at Struisbaai . But the sea was rough , and one of the ship 's masts was cut down to improve her balance . The Meermin eventually grounded on a sandbank , by which time a militia consisting of local farmers and burghers had been formed onshore , who had observed that the ship was flying no flags , which they recognised as a distress signal . The militia killed or captured those of the Malagasy who ventured ashore , and then organised the removal into custody of all Malagasy remaining on the ship , under the command of a magistrate from Stellenbosch . The Meermin was assessed as beyond recovery , and left to break up where she grounded . 
 = = Salvage and archaeology = = 
 The VOC authorities salvaged as much as possible from the Meermin , recovering 286 muskets , 12 pistols , 5 bayonets , gunpowder , musket balls and compasses ; cables , ropes and other items from the ship were auctioned on the shore . The ship 's logbook has not survived . 
 In 2004 , Iziko Museums started a maritime archaeology project to find and recover the wreck of the Meermin , with supporting historical and archaeological research funded by the South African National Lottery . 
 Jaco Boshoff of Iziko Museums , who is in charge of the research , retrieved the Meermin 's plans from the Netherlands , to help identify this wreck among the numerous ships reputed to have run aground in the Struisbaai area . The search for the Meermin has employed an airborne magnetometer survey , as a marine magnetometer survey proved to be impractical owing to the shallowness of the waters . <unk> surveys can readily pick out wreck sites , as iron items from the ships can be detected by their recognisable signatures . Of 22 new , possible wrecks identified , 11 were identified as candidates for the wreck of the Meermin . Six are on what is now land , but have been ruled out as they are wrecks of pine @-@ built ships , whereas the Meermin was built of oak . In 2011 , the Iziko Museums ' travelling exhibition " Finding Meermin " included updates on the progress of Jaco Boshoff 's work with the archaeological research team . In November 2013 it was reported that , while the ship had not yet been found , lack of funding was holding up completion of the search , with four target areas remaining to be examined . 
 = Bizenghast = 
 Bizenghast is a debut gothic graphic novel series written and illustrated by M. Alice LeGrow . The first seven volumes were published by Tokyopop , with the final volume released in late April 2012 . After placing in Tokyopop 's Rising Stars of Manga competition with her short story " Nikolai " , LeGrow successfully pitched the series to Tokyopop 's editors . She worked on the series from 2004 to 2011 . Set in the haunted New England town of Bizenghast , the story follows Dinah , an orphaned teenager who is tasked with returning each night to an ancient mausoleum to free the ghosts within the building . 
 Several adaptations of Bizenghast have been released , including a novel by Shawn <unk> , animated episodes , and a tabletop roleplaying game . Critics praised Bizenghast for the gothic atmosphere and art , but noted the traditional elements and varying quality of the series . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Set in the fictional New England town of the same name , Bizenghast focuses on fifteen @-@ year @-@ old Dinah Wherever . Her parents ' car crash leaves her orphaned at a young age , and as a result , she moves in with her aunt . Dinah can see the ghosts which haunt her aunt 's house , which was a hospital and later a boarding school ; however , her aunt and doctor believe that she suffers from schizophrenia . One day , she and her only friend , Vincent Monroe , sneak out of her aunt 's house to search for materials for his garden . They stumble across an ancient mausoleum , and after Dinah reads aloud from a plaque , she discovers that her name is written on a contract which binds her to return to the mausoleum every night to free the ghosts . If she succeeds , she will win her freedom and a reward . If she fails , she will die and stay in the mausoleum as a corpse . 
 For every ten ghosts appeased , Dinah and Vincent get a tower guard to help with their task . Over the course of the series , they meet two of the guards : Edaniel , a grinning cat @-@ like creature , and his brother Edrear , who secretly likes Dinah . Vincent dies while in one of the vaults , causing Dinah to become depressed . Later , the hooded angel , which normally guards the entrance to the mausoleum , appears as two stones that talk to Dinah and help her overcome the depression which resulted from Vincent 's death . 
 Dinah continues searching the vaults and discovers that Edaniel and Edrear 's sister , Eniri , is missing , and that the seed of the mausoleum — its link to the Host in the afterlife — has been stolen . Additionally , Edaniel and Edrear 's other sister , <unk> , is found dead . After Edaniel and Edrear lock down the mausoleum , they send Dinah home and she discovers that Maphohetka , a girl hanged for witchcraft and who now as a ghost can control minds in the real world , is manipulating Eniri and the townspeople . Unsuccessful in her attempt to stop her , Dinah flees to the mausoleum and receives a special outfit melted from the gold tolls that she and Vincent paid to gain access to the mausoleum . Returning , she confronts Maphohetka , who then orders Edaniel to kill her . 
 In the ensuing battle , Dinah faces off against her former friend , accidentally decapitating Edaniel in the process . An enraged Edrear attempts to kill her , but eventually halts when Dinah points out that he 's crying for his brother , something that he 's normally unable to do and that 's being caused by Maphohetka 's influence . Knowing that he 's been compromised , Edrear stabs himself with his own sword , leaving Dinah to mourn him and share one kiss . Maphohetka , taking the opportunity , destroys Dinah 's scythe ( the only thing she had that could potentially kill her ) and ends up mutating into a large monster . After Dinah is captured in Maphohetka 's body , she happens upon the entity 's core , which is Maphohetka 's decayed corpse . Using Eniri 's bracelet to see into the monster , she finds that a piece of the cross Maphohetka was stabbed with during her hanging is still lodged in her chest , allowing Dinah to conclude that the piece is what keeps the evil spirit anchored in the living world . Dinah removes the cross shard , causing Maphohetka to fade away . 
 Wanting to seek help , Dinah stabs herself with the <unk> piece , allowing her to temporarily ascend into the afterlife . There , she encounters her mother , who gives her another mausoleum seed that Dinah takes back to the living world . Dinah uses the seed to revive everyone killed in the incident and her armor melts into coins that flow out of the fountain . But in the end , Dinah opts to remove the crucifix piece , killing her . 
 Dinah walks through her own funeral , bidding her mourning aunt goodbye before wandering outside . On the way , she encounters Vincent , but the two don 't recognize each other until they find the hidden graveyard . Dinah and Vincent become two mausoleum guards alongside a revived Edaniel and Edrear ( two young women who happened onto the graveyard having been contracted to the mausoleum ) . The series closes with Dinah on top of one of the towers beside Vincent , commenting how " she 's starting to like this town . " 
 = = Development = = 
 As a young girl , Mary Alice LeGrow was not interested in comics since she grew up in <unk> , Germany where comics were not readily available . In her freshman year of high school , she discovered comics and anime . She heard about Tokyopop 's Rising Stars of Manga competition from a friend at the 2003 Otakon , an anime convention in Baltimore , Maryland ; the <unk> story LeGrow submitted won a runner @-@ up place in the competition and was published in the 2003 Rising Stars of Manga anthology . She successfully pitched Bizenghast to the Tokyopop editors , and became the second Rising Stars of Manga winner to have an original series published by Tokyopop . 
 LeGrow worked on the series from 2004 to 2011 . She began Bizenghast when , for an art class assignment , she drew an open door and added the hooded angel statue in another class . In her initial designs , Dinah had simple features and short black hair , and Vincent was one of Dinah 's friends . LeGrow later removed the other friends from the story . She later lengthened Dinah 's hair and depicted her dressed in Lolita fashion — clothing influenced by the Rococo and Victorian eras . Other changes included Dinah 's hair being altered from straight to curly and the addition of an exoskeleton @-@ like armour to Edrear . Tired of thin female characters in comics , LeGrow designed Edaniel 's girlfriend , <unk> as " super full @-@ figured " . 
 When deciding on names for her protagonist , LeGrow considered Molly , Charlotte , Moira , Sally , and Diana before choosing Dinah — a reference to the pet cat of the protagonist of Lewis Carroll 's novel Alice in Wonderland ; the 1984 comedy film Johnny Dangerously inspired her last name , Wherever . Vincent Monroe takes his name from Vincent Price and the actress Marilyn Monroe . Jane , Dinah 's aunt , shares her name with LeGrow 's sister . Edaniel takes his name from the name Daniel in a middle school yearbook which LeGrow picked at random ; she noted that the editors let her keep him in the story although he appeared a risky character to them . Edrear was initially named Mordred after the character from Arthurian myths . The name of his sister <unk> comes from the character Lala Orange of Rainbow Brite , an animated television series . The minor character Prince Ironbound takes his name from the city Ironbound , New Jersey , while Lalibela , a holy town in northern Ethiopia , inspired Bali Lali 's . Another minor character , Dr. Morstan , takes his name from Mary Morstan , Dr. Watson ’ s wife . " <unk> " , the Russian word for marionette , inspired the name of the antagonist Maphohetka . 
 LeGrow comments that the series " is about life , death and fabulous outfits ( not in that order ) " and notes that there are " a lot of religious themes " present . The town of Bizenghast " represents a world cut off from that sort of constant access [ of technology ] . " The series was initially written to span about fourteen volumes and be divided into three seasons : the first seven volumes would make up the first story arc ; the second season , volumes eight through eleven , would center on the mausoleum 's relationship with the other guilds ; and season three would focus on the afterlife and consist of the last three volumes . LeGrow also considered writing a spin @-@ off based on Bizenghast with a guest artist , after she finished the first story arc of Bizenghast . The spin @-@ off would contain chapters not present in the original series , and after her other series was completed , she would continue Bizenghast . LeGrow concluded Bizenghast at eight volumes . 
 = = = Minor controversy = = = 
 A minor controversy occurred over a statement published in the July 2007 issue of the Tokyopop publication <unk> and in the back of the first Bizenghast volume written by a former Tokyopop editor and not authorized by LeGrow . It read : 
 Meet M. Alice LeGrow , and please call her Marty . And while you 're at it , call your best friend and tell her that if she 's going to cosplay any of Marty 's characters with you , both of you better do your research , or Marty 's going to be pissed . Because that 's Marty . She doesn 't like sloppiness . Especially when it comes to anime and cosplay . She especially won 't tolerate it if you 're dressing up like Dinah from Bizenghast , because Dinah is her first big market character . Not only that , Dinah 's fabulous . Do Dinah right , or don 't Dinah at all . Understand ? 
 LeGrow called it " worded in a way that I felt was offensive to me and to cosplayers " and noted that " none of it reflects my opinions . " Fan reaction to learning that the statement was inaccurate was generally relief since " they felt it didn 't mesh with [ her ] personality . " She stated : 
 I love cosplayers and I 'm flattered that anyone would cosplay my characters . I certainly wouldn 't want to deter anyone from doing so ... I 'm very open to any kind of cosplay . I 'm afraid the person who authored that piece felt they were doing me a favor and putting an edgy spin on my persona , but had I known about it prior to printing , I would have never allowed it to go into the book . 
 = = Media = = 
 = = = Graphic novels = = = 
 Written and illustrated by M. Alice LeGrow , Bizenghast is published in North America by Tokyopop . As of July 2010 , seven volumes have been released . The first was released on 9 August 2005 ; the most recent was published 1 July 2010 . However , Tokyopop 's North American branch stopped publishing on 31 May , 2011 ; because of it , the final volume of the series is being released through a print @-@ on @-@ demand agreement with <unk> The series is also distributed in New Zealand and Australia by Madman Entertainment , in Hungary by <unk> , in Germany by Tokyopop Germany , in Finland by <unk> Media Group , and in Russia by Comix @-@ art . 
 = = = Books = = = 
 Three books based on Bizenghast have been released . On 13 February 2007 , Tokyopop also released a 72 @-@ page limited @-@ edition art book , Bizenghast : Falling into Fear ( ISBN 978 @-@ 1 @-@ <unk> @-@ 748 @-@ 1 ) , which included stickers and pinup pages . Running Press published a coloring book based on the series , Color Me Manga : Bizenghast ( ISBN 978 @-@ <unk> ) on 12 November 2007 . On 13 August 2008 , Tokyopop published a novel adaption , Bizenghast : The Novel ( ISBN 978 @-@ 1 @-@ <unk> @-@ 1030 @-@ 4 ) , written by Shawn <unk> and with illustrations by LeGrow . 
 = = = Other = = = 
 <unk> Electronic Art adapted Bizenghast into animated short episodes or " <unk> " . The <unk> episodes featured music by Divine Madness and Kissing Violet , and premiered on My Space in summer 2007 . Overall , LeGrow praised the adaption . She liked the " kooky " background effects and Edaniel 's voice actor , but disliked Dinah 's " high @-@ pitched " voice which she had imagined as " deeper ... with a slight edge to it . Sort of like Mandy from The Grim Adventures of Billy and Mandy , but without the sarcasm . " The episodes were also available on Verizon 's V CAST . The television network <unk> acquired the seventeen two- to three @-@ minute @-@ long episodes as part of a " program acquisition deal and strategic ad sales partnership with Tokyopop . " 
 A tabletop roleplaying game based on the series was created by Clint Krause . Other merchandise included posters , scarves , playing cards , a plushie , postcards , a signed puzzle kit , and T @-@ shirts . Additionally , a two @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half @-@ hour DVD commentary about the first Bizenghast volume , with Tokyopop editor interviews and bonus material , was planned to be released in mid @-@ August 2010 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Bizenghast was well received by English @-@ language readers . The first volume debuted at the 79th spot on a list of the top 100 best @-@ selling graphic novels of August 2005 with an estimated 1 @,@ 434 copies sold . Daily Variety named Bizenghast one of Tokyopop 's top ten biggest titles . In June 2010 , the seventh volume sold 425 copies , ranking 294th on the list of the top 300 best @-@ selling graphic novels . 
 Bizenghast received positive reviews from critics . The September 2005 issue of Teen People listed Bizenghast as the Hot Book of the Month . Sheena McNeil of Sequential Tart praised the first volume as " a highly enjoyable read " . <unk> Cartoons 's Leroy Douresseaux described the series as " belong [ ing ] to a fantasy subgenre sometimes referred to as ' pop Gothic ' " and relying on atmosphere and looks . Critics praised the art of Bizenghast as detailed , but did not see it as manga @-@ styled . Anime Jump 's Chad Clayton called the series " heavily steeped in the gothic tradition " and commented that the series " successfully develops an inventive visual style all its own . It seems to owe more to classical art , gothic comics , and even artists like Edward Gorey than it does to manga . " Johanna Draper Carlson , a longtime reviewer for Publishers Weekly , found the art reminiscent " of classic fantasy <unk> comics " and noted " stock elements " in the story . Reviewers found Dinah 's character design " striking " and with the potential to appeal to fans of the Gothic Lolita fashion . Criticism focused on the writing , " uneven pacing " , flat characters , and the varying quality of the art . Anime News Network 's Zac Bertschy heavily criticized Bizenghast for the " slightly modified generic monster @-@ of @-@ the @-@ week cliché " plot , one @-@ dimensional characters , and art . David Welsh compared Bizenghast to " a cosplay of a horror manga " , and wrote : " It ’ s got a handle on the cosmetics , but central elements of story and character are vague and underdeveloped . " 
 In his review of the novel adaption , Mania Entertainment 's Greg Hackmann disliked the large amount of description , the " inconsistent " narration , and felt that the novel was more of a " novelization in the most literal sense of the word , reading much less like an adaptation in the spirit of LeGrow 's work than a 1 @-@ to @-@ 1 copy of the source material . " Conversely , Sabrina Fritz wrote that the novel adaption was " well @-@ written , [ and ] engaging " and called it " one of the best light novels on the market " . Another reviewer for Mania Entertainment , Danielle Van Gorder , enjoyed " [ t ] he detail and perspective in the architectural drawings " and " incredibly detailed costumes " of the art book Falling into Fear . 
 = Yugoslav minelayer Zmaj = 
 The Yugoslav minelayer Zmaj ( Dragon ) was built in Germany as a seaplane tender for the Royal Yugoslav Navy in 1928 – 30 . She does not appear to have been much used in that role and was converted to a minelayer in 1937 . Captured by the Germans in 1941 , she was renamed Drache ( Dragon ) and redesignated as an aircraft tender and later as a troop transport , before she was rebuilt as a minelayer in 1942 . She laid one minefield in 1943 that sank two Allied destroyers and badly damaged a third in the Aegean Sea . Drache was also used by the Germans to evaluate the shipboard use of helicopters for reconnaissance purposes . She was sunk by Allied aircraft in 1944 at Samos and scrapped in place after the end of World War II . 
 = = Description = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 The Royal Yugoslav Navy operated a series of seaplane bases on the Dalmatian Coast before World War II and decided that it needed a ship to transport seaplanes between them and to rescue downed aircraft after operations as had been common during World War I. It decided on the smallest possible ship that could carry supplies and spare parts for ten seaplanes . 
 = = = General characteristics = = = 
 Zmaj was 83 meters ( 272 ft 4 in ) long overall . She had a beam of 13 meters ( 42 ft 8 in ) and , at full load , a draft of 4 meters ( 13 ft 1 in ) . She displaced 1 @,@ 870 metric tons ( 1 @,@ 840 long tons ) at standard load . Her two propellers were powered by a pair of eight @-@ cylinder , four @-@ stroke MAN Diesel engines that had a maximum output of 3 @,@ 260 shaft horsepower ( 2 @,@ 430 kW ) . This was enough to propel her to a speed of 15 knots ( 28 km / h ; 17 mph ) . She carried a total of 140 tonnes ( 140 long tons ) of fuel which gave her a range of 4 @,@ 000 nautical miles ( 7 @,@ 400 km ; 4 @,@ 600 mi ) . She lacked a traditional funnel as her engine uptakes were taken up through the lattice mainmast . 
 The ship was fitted with two single 55 @-@ caliber 83 @.@ 5 @-@ millimeter ( 3 @.@ 29 in ) Škoda anti @-@ aircraft guns , mounted on the forecastle and the stern . They had a maximum elevation of 85 ° and fired a 10 @-@ kilogram ( 22 lb ) shell at a muzzle velocity of 800 m / s ( 2 @,@ 625 ft / s ) . They had a rate of fire of 12 rounds per minute and had a maximum ceiling of 11 @,@ 300 m ( 37 @,@ 100 ft ) . Four 40 @-@ millimeter ( 1 @.@ 6 in ) 67 @-@ caliber Škoda AA guns were mounted between the bridge and the mainmast in a twin @-@ gun mount on each side of the ship abreast the aircraft hold . They fired a 0 @.@ 95 @-@ kilogram ( 2 @.@ 1 lb ) shell at a muzzle velocity of 950 m / s ( 3 @,@ 117 ft / s ) . After her 1937 conversion to a minelayer , Zmaj carried 100 mines . 
 A single disassembled de Havilland DH.60 Moth floatplane was stored in the aircraft hold between the forward superstructure and the mainmast . Its components would be moved from the hold by the aircraft crane to the after deck where it could be assembled . Then the aircraft would be swayed over the side where it could be launched . 
 = = Construction = = 
 Zmaj was built by Deutsche Werft in Hamburg , Germany . Due to the restrictions of the Versailles Treaty , she had to be built as an unarmed auxiliary . Her keel was laid down in 1928 and she was launched on 22 June 1929 . While en route to Yugoslavia she had a severe engine fire on 9 September 1929 off Flushing , Netherlands and was forced to return to Hamburg for repairs . These took almost a year and she was accepted by the Royal Yugoslav Navy on 20 August 1930 . She was finally commissioned in 1931 after she was armed and finished fitting @-@ out in Kotor . 
 = = Service = = 
 Zmaj appears to have been little used in her intended role ; only her salvage of an upside @-@ down Dornier Wal in the Bay of Kotor in 1936 has been confirmed . This may be why she was converted to a minelayer the following year . Following her conversion she made port visits to Piraeus and Istanbul , accompanied by the destroyer Dubrovnik and the submarines Hrabri and Smeli . Zmaj served as the fleet flagship in 1939 and witnessed the new destroyer Ljubljana run aground and sink in January 1940 at the narrow entrance to Sebenico harbor . Shortly before the German invasion of Yugoslavia on 6 April 1941 Zmaj laid defensive minefields along the Dalmatian Coast and off the main ports . These minefields may have caused the loss of the Yugoslav passenger ships SS Karađorđe and SS <unk> Petar off <unk> . Zmaj was captured in Split by the Germans on 17 April . 
 Renamed as Drache ( Dragon ) by the Germans she was initially used in support of Luftwaffe seaplane units , but was redesignated as an aircraft rescue ship ( German : <unk> ) on 7 August 1941 . Her armament was increased by two 2 @-@ centimeter ( 0 @.@ 79 in ) and one 1 @.@ 5 @-@ centimeter ( 0 @.@ 59 in ) anti @-@ aircraft guns as well as racks for a dozen depth charges . She was transferred on 27 December to the Aegean and reclassified as a troop transport . Drache was modified at Trieste between April and August 1942 for service as a minelayer . Her existing armament was replaced by two 10 @.@ 5 @-@ centimeter ( 4 @.@ 1 in ) , five 3 @.@ 7 @-@ centimeter ( 1 @.@ 5 in ) and six 2 cm AA guns . She was equipped with four mine rails on her after deck that could accommodate up to 120 mines and another 120 mines could be carried internally . Her crane was replaced by two derricks and the lattice mainmast was plated over and resembled a funnel . A 20 @-@ by @-@ 5 @-@ meter ( 65 ft 7 in × 16 ft 5 in ) platform was built behind the funnel above the main deck . 
 Drache was recommissioned on 20 August 1942 and she was renamed Schiff 50 on 6 November . She conducted a number of minelaying operations in the Aegean as well as some of the west coast of Greece . After the surrender of Italy in September 1943 she was used to carry troops to reconquer the island of Kos on 2 – 3 October ( Operation Eisbär ) . On 8 October she was unsuccessfully attacked by the British submarine HMS Unruly although her companion , the German minelayer Bulgaria , was sunk . Drache 's most successful operation was a mine barrage laid just east of the islands of <unk> and Kalymnos to protect German troops during the Battle of Leros . The British destroyer HMS Hurworth and the Greek destroyer Adrias , carrying supplies and reinforcements for the British forces on Leros , ran into this minefield on the evening of 22 October . Adrias had her bow blown off and Hurworth was sunk attempting to come to the aid of Adrias . Adrias , however , was eventually able to make it back to Alexandria . Two nights later the destroyer HMS Eclipse encountered the same minefield while carrying reinforcements to Leros . She hit a mine , broke in two , and sank in five minutes . 
 Drache was also used for shipboard trials with the Flettner Fl 282 Kolibri ( Hummingbird ) helicopter . She embarked the V6 and V10 prototypes for a period in 1942 and in January – February 1943 . They used the small platform abaft the funnel to take @-@ off and land . The Kriegsmarine ( German navy ) wished to evaluate their potential for anti @-@ submarine warfare and mine reconnaissance , but visual detection proved to be possible only in clear weather . 
 The ship was attacked by Allied aircraft several times in 1943 and early 1944 , but she was only lightly damaged on two occasions . Nonetheless her anti @-@ aircraft armament was augmented during 1944 . One quadruple 2 cm Flakvierling 38 mount was installed on each side of the bridge and she carried a total of thirteen 2 cm guns . Her 10 @.@ 5 cm guns were exchanged for lighter 8 @.@ 8 @-@ centimeter ( 3 @.@ 5 in ) guns to compensate for the increased top weight . However this proved to be insufficient to save Drache when she was attacked by several British Bristol Beaufighters on the afternoon of 22 September 1944 while anchored in <unk> harbor on the Greek island of Samos . She was set on fire , exploded and sank two hours later ; eleven of her crew , including the commander Joachim <unk> , died during the attack . She was not salvaged and remained in place to be scrapped after the end of the war . 
 = William Shakespeare = 
 William Shakespeare ( / <unk> / ; 26 April 1564 ( baptised ) – 23 April 1616 ) was an English poet , playwright , and actor , widely regarded as the greatest writer in the English language and the world 's pre @-@ eminent dramatist . He is often called England 's national poet , and the " Bard of Avon " . His extant works , including collaborations , consist of approximately 38 plays , 154 sonnets , two long narrative poems , and a few other verses , some of uncertain authorship . His plays have been translated into every major living language and are performed more often than those of any other playwright . 
 Shakespeare was born and brought up in Stratford @-@ upon @-@ Avon , Warwickshire . At the age of 18 , he married Anne Hathaway , with whom he had three children : Susanna , and twins Hamnet and Judith . Sometime between 1585 and 1592 , he began a successful career in London as an actor , writer , and part @-@ owner of a playing company called the Lord Chamberlain 's Men , later known as the King 's Men . He appears to have retired to Stratford around 1613 , at age 49 , where he died three years later . Few records of Shakespeare 's private life survive , which has stimulated considerable speculation about such matters as his physical appearance , sexuality , and religious beliefs , and whether the works attributed to him were written by others . 
 Shakespeare produced most of his known work between 1589 and 1613 . His early plays were primarily comedies and histories , and these are regarded as some of the best work ever produced in these genres . He then wrote mainly tragedies until about 1608 , including Hamlet , Othello , King Lear , and Macbeth , considered some of the finest works in the English language . In his last phase , he wrote <unk> , also known as romances , and collaborated with other playwrights . 
 Many of his plays were published in editions of varying quality and accuracy during his lifetime . In 1623 , however , John Heminges and Henry Condell , two friends and fellow actors of Shakespeare , published a more definitive text known as the First Folio , a posthumous collected edition of his dramatic works that included all but two of the plays now recognised as Shakespeare 's . It was prefaced with a poem by Ben Jonson , in which Shakespeare is hailed , presciently , as " not of an age , but for all time " . 
 In the 20th and 21st centuries , his works have been repeatedly adapted and rediscovered by new movements in scholarship and performance . His plays remain highly popular , and are constantly studied , performed , and reinterpreted in diverse cultural and political contexts throughout the world . 
 = = <unk> ် ​ ဆင ် ​ ရန ် ​ = = 
 = = = Early <unk> ် ​ ဆင ် ​ ရန ် ​ = = = 
 William Shakespeare was the son of John Shakespeare , an alderman and a successful <unk> originally from Snitterfield , and Mary Arden , the daughter of an affluent landowning farmer . He was born in Stratford @-@ upon @-@ Avon and baptised there on 26 April 1564 . His actual date of birth remains unknown , but is traditionally observed on 23 April , Saint George 's Day . This date , which can be traced back to an 18th @-@ century scholar 's mistake , has proved appealing to biographers , because Shakespeare died on 23 April 1616 . He was the third child of eight and the eldest surviving son . 
 Although no attendance records for the period survive , most biographers agree that Shakespeare was probably educated at the King 's New School in Stratford , a free school chartered in 1553 , about a quarter @-@ mile ( 400 m ) from his home . Grammar schools varied in quality during the Elizabethan era , but grammar school curricula were largely similar : the basic Latin text was standardised by royal decree , and the school would have provided an intensive education in grammar based upon Latin classical authors . 
 At the age of 18 , Shakespeare married 26 @-@ year @-@ old Anne Hathaway . The consistory court of the Diocese of Worcester issued a marriage licence on 27 November 1582 . The next day , two of Hathaway 's neighbours posted bonds guaranteeing that no lawful claims impeded the marriage . The ceremony may have been arranged in some haste , since the Worcester chancellor allowed the marriage banns to be read once instead of the usual three times , and six months after the marriage Anne gave birth to a daughter , Susanna , baptised 26 May 1583 . Twins , son Hamnet and daughter Judith , followed almost two years later and were baptised 2 February 1585 . Hamnet died of unknown causes at the age of 11 and was buried 11 August 1596 . 
 After the birth of the twins , Shakespeare left few historical traces until he is mentioned as part of the London theatre scene in 1592 . The exception is the appearance of his name in the " complaints bill " of a law case before the Queen 's Bench court at Westminster dated Michaelmas Term 1588 and 9 October 1589 . Scholars refer to the years between 1585 and 1592 as Shakespeare 's " lost years " . Biographers attempting to account for this period have reported many apocryphal stories . Nicholas Rowe , Shakespeare 's first biographer , recounted a Stratford legend that Shakespeare fled the town for London to escape prosecution for deer poaching in the estate of local squire Thomas Lucy . Shakespeare is also supposed to have taken his revenge on Lucy by writing a scurrilous ballad about him . Another 18th @-@ century story has Shakespeare starting his theatrical career minding the horses of theatre patrons in London . John Aubrey reported that Shakespeare had been a country schoolmaster . Some 20th @-@ century scholars have suggested that Shakespeare may have been employed as a schoolmaster by Alexander Hoghton of Lancashire , a Catholic landowner who named a certain " William <unk> " in his will . Little evidence substantiates such stories other than hearsay collected after his death , and <unk> was a common name in the Lancashire area . 
 = = = London and theatrical <unk> ် ​ ဆင ် ​ ရန ် ​ = = = 
 It is not known definitively when Shakespeare began writing , but contemporary allusions and records of performances show that several of his plays were on the London stage by 1592 . By then , he was sufficiently known in London to be attacked in print by the playwright Robert Greene in his Groats @-@ Worth of Wit : 
 ... there is an upstart Crow , beautified with our feathers , that with his Tiger 's heart wrapped in a Player 's hide , supposes he is as well able to bombast out a blank verse as the best of you : and being an absolute Johannes factotum , is in his own conceit the only Shake @-@ scene in a country . 
 Scholars differ on the exact meaning of Greene 's words , but most agree that Greene is accusing Shakespeare of reaching above his rank in trying to match such university @-@ educated writers as Christopher Marlowe , Thomas <unk> and Greene himself ( the so @-@ called " university wits " ) . The italicised phrase parodying the line " Oh , tiger 's heart wrapped in a woman 's hide " from Shakespeare 's Henry VI , Part 3 , along with the pun " Shake @-@ scene " , clearly identify Shakespeare as Greene 's target . As used here , Johannes Factotum ( " Jack of all trades " ) refers to a second @-@ rate tinkerer with the work of others , rather than the more common " universal genius " . 
 Greene 's attack is the earliest surviving mention of Shakespeare 's work in the theatre . Biographers suggest that his career may have begun any time from the mid @-@ 1580s , to just before Greene 's remarks . After 1594 , Shakespeare 's plays were performed only by the Lord Chamberlain 's Men , a company owned by a group of players , including Shakespeare , that soon became the leading playing company in London . After the death of Queen Elizabeth in 1603 , the company was awarded a royal patent by the new King James I , and changed its name to the King 's Men . 
 In 1599 , a partnership of members of the company built their own theatre on the south bank of the River Thames , which they named the Globe . In 1608 , the partnership also took over the Blackfriars indoor theatre . Extant records of Shakespeare 's property purchases and investments indicate that his association with the company made him a wealthy man , and in 1597 he bought the second @-@ largest house in Stratford , New Place , and in 1605 , invested in a share of the parish tithes in Stratford . 
 Some of Shakespeare 's plays were published in quarto editions beginning in 1594 , and by 1598 , his name had become a selling point and began to appear on the title pages . Shakespeare continued to act in his own and other plays after his success as a playwright . The 1616 edition of Ben Jonson 's Works names him on the cast lists for Every Man in His Humour ( 1598 ) and Sejanus His Fall ( 1603 ) . The absence of his name from the 1605 cast list for Jonson 's Volpone is taken by some scholars as a sign that his acting career was nearing its end . The First Folio of 1623 , however , lists Shakespeare as one of " the Principal Actors in all these Plays " , some of which were first staged after Volpone , although we cannot know for certain which roles he played . In 1610 , John Davies of Hereford wrote that " good Will " played " kingly " roles . In 1709 , Rowe passed down a tradition that Shakespeare played the ghost of Hamlet 's father . Later traditions maintain that he also played Adam in As You Like It , and the Chorus in Henry V , though scholars doubt the sources of that information . 
 Throughout his career , Shakespeare divided his time between London and Stratford . In 1596 , the year before he bought New Place as his family home in Stratford , Shakespeare was living in the parish of St. Helen 's , Bishopsgate , north of the River Thames . He moved across the river to Southwark by 1599 , the same year his company constructed the Globe Theatre there . By 1604 , he had moved north of the river again , to an area north of St Paul 's Cathedral with many fine houses . There he rented rooms from a French Huguenot named Christopher Mountjoy , a maker of ladies ' wigs and other headgear . 
 = = = Later years and <unk> ် ​ ဆင ် ​ ရန ် ​ = = = 
 Rowe was the first biographer to record the tradition , repeated by Johnson , that Shakespeare retired to Stratford " some years before his death " . He was still working as an actor in London in 1608 ; in an answer to the sharers ' petition in 1635 Cuthbert Burbage stated that after purchasing the lease of the Blackfriars Theatre in 1608 from Henry Evans , the King 's Men " placed men players " there , " which were Heminges , Condell , Shakespeare , etc . " . However it is perhaps relevant that the bubonic plague raged in London throughout 1609 . The London public playhouses were repeatedly closed during extended outbreaks of the plague ( a total of over 60 months closure between May 1603 and February 1610 ) , which meant there was often no acting work . Retirement from all work was uncommon at that time . Shakespeare continued to visit London during the years 1611 – 1614 . In 1612 , he was called as a witness in <unk> v. Mountjoy , a court case concerning the marriage settlement of Mountjoy 's daughter , Mary . In March 1613 he bought a gatehouse in the former Blackfriars priory ; and from November 1614 he was in London for several weeks with his son @-@ in @-@ law , John Hall . After 1610 , Shakespeare wrote fewer plays , and none are attributed to him after 1613 . His last three plays were collaborations , probably with John Fletcher , who succeeded him as the house playwright of the King 's Men . 
 Shakespeare died on 23 April 1616 , at the age of 52 . He died within a month of signing his will , a document which he begins by describing himself as being in " perfect health " . No extant contemporary source explains how or why he died . Half a century later , John Ward , the vicar of Stratford , wrote in his notebook : " Shakespeare , Drayton and Ben Jonson had a merry meeting and , it seems , drank too hard , for Shakespeare died of a fever there contracted " , not an impossible scenario , since Shakespeare knew Jonson and Drayton . Of the tributes from fellow authors , one refers to his relatively sudden death : " We wondered , Shakespeare , that thou went 'st so soon / From the world 's stage to the grave 's tiring room . " 
 He was survived by his wife and two daughters . Susanna had married a physician , John Hall , in 1607 , and Judith had married Thomas Quiney , a vintner , two months before Shakespeare 's death . Shakespeare signed his last will and testament on 25 March 1616 ; the following day his new son @-@ in @-@ law , Thomas Quiney was found guilty of fathering an illegitimate son by Margaret Wheeler , who had died during childbirth . Thomas was ordered by the church court to do public penance , which would have caused much shame and embarrassment for the Shakespeare family . 
 Shakespeare bequeathed the bulk of his large estate to his elder daughter Susanna under stipulations that she pass it down intact to " the first son of her body " . The Quineys had three children , all of whom died without marrying . The Halls had one child , Elizabeth , who married twice but died without children in 1670 , ending Shakespeare 's direct line . Shakespeare 's will scarcely mentions his wife , Anne , who was probably entitled to one third of his estate automatically . He did make a point , however , of leaving her " my second best bed " , a bequest that has led to much speculation . Some scholars see the bequest as an insult to Anne , whereas others believe that the second @-@ best bed would have been the matrimonial bed and therefore rich in significance . 
 Shakespeare was buried in the chancel of the Holy Trinity Church two days after his death . The epitaph carved into the stone slab covering his grave includes a curse against moving his bones , which was carefully avoided during restoration of the church in 2008 : 
 ( Modern spelling : Good friend , for Jesus ' sake forbear , / To dig the dust enclosed here . / Blessed be the man that spares these stones , / And cursed be he that moves my bones . ) 
 Sometime before 1623 , a funerary monument was erected in his memory on the north wall , with a half @-@ effigy of him in the act of writing . Its plaque compares him to Nestor , Socrates , and Virgil . In 1623 , in conjunction with the publication of the First Folio , the Droeshout engraving was published . 
 Shakespeare has been commemorated in many statues and memorials around the world , including funeral monuments in Southwark Cathedral and Poets ' Corner in Westminster Abbey . 
 = = <unk> ် ​ ဆင ် ​ ရန ် ​ = = 
 Most playwrights of the period typically collaborated with others at some point , and critics agree that Shakespeare did the same , mostly early and late in his career . Some attributions , such as Titus Andronicus and the early history plays , remain controversial , while The Two Noble Kinsmen and the lost <unk> have well @-@ attested contemporary documentation . Textual evidence also supports the view that several of the plays were revised by other writers after their original composition . 
 The first recorded works of Shakespeare are Richard III and the three parts of Henry VI , written in the early 1590s during a vogue for historical drama . Shakespeare 's plays are difficult to date , however , and studies of the texts suggest that Titus Andronicus , The Comedy of Errors , The Taming of the Shrew and The Two Gentlemen of Verona may also belong to Shakespeare 's earliest period . His first histories , which draw heavily on the 1587 edition of Raphael Holinshed 's Chronicles of England , Scotland , and Ireland , dramatise the destructive results of weak or corrupt rule and have been interpreted as a justification for the origins of the Tudor dynasty . The early plays were influenced by the works of other Elizabethan dramatists , especially Thomas Kyd and Christopher Marlowe , by the traditions of medieval drama , and by the plays of Seneca . The Comedy of Errors was also based on classical models , but no source for The Taming of the Shrew has been found , though it is related to a separate play of the same name and may have derived from a folk story . Like The Two Gentlemen of Verona , in which two friends appear to approve of rape , the Shrew 's story of the taming of a woman 's independent spirit by a man sometimes troubles modern critics and directors . 
 Shakespeare 's early classical and Italianate comedies , containing tight double plots and precise comic sequences , give way in the mid @-@ 1590s to the romantic atmosphere of his most acclaimed comedies . A Midsummer Night 's Dream is a witty mixture of romance , fairy magic , and comic lowlife scenes . Shakespeare 's next comedy , the equally romantic Merchant of Venice , contains a portrayal of the vengeful Jewish moneylender Shylock , which reflects Elizabethan views but may appear derogatory to modern audiences . The wit and wordplay of Much Ado About Nothing , the charming rural setting of As You Like It , and the lively merrymaking of Twelfth Night complete Shakespeare 's sequence of great comedies . After the lyrical Richard II , written almost entirely in verse , Shakespeare introduced prose comedy into the histories of the late 1590s , Henry IV , parts 1 and 2 , and Henry V. His characters become more complex and tender as he switches deftly between comic and serious scenes , prose and poetry , and achieves the narrative variety of his mature work . This period begins and ends with two tragedies : Romeo and Juliet , the famous romantic tragedy of sexually charged adolescence , love , and death ; and Julius Caesar — based on Sir Thomas North 's 1579 translation of Plutarch 's Parallel Lives — which introduced a new kind of drama . According to Shakespearean scholar James Shapiro , in Julius Caesar " the various strands of politics , character , inwardness , contemporary events , even Shakespeare 's own reflections on the act of writing , began to infuse each other " . 
 In the early 17th century , Shakespeare wrote the so @-@ called " problem plays " Measure for Measure , Troilus and Cressida , and All 's Well That Ends Well and a number of his best known tragedies . Many critics believe that Shakespeare 's greatest tragedies represent the peak of his art . The titular hero of one of Shakespeare 's most famous tragedies , Hamlet , has probably been discussed more than any other Shakespearean character , especially for his famous soliloquy which begins " To be or not to be ; that is the question " . Unlike the introverted Hamlet , whose fatal flaw is hesitation , the heroes of the tragedies that followed , Othello and King Lear , are undone by hasty errors of judgement . The plots of Shakespeare 's tragedies often hinge on such fatal errors or flaws , which overturn order and destroy the hero and those he loves . In Othello , the villain Iago stokes Othello 's sexual jealousy to the point where he murders the innocent wife who loves him . In King Lear , the old king commits the tragic error of giving up his powers , initiating the events which lead to the torture and blinding of the Earl of Gloucester and the murder of Lear 's youngest daughter Cordelia . According to the critic Frank Kermode , " the play @-@ offers neither its good characters nor its audience any relief from its cruelty " . In Macbeth , the shortest and most compressed of Shakespeare 's tragedies , uncontrollable ambition incites Macbeth and his wife , Lady Macbeth , to murder the rightful king and usurp the throne , until their own guilt destroys them in turn . In this play , Shakespeare adds a supernatural element to the tragic structure . His last major tragedies , Antony and Cleopatra and Coriolanus , contain some of Shakespeare 's finest poetry and were considered his most successful tragedies by the poet and critic T. S. Eliot . 
 In his final period , Shakespeare turned to romance or tragicomedy and completed three more major plays : Cymbeline , The Winter 's Tale and The Tempest , as well as the collaboration , Pericles , Prince of Tyre . Less bleak than the tragedies , these four plays are graver in tone than the comedies of the 1590s , but they end with reconciliation and the forgiveness of potentially tragic errors . Some commentators have seen this change in mood as evidence of a more serene view of life on Shakespeare 's part , but it may merely reflect the theatrical fashion of the day . Shakespeare collaborated on two further surviving plays , Henry VIII and The Two Noble Kinsmen , probably with John Fletcher . 
 = = = <unk> ် ​ ဆင ် ​ ရန ် ​ = = = 
 It is not clear for which companies Shakespeare wrote his early plays . The title page of the 1594 edition of Titus Andronicus reveals that the play had been acted by three different troupes . After the plagues of 1592 – 3 , Shakespeare 's plays were performed by his own company at The Theatre and the Curtain in Shoreditch , north of the Thames . Londoners flocked there to see the first part of Henry IV , Leonard Digges recording , " Let but Falstaff come , Hal , Poins , the rest ... and you scarce shall have a room " . When the company found themselves in dispute with their landlord , they pulled The Theatre down and used the timbers to construct the Globe Theatre , the first playhouse built by actors for actors , on the south bank of the Thames at Southwark . The Globe opened in autumn 1599 , with Julius Caesar one of the first plays staged . Most of Shakespeare 's greatest post @-@ 1599 plays were written for the Globe , including Hamlet , Othello and King Lear . 
 After the Lord Chamberlain 's Men were renamed the King 's Men in 1603 , they entered a special relationship with the new King James . Although the performance records are patchy , the King 's Men performed seven of Shakespeare 's plays at court between 1 November 1604 and 31 October 1605 , including two performances of The Merchant of Venice . After 1608 , they performed at the indoor Blackfriars Theatre during the winter and the Globe during the summer . The indoor setting , combined with the Jacobean fashion for lavishly staged masques , allowed Shakespeare to introduce more elaborate stage devices . In Cymbeline , for example , Jupiter descends " in thunder and lightning , sitting upon an eagle : he throws a thunderbolt . The ghosts fall on their knees . " 
 The actors in Shakespeare 's company included the famous Richard Burbage , William Kempe , Henry Condell and John Heminges . Burbage played the leading role in the first performances of many of Shakespeare 's plays , including Richard III , Hamlet , Othello , and King Lear . The popular comic actor Will Kempe played the servant Peter in Romeo and Juliet and <unk> in Much Ado About Nothing , among other characters . He was replaced around 1600 by Robert Armin , who played roles such as Touchstone in As You Like It and the fool in King Lear . In 1613 , Sir Henry Wotton recorded that Henry VIII " was set forth with many extraordinary circumstances of pomp and ceremony " . On 29 June , however , a cannon set fire to the thatch of the Globe and burned the theatre to the ground , an event which pinpoints the date of a Shakespeare play with rare precision . 
 = = = Textual <unk> ် ​ ဆင ် ​ ရန ် ​ = = = 
 In 1623 , John Heminges and Henry Condell , two of Shakespeare 's friends from the King 's Men , published the First Folio , a collected edition of Shakespeare 's plays . It contained 36 texts , including 18 printed for the first time . Many of the plays had already appeared in quarto versions — flimsy books made from sheets of paper folded twice to make four leaves . No evidence suggests that Shakespeare approved these editions , which the First Folio describes as " <unk> 'n and surreptitious copies " . Nor did Shakespeare plan or expect his works to survive in any form at all ; those works likely would have faded into oblivion but for his friends ' spontaneous idea , after his death , to create and publish the First Folio . 
 Alfred Pollard termed some of the pre @-@ 1623 versions as " bad quartos " because of their adapted , paraphrased or garbled texts , which may in places have been reconstructed from memory . Where several versions of a play survive , each differs from the other . The differences may stem from copying or printing errors , from notes by actors or audience members , or from Shakespeare 's own papers . In some cases , for example Hamlet , Troilus and Cressida and Othello , Shakespeare could have revised the texts between the quarto and folio editions . In the case of King Lear , however , while most modern editions do conflate them , the 1623 folio version is so different from the 1608 quarto that the Oxford Shakespeare prints them both , arguing that they cannot be conflated without confusion . 
 = = <unk> ် ​ ဆင ် ​ ရန ် ​ = = 
 In 1593 and 1594 , when the theatres were closed because of plague , Shakespeare published two narrative poems on erotic themes , Venus and Adonis and The Rape of Lucrece . He dedicated them to Henry Wriothesley , Earl of Southampton . In Venus and Adonis , an innocent Adonis rejects the sexual advances of Venus ; while in The Rape of Lucrece , the virtuous wife Lucrece is raped by the lustful Tarquin . Influenced by Ovid 's Metamorphoses , the poems show the guilt and moral confusion that result from uncontrolled lust . Both proved popular and were often reprinted during Shakespeare 's lifetime . A third narrative poem , A Lover 's Complaint , in which a young woman laments her seduction by a persuasive suitor , was printed in the first edition of the Sonnets in 1609 . Most scholars now accept that Shakespeare wrote A Lover 's Complaint . Critics consider that its fine qualities are marred by leaden effects . The Phoenix and the Turtle , printed in Robert Chester 's 1601 Love 's Martyr , mourns the deaths of the legendary phoenix and his lover , the faithful turtle dove . In 1599 , two early drafts of sonnets 138 and 144 appeared in The Passionate Pilgrim , published under Shakespeare 's name but without his permission . 
 = = = <unk> ် ​ ဆင ် ​ ရန ် ​ = = = 
 Published in 1609 , the Sonnets were the last of Shakespeare 's non @-@ dramatic works to be printed . Scholars are not certain when each of the 154 sonnets was composed , but evidence suggests that Shakespeare wrote sonnets throughout his career for a private readership . Even before the two unauthorised sonnets appeared in The Passionate Pilgrim in 1599 , Francis Meres had referred in 1598 to Shakespeare 's " <unk> Sonnets among his private friends " . Few analysts believe that the published collection follows Shakespeare 's intended sequence . He seems to have planned two contrasting series : one about uncontrollable lust for a married woman of dark complexion ( the " dark lady " ) , and one about conflicted love for a fair young man ( the " fair youth " ) . It remains unclear if these figures represent real individuals , or if the authorial " I " who addresses them represents Shakespeare himself , though Wordsworth believed that with the sonnets " Shakespeare unlocked his heart " . 
 The 1609 edition was dedicated to a " Mr. W.H. " , credited as " the only begetter " of the poems . It is not known whether this was written by Shakespeare himself or by the publisher , Thomas Thorpe , whose initials appear at the foot of the dedication page ; nor is it known who Mr. W.H. was , despite numerous theories , or whether Shakespeare even authorised the publication . Critics praise the Sonnets as a profound meditation on the nature of love , sexual passion , procreation , death , and time . 
 = = <unk> ် ​ ဆင ် ​ ရန ် ​ = = 
 Shakespeare 's first plays were written in the conventional style of the day . He wrote them in a stylised language that does not always spring naturally from the needs of the characters or the drama . The poetry depends on extended , sometimes elaborate metaphors and conceits , and the language is often rhetorical — written for actors to declaim rather than speak . The grand speeches in Titus Andronicus , in the view of some critics , often hold up the action , for example ; and the verse in The Two Gentlemen of Verona has been described as stilted . 
 Soon , however , Shakespeare began to adapt the traditional styles to his own purposes . The opening soliloquy of Richard III has its roots in the self @-@ declaration of Vice in medieval drama . At the same time , Richard 's vivid self @-@ awareness looks forward to the soliloquies of Shakespeare 's mature plays . No single play marks a change from the traditional to the freer style . Shakespeare combined the two throughout his career , with Romeo and Juliet perhaps the best example of the mixing of the styles . By the time of Romeo and Juliet , Richard II , and A Midsummer Night 's Dream in the mid @-@ 1590s , Shakespeare had begun to write a more natural poetry . He increasingly tuned his metaphors and images to the needs of the drama itself . 
 Shakespeare 's standard poetic form was blank verse , composed in iambic pentameter . In practice , this meant that his verse was usually unrhymed and consisted of ten syllables to a line , spoken with a stress on every second syllable . The blank verse of his early plays is quite different from that of his later ones . It is often beautiful , but its sentences tend to start , pause , and finish at the end of lines , with the risk of monotony . Once Shakespeare mastered traditional blank verse , he began to interrupt and vary its flow . This technique releases the new power and flexibility of the poetry in plays such as Julius Caesar and Hamlet . Shakespeare uses it , for example , to convey the turmoil in Hamlet 's mind : 
 After Hamlet , Shakespeare varied his poetic style further , particularly in the more emotional passages of the late tragedies . The literary critic A. C. Bradley described this style as " more concentrated , rapid , varied , and , in construction , less regular , not seldom twisted or elliptical " . In the last phase of his career , Shakespeare adopted many techniques to achieve these effects . These included run @-@ on lines , irregular pauses and stops , and extreme variations in sentence structure and length . In Macbeth , for example , the language darts from one unrelated metaphor or simile to another : " was the hope drunk / Wherein you dressed yourself ? " ( 1 @.@ 7 @.@ 35 – 38 ) ; " ... pity , like a naked new @-@ born babe / Striding the blast , or heaven 's cherubim , hors 'd / Upon the sightless couriers of the air ... " ( 1 @.@ 7 @.@ 21 – 25 ) . The listener is challenged to complete the sense . The late romances , with their shifts in time and surprising turns of plot , inspired a last poetic style in which long and short sentences are set against one another , clauses are piled up , subject and object are reversed , and words are omitted , creating an effect of spontaneity . 
 Shakespeare combined poetic genius with a practical sense of the theatre . Like all playwrights of the time , he dramatised stories from sources such as Plutarch and Holinshed . He reshaped each plot to create several centres of interest and to show as many sides of a narrative to the audience as possible . This strength of design ensures that a Shakespeare play can survive translation , cutting and wide interpretation without loss to its core drama . As Shakespeare 's mastery grew , he gave his characters clearer and more varied motivations and distinctive patterns of speech . He preserved aspects of his earlier style in the later plays , however . In Shakespeare 's late romances , he deliberately returned to a more artificial style , which emphasised the illusion of theatre . 
 = = <unk> ် ​ ဆင ် ​ ရန ် ​ = = 
 Shakespeare 's work has made a lasting impression on later theatre and literature . In particular , he expanded the dramatic potential of characterisation , plot , language , and genre . Until Romeo and Juliet , for example , romance had not been viewed as a worthy topic for tragedy . Soliloquies had been used mainly to convey information about characters or events ; but Shakespeare used them to explore characters ' minds . His work heavily influenced later poetry . The Romantic poets attempted to revive Shakespearean verse drama , though with little success . Critic George Steiner described all English verse dramas from Coleridge to Tennyson as " feeble variations on Shakespearean themes . " 
 Shakespeare influenced novelists such as Thomas Hardy , William Faulkner , and Charles Dickens . The American novelist Herman Melville 's soliloquies owe much to Shakespeare ; his Captain Ahab in Moby @-@ Dick is a classic tragic hero , inspired by King Lear . Scholars have identified 20 @,@ 000 pieces of music linked to Shakespeare 's works . These include two operas by Giuseppe Verdi , Otello and Falstaff , whose critical standing compares with that of the source plays . Shakespeare has also inspired many painters , including the Romantics and the Pre @-@ Raphaelites . The Swiss Romantic artist Henry Fuseli , a friend of William Blake , even translated Macbeth into German . The psychoanalyst Sigmund Freud drew on Shakespearean psychology , in particular that of Hamlet , for his theories of human nature . 
 In Shakespeare 's day , English grammar , spelling and pronunciation were less standardised than they are now , and his use of language helped shape modern English . Samuel Johnson quoted him more often than any other author in his A Dictionary of the English Language , the first serious work of its type . Expressions such as " with bated breath " ( Merchant of Venice ) and " a foregone conclusion " ( Othello ) have found their way into everyday English speech . 
 = = Critical <unk> ် ​ ဆင ် ​ ရန ် ​ = = 
 Shakespeare was not revered in his lifetime , but he received a large amount of praise . In 1598 , the cleric and author Francis Meres singled him out from a group of English writers as " the most excellent " in both comedy and tragedy . The authors of the Parnassus plays at St John 's College , Cambridge numbered him with Chaucer , Gower and Spenser . In the First Folio , Ben Jonson called Shakespeare the " Soul of the age , the applause , delight , the wonder of our stage " , though he had remarked elsewhere that " Shakespeare wanted art " . 
 Between the Restoration of the monarchy in 1660 and the end of the 17th century , classical ideas were in vogue . As a result , critics of the time mostly rated Shakespeare below John Fletcher and Ben Jonson . Thomas Rymer , for example , condemned Shakespeare for mixing the comic with the tragic . Nevertheless , poet and critic John Dryden rated Shakespeare highly , saying of Jonson , " I admire him , but I love Shakespeare " . For several decades , Rymer 's view held sway ; but during the 18th century , critics began to respond to Shakespeare on his own terms and acclaim what they termed his natural genius . A series of scholarly editions of his work , notably those of Samuel Johnson in 1765 and Edmond Malone in 1790 , added to his growing reputation . By 1800 , he was firmly enshrined as the national poet . In the 18th and 19th centuries , his reputation also spread abroad . Among those who championed him were the writers Voltaire , Goethe , Stendhal and Victor Hugo . 
 During the Romantic era , Shakespeare was praised by the poet and literary philosopher Samuel Taylor Coleridge ; and the critic August Wilhelm Schlegel translated his plays in the spirit of German Romanticism . In the 19th century , critical admiration for Shakespeare 's genius often bordered on adulation . " That King Shakespeare , " the essayist Thomas Carlyle wrote in 1840 , " does not he shine , in crowned sovereignty , over us all , as the noblest , gentlest , yet strongest of rallying signs ; indestructible " . The Victorians produced his plays as lavish spectacles on a grand scale . The playwright and critic George Bernard Shaw mocked the cult of Shakespeare worship as " <unk> " , claiming that the new naturalism of Ibsen 's plays had made Shakespeare obsolete . 
 The modernist revolution in the arts during the early 20th century , far from discarding Shakespeare , eagerly enlisted his work in the service of the avant @-@ garde . The Expressionists in Germany and the Futurists in Moscow mounted productions of his plays . Marxist playwright and director Bertolt Brecht devised an epic theatre under the influence of Shakespeare . The poet and critic T.S. Eliot argued against Shaw that Shakespeare 's " primitiveness " in fact made him truly modern . Eliot , along with G. Wilson Knight and the school of New Criticism , led a movement towards a closer reading of Shakespeare 's imagery . In the 1950s , a wave of new critical approaches replaced modernism and paved the way for " post @-@ modern " studies of Shakespeare . By the 1980s , Shakespeare studies were open to movements such as structuralism , feminism , New Historicism , African @-@ American studies , and queer studies . In a comprehensive reading of Shakespeare 's works and comparing Shakespeare literary accomplishments to accomplishments among leading figures in philosophy and theology as well , Harold Bloom has commented that , " Shakespeare was larger than Plato and than St. Augustine . He encloses us , because we see with his fundamental perceptions . " 
 = = <unk> ် ​ ဆင ် ​ ရန ် ​ = = 
 = = = Classification of the <unk> ် ​ ဆင ် ​ ရန ် ​ = = = 
 Shakespeare 's works include the 36 plays printed in the First Folio of 1623 , listed according to their folio classification as comedies , histories and tragedies . Two plays not included in the First Folio , The Two Noble Kinsmen and Pericles , Prince of Tyre , are now accepted as part of the canon , with today 's scholars agreeing that Shakespeare made major contributions to the writing of both . No Shakespearean poems were included in the First Folio . 
 In the late 19th century , Edward Dowden classified four of the late comedies as romances , and though many scholars prefer to call them <unk> , Dowden 's term is often used . In 1896 , Frederick S. Boas coined the term " problem plays " to describe four plays : All 's Well That Ends Well , Measure for Measure , Troilus and Cressida and Hamlet . " Dramas as singular in theme and temper cannot be strictly called comedies or tragedies " , he wrote . " We may therefore borrow a convenient phrase from the theatre of today and class them together as Shakespeare 's problem plays . " The term , much debated and sometimes applied to other plays , remains in use , though Hamlet is definitively classed as a tragedy . 
 = = Speculation about <unk> ် ​ ဆင ် ​ ရန ် ​ = = 
 = = = <unk> ် ​ ဆင ် ​ ရန ် ​ = = = 
 Around 230 years after Shakespeare 's death , doubts began to be expressed about the authorship of the works attributed to him . Proposed alternative candidates include Francis Bacon , Christopher Marlowe , and Edward de Vere , 17th Earl of Oxford . Several " group theories " have also been proposed . Only a small minority of academics believe there is reason to question the traditional attribution , but interest in the subject , particularly the Oxfordian theory of Shakespeare authorship , continues into the 21st century . 
 = = = <unk> ် ​ ဆင ် ​ ရန ် ​ = = = 
 Some scholars claim that members of Shakespeare 's family were Catholics , at a time when practicing Catholicism in England was against the law . Shakespeare 's mother , Mary Arden , certainly came from a pious Catholic family . The strongest evidence might be a Catholic statement of faith signed by his father , John Shakespeare , found in 1757 in the rafters of his former house in Henley Street . The document is now lost , however , and scholars differ as to its authenticity . In 1591 the authorities reported that John Shakespeare had missed church " for fear of process for debt " , a common Catholic excuse . In 1606 , the name of William 's daughter Susanna appears on a list of those who failed to attend Easter communion in Stratford . As several scholars have noted , whatever his private views , Shakespeare " conformed to the official state religion " , as Park Honan put it . Also , Shakespeare 's will uses a Protestant formula , and he was a confirmed member of the Church of England , where he was married , his children were baptized , and where he is buried . Other authors argue that there is a lack of evidence about Shakespeare 's religious beliefs . Scholars find evidence both for and against Shakespeare 's Catholicism , Protestantism , or lack of belief in his plays , but the truth may be impossible to prove . 
 = = = <unk> ် ​ ဆင ် ​ ရန ် ​ = = = 
 Few details of Shakespeare 's sexuality are known . At 18 , he married 26 @-@ year @-@ old Anne Hathaway , who was pregnant . Susanna , the first of their three children , was born six months later on 26 May 1583 . Over the centuries , some readers have posited that Shakespeare 's sonnets are autobiographical , and point to them as evidence of his love for a young man . Others read the same passages as the expression of intense friendship rather than romantic love . The 26 so @-@ called " Dark Lady " sonnets , addressed to a married woman , are taken as evidence of heterosexual liaisons . 
 = = = <unk> ် ​ ဆင ် ​ ရန ် ​ = = = 
 No written contemporary description of Shakespeare 's physical appearance survives , and no evidence suggests that he ever commissioned a portrait , so the Droeshout engraving , which Ben Jonson approved of as a good likeness , and his Stratford monument provide perhaps the best evidence of his appearance . From the 18th century , the desire for authentic Shakespeare portraits fuelled claims that various surviving pictures depicted Shakespeare . That demand also led to the production of several fake portraits , as well as mis @-@ attributions , <unk> and <unk> of portraits of other people . 
 = The Erlenmeyer Flask = 
 " The Erlenmeyer Flask " is the 24th episode and the first season finale of the science fiction television series The X @-@ Files . Written by executive producer Chris Carter , and directed by R. W. Goodwin , the episode continues with the mythology story arc which started with " Pilot " . The episode first aired in the United States on May 13 , 1994 on the Fox network . With 8 @.@ 3 million households turning in during its initial broadcast , the episode was the most @-@ viewed episode of the show 's first season . The episode received an Edgar Award nomination in the Best Episode in a TV Series category , and has , since broadcast , received positive responses from both critics and crew members . 
 The show centers on FBI special agents Fox Mulder ( David Duchovny ) and Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) who work on cases linked to the paranormal , called X @-@ Files . In this episode , Mulder and Scully discover evidence of a secret government experimentation with alien DNA , but the evidence and everyone who has seen it are quickly targeted for elimination . 
 " The Erlenmeyer Flask " introduced several new plot elements which would continue in later seasons and featured the death of recurring character " Deep Throat " ( Jerry Hardin ) . Carter described the inspiration for the episode as " the result of a year @-@ long learning experience " . 
 = = Plot = = 
